THE LADIES DICTIONARY; Being a General Entertainment For the Fair-Sex:

A WORK Never attempted before in English.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN DUNTON at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1694.

Price Bound Six Shillings.

TO THE Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Others, OF THE Fair-Sex. The Author Humbly
Dedicates this following Work.
Ladies,
THIS Project of Composing a DICTIONARY for the use of the Fair-Sex, (which may
serve as a Secret Oracle, to Consult in all difficult Cases) being the First
Attempt of this kind that has appeared in English, it is hoped 'twill meet with
a Courteous Reception from all, but more Especially from you, for whose sakes
'twas undertaken; and if it receives any Favor at your Hands, I shall
Attribute its Success in the World, to the ILLUSTRIOUS SUBJECT it Treats on;
viz. The Virtues and Accomplishments of your Sex; which are so many and
Admirable, that no Volume can contain them in their full Extent. However my
thoughts and good wishes have bid fair in this Essay, which is intended for a
General Entertainment, and will, I hope, prove to the Satisfaction of the
Learned and Ingenious of the Age; whose Discretion I need not doubt, will keep
them from wresting it to any other end, than what it was designed for; viz. The
Benefit and Advantage of the Modest of either Sex, not desiring that this Book
should fall into the Hands of any wanton Person, whose Folly or Malice, may
turn that into Ridicule, that loudly Proclaims the Infinite Wisdom of an
Omnipotent Creator, neither is any thing inserted in this WORK, but what I have
sufficient Authority to back it with ready at hand.

It is now near a Twelvemonth since I first entered upon this Project, at the
desire of a worthy Friend, unto whom I owe more than I can do for him: And when
I considered the great need of such a Book, as might be a Complete Directory to
the Female-Sex in all Relations, Companies, Conditions and States of Life; even
from CHILD HOOD down to Old Age, and from the Lady at the Court, to the
Cook-maid in the Country: I was at length prevailed upon to do it, and the
rather because I know not of any Book that has done the like; indeed many
Learned Writters there be, who have wrote excellent well of some Particular
Subjects herein Treated of, but as there is not one of them has written upon
all of them, so there are some things Treated of in this Dictionary that I have
not met with in any Language. It Is true, MY OWN EXPERIENCE IN LOVE AFFAIRS,
might have furnished out Materials for such a Work; yet I do not pretend thereby
to lessen my Obligations, to those Ladies, who by their Generous imparting to
me their Manuscripts, have furnished me with several hundred Experiments and
Secrets in DOMESTIC AFFAIRS, BEAUTIFYING, PRESERVING, CANDYING, PHYSIC,
SURGERY, etc. Proper for my Work, and such as were not taken out of Printed
Books, or on the Credit of others, but such as are Re-commended to me from
their own Practice, all which shall be inserted in a Second Part, if this First
meets with Encouragement, that so both together may contain all ACCOMPLISHMENTS
needful for Ladies, and be thereby rendered perfect. Nor shall I dissemble the
Assistance which I had from the Private Memoirs of Madam -- a Person well known
to all the World, for being both Exact and Curious in those Matters, of which
my DICTIONARY Treats. And as this Work contains my own Observations on Love and
Marriage, etc. For many Years, as also the Secrets received from Ladies of the
best Quality; So Lastly, That nothing might be wanting to render the Work
perfect, I have consulted the most valuable Books written for, and against the
Fair-Sex, as also Dr. Blancards, Mr. Blounts, and other Dictionaries, of note,
from which I extracted what was proper for my Work; for as the things Treated
on, are many and various, so were my helps.

I hope Ladies, you will not think it much that as the Famous Limner, when he
drew the PICTURE OF AN EXACT BEAUTY, made use of an Eye from one, of a Mouth
from another, and so Cul'd what was rare in all others, that he might present
them all in one Entire Piece of Workmanship; so I, when I was to write of Love,
Marriage, the Behavior, Dress and Humors of the Female Sex, have consulted
all Books I could meet with on those Subjects, to Complete my own Experiences;
So that you will find here at one view, the whole Series and Order of all the
most Heroic and Illustrious Women of all times, from the first dawning of the
World to this present Age, of all degrees, from the IMPERIAL DIADEM, to the
SHEPHERDS CROOK, of all Regions and Climats, from the Spicy East, to the Golden
West, of all Faiths, whether Jews, Ethnicks, or Christians, (and particularly
an Account of those WOMEN MARTYRS that suffered in Queen Mary's days: And in
the West in 85: And of all Eminent Ladies, that have died in England for these
last fifty years) of all Arts and Sciences, both the graver, and more polite;
of all Estates, VIRGINS, WIVES and WIDOWS; of all Complexions and Humors, the
Fair, the Foul, the Grave, the Witty, the Reserved, the Familiar, the Chaste,
the Wanton. What ever Poets have fancied, or credible Histories have Recorded,
of the first you have the Mysteries and Allegories clearly interpreted and
explained; of the latter, the Genuine Relations Impartially delivered.

Here therefore (Ladies) as in a perfect Mirror, you may behold the lively
Ideas of all laudable Qualities whatsoever, suitable to them in all Callings
and Conditions; here you may observe the profoundest of Learning and Divine
Contemplation in the Prophesies of the Sybils, etc. Here are Erected the
Trophies of Female Fortitude and Valor, in several Instances. Here Queens may
learn the Arts of Splendour and Magnificence from Nitocris, Cleopatra, and
others. Wives here may read how to demean themselves toward their Husbands in
all Conjugal Affection. Daughters may here be taught Examples of Obedience and
Chastity, from the Vestal Votaresses. Matrons may find here that decent
Deportment which becomes their Gravity, and Widows, that Constancy which besits
their Solitude. Here is also to be found the true Interpretation, and
Etymology, of Women's Names; with so plain derivations of each Name, whether
Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, Greek, or Latin, etc. that any ordinary Capacity may
understand them.

But never does my Hand more compulsively direct my Pen, nor my Pen wi^h less
willingness blot Paper, then when I am forced in this Work, to lay open the
frailties of your Sex, before so much commended. But this is my Encouragement
to proceed; because I can produce nothing out of History, to the Disgrace of
the bad and vicious, which adds not to the Honor of the good and virtuous.
Were none foul, what benefit were it to be fair? And if none deformed, what
Grace could it be to be featured? There were no honor to be ascribed to
Modesty, but that we see the dishonor of Immodesty depending; nor to the
temperate, but that we daily find the Inconveniences inherent to Riot and
Excess. Besides, were all alike fair, what praise were it to be Beautiful? Or
if all alike chaste, what admiration could be attributed to so rare a Virtue?

I could not therefore but conclude it the highest of Injuries, that whereas
the Actions of Men, had met with so ample and so many memorials, Your Sexes
being not inferior to them, should meet with so slender and so few, and that to
Erect this Monument to their lasting Glory, would be a piece of justice great
as their misfortune, in not having a more Judicious Recorder of their Worths
then

Ladies, Your very Humble Servant, N. H.

THE LADIES DICTIONARY.
A.
ABigal, (...) 2 Samuel 25.40. i. e. my Fathers Joy, or the rejoicing of my
Father. -- Abigal being Wife to churlish Nabal the Carmelite, by her Prudence
in timely meeting David by the way, which her Husband had refused to send him,
prevented the Destruction of her House; and Nabal dying for fear when he heard
what ruin had like to have fallen upon him, she became David's Wife. --
Abishag, (...) 1 King. 1.3. i. e. my Father's Ignorance, or Error. Acsah,
(...) Gnaksah* Josh. 15.16. perhaps decked or trimmed with tinkling Ornaments,
such as formerly Women wore about their Feet see Isa. 3.16, 18. from the root
(...) gnekes, Fetters; hence R. Levi Gersom writes, (...) Gnakasim, Sunt sicat
ornamenta quas gestant (mulieris) in pedibus suis, i. e. that is, That those
(Fetters) were like those Ornaments which (Women) wore on their Feet. Adelin,
i. e. Noble, or descended from Princes. Agar, see Hagar. Agatha, (...), she
that is good or honest. Agnes, i. e. Pure, Holy, Chaste, Uedefiled, from (...),
which seems to be so called from (...), i. e. Veneratio, i. e. Honor and
Worship, quod eam possidentes veneratione and laud dignos reddat castitas, i.
e. because Chastity renders them that have it worthy of Honor and Praise, so
the Latin word (...), i.e. adorned, from (...), to adorn: For as ( Solon says)
pure Chastity, is Beauty to our Souls, Grace to our Bodies, and Peace to our
Desires; so contrariwise, is Chastity be once lost, there is nothing left
praiseworthy in a Woman (as Nicephorus says.) Alethia, (...), veri^as, i. e.
Truth. Alexander, a helper or succourer of Men. Alice, or Alse, i. e. Noble,
abridged from Ade-liz, Cer. or a Desendress. Fr. Amara, i. e. she that is
beloved. Aimie, i. e. beloved, from aimi^. Fr. Ana^tace, Etym, (...), i. e.
Resurrectio, a Resurrection. Anchorette, one that lives solitarily. Gr.
Angeiletta, dim. from Angelus, i.e. a Messenger, from (...), to declare. Anne,
see Hannah. Apphia, (...), Phil. 2. it signifies with them that make Comedies,
a Mistress, Gr. Arbella, i. e. God has avenged, Heb. Areta, (...), i. e.
Virtus, Virtue, Gr. Athaliah, (...) Gnatahabu, 2 King. 8.26. as if (...) Gnet
la bovah, i. e. time for the Lord. Audrie, i. e. noble Advice. Ger. Abice, i.
e. Lady in defense. Aureola, i. e. little pretty golden Lady, dim. ab Aram,
Gold. Azubah, (...) Gnazubah, 1 King. 22.24. i. e. forsaken. Abdona, styled by
the Ancients the Goddess of True-Lovers. after her death, because in her Life
time she had charitably relieved them in their Journeys, and furnished them
with Guides to show them the difficult ways. A^alis vel Acacalis, held to b^
the Wife of Mercury the (...) of the God^, and Daughter of Minos the once
fa^ous King of (...) no* called (...), and in the Posssesion of the Turks, on
which the fair Lady Mercury is held to beget Sydon, the supposed Founder of
Sydonia, now Candia in Creet, or Candy. Acca Laurentia, married Faustalus,
Shepherd to King Numitor and is famous in Story for Nursing Romulus and
Rheemus, the first Founders of Rome, when they were cast out to be destroyed of
wild Beasts on the Mountains; she was also called Lupa, from whence it is
fabled they were nursed by a she Woolf. Acidalia, was a Name given to Venus the
fabled Goddess of Beauty, by the Boetians, from a Fountain there dedicated to
her, wherein it is said she and the Graces were wont to bathe themselves.
Actia, Mother of Augustus Ceasar, sleeping in Apollo's Temple, dreamed she was
Embraced by a Dragon; and being with Child at another time, dreamed her Bowels
were carried into the Air, and spread over all the Earth, which denoted that
Son she was soon after delivered of was to be Emperor of Rome, and a mighty
Conqueror. Act. A Female Bondslave to the Emperor Nero, she was so exceeding
beautiful that he not gaining upon her otherways, desired leave of the Senate
to marry her, pretending she was nobly descended, but that not appearing, his
Suit was rejected. Adrigis, Adargiseis, amongst the Assyrians, was esteemed by
them as a Goddess. She was feigned by them to be married to Adad in that
Language, signifying one. These two were pictured, the first shooting Rays
upwards, and the latter downwards, to signify the benefit the Earth receives
by the Suns influence. Adamantaca, held to be the Nurse of Jupiter, who by her
Prudence placed his Cradle in a Tree among thick Boughs where the Bees fed him
certain days with Honey, and saved him from the Destruction wherewith his
Father Saturn threatened him. Adelais, Wife of Lothaire the Second, being
solicited by Berrenger the Second (who had usurped her Husband's Kingdoms) to
marry him, she utterly refused it, no Threats or Promises being able to work
upon her; so that after a long Imprisonment where she begged her Bread, she had
the good Fortune to Escape; and there as a reward of her Constancy in not
consenting to the will of that Usurper; Otho the great Emperor of Germany
married her, by whom she had many Children, and lived happy the remainder of
her days. Addona, feigned a Goddess, and worshipped by the Heathens, when they
desired easy liberty or access to any great Person, because in her Lifetime
she had been very courteous and humble to all sorts of People. Adrastia, having
for the other name Nemisis feigned by Poets to be the Daughter of Jupiter, and
Necessity; as also to be Goddess of Justice or Revenge. The Athenians pictured
her with Wings, to show how ready she was to execute, and the Egyptians sitting
on the Moon, and inspecting Human Affairs. Aemplia, an Italian Woman having
been married 12 Years to a Husband, by a strange Metamorphosis, at the end of
that time, found her self changed into a Man, and turning off her Husband,
married a Wife. Aeorretta, a Woman of Laodicea, after long cohabiting with a
Husband, was changed in the like manner as the foregoing. Aethra, the Wife of
Atlas, was feigned the Daughter of Thetis, and Ocianus having one Son of twelve
Daughters, five of the Daughters wept to death upon the Sons being killed by a
Serpent, whereupon they were turned into the Stars called Hyades, which rise
about St. Swithin's Day, and generally bring Lowering or Rainy Weather. Afrania,
she was Wife to Lucinus Buccio, a woman of Masculine Spirit; for though the
Senate of Rome had decreed, that Women should not speak in the places of
Judicature, unless questions were asked them, she bodily started up before the
Pretors and pleaded her own Law Suits. Agarilla, Daughter to Clis^^nes, was so
exceeding beautiful, that all the Grecian Youths were Enamouted on her and at
great cost, made Plays and other Entertainments* that she being present they
might feast their Eyes on her beauteous face. Agatha, a Sicilian Lady, who
refusing to turn Pagan, and Marry Quintianus the Proconsul, was by him cruelly
Tormented, and afterward put to death: When that day Twelvemonth Mount Aetna
broke out in a violent Torrent of fire, which streamed in s^ames as far as
Catana, where she was Martyred, so that the Pagan Inhabitants looking upon it
as a fearful Judgment, for shedding innocent blood; ran to her Grave, and
taking the Shroud that covered her, opposed it to the Torrent of Fire, which
thereupon immediately, stopped. Agathor^ca, a famous Curt^^^^, so bewitched
Ptolome Philopater, King of Egypt, with her Charms and Beauty, that to make way
for Marrying her, he made away his Wife Euridice, by whom he had Ptolome,
Epiphanes, whom the new advanced Queen would have murdered, but the people
h^ndered it and made her fly the Country. (...), was Daughter to Cadmus and
Hermione, Married to Echiron of Thebes, by whom she had Pentheus, who was King
of Thebes, after his Fathers death; but torn to pieces by his Mother and other
Women, at the feet of Baccus, in their drunken sits, because he disapproved of
such unseemly Revels. Agen^ria, was a name the Ancients gave to their Goddess
of Industry, and a Temple was erected to her in the Adventine Mount. Agno, one
of the Nimphs by whom Jupiter was brought up, she gave name to a Fountain, said
to have this rare gift that if it in time of drowth, the Priest of Jupiter,
Lyceus stirred it with an Oaken bough, a thick mist would arise from it and
imediately gathering into Clouds, send down plenty of Rain. Agnodi^e, a Virgin
of Athens, Who above all things desired to study Physic, and became so famous
therein that the Physicians e^vyed her, and accused her before the Ar^^pagites
or Judges, as an Ignorant Pretender, but she gave such Learned Demonstrations
that the cause not only went for her but an order was made, That any free Woman
of Athens, might practice Physic, and that the Men Physicians should no more
meddle with Women in Childbirth, seeing the Women were as capable in all
matters Agraules, was Daughter to Cecrops, sometimes King of Athens, who being
over curious, though forbid it in opening a basket, wherein Minerva had hid
Ericthenius, was stricken with Phrensy, to that height of madness, that running
to a precipice, she threw her self headlong from it, and was dashed in pieces
on the Rocks. Agiripina, Daughter to Marcus Agrippa, she was Married to
Tyberius the Emperor, by whom he had Drafius. Agripina ^espania, daughter to M.
Agrippa by Julia the Daughter of Augustus a Woman Courageous and Chaste, but
because she prosecuted the Murderers of her Husband: Tyberius banished her.
Agrippina, wife of Claudius, daughter of Germanicus, and Sister to Caligula,
and Mother to Nero, all Caesar's, so that she had more Emperors in her Family,
than any before or after her: She was slain at the commandment of her Son Nero,
When he was Emperor, as had been foretold by a Soathsayer, and her ^elly
ripped up, to show him the place where he had lain. Albuna, Anciently held as a
Goddess, and worshipped at Rome, had (...) being in a Grove in the Teritories
of T^^^^tum: Some will have her to be Juno, the Daughter of At^^n^s, who ^lying
her Husbands fury, threw her self together with her son Maliceris into the Sea.
Alceste, otherwise Alcestis, she was the daugeter to Peleus, wife to Admetus
King of Thessaly; and so loving was she to her husband, that being Condemned,
she offered to lay down her Life as a Ransom for his. Alcippehed. To be the
Daughter of Mars and Agl^^^os, who being pursued by (...), Neptunes Son, who
designed to Ravish her, and the crying out for help, Ma^s came to her rescue,
and killed her Pu^s^^r. There was likewise another (...) daughter to (...),
wife to (...), and Mother to Marpissa who being R^vi^l^ed by Ida; but thhe
Ravi^^er being pursued, threw himself into the River (...), where he is fa^l^^
to be (...) into a River God.

Al^^ppe, a Woman mentioned by (...), to have brought ^orth an (...). (...),
for (...) the (...) of (...) and spinning at home, whilst other Women were
Celebrating her Festival; is fa^led to be turned into a (...) and her spinning
yarn into Ivy and a Vine. (...), Ele^^^ya's daughter by ^^sidice, and Wi^e to
(...) on her (...) ^^got (...), by (...) himself the (...) of her Husband,
which is (...) famous for his great (...). Althea, Wife to Collidon, upon
notice that all her Sons except Meleager were slain in Battle, threw a brand
into the Fire, on which the Fates had write his desteny, at the Expiration of
which, though many miles distant he dyed, and upon notice of his death, after
repenting her rash Act, she killed herself. Amalasontha, Daugther to the
Austra-gothick King; a Woman of rare Wit and Ingenuity, so that after the death
of her Father, taking the Government upon her; she answered all Ambassadors in
their own Language: But marrying her Kinsman, that he might assist her in the
Government, he put her to death, to gain a more absolute power, which Justinian
the Roman Emperor Revenged, by driving him and his people out of Ita^.
Amalthea, was Daughter to M^lisius King of Creet, and said to Nurse Jupiter
with Goats Milk and Honey, when his Father Saturn had doomed him to death, for
which he afterward gave her plenty of what ever she desired, and placed the
Goat as the Celestial Sign Capricorn. Amestrie, Wife to Xerxes King of Persia
upon a jealousy that her Husband loved his Sons Wife, took an opportunity to
beg her of him in a drunken humor, at his Feast, called, Tycta, and then most
Inhumanely murdered her; she likewise caused diverse of the Persian Nobility to
be buried alive as Sacrifices to her Idol, that she might have long Life, and
be prosperous in her undertakings. Amymone, Accounted the Daughter of Danaus,
she gave her self much to Hunting, and in a Forest, letting an Arrow fly at
Random, she wounded a Satyr, who thereby being roused, pursued her to Ravish
her, but upon her Invocation, Neptune rescued her, and for that kindness got
her good will, and by him she conceived, and brought forth Naupleous a famous
Hero. Ancelis, was Celebrated amongst the Eastern People, and the fairest
Females that could be chosen were her Priestesses, who by an Indecent custom,
prostituted their Chastity to such as came to offer at her Shrine, which
brought her crowds of Adorers. Anchire, Queen of Sparta, upon a discovery, that
her Son designed to betray her Country to her Enemy; Ordered him to be brought
to Justice, but upon notice of it he fled to the Temple of Minerva, which the
caused to be so strictly guarded, in order to prevent his Escape, that he there
perished by famine. Andromeda, Daughter to Cepheus, for her Mothers comparing
her Beauty to that of the Nerci^es, was doomed to be devoured by a Sea Monster;
but Perseus the Son of Jupiter, by Dane, seeing her bound naked to a Rock,
became Enamoured of her; killed the Sea Monster that came to devour her, and
made her his wife. Angerona, was by the An-cient Romans worshipped as the
Goddess of silence, and Consulted in all Abstruse matters; her Altar being
placed under that of the Goddess of Pleasure. Anna Goranena, Daughter to Alexix
Emperor of Constantinople, she wrote the Reign of her Father, and other
Learned Books, and is remembered by diverse Authors. Anne, Mother to the Virgin
Mary, who was Mother to our Blessed Savior, according to the Flesh. -- Anne a
Prophetess, daughter to Phanuel, who frequented the Temple in Jerusalem, in a
devout manner, and Sung Praises to God, by the Direction of the Holy Spirit,
when our Savior was first brought and presented there, she dyed in the 84 year
of her Age, and in the first of our Lords Incarnation.

Anne, P^gmalion, the King of Tyres Siner, she was also Sister to Queen Dido of
Carthage, and after her Sisters death, who flew her self for the Love of
Ae^eas, she failed to Malea* and thence to Italy, where L^vinia, who had
Married Aeneas, being jealous of her, she fled her Fury; and in her flight, was
drowned in the River Numicus, and afterward was held amongst the Romans as a
Goddess: Her Feast with much Reveling, was held in the Ides of March. Anne,
Daughter and Heirs to Duke Francis, the Secon^ of Brittanny, she should have
been Married to Maxmilian of Austria; but after the death of her Father,
Charles the Eight of France, ne^re^^ to whose Te^r^tories her Duchy lay:
Gained her, and annexed that Dukedom to the Kingdom of France. -- Anne the
Third daughter of King Charles the Fir^^ of England, was born on the 13. of
March 1637 at St. James's: Her Piety and Ingenuity, was above her Age, for
being but Four Years old and falling ^ick she fervently called upon God by
Prayer, and being at last almo^t s^ent and feeling the Pangs of death upon her,
after a Sigh or two ^he said, I cannot now say my long Prayer (meaning the
Lord's Prayer) but I Will say my short one, viz. Lighten mine E^es, O Lord, least
I sleep the sleep of Death* and then quietly gave up the the Ghost.

Anne, Queen of Bohemia and Hungary. Daughter to Landislaus, was Wife to
Ferdinand of Austria upon which after some contests, such discontents arose,
that S^^^man* the Turkish Emperor being called in War, a great part of Hungary,
and narrowly missed taking Vienna, to which he laid a hard Seige, which went
very bloody on both sides. Anteborta, held to be a Goddess among the Romans,
and had Adoration given her for the Success of things and favors past, as they
did to another Goddess called Postvorta, in Expectation of the Success of
things to come. Antiope, a Queen of the Amazons, she assisted the Ethiopians in
their Invasion of the Athenians; but Theseus, commanding the Greeks, vanquished
both Armies. There was another of the same name, who was married to Lycus a
Thebian King, who is fabled to be ravi^^d by Jupiter, and Conceiving of that
Rape, brought forth Amphion, who drew the Stones with the Music of his Harp
after him, that rebuilded the demolished Walls of the City. Antonia, The
Emperor Clad^^^'s Daug^ter, who being accused by Nero the Emperor, for
intending to raise Sedition in the State, and finding no hopes to free her self
from the Tyrants Cruelty, without marrying him, which he earnestly pressed her
to do, and she de^^^^ing the Murder of his two Wives, killed her self to be
freed from his Insults over her, rather than she would yield to his Embraces or
be at his Mercy. Apicata, Sejanus's Wife, writ upon her being divorced, a
Memorial to Tiberius Emperor of Rome, informing him how Drusius came by his
death, and the hand that Livia his Wife had in the concurring to it. Also the
Villainies of Ligdus the Eunuch, and Endemes the Physician, for which those that
the accused were severely punished, though the main end of her discovery was to
revenge her self upon Livia, her fair Rival. Araclue, a Lydian Virgin, Daughter
of Idomon, who was so expert in all manner of Needle Work and Textury, that she
boasted her self equal in those Arts to Minerva, which caused her to spoil her
curious Manufactury, which so grieved her that she hanged her self; but the
Goddess in compassion brought her again to life, yet turned her into a Spider,
a Creature which is usually busy in Spinning out its own Bowels. Arch^damia
Cleonigmus, a King of Sparta's Daughter, hearing that upon the approach of
Phyrus to besiege the City, the Senate had made a Decree that all the Women
should depart it, she went boldly with a drawn Sword in her hand to the
Senate House, and told them. That the Mothers, Sisters and Wives of those
Warriers that were to fight the Enemy, scorned to be less Valiant than they,
and thereupon got the Decree revoked. Autem Mor^s, are such who are married,
having always Children with them, one in the Arm, and another at the Back, and
sometimes leading a third in the Hand. You are not to ask what Church she was
married in, or by what Parson, so long as a Totterdemallion shall swear he will
justify himself her Husband before any Justice of Peace in England. Armenias's
strict Virtue and great Love to her Husband. Ladies we have in London, who are
so far from having a light Assent, as they scorn to admit a weak Assault; which
confirms the Judgment of that noble accomplished, though unfortunate Gentleman:
In part to blame is she that has been tried,
He comes too near, that comes to be denied.
(Sir T.O. This that noble minded Lady Armenia expressed, who being solemnly
invited to King Cyrik's Wedding, went thither with her Husband. At night when
those Royal Rites had been solemnized, and they returned, her Husband asked
her, how she liked the Bridegroom, whether upon perusal of him she thought him
to be a fair and beautiful Prince, or no? Truth, says she, I know not; for all
the while I was forth, I cast mine Eyes upon none other, but upon thy self --
Those receiving Portels of her Senses, were shut against all foreign Intruders:
She had made a moral League with her Loyal Eyes, to fix on no unlawful Beauty,
left her surprised Eye might engage her to folly -- We may imagine that noble
Lady Armenia, when she was invited with her Husband, to the solemnizing of
those Princely Nuptials of Magnificent Cyrus, that she might have seen many
goodly and amiable Personages, pleasing and attractive Objects; such as wanton
Eyes would have taken wonderful delight in: Put how fixed was her outward Eye on
him solely, to whom she stood engaged by an inward Tie, may appear by that
discreet mode^t Answer, which she returned her Husband; who at Night when they
were come home, demanded of her (it may be out of a causless Jealousy, which
he conceived of her, how she liked that Princely Bridegroom, whether she
thought him not to be a fair and beautiful Prince, or no? And what Personage in
that brave Assembly rendered the most graceful Presence to her Eye? Truth, said
she, I know not; for all the while I was forth, I cast mine Eyes upon no other
but thy self. This was an excellent Pattern to imitate! When no Object could so
take her Eye, as to convey the least Impresion of deluding Fancy to her Heart.
There is small doubt, but those experimental Maxims hold constantly current:
That the very state and composure of the Mind is to be seen in the carriage and
posture of the Body: And that by the gesture and composition of the Body, is to
be discovered the quality and disposition of the Mind. Apparel, or the Ladies
Dressing Room. Apparel and Ornaments are not only for shrouding Nakedness, and
screening the pinching Cold, but for setting out the shape and proportion of
the Body, and rendering the Fabric of Mortality more Airy and Charming:
Wherefore, Ladies, since there are such a number in the ^arie^ies of this
Nature, and the French for the most part have given them Names, as well as
communicated the Fashions to us; we have thought fit for the better informing
those of your Sex, who have not leisure to frequent the Court-Balls and Plays,
to set down their Names as they are now in vogue begging Pardon of the more
knowing of the Fair Sex for intruding into their Dressing-Rooms, to fetch
thence this Inventory. -- An Attache, is as much as to say, vulgarly, tacked or
fastened together, or one thing fastened to another. -- A Bargoigin, is that
part of the Head-dress that covers the Hair, being the first part of the Dress.
-- A Be^ger is a little Lock, plain, with a Puff turning up like the ancient
Fashion used by (...). -- A Campaigne is a kind of a narrow Lace, picked or
scallop'd. -- A Choux is the round Bos^ behind the Head, resembling a Cabbage,
and the French accordingly so name it. -- A Colberteen, is a Lace resembling
Network, being of the Manufacture of Monsieur Colbert, a French Statesman. --
A Collaret, is a kind of a Gorget that goes about the Neck* A Commode, is a
frame of Wire, two or three Stories high, fitted for the Head, or covered with
Tiffany, or other thin Silks; being now completed into the whole Head-dress.
-- A Confidant, is a small Curl next the Ear. -- A Cornet, is the upper Pinner
that dangles about the Cheeks, hanging down with flaps. -- A Cre^eco^ur, by
some called Heartbreaker, is the curled Lock at the nape of the Neck, and
generally there are two of them. -- A Cruch or Chruches, are the small Locks
that dangle on the Forehead. -- A Cupee, is a Pinner that hangs close to the
Head. -- An Echelles, is a Stomacher laced or riboned in the form of the Steps
of a Ladder, lately very much in request. -- Aengageants, are double Ruffles
that fall over the Wrists. -- Al-Favourites, a sort of modish Locks hang
dangling on the Temples. -- A F^andan, is a kind of a Pinner joined with a
Cornet. -- A Font-Ange, is a modish Top-knot first worn by Mademoiselle
d'Fontange, one of the French King's Misses, from whom it takes its name. -- A
Jardine, is a single Pinner next the low mark or Burgogn. -- A pair of Martials
Gloves, so called from the French-man's Name, pretends to make them better than
others. -- A Monchoir, is only that which we vulgarly call a Handkerchief. -- A
Mouche, is a fly or a black patch. -- A Murtnere, is a black knot that unites
and ties the Curles of the Hair. -- A Palatine, is that which used to be called
a Sable-Tippet, but that name is changed to one that is supposed to be finer,
because newer, and Ala mode de France. -- A Passager, is a Curled Lock, next
the Temple, and commonly two of them are used. -- A Mont la Haut, is a certain
Wier that raises the Head Dress by degrees or stories. -- A panache, is any
Tassel of Ribons very small. etc. -- A Ragg, is a quaint name they give to
Point or Lace, so that the Sempstresses, who bring them to the Chambers of the
Ladies; are called by them ragwoman. -- A Rayonne, is a Hood placed over the
rest pinned in a Circle. -- A Ruffle or Ruffles, is that which we call a Cuff
or Cuffs. -- A Se^tee, is only a double Pinner. -- Asortie is a little knot of
small Ribbons, it appears between the bonnet, and pinner. -- Aspagnolet, is a
Gown with narrow Sleves and Lead in them, to keep them down Ala Spagnole. -- A
Sultane, is one of these new fashioned Gowns, trimed with Buttons and Loops --
A Sir tout, is a Night-Hood, which goes over, or covers the rest of the head
geer. -- A Toilet, is a little cloth which Ladies use for what purpose they
think fit, and is by some corruptly called A tarylight. -- A Tour, is an
Artificial dress of Hair, first invented by some Ladies that had lost their own
Hair, and borrowed of others to cover their shame; but since it is brought into
a fashion -- An Asasin or Venz^m^y, signifies a breast knot, or may serve for
the two Leading strings that hang down before, to pull a Lady to her Sweetheart
-- Thus much for the Dress, but there are yet other things necessary for a
Ladies Dressing Room; which have such odd names, that a R^^ Lass being
entertained in service, and hearing her Mistress one day call for some of them,
she was so far from bringing any that she verily took her to be a Conjuring,
and hastily run out of the House, for fear she should raise the Devil.
App^^^enances in Dressing, etc. A Brancher, or a hanging Candlestick, with
branches to see to undress by the Glass. -- A Brassier, a moving Hearth made of
Silver or Vessel to hold Fire, to warm a Ladies Shift, etc. -- A Columbuck, a
piece of wood of a very pleasant Scent, used in their Chambers to keep out
unwholesom Aires -- A Cossoletis, a perfuming pot, or censer. -- A Coffrefort,
is a strong Box made of Olive, or other precious wood, bound with gilded Ribs
-- A Cosmetick, or Cosmeticks, are of diverse kinds, and highly in use for
beautifying the face and hands. -- A Crotchet, is the hook whereto Ladies Chain
their Watches, Seals and other matter. -- A Tilgrain'd, is a Dressing-Box, a
Basket, or what ever else is made of Silver work in Wire. -- A Firmament,
Precious Stones, as Diamonds and the like, which Ladies head their pins withal,
to make their heads shine, and look in their Towers like Stars. -- A Jappaman
work, is any thing Jappand, or Varnished, China polished or the like. -- A
Spr^nking Glass, this spranking is a Dutch word, the first as we hear of that
Language, that ever came in fashion with Ladies, so that they give us reason to
believe, they at last may tack about from the French to the Dutch mode, This
signifies pruning by a Pocket-Glass, or a Glass to Sprucifie by, -- A Milioner,
is the thing they use to turn about in the Choccolatpot when they make it. -- A
Pastillo de Bocco, is a perfumed Lozange, to perfume the Breath, and corrects
any defects that may be in it of unsavoriness. -- A Plumper, is a fine thin
light Ball, which old Ladies that have lost their side Teeth, hold in their
mouths to plump out their Cheeks, which else would hang like Leathern bags -- A
Poluil, is a paper of Powder being a Portugal term given to it, and also passes
for a perfume. -- A Rare le metlleure, is any thing that is fine or excellent.
-- A Rouleau, is a paper of Guineas, to the number of 39. which the Gallant
steals into his Mistress hand, when she is on the Losing side, at Baf^et, or
Commet, for which he expects some singular favor. -- A Duchess, is a knot to
be put immediately above the Tower. -- It seems this high building of head geer
is not of a new Invention as some take it to be, but of an old Edition, For
Ju^enai in his sixth Satyr makes mention of them. Tot premit ordinibus, etc. --
Such Rows of Curles pres^'d on each other ly,
She builds her head so many Stories high
: That look on her before, and you would swear,
Hectors tall Wife Andromache, she were.
Behind a Pigmy, So that not her Wast,
But Head seems in the middle to to be placed.
A sort of red Spanish paper must not be forget, in a Ladies Dre^sing Room, to
give her Cheeks and Lips a pleasant rosy color. Attire of Men. etc. how
expressed, And now Ladies, since we design this work to be a complete one,
relating to your Sex, We once more beg pardon for this discovery, and that the
Men may have no occasion to laugh at something they fancy Ridiculous in your
Inventory, we shall take a view of theirs, and show them their Faces in their
own more Fantastick-Glass: the French, we must confess, has been so admired by
the Men of Mode, that any thing named in another Language, sounds harsh, and
grates on their Consciences. It has long since Justl'd Latin out of their
heads, and almost the true pronounciation of English: O how fine and delicately
charming it is, when a young Spark comes to take leave of his Country Friends
to Crindg Alamode, and in a formal tone to say, Adieu donce me cheres whilst
not understanding a word of it, they start at his Salute, and take him for a
Conjurer, when he might have as well expressed himself in English, that they
might have known what he had said, viz. Farewell my dear Friends; but this was
to show the breeding he had got in Town, at the Expense of Five hundred a year;
and to be reported in the place where he was born, to be Gentleman, a Man of
parts and breeding: One who studies the Languages, though perhaps he paid Ten
Guineas for this Sentence, though he picked it up at an Ordinary; when he calls
for a suit of Clothes, he bids them haste and bring his Arroy, the Maid or Boy
stands Gaping for an Explanation, till he growing Impatient, Stamps and Cries,
Dog, bring my Clothes, what a blockheaded place it this, that cannot understand
a Gentleman, without forcing him to speak dull insipped English. When he has
Coached his Miss about a long Evening, and given her satisfaction, as a
Civil-Gentleman ought, he conducts her safe to her Lodging, and having taken
his last leave for that night. Away he posts to Adjust a Man self as he terms
it, or address him to the Be^^x Esprits, or Club of Wits as they call
themselves to be refreshed and Enlivened by their Sophosisms, tho the more
sober part of Mankind, hold them only a Cabal of Bea^^'s. The word is a
Masculine French Adjective, signifying fine or gaudy trims but now naturalized
into English, it is taken for Sparkish dressing-sop: Our Spark being arrived
upon this Parnassus-Top, thinks he is in the Shades of Heaven, preparing for
light whilst the Heliconian Liquor flows in full Bumpers, as if that River was
at her highest Springtide, then the (...) of Language, or sharp and witty
Expre^ions bring a little over, to cheer them up they beginning to be drowsy
Souls; then in comes Bachique, or a drinking Bawdy Song, or Catch, in the mean
while out comes their Combs, to Careen their Periwigs, that is to order them.
One shows to the next at hand, his Le Grass, the Furniture of his Suit, and
demands if it be not Eveilie, more Sparkishly and Airy, than any he has seen.
Then he pointing at another, cries he is Deshabille, that is in a careless
Dress, and that his Chedreux Periwig is not of a coal black, nor such a ones of
of a right flaxen, but of mixed motely Colors not En Cavalier, like a
Gentleman. Then pointing to another, he sneers, with a scornful smile, and
whispers him in the Ear, on his Left hand telling him that the party he holds
his finger against, is not Equipt, that is, well furnished with Money or
Clothes; another he has marked out by this time, that is not Bien Gaunte,
Modish in his Gloves, after which admiring his wit, in discanting upon these
observations, he has made; he falls out into a loud Laughter, and lifting up
his hands and eyes in a Commical Ecstasy; gives a stamp or two with his foot,
at which the Drawer thinking the Company called; for now, by the hour of the
night, he imagined it was time for them to be gone, up he comes upon his half
trot, Crying, Gentlemen, do ye call; at which our Spark seeming very much
offended, that his heels should occasion the Company to be thus Interrupted,
and thinking himself mocked, starts up, and beholding the Drawer with a stern
Countenance, calling a hundred Dogs and Sons of Whores, he cries. the World is
very Gressier, that is dull, ill bred, and unmannerly, upon which, by and by,
coming Sir, sneaks down without the least reply, then sitting gravely down
again, he throws his Orangers Carlesly on the Table, as in a huff, being put
out of humor Baccuses valet: These are Gloves scented with Essence, or Butter
of Orange Flowers, or some such thing, and this he does, that they may be taken
notice of, to be the finest well scented pair in the Company: Then one Leg is
upon a Chair in a rening posture, though indeed it is only to show you that he
has new Picards, ala mode de France that is new Shoes of the French fashion; I
do not mean their wooden ones worn by the Country Peasants, but such as tread
the Spacious walks of Versailles, his Rolls then are strained higher with both
hands, that is the knee Rolls of his Stockings, that you may s^e how Complete
they fit, and his Surtout, (which our Ignorant Ancesters, not understanding the
French so well as their Po^^erity, called, an upper Garment,) is brushed down
with his hand, though not a speck be on it; the Reckoning paid, and passing by
the Bar, he must Kiss his Landlady, and seeming very much enamored with her
Ruby Face, tells her in a languishing Tone, she is Es^lat, the Luster of
Beauty, or some other fine Matter to that purpose, and so parting, says a
Revoir, Madam, till I see you again; then he being Top heavy, is for Couchee,
going to Bed; but not being able to pull off his Clothes, lies all Night in his
Brandenburger, or Nightgown Anger in Ladies, etc. discommendable and hurtful,
and by what means to be avoided and remedied. -- Anger is unseemly and
discommendable in all, but more especially in Young Ladies, who like Doves,
should be without the Gall that serments and stirs up these kind of Passions to
disturb and hurt the Mind, and ^pot the Names of those that indulge them with
the Epethits of rash, pievish, revengeful and inconsiderate Anger, is a
professed Enemy to Reason, Council, or found Advice; it is a storm and loudness
in which none of these can be heard, nor is it to be surpressed but by
something that is as inward as it self, and more habitual: So that we may
conclude, that of all Passions this chiefly endeavors to render Reason
useless. It surpasses Envy, for there are many things in the World so miserable
and contemptible, that they are below that; but Anger once let loose, quarrels
with every thing, even a Spot falling upon the Angry Person's Clothes, though
but of Rain, by the common Courses of Nature is a sufficient subject for it to
insist upon, till a Tempest rises in the Mind, and Heaven is cavell'd withal
for not restraining the Drops of the Clouds, till she was under a secure
shelter. But if it proceeds from a greater Cause, it turns to Fury; and so is
always either terrible or ridiculous; it makes a beauteous Face in a little
time Monstrously deformed and contemptible, rendering the Voice of an unpleasing
Sound, the Eyes fiery and staring, and seperates the the lovely mixture of
Roses and Lillies, by quite removing one or the other out of the Ladies Cheeks.
Anger in some causes a Paleness, and in others a fiery Red, the Mein and
Gesture is fierce and threatening, yet frequently very Antic, the Speech loud
and clamourous, it is neither Heroic nor Ingenious, always, or for the most
part proceeding from Pusilanimity or softness of Spirit, which makes the
Fair-Sex frequently more subject to Anger than the other, by reason the
Passions of their Minds are sooner moved and agitated; and this is the reason
likewise that old People are more pievish and angry than the younger sort. It
is a Passion more becoming Brui^s than rational Creatures, professing Charity,
Nobleness and Bounty, Meekness and Patience, in their Christian Calling. It is
troublesome not only to those that suffer it, but to those that behold it; it
makes Marriage to be necessary and an unavoidable. Trouble Friendships,
Societies and Familiarities to be intolerable: It makes innocent Jesting to be
the beginning of Tragedies, it turns Friendship into Hatred, and makes one lose
one's self in the Alteration it makes, and turns the desires of Knowledge into
an itch of Wrangling, it adds Insolence to Power, it turns Justice into
Cruelty, and Judgment into Oppression, it changes Discipline into Tediousness,
and Hatred of liberal Institution; it makes those that are Prosperous to be
Envied, and those that are unfortunate to be unpitied; it is a Confluence of
all the irregular Passions; there is in it Envy, and Sorrow, Fear, Scorn,
Pride, and Prejudice, Rashness, and Inconsideration, a rejoicing in Evil, and a
desire to inflict Punishment; it has Self-Love, Impatience, and Curiosity, and
above all, it is the most troublesome to those that possess it: Be diligent
then, Ladies, to observe that it gain not too great a Power over you, least
when you think to surpass it; you run into another Error, by being passionate
and angry with your selves, for being angry like Physicians, who give a bitter
Potion when they intend to eject the bitterness (...) Choler, for this will but
provoke and increase the Passion therefore rather placidly an^ quietly set upon
the Mortification of it, do it by degree and make no thorough resolve at first,
but resolve not to be Angry for a time, and the^ watch over your Passion, an^
let it not kindle so much as within; and the shorter the Time, the less Trouble
it wi^^ be unto you; and so you may encroach upon it, till a^ length you subdue
and bring i^ under; and then you may say you have truly conquered and triumphed
over your self; and the better to do it, observe what we now lay down a^ Rules
to be regarded in avoiding or remedying this dangerous Evil. (1.) Anger arising
in your Breasts, instantly seal up your Lips, and let it not go forth; for like
Fire, when it wants vent, it will suppress it self. It is good in a Feavor to
have a tender smooth Tongue, but it is better that it be so in case of Anger,
for if it be rough and distempered, There it is an i^^ Sign, but here it is an
ill Cause. Angry Passion is a Fire, and Angry Words are like Breath to fan them
together; they are like the Steel and the Flint, sending out Fire by mutual
Collusion: Some will discourse themselves into Passion, and if those they
discourse withal be kindled too, they flame with Rage and Violence. -- (2.)
Observe that Humility is the most excellent natural Cure for Anger; for he, or
she, that daily considers his, or her own Infirmities, make a Neighbors or
Servants Errors their own Case, and remember that their is daily need of God's
Pardon, and the Charity of our Neighbor; and so neither will be apt to rage at
the Lenities, Misfortunes, or Indiscretions of another, of greater than which
they consider they are very frequently, and more inexcuseably guilty. Let us
remember the Examples of those prudent and patient Persons in Scriptures, and
such Histories as we have read, who have overcome, and subdued their Angers,
whose firm and constant Souls nothing could trouble or shake: And if we be
tempted to Anger in the Action of Government and Discipline to our Inferiors,
let us propound to our selves the Example of God the Father, who at the same
time, and with the same Tranquillity, decreed Heaven and Hell, the Joys of
Angels and blessed Souls, and the torment of Devils and wicked Spirits, and at
the Day of Judgment, when all the World shall burn under his Feet, he shall not
be at all enflamed or shaken in his Essential Seat and Center of Tranquillity
and Joy; and if at first the Cause may seem reasonable, yet stop your Anger,
and proceed in all things with Mildness, and Moderation, that so you may make a
better Judgment, and more easily determine what is fit to be done. Anger makes
People rush blindly upon things that many times they repent in their ruin. The
Athenians were extreme angry, and displeased with the Macedonian Government,
that Philip the Father of Alexander, as a Conqueror, had set over them; so that
when they heard that Alexander was dead at Babylon, they were imediately for
revolting and assuming their former Liberty; but Phocian staid their hasty
Proceedings, which their Anger to the Macedonians, who were set over them in
Command, was about upon a mere Rumor to put in practice, which if it had
failed to have been true, would have been their ruin, by telling them that they
ought advisedly to consider what they did, and that their rashness, if
Alexander was not dead, would bring a great Calamity upon them; but on the
other hand, if he were dead, their staying for the Assurance of it could no
ways prejudice them, for if he was dead to day, he would be as certainly dead
to morrow. So if your Servants, or Inferiors, deserve Punishment, staying till
to morrow will not make him innocent; but it will many times abate an unjust
Anger, and you see your Error, that in your Passion you was blind too. It Is the
greatest Victory for one to overcome one's-self; So Aristotle finding
Alexander the Great was causlesly in his Anger determined to put one of his
Princes to death, none of the Commanders daring to interceed in his behalf, the
Philosopher went boldly to the King, and told him he would that day that he
should be a greater Conqueror than ever he had been, to which Alexander (
admiring to what it should tend, seeing he had made so great a progress in
Arms, that he wept to think there was no more Worlds to Conquer) he would be
contented so to be, why then, says the other, I will that you Conquer your self
by subduing your Anger, which is more Glory to a Prince than the Conquering of
Armies, for there he is assisted by others and, but here his own Power and
Magnanimity is more evident, upon this a Pardon was granted: But for all this
there is something, that requires our Indignation, but it must be with great
Caution, and that is a displeasure against Sin, which is more properly called a
Holy Zeal than Anger, and an Effect of Love to God and our Brother; For whose
Interest we may, like concerned Persons, be passionate, and if we take care
that our Anger makes no Reflection of Scorn or Cruelty upon the Offender, or of
Pride and Violence, and Transportation on our selves it is not blameable.

Ability, In some Women, why Extraordinary. Although Man from the Dominion
given him in Paradise, may style himself Superior, and boast of his wonderful
Abilities; looking on those in Women, much Inferior. Yet let us mind him that
he frequently runs into mistakes; for though the Strength of body may be
different, by reason that of the fair Sex is Soft, and Pliable, made for
Pleasure, and Charming Attraction; more than Rebu^^ Actions, and suffering
hardship: Yet we conclude, that either Souls, proceeding from the Same Fountain
of Life; can admit of no difference, or distinction, and where the Organick
parts are Entire and Undisturbed; why should they not equally operate. If we
consider, Women in these particulars, we find her more lively and active than
Men, by reason of her Soft Contexture: Nature has not been wanting to frame
this Cabinet of the Soul to the best Advantage, manifesting her self herein, an
excellent work Mistress, for a Creature more Regular in every part or fairer,
and more lovely in proportion she never made: Therefore those that Object, that
the difference is in the Organs of the Body, where the Soul Actuates in the
several Faculties, may here be mistaken unless in case of some visible defect,
as in Idiots Madmyn, or those not of years of Discretion, or where distempers
Reign and Disorder the frame of Nature, nor can the reasons they would fain
seem to draw from the Coldness of the Woman's Constitution, be allowed in this
case to hinder them from vigor, Activity, Acuteness, and solid Judgment, since
Experience shows us the contrary, and we frequently find that a Woman's Wit upon
a sudden Conception or a swift turn, is most available, and many times draws
Men out of danger, which they would otherwise sink under, by their own
Inadvertencies, when all their solid reason, as they term it, would fail to
help them at a dead Lift. -- Any one of Understanding observes that Men are of
diverse Complexions and Constitutions yet of every kind, there have been some
famous on sundry Accounts, as in Learning, Arts, and Arms, etc. And Men
doubtless of Phlegmatic, or Melancholy Complexions, cannot easily be allowed
to be of hotter Constitutions than Women that are of Choleric and Sanguine
ones; if it be measured by strength, which heat in General gives more to the
Men than to the Women: We answer, that some Women are stronger than some Men,
which they have proved in War, and by the Achievement of much Fame and Renown;
and therefore their Souls freedom in Acting, cannot reasonably be said to be so
restrained, but that they move and operate in their degrees, equal at least to
those of Men: But for a plainer Demonstration, we see that Crooked Deformed
body ( which one might imagine should have more obstructions, and hindrances,
than one cast in Natures curious Mould,) is frequenly joined with a Beautiful
Mind that makes even the Bodies Deformities seem Fair and Lovely: Aristotle was
Crooked and Deformed, yet the World has never since been known, to produce a
Man of so universal Learning, and Skill, in all Arts and Sciences. And to
confute the main Obstruction, we find that Men of the coldest Constitutions,
are frequently the Wisest and most Judicious; too much heat being an Enemy to
the Sagacity of the Understanding: And is rather fit to push them rashly on to
unadvised attempts and actions; why then, though Women in General, are granted
to be of a colder Constitution than Men, should that hinder them from being
Prudent, Learned, and Skilled in Arts and Sciences: We can find no warrantable
Reason to Obstruct it; and therefore must be apt to think, that Men having
gotten the upper hand, and Engrossed the Power; will right or wrong have Women
to be no wiser than they will have them to be and then to be sure, they will
not allow them to be so wise as themselves; what ever Evidence they can bring
as plain Proof and Demonstration, a Masterpiece in Cunning. We must allow it
is in the Men to Endeavor as much as in them lies, to keep the Fair-Sex in
Ignorance, that they may Reign the more securely without Control, and to
Effect it possess them if possibly, with a belief of their Incapacity, that
they are not made to reach at Sublime things, but ought to be contented, and
rest satisfied with things that are In view, near at hand and Easy to be
obtained: Thus the Turk keeps Learning from his Subjects, that in ignorance
they may bear their Chains with more content. And the Church of Rome, that her
Proselytes may wander in a Mind Devotion and not be able to discover her
Errors, though many break through these clouds and appear with the brighten
(...). Men Indeed, have been very ungrateful to them, in not only declining to
give them their due praises, but in laboring to Eclipse their same in their
Writings, they should out shine their own. They (...) to let you see your (...)
Equal force and (...) that your Wisdom (...) Inferior, nor your Thoughts
confined to narrower (...) than theirs: Therefore as many of your Sex have
bravely done, so it is your part to imitate them in breaking through this tender
Cobweb, of Ignorance in which Men like subtle Spiders, would detain you to gain
the advantage to themselves of Triumphing over your better Parts and Abilities,
we have given you in this Work diverse Examples of those that have set Patterns
for you to imitate and copy out, which may Excite and Stir up a generous Flame
in your Breasts, to Learning, Arts, Sciences, etc. And since God has made you
so Lovely and Charming, that no Creature in the Universe is comparable to you
for the Beauty of your Bodies: Let your Souls be also Beautiful, which will
render you far more Lovely and Amiable in the Eyes of God and Man, and either
fully Answer or Baffle all that can be objected against you. The Bearing
Children is no sign of your weakness, but rather adds to your Glory, by a
Revival of Mankind; without which the World would soon become a desert: And
without which, all Mankind must have been inevitably miserable, how often do we
find in Holy Writ, that God Communicated his Holy Spirit to Women that
P^^p^^hed, and if he had thought them unfit for the Sacred an undertaking by
reason of the difference of Soul, he would not have ^^^^ed them with such
power as the delivering the Wife and Sacred Oracles of Truth, we blame Eve,
because she transgressed in Paradise, having no example before her, yet do not
consider what power it was, that tempted her, no less than a fallen Archangel,
wise and subtle, and yet Men consider not how easily they are drawn away to
commit sin and folly, though thousand of Examples are before their Eyes, even
by far inferior temptations and tempters: And indeed what can we say of Adam,
he easily took the bait, which his Wife did not without parley and a kind of
caution; she remembered the strict Command given by her Maker, concerning the
Interdicted Tree, and urged it as the proof of her Obedience: But we find not
that Adam so much as minded it, till he had s^ansgressed, and his Conscience
was awaked from its Innocent Security, by the Intrusion of Guile: And yet this
is the greatest Invective Men have against the Sex, not considering how (...)
themselves have been; however by the means of a Blessed Woman, Reparation is
made, and Men are again put into a possibility of gaining a better Paradise,
and yet we cannot but blush to see how little they regard it, and how they sell
and forfeit it for (...) and (...). (...) (^^^^tarium) p^operly spoken of
married person; but if only one of two persons, by whom this sin is committed,
be married, it makes Adultery; Adulterium, seems to have taken that name, as it
were ad ulterius thorum, i. to another bed, which the Adulterers always aims
at. Adultery and Vu^leanness; The dangerous Consequences that attend it, and
the dishonor it puts on the Fair Sex, and Revenge it stirs them up to; And
raging Lusts have occasioned a World of Miseries to fall upon Men and Women,
ending generally in Blood and Disgrace, therefore to caution either Sex
carefully to avoid that spare, we have thought fit to say something of it in
this Book, as not perhaps foreign from the Subject. -- At a certain place in
the Territories of John Duke of Bargundy, in an ancient Emblem, was to be seen
a Pillar which two Hands seemed to labor to overthrow, the one had Wings, and
the other was figured with a Tortois, and the word V^^^^que, which in plain
terms may be interpreted, by one way or other. There are many Amorists that
take the same Course in unlawful Amors, some strike down the Pillar of
Chasti^^, by the impertuous Violence of great Promises and unexpected Presents;
others with (...) slo^ly to be the (...) sure of Accompli^^^ng, (...) with long
(...) Submiss^on, and (...); yet when they gain the Fort either by storm or
tiresom long siege, it brings the Victor and the Vanquished most commonly to a
sad Repentance, there is many times brought in an unexpected Reckoning, that
drenches all their sweet pleasures in Blood and Confusion: And draws the Sables
of Death over their promised mountains of delicious Recreation, though no one
can hope to find Constancy in such Love; for Virtue depraved, and Chastity once
fullied, become regardless; and the Favors that were difficult to be attained
before, grow cheap and common, as a Modern Poet has expressed it: O Heaven,
were she but mine, and mine alone;
Ah, why are not the Hearts of Women known!
False Women to new Joys unseen can move,
There are no prints left in the paths of Love;
All Goods besides by public Marks are known,
But what we most desire to keep has none.
Even the Frosts of Age, and decrepped Years has so much Fire alive under the
decayed Embers of Life, as to heat their Desires: This way, though Impotences
has put Bars and Boundaries to any vigorous Attacks. Unlawful Lust extinguished
the Wisdom of Solomon. Sampson himself, was enervated by it. Lot forgot and
committed folly tho a little before he had seen Heavens flaming Vengance,
consume so many thousands, together with their Cities. Unlawful Lust made Ely's
Sons fall in Battle, and rent the Priesthood from their House for ever. Amnon
fell for Ravishing Thamar; the two Elders for attempting to violate the
Chastity of Susanna, and many more: For where this violent Distemper breaks
out, Human Divine Laws, Precepts, Exhortations, fear of God or Men, fair or
foul means, Fame, Fortune, Shame, Disgrace, Honor, are not Bars sufficient to
keep them from breaking in: The Scorching Beams, under the Equinoctial, or
Extremity of Cold under the Artick-Circle, (where the Seas are glazed with the
Winter's lasting Tyranny) cannot expel or avoid this Heat, Fury, or Rage of
Mortal Men, though so Ruinous and Destructive in it self. -- At the Coronation
of Edwin, who succeeded King Eldred, Lust so overcome that Prince in the
height of his Jollitry, that before several of his Nobles, he committed Adultry
with a very honorable Lady his near Kinswoman, and liked her then so well,
that he found means to cause her Husband to be Murdered, that he might Enjoy
her more freely; but remained not long unpunished, for the Mercians and
Northumbrians revolted to his younger Brother, which so perplexed him, that in
great Pain and Grief he soon after Dyed. -- A Captain under the Duke of Anjou,
when he came to Assist the Revolted Netherlanders against the Spaniards, coming
into a Farmer's House, and not content with the Provisions they aforded him on
sreecost, he demanded his Daughter for his pleasure, the Countryman, who loved
her dearly, entreated him he would be otherwise satisfied, offering him any
thing else that was in his power; but this so enraged him, that he ordered his
Soldiers to beat'em all out of doors except the young Woman, whom amidst Tears
and lamentable Cries, he forced to his Lust, and after his beastial appetite
was satisfied with unlawful pleasure, he fell to flouting and dispising her;
This Mastered up a Woman's Revenge, in its most bloody shape; so that being at
the Table with him, the with one home-thrust of a sharp Knife; let out the hot
Blood that circled in his Veins, whilst he was giving orders to one of his
Corporals, and not aware of the stroke that brought him sudden death. Thas you
see Carnal Lust. -- It Is a bewiching evil, being an (...) appetite, in
whomsoever it reigns, it k^lleth all good motions of the mind, (...) dries
and weakeneth the body, shortning life. deminishing memory, and understanding.
-- Cirena, a notorious strumpet, was surnamed Dodo Camechana, for that she
found out and invented twelve several ways of beastly pleasure -- Proculeius
the Emperor, of an hundred Samatian Virgins he took Captives, defloured ten
the first might, and all the rest within fifteen days after. -- Hercules in one
night defloured fifty. -- Sigismund Malatesta, strived to have carnal knowledge
of his Son Robert, who thru^^ing his dagger into his Fathers ^osom, revenged
his wickedness. -- Cleopatra, had the use of her brother At^^o^eus's company,
as of her Husband. -- Auteochus staid a whole winter in Chalcidea, for one Maid
which he there fancied. -- Lust was the cause of the Wars between the Romans
and the (...). -- Thalestins Queen of the Amazons came 2^ days journey to lie
with Alexander -- Adultery in Germany is never pardoned. -- (...) and P pilia
were so inco^in (...), that they commended with most shameful (...) themselves
without respect of time, place, or company, to any, though never so (...). --
(...), not co^^ented with ^is three (...) commi^ted (...) si^te^s -- (...)
like, (...) the (...) by his wi^e, the (...). -- A (...) the c^^se of the (...)
of the City of Rome. -- Sempronia, a woman well learned in the Greek, and
Sappho no less famous, defended Luxury and Lust by their Writings. -- Cleopatra
invited Anthony to a Banquet in the Province in Bithynia in the wood Sesthem,
where, at one instant, of threescore young Virgins, fifty and five were made
Mothers. -- Cleophis a Queen of India, saved her Kingdom and Subjects from
destruction, by a nights lodging with Alexander, by whom she had a Son called
Alexander, who was afterward King of India; she was ever after called Scortum
Reginum. -- Jane Queen of Naples was hanged up for her Adultery, in the same
place where she had hanged her husband Andreas before, because he was not (as
she said) able to satisfy her beastly desire. -- Foron King of Egypt, had been
blind ten years, and in the eleventh the Oracle told him that he should recover
his sight, if he washed his Eyes in the water of a Woman which never had to do
with any but her husband; whereupon, he first made trial of his own wife, but
that did him no good; after of infinite others, which did him all as little
save only one, by whom he recovered his fight, and then he put all the rest to
death -- Julia, the Daughter of Augustus, was so immodest, shameless, and
unchaste, that the Emperor was never able to reclaim her: And when she was
admonished to forsake her bad kind of life, and to follow chastity as her
Father did, she answered, That her Father forgot he was Caesar, but as for
herself, she knew well enough, that she was Caesar's Daughter. -- Caelius
Rhodoginus, In his II Book of Antiquities, tells of a certain man, that the
more he was beaten, the more he fervently desired women. -- The Widow of the
Emperor Sigismund intending to marry again, one persuaded her to spend the
remainder of her life after the manner of the Turtle Dove, who has but one
Mate; If you counsel me (quoth she) to follow the example of Birds, why do you
not tell me of Pigeons and Sparrows, which after the death of their Mates, do
ordinarily couple with the next they meet. -- Hiero King of Syracusa, banished
the Poet Epicharmus, for speaking wantonly before his Wife, and that very
justly, for his Wife was a true Mirror of Chastity. -- Sulpitius Gallius, put
away his Wife by divorce, because she went about unmasked. -- Pompey, caused
one of his Soldiers eyes to be put out in Spain, for thrusting his hand under
a Woman's Garment that was a Spainard; and for the like offense, did Sertorius
command a footman of his band to be cut in pieces. -- If Caracalla had not seen
his Mothers thigh, he had not married her. -- Tigellenus died amongst his
Concubines. -- -- The Terentines had taken and spoiled Carbinas, a Town in
Japyges, and were not only for Ravishing the Women themselves, but permitted
Strangers that came that way to do it; even in the Temple, where they had
Penned them up naked, Divine Vengeance over-took them. so that all who had
committed this Villainy were struck dead with Lightning from Heaven, and their
own Friends looking upon it as a just Judgment, were so far from pitying them;
that they offered Sacrifice to Jupiter the Thunderer. It would be too tedious
to draw the Scene too open, and discover the miseries that have befallen such,
as have been eager in pursuit of these Vices; they have occasioned the
subversions of Kingdoms and States. Tarquine the proud and all his Race were
driven out of England, for Ravishing Leucretian, who finding her Chastity
violated, though by a King, killed her self, and if we believe our
Chronologers, it occasioned the calling in the Danes; by the incensed Husband,
who had been Ravished by the Kings Viceroy in the North, and with them came in
a Deluge of miseries, for almost a hundred years. The Adulteries of Fergus King
of Scotland, was by the occasion of hers, likewise; for when she had killed him
in his bed, and was yet unsuspected for the good opinion all people had of her
virtue; hearing that diverse people, ignorant of the Murder, were tortured, in
order to a Confession: She came into the Judgment Hall, where the Lords and
others were Assembled and thus Expressed^ her self. -- As for me (said she)
good People, I know not what it is that moves me, nor what Divine Vengeance
pursues and vexes me; with diverse Cogitations, but this I am sure of all this
day I have had no rest, nor quiet either in body or mind: And truly when I
heard that diverse guiltless Persons, were cruelly tortured: Here in your
presence, had it not been for their sakes, I had soon rid my self out of the
way, and not have appeared in this place, to have declared the kings death was
my own Act; my Conscience constrains me to Confess the Truth, without
considering my own safety, least the Innocent should wrongfully perish.
Therefore take it for a certain Truth, that I, and I alone am she, that with
these wicked hands did strangle Fergus the last Night, being moved thereto by
two as sharp Motives as can possibly incite a Woman's Impatient Desire and
Furious Reverge: Fergus, by his continual Converse with Concubines, has a long
time denied me the right of a Wife; whereupon when by my often reproofs, I
dispaired to bring him to Reason: My Breast swelled with vehement Rage and
Fury, which drove me on Impetuously to commit so a wicked a Deed. I thought it
better to dispatch the Adulterer, than being destitute of my Husband, and
defrauded of all Queen-like Honor; to live Subject to the Injuries and
Affronts of such Base Women as he kept in my stead. Give Liberty therefore to
those that are wrong-fully accused of the Kings Death. And as for me, you need
not proceed against me, for I that had the boldness to do this Fact, will not
fear to do Execution upon my self, even here in your Presence. What Honor is
due to the Dead, see it performed. -- At the End of this Oration, she drew out
a Dagger, and Stabbing her self to the heart; fell down dead amongst them, who
were amazed at her Constancy in Dying, and could not but pity her as an
unfortunate Woman. Affability, Commendable in Women kind. Affability, is highly
Commendable, and Sparkles like a bright Jewel in the Coronet of Beauty: It may
be considered either as a mere humane accomplishment, or a divine virtue; and
in either Notion, it is worthy of praise, but it is the latter that gives it
the highest Excellence and Perfection. In the first Notion, we may properly
take an Estimate of its value, by its Cause and Effects. -- As for its Cause,
it derives it self either from a native Candor and Generosity of Mind, or else
from an Ingenious and Noble Education, or something Reciprocally from both, and
these are as good Originals, as any thing, merely Moral, can proceed from, and
that these are truly it is Sources, common experence justifies those of the
largest Minds and Noblest Extraction, being commonly the most Affable
condescending and obliging, when on the other hand, those of the most
Abject-birth and Spirits; are the most insulting and Imperious. It is indeed a
great Error in Persons of honor, to conclude they acquire a profound reverence
and respect, by putting on a Supercilious Gravity, looking Coyly, and with
Disdain, as it were on all about them. This is certainly so far from that, that
it gives a just ground to suspect that it is but a Pagentry of Greatness, and
instead of teaching those they fancy admire them, to keep at a distance; they
rather by their stiffness invite them to a closer inspection, curiously to
Scrutenize their Originals, and find whether or no they are of Mushrom growth,
or of Ancient standing, for there is no such prying Inquisitor as Curiosity,
when it is moved to by the sense of contempt. -- Affability carries it is just
Esteem always along with it; endears to all, and often in ^pight of many
blemishes, keeps up a Reputation: A kind word or a pleasing look from one of
worth and quality is strangly Charming, insensibly Stealing away our hearts.
Plutar^n observes of Cleomenes King of Sparta, that when the Grecians compared
his easiness of Access and Affability, with the state and sullen Pride of other
Princes, they were so in love with his Winning and Courteous Behavior, that
they only judged him worthy to be a King, and as there is no certainer, so
there is no Cheaper way of gaining Affection: A kind Salutation, is as easy as
a Reproach or Frown; and by Affability, those kindnesses may be preserved,
which will not if once forfeited, be recovered at a far greater Price.
Moreover, when humane vicissitudes are rightly weighed, it may be a point of
Providence, for the Greatest Persons may sometimes stand in need of the
assistance of the Meanest, as the Globe of Fortune may move upon her fickle
Axis. It Is Prudence then to be obliging to all, and give none occasion to hate
us, and become our Enemies when we have most need of Succor. That Emperor no
doubt considered this, who said, he would entertain the Address of his
Subjects, as if he were a Subject himself. And since in a strict sense, even
among the Ladies, there are degrees; she many times who is Superior to one, is
Inferior to another; they have a ready way to compare the Civility they pay,
with what themselves but reasonably Expect. Let one of the Fair ones then, who
meets with a cold and neglectful treatment from any Superior to her, examine
her own resentments, and then reflect, that if she gave the like to her
Inferior, it must be as coursly resented there: And therefore she ought to
resolve never to offer what so much distasts her self to another, and by
observing it, she may convert an Injury into a Benefit, making their ill
nature, her own discipline, and civilize her self by the Rudeness of others. --
Affability is now come to be considered by us in its Second Notion, wherein we
justly allow it to be a Divine Virtue; nor have we lesser Authority than St.
Paul's to justify it, who incerts it in the number of those Christian Graces
that are by him recommended to the Roman Proselytes, Romans 12.16. Condescend to
them of low Estate, and that it is value may be the more discernable, He joins
it with Humility: It immediately follows his Precept, viz. be not high minded;
we may therefore conclude that Courtesy and obliging behavior of this kind,
in respect of its Source and Original, is very much to be preferred before that
which only springs from Natural or Prudential Motives: And since we find it
natural for every production to have some Similitude, this is to be observed no
less Excellent in respect to its Properties, as it is desent, which may be
demonstrated in only instancing two of them, viz. Sincerity and Constancy. --
Affability then as to the first of these, as far as it partakes of Humility, in
such a degree, it must likewise partake of Sincerity; that being a Virtue whose
proper Elements are Simplicity and Plainness, so having no ill design, it wants
no Umbrage or Coverture, it has no occasion for those Subtilties and
Simulations, those Artifices and Pretenses required by those that do. It Is the
Precept of the Apostle, Phil.. 2.3. In Lowliness of mind, Let each esteem
others better than himself, by which we may gather, that it is the nature of a
lowly Mind, to Transfer that Esteem to others, which he voluntarily substracts
from himself. And where such an Esteem is planted in the Heart, it verifies
every Expression and outward Signification of respect; rendering the greatest
Condescensions (which to an Insolent humor may seem Extravagant and Affected)
Unseigned and the highest Reality; when on the contrary, a Courtesy which
derives no higher than from mere humane Principles, there is no greater stress
to be laid upon it, nor is it much to be confided in. -- Affability under this
notion has as we have said, Constancy for it is second Property; for it is not
only true to others, but is so to its self, as being founded on the solidst of
Virtues; not being subject to those giddy uncertainties that are incident to
vulgar Civilities, for he who out of disesteem of his proper worth, has placed
himself in an inferior Station, will not conclude it an Arbitrary matter, but
rather a just debt to pay a respect to those in a Superior Station, they had
Access to it by his Voluntary receeding; For an humble mind will see in others
something or other, to which it will allow preference, so that acting upon a
fixed Principle, it runs not the hazard of Contradictions, but is rendered
sweet and affable, whilst what is more stiff and unplyable, is not regarded
unless with contempt, and neglect; except the party holds conversation with
Flatterers, and Parasits, who sell their breath to make their advantage, and
prey upon him; but then again, he is frustrated even of their Encomiums if it
so happen, that the prosperous Gales increase into a shipwrecking Storm, than
those who were prodigal of their civilities whilst nothing else was want^ng to
make him swell above himself, will withdraw even those from him; least by their
being continued, they should ^ncourage him to ask some^hing more of him, which
his ^rgent Necessities in his de^ressed Condition more earn^stly crave and
require; Job ^ompares such to Winter Brooks ^unning over, when not need^d, but
shrinking away, and ^rying up, when the heat of ^ummer causes the greatest
thirst, and their Waters are ^ost coveted for cooling and ^efreshment; or if it
has been ^is good Luck to happen upon ^ome of a more generous Temper, who
instead of a servile ^ompliance with his Humor and high Characters of his
worth, entertains him with ^he true Image of himself; it (...) frequently held
as an unpardonable Crime, which forfeits ^ll degrees of Favor, and does ^ot
only avert but incence, and ^nflame the easy stirred up Passi^ns of an unsteady
Mind, till ^ breaks out into a violent Anger; for a faithful Monitor is ^s
unacceptable as a true Look^ng-glass to a deformed Person, which at the best
will be set ^side, and escapes well if not ^roken; and Ladies, we must
^cknowledge (for this is ap^licable to either Sex) whilst ^reat Persons
dispense their ^rowns, or Favors, by such ^easures, they will be sure to ^o it
unjustly as well as un^onstantly. Anyle, an Epigrammatick Poetess, whose name
is to 17 Greek Epigrams: Her Verses of Birds are said to be yet extant.
Aspasia, a Noble Milesian Dame, said to have been the Mistress, that is, the
Instructress of Pericles, the Great Athenian Philosopher and Orator.
Astyanassa, one of the Maids of Honor to that Helena, whose Beauty set Troy on
fire, whom yet surpassing in the Theory of active Love, she impudently
committed by writing to the public view; and as it is supposed in Verse, the
Descriptions of more Spintrian Pranks and Gambols, then perhaps her Mistress
ever practiced or understood; and which seem to have been a Pattern of those
lewd Inventions, which the witty ribauld Aretine, in after Ages, broached for
the use of the Sons of Priapus; nor were their wanting in those Times apt
Scholars to such a Mistress, who prosecuted and enlarged upon the Subject the
had begun; Philenis, a Strumpet of Leucadia, as unchaste, faith a late Author in
her Verses, as her Life. Athenais, the Daughter of Leontius, an Athenian
Sophist; a Woman of that Wisdom and Ingenuity, as that she was thought worthy
to be chosen for a Wife by the Emperor Theodosius the Second. Angela de
^ugarolis, an Italian Lady, accomplished in Grammar, Rhetoric, and Poetry.
Anne Askew, the Daughter of Sir William Askew, of Lincolnshire; she is
remembered among the English Writers, as well as in Verse as Prose, for a Woman
of singular Beauty, Virtue and Ingenuity. Anne Broadstreet, a New England
Poetess; She writ Descriptions of the Four Elements, the Four Humors, the
Ages, the Four Seasons, and the Four Monarchies. Anna Maria Shurman, an
Holandish Lady, of the most celebrated Fame for Learning of any of her Sex that
I have heard of in Europe, at this day, by her Epistles to many of the most
Eminently Learned Men of this Age. Arabella, an English Lady, in the time of
King James, a near Kinswoman of his, she was a Lady of no less Eminence for
Learning and ingenuous Parts, then for her Quality; and as says an English
Writer, who makes a mention of her, She had a great facility in Poetry, and was
elaborately conversant among the Muses. She had Correspondence with Andrew
Melvin, the witty Scotchman in the Tower, being Prisoner there at the same
time. Aurca Behn, a Dramatick Writer. She writ the Dutch Lover, the Amorous
Princess, the Forced Marriage, a Tragy-Comedy, the Fatal Jealousy, a
Tragedy,etc. Affinity. ( Affinitas) (...) dred or alliance by Marria^^
sometimes likeness of ag^ meant. Address or Adress, ( Fr^^ direction; a short
court^ near and ready way. I ad^^ my self to such a Person, i^ resort unto,
make toward, make my application to hi^ Age. (aetaes) that part o^ Man's Life
which is from Birth to this or his last Day, Man, by our Common-L^^ has two
Ages; the Age 21 Years is termed his (...) Age, and 14 the Age of dis^^tion,
Lit. l. 2. c. 4. In a W^man there are six. 1. At ^ven Years of Age she may
c^^sent to Matrimony. 2. At (...) she is Dowable. 3. At twe^^^ Years she is
able finally to c^^firm her former consent gi^^ to Matrimony. 4. At fo^^teen
she is enabled to rece^^^ her Land into her hands, ^ shall be out of Ward if
she of this Age at the death of (...) Ancestor. 5. At sixteen (...) she shall
be out of Ward, thou^^ at the death of her Ancestor was within the Age of
fourt^^ Years. 6. At one and Twe^^^ Years she is able to alienate Lands and
Tenements. ^^clus, (a Greek Author) divi^^ the Life of Man into seven A^^ 1.
Infancy contains four Ye^^^ 2. Childhood contains ten Ye^^^ 3. Youthhood or
Adolesce^^ consists of eight Years tha^ from fourteen to two and tw^^ty. 4.
Young-manhood co^^^^ues nineteen Years, that is, from two and twenty to forty
^ne. 5. Ripe-man-hood has ^ifteen Years of continuance, therefore makes his
progress to ^6 Years. 6. Old Age, which ^n adding 12 to 56 makes up ^8.7.
Decrepit Age is limi^ed from 68 Years to 88. See ^ore divisions of Age, if you
^lease in first part Treasury of Times, p. 377. and in Vul. Err. p. 216.
Alimony, (Alimonia) nou^ishment, maintenance; but in a modern legal Sense it
signifies that portion or allowance, which a married Woman sues for, upon any
occasional separation from her Husband, wherein she is not charged with
Elopement or Adultery. This was formerly recoverable in the Spiritual Court,
but now only in Chancery. Abortion, an untimely Birth or Miscarriage, which
happens through diverse Causes, Inward and Outward. Amnion, the Membrane with
which the Faetus in the Womb is most immediately clad, which with the rest of
the Sc^ndine, the Chorion and Alantoin, is ejected after the Birth; it is
whiter and thinner than the Chorion. It contains not only the Faetus, but the
nutritious Humor, whence the Faetus by the Mouth and Throat sucks its
nourishment. It is outwardly clothed with the Urinary Membrane, and the
Chorion, which sometimes stick so close to one another, that they can scarce be
separated. Dr. Blanchard. Amazons, ( Amazones,) Warlike Women of Scythia, that
had but one Teat (their name in Greek impowring as much) they were very
Man-like, and cut off their Right Breasts, that it might not hinder their
shooting for they were excellent Archers; they lived by themselves, and if at
any time they went to their Husbands or neighboring Men, and conceived; if it
were a Female Child, they kept it; if a Male, they sent it to the Father; The
Country where they lived is denominated from them, and called Amazonia.
Anchores^, a Religious Woman that Lives solitarily in a Cell. Vide Anachorite.
Anne, (Heb. Hannah) gracious or merciful. Annulet, (Annulus) a Ring, or any
thing like a Ring. Aretaphila, ( Gr. i.e. amatrix virtutus) a lover of, or
friend to virtue, a Woman's Name. Abia, Hercules Daughter. Aegiale, the Wife of
Diomedes, an Adultress. Aegina, Jupiter's Mistress in the shape of fire. Aegle,
Daughter of Hesperus, King of Italy. Agatha, g. good, a Woman's Name. Aglata,
one of the Graces. Aglais, a very great sheeater, Megale's Daugther. Agnes, g.
chaste, a Woman's Name. Agnodice, a Maid Physician. Alepone, Neptunes Daughter,
turned into a King-fisher. Ambosexons, Male and Female. Amorets, f. Love toys.
Amulet, l. a ball about the neck to keep from Poison or Witchcraft. Amymone,
one of Danaiis's fifty Daughters, Mother of Nauplius by Neptune. Anetis, a
Lydian Goddess. Anatiferius, l. Bringing the age of old Women. Anaxarete, a
hard hearted Virgin turned into a stone. Anchoress, a Nun. Andrago, g. a Manly
Woman. Andrast^s, Andate, Goddess of Victory among the Britans. Andromache, g.
[many fight] Hectors wife. Andromeda, Cepheus's daughter. Aretapila, g. a
she-friend of virtue. Arethusa, Daughter of Nereus a river of Sicily; also an
Armenian fountain in which nothing sinks. Ariadne, Daughter of Minos.
Asbiaroth, Goddess of the Adonians. Assedrix, a she-assistant, a Midwife.
Astroarch, Queen of Pl^nets, the Moon. Atalanta, the swift Lady won by
Hipomanes's three Golden Apples. Arthis, Daughter to Cranaus, King of Athens.
Ave Marie, l. Her Salutation by the Angel. Avice, Hildevig, Sa. Lady ^^
defense. Anses, African Virgins used to combat in honor of Minerva. Autonoe,
Actaeon's Mother. Agetus, the Lacedemonian, Herodotus, lib. 6. thus writes of
this Lady, the Daughter of Alcydes the Spartan, first wife to Agetus, and after
to the King Ariston. She, of the most deformed, became the excellentest amongst
Women. Aristorlea, Of all the deaths that I have read of; this of Aristoclaea,
methinks exceeds example, with which, howsoever her body was tormented, her
soul could not be grieved; for never woman died such a loving death. Her Lovers
contending in the heat of their affection, but not regarding her safety whom
they did affect, she as it were set upon the rack of Love, plucked almost to
pieces, betwixt them both expired. Ada, Alexander the Great, amongst his many
other conquests, having besieged the great City Halicarnassus and by reason, of
opposition made against him, levelled it with the ground. He entered Caria,
where Ada then reigned Queen, who being before oppressed by Orontobas (employed
by Darius) was almost quite beaten out of her Kingdom: Having at that time no
more of all her large Dominions left her, saving Alynda the most defenced City,
into which she had retired herself for safety, She hearing of Alexanders
approach, gave him a Royal meeting, and submitted herself, her Subjects and
City into his Power, withal Adopting him by the Name of Son. Agathoclea, Ptolme
being free from all foreign Invasions, he began Domestic troubles at home: For
being given over to his own Appetite, and besotted to his Insatiate Pleasures,
he first began with Loadice, (both his Sister and Wife) causing her to be
slain, that he might the more freely enjoy the society and fellowship of his
most rare and beautiful Mistress, Agathoclea: So that the greatness of his
Name, and the Splendour of his Majesty both set apart, he abandoned hinself
solely to Whoredoms by Night, and to Banquets and all profuseness of Riot by
day. Aristomache, Dionysius the Tyrant banished Dion out of Sicily, taking into
his own custody the Exiles Wife Aristomache, and her Daughter: But after, at
the great Intercession of one of his Servants. Polycrates (a man by him much
affected) he compelled the Lady (who still Lamented the absence of her Lord)
unto a second Marriage with this Polycrates, who was by Nation of Syracusa. But
Dion having gathered fresh Forces, and expelling Dionysius from Syracusa unto
the Locrenses: Arete his Sister, meeting him, and Congratulating his Famous
Victory, made Intercession for Aristomache, who with great shame had kept
herself from the presence of her first Husband, not daring to look him in the
Face, howsoever her second Nuptials were made by Force and Compulsion: But the
necessity of the cause, the wondrous submission and modest Excuse of
Aristomache, together with the Mediation of Arete, so much he prevailed with
Dion, (all confirming her innocence) that he received his wife and Daughter
into his Family, still continuing their former Love and Society. Artimesia,
Queen of Caria, so much honored the remembrance of her Husband Mausolus being
dead, that after Meditation. and deliberate counsel which way she might best
decorate his Hearse, and withal to express to Perpetuity; her unmatchable Love:
She caused to be erected over him, a Tomb so Magnificent, that for the Cost and
State, it was not doubted to be worthily reckoned amongst the Nine Wonders. But
what do I speak of so rich a Structure, when she her self became the living
Sepulcher of her dead husband, by their Testimonies who have Recorded, that she
preserved his bones, and having beaten them to powder, mingled their dust with
her Wine in remembrance of him, every morning and evening, Cicer. Tusc. lib. 3,
and Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5. Aretaphila Cyrenea, is deservedly numbered amongst
the Heroic Ladies, she lived in the time of Mithridates, and was the Daughter
of Aeglatur, and the Wife of Phedimus: A Woman of excellent Virtue, exquisite
Beauty, singular Wisdom, and in the Managing of Commonwealths business, and
Civil Affairs ingeniously Expert. Aurora, or the Morning, Hesiodus in Theog.
terms her the Daughter of Hyperion, and the Nymph Thya, and Sister to the Sun
and Moon. Others derive her from Tytan and Terra; they call her the way leader
to the Sun; as Lucifer the Day Star is styled her Henshman or Usher: For so
says Orpheus in an Hymn to Aurora. Homer in an Hymn to Venus, allows her
Roseat Fingers, a red or ruddy color, and to be drawn in a Golden Chariot.
Virgil sometimes allows her four Horses, sometimes but two, and those of a red
color. Theocrites describes them white or gray, according to the color of the
morning. Lycopheon in Alexandra, brings her in mounted upon Pegasus. Pausanius
in Laconie, Writes that she was doatingly besotted of the fair young Man
Cephalus, as likewise of Orion, in which Homer agrees with him. Apollodorus
makes her the Mother of the Winds and the Stars: Hesiod is of the same opinion,
that by prostrating herself to her Brother Astraeus, the Son of Hyperion and
Thya, she brought forth Argestre, Zephyrus, Boreas and Notus, with a Daughter
called Jadama. Amphitrite, Jupiter having expelled Saturn from his Kingdom, by
the help of his Brothers, Neptune and Pluto, and having cast Lots for the
Tripartite Empire; the Heaven fell to Jupiter, Hell to Pluto, and the Sea with
all the Isles adjacent to Neptune; who Solicited the Love of Amphitrite, but
she not willing to condescend to his Amorous purpose* he employed a Dolphin to
Negotiate in his behalf, who deals so well in the Business, that they were not
only reconciled, but soon after Married. For which, in the perpetual Memory of
so great and good an Office done to him, he placed him among the Stars, not far
from Capricorn, as Higinus has left remembered in his Fables, and Aratus in his
Astronomicks: Others contend that Venilia was the Wife of Neptune: But
notwithstanding his Love to, and Marriage with Amphitrite, he had many Children
by other Nymphs, Goddesses and Wantons. Ate. Ate, whom some call Laesio, is the
Goddess of Discord or Contention, and by Homer termed the daughter of Jupiter.
Ate prisca proles quae laserit omnes
Mortales.
Ate the ancient Offspring that has hurt and harmed all Mankind.

He calls her a certain Woman that to all men has been Obnoxious and Perilous
alluding (no doubt) to the Parent of us all, Eve, that first transgressed, and
by some Relics of Truth, with which he was enlightened, for he says

Filiae prima Jovis queque omnes perdidit Ate
Pernisciosa --
As much as to say, Pernicious Ate, the eldest daughter of Jupiter, who has
lost us all. In another Fable he alludes to the same purpose, where he says,
Jupiter notwithstanding he was the most wise of all Mortals, yet was in the
days of old tempted and deceived of his Wife Juno. And this Homer has plainly
delivered that the beginning of evil came first from a Woman, and by her the
wisest of Men was beguiled. Hesiod, (in his Book of Weeks and Days) is of the
same opinion, and writes to the same purpose: But in another kind of Fable,
from the old Tradition. For says he, From Pandora a Woman of all Creatures the
most fairest, and first created by the Gods, all mischiefs whatsoever were
dispersed through the face of the whole earth,

Aretaphile, was Wife to Nicecocrates, called the Tyrant of Cyrene, who very
passionately Loved her for extraordinary beauty, but was so detested by her for
his cruelty, that she complotted with Leander his Brother, to destroy him. One
Grand Motive Inducing her to it, was, that he had put her first Husband to
death to enjoy her; but being discovered e're she could give him the intended
Dose of Poison; she was Racked to Extort a Confession of her Accomplices, but
stood to firmly in her denial, that she was acquitted, yet gave not over her
enterprise, till she had accomplished it: And then Married Leander, who proving
more cruel than his Brother; She caused him to be sewed up in a Sack, and
thrown into the Sea where he perished: By which those of Cyrene gained their
lost Liberty; and in Grateful acknowment, offered her to be their Queen, but
she refused Sovereignty: And chus'd to live a private Life the rest of her
days. Arethusa, Daughter as tho Poets fable of Nereus Coris, one of the Nymphs
attending one the Goddess Diana; who flying the Embraces of Alpheus, is said,
upon her imploring the Goddess, to be turned into a Fountain which bears her
Name. Argyra, a Beautiful Nymph, whose Charming Features so Ravished Solemnus,
that not finding means to enjoy her, he dyed for Love: Whereupon Venus in
Compassion to his Sufferings* turned him into a Fountain, in which, whomsoever
Bathed, were Cured of Love; and had the Memory of the fair Female, for whom
they Languished obliterated. Ariadne, King Minos of Creets Daughter, who was
carried away by Theseus, after he had overcome the Minataure, but he in his
flight being warned by Bacchus to leave her in the Isle of Naxos, set sail
whilst she slept, who awaking and missing him, run about the Island in a
distracted Condition, till the fabled God came and Espoused her, and afterward
translated her to the Starry Region, where some of those bright Spangles are at
this day called her Crown. Ariadne, another of the Name, Wife to Leno, Emperor
of Constantinople: She caused her Husband to be made drunk, and then Emured him
in a Tomb: After that she placed Anastasius her Paramour in the Throne, and got
her Husbands brother whose right it was to be Excluded. Arie, an I^a^^an Lady,
wife (...), a Roman Senator, who advised her Husband to dye a Heroic death,
after he was condemned and showed him the way by first stabbing herself.
Athalia, Ahabs Daughter, Mother to Ahaziah, who being slain by Jebu, upon
notice of it, she put all the Royal Seed, except Joash, to death, who was saved
by Jehojadahs wife, and assumed, the Government but she was afterward slain in
the Court of the Temple, 2 King. 11. Augea, Daughter to Alaeus, she was
Ravished by Hercules, and of that Rape brought forth Telephus, which known to
the Father of Augea, he put her and her Son into a Chest, and cast them into
the River Caycus, but Venus taking compassion on them, caused it to float safe
till it was taken up by Teuthras the King of the Country; who Married the Lady
for her Beauty, and left the Kingdom to her Son after his decease. Aurora, held
to be the Daughter of the Earth and Sun, of whom Procris Wife of Cephalus,
being jealous, was slain with an Arrow by her Husband, who took her for a wild
Beast as she lay in the bushes, to discover his Amors. This Aurora, is fabled
to be Married to Tytheus, a very Ancient Man, which makes her rise Early in the
Morning, by reason she finds no pleasure in his cold Embraces. Signifying that
Young Ladies Married to old Men, think the Night tedious, and wish for day;
that they may disencumber themselves of Society so unagreeable to their
Constitutions. Arrabella d' Cordona, a Beautiful Spanish Lady of Toledo,
skilled in almost all the Arts and Sciences, her Music and Voice, Charmed all
that heard her, into wonder, and many of the Grandees labored to gain her in
Marriage; but she refused all Society with Men in that way, as having Vowed
perpetual Virginity. Antonia, Daughter to a Senator of Venice, although she had
diverse great Matches offered her: Yet she Married a poor Gardener, saying, She
would Wed for Virtue, and not for Riches; and lived with him a Contemplative
Life all her days. Aristoclea, a very Beautiful Lady, being courted at once by
Callisthenes, and Strato; the former, being the Richer gained her by the
Compulsion of her Parents, and the latter endeavoring to take her away by
force, she by interposing to part them, was killed; whereupon Strato killed
himself, and Callisthenes went distracted. Arsione, Daughter to Ptolomy Lagos,
one of the Greek Kings that Governed Egypt, she was first Married to L^simachus
Kind of Macedon, and then to her Brother Ptolomy Coraunnus, who murdered her
two Children by L^simachus, and deposing her; got the Kingdom of Macedon, yet
held it not long before he lost his Life: Of which proceedings else where, see
more at larg. Astrea, held to be Daughter of Jupiter and Themis and is styled
the Goddess of Justice, who in the Golden Age was sent from Heaven, but that
Age changing into Violence and Rapin, and no regard being given to her, she
^led back to Heaven; and there holds the Balances, or the Sign Libra in the
Zodiac. Atalanta, Daughter to Schoenus King of Scyros, who for her nimbleness
in running exceeded most of her Age* and being very Beautiful, she had many
Suitors, but resolved none should enjoy her, but him that could outrun her;
upon condition, that if she won the Race, he should be put to death that
undertook it, this dashed many out of Countenance, and many that she outrun
were slain with Darts, till Hippomanes praying at the Shrine of Venus for
assistance, had three Golden Apples given him, which in the Race he threw
diverse ways, and whilst she was heedful in gathering them, he gained the Goal,
and had her to wife: But afterward for desiling the Temple of Cyble, in lying
together under the Altar, they are (...) to be turned into a (...) and Lyoness.
Ate, held to be the Goddess of Strife and Envy, who made it her business to set
People at varience, but from her Malice there an appeal to the Lites Daughters
of Jupiter, who restored People to Peace and Concord, and prevented many
Mischiefs that would otherwise have befallen them. Atergatis, a Goddess,
worshipped by the Ascolonities, in the shape of a Mare-maid. Artificial Beauty.
I do find that washing and painting is condemned in Holy Writ, as the practice
of loose, licentious and lascivious Women; who with the deforming of their
Souls, and polluting their Consciences, do use the Art for embellishing their
Countenances. The New Testament affirms we cannot make one hair of our head
white or black; and if we have neither the liberty nor are to assume the power
to alter the Complexion of our hairs, then muchless the complexion of our
cheeks and faces. St. Paul and St. Peter prescribed how Women should be clad,
that is, with Modesty, shamefacedness and Sobriety, and not with gorgerous
Apparel, or with braided Hair, Gold or Pearls; and if these things were
forbidden, how much more is washing or painting the Face? So that this
Artificial Beauty may appear to be divinely forbidden as an Enemy to Truth,
which needs none but its own native Complexion; and is so far from being
beholding to Art for any addition to enliven her color, or to put a blush upon
it; but grant it were neither scandalously sinful, nor absolutely unlawful, yet
the offense it gives to the true and strict Professors of Piety is a
sufficient Argument, that it ought not to be practiced. Although many things
may be permitted in themselves, yet they become evil and are to be forborne,
when others are offended at them. Neither is this all, for the very name of a
painted Face is enough to destroy the Reputation of her that uses it; and
exposes her to all manner of Reproaches. Upon reading of these Reflections
upon Artificial Beauty, methinks I hear some angry Lady saying; I perceive this
censorious Man has been too busy with my Face, and has endeavored to throw
dirt on it, because it has been lately spotted in the fashion; a fashion that
has as much innocence to plead for its excuse, as custom for its authority.
Venus the Goddess of Beauty was born with a Motticella, or natural Beauty-spot,
as if Nature had set forth a Pattern for Art to imitate. You may see every day
some little clouds over the face of the Sun, yet he is not ashamed of his
Attraction. The Moon when she is at Full, and shining in her greatest luster,
has in her Face some remarkable spots, and herein is placed her chiefest
glory; as being in every thing inconstant but in this. When I put on my Mask,
which is no more nor better than one great Patch, you do commend me for it; and
will you be displeased with me for wearing a few black Patches? which if they
are cut into Stars, do represent unto me whither I would go; or if into little
Worms, whither I must go; the one of them testifying in me the sense of my
Unworthiness to increase my Humility, and the other the height of my
Meditations to advance my Affections. It is the unhappiness of the most
harmless things to be subject to the greatest Misconstruction; and on the same
subject from whence others draw their suspicions of Curiosity to accuse our
Pride, we derive the greatest Arguments of discipline and instruction to defend
our Innocence. Nevertheless, according to the obligation of my Duty, to give
you in all things Satisfaction, I am determined to wear them no more.
Ausonius's Poem on the great Love that ought to be between a Man and his Wife,
it is this which follows; Ad Vxorem.
Live as we have lived, still to each other new,
And use those names we did when we first knew:
Let the same Smiles within our Cheeks be read,
-- As were at first --
Let the day never come to see the change,
That either Time or Age shall make us strangec
But as we first met, let us ever be,
I, thy young Man, and thou a Girl to me:
To others, though I seem like Nestor old;
And thou more years have, then ^ Cumana told: ( Sib.
Times snow we will ( Cuman. not see, though it appears,
It Is good to know our Age, not count our Years.
Such, I must confess, Husbands ought to be to their Wives, and Wives to their
Husbands, but they are seldom found in these days.


B.
BArbara. She that is strange inhumane, or of a strange tongue, and unknown.
Bathsheba, (...), Bathshebang, 2 Samuel 11.3.^. the Daughter of an Oath Bathshua,
(...), Bathshuang, 2 Chronicles. 3.2. v. 5. the Daughter of crying or a Rich Noble,
and Liberal Man's Daughter. Bauris, perhaps pleasant, from (...), ibid. Grae.
Beatrice, ^. bles^ed, from ^eo, to bless. Bener, or Benedicta, Blessed.
Benigna, i. kind, courteous, bounteous. Bertha, i. bright or famous, Bilhah,
(...) Genesis 29.29. i. old or fading. Bethiah, (...) may be rendered the Daughter
of the Lord, as it were (...) or the House of the Lord, as it were (...) 1 Chronicles, 4.18. of (...) bath, a Daughter, see 22. and (...) beth, a House, from
(...) banah, he builded, and (...) jah, a name of God, from (...) hajah, he
was. Blanch, or Blanchia, i. white or fair, from blanc. Fr. Bona, i. She that
is good, favorable, or affable. Lat. Bridget, from Bride. Irish. Batilda,
Queen of France, she is Renowned for her Piety and Learning; Descended from an
English Saxon Prince, In her Youth as she walked by the Sea-shoar, she was
surpized by Pirates, who carried her to France, and sold her to the Mayor the
Kings Palace, where the King no sooner saw her, viz. Clovis the Second, but he
fell in Love with her, Married her, and had by her Three Sons; and Governed the
Kingdom very prudently, till Clotaire her third Son came of Age: She was for
her holy manner of Living, and the Charitable Deeds she had done, Sainted, or
Cannonized by Pope Nicholas the First. Baudise, or Boadicia, a Queen of the
Ancient Britains, who for the Rape of her Daughters, by the Roman Lieutenant,
fell upon their Army with a great power at unawares, and cut of seventy
Thousand of them; but not being afterward assisted by the rest of the British
Princes she was Vanquished by Suctonius, and treacherously poisoned by those to
whom she fled for Refuge. Beatrix, Queen of Naples and Sicily, Daughter of
Raymond Berrenger, the fifth Earl of Provence; she was a Woman of a Masculine
Spirit, and stired up great Wars in those Kingdoms, which occasioned much
Bloodshed. Beatrix, Daughter to Renaud Earl of Burgundy, she was Married to
Frederick the first Emperor of the Romans, she going out of Curiosity to see
the City of Milan, the People by some Incendiaries, were possessed that she had
contributed to the Abridgment of their Liberties; whereupon they took her from
her stately Chariot, and set her upon a scurbbed Ass, her face to the Tail,
which they compelled her to hold in her hand instead of a Bridle; and so led
her through the Principal parts of the City: Which Afront, the Emperor
Resented so highly, that he razed the City, except the Churches, to the Ground,
sowed it with Salt, and put all those who had a hand in this business to death,
unless such as could with their Teeth take a Figg out of the Fundament of the
Ass, on which they had set the Empress, which many detested, and chose rather
to suffer death than attempt it. Batsheba, Wife to Uriah the Hittite, her naked
beauties so Enchanted King David, who espied her from a Turras, as she was
washing in a Fountain; that he procured her Husband to be slain, and took her
to Wife, of whom he begat Solomon, the wife King of Israel. Bacchanetes, a sort
of Warlike Woman, who attended Bacchus in his War and Conquest of the Indians,
and afterward the Priestess of Bacchus, were so called, who Celebrated his
Feasts and Drunken Revels, and were clad in Leopards and Panthars skins: The
Men were attired like Satyrs, and Crowned with Ivy or Vines; and these Feasts
were Celebrated with all manner of Discordant Music, as Horns and Cymbals,
etc. And with very great disorder to show the folly of Drunkenness. Barchia.
Daughter of Bacchus, at the Celebration of whose Feast, the Bacchinalians, tore
Acteon, the Son of Melissus in pieces, because he refused to join with them in
those disorders, for which they were banished the City of Corinth. Bagoe, held
to be the Nymph, that taught the Tuscan Sages, the Art of Divination, by the
flight of Ligthning, and is held by some to be one of the Sibyls, others say,
she was the first Woman, that Interpreted the Oracles, and flourished in the
time of Alexander the Great. Barrbancon, ( Marie de) Daughter of Michael Lord
of Cany, in her Castle of Benegon in the Province of Berry by the Lord
Lietenant of Burgundy; she with her Sword in her hand, marched at the head of
the Breach that was made, and beat the Enemy out again; but famine growing so
fast upon her, she was compelled to surrender, yet in consideration of her
great Courage and Conduct, had her Castle restored to her again. Barro, a Woman
very Learned in Philosophy. Bassine, Artebabaze, a Persion Captains Daughter,
she was taken in Damascus, and presented to Alexander the Great, who for her
Beauty Married her. Beaufort, ( Margaret) Grand Child to Edward the Third, she
was Mother to Henry the Seventh: she founded many Religious Houses, and gave
liberaly to Charitable uses. among which Christ's and St. John's Colleges in
Cambridge; are not the least Memorable, she was so zealous for the promotion of
the Christian Religion on in the Eastern Countries, where it was so much
decayed, that she would often say, if it pleased God to stir up the Christian
Princes, to War for the Recovery of the Holy Land, she would attend upon them
as their Laundress. Bertos, (Claudia) first a Nun, then an Abbess; She was a
Virgin of Singular Learning and Piety. Beledes, they were so called, as being
the fifty Daughters of Danaus, who being Married to Egyptus fifty Sons all of
them at their Fathers command, except Hypemnestray, killed their Husbands on
the Wedding Night, and she for her refusal, and contributing to his Escape, was
a long while imprisoned by her Father, till her Husband came with an Armed
power and Rescued her. Bellides, or Danaides, the same with the former.
Bellona, styled the Goddess of War, Companion and Sister to Mars; she had
Temples Dedicated to her, and Priests who were called Belonary they used to
offer part of their blood to her, and then give it to those that participaed
with them in the Mystery: Some will have her to be the same with Pallas; the
Cappadocians held her in such Esteem, that her Priests took place next the
Kings, she is variously painted in Warlike dresses. Biblia, or Billa Wife to
Duellus a Roman, being reproved by him, for not telling him of the strong smell
of his breath; that had been objected to him in a Brawl, she innocently told
him, that never having kissed any Man but himself, she concluded all Men's
breath had the same favor. Biblis, Daughter of the Nymph Cyana, she fell
passionately in Love with her Brother Caunus, who refusing to comply with her
desires in a Lustful way, she attempted to hang herself; but being prevented in
that by her Nurse, she mourned and wept so long till she dyed, and is fabled to
be turned into a Fountain. Billichilde, first Married to Theodebertus, Second
King of Austrasia, who of a Slave, for her beauty, advanced her to the dignity
of a Queen, and by her he had two Sons and and a Daughter; but within a while
after growing jealous of her, he caused her to be put to death. Birthia, a
Woman of Scythia, mentioned by Pliny, who had such infectious Eyes, that with
long and steadfast looking upon any Living Creature, she would kill, or much
injure it; she had in each Eye two Apples and two distinct Sights, etc. Blanch
of Castile, Daughter to Alphonsus the Ninth, and Elenor of England; she was
Married to Lewis called the Lion, and afterward King of ^ance, she managed the
Affairs of the Kingdom after her ^usbands death to Admiration: ^otwithstanding
Powerful Fa^tions opposed her; she was ^other to St. Lewis of France, and
brought up him and her ^ther Children, under the Tu^erage of such Learned and
^ious Men, that they became ^n Ornament to their Coun^ry. Blanch, Daughter to
Otho, ^he Fourth Earl of Burgundy, and Maud, Countess of Artois, ^he was
likewise Queen of France, by her Marriage with Charles the Fourth; she was
^alsly accused of Adultery, which Conspiracy against her Life, evidently
appearing the Accusers were flead alive, and then being beheaded, their
Carcasses hanged on Gibbets. Bentivoglia (Francisca) Married to Galeoto
Manfredi, but upon suspicion that he was secretly Married before to a Virgin of
Fayenza, she with two others, who were pretended Physicians Assassinated him
giving him the Mortal wound with her own hand. Berenice, Daughter of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt. and Married to Antiochus Sotor, King of Syria, who
were both murdered by Laedicea, Antiochus first Wife. -- Bernice, another
Daughter to the aforefaid King of Egypt, whose Hair being Dedicated to Venus,
for P^olomeus Evergetes her Husbands success in War, and hung up in the Temple,
where in a short time it being missed, it was fabled by Callimachus, and others
to be taken up to the Skies by the Goddess, and turned into a Star. Berenice,
Daughter to Agrippa the Elder; she was Married to Agrippa the Younger King of
the Jews; and sat with him when St. Paul pleaded before him, and Festus the
Roman Proconsul. Berenice, Daughter of Mithridates King of Pontus, who when her
Father was overcome by Lucullus the Roman Consul in a mortal Battle, took
poison, that she might not fall into the hands of the Enemy alive, but that not
presently dispatching her, she caused one of her Slaves to strangle her.
Berthe, Daughter of Cuthbert King of France and Ingoberge; she was Wife to
Ethelbert King of Kent, a Saxon Prince, who then was a Pagan, but by her pious
and Examplary Life, she won him to Embrace Christianity. Berthe, Daughter to
Lotharius the Second King of France, and Valrada his Queen, she was one of the
most Courageous, Beautiful, and Illustrious Princesses of her Age; she had
diverse Noble Husbands at sundry ti^es, and did many brave Exploit^ in War.
Barthe, Daughter of Cheribert, she was Wife to Peppico the short, afterward
King of France, and Mother to Charles the Great. Bonere Force, a Queen of
Poland, Wife to Sigismund the First, by Isabel of Aragon, she was a Woman of
great Virtue, exceeding Loving and Tender of her Husband; attending him like a
common Nurse in all his Sickness, sitting up with him, and tending him with
little or no rest to herself, though he diswaded her to take off herself, and
commit that charge to others. Bo^romea (Biancha) a Learned Lady of Padua, being
perfect in the Sciences, and spoke diverse Languages; the which together with
her rare Beauty gained her a singular Esteem among the Learned. Brigite, since
called St. Brigite, was a Swedish Princess, she flourished in the 14th. Age;
and was Married to Prince Vison of Nericia, and by him had Eight Children,
after the Death of her Husband, who turned Cestertian Monk; with whom before
she had been on a Pilgrimage: She wrote a Volume of Revelations in Eight Books,
which has been approved by diverse Popes, and dying 1373. She was Canonized by
Pope Boniface the Second. Britomaris, a Cretian Nymph, held to be daughter to
Jupiter and Charmea, she much delighted in Hunting but one day heedlesly
Traversing a Forest, she fell into a Hunters Net, and fearing some wild Beast
should come to devour her; she implored the help of Diana, whereupon the
Goddess released her from the Toil, in Grateful acknowledgment, the Nymph built
a Temple, and dedicated it to her by the Name of Dyctin Diana Minos King of
Creet, attempting afterward to Ravish her, she leaped into the Sea, and was
drowned. Brumechilde, Daughter of Athanagilde King of the Wisgoths, she was
Married to Sigebert the first King of Austratia; she caused great mischiefs in
France, which in the end came home to her, for being accused by Clotaire the
Second, for the murder of Ten Kings: She was first Racked, and then torn in
pieces by drawing Horses: She was a Woman of vast Ambition, and endeavored to
destroy all her Opposers, but her death, in a great measure, prevented it.
Budos Lodovica, wife to Montmorency, Constable of Fr. Busa, a Lady of Apulia,
who fed Ten Thousand Hunger-starved Romans, as they fled from the Battle of
Cannea, where the Roman Army was defeated by Hannibal. Ba^helors. It was
inserted in Plato's Laws, that what Man soever lived a Bachelor above five and
thirty Years of Age, was neither capable of Ho^our or Office, Alexand, ab.
Alex. lib. 4. cap. 8. Licurgus the Lawgiver amongst the La^edemonians, (as the
same Author testifies) to show the necessity of Marriage, made a Decree, That
all such as affected singleness and solitude of life, should be held
Ignominious. They were not admitted to public Plays, but in the Winter were
compelled to pass through the Marketplace naked, and without Garments. The Law
of the Spartans set a Fine upon his Head first, that married not at all; next,
on him that married not till he was old; and lastly, on him they set the
greatest Mulct, that married an evil Wife, or from a strange Tribe. So laudable
and reverent was Marriage amongst the Lacedaemonians Procreation of Children,
and fertility of Issue, That whosoever was the Father of Three Children, should
be free from Watch or Ward by day or Night; and whosoever had Four, or upward,
were rewarded with all Immunities and Liberty; This Law was confirmed by Q.
Metellus Numidicus, Censor; after approved by Julius Caesar; and lastly,
established by Augustus. Memorable are the words of Metellus in a public
Oration to the People, If we could possibly be without Wives, O Romans, (says
he) we might all of us be free from molestation and trouble: but since Nature
excites us, and necessity compels us to this exigent, That we can neither live
with them without Inconvenience, nor without them at all; more expedient it is
therefore that we aim at the general and lasting profit, than at our own
private and momentary pleasure. Bawd, Pimp, etc. I put these together because
it is pity to part the Devil's Housholdstuff: And indeed she is very much like
him, her Envy running Parallel with his; For all that the Devil endeavors to
do, is to bring Mankind into the like state and condition; and the nature of a
Bawd is to make all fair Women as foul as her self: Now because their Youth
perhaps will not admit of it so soon; she hurries them on to it by degrees, by
the excess of Drink, Smoke, and Venery. -- If you visit her House, she pretends
to have no Drink, but will send for some that she may be sure of your Money: If
you touch her Bedding it will infect you, for few comes near it but they are
troubled with a fit of the Falling Sickness; but yet this I shall tell you,
she will teach you Temperance, not suffering you to have too much Liquor for your
Money: If she stays a Year in a place she is befriended by the Justices Clerk.
-- The Instruments in chief of a Bawd's Trade are an Hector or Huff, which
seems instead of the Giant to defend her Enchanted Castle from being violated
by Knights-Errant: The Pimp, which brings Grist to the Mill, that is, Bawdy
Customers to the House, which he picks up under this pretense; Go along with
me, and I will show you the fairest Wench in Christendom, or raise a Discourse
of Bawdry, and then swear, There is not such a curious fine Sinner in or about
the City as there is at such a place, etc. -- But the Whore is the main support
of the House. The first will not swagger unless he be paid; the next wont
procure unless he may Sponge, and have his Folly for nothing, and the Whore
will not ply unless she have half share of her own getting, besides a little
Money by the by. -- The Marketplaces to which a Bawd resorts to buy Tools for
her Trade, are Inns, where she enquires of the Carriers for Servant-Maids, and
according as they are Handsome she entertains them, and trains them up in the
Mysteries of her Occupation; and having quallified them for her Profession of a
Prostitute, the Bawd furnishes them with Butterfly -- Garments, and other gaudy
Accoutrements, for which she has three shares, or as much as they can agree
about. -- Piutarch in the Life of Pericles, reports, That Aspasia his sole
delight, made her House a Stews, in which the Bodies of the fairest young Women
were made comm^^ for Money. In my opin^^^ to be wondered at it is, (...) these
being past their own ac^ al Sins, wherein too much ^^ciety has bred a Surfeit,
or (...) Infirmity of Age, or Disease mere disability or Performanc^ yet even
in their last of da^ and when one Foot is alrea^^ in the Grave, they without
(...) thought of Repentance, or (...) hope of Grace, as if they (...) not
Wickedness enough of the^^ own to answer for, heap upon them the Sins of
others; as (...) only enticing and alluring (...) gins and young Wives, to
(...) base Venerial Trade, and (...) infinite Inconveniences both (...) Soul
and Body dependi^^ thereupon, but to wear the^^ Garments by the Prostituti^^ of
others, and eat their Brea^ and drink Sack and Aqua-vi^^ by their mercenary
Swea^ and so base an usury and (...) comely a travel of their Bodie^ as is not
only odious in the Eyes of Man, but abominab^^ in the sight of Angels. Brute
Beasts in Love with an Account of the strang^ Love of an Athenian. -- To se^
Men affectioned to Women and Women to Men, is a n^tural thing, and to be
believed But here Blindness is come (...) that height, that that which intend
to speak of, seems impossible and incredible. H^storiographers write it for
truth That in the Town of Athen^ there was a young Man, of a^ honest Family,
competently Rich and well known, who having curiously observed a Statue of
Marble, excellently wrought, and in a public place in Athens, fell so in love
with it, that he could not keep himself from the place where it stood, but be
always embracing of it, and always when he was not with it, he was
discontented, and blubbered with Tears. -- This Passion came to such an
Extremity, that he addressed himself to the Senate at Athens, and offering
them a good Sum of Money, beseeching them to do him the favor that he might
have it home with him. The Senate found that they could not by their Authority,
suffer it to be taken away, nor to sell any public Statue, so that his Request
was denied, which made him mavelous sorrowful even at the Heart. Then he went
to the Statue, and put a Crown of Gold upon it, and enriched it with Garments
and Jewils of great price, then adored it, and seriously beheld it, musing
always upon it, and in his folly persevered many days, that at last being
forbidden these things by the Senate, he killed himself with Grief; this thing
was truly wonderful. But if that be true which is written upon Xerxes, and
affirmed by so many Authors, indeed he excelled in Folly all the Men in the
World. They say he fell in Love with a Palm Tree, a Tree well known though a
stranger in England, and that he loved it, and cherished it, as if it had been
a Woman. -- Seeing then these things happen to rational Men, we may be-believe
that which is written of Bruit Beasts, which have loved certain Men and Women,
especially when we find it certified by great and famous Writers; as Glaucus,
that was so loved of a Sheep, that it never forsook him. Every one holds that
the Dolphin is a lover of Men. Elian writes in his Book of Beasts a Case worthy
be read; He says, that a Dolphin seeing upon the Seashoar, where Children were
a playing, one among the rest, which he liked very well, he fell so in love
with it, that every time that the Dolphin see him, he came as near as he could
to the edge of the Water to show himself. At the first the Child being afraid,
did shun it, but afterward, by the Dolphin's perseverance one day after
another, and showing signs of love to the Child, the Child was encouraged, and
upon the kind usage of the Dolphin, the Child was emboldned to swim upon the
Water near unto the Fish, even to go ride upon the back of it, and the Fish
would carry him for a good space of time, even to the bottom of the Water, till
the Child made a sign to rise again. -- In this solace and sport they spent
many days, during which the Dolphin came every day to present himself to the
brink of the Sea. But at one time, the Child being naked, swimming in the Sea,
and getting upon the Dolphin, willing to hold fast, one of the sharp pricks in
the Fin of the Dolphin run into his Belly, which wounded him so that the Child
died immediately in the Water, which the Dolphin perceiving, and seeing the
Blood and the Child dead upon his back, he swam presently to the shore, and as
though he would punish himself for this fault, swimming in great fury, he
leaped out of the Water, carrying with him as well as he could the dead Child,
which he so much loved, and died upon the shore with him. -- This very thing is
recited by Pliny, and others with Examples of Dolphins which have born love to
Men. And particularly he says, that in the time of the Emperor Octavian,
another Dolphin, in the same manner, took love to a Child upon the Sea coast
near to Pusoll, and that every time this Child called Simon (they say this Fish
will run at that name) it came presently to the Sea brink, and the Child
mounted upon the back of it, and the Child was carried into the Sea as little
away as he would and brought back again safe: He says also that this Child
dying by accident of Sickness, and the Dolphin coming diverse times to the
accustomed place, not finding the Child there, died also. -- In Argis, the
Child Olenus was affected by a Goose: So likewise Lycidas the Philosopher, who
whould never depart from him, nor be driven out of his Company, but was his
continual associate, in public and private, in the Bath, in the Night, in the
Day, without any Intermission, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 22. Glauce the Harper was
beloved of a Ram; a Youth of Sparta by a Daw. Nicander apud Caelium witnesses,
That one Selandus, Butler to the King of Bithynia, was beloved of a Cock, whom
they called Centaurus. A Cock doted likewise on a young Lad, whose name was
Amphilochus, by Nation an Olenian. Why may we not then as well give credit,
that Semiramis was affected by a Horse, and Pasiphae by a Bull? When Pliny
tells us, that in Leucadia a young Damosel was so beloved of a Peacock, that
the enamoured Bird never left her in life, and accompanied her in death: For
seeing the Virgin dead, she never would receive Food from any hand, but so
pined away, and died also. In the City of Sestos, a young Eagle (taken in a
Nest) was carefully brought up by a Virgin: The Bird being come to full growth,
would every day take her flight abroad, and all such Foul as she could catch
bring home, and lay them in the Lap of her Mistress: And this she used daily,
as it were to recompense her for her fostering and bringing up. At length this
Virgin dying, and her Body being carried to the Funeral Fire, the Eagle still
attended; which was no sooner exposed unto the flames, but the Bird likewise
cast her self, with a voluntary flight, amidst the new kindled Pile, and to her
Mistresses Hearse, gave her self a most grateful Sacrifice. Beauty in General,
its Alluring to Liking and Love. -- They who do adore, or contemn Beauty, do
ascribe too much or too little to the Image of God; it is undoubtedly one of
the rarest Gifts which Heaven has afforded unto Earth: According to the
Opinion of Plato, It is a humane Splendour, lovely in its own Nature, and which
has the force to ravish the Spirit with the Eyes. -- This worthy Quality is
worthy of Respect, wheresoever there be Eyes, or Reason, it has no Enemies but
the Blind and Unsensible; all the World yielding Homage to those to whom Nature
has given the pre-eminence over others. -- Those Ladies who imagine that the
Number of their Servants do add something to their Beauty, Rules for the
Beautiful.
and thereby seem to take much satisfaction in their submissions and services,
do give a great advantage to their Enemies, and show they may be won at an
easy rate, whilst there needs more for them to become Masters of their
desires, than Praises, and Respects -- But the fairest of Women may find an
excellent Remedy against Vanity, The best use to be made of Beauty.
it being at sixteen Years of Age, they could represent unto themselves the
defects and Inconveniences of old Age. -- Nevertheless it is worth the
Observation, that Cato had Beauty in so high an Estimation, as that he was
heard to say publicly, It was no less a Crime to offend Beauty, than to rob a
Temple. -- Sulpitia amongst the Roman Ladies had such beautiful Eyes, that the
Men of those Days could not behold her without a will to adore her. It is
recorded that the Neck and Bosom of Theodeta the Athenian was so pleasing, that
Socrates himself, did fall in Love with them; they are Draughts and Charms,
Beauty not to be beholding to Art.
which are not to be sought by Artificiousness, nor possessed by Vanity: Nature
affords them to some Ladies, on purpose to please the Eye, and to raise the
Mind unto the Love of him, who is the Fountain of all Human Perfection. --
Galen does make mention of Phryne, who whenever she appeared, she Eclipsed the
Luster of all the Ladies of the Assembly, and filled them with Revenge and
Shame; at the last they invented a Sport amongst themselves which every one was
to Command by turn, when it came to her turn to be Commandress, she told them
that she would lay but an easy Charge upon them, which was that every one of
them should wash their Face and their Hands, which when they had done, (for
they were bound unto obedience) they might easily discover the the true
Beauties from the Counterfeit, and there was hardly any one that could be known
by their former Countenances, their Faces were become quite others than they
were. -- This pastime, if it were put in practice in our times, would no doubt
be as ungrateful to many of our Ladies. I do the rather make mention of this
rare Beauty, because that it was for her, that those famous Judges called the
Areopagites, did lose the Name and Reputation of Judges not to be Corrupted,
because not believing her to be innocent, Beauty blinds Justice.
yet when they beheld her, they could not judge her to be faulty. Hipperides
the Orator pleaded in vain against her, for as soon as she made her
appearrance, her presence served ^ an Apology, and she needed not, but only to
appear, to defend herself. The Beautiful ever gain their suit, and ^ Justice
does but open her Eyes to behold them, how poorly soever it is solicited,
their cause cannot go ill. -- So that you see Beauty is a pleasing Object in
the eye, improved by the apprehension of Fancy, Beautie^ description.
and conveyed to the heart by the Optic part. If the Owner that enjoys it,
know it: It begets in her a dis-esteem and contempt of inferior features. None
can serve an Ecc^ but Narcissus. What a scornful eye she casts upon common
persons, or a Plebei^^ presence? She could find in her heart to be angry with
the wind, for dealing so roughly with her Veil, or hoising up her skirts; and
scourge those Aeolian scouts for being (...) saucy. She wonders that Venus
should be for a Goddess recorded, and she never remembered. -- This that
passionate Amorist well discovered in this Canto. Beauteous was She, but to coy,
Glorious in her tyres anto^es.
But too way-ward for the Boy,
Who in action Spher'd (...) joys.
Love-tales she could deig^^ to hear,
And relate them Week by Week,
But to kiss when you come near,
Lips was turned into the Cheek.
Beauty that is too precise
Though it should attractive be.
Darting beamelins from her eyes,
'Twere no Adamant to me.
-- Nor did that incensed Gentleman show less passion upon the like regret from
a disdainful Lady; whose long practice in Painting, and delicate Tooth
together, had so corrupted her breath, as Cocytus could not have a worser
favor. A Lady gave me once her cheek to kiss,
Being no less than I my self did wish.
For this I Will say, and bind it with an oath,
Her cheek tastes sweeter far than does her mouth.
-- But there is nothing so much discovers the vain Pride of these Beauties,
as a coyness to their Servants in their Wooing and Winning. If they affect you,
that affection must be so shrouded and shaddowed, as Lynceus's eyes could not
disclose it. Walk from them, their eyes are on you; walk to them, their eyes
are from you. There is no argument, be it never so well-relishing, nor sorting
with their liking, that they will give ear to: No posture, be it never so
graceful, they will afford an eye to. Opposition suiteth best with their
condition. To a stranger they will show themselves familiar; to you, whose
intimacy has got a room in their hearts, they will seem a stranger. If you
appear merry, it must be expounded trifting childishness; if grave, stoic
fullenness. It were a gift above apprehension in every particular to fit their
humor. And yet they must be humored, or they are lost for ever. -- Beauty is
coveted by all, and where Nature has not cast the Face and Body in one of her
finest Moulds, what Arts, what Costs are used to repair her work, and varnish
over her defect, that they may not be obvious. -- Beauty was so greatly Admired
by the Ancients, that whereas Gorgon, by some called Medusa, had such a
loveliness imprinted on her Face, that she fixed the Admiring Spectators for a
time Immovable* rendering them as Men Amazed and Astonished. They hereupon
feigned that she converted Men into Stones with the dazzling brightness of her
Eyes. The Barbarous Nations had also such veneration for it, that they thought
none capable of any extraordinary Action, unless nature had Impressed an
Excellent shape, and Loveliness upon their Persons; to dignifie and distinguish
them from others; Holding that the accidental meeting of a Beautiful Person,
was an Augury, or presage of good fortune, whereas the contrary was looked upon
as an unlucky Omen: And indeed Beauty has found its favorers amongst all sorts
of Persons pleading more powerfully than the most refined Oratory: No Armor is
proof against it is pointed rays, the Sword and the Gown bend to it, and pay it
homage, as the Sovereign Commandress of Affection: And lays a Thousand snares,
for even the most stubborn and stoical of Mankind, which they cannot at all
times escape. -- Beauty so Captivated the heart of that Renowned Warrior
Edward the Fourth King of England, that after in a Bloody War with the House of
Lancaster, having obtained the Crown; the Lady Elizabeth Gray, Widow to Sir
John Gray, slain in the Quarrel of Henry the Sixth, coming to petition him for
her Husbands Estate, that had been declared Forfeited, and Seized to the Kings
use: He at the first sight of her, was so passionately in Love, that though the
Great Earl of Warwick, who had by his Valor been mainly Instrumental in making
him King, was at that time as his Proxy, Wooing for him the Infanta of Savoy,
he finding she would not yield to be his Mistress; made her his Queen, though
to the hazard of his Kingdom: Being driven out by the Enraged Earl, who for
this Affront, took part with Henry the Sixth, and remained as an Exile for a
considerable time, till Fortune favoring him, he again by force of Arms
assumed the Royal Dignity. -- Beauty in Aspasia the daughter of Hermotimus the
Phocian, surpassed all the Virgins of her Age in the Elegance of her form,
being a perfect Pattern of an Excellent Beauty: Attracting the Affections of
all that gazed upon her, so that he who came a Spectator, departed a Lover; and
is by Aelian described in this manner: Her Hair Yellow, and naturally Curling;
her Eyes bright, Sparkling and full; her Ears small; and her Nose a Gentle
rising in the Midest; her Skin smooth, and her Countenance of a Rosy Color:
For which cause the Phocians whilst she was a Girl, gave her the Name of Milto;
her Lips Were red and her Teeth white as Alablaster; her Feet small; and her
Voice had something in it so smooth and sweet, that whilst the spoke it was
like the Music of Sirens, she used no Feminine Arts to render her Beauties
more Advantageous: as being born and brought up by poor Parents; she was as
Chaste as Lovely, so that allured by both Cyrus the Younger King of Persia,
made her his Wife: And after his Decease, she was Married to King Artaxerxes;
the force of Beauty and Chastity, having so Transcendant a power as to make her
twice a Queen. and have the Ascendant over the most Celebrated Monarchs of
Asia. -- Beautiful Phryne, being accused of Lewdness, and having Learned to
plead for herself at Athens, baring her Breasts, and disclosing but part of her
Beauty, so charmed her Judges that notwithstanding the proof against her, they
declared her innocent. At that time, notwithstanding they ordained for the
prevention of the like Rapture or Surprise; that no woman should ever after
Plead her Cause. And so admirable was her Beauty Naturally, without the
Assistance of Art, that she took all in her snares that had the least
Glimmering of a Conversation with her. -- Beauty was so Dazzling Triumphant in
Lais, that she inflamed all Greece, many at the report of her Excellent
Features, falling in love with her, when being pestered with Troops of Adorers;
whom she refused, she at last fell in Love with Hypolochus, and went to him at
Meglopolis, but there her Beauty proved her destruction; for the Women envying
her rare Perfections in Nature; wherein themselves were so much outdone,
surprised the charming Lady, and carried her to the Temple of Venus, where in a
fit of jealous rage, they Stoned her to death, which so grieved the Men, that
they Branded the place from that time, with the Temple of Venus the Murtheress.
-- Beautiful Polyxena, Daughter of Pryamus King of Troy; is Discribed by Dares
to be in this manner of stature: She was Tall, Beautiful in her Features, her
Neck long and white as Down of Swans, her Eyes sparkling, her Hair of a Golden
Color and Long, her Body exactly Shaped throughout, her Fingers small and
long, her Legs Straight with a declining Calf, her Feet neatly compacted: And
in the whole frame of Nature, such a one as for Beauty excelled all the Women
of her time besides; which in Modesty, she was Plain Hearted. Bountiful, and
Affable to all Persons, -- -- Beautiful Helena of Greece, whose story is not
unknown to the World, since in her Cause so many Thousand Lives were spent; and
the famous City of Troy, after a hard Ten Years Siege, reduced to Ashes: Is
thus Discribed, by the aforementioned Dares a Phrygian, who was present in the
War. She (says he) was of a Golden Hair, full and Sparkling Eyes, exceeding
Fair of Face, her Body well Shaped, her Mouth Small and Curiously made, her
Legs Exactly Framed, and a Mold between her Eyebrows; her Disposition was Open
and Ingenious, and her Deportment Courteous, and obliging to (...) Pomp of
winning Graces. -- Beauty, though we have given some transmarine Examples, has
fixed the Throne of her Empire in this Nation, as bright, Illustrious and
Commanding, as in any under Heaven, of which we might name not only in the
past, but present Age; a number of celebrated Ladies, who outshine other
Nations, as Stars of the first Magnitude, outshine those of the lesser. The
Eng^ish Ladies have Eyes that even dart beams of Amiableness, and Influence the
World of Love, and extend its power to captivate the stubborn Hearts of Men,
and and make them pay homage at those Lovely Shrines they once thought not
worthy of their regard, as one thus discants upon a Lady, whom he found asleep
in an Arbor, and was raptured with her Features in that posture, viz.

In a flowery Myrtle Grove,
(The sollitary scene of Love)
On beds of Violets all the day
The charming Floriana lay,
The little Cupids hovered in the Air,
They peeped and smiled, and
thought their Mother there.
Beautifying, Reasons and Arguments for its Lawfulness, and that it is not
discommendable in it self. etc. -- Beautifying Arts to restore or preserve a
fair and lovely Complexion, have been questioned and cavell'd with by the
austeerer sort, ^hether they are not only unfit to be practiced, but even
sinful in those that use them; wherefore, for ^alving Scruples that may arise
upon reading their Opinions, that have given casting Voices against it. We have
thought it convenient to give the Fair-Sex an Abstract of what is convenient to
be known in this matter, those that oppose it mainly build upon Peter Martyr's
inveying against all the use of Art to advance the Beauty or Color of the Face
or Hands, who with great Gravity tells us, and would have us believe it, as
from the Apostles mind, that we cannot be the Servants of the Lord, if we are
industrious in seeking to please Men, therefore Women may not use any such
Complexion. This seems to us a little odd, and quite beside the true meaning of
the Text, for if it be granted, that by being the Lord's Servants we cannot
please Men: Then Wives consequently may not please their Husbands, Children
their Parents, Subjects their Prince, Servants their Masters, nor Tradesmen
their Customers. But Christians must rise up to a constant antipathy and mutual
displeasing of each other, or they according to this Rule cannot please God,
than which there is nothing more beyond the Line of Reason and Religion; we
understand it then, that the Apostles meaning is, Gal. 1.10. That if by any
ways displeasing to God we seek to please Men, or if by seeking to please Men
we take off our Esteem for God, preserving worldly Favors before him and his
Service, we cannot then be such Servants, but in all such lawful ways as were
neither against Piety, Truth, nor Charity; no Man was more a pleaser of Men
than St. Paul himself, when he tells us, he became all, (that is in honest
things) to all Men that he might gain some. There is a comely Decency in
adorning and attiring the Body, and we do not find it any where forbid where it
does not reach to pride, when a ^lovenly neglecting our selves is reproved as
Sloth; the Children of Israel were commanded to borrow Ornaments, not
absolutely necessary to keep them from Cold or Heat, but Jewels and Rings, etc.
to adorn them, and they are no where forbid to beautify themselves, by
anointing, and such other ways, as then were in use, and as Wine makes a Man's
Heart glad, so the same Prophet tells us, That Oil makes his Face to shine,
from which we gather it was then used for beautifying, and that the Anointing
Oil, used in holy Offices, set a kind of an awful Splendour of majestic beauty
on the Faces or Bodies of those that were anointed with it, though that was
not the prime End of its design; the Pharisees were reproved when they made
themselves hypocritically sower Faces by practice, that they might seem to have
fa^ted when he that truly salted was to wash and anoint himself, that he might
look cheerfully, and so rather to fast to God than gain the Applause of Men. --
It is again objected, that beautifying is in use with Harlots, and therefore
ought to be avoided by modest and virtuous Ladies, but certainly it can be no
prejudice for virtuous Women to use those things that dishonest Women use, the
one wears apparel, and so does the other, the one eats and drinks, and so does
the other, the one beautifies her Face, and so does the other; but then that
which really makes the difference is, the end and design of them. The Harlot
dresses her self up to allure and ensnare the Unwary into her Embraces, the
virtuous Lady for Decency, and the Credit of her Family; the Harlot eats and
drinks to excess to enslame her Blood, and provoke lustful Desires, the other,
moderately to satisfy the necessities of Nature. and keep her self in a
healthful Temper of Body: The Harlot beautifies her Face to attract lascivious
wandering Eyes, and the virtuous Lady to gain and keep the Love of a Chalt
Husband, her Care in that too is much inferior to her Care in trimming up and
adorning her Soul with such Spiritual Graces as may allure and entertain the
glorious Bridegroom, none that ever we heard of that have gone about to make it
criminal in a virtuous Woman could make it our, viz. that it is so by God
forbidden, that no Modest Woman can lawfully use it, only contenting themselves
with strong Presumptions, and weak probations, which Poverty and Tenuity of
Argumentation in a matter pretended to be by some a gross Sin, is no ways
becoming, especially Learned and Grave Divines, who ought not to play with
Cases of Conscience, or adventure to create Sins, calling Light Darkness, and
Darkness Light, Evil Good, or Good Evil; it being worthier of their Calling to
meddle more with Ladies Hearts, and less with their Faces, rather encouraging
them to study all holy Ornaments of Grace and Virtue; also confining them to
the undoubted Limits of Sanctity, Modesty, Chastity, and Humility, which none
will dare to dispute against, rather than by little Oratorous Circles and
Sophistries to seek to ensnare their Consciences, and discourage their Spirits
by endless and needless Severities, against those petty Ornaments which may, no
doubt, be kept very easily within all sober, civil, and harmless Bounds, as any
other things of the like Indifferency, whereby Art is assisting to Nature; and
adds, by Clothes, Colors, Jewels, and many Curiosities, to the advantage of
Humane Honor and Majesty. -- Beauty is by natural Adornments placed in many
Creatures, more in one than another, as in their Shapes and Colors; what
various colored Plumes, exceeding the imitation of Art, has Nature furnished
out to make the Peacock spread in a generous Gayness; the hundred Argus Eyes
fabl'd to be placed by Juno in his Train. She indeed in the end of her working
intends all things fair and beautiful in their kind, and then especially Women,
who is her Masterpiece in Loveliness was never designed for Deformity; and
where any such thing happens by defect, it is but reasonable Art should repair
it, as well as it is allowed in matters of lesser Concern and Moment, without
any reflecting that we are displeased with God's making us, since we cannot
conceive such Deformity was made on purpose, but by cross Accidents obstructing
Nature in her Opperation; and the rather we conclude it so, because we have
reason to believe, That in the Resurrection all Deformity shall be done away,
the recollected Dust shall shape a perfect Body; for if the Blind and the Lame
were not admitted into the earthly Temple, how much less will there be any such
thing seen in that which is above in glorified Bodies? But we are started a
little from our Proposition, and got too far into Deformities; and therefore
must return again from whence we digressed. -- Beautifying for honest purposes
(then) not being proved a sin, we see no reason to forbid it when God and
Nature has allowed it; nor can Virtuous Women contentedly want (whilst they are
capable of them) those things that may render them most acceptable to their own
and other Eyes, being loath to draw the Curtains of obscurity, or Uncomliness
quite over them, till the Night of Death comes, when they must hide their Faces
in the Dust, in hopes to recover that perfect Beauty, that admits no decays,
and needs no repairs of Art: And though some more moderate than the former
allege that it is safest, in a case dubious or disputed rather to abstain
from, than use what many deny though allow, seeing there is no necessity of
using it at all. We answer to this point, that there are many things which are
not absolutely necessary, which we would be loath to part withal, or be Argued
out of, under the pretense of superfluity and sinful, since God allows us not
with Nigardly Restraints, but with a Liberality worthy his Divine Benignity;
all things Richly to enjoy even to delight, Convenience. Elegancy, and Majesty.
Therefore, Ladies be not discouraged by the reflections cast on you by the
younger sort, whose Faces are too dark ever to shine in the Sphere of Beauty
what Arts soever, are used to brighten them, nor by those of Elder years, over
whose declining splendor, time has drawn a Cloud that will Skreen it till it
sets in the shades of the grave; but mind well what is said, Tit. 1.15. (and
give good heed to it) viz. To the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled
and unbelievers, nothing is pure but even their Minds and Consciences are
defiled. Beauty a Charm, To Captivate at a distance, etc. -- Beauty has several
ways to Captivate a Lover, besides the plain and common Method; though we must
confess, that Sight of all others makes the (...) Advance; and hearing like
another Leg steps next to make it Advance fa^^er, and sometimes runs a great
way in the Adventure. Calisthenes a young Man of Byzance in Thrace, very Rich
and Comely, no sooner heard of the Fair Daughter of Softratus, but upon the
report of her rare Perfections by common Fame, he fell in Love with her,
resolving e're he saw her to have her for his Wife. So the Three Gentlemen in
Balthazar Cast^lio, who fell in Love with a young Gentlewoman whom they never
had any notice of, but by the babbl^ng of fame. Many likewise by hearing a
Person commended have fallen in Love, and often by Reading a Letter Curiously
Indicted, wherein a Moving Passion is Expressed, which is so mainly taking that
it has done wonders, especially among the Female Sex: These things give us some
glimmering toward a Belief, that there is a Destiny in Marriage, and a
sympathy in the Souls of those that are to be united by that overruling
Decree, Moving and Agitating their Minds, though at such distances, but we dare
not give our Opinion in the Affirmative; since Money in this Age, has such a
power that it is, if 'twere possible stronger than Love it self: For if Destiny
had decreed who shall be Paired in Wedlock, then the Rich and Poor would be
shuffled together, and Deformity with store of Treasure, would not pass Current
in all parts of the Nation, whilst Beauty and good Humor, without it are
little regarded, those that have much to spare Covet; notwithstanding, Rich
Wives rarely enquiring into her Education or Conditions, and those whose
Fortunes are very slender, must be compelled to take up with those that have as
little as themselves, unless now and than by a wonderful chance a Lucky hit
falls to some few. For as a Modern Poet says, It is not the Silver or Gold of
it self,
That makes Men adore it it is for its power.
(...) dote upon pelf ^^^ause pelf.
But all court the Lady in hopes of her Dowr.
The wonders that we in or days do behold,
Done by the Irresistible I^^fluence of Gold;
Our Love, and our Zeal, an^ our all things do mould.
This Marriages makes, (...) the Center of Love,
It draws on the Man, and (...) tricks up the Woman;
Birth, Virtue, and Parts, (...) Affection can move.
Whilst this makes Ladies (...) to the Brat of a Broom-m^^^
-- Beauty notwithstanding this digression will come in (...) a share with
those that understand it; and have not totally devoted themselves to Mammon,
Xerxes when he destroyed (...) of the Temples of the Grecia^ Gods; yet spared
that of Diana, for its Beautifulness* Painters, Orators, and all others, labor
to excel each others, in the beauty of their Art. -- Beauty it was that first
Ministered occasion, whereby Art and Learning might find out the knowledge of
all Curious Inventions. Behold and wonder at the Variety of Beauty in Flowers
and Plants. The Rose is gay in its Virgin blushes, and the Lilly is admired for
it is Whiteness, and it is preferred by the Wisest of Oracles, before King
Solomon in all his Glory: And if these things are so moving and delectable; and
there is a Beauty according to its kind and proportion: Admirable in ^ll
Creatures; how excellent than must the Fountain be, but not to soar too high,
let us keep within the Compass of what may be seen and observed. Beauty in
Women, its Dower and Force, -- Beauty had some Effects upon Diogenes, held to
be the Morosests of all the Philosophers; for when he saw handsome Women, he
called them Queens, because he had observed Men so Courteous, Obliging and
Obedient to them; bowing and bringing, as if they would adore their very
Shoe-strings: Wine is strong, and Kings are strong, but a Beautiful Woman fixes
her unshaken Empire in the hearts of her Admirers, when all things totters.
Monarchs we confess, though they sit still, streach a wide Command over Sea and
Land; but Beauty, we generally find has Dominion even over them: Gold and
Jewels tumbles at the Fair ones feet, and the Doner is proud if she will deigne
to receive it, their Eyes are fixed on her with wonder, and they take her for a
kind of a Terrestial Paradise, furnished out with delights not common to the
World; Friends and Relations are forsaken for her, and she is exalted upon the
Sovereign Throne of Affection: Life is a small hazard to protect or vindicate
her Honor, Says Esdras, though it was death for any to touch the Persian Kings
without an especial Command, yet says he of Darius, I saw Apame his Concubine
sitting familiar with him on his right hand, and she took the Crown from off
his head, and put it on her own, and stroaked him with her left hand; yet the
King was well pleased, Gaping and Gazing on her; and when she smilled, he
smilled; and laughed when she laughed; and when she was angry, he flattered to
be reconciled to her. When the fair Chariclea fell into the hands of Pirates
with diverse others, she only escaped being put to the Sword, her Excelling
Beauty, working upon the Villains heart, contrary to their bloody custom to
save her Life. Some Nations choose their Kings and Queens by their Beauty and
Proportion of Body, without regard to their Birth: As of Old, the Indians,
Persians, and Aethiopians have done. Barbarians, Stand in awe of a Fair Woman,
etc. -- Barbarous People have many times given Adoration to Beauty: And Helena,
though she was the cause of a Ten Years War, attended with so much Ruin and
Dissolation, with the Armor of her Dazzling Beauty stood proof against her
injured Husbands Anger, and Disarmed his hand that was about to take her head;
so that he stood as one amazed at her Excellent Features; and letting his
Weapon fall, tenderly Embraced her: For as the Old saying is, The Edge of the
Sword is dulled by Beauties Aspect. It is said of Sinalda a Queen, that when
she was doomed to be trampled to death by wild Horses; the Beasts, though
before untractable, were so astonished at her Beauty, that they stood still
gazing with wonder upon her admirable Form; and would not by any force be
driven over her. Lucian confesses though a Person very judicious, that his
Mistrisses Presence has for a time so overpowered his Senses, that he has been
void of Understanding: And others indeed have run quite distracted, when they
have found nothing, but disdain after a long attendance. They wait the
sentence of her Scornful Eyes,
And whom she favors, lives, the other dies,
No Medium she allows, there always waits,
Life on her smiles, her frown commands the fates.
To cut his Early Thread who must forego.
Her Beauties for the Mellancholy shades below.
Body the Beautifying thereof, Bodies that are weak and moving Mansions of
Mortality, are exposed to the Treacherou^ underminings of so many Sicknesses
and Distempers, that it is own frailty seems a Petitioner for some Artificial
Enamel; which might be a fixation to natures Inconstancy, and a help to its
variating Infirmities; for he that narrowly observes that Fading house of
distempered Clay, will soon find, that it Imulates the Moon in Mutability; that
though to day it be Varnished over with a Lively Rosy Blush, to Morrow it is
white-washed with Megar paleness, as if death had took it to hire, and made it
a whited Sepulcher; that though to day it appears smooth and gay: So that Venus
herself might be tempted to take her Recreation, there to Morrow it may be so
rough cast and Squall'd, that Cupid can scarce walk there, without being over
Shoes. Now to Sublimate Nature beyond the reach of Sickness, by a lasting
Aetherial Pulcritude, and by Cosemetick Antidotes to fortify it; with and
Incapacity of being surprised by any Features: Fretting Malady would be a
business that would not only puzle the whole Elaboratory of Chemists, but their
Atcheus too, although of the Privy Council to Nature; and confident to her
recluded Privacies, But to make Beauty the Lure of Love, of a more ordinary
Luster, to fix the Complexion of the Body, so that it be not too frequent in
it is variation; or to keep the Fair and Damasked Skin from being too much
sullied with deformities: Is a task not transcending the Sphere of a Modest
Undertaking, and such a one. Ladies you will find in this work beyond, perhaps
what ever has been before exposed to your fair Eyes, though not in a Complete
Body, but reduced under their Several Alphabets, as the nature and necessity of
this undertaking requires. But let us come a little nearer to the purpose.
Bodies that are very Lean and Scragged, Body Lean how to make ^t Plump and Fat.
we all must own, cannot be very Comely: It is a contrary Extreme to
Corpulency, and the Parties Face seems always to carry Lent in it; though at
Christmas looking so Megarly, that when such of either Sex come to their
Confessor, and he perceiving them mere Skelitons dares not for fear of
Solecism, join them Penance to Mortify the Flesh: No part about them thrive
but their Bones, and they look so Jolly and Lusty, as if they had eaten up the
Flesh, and were ready to leap up of the Skin that they may fall upon others.
Truly Ladies such Leanness is a very Ravenous Guest, and will keep you bare to
Maintain him. If thefore you are Desirous to be rid of his Company observe the
Following prescriptions. -- Be sure to take care in the Summer to keep your
Chamber Cool and moist, with some Fragrant Flowers, set or scattered about it,
when you are about to go to Meals, chase your Body as much as you can, that the
blood may be stirred in the Veins and the Skin sit more loose: At your Meals
Eat not any thing that is very Salt, Sharp, Bitter, or too Hot, but let your
Food be sweet, of a quick Digestion, and Nourishing, as New Eggs, Veal, Mutton,
Capon, etc. and for three hours after Meat. take your Recreation in that
whereby your Body may be moving and stiring twice a Month, if the weather be
not extreme bad, make moreover an Electuary, to be taken Morning and Evening in
this manner, viz. Take sweet Almonds, Pistach-nuts, Suga^ and white Poppy-Seed,
beat them according to Art, into the form of an Electuary, and take the
Quantity of a Walnut, for many Mornings and Evenings, this will not only make
you Fat, but give you a good Complexion; then for your diet take a young Capon,
and the Flesh of Four Calves feet, with a piece of the Fillet of Veal; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of fair Water and white Wine, then scum the Fat
off; and put the Broth well pressed from the Meat, into a New Earthen Vessel;
with a pound and a half of Sugar, a doz^^ of Cloves, half an ounce of Cinnamon,
then boil it gently again and add the whites of 2 Eggs; reboil it, and pass it
through a strainer, before it cool, mix with it a little Musk and Amber, boiled
in Rose Water, and take of this which will be a kind of a Jelley, twice or
thrice a day. -- Bodies sometimes fall away in one part, Bodies unequally
thriving: The Remedy.
and not in another; if so to bring your Body to even terms: take an ounce and
a half of Oil of Foxes, Oil of Lillies, and Capons Grease, and Goose Grease,
each two ounces: Pine, Rosin, Greek Pitch and Turpentine, of each two ounces;
boil them together in an Earthen Glaz'd-Vessel: Adding then an ounce of the
Oil of Elder, being taken hot from the fire, add some Virgins-Wax to them, as
much as will stiffen the Mass, into a Searcloth, and when it is almost cold,
spread it, and apply it to the place that Languishes, or does not equally
Thrive: And for that and the rest, the Plaster after some continuance being
taken off; use this Bath in Claret Wine, Boil half a handful of Wormwood,
Roses, Stachas, of Rosemary, Calamint, Sage, Squinath, Cammomile, each a
handful, boil it till the third part of the Wine be consianed, and when it is
warm Bath the Body, or any particular part more immediately requiring it; will
Nourish, Strengthen, and Beautify the Fram^ of the Body. Body when too Fat,
Ho^ to reduce it to a Beautif^^ Form and handsome Propor^^^on. -- Bodies of an
(...) weildy Bulk are to many ^^^ pleasing as the former, as bei^^ the other
Extreme; no one c^^ think it a very pleasing Sig^ to see a Soul Struggling (...)
a mountanous Load of Fles^ and the Body stretched to (...) Dimensions, as
renders it (...) most out of shape. And if the were nothing more than (...)
Encumbrance, it were suffic^^ent to deter any one from (...) unweildy a
Magnitude, (...) here in too Legible Character those that can Read, (...) Sloth
and Voluptuousnes occasioned it; for when e're (...) Carcass swells it self
into a bu^ too Voluminous: Idleness (...) there described in Folio. Ladies then
be careful to kee^ your Bodies in an due Proportion, and if ever they enlar^^
themselves to Extravagant L^^mits, use the Directions to ^^^duce them to their
form^ bounds, that so you may (...) gain both your Credits (...) your Beauties.
-- Bodies (...) such Proportions, must (...) Early in the Morning, be Exercised
to Sweating; be (...) in Diet, not Eating Swe^^t things, but rather Salt, Shar^
or Bitter, especially ^awc^^ lie not over Soft at Night Bleed in the Right Arm
pre^ largely in the Spring, and in (...) Left in Autumn, purge pretty strongly
in those Seasons, and once a Week take some Laxatives, and in Winter Mornings
the Powder thus Composed, -- Bray Anniseeds, Fennel, Agnus Castus, Carroway,
Rue and Cummin, Nutmegs, Pepper, Mace, Ginger, Galingale and Smallage, dried
Marjorum, Gentian, Round-bithwort, of each an equal part, and by drying,
beating and sifting, bring it into a Powder, and take in a Glass of White Wind
a Dram of it half an hour before Meals; and to the Heart and Liver, as you see
Cause, ^ay cooling Applications, as the Juice and Decoction of Plantane,
Sheepherds-purse, Lettice, and the like; and if any particular part be more
Corpulent then the rest, take Cerus, Fullers-earth and white Lead, mix them
with the Juice of Henbane and Oil of Myrtle, and when the part has been bathed
with Vinegar, anoint the place, and the Success will be evident. Brea^^s
hanging down or large, how to make them Plump and Round. -- Breasts that hang
loose, and are of an extraordinary Largeness, lose their Charms, and have their
Beauty buried in the grave of Uncomliness, whilst those that are small, plump
and round, like two Ivory Globes, or little Worlds of Beauty, whereon Love has
founded his Empire, command an awful homage from his Vassals, captivate the
wondering gazers Eyes, and dart warm Desires into his Soul, that make him
languish and melt before the soft Temptation; therefore to reduce those Breasts
that hang flagging out of all comely Shape and Form, that they may be plump,
round and smaller. -- Bind them up close to you with Caps or Bags that will
just fit them, and so let them continue for some Nights, then take Carret-seed,
Plantan-seeds, Anniseeds, Fenel-seeds, Cummin-seeds, of each two Ounces,
Virgins-Honey an Ounce, the Juice of Plantane and Vinegar two Ounces each,
bruise and mingle them well together, then unbinding your Breast, spread the
Composition Plaister-wise, and lay it on your Breasts, binding them up close as
before, after two days and two nights, take off the Plasters and wash your
Breasts with White Wind and Rose Water; and in so doing for twelve or fourteen
days together, you will find them reduced to a curious Plumpness, and Charming
Roundness, wash them then with Water of Benjamin, and it will not only whiten
them, but make their Azur Veins appear in all their intricate Meanders, till
the Lover in tracing them looses himself. -- Breasts are likewise to be reduced
by washing them with Scabeous Water-Verjuice, the Waters of Bean-Blossoms,
Rosemary-flowers, and the Juice of Citrons, anointing them afterward with Oil
of Mastick and My^rhe, and binding them up close as before directed. So the
unseemly spreading Alps you will see
Round as Parnassus spiry Tops to be.
Bracelets Perfumed, how to make them. -- Bracelets have been highly in Esteem
among the Ladies, adorned with Gold and precious Stones, but since those seem
to be laid aside, we hope Pomander or Perfumed Bracelets may be used, they, by
their odoriferous Scent conduce much, Ladies, to the making your Captives
numerous, though they bind only your Arms, yet they take Men your Prisoners: To
make them then, -- Beat Musk and Ambergreece, of each forty Grains, with two
Ounces of the Buds of Damask-Roses, the Whites being clipped off, add of Civit
twenty Grai^^; also a little Labdanum, being well mixed and fine beaten, make
them up with Gum-tragacanth disolv'd in Rose water; and so make them, when
hardened into small Beads, and string them; the Scent is rare and Comfortable,
or for another sort take Labdanum and Styrax, Calemite, each a Dram and a half;
Benjamin one Dram, Mace, Cloves, Lavender-Flowers, and Wood of Aloes of each
half a Scruple, Musk and Ambergreece of each four Grains, a little ^^rpentine
and Gum-Traga^anth dissolved in Rose Water as much as will suffice, beat and
mix them well together in a warm Mortar, and make them into a Pomander
according to Art. Boxes of Perfume. Boxes are very necessary on sundry
Occasions, viz. To hinder Vapors, prevent Infections, remove Ill Scents, or
bad Airs; To make these Perfumed Boxes. -- Take right Jessemine Butter, half an
Ounce, Essence of Orange-flower, Essence of Cynnamon, Oil of Orange peel, Oil
of Nutmegs, Essence of Roses, of each half a Scruple; Flowers of Benjamin, one
Scruple, Essense of Amber Musk and Civit, of each half a Scruple: All these you
must work well together in a cold Marble-Mortar, keeping it as close as may be;
Then put it into your Boxes of Ivory or Silver, with holes for the Scent to
come through; and it is a great preservative against the Plague, Pestilence,
etc. as well as pleasant and delightful to the Brain. Brows of the Eyes, How to
Beautify and Adorn. -- Brows of the glittering Eyes are Cupid's Groves of
Pleasure, where he shelters himself from the violent Heat of the too flaming
Optics, or rather (...) a controlling Intelligence, made super Intendant to
the Crystal Spheres below him, he keeps hi^ Residence there, that he might
with the more Facility direct their bea^^ Influences, when and whither he
pleases; you may, Ladies, by this means make them beautiful. -- Brows that have
their Hair growing too thick or irregular; Take Ivy, Gum, Emmets-Eggs, or
Pincent Colophonie, Leeches burnt, half an Ounce, grind and mingle them with
the Blood of a Frog, and anoint the superfluous Hair, and it will come off; or
you may take the Juice of Henbane, Sanguinis Draconis, Gum-Arabick, and
Frankincense, of each three Drams, Juice of Nigthshade, as much as will suffice
to make it into an Ointment, and apply it as the former. -- Brows falling too
low over the Eyes; you must work to remedy that defect, a little Mastick,
together with the Juice of Colworts, and going to Bed, put the Brow up into its
place, and in the form of a Pla^^ter, apply the Mastick to it all Night, and in
so doing three or four Nights, it will keep in its proper place. -- Brows that
shed their Hair, may be prevented from so doing, by taking the small filings of
Lead, a little Linseed-Oil and Goose-grease, with which being well mixed,
anoint them; or Maidenhair one Dram, black Henbane-seed two drams, Unguentum
Irinum three Spoonfuls, bruise what is to be bruised, and with Oil make them
into an Unguent, and having bathed the Brows with Water, wherein Mirtle-Berries
have been boiled, anoint them with it. -- Brows that have lost their Hair; to
recover it, take Wasps or Bees, burn them to Ashes, and mix the Ashes with
Honey, and laying it to the Hair; 'twill quickly come again. -- Brows reddish
or white are made black by this means; Take what quantity you please of Red
Filberds, calcine them in an earthen Vessel, mix it with Goats-grease, and
anoint the Brow with it, and if the Skin be soiled, wash it off with warm
Water, and in often using, the Hair, 'twill become of a very curious Black.
Beauty of an Itchy o^ Scabby Skin repaired. -- Beauty, Ladies, by these defects
is much impaired, but we fear whilst we are prescribing Remedies, for such
loathsome Skin-defiling Maladies, you will, perhaps, think we have forgot you,
and are Addressing our selves to your Kitchen-maids: We must confess these
fretting Exulcerations are more frequently incident to such as have not the
advantages of Neatness and anticipating Remedies; but most certain it is, that
not only they, but the most nice and delicate, if any thing the most Irregular
or Intemperate cannot at all times be secured from them. If ever then your ill
disposed Humors grow so strong as to break their way through the enclosing
Skin, it will do you no har^ to have something in readiness that may check
their Presumption. -- Be it so then, take Fumitory-water an Ounce and a half,
Succory-water three Ounces, Syrup of Fumitory and Succory of each one Ounce,
mix them together, and take two Spoonfuls in a Glass of White Wind for your
Mornings draught, and by often using, you will find it an excellent Remedy; or
take Rhuburb one Scruple, Senna two Drams, Anniseeds half a Scruple, White Wind
half a pint, put them into an earthen Bottle. stop it close, and set it over
warm Embers all Night, in the Morning strain it out and drink it, and to purge
your Body afterward, that the Humors may be removed, which may be done with
Pills made of Citron, Mirabolaus, and Rhuburb of each half a Dram; Aloes washed
in the Decoction of Senna one Scruple, mix them well by bruising, and make them
up into Pills with Syrup of Fumetory: And to wash the place afflicted, Take
Balm a good quantity, bruise it well, and set it to macerate one Night in White
wine, the next day draw off the Water in a Glass-still, it is exceeding sweet,
and will cleanse and purify the Skin after the defect is taken away, then
anoint it with Natural Balsom, and a Grain of Musk, and you will find a rosy
Beauty where Deformity had usurped the place. Big-belly'd Woman, how to govern
herself. -- Good Government in these Cases, has not only saved Miscarriages and
Abortions, but prevented endangering the Mother's Life; wherefore we have
thought it convenient, for the Instruction of new married Women to lay down
some modest Rules, and commend them to their Observance: First then, We advise
Women with Child, i^ they are not strong of Body and very healthful, to chus^ a
temperate Air where no gros^ Fogs or Damps arise from Lakes, Marshes, or the
like; and no^ to venture herself abroad when the Weather is either too Cold or
too Hot, nor when the Southwind blows too strong, for that above all others is
held to be injurious to the Birth she carries in her Womb: The Northwind in the
next place, when it is too turbulent and cold, is offensive to her Person,
carsing Catarrhs, Coughs, and Rheums, which opening the Body, lets in too much
Air (...) the Womb, or causes it to dismiss its Burden untimely and if any
evil Vapors be drawn in, during pregnancy they produce many disorders and
sometimes cold Diseases. And Secondly, In her Diet, (...) ought to be careful
and cautious, choosing such Meats (...) create wholesome Nourishment and those are
held to do so which are moderately dry she must avoid Excess on the one hand,
and immoderate Fasting on the other, for as the one causes it to swell beyond
its natural bounds, so the other renders it weakly and sickly, and often for
want of Nourishment to come before its time. All Meats too hot or too cold are
to be avoided, as Sallets, any thing dressed with hot Spices, Salt-meats, and
the like, which being eat to any degree, sometimes makes the Child come forth
without Nails, and such other defects as are signs of short Life, or a very
unhealthy Constitution; therefore let her take such as are of good Nourishment
and a facil Digestion, as Lamb, Veal, Mutton, Larks, Partridges, and the like;
and of Fruits such as are sweet and pleasant, as Cherries, Apricots,
Rasberries, Pears, Plumbs, etc. but by any means avoid those things that
occasion windyness in the Body; she must regulate as well as she can her
Longings, that they extend to nothing that is unwholsom or extravagant. --
Government must in pregnant Women be observed in their Sleeping, which we
advise to be moderate, not soon after Meals, and little as may be in the day
time: Moderate Exercise is likewise required to move the Body, and keep it in a
good Temper, by distributing the Humors, and giving the Blood a freer
Circulation; but all vi^lent Motion in Walking, or otherways must be avoided;
for it molests and injures the frame of the Womb; any great Sounds, or Noises,
especially Ringing of Bells and Shooting off Guns, are to be shunned as much as
may be. Immoderate Crying, or Laughing, are very hurtful; and the better to
help the Birth when it comes near to delivery: Let the Childbearing Woman take
such things as will keep her Body soluble, as Syrup of Violets, sweet Wines, or
the like, avoiding all Astringents, that contract the Vessels and Passages, and
going Loose: Let her give what scope she can in the Fourth Month when the
Motion is great, she may Sweath her Belly with a Sweath-band; And Anoint it
with an Ointment thus made: -- Get of Capons-grease and Goose grease each an
Ounce and a half; the Gall of a Kid or a Lamb, three Ounces, then having melted
and mixed them well together, add the Marrow of a Red Deer, or the Suet for want
of it, an Ounce; then work it up in half a pint of Rose Water, and in using it,
will keep the Belly smooth, and from hanging down after delivery. It during her
Pregnancy she finds but little motion, let her make a Quilt thus, Take the
Powder of Red-roses, Red-Coral and Gilliflowers, each three Ounces, Ma^tick a
Dram, and of Angelica-seeds two Drams, Ambergris two Grains, and one of
Musk, being beaten well and mixed; Then make a Quilt of a Linen bag put the
Ingredients into it, and lay it upon the Woman's Navel, and it will not only
refresh her, but greatly strengthens the Infant. This we have thought fit to
advise, which will turn to the Advantage of those that are due observants.
Books, Directions to Ladies about Reading them. -- It is not necessary then to
read many Books, but to read the best, and especially never to be curious of
such, whereby we cannot Learn any thing, without the danger of becoming
Vicious. And here I needs must encounter with two great Errors, the one
proceeding from Fear, and the other from Boldness. Some Mothers of Children,
and others there are who make a great scruple, that their Children should read
the Books of the Heathens, such as Seneca, (...), and others* in English; and
yet they will give them full leave to read any lying Pamphlet. There are some
again, who make a Conscience to read the Books of the (...), though full of
good Precepts, yet the History of Parisinus, or Ornatus, and Artesia, must be
commended and read by them. -- But what Contentment can there be in a
counterfeit Pamphlet, which is not found in History? Are there not Succeses and
Events fair enough? Can there be a greater Pleasure than to be present at the
Birth and Ruin of Monarchies and Empires, and in the compass of an Hour, to see
what has passed many Ages? It is not an honest and a witty Way, to shorten
time when it seems long, The praise of Histories.
by fetching it again when it is slipped away, and to find Recreation against
Cares, and Memory against Oblivion? What cause is there that young Gentlewomen
may not refresh themselves, without danger of Debauchment? -- The reading of
many wanton things do heat by little and little; it insensibly takes away the
Repugnancy and the Horror we have to Evil; and we acquaint our selves so
thoroughly with the Image of Vice, as we afterward fear it not when we do meet
with Vice it self. When once Shame is lost, we are in great danger to lose that
which is not preserved but by it. -- But this is not all; for after that these
Pamphlets and Songs of Wantonness, have made young Maidens bold, it afterward
does make them to practice what they read, or sing; then they labor to find
out Subtleties, to carry them on to what so much they do desire, and do learn
not only the Evil which they should not know, but even the faire^^ way to
commit the (...). And to speak the truth, what likelihood is there for them to
be familiar with such alluring Books, and Songs, and not put their Innocence it
self in danger. In those vain Pamphlets, they read how this Virgin leaves her
Country, and her Parents, to run after that Stranger; another is in love in a
Moment, when she reads that she has received Letters from such and such a
Gallant, and how they have appointed private places where to meet together.
These are but cunning Lessons, to learn young Maids to sin more wittily; and
there is no Man can comprehend with what reason, nay with what probability,
such perilous Books, and Sonnets, may be justified. -- And not to diss^emble,
The forbidding of idle Books makes young People more curious to read them.
it is a great calamity to see now adays, that it is even to make us more
eager, and it does put an edge upon our Curiosity, to read a Book that is
forbidden. It seems the same Spirit who deceived our Great Grandmother Eve, by
seducing her to lose the sweetness of the Fruit of Knowledge, inspires no less
too many with the same Liberty, promising that their Eyes shall be opened to
see admitable things, and that they are denied the reading of such wanton
Books, only out of pure envy. This Error corrupts a great number of Ladies.
Behavior, in Conversation: Ze^xis being to Paint a perfect Beauty, proposed to
himself five of the most accomplished Ladies in all Greece, to take from every
one of them those Charms and Representations, which he conceived to be most
powerful: But to frame the Model of a woman, whose Behavior should be such as
to please in all Companies, What is necessary in B^haviour.
he had need of greater assistance all that Nature affords, or Morality
teaches, is too (...) for this End. -- To say then what seems to me, to be
at the first most necessary, I could content my self to wish in young
Gentlewomen, those three Perfections which Socrates desired in his Disciples,
Discretion, Silence and Modesty. -- Behavior in young Ladies is a comely Grace
if well considered, and diligently regarded; it is that which makes them to be
Esteemed in the World, and ^i^s them to go abroad in it, as they would wi^h to
be Prized and Rated: It raises them a Character that will (...) their Names to
po^er^ty and better the (...) they have (...) if their Examples be (...)
Practice, and all (...) Examples better than (...) or Precepts. (...) your
behavio^r then strongly incline toward a reserved part, not excluding a modest
freedom, being well timed and innocent, but avoid all Extravangances, that too
much Encumber and peiter the Age: And indeed though a Generous freedom in
itself be innocent and harmless, yet the too great Liberty ill Men upon that
account, have taken to encroach upon the honor of your Sex; though but in
their own opinions, has made such freedom in a manner unjustifiable, and
involved you into a necessity of reducing it into more strictness, and although
it cannot so alter the nature of things, as to render that Criminal, which in
it self is indifferent; yet if it make it hazardous to your Reputations, that
ought to be a sufficient cause for a nearer reservedness. A close Behavior is
the most seemly to receive Virtue for a constant Guest, because it is a
Fortress in which it can only be secure from Assaults: For proper and seemly
Reserves, are the outworks, and must not at any time be diserted by those that
design to keep the main (...) in possession; for then if you see the danger at
a distance you have more time to prepare for the repelling of it: She that will
suffer things to come to the utmost (...) by trusting too far to her Strength
is the more easily overcome* Men from a double Temptation of Vanity and Desire,
are but too apt to turn whatever a Woman Acts to the hopefullest side; The
nearest complying to their Wishes and Wills, sometimes strain them to an
impudent Application, till they find something suiting to their purpose, to
give them larger encouragement: It is consequently then more safe to prevent
such forwardness, than to undertake its Remedies; for once having fortified it
self, it continually gathers strength: And from its first Allowances claims a
Privilege for having been suffered to encroach, without impunity, therefore
nothing ought more seriously to be avoided, than such a kind of Civility, as
may be mistaken for an Invitation to what is unreasonable. It will not Ladies
be sufficient for you to keep your selves free from any such Criminal
Engagments; for there is a Spot many times upon your Reputations, in that only
that creates hopes and raises but a discourse, and that Blemish being dropped
upon your Candid Names, by Man's vanity, is the more difficult to be wiped off;
sometimes Women's Malice extend so far (for there is an Emulation in the Sex,
which grows up into a Spleen) to take all advantages, and to magnify that by
the prospective of their resentments, which to the naked Eye is scarce
discernable. -- some have a secret Joy when any that stands in their way, or
overshadows them is removed, that they may be the better seen. If these spend
their breath to blast such as are indiscreet or unwary; they improve all the
advantages they can lay hold on, and sometimes by a kind of insinuation will
make Innocence appear Criminal to undiscerning minds, for Interest rarely lies
to it self, but improves every thing that casts but a shadow toward its
advantage: And some again who have shaken hands with Virtue, and have lost
their Esteem, Like the fallen Angels, labor to bring others into the same
state and condition* that their Crimes may appear the less; and if they find
them fenced about, and proof against their Temptations, they will at least
endeavor to blast them with causeless Calumnies and Reproaches: And according
to the Old Proverb, where much dirt (of this nature) is thrown upon a Candid
Reputation some will happen to stick: Especially for a time they will narrowly
watch your Looks, your Actions, and your least Mistakes, and out of them gather
something that will make against you, to lessen the Reproach your virtuous Life
gives their vicious procedures; and though you have no Conversation with such,
you must be very wary how at any time you speak of them least coming to their
Ears (for there are abundance of Whisperers in the World, and we know not who
we trust with any thing, we would not have related again) they meditate
Revenge, which to bring about, they will stick at no unjust ways, if they
cannot find such occasion, as will more colourably suit to their purposes.
Therefore choose such a way of behaving your selves that no Advantages may be
taken; keep your secrets to your selves, and stand at that distance, that may
prevent all Ralleries, and many unmannerly freedoms; Frown upon any thing that
looks like Rudeness, and smile not at any Antic or Ridiculous Behavior, but
seem as if you took no notice of it, or at least as if you had no satisfaction
by it. Your Eyes too must be kept within Compass, their wanderings, restrained,
for many are so vain as to pretend (when they give themselves up to be Lovers,
or a kind of troublesome Buzzers of Courtship, to study the Language of Ladies
Eyes and when they are their own Interpreters, be sure they will conclude every
motion to be favorable on their own side, and con^^^^e a Glance as a good Omen
of their approaching Happiness though heedlesty cast. -- Gentlewomen who would
be observed fortheir behavior, C^^se^ of Company.
ought to beware whom they elect into the number of their Companions, for the
World will be apt to judge of the according to the Company they keep; Augustus
Caesar discerned the Inclination of his two Daughters Livia and Julia, by the
Disposition of those who professed Courtship to them; for Ladies of Honor and
of Eminence came to attend upon Livia, and those who were more licentious on
his Daughter Julia. Many Questions are often times asked them, by those that
profess love unto them, which are not to be answered but by silence. -- To
enter into discourse with Strangers does argue lightness and Indiscretion:
Rules for Good Behavior.
If I might advise, their Carriage in this Nature should not be too loose, nor
too precise. The Simpering Countenances, and such kind of Antic Gestures, are
more suitable to the Condition of Chamber-Maids, than Gentlewomen. Resolution
and Modesty a^tended with Mildness do carry a constant and a sweet
Correspondency. -- Consider we now in this matter, another thing that is not
quite so blamable, yet not less Ridiculous and that is she to whom the Men of
the Town, more particularly have given the Epethite of a Good humoured Woman,
one who always kept up her humor by Laughing or Smiling, or else she thinks
herself not obliging (or as she terms it Complacent) concluding it by much the
less, ill manners to be noisie, and impertinent, than to be confined in Company
to silence; and if she meets with any thing that looks like Applause, or
Approbation, it sets her afloat, and she fails in the Current of her Discourse
without a Compass, till she looses herself, and knows not into what Latitude
she is driven, but lies hulking on the Ocean of her conceited Opinions of
herself, till she knows not where to make Land, nor to what Port the tedious
Voyage of her Discourse is bound; she fancies that Mirth is to have no
Intermission, though Solomon has told us, there is a certain time for all
things; and therefore she will keep it up to the same height, as well at a
Funeral as a Wedding, and if any odd fort of unseemly Question should be put to
her, she will rather pass it over with a smile or complement, than frown at the
Rudeness of the unmannerly Party, least she should loose the Reputation of a
Good huoured Lady. But alas, this supposed necessity of being pleased at all
times, or so appearing to be, is a strange mistake: For as much as in a
Beautiful Woman, Invitation is unnecessary, because she attracts Admirers, as
certainly as the Needle touched with a Loadstone, points to its beloved North:
And for one that is no ways inviting, though defect of comeliness: Such little
Artifices of Invitation appear only Ridiculous to discerning Minds. -- Let them
be counseled also that they neither give nor receive any thing that afterward
may procure their shame, A Caution for writing of Letters.
nor write any thing to any that profess Love unto them, that may afterward be
a Witness against them, nor give the least advantage to any, that underth
pretense of love endeavor to ensnare them. And above all, Not to entertain any
familiarity with Serving Men.
they are not to entertain any Parley with any that are despicable in their
Conditions, such as are Servants to their own Parents or Kindred, or any other
of such a ^ordid Relation. It is dangerous to admit of any such Persons of
inferior Rank into a Parley with them. Virginity is an ^nclosed Garden, it
should not admit of any such Violation, the very Report may cast a blemish on
it. Some have been inslaved to that passion deservedly, which at first they
entertained disdainfully. Presumption is a daring sin, and always brings forth
an untimely Birth. -- The way to prevent this is in the behavior, to give not
the least Occasion to the Tempter that shall endeavor to ensnare them, Not too
much to affect to be seen in public.
nor to give way to the weakness of their own Desires. How excellent had many
Ladies been, and how impregnable had been their Chastities, if they had not
been possessed with such a dangerous Security, when they let open their Windows
to betray themselves, when they leave their Chamber to walk, and on purpose to
be seen in public. -- Young Gentlewomen are to have a great Care to keep
themselves from all Privacy, Too much privacy in some cases dangerous
and Retiredness unless it were with Good Books and Duties of Devotion;
Diogenes when he found a young man walking alone, he demanded of him what he
was doing, he returned Answer, that he was discoursing with himself, Take Heed
(said he) that thou Converse not with thine Enemy. And not much unlike to this
was the Report of a young Girl, who was so lost in Love, that it was truly said
of her, she minded her work lea^^ when she sat down to it, and eyed her
Sampler. Blower, one Man's particular Lass. Baun, ( Lady) one of the Four
Daughters of Sir Anthony Cook, famous for her great Poetic genius. Borho, a
poor Woman of Delphos, who pronouncing the Delphick Oracles, must needs be
inspired with a Poetic Spirit, besides which she is said to have composed
several Hymns. Bastardy, (comes of the Brit Bastardo, i. Nothus) and signifies
in Law, a defect of birth objected to one begotten out of wedlock. Bracton lib.
5. c. 19. per totum. Beatrice ( beatrix) that makes happy or blessed; a woman's
name. Bonne mine, f. good aspect. Boun and unboun, dress and undress.
Brand-iron, Trevet [to set a pot on.] Brawl, f. a kind of dance. Bridgame, ^.
Bridegroom. Briseis, Achilles's Mistress. Britomartis, a Cretan Lady inventress
of Hunting Nets. Beguines an order of Nuns or Religious Women (commonly all
well in years) so called from St. Bega a Virgin their Foundress commemorated on
the 6th of Sept. Beilarrite ( bellatrix) a Warrioress, a Woman well skilled in
War, a Virago. Bellena, The Goddess of War. Ball, f. a dancing meeting. (...),
given by a new (...) to her old Play-fellows. (...), a mask or visard.
(...)-cloth, ^. apron. (...)-teams, broods of Children Basiate, l. to kiss.
Basse, o. a kiss, or the lower [lip.] Baucis, Philemon's wife. Baud, o. bold.
Barn (Sax Bearn) a child Hence it is we say in the North of England, how do Wife
and Barnes, i. How do Wife and Children. Biggening, up-rising [of women.]
Big, a pap or teat ^ build o. Bite, o. to cheat also to steal. Biton and
Cleobis, rewarded with death, for their piety to their Mother Argia, in drawing
her Chariot to the Temple. Bleit, Blate, Sc. shame faced. Blower, l. a Queen.
Bobtail, a kind of short arrow-head; also a Whore. Bona roba, I. a Whore. Banes
or Bans, (from the Fr. Ban.) singnifies a Proclaming or public notice of any
thing. The word is ordinary among the Feudists, and grown from them to other
uses; as to that, which we here in England call a Proclamation, whereby any
thing is publicly commanded or forbidden. But it is used more especially in
publishing Matrimonial Contracts in the Church before Marriage, to the end if
any Man can say any thing against the intention of the Parties, either in
respect of Kindred, or otherwise. they may take their Exception in one. Cow.
But Mr. Sumner de^es it from the Saxon Aban^^n, i. to publish. See his Sax.
^ct. verbo. Abannan. Beating, Y. with Child, breeding. Beed [ings] the first
Milk after Birth. Belides, Danus's fifty Daughters. Bellatrice, l. a she
Warrior. Belly-cheat, an Apron. Berecynthia, Cybele, the Mother of the Gods.
Berenice, Ptolomy's Daughter. Bigamis^, ( Bigamus) he that has married two
Wives, ^^ which sort Lamech was the (...). Bigamy, ( Bigamia) the marriage of
two Wives; It is (...) in Law for an Impediment to be a Clerk, and makes a
Prisoner lose the benefit of Clergy. For the Canonills hold, that he that has
been twice married may not be a Clerk; and they ground it upon these words of
St. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.2. Oportet ergo Epis^pum irreprehensibiiem esse, and unius
uxoris virum. And also him that has matry'd a Widow, they by Interpretation
take to have been twice married, and both these they not only exclude from Holy
Orders, but deny all Privileges of Clery; but this is Law abolished by Anno 1
Edw. 6. cap. 12. And to that may be added the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 7. which
allows to all Men that can read as Clerks, though not within Orders, the
benefit of Clergy in case of Felony, not especially excepted by some other
Statute. Cowel. Dr. Brown. Billet, ( Fr.) a little Bill, Note or Ticket, stuck
up upon a Post or Door; and more commonly a stick of firewood, well known in
London. Burlet, f. a Coif. Burnet, ^. Woollen, also a Hood. Burom, Burlom, ( D.
Boogsarm) pliant, obedient; also blithe, merry. Blanch, ( Fr.) white or fair we
use it in England for a Woman's name. Blithe, ( Sax.) joyful, glad, merry
cheerful. Bonair, ( Fr.) gentle, mild, courteous. Bongrace, ( Fr.) A certain
Cover which Children use to were on their Foreheads to keep them from
Sun-burning; so called because it preserves their good grace and beauty. Brigid
or Bridger, Contracted also into Bride, an (...) name, as it seems, for that
the ancient S. Brigid was of that Nation. Came. Brigidians, an Order of
Religious Persons, instituted by Brigidia a Widow, Queen of Sweden, in the time
of Pope Urban the fifth, about the Year of our Lord 1372. It was as well of Men
as Women, (...) beit they (...), (...). The Nuns of this Order had a noble
Convent at Sion in Middlesex, built by K. Henry V. Buggery, ( Fr. Bougrerie) is
described to be, carnalis copula contra naturam, and hae (...) per confusionem
Specierum, sc. a Man or a Woman with a ^r^it Beast, vel sexuum; a Man with a
Man, or a Woman with a Woman. See Lev. 18.22, 23. This Offense committed with
Mankind or Beast is Felony without Clery; it being a Sin against God, Nature,
and the Law; And in ancient time such Offenders were to be burnt by the Common
Law, 25 Hen. 8.6.5 Eliz. 17. Fitz. Not. Br. 269. My Lord Coke ( Rep. 12. p.
36.) says, that this word comes from the Italian, Buggerare to bugger.
Buxomness, or Bughsomness, pliableness, or bowsomness, to wit, humbly stooping
down in sign of obedience. It is now mistaken for lustiness or rampancy,
C.
Cassandra I. Inflaming Men with Love. Chara, I. She that is dear, beloved,
favored, or precious. Charity, I. Charity, Love, Bounty. Chl^ris, forsan a
(...), (...), i. green. Gr. Christian, given from our Christian Profession*
from Xe^^, i. the Anointed, i. (...). C^^rlie, that has a kind of dimness in
his sight, or the is Gray-ey'd. Clare, she that is fair, bright or clear. Lat.
Cleobulina, dun. for Cleo^lus, I. famous for Counsel. Cleopatria, qu. (...), i.
the Glory (...) her Father or Country. Constance, i. constant, fine always one.
Lat. Calphurnia, a Roman Ma^tron, who pleading her own Cause, made such an
unpl^sing a Harangue, that the Senate made a Decree that ^ Woman should be
admitted (...) plead for the future. Camillia, Queen of the Volscians, she
aided Turnus (...) against Aeneas, and after many brave Achievements, was (...)
by a cowardly hand. Camilla, Sister to Pope Sixtus the Fifth, who of ^ Poor
Woman was raised by him to the degree of a Princess and her Children provided
for after an extraordinary manne, tho we do not hear that her Advancement made
her proud; a thing very common in o^^ Age. Camma, a Lady of Galatia, married to
Sinatus, who being killed by Sinorix, that he might enjoy Camma; she after
having bewailed her Husband's death, seemingly consented sented to be his Wife,
but poisoned him in the Nuptial Cup, and at the same time (...) rejoicing that
she had the happiness in her Fall to be revenged on her Husband's Murderer,
Campaspe, a very beautiful Woman, whose Picture Alexander the Great caused to
(...) drawn by Apelles, but the Painter whilst he was drawing (...), fell in
Love with her, and ^btain'd the King's leave to marry her. Candace, an
Ethiopian Queen, of the Isle of Meroe, whose Eunuch St. Philip con^erted to the
Christian Religion, and he converted the Queen with a great number of her
Subjects. She was a Woman of a Heroic Spirit, much ^ddicted to the Wars, in
which ^he lost one of her Eyes. Carines, Women, who in great Funerals were
Mourners; and made doleful Lamentations over the Dead. Carmel, our Lady of
MountCarmel. Carmenta, a Grecian Lady, Mother to Evander, who ^ailing from
Greece, planted himself in Italy, by the courtesy of King Faunus; and assisted
Aeneas in his Wars against Turnus, for the gaining the Fair Livinia. Carna, a
Goddess, taking Care of the Vital parts of Men, to keep them in Health; and
^engthen their Days. Cassandra, a Lady of Venice, very famous for her Learning
in diverse Languages and Sciences, leaving many curious Pieces of her works
behind her. Cassandra, Daughter to King Priamus, ravished by Apollo, who to
recompense her, gave her the Gift of Prophecy; but she afterward not proving so
agreeable as he expected, he so ordered it that none should believe her.
Cat^hina, Daughter to Lucippius, the Sicyonian King; she succeeding her Father,
married Messapais a Sea Captain, who had before gotten her with Child as she
was rambling on the Sea-shoar, when to hide her Infamy, she declared, That
Neptune came out of the Sea and ravished her, which passed for current with the
People. Calliope, one of the Nine Muses, styled the Goddess of Rhetoric and
Heroic Poetry. She was painted Young, crowned with Flowers, holding in one
hand a Book, and in the other a wreath of Laurel. Callipatria, a Woman of Elis,
being of great strenght, she used to disguise herself in Man's Apparel, and
Wrestle at the Olimpick Games, tho Women were strictly forbidden to appear
there; but being discovered she was pardoned, and to prevent the like for the
future, it was ordined that those who entered the Lists should be stripped naked.
Calithoe, Daughter of S^amander, married to Tro^, third King of the (...)
afterward from him named (...) had by him three Sons, (...) ^^nim^les, and
(...), Grandfather father to Anchises the Father of Aeneas the Fugitive Trojan,
who planted himself in Italy, after the Destruction of Troy. Chalisto, Daughter
of Lycaon an Arcadian, who listing herself among the Nymphs of Diana, and
vowing Chastity, was nevertheless debauched by Jupiter; and being found with
Child the Goddess turned her into a Bear, yet she brought forth a Son called
Arcos. But Jupiter taking compassion on them, translated them to the Stars,
where they are called the great and little Bear. Callithoe, Daughter of Lycus a
Tyrant of Lybia; she advertised Diomedes her Husband, of the Ambushes her
Father had laid, and by that means saved his Life: But he afterward
ungratefully forsook her, upon which she hanged herself. Callithoe, Daughter of
the River Achelous, she was Wife to Alcemon, who being Murdered, her Father,
obtained of Jupiter that her young Children should immediately grow up to Men's
estate, that they might revenge their Father's death, which was granted, and
they accordingly performed it by slaying the Conspirators. Calphurnia, Wife to
Julius Caesar, a virtuous Lady, who dreaming that the Roof of the House was
fallen down, her Husband stabbed in her Arms and all the Doors opened of their
one accord, persuaded him not to go to the Senate. But (...) regarding her, he
was there stabbed by the Conspirato^ Cassiope, Wife to Cep^ an Ethiopian King,
she (...) Mother to Andromede, (...) for comparing her Beauty (...) the
Nereides, had a Sea-^^ster sent by Neptune to ^^vour her Daughter; but she was
tied naked to a Ro^ Perseus the Sun of Dane ^^ Jupiter came on his wi^^ Horse,
Pegassus, through (...) Air, and in a dreadful Com^ killed the Monster, and
(...) the Lady; and is fabled to ^^tain of Jupiter that the Mo^ and Daughter,
when they (...) might be made Constellati^^ and fixed in the Skies (...) the
Northern Stars. Catharine d'Bedicis, (...) of France. Catharine d'Siena, a
(...) of the third Order of St. D^minick, a very Pious and D^vout Lady; after
her death (...) was Canonized by Pope (...) Catharine of Alexan^^ another
Saint, tho some (...) whether there ever was such Person. Catharine of Ara^^
Daughter, to K. Ferdinand (...) Fifth, she was sent over (...) England, and
first married ^^ Prince Arthur, and after (...) death to Prince Henry, w^^
Succeeded Henry the Seve^^ She was Mother to Q. (...) and being divorced, the
(...) after died for Grief. Catharine of Austria, D^ches of Savoy; she was
Daughter to Philip the Second ^^ Spain by Elizabeth of France, she was Married
to Emmanuel, the first Duke of Savoy; and dyed at Turin, Anno 1597. Leaving
Five Sons and Four Daughters behind her. Catherine of Poland, she was Queen of
Sweden, and Daughter of Sigismund the first King of Poland; she was Married to
John Prince of Swedeland, and Duke of Fineland, Son to Gustavus the first: She
was a Lady of great Virtue and Patience, bearing her Husbands troubles, and
continuing with him, during his seven years Imprisonment, with a wonderful
Constancy. Catharine of Portugal, Duchess of Bragance, she was Daughter of
Edward the Second, King of Portugal, and Married to John the Second Duke of
Bragance; after the death of Sebastian, she disputed her Right with Philip the
Second, King of Spain, for the Kingdom of Portugal; but though the Spaniard had
then the longest Sword; it is since fallen to her Posterity: The Virtuous Donna
Catharina Queen Dowager of England, being likewise decended from her. Cave vel
raba, Daughter of Julian, Count of Ceuta and Consuegra, she was Ravished by
Rhoderick King of Spain, which so incensed her Father, that to Revenge it, he
called in the Sarazens, who in a Barbarous manner overrun all Spain, and
expulsed Rhoderick his Kingdom. Centhris, Wife to Cinyre, King of Cyprus,
Mother of Myrrha, whom Venus turned into a Myrrh tree. Cenee a Maid, That for
her Viginity, prevailed with Neptune, to turn her into a Man, that she might
never more be ravished; which he did, and finding her of a Martial Spirit; that
she might be safe in War, he rendered her Invulnerable, but fighting with the
Centaurs, they bruised her to death with the weight of mighty Clubs, after
which she is fabled to be turned into a Bird. Ceres, the Goddess of Corn,
Daughter of Saturn and Ops, who went about the World with blazing Pines, to
seek her Daughter Proserpina, whom Pluto had Ravished, and carried to Hell, and
at last finding her, agreed that the should be six months in the year with
Pluto, and the other six with her on Earth. Cesonie, Empress of Caligula, and
after his death was Murdered by Julius Lupus for weeping over the dead Body of
her Husband, baring her Neck to the Cruel Wretch, and dying with great
Constancy and Courage; she likewise strangled her Daughter Julia Drusila, a
Child of Four Years old. Charicke Hyda^pes, a King of Aethiopia's Daughter,
being very Fair and Beautiful, to the rest of the Ethiops; so that the Queen
feared, being mistrusted of Disloyalty; but when she beheld an Ebbony Spot
Arrisen on the Princess Arm, the true Mark of a Legitimate Child of that
Family, she greatly rejoiced. Charlotte, Daughter of Lewis the Second Duke of
Montpensire, she was veiled a Nun, when very young, and afterward became Abbess
of St. Jovare, but not liking that kind of Life; she privately withdrew into
Germany, and there turned Protestant, and was Married to William of Nasau,
Prince of Orange, whom she Loved so entirely, that hearing he was desperately
wounded by one Jourigni, she fell sick with Grief, and dyed at Antwerpt.
Chahatri Colombe, a Tailors Wife of Burgundy, being in Labor, could by no
means be Delivered, but her Belly continued big till she dyed, which was twenty
four years after, when being opened to find the cause; the shape of a perfect
Female Infant was found in her Womb, petrefied to the hardness of a^stone.
Christiana, Queen of Sweden, she was Daughter to Gustavus Adolphus, the Warlike
King of the Swedes, and Mary Eleanor of Brandenburgh, after she had Reigned as
Queen some years; she voluntarily resigned the Crown to her Cousin Charies
Gustavus, and went to Rome where she lived very Splendidly to her death, which
happened Anno 1688. Chrysame, a Thessalia^ Priestess, who inured Cattl^ by
degrees to eat poisono^^ Herbs, till they became their Natural Food: And in the
War between the Grecians and Barbarians, Left them as a Prey to the hungery
Enemy who feeding on their Flesh, became distracted; so that (...) easy
Victory was gained over them. Ciree, an Inchantress dwelling in the Isle of
Oggia, (...) to be the Daughter of the S^^ who by her Inchantmen^ changed Men's
shapes, and turned them into Beasts, (...) stayed Ulysses in his return from
Troy, till Minerva (...) Protectress got leave of (...) to set him free. St.
Claire, an Order of Religious Women, taking the^^ Denomination from her, they
were confirmed by Pope Innocent the Third. Claudia, a Roman (...) Virgin she
fastening her (...) to the Galley wherein the S^^tue of Cyble was, on the Riv^
Tyber, drew it to Rome when it stopped, and no other (...) move it. Clemenie, a
Pagan Goddess, Patroness of Mildness and Mercy; she was painted wi^^ a Branch
of Laurel in one hand and a Lance in the other: she had her Temple in Rome, and
Celia, a Roman Virgin, she was given in Hostage to Porsena, when he besieged
Rome, but made her Escape on Horseback over the Tyber, but being sent back
again, he freely released her for the Virtue he found in her, whereupon the
Senate Erected her a Statue on Horseback in the Marketplace. Ceobulina, she
Renounced the Crown of Rhodes, to apply herself to Philosophy, and a
Contemplative Life. Cleopatria, Second Wife to King Philip of Macedon, she was
Murdered by Olimpias his first Wife, after his being slain by Possanias.
Cleopatra, Daughter of Philip of Macedon, she was Married to Alexander King of
Epirus, and put to death by Antigonus at Sardis. Cleopatria, Daughter of
Ptolomy Philometus King of Egypt, Admirable for her Wit and Beauty; she was
Married to Alexander Bela, King of Syria, and left him for Demetrius Nicanor,
but he being taken Prisoner by the Persians, she Married Rodogune, and soon
after put him to death; and her Son Selucius ascending the Throne without her
leave, she ^hot him dead with an Arrow, and made Antiochus the Eight King, who
understanding she ^^^ended to poison him at a Banquet she had prepared, made
her drink the dose of which she dyed. Cleopatra, Daughter of Ptolomy Physoon,
King of the Egyptians, she was Married to her Brother, and then to Antiochus
King of Syria but she was strangled by Griphine, his first Wife, which known,
so ingraged the King, that he caused her to be offered as a Sacrifice to
appease the Ghost of the Murdered Cleopatra. Cleopatra, Daughter of Ptolomy
Epiphanes. Cleopatra, The fair Queen of Egypt, Daughter to Ptolomy Auletes, she
was first Married to her Brother Ptolomy, but he being drowned in the Nilus,
when he fled from the overthrow given him by Julius Caesar, she Captivated the
Conqueror with her Beauty. he begot on her a Son, called Cesa^ion, slain after
Cesars death by the Soldiers of Augustus, afterward Mark Anthony doated on her;
but after the overthrow at Actium, she clapped Aspicks to her Breast and dyed,
to prevent her being carried Captive to Rome. Cleophe, Queen of the Massagues,
a People of India; ^he opposed the Progress of Alexanders Victories, till she
brought him to terms, which were to draw off his Army, and leave her in quiet
Possession of her Kingdom, for which sue is said to pay him only the Tribute of
a Nights Lodging. Cleopatra Selene, Married to Antiochus G^^phus, King of
Syria, and afterward to Antiochus Cizicenus, and thirdly to Antiochus Eusebius,
but being taken in a Battle by Tyranes, he put her to death. Clio, one of the
Nine Muses, said to be the Daughter of Jupiter and Memory. Clotilde, Queen of
France, Wife to Clovis the First, she Converted him to the Christian Religion,
and persuaded him to be Baptized: she had diverse Sons, among whom, after their
Fathers Death, there arose Civil Dissentions in disputes for the Throne, which
she being by no means able to Regulate, it hastened her death. Clotilde,
Daughter of Clovis and St. Clotilde, she was Married to Amaury King of the
Vice-Goths in Spain, but he abusing her because she would not change her
Religion: Childeber, her brother, made War upon him, and rescued her out of his
hands, but in her way to France she dyed. Clotho, one of the Fatal Sisters,
that spun the thread of Men's Lives, which when cut by Atropos, another of them,
the Party whose Thread was so cut dyed. Clusia the Chaste Daughter of King
Thuscus, who being denied in Marriage to Valerius Torqu^tus, he Besieged her
Father in his Chief City; When to prevent the Misery of which, she was
innocently the Cause, the threw herself from the Battlements, but her Coats
(...) the got no harm. Constance, or Constantia, Daughter of the Emperor
Constantine Clorus, by his Wife theodora, she was Married to Licinus, who
raising Rebellions in the Empire, was slain. Constance Daughter of Roger King
of Sicily. Constance, Married to Robert King of France, she was Daughter of
William the First Earl of Provence. Constance, Queen of Aragon, Wife to Peter
the Third King of Aragon, and Daughter of Manfroy Frederick. Core, Daughter of
Cere^ the word from the Greek signifying Nourishment. Corrina, a Grecian Lady
famous for Poetry, and mu^^ Celebrated by the Poets of he^ Nation and others,
as a very Learned, Ingenious and Beautiful Woman. Cornelia, Daughter of Scipio,
first Married to Marcus Crassus, but he being (...) in the Parthian Wars; (...)
Married Pompey the Great, and Accompanied him in his flight after the Battle of
Pharsalia. Cornelia, a Roman Lady, Married to Cornelius Gr^chus. Cornelia,
Daughter to Ci^na, and Wife to Julius Caesar, she had by him Julia, married to
Pompey before Cornelia. Cratefipolis Wife to Alexander King of Siconie: The
Siconeans after the death of her Husband, Rebelled against her, and fought to
Dethrone her; but at the head of a far less Army she Routed them, Executing the
Chiefs, which quieted the rest. Cretheis, Married to Ascestus King of Thessaly,
a Woman of infatiable Lust. Creusa, Daughter of Creon King of Corinth, she was
Married to Jason, upon which Mede^ his former Wife destroyed ^er, and most of
her Fathers Family by Enchantments. Cumegonde, Married to the Second, yet
living with him as a Virgin, upon his suspecting her not to have brought her
Virginity to his Bed. After his death she went into a Convent of Nuns, and
spent the remainder of her days. Cunina, a Goddess held by ^he Ancients, to
have the care of young Children in their tender Age. Cyana, a Nymph attending
in Proserpina, endeavoring ^o rescue her from Pluto, was ^^med into a
Fountain, that ^ears her Name. Cyble, styled the Mother and Grandmother of the
Gods and Goddesses, she is represented Crowned with Castles, and (...) Key in
her hand. Cyna, Daughter of Philip King of Macedon, Married to ^myntas Son to
Perdicas the Third, and then to Lageus King of the Argives, a Lady of a
Courageous and Magnanimous spirit, for under the Command of the Argives, won
many Victories, She killed the Queen of the Illyrians, fighting hand to hand;
and after the death of Alexander the Great, her Brother; she opposed the
aspiring of Perdicas, who in vain contrived her death. Canidia, a Thessalian
Woman that dealt in Charms, so powerful that it held: She could easily destroy
People at a great distance, stopped the Course of Rivers, and make Birds fall in
their Flight; raise Storms of Rain, Hail and Thunder, stop a Ship in her
Course, and many such like Matters, by the Power of her Hellish Art. Cumea, or
the Cumean Sibyl, a Prophetess that foretold the Roman affairs, and many of
other things. Of which see more at large. Converted Whore; An honest Gentleman
in the heat of Summer having been walking in the Fields, comtemplating with
himself, and returning back not the same way he went out, but through another
part of the Suburbs, to which he was a mere stranger, and finding himself
athirst, he stepped into the first House, and called for a Cup of Beer, seating
himself in the first Room next the Street. He had not well wiped the Sweat from
his Face with his Hankerchief, but two or three young Wenches came skittishly
in and out of the Room; who seeing him to be a Man of Fashion, they thought to
make of him some booty, being (it seems) set on by the Grandam of the House,
for as (...) proved, it was a common Brothel house. The handsom^^ amongst them
was put upon him; who entreated him not to be seen below, where every Porter,
Carman, and common Fellow Came to drink; but to take a more convenient and
retired Room. The Gentleman being willing to see some fashions, took her gentle
prosfer, and went with her up Stairs, where they two being alone, Beer being
brought up, she began to offer him more than common courtesy; which he
apprehending, asked her in plain terms, If these were not mere Provocations to
incite him to Lust? which she as plainly confessed. To whom he replied, That
since it was so, he was most willing to accept of her kind proffer; only for
modesty sake, he desired her to show him into a Darker Room, to which she
assented, and leads him from one place to another; but he still told her, that
none of all these was dark enough: insomuch, that she began at length somewhat
to di^ta^le him, because in all that time he had not made unto her any friendly
proffer. At length she brought him into a close narrow Room, with nothing but a
Loop-hole for light, and told him, Sir* unless you propose to go into the Cole
home, this is the darke^ place in the House. How does this please you? To whom
he answered, Unless (thou strumpet) thou can bring me to ^ place so palpably
tenebrio^^ into which the Eyes of Heaven cannot pierce and see me, tho^^ can
not persuade me to (...) Act so detestable before Go^ and good Men: For cannot
(...) that sees into the Hearts and Reins of all, behold us here (...) our
Wickedness? To conclude he read unto her so strict and austere a Lecture,
concerning her base and debauched Life that from an impudent Strumpet, he
wrought her to be ^ repentant Convert. Wh^^ further asking her of her Birt^ and
Country, the freely co^fess'd unto him, That she (...) sold such small things
as (...) had, to come up to (...) with the Carriers; where i^ was no sooner
alighted at (...) Inn, but she was hired by (...) Bawd (altogether unacquaint^^
with her base course of Life) (...) by degrees trained her to (...) base
Prostitution. Her app^rent Tears and seeming P^^tence much prevailing (...) the
Gentleman, he protested If it lay in him, he would otherwise dispose of her
according to her wishes; and with (...) charging her, That if he (...) unto her
within two or three days with Money to acquit he^ of the House, that she (...)
attire herself as modesty as (...) could possibly, not bringing with her any
one rag that belonged to that Abominabl^ House, or any borrowed G^ment in which
she had offended, but instantly to repair unto him at his first sending; and
this being agreed betwixt them, for that time they parted. She was sent for,
according to appointment, and (after he had tutored her in all things which she
should answer) accepted and entertained. Her modest Behavior and fair
Carriage, with her tender Love and Diligence about the Children, won her in
short time a good Opinion of her Master, but a greater Affection from her
Mistress. So she was raised from a Chambermaid to be a Waiting-Gentlewoman, and
the only Bosom Friend of her Mistress: who falling Sick, even to death, ready
to expire: her last, so much doted on her new Servant, that she sent for her
Husband, and besought him, after her decease to make that Woman his Wife, and
Mother to his Children. The Gentlewoman soon after dies, he is left a Widower,
and the charge of the whole House committed to our new Convert, with the
bringing up of his Children. Which she executed with such Fidelity, that he
casting a more curious Eye upon her Youth and Beauty, and withal remembering
his Wives last Words, not knowing for the present how better to dispose of
himself (Time, Place, and Opportunity, all things furthering her Preferment) he
contracted himself unto her, and they were soon after Married. Instantly upon
the Preferment of this young Woman, the Gentleman that brought her this
Fortune, adventured all his Means upon a Voyage which miscarried, but scarce
had honest Rags to cover his Nakedness, or hide him from shame. It happened, that
just upon his return the old Gentleman died too, and left her posess'd of Eight
Hundred a Year. Now just as the followed the Hearse to the Church this Gentleman
by chance coming by, like the Picture of the Prodigal, the casting her Eye
aside, had espied him, and presently apprehended him to be the Man he was, and
whispering a Servant in the Ear, bad ^im to fall into discourse with him, to
enquire his Name, his Lodging, with other Questions, as the directed him, and
to proceeded to the Funeral; but to s^ake nothing as from her. The Servant
brought word how things stood. The next Morning (by her appointment) came a
Gentleman very early to his Lodging, who desired to speak with him, and (...)
him his Name, which (though loath) he told him; the (...) proceeded, That if he
were the same Man he pretended, he had heard of his Worth and noble Qualities,
and withal, his Casu^lties at Sea; and not willing that any Gentleman (...)
groan under so heavy a Burden, told him there (...) Pounds, bad him furnish
himself with Apparel and other Necessaries, and so was ready to take his leave.
The other Extasi'd with so great a Courtesy from a Stranger, whom he had not
seen before, enforced him back, to know what Reason he had to be so Charitable.
The other answered, That for the first, his Courtesy was grounded upon his
Worth; his Satisfaction was his Acknowledgment; and his security, in that he
knew him Honest, and told him, some three days after he would call upon him,
when he was Habited like himself. When the Gentleman came according to Promise,
he seemed glad to see this present Alteration; and withal entreated him to walk
abroad with him to Dinner, he seemed willingly to assent, not once demanding
whether. In the mean time the Widow had provided a great Feast, whither she had
Invited all her Suitors. This New Gentleman was neglected, and the Stools being
furnished; She took place at the Tables end only, leaving her Husbands Chair
empty, when suddenly starting up: Methinks says she, some one in this Room
might be well spared, for we have more Guests then Stools. The Gentleman at
there words bit his Lip, and was entreated to sit down by his friends, but
whilst they were Straining Courtesy; She proceeded, Is this a Suitor too? No
question some that either has barrowed his Clothes, or engaged all his Credit
for this one New Suit, in hope to gain the Widow; but Women are now adays grown
wiser. This was sport to the rest, but torture to him, who much blaming her
Ingratitude, yet Arming him with Patience (the rather for his friends sake who
brought him thither) he sat down silent with an ill Stomach, eating as little
as he spoke. Methinks (says she) we are all very merry, only that Gentleman at
the lower end of the Table is Melancholy, but I know the Reason; it is perhaps,
because he is placed so low; but if that be his Disease, I have for it a
present Remedy: When walking to him where he sat, she plucked him by the Sleeve,
desiring him to remove. And being drawn by her to the upper of end the Chamber,
like a Bear to the Stake, where her late Husbands Chair Stood Empty: Now Sir
(says she, with a more serious Countenance than before my New Husband, sit
here in my Old Husbands Chair, and bid these your Guests Welcome. Still he
fretted, and they laughed as before when she craving Pardon for so abusing his
Patience, openly Protested, That this meeting was merely for his sake: And to
make them Witnesses of their present Contract; for if he refused her to Wife,
she vowed never to have another Husband, acknowledging that all her Fortunes
(next to the Divine Providence) came by his Goodness; and that she knew no way
better to express her Gratitude, than to confer them on him, by whom they first
came. Thus the close proved better than the beginning; and the Banquet of
Sweetmeats made amends for the harsh Feast, for they found this last (of all
the other passages) to be only serious. They were there Contracted ( the
Suitors Witnesses) and soon after Married. And thus his Virtue and her
Conversion, had one joint reward. Mr. Heywood. Confession of a New Married Man,
Happy are you (old Batchelours) who have made a good Choice, who have gotten a
Wife that is Beautiful, Rich, Good Natured, And Virtuous, you learnt first to
know her well, that you might the better woe her, and so be happy in Marriage.
Make this your example, O all you foolish and wandering Lovers, who are so
desirous to taste of the Pleasures and Sweetness of Marriage; and are sometimes
so disquieted and troubled, till you cast your selves upon an in^ulting
domineering Wife, who perhaps has the Breeches already on, and will vex you
with all the Torments imaginable in the World. Do but use these few Remedies
for your Squandered Brains, and be asured they will bring you to have good
Fortune and Tranquillity. -- Search not after great Riches, but for one of your
own degree: For the Rich are Insulting, Self-conceited and Proud.. -- Admire no
outward Imbellishments because they are proud of their Beauty, and imagine
themselves to be Goddesses whom their Husbands ought to obey. -- Shun those who
are much lesser then your self: For when a mean one finds herself promoted by a
great Match, she is much prouder and self-conceited than one of a good
Extraction; and will much sooner than another endeavor to Domineer over her
Husband. -- Dissemble not in your Wooing; for Dissimulation deceives its own
Master. -- Be not too ha^^y, For a thing of Importance, must be long and
prudently Considered of, before a Final Conclusion can be made. -- Follow the
Advice of Understanding Friends. For to be Wise, and in Love, was not given to
the Gods themselves. -- Choose no Country Wench: For she will want a whole years
Learning, before she will know how to cleanse an House of Office, and two years
to Learn to make a Currie. -- If you Marry, arm your self with Patience. For ^e
that has the yoke of Marriage upon his shoulders must (...) and ind^re all the
(...) and trou^^es that that estate is subject to. -- If these things to be
observed by you Innocent and Wandering Lovers, they will much assist you in your
choice, but not preserve you from being a Slave; because the Gentlewoman whom
you have chosen, has till this time be past, had one or other ill condition,
which she knew how to hide and dissemble with, that you never so much as
thought of, or expected from her. Cornelius Agrippa knew this in his days, when
he said, Men must have and keep their Wives, even as it chances; if they be
(says he) merry humoured if they be foolish, if they be unmannerly, if they be
proud, if they be sluttish, if they be ugly, if they be dishonest, or
whatsoever Vice she is guilty of; that will be perceived after the Wedding, but
never amended. Be therefore very vigilant, you wandering Lovers, and sell not
your Liberty at so low a Price, which cannot be Redeemed again with a whole Sea
of Repentances. -- And you, O silent Gentlewomen, methinks you long to know
whether there be no Remedies for you to be had, that you may also be as well
armed against the Rigid-Natured. Subtle and Dissembling Lovers; as well as they
have against the Vicious Gentlewomen; take notice, that since you have
subjected your selves to that foolish fashions of these ^ime, never of your
selves to go a wooing; but with Patience will expect who will come for you;
that Rule must be first observed, and regard taken of him that comes, then it
is the time to consider, principally. -- Whether he loves you for your Money,
or for your Beauty. -- Inquire whether he have a good method, or way, for the
maintaining of a Family. For if he have not that to build upon, the whole
foundation will tumble. -- Search also whether he be of an honest, rather then
great extraction. For Virtue is the greatest Gentility. -- Inquire also whether
he be a frequenter of Alehouses especially of such as are of an ill repute. To
be a Lover of such houses,
Makes him to think of other Spouses.
-- If he be covetous of Honor, he has several other Virtues. -- Hate a
Gamester like the Plague; for they are consumers of all; nay their very gain is
loss. -- Abhor a Person of no employ, or gadder along the Streets; for they are
fit for nothing. -- If you Marry, show all Honor, Respect, and Love to your
Husband. Endeavor not to Lordize over him; because that, both by Heaven and
Nature is given unto him. -- In so doing, you will have the expectation of a
happy match. Confession of a Lewd Woman, A Gentlewoman (whose Name must be
concealed) having received singular breeding, and all Liberty she could
possibly desire: Falling one day into a serious Consideration of her own state;
debated the matter with herself in this manner, I have thus long lived, and
enjoyed what liberty or pleasure I desired. Young I am in Years: Yet though my
years be few, many are mine hours of fruitless expense. Delicacy I affected,
and none ever was more Cockered. Public places of meeting I frequented; and
from these have I ever returned more depraved. How tedious was an hour employed
in Devotion? How short, bestowed in any light Recreation? How many Mornings
have I Sacrificed to my Glass? With what winning looks have I opened my
windows; while the Windows of mine own Body let in sin? With what Care were my
Breasts laid out, to take a wandering eye? How pleasantly to my light ear
sounded any amorous Discourse? What a Wardrobe of Vanities had I in store to
catch a vain Passenger? How happy were I, if I could but find one day that
might justify her plea for that days employment? Was it not my highest
ambition to be impaled with multitude of Suitors? Was it not my glory to
Triumph in their Repulse: And to supply their decrease with an admittance of
fresh Servants? Have I not expressed most scorn where I received most love? Have
I not solaced my self with their sighs: and highly prided my self in putting on
a Countenance of Disdain? Was there any dress so Fantastic, which did not
quickly take me? Did any habit less please me, than what seemed most graceful
in the eye of modesty? -- What rests then, but that thou redeem the time? Put
off that Habit of Lightness which thou have so long affected: Address thy
thoughts to win nobler Suitors than thou have hitherto desired. Thou art but ye
in thy Prime; defer not one hour longer from rescuing thine honor. Blush at
those sensual delights which have so long taken possession of thee. Let it be
thy greatest scorn to blemish thy Souls glory, with making an Idol of a light
portion of earthly beauty. And though thy youth will hardly admit so strange an
overture: Let it be thy Task to prevent occasion, and to subject Sense to the
command of Reason. The more difficulty which attends the Task, the more
glorious shall be thy Victory. One minute is too long to adjourn such a
purpose: Bid adieu then to thy darling pleasure; and that for ever: So must
thou enjoy those will last for ever. -- Nor was this Nobie Female Convert
flower in performing, than she was in promising. For desiring a small Portion
from her Friends, to support her with a Competency of Livelihood: With a
constant Resolution she bad farewell to those mis-spending Pleasures, which she
formerly so tenderly loved: Embracing a Private Retired Life, where she
bestowed many precious hours in Devotion, to her own Comfort and others
Direction. A rare President in this Age, for one in the very flower of her Age,
to change the condition of light love, with the profession of a strict life.
Chyrurgery, It is every day confirmed by the Experience of City and Country;
that many Ladies and Gentlewoman, have a very rare hand in the Curing of
Contusions, green Wounds, and many Sores, and other Evils which are daily
Incident unto Men and Women, in which, I know not by what happiness, they
oftentimes exceed the cunning of the Chyrurgeons themselves. -- The most
remarkable Books for Physic and Chyrurgery which I shall at present commend to
Gentlewomen, for their Improvement in the Knowledge of Chyrurgery are, The
Queens Closet, The Countess of Kents Secrets, Dr. Bruges his Vade Mecum, etc.
But in my Second Part of the Ladies Dictionary, I shall insert several Curious
Receipts in Chemistry, that I want in Manuscript from some emine^^ Ladies.
Cook-Maids, If you would fit your selves for your Employment, and so
consequently get great Wages, good (...) and the Reputation of an Accomplished
Cook. -- You must Learn to be skilful (...) Dressing all sorts of Flesh, For
and Fish; to make Variety (...) Sauces proper for each of them, to raise all
manner of Pasties and Kickshaws; to be curious in Garnishing your Dishes, and
making all manner of Pickles, etc. And as you must know how to dress Meat well,
so must you know how to save what is left, of that you have dressed; of which
you may make both. Handsome, and Toothsom Dishe^ again, to the saving of you^
Masters Purse, and Credit (...) his Table. -- You must be (...) to be as saving
as you can, and cleanly about every thing; seeing likewise that your Kitchen be
kept clean, and all things scoured in due time, your Larders also and
Cup-boards that there be no bits of Bread and Meat to lie about them to spoil
and stink. -- You must be careful that your Meat tai^ not, for want of good
Salting. You must also keep good hours for your Meals, otherwise you put an
House quite out of Order, do not covet the Kitchinstuff for your Vails, but
rather ask the more Wages; for that may make you an Ill-Huswife of your Masters
Goods, and teach you to be a Thief, for you would be apt to put that which
would go into the tried Suet, into your Pot. -- Lay not all your Wages upon
your back; but lay up something against Sickness, and an hundred other
Casualties; for you may assure your self it is more Commendable, for one in
your Employment, to go decent and clean, than gaudishly fine. Chamber-Maids to
Persons of Quality. -- It will be required of you, that you Dress well, that
you may be able to supply the place of the Waiting Woman, should she chance to
fall sick, or be absent from your Lady; you must wash fine Linen well; and
starch Tiffanies, Lawns, Points and Laces, mend them neatly; and wash white
Sarsenets, with such like things. -- You must make your Lady's Bed; lay up, and
lay out her Night-cloaths; see that her Chamber be kept clean, and nothing
wanting which she desires or requires to be done: Be Modest in your Deportment,
ready at her call, always diligent, answering not again when reproved, but with
pacifying words; loving and courteous to your Fe^^ow servants, not gigling or
idling out your time, not wantoning in the Society of Men; you will find the
benefit thereof. Chamber-Maids, to Persons of Honor or Quality, or
Gentlewomen, either in City or Country. -- Would you endeavor to fit your self
for this Employment, that you may be capable of serving a Person of Honor or
Quality, you must in the first place learn to Dress well, that you may be able
to supply the place of a Waiting Woman, should she chance to fall sick or be
absent from your Lady, you must also learn to wash fine Linen well, and to
Starch Tiffanies, Lawns, Points, Gawses and Laces, you must likewises learn to
mend them neatly, and wash white-Sarsenets, with such like things. Then you
must learn to make your Lady's Bed, well, soft, and easy, to lay up her
Night-cloaths, and see that her Chamber be kept neat and clean, and that
nothing be wanting which she desires or requires to be done. Then you must
learn to be Modest in your Deportment or Behavior, to be ready at her Call,
and to be always diligent, never answering again when she takes occasion to
reprove you, but endeavor to mitigate her Anger with pacifying Words. Be
loving and courteous to your Fellow Servants, not gigling or idling out your
time, or wantoning in the Society of Men, you will soon find the benefit
thereof. For an honest and sober Man will rather make that Woman his Wife, whom
he sees employed continually about her Business; that one, who makes it her
Business to trifle away her own and others time. Neither will a Virtuous and
Understanding Mistress long entertain such a Servant, whom she finds of such a
Temper: Be not subject to change, but still remember that a rolling Stone never
gets Moss, and as you gain but little Money, so if you tumble up and down you
will gain but little Credit. -- If you would sit your self to serve a
Gentlewoman only (either in City or Country) you must not only learn how to
Dress, Wash and Starch very well all manner of Tiffanies, Lawns, Points,
Gawses, and Laces, and to Mend the same; but you must learn to Work all sorts
of Needle work, and Plain-work, to Wash black and white Sarsenets, you must
know how to make all manner of Spoon-meats, to Raise Paste, to Dress Meat well,
(though not often required thereunto) to make Sawces both for Fish and Flesh;
to Garnish Dishes; to make all sorts of Pickles, to see that every thing be
served in well and handsomely to the Table in due time, and to wait with ^
graceful Decorum at Table if need should require: Keep your Mistresses Chamber
clean, and lay up every thing in its due place. You must also learn to be
skilful in Buying any thing in the Market, if you be entrusted therewith, if
there be no Butler in the House. You must see that all things be decent and
fitting in the Parlour and Dining Room. You must endeavor to take off your
Mistress from all the Care you can, giving to her a true and just Account of
what Money you laid out for her, showing your Self Thrifty in all your
Disbursements. Be careful in over-looking Inferior Servants, that they waste
nothing that belongs to your Master and Mistress. Lastly you must learn to be
diligent to perform whatsoever your Mistress commands you, to be neat in your
Habit, modest in your Carriage, silent when she is Angry, willing to please,
quick and neat handed about what you have to do. If you attain to these
Qualifications, and be of an humble good Disposition, you will deserve a good
Salary, and a great deal of Respect. Courtship of Men, how to be received by
the Fair-Sex. -- Having in the following Work, inserted the Instructions given
by the Athenians to the Men, how regularly to Court the Women: I shall here
insert their Advice to the Women how they should behave themselves when Courted
by the Men; which is as follows. -- Queit. I. Is it proper for a Woman to yield
at the (...) we love? -- Answer. We must first promise before we dispatch the
Ladies Questions relating to this matter. -- For the Men, they are such poor
helpless Creatures, that they much more need Direction in this Affair than the
Fair-Sex, whom Nature has sufficiently instructed with Wit, as well as armed
with Beauty, and so provided against all Attacks of what Nature soever. But you
think, Madam, you are not yet upon the Square with us, and if the pretty (for
ought we know) invisible Armaryllis will not enter the Lists with that dreadful
Creature Man, unless she is Armed Back and Breast, we must not be such
Discourteous Knights to refuse our Aid and Assistance therein to her or any
other distressed Damsel. -- -- Accordingly we Answer to this first Question, --
There Is no such want of Man yet thanks to our French and Irish Enemies, that
you Ladies should be in such great haste to yield at the first Appearance of a
Foe -- What if you are Cowards at Heart, (as Mrs. Raysin in her Breeches) it is
however decent not to hang out the White Flag 'till the Cannon be drawn down;
besides you will get better Conditions if the Enemy does not know how weak you
are within. (Forgive Ladies, all this Warlike Gibberish, for we had been just
reading the Gazer, and cannot easily get out on it.) But to be less figurative,
in plain Truth and English, as we have often told you, there is little Faith in
us Men, and perhaps less Generosity, and but very few of us can bear such a
Favor -- It Is e'ne too luscius Fare, as was said before of Kisses, for a
Hungery Lover, who ten to one will Surfeit upon it, and in a little while will
naufeat the Giver, Feast and all; Not but that could the Ladies be sure of
their Lovers Hearts, that will whip you about like Jack-a-Lents, a Mile in a
Minute, could ye but know your Man once, and had you the good Fortune to light
upon a Generous Lover, (as great a Phoenix as the Eel among the Sack of Snakes,
etc. -- you know the Story) in such a Case the less Ceremony the better,
(except the grand one of the Ring, and Sack-posset) and he must be
proportionably the better as he is the happier Lover, being surpised into
Bliss, and the mighty Joy heapt upon him before he is aware on it: And besides,
all the World knows, as well as Seneca, that a Benefit is so much the greater
by how much the more unexpectedly and speedily it is conferred. All the Fear
here Ladies, is, least Love should put a Cheat upon you, infect you with his
own Blindness, and make you take the Lovers for as errant Angels as they do
you, and be perhaps both alike mistaken. However the other side we look upon to
be much the safer, as the World now is, and that 'twou'd do best to keep the
Hounds at a Bay for some convenient time, which will make 'em more eager, and
when they do fasten more in earnest. But for this piece of the Art of Love, as
is before said, we believe Women need little Instruction, since though you were
all as Innocent as Eve in Paradise, you would have the Wit to Answer your Lovers as
she did our great Grandfather, Who even before she knew she was Naked could
tell Adam, unless Mr. Dryden slanders her. -- You long should Court, and we
should long Deny. -- Quest. 2. If our Lovers Sing to us, whether we ought to
Praise 'em. -- -- Answ. There seems no great matter in it of one side or the other
-- but of the two it is more Civil to Praise 'em than otherwise, since if they
Sing Well, you ought to do it out of Gratitude, if Ill, out of Pity, if not
Justice too; since if they know it themselves, you are ^till the more Obliged
to 'em, when they have so much Complaisance to expose even their own
Imperfections to gratify your desires. OF the other side, if they have a little
of the Sir Courtly in 'em, and think to stop the Fair Thief that has trussed up
a certain little foolish Heart of theirs, and run away with it; if they think
to stop it with their own howling Hue and Cry, and persuade themselves that
they sing like Bowman himself, when perhaps they Sing and Dance too, like the
Witches in Mackbeth, or Scaramouch a Serenading his Mistress -- in this Case we
think most of all a good Humored Lady would comment 'em; for it is the only
kindne^^ Nature has shown, the poor Creatures, to give 'em a good Opinion of
their own pretty Parts; for fear if they knew their true Character as well as
others do, they should han^ themselves out of the way -- But then for the Way
of Praising, which the greatest W^^ and those who have done it best, tell us,
is the Nicest thing in the World -- and this, Ladies you know how to do the
best of any. That way of Praising a Lover, which would please him best, is
letting him take his own Commendati^^ and Reward at once from the pretty Mouth
which can (...) way more obligingly Praise him -- or if the poor Icar^^ must
not rise so high. (for fear of melting his Wings) a soft grasp of a fine Hand,
a twirl of the Eye, a turn of the Head, and a thousand other pretty
insignificant Nothings, which you Women call Favors, will be sufficient to
make the happy Lover believe you are pleased with him, and almost set him out
of his little Wits for Joy. -- Quest. 3. What is the handsomest way of putting
off a Lover? -- Answ. Were it not more for the Ladies sake than the Lovers,
we'd not meddle with this Question; for we think it is as desperate a piece of
Service as for the Garrison o^ a Fort to Act its way through an Enemy's Army. In
a word it is almost an impossible thing for a Lady so to deny a Lover as to
please him -- for as it is wittily said of a very Ingenious Person in the Case
of Rivals -- We are all Ishmaelites to one another if a Woman's in the Case; so
ten to one but a Lady gets an Enemy when she refuses a Lover -- who is
generally so unreasonable an Animal, that he does not consider, One poor Woman
can suffice at once but for one Man; whereas if a Famed Beauty, or Fortune, she
can never content all Pretenders -- unless she had as many Bodies as she has
Faces when she looks in a Multiplying Glass. But tho a Woman of Prudence cannot
satisfy her Lovers, she may herself, by doing what becomes her, however they
resent it. Our Advice then for her Behavior is -- as to the swarm of Fools
that buz about her, e'ne to let 'em alone to pretend on, since they think too
well of themselves to believe she scorns or refuses 'em, though they were he're
so often told so by her own Mouth. -- But if there be any Person of Sense,
Generosity and true Worth, who appears to be really in Love with her, when her
Heart is before engaged, we think she would do very handsomely to let him know as
much in as Obliging Terms as possible, that he might as soon as he could wean
himself from a Fruitless Amor -- Quest. 4. How shall we most decently give our
Consent in Marriage. -- Answ. For the Time, what has been said of Widows, may
be partly applied to it, as well as what has been said in Answer to the first
Question. For the manner there are a Thousand, which a witty Woman cannot be to
seek in, and whatever way it is done, a Passionate Lover will scarce find fault
with it: However, the less formal it is, we think it the better -- the more
unexpectedly, the more frankly it is done. the more Obliging it must needs be.
-- Quest. 5. Suppose a Man and Woman were shut up in a room together, who had
never seen nor heard of the difference of Sexes before, how do you think they would
behave themselves? -- would they -- Answ. In Answer to this hasty Question,
which had almost overrun us, had we not tript up its heels -- We say -- that
we don't know what to say. We are very unwilling to send the Ladies to Daphnis
and Chloe for Information -- that Book is too waggish in some places and not
Spiritual enough for 'em: As for the Tempest that don't come up to the
Question, though Miranda and Hypolito are pretty fair for it, who had never seen,
though they had heard of Man and Woman. -- Well then there is no Remedy but we
must fall a guessing, but promise to do it as far from the Truth and as Civilly
as possible -- Why what should they do but fall Purring upon one another, for
Nature would work, and then do the self same that we use to do when we were
Children, make Dirtpies together, be very Inquisitive and very Innocent, and
share of one another Bread and Butter, till they know how to employ their time
better. -- Quest, 6. Whether Fondness after Marriage is more pardonable in a
Man or Woman? -- Answ. It Is Silly enough in both -- and besides Cruel, to set
other Peoples Mouths a watering, as if you were Cutting a Lemon. Further, it is
indecent, to be always slabbering, like a couple of Horses nabbing one another.
Again, it often times shows all things are not well behind the Curtain, when
there is such a deal of Love before Folks. And last of all, there is danger least
their Love should not last long* if they squander it away so fast at their
first setting up. But to compare this Fondness of both Sexes, we think it seems
worst in a Man, because there it is most unnatural, and looks like a Woman with
a Beard, so very monstrous that all the Street points at him, whenever he
appears; as they may easily do, for the World (...) not now much inclined to
th^^ Vice; and if the City it (...) be never Burnt again, unle^^ for that
Fault, it is like to (...) just where it does till the (...) Conflagration. --
Quest (...) Why are Widows more forw^^ to Marry than Maids? -- Answ. Because as
the Widow (we think) Blackacre has i^ the young Fellows take it for granted,
it is nothing but -- Up and Ride -- and indeed almost Ravish the Widows into
Matrimony, if they (...) any Appurtenances worth ^gling for. This for the Man
side -- then for the Woman's to carry on the forementio^ Metaphor -- Whether o^
two is the easier to mount, ^^ Old Pad-Hack that has be^^ beaten upon the Read
this T^ Year, or a Young Skittish F^^ that was never backed before but flouncing
about like Bu^phalus, when he stood in (...) own Light? -- Quest (...) How long
after the Death of ^ Husband may a Woman M^destly Marry? -- Answ. We think that
Pio^ Widow was a little of the soo^est, who when most deeply Lamenting at her
Husband Funeral, and one of the Company at the Grave, whispe^ her not to take
on so heavily for if she thought fit, he was ready to supply his room --
Answered, sadly sobbing, Thank ye Sir, for your Care to Comfort a Poor
Disconsolate Widow, but indeed I Have just now Promised another that came before
ye. The Ephesian Matron o't'other side was a little of the longest, though she
made up for it afterward, and was very much in have when she once set about the
Business. Nor need we go so far as Ephes^ for Ladies that have almost worshipped
their husbands tombs for seven Years together, after their Death, and at last
expressed the Extravagance of their Love to their Memories, by Marrying the
Tutor of their Children. But might we propose a term of Mourning in this Case,
our Judgment is, that the Widows Love is too warm, who though like the Indian
Wives they don't burn themselves with their Husbands, are yet far as good in
burying themselves alive to keep 'em Company -- and o't'other side, that hers
is too cold, who can scarce lie alone, 'till her Husband is so. There is a mean
betwixt 'em, and we think a Widow does very well in Mourning for one
Twelvemonth after she is so, both because it is decent, and because she
generally looks Prettier in it, and 'twill the sooner get her another Husband.
Conjugal State, fully considered. -- There is nothing in the World which may
compare in joy and fulfilling of Pleasure to Marriage. For be sure that Fortune
as well prosperous as adverse is common to both; the Bed common, and Children
common, and that more is, there is so great Communality of Body and Union of
Spirits, that they seem two transformed into one. And if the pleasure seem to
us great, to confer our secret Affairs to our Friends and Neighbors, how much
is the Delectation greater that we receive; to discover our thoughts to her,
that is joined to us by such a knot of Charity, that we put our trust in her,
as in our selves, making her wholly Treasurer or Faithful keeper of many inward
Secrets and Cogitations of our Mind. But what may be more greater Witness of
fervent Love, and undesolvable Amity, than to forsake Father, Mother, Sisters,
and Brothers, and generally all the Consanguinity till they become Enemy of
themselves; for to follow a Husband, that does Honor and Reverence her; and
having all other things in disdain, she only cleaves to him if he be Rich, The
love of a Wife toward her Husband.
she keeps his Goods, if he be Poor, she employeth all the Art that Nature
has given her, to be a Companion with him in his Poverty: If he be in
Prosperity, his Felicity is redoubled in her; she seeing herself partaker of
his Benefits: If he be in Adversity, he bears but the one half of the Grief;
and furthermore she Comfort him, Assisteth and serves him. If a Man will
remain Solitary in his House, his Wife keeps him Company, does Cherish and
Comfort him, and causes him more easily to digest the Incommodiousness of his
Solitude: If he walks the Fields, she Conducteth him with her Eye, so far as
she can see him, she desires and honors him: Being absent, she Complains,
and Sigheth, and wishes his Company: Being come home, he is Welcomed,
Received, Cherished and Countenanced with the best Shows and Tokens of Love
that Nature has showed, in such sort, that for to speak the truth; it seems
that a Wife is a Gift from Heaven granted to Man, as well for the Contentation
of Youth, as for the Rest and Solace of Age: Nature can give us but one Father
and one Mother, but Matrimony represents many in our Children the which do
Reverence and Honor us, who are more dear than our own proper Bowels: Being
young and little, they play, prattle, laugh, and show us as many ^pish toys;
they prepare us an infinite number of Pleasures, and seems Recreations and
Pastimes that Nature has given us, for to deceive and pass away part of our
miserable Life (if we be vexed with Age, The duty o^ Children (...) their
Parents
a thing common to all) they Solace the incommodiousness of (...) Age, closes
our Eyes, bring^ us to the Earth from whe^^ we came: They are our Bones our
Flesh and Blood, seeing them, we see our selves, in (...) sort that the Father
seeing (...) Children, may be assured (...) he sees his lively Youth ^ newed
in the Face of the^ -- But if we do we consider and weigh in a (...) Balance,
the great and un^^^portable doings; we shall (...) amongst these Roses (...)
Thorns, and among the^ Sweet Showers of (...) that there falls alway^ much
Hail: it is true the Athenians are a People (...) commended for their Pruden^
and Wisdom, seeing that (...) Husbands and Wives could (...) agree, because of
an infinite number of Dissentions and Provocations that chanced ordinarily
between them; were co^^trained to ordain in their Common wealth several
Magistra^^^ whom they called Reconcilers of Married ones, Laws for a Reconcile
the Man and the Wife.
the Office of whom is to Reduce, Reconcile and make Agreement by (...) means.
The Spartans in their Commonwealth, had in like case Established certain Magi
strates, Named Armasins, who had the charge to Correct the Insolency of Women,
to Reprove their Arrogance and Audacity toward their Husbands. The Romans
would not ordain Magistrates, persuading with themselves ( per adventure) that
Men were not sufficient to bridle the unbridled raging Temerity of Women, when
that they were out of Order: But they had their Refuge to the Gods. For they
Dedicated a Temple to the Goddess Viripla, where in the end they agreed of
their Domestical Quarrels. But who can (say they) patiently bear the charges of
Marriage, the Insolency and Arrogance of Women, the yoke of a kind so
unperfect? Miseries and Thorns in marriage.
Who may accomplish their carnal appetite, is also their unsatiable Pomps? ^oth
not the Old Greek Proverb say, that Women and ^hips, are never so well
accomplished, but that always they ^ant Repairing? If thou take ^er poor,
she shall be despised ^^d thy self less esteemed: If ^ou take her rich, thou
mak^st thy self a Bond-slave: For ^hinking to Marry a Compani^n equal to thee,
thou Marriest ^n unsupportable Mistress: If ^ou take her soul, thou (...) not
love her, If thou ^kest her fair, it is an Image ^ thy gate for to bring thee
^ompany. Beauty is a Tower that is Assailed of all the World, and therefore it
is very hard to keep that every one seeks to have the Key, behold the hazard
wherein thou art (says William de la Perreire) that thy roundhead become not
forked, which were a fearful Metamorphosis, Beauty makes a Woman suspected:
Deformitty hated: and Riches Proud.
if it were visible and apparent: This then is the Conclusion: Riches causes a
Woman to be Proud, Beauty makes her suspected, and Deformity or foulness
causes her to be hated. Therefore Diponares having tasted the Martyrdoms of
Marriage, said: That there were but two good days in all the Life of Marriage;
the one was the Wedding day, and the other the day that the Woman dies: For
that on the day of Marriage there is made good Cheer; the Bride is fresh and
new, and all Novelties are Pleasant; and of all Pleasures the beginning is most
delectable. The other day that he commends to be good, is the day the Woman
dies: For the Beast being dead, dead is the poison; and by the death of the
Woman, the Husband is out of Bondage and Thraldom. Ceremonies before Marriage.
-- The Persians were only permitted to contract Matrimony in, or before the
Summer Equinoctial, but not after: The Dapsolites once a Year make a solemn
Convention of all the Men and Women that are disposed to Marriage, in one day,
in which after their great Feast, the Women retire themselves and lay them down
upon their several Pallets, the Lights being all put out, the Men according to
their number are admitted in the dark, where without any premeditate Choice,
but mere Lot and Chance, every Man chooses her whom he first lights on and
Divirginates her; and be she fair or foul, ever holds her as his Wife, Stobre
Sermon. 42. Amongst the Carmanians no Man is suffered to marry, before he has
presented the Head of an Enemy to the King. About the Lake Meotes, there is a
People called Laxamat^e, amongst whom no Virgin contracts Matrimony before she
has subdued an Enemy. There is a Law amongst the Armenians, that Virgins are
first prostituted in an old Temple, dedicated to the Goddess Anetes. whose
Picture was of solid Gold; which Antonius after sacrilegiously (as they held
it) took away: according to the gain of their Compression, it was lawful for
any Man to choose a Wife where he pleased. Amongst the C^prians, the Virgins
before Marriage daily repair to the Sea ^hoar, and there company with
Strangers, till they have got such a competent Sum as man make up their
Marriage Dowe^ The Phoenicians do the like i^ the City of Syca, but th^^
Prostitution is in the Temple of Venus; the Surplusage the arises above the
Dower, returns toward the Repairing o^ the Church. The Carthagi^nians observe
the like Custom The Lydian Virgins, before they were suffered to lie wi^^ their
Husbands, made them^selves for a certain time com^mon to any Man, till (...)
with Saciety, they became gen^tle and quiet to their Beds, (...) from that time
forward vow^ Chastity, but if any one (...) found ever after to transg^^^ the
bounds of Temperance she was punished with all Ri^gour and Cruelty, Ae^^^ ^ib
4. de Var. Hist. Lycur^^ having prescribed a certain Ag^ before which time it
was (...) lawful for young Men (...) Maids to have Carnal company being
demanded the reason, ^^^swer'd, Because the issue (...) proceeds from those of
Ra^ Years, and grown Strength, (...) likewise able and perfect; (...) the hasty
and untimely Ge^^ ration is still subject to We^ ness and Infirmity. Plut^^ in
Lacon. Ceremonies used in M^^^riage by several Nations. -- In the Roman
Marriages, wh^ commenced with Contracts mutually Sealed and Sign^ with the
Signets of diverse W^^^nesses there present, there we^ sundry Customs observed
by them. The Man, in token of good Will, gave to the Woman a Ring, which she
was to wear upon the next Finger to the little one of the Left Hand, because
unto that Finger alone, a certain Artery proceeds from the Heart. The Sabine
Women, they continued a Custom, that the Man should come and take away his Wife
by a seeming Violence from the Lap or Bosom of her Mother, or her next Kin. She
being thus taken away, her Husband did part and divide the Hair of her Head
with the top of a Spear, wherewith some Fencer had been formerly killed; which
Ceremony did betoken, that nothing should disjoin them but such a Spear and
such like Violence. Toward Night the Woman was brought home to her Husband's
House with five Torches, signifying thereby the need which married Persons have
of five Goddesses and Gods, Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Suadela, and Diana, who is
called Lucina. When the Woman was thus brought to the Door, then did she
anoint the Polls of the Door with Oil; from which Ceremony the Wife was called
Vxor, quasi Vnxor. This ended, the Bride-men did lift her over the Threshold
and so carried her in by a seeming Violence. (because it should not be thought
the w^n willingly to bed with her (...).) -- The ancient Persians used to
celebrate their Marriages in the Spring, and on their Marriage-day the Husband
eatsnothing but an Apple, or the Marrow of a Camel. As for the Marriages in
New-Spain; The Bridegroom and the Bride stood together before the Priest, who
took them by the Hands, asking them if they would marry? Understanding their
Will, he took a corner of the Veil wherewith the Woman had her Head covered,
and a corner of the Man's Gown, which he tied together on a Knot, and so led
them thus tied to the Bridegroom's house, where there was a Hearth kindled.
Then he caused the Wife to go Seven times about the Hearth, and so the married
Couple sat down together, and the Marriage was contracted. -- In other parts of
New-Spain, they used other Marriage Rites; at Thaxcalla the Bridegroom and
Bride polled their Heads to signify that from henceforth all childi^h Cou^ses
should be laid aside. At Machuachan the Bride must look directly upon the
Bridegroom, or else the Marriage was not perfect. Macateous did not come
together in twenty days after Marriage, but abode in Fasting and Praying all
that while, fearrifying their Bodies, and anointing the Mouth, o^ their Idols
with their Blood in (...), the Husband (...) their (...) for a (...) Arrows,
and a Net; and afterward the Father-in-law speaks not one word to the
Son-in-law for the space of a Year. When he has a Child, he lies not with his
Wife in two Years after, lest she should be with Child again before the other
be out of danger. Some suck twelve Years, and for this cause they have many
Wives. -- The Dutchmen, who are well acquainted with Guiney, tell us, That at
the Marriages of their Daughters, in those Parts, they give half an Ounce of
Gold to buy Wine for the Bridal; the King himself gives no other Portion. The
Bride, in the presence of her Friends, swears to be true to her Husband,
which the Man does not. They have many Wives, if they can buy and keep them;
each dwells in a House by herself, though there be ten of them; they eat and
lodge asunder; sometimes they will bring their Cheer together. The Husband
closely takes which he will have lie with him to his Room, where their Bed is a
Mat. At eighteen Years old they begin to set up for themselves, two or three of
them together, hiring a House and Canoe: and then they cover their Privities,
grow Amorous, and their Fathers look out Wives for them. -- If a Man amongst
the Turks likes a young Woman, he buyeth her of her Father, and then enrolleth
her in the Cadies Book, the Marriage following with all Bacchanal Solemnities.
-- They sit not at Table with their Husbands, but wait and ser^^ them; and then
they Dine by themselves, admitting no Mankind with them above twelve Years old;
and they never go abroad without leave, except to the Bath, and on Thursday to
weep at the Graves of the dead; they rise to their Husbands, and stand while
they are in Presence, and beside them come in no Company of Men, nor do they
speak with ^ Man or in any other part of their Body are seen with any Man,
because they think Sight, especially where Beauty and Comeliness is, cannot be
without Sin; only the Brother may be permitted to see the Sister, b^^ not the
Husbands Brother. -- In Negapatan, upon the River Ganges, in the East Indies,
the manner of their Marriage is extraordinary; for, many time^ the Priest, with
a Cow, and the Man and Woman, go together to the Waterside, where the Bramane
first mutters ^ short Prayer, and then links their hands about the Cow'^ Tail,
pours upon them all his hallowed Oil, and lastly, forces the Beast into the
River, where into she goes willingly so far (...) till they be to the middle in
Water; neither returns she, nor do they disunite till the Waves advise them;
when being on shore they unite, and hold that mysterious Tie forcible and
sacred ever after. -- The manner of the Tartars Wedding is as follows. The
Husband Covenanteth with the Father of the Maid; who having given him power to
take her wheresoever he shall find her, he seeks her among some of her
Friends, where she has then of purpose hidden herself, and by a kind of force
carries her away. They marry with any, except their own Mother and Sister. --
In China their Marriages and Espousals want not many Ceremonies; both are done
in their Youth: They like equality of Age and State betwixt the Parties. The
Parents make the Contracts, not asking the Childrens consent, neither do they
ever refuse. As for their Concubines, every one keeps according to his Pleasure
and Ability, respecting in them especially their Beauty; and buy them for the
most part, their price being an Hundred Crowns* or less. The common People also
buy their Wives, and sell them at their Pleasure. The Magistrates Marry in
their own Rank their Legitimate Wife. This chief Wife only sits at Table with
her Husband, the rest (except in the Royal Families) are as Servants, which in
the presence of either of the former may not sit, but stand. -- If any Merchant
resort into Pegu, he shall have many Maids offered him by their Parents, to
take his choice, and having agreed with the Parents, he may for the time of his
abode use her as his Slave, or his Concubine, without any discredit to her.
Yea, if he come again after she is Married, he may for the time he slays
there, demand her in like sort to his use. And when a Man marries, he will
request some of his Friends to lie the first night with his Bride. -- The
Marriages of the Bengalans are after this sort; The Man and Woman come to the
Water side, where stands a Bramane, or Priest, with a Cow and Calf, or a Cow
with Calf: These all go into the Water together, the Bramane, holding a white
Cloth of four yards long, and a Basket cross bound, with diverse things in it.
This cloth he lays upon the back of the Cow, by the Tail, and says certain
words. She has a Copper or Brass Pot full of Water. The Man holds his hand
by the Bremans hand, and the Wives hand by her Husbands, and all have the Cow
by the Tail. Then they pour Water out of the Pot upon the Cow's Tail, which
runs through all their hands, and they lade up Water with their hands, and
then the Bramane tieth their Cloath^ together. After this, they go round about
the Cow and Cal^, and give somewhat to the Poor there attending, leaving the
Cow and Calf for the Braman's use, and offer to diverse of their Idols Money;
then lying down upon the ground, they kiss it diverse time, and go their way. --
The young Men in Arabia may go a wooing to diverse Maids, till such time as they
have sped of a Wife; yea, the Father of the Maid most friendly welcometh her
Suitor; so that I think scarce any Noble or Gentleman among them can choose a
Virgin for his House: -- The Bramanes marry but once, and that not all, but
only the eldest of the Brethren, to continue the Succession, who is also Heir
of the Father's Substance, and keeps his Wife straightly, killing her, if he
find her adulterous, with poison. -- In the Kingdom of Calicut, when the King
marries a Wife, one of the principal Bramanes has the first Nights Lodging
with her for which, he has assigned him by the King, four or five hundred
Ducats. -- The Gentlemen and Merchants have a custom to exchange Wives, in
token of great Friendship. Some Women amongst them have six or seven Husbands,
fathering her Children on which of them she pleases. The men when they marry,
get others to bed them if they be Virgins, fifteen or twenty days before they
themselves will bed them. -- As for the Marriages in Peru, the Men had many
Wives, but one was principal, which was Wedded with Solemnity, and that in this
sort. The Bridegroom went to the Bride's House, and put O Hoya, which was an
open Shoe on her Foot; this, if she were a Maid, was of Wool, otherwise of
Reeds: And this done, he led her thence with him. -- In the Canaries they used
for Hospitality, to let their Friends lie with their Wives, and received theirs
in like Courtesy; and therefore, as in India, the Sisters Son inherited.-In
Caraz^an, When a Woman is delivered of a Child, the Man lies in and keeps
his Bed, with Visitation of Gossips, the space of forty days; they worship the
ancientest Person in the house, ascribing to him all their Good. In some part
of the Country, Knights and Soldiers never marry, but lie with such Women or
Daughters as like them. -- A^^ place in the Kingdom of Fe^ there was a Temple
built; (...) which at certain times in the Year, resorted Men and Women in the
Night; where, after Sacrifices, the Candles were put out, and each Man lay with
the Woman he first touched. Those Women were forbidden to lie with any other
for a Year after. The Children begotten in this Adultery were brought up by the
Priests of the Temple. Capacities of Women. Women are capable of the highest
Improvements, and the greatest Glory to which man may be advpnced. -- I might
call in the Testimonies of the Wisest of the Heathens concerning this; among
others I remember Plutarch, one of the most Learned of the Grecians, upon the
death of the excellent Leontide, Discoursed with his friend of the equal virtue
of Man and Woman, and doubts not if he might compare Lives with Lives, and
Actions with Actions, to make it appear, that as Sapho's verses were equally
with Anacreon's, so Semiramis was as Magnificent as Sesostris, Queen Tanaquilla
as Politic as King Servius, and Porcia as full of Courage as Brutus. -- Moses
from whom we receive the first and original Truths, tells us that Woman as well
as Man was created after the Image of God. God created man in his own Image,
Genesis 1.27.
in the Image of God created be him. Male and Female created be them, What the
Image of God is, and what the Difference (if there be any) is between Image and
Similitude, I am not disputing; this is it only for which I have alleged
Moses, that Woman has the same Prerogative of creation with Man. -- It Is true
that from the beginning, the the Woman was subjected, as in order of time she
was created after Man: And being intended to be an helper, she shines mo^^,
when she does most observe that Ordinance of Subjection, for then she is the
Glory of the Man, according to the instance of the Prudent Woman that Solomon
speaks of, In whom the heart of her Husband does safely trust; Prove. 31.11, 23.
and she being modest and industrious, Her Husband is known in the Gates, when
he sits among the Elders of the Land -- But to proceed as Man and Woman were
equal in Creation, so there is no difference between them in State of Grace.
Which Truth, whether it be held sorth in this place or not, I will not contend;
sor elsewhere we have it delivered without controversy, that there is neither
Male nor Female, ^o prefering the one Sex before the other, Gal.3.28.
but all one in Christ Jesus. -- The Soul knows no difference of Sex, neither
do the Angels, and therefore it is that some Learned Men are of Opinion, that
after the Resurrection in the State of Glory, there will be no more any
distinction of Male and Female, because Christ has said, Matthew. 22.30. We
shall then be as the Angels of God in Heaven. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.42,
43, 44. That the body being sown (in the grave) in corruption, in dishonor, in
wea^^ess, shall be raised in (...), in glory, in power. The commerce of Sexes,
was of necessity, because of Corruption and Change by Mortality. But the Body
that shall be raised, in difference from the Natural Body, is called a
Spiritual Body. The Soul then knowing no subordination because of Sex. -- What
Eminency is thereto be named in Men, which we have not discerned sometimes to
shine even in Women. -- Plutarch has given us a wonderful account of the
wisdom of the Celtick Women, who when their Country was fallen, through
misunderstanding and differences, into a Civil War, would not rest, or give
over their Mediation, till Arms were laid down, and Peace was settled in all
their Cities and Families, which was so great a Service to their Country, and
so acceptable, that it grew a custom among them to call and admit their Women
to Council. And in the League which long after they made with Hannibal, this
was one Article, which for the strangeness and same of it, I will record: If
the Celtans have any matter of Complaint against the Carthaginians, the
Carthaginian Commanders in Spain shall judge of it: But if the Carthaginians
have any thing to object against the Celtans, it shall be brought before the
Celtan Women. Candying, and Preserving etc. -- These are Curiosities which are
not only Commendable, but required in young Ladies and Gentlewomen; (...)
Represent them at large wou^^ ask more Art and Time than (...) have either the
Ability or the Leisure to perform it: and besides there are already in Pri^^
many excellent Books concerning the same Subject, as (...) Choice Manuel of
Secrets (...) Physic and Chyrurgery, by the Countess of Kent: To Accomplished
Cook, by (...) 1671, is the best in that kind and the largest for Pastry. Read
also Mrs. Wooly's Gentlewomans Companion; but I shall add no more here, having
lately received great Curiosities on this Subject, never yet in Print; which I
design to In^er^ in the Second Part of this Dictionary. Carmenta, see
Nicostrata; Cassandra, the Daughter of Priamus King of Troy, a great
Prophetess. Charicena, a very Learned Grecian Lady, she is said to have written
a Poem entitled Crumata. Claudia Ruffina, a Noble British Lady, of her
Poetic writings there are remembered by Balaeus, her Book of Epigrams, an Elegy
upon her Husbands death, and other Verses of various kinds and subjects.
Cleobule or Cleobuline, the Daughter of Cleobulus Prince of Lindus; she is
particularly noted for her faculty in Aenigmatical Sentences or Riddles.
Corrina, a Theban Poetess, who wrote Five Books of Epigrams; and is said to
have been five times Victress over Pindarus: Besides her, there were two others
of the same name, namely Corinna the Thessuzin, and Corinna the Roman Lady whom
Ovid much admired. Carnificia, a Roman Epigrammatick Poetess. Cassandra Fidele,
a Venetian Lady, She write a Volum^ of Latin Poems of various subjects and
kinds. Catherine Philips, the most applauded Poetess of our Nation, her Fame is
of a fresh and lively date, from the but late published Volume of her Poetical
Works. Churlo ( Sax. Ceorle) a Country Clown, a Bumpkin; in the North a Carle.
Chiromanter ( Chiromantes) a Palmester, or one that tells fortunes by the lines
of the hand. Cloris, The Goddess of Flowers, called also Flora. Chorus ( Lat.)
a Company of Singers or Dancers, a Quire. The singing or music between every
Act in a Tragedy or Comedy. In a Comedy there are four Accessory parts. viz. 1
The Argument. 2 Prologue. 3. Chorus. 4. Mimick. Of all which the Tragedy has
only the Chorus. Chrisome ( a (...)) signifies properly the white cloth which
is set by the Minister of Baptism upon the head of a Child newly Anointed with
Chrism after his Baptism: Now it is vulgarly taken for the white cloth put
about or upon a Child newly Christened, in token of his Baptism; wherewith the
woman used to shroud the Child, if dying within the Month; otherwise it is
usually brought to Church at the day of Purification. Chrisomes in the Bills of
Mortality are such Children as die within the Month of their Birth, because
during that time they use to wear the Chrisom cloth. Cabaline, [fountain] of
the Muses. Calivate ( caelibatus) single life, the state of Man or Woman
unmarried. Herb. H.8. Care-cloth, According to the use of the Church of Sarum,
when there was a Marriage before Mass, the parties kneeled together, and had a
fine Linen cloth (called the Care-cloth) laid over their heads during the time
of Mass, till they received the Benediction, and then were dissmissed. Caresse
( Fr.) a cheering, cherishing, welcoming, making much of. Carnaval ( Fr.)
Shrovetide; also a Licentious or Dissolute Season. Castalian-Well; a fountain
at the foot of Parnassus, sacred to the Muses; taking the name of Castalia a
Virgin, who (as Poets fain) flying from the Leacherous God Apollo, fell down
headlong, and was turned into this fountain. Rider. Catamite, ( Catamitus) a
Boy hired to be abused contrary to Nature, a Ganymede. Ceruse, ( Cerussa)
Whitelead, often used by Chyrurgeons in Ointments and Plasters. It is with
Painters a principal white Color; and has been, and is still much used by
Women in painting their Faces, whom Martial, in his merry vein, scoffeth,
saying, Cerussata timet Sabella solemn. Cest, ( Cestus) A Marriagegirdle, full
of studs, wherewith the Husband girded his Wife at the Wedding, and which he
loosed again the first Night. Chaperon, ( Fr.) a FrenchHood, (for a Woman) also
any Hood or Bonnet, mentioned in the Stat. 1 R. 2.7. Chaplet, (Fr. Chapelet) a
Wreath, Garland, or attire for the Head made of Gold, Pearl, or other costly or
curious stuff, used to be fastened behind in manner of a folded Roll or Garland.
Cully, Fop, or one that may easily be wrought upon. Concubinage, (
Concubinatus) the keeping of a Whore for his own filthy use, an unlawful Use of
another Woman instead of one's Wife: In Law, it is an Exception against her
that Sues for her Dowry whereby it is alleged, that she was not a Wife
lawfully married to the Party, in whose Lands she seeks to be endowed, but his
(...). Confarreation, ( Confarreatio) the solemnizing a Marriage, a Ceremony
used at the Solemnization of a Marriage in token of most firm Conjunction
between Man and Wife, with a Cake of Wheat or Batley: This Ceremony is still
retained in part with us, by th^^ which we call the Bride-cake, used at
Weddings Continency, ( Continentia) a refraining of ill Desires, or more
strictly, a restraining from all things delightful that hind Perfection.
Copulation, ( Copulatio) ^ coupling or joining; it was one of the three ways of
betrothing Marriage in Israel. See Moses and Aaron. p. 231. Coquettery, ( Fr.)
the prattle or twattle of a pert Gossip or Minx. Coral or Corral, ( Corallum)
There are two principal forts hereof, the one white the other red, but the red
is best. It grows like a Tree in the bottom of the Sea, green when under the
Water, and bearing a white Berry; and when out, turns red. It is cold and dry
in Operation, good to be hanged about Childrens Necks, as well to rub their
Gums, as to preserve them from the Falling sickness. Coranto, (Ital. Corranta)
a French running Dance; also a News-book. Corrivals, ( Corrivales) they who
have Water from, or use the same River. And Metaphorically a Competitor in
Love, or they that Love one and the same Woman. Cul^^riches, Man eyes you.
Coverture, ( Fr.) signifies any thing that covers, as Apparel, a Coverlet, etc.
In Law, it is particularly applied to the Estate and Condition of a married
Woman, who by the Laws of the Realm is in potestate viri, under Coverture or
Covert-Baron, and therefore disabled to make any bargain or contract, without
her Husband's consent or priviry, or without his Allowance or Confirmation.
Brook. hoc titulo per totum. Courtesan, (Fr. Courtesane) a Lady, Gentlewoman,
or Waiting Woman of the Court; also (but less properly) a professed Strumpet, a
famous, or infamous Whore. Courtesy of England, ( Lex Angliae) is used with us
for a Tenure. For if a Man marry an Inheritrix seized of Land in ^ee-simple, or
in Fee-tail general, or as Heir in Tail special, and gets a Child of her, that
comes alive into the World, though both it and his Wife die forthwith, yet if
she were in Possession, he shall keep the Land during his Life, and is called
Tenant by the Courtesy of England. Crabbat, ( Fr.) is properly an Adjective,
and signifies comely, handsome, gracious; But it is often used Substantively for
a new fashioned Gorget which Women wear, or a Riding-band which Men wear.
Curranto, ( ab (...) and illue currendo, Fr. Courante) a running Dance, a
French-dance, different from what we call a Country-dance. Corkney or
Corkneigh, applied only to one born within the sound of Bow-Bell, that is,
within the City of London, which Term came first (according to Minshaw) out of
this Tale; A Citizens Son riding with his Father out of London into the
Country, and being utterly ignorant how Corn grew, or Cattle increased, asked,
when he heard a Horse neigh, what he did? His Father answered, The Horse does
neigh: Riding further, the Son heard a Cock crow, and said, Does the Cock neigh
(...)? Hence, by way of Jeer, he was called Cookneigh. Min. -- A Cockney,
according to some is a Child that Sucks long; But Erasmus takes it for a Child
wantonly brought up, and calls it in Latin Mammothreptus. Cybele, the Mother of
the Gods, etc. See the many names and particular Fables of her, in Rider.
Co^mptional, (Co^mpt^^^^lis) which is often in Buying, or a Buying together.
Among the Romans, (...), were those old Men, in whose Tuition and Authority,
Men by their last Will and Testament left their Widows o^ Daughters, and
without whom they might not pass in Dominium vironum per Coemptionem, i. be
married, according to the Ceremony called Coemption, whereby the Husband and
Wife seemed to buy one another. Coition, Carnal Copulation. Collateral,
(Collateralis) not direct, on the one side, joining to, or coming from the same
side. Every degree of Kindred, is either right Lineal, or Collateral. The right
Lineal is that which comes from the Grandfather to the Father, from the Father
to the Son, and so still right downward. Collateral is that which comes
side-ways, as first between Brothers and Sisters, then between their Children,
etc. Also Uncles, Aunts, and all Cousens are contained under this Term
Collateral Kindred. Comperage, ( Fr.) Gossiping; the affinity or friendship
gotten by Christning Children together. Cotgr. Complement, ( Complementum) a
furnishing, filling up, or perfecting that which wants: It is usually taken for
verbal Expressions of Respect, of Affection, of readiness to serve, and the
like. Or Complement, is a Performance of affected Ceremonies in Words, Looks
and Gestures. Caramenia, Women's Courses, which gathering every Month by the
Fermentation of the Blood, and being come to a Turgency by the Accessio^ of a
Ferment that is in the Womb, discharge themselves at their set time. Some
ascribe the Courses to the Motions (...) the Moon; but if this were true, then
all Women would have them at the same time. They begin at Twelve, T^^teen, or
Fourteen Years of Age and stop about Fifty: But (...) cannot exactly be
determined. They are suppressed in Breeding Women and Nurses; yet (...) is not a
Rule neither. Dr. (...) Clitoris, a part of a Woman, whose Use is Titillation;
it consists like a Man's Yard, (...) Nervous Bodies, which (...) from the lower
part of the Bones of the Privities, and (...) the end is covered with a (...)
and a Prepuce or Foreskin: Its Substance is spungy, so that it is capable of
Increase and Relaxation, but is not perforated as in Men. Dr. Blankard.
Conserva, a Conserve, is a Composition of Flowers (...) Herbs beat together, to
every Pound whereof, if they be dry, are added three Pounds of Sugar; if
moister, two Pounds, so that they may be kept severral Years. Carnis, a
Thessalian Virgin, Ravished by Neptune. Cainsham-smoke, a Man's Weeping when
beat by his Wife. Calisto, one of Diana's Nymph's, corrupted by Jupiter, and
turned out of her Train. Calliope, one of the Nine Muses. Callirchoe, her 30
Suitors having killed her Father Phocus, (King of Baeotia) were burnt to death.
Callot, sa. a wanton Woman. Cambles, a Lydian King, who devoured his own Wife.
Camene, l. the Muses. Campions, a kind of Lychnis, or Batchelors-buttons.
Campus ^celeratus, where the incontinent Vestal Nuns were buried alive. Cana^e,
Daughter of Aeolus, with child by her own Brother. Canachus, a Fountain near
N^uplia, where Juno used to bathe, to recover her Virginity. Candiope, being
ravished by her Brother Theodotion, brought forth Hippolagus. Caratar, a Wife,
(yet contemptible) Counselor to Saladine the Turk. Caranet, a rich Chain to
wear about the Neck. Cardiacline, the Heart-line, or Line of Life, (on the
Hand.) Carmenta Ni^co^trato, an Arcadian Prophetess, who first gave the Oracle
in Verse. Carthismandua, a British Queen, who casting off her Husband Venusius,
married and crowned his Armor-bearer, ^ell^-catus. Cassandra, a Prophetess the
Daughter of Priam and Hecuba. Calliope-pea, Cephus's daughter, placed among the
Stars. Cecrops, an Egyptian King of Athens, he first civilized them, and
instituted marriage. Cest, l. the Bride's Wedding girdle untied (the first
Night) by the Bridgeroom. Charitees, g. the Graces, Thalia, Aglia, Euphrosyne^.
Childwit, power to take a Fine of your Bondwoman gotten with Child without
your consent, also the reputed Father of a Bastard. Crinisus, a River of (...)
which (in the form of a Bear) ravishing Hogesta, begat ^^castes King of Sicily.
Cui ante Devortion, a Writ empowering a divorced Woman to recover her L^nds
from him to whom her Husband did, (before the Divorce) alienate them. Cui in
vira, a Writ of entry (for a Widow) upon her Lands alienated by her Husband.
Cybele, Cib, -elle, Barecynthia, Dindymene, Ops, Rhea, Vesta, Magna matter, or
the Mother of the Gods. Cynthia, Diana, Twin-sister to -- Cynthius, Apollo,
born near Cynthus, a Hill in Delos. Cos^ak^, Turkish Women, Girdles. Coverture,
Covertbarn or Bar^n, f. the Condition of an English Wife, who can make no
bargain without her Husbands Consent. Countess, f., an Earls Wife. Courtisane,
f. a CourtLady, also a Strumper. Crabbat, f. comely, also a Woman's Gorget; also
a Cravate, worn first (they say) by the Croats in Germany. Cornucopia,-py, a
Horn (with plenty of all things) given by Jupiter to his Nurse Amalthea.
Constupration, a Ravishing of a Virgin. Concubinage, f. Fornication; also an
Exception against her that sues for Dowry, alleging that she is not a Wife but
Concubine. Concubine, half Wife. Confarreation, l. a Wedding Ceremony, like the
breaking of our Bride-cake. Compeer, l. Confort, fellow, also Go^^ip, and (in
some places) all the young Men invited to the same Wedding. Comperage, f.
Gossipping, also the affinity or friendship gotten by being Gossips.
Conception, a conceiving with Child, also a Thought, Fancy, or Conceit.
Colostration, a Distemper in Childrens Stomachs by sucking the beectings or
first Milk. Coludum, Coldana, Coldingham in Scotland, where the Nuns (and
Prioress Ebba) cut off their Lips and Noses, to shun the Lust of the Danes.
Clytemnestra, lived in Adultery with Aegisthus, and with his help killed her
Husband Agamemnon. Clytia, flighted by Apo^^ pined away to an Heliotrope. Clio,
one of the Nine Muses, Inventress of History. Cloetia, a noble Romon Vi^^gin,
who swam over Tybris, from Persenno, with whom she wa^ left an Hostage. Clotho,
one of the (...) Destinies, carrying the (...) of Man's Life. Chione, Daughter
to (...), with Child by (...) and Phoebus, brought the at once Antolychus and
(...). Chlozis, Flora, the (...) Zephyrus. Course of Life, What (...) to
preserve or procure (...). -- Course of Life by us (...) mentioned, is intended
as a general Notion, Comprehensing all those things that Physicians frequently
term, (...) non Naturales: So that it (...) taken in whatsoever any (...) of a
sensible alteration in (...) Body; as Air, Watching, Sleeping External
Exercise, Repos^^ Passions or Perturbation of (...) Mind, and to conclude,
(...) or Drinks. -- Consider, first then, That Air is the (...) Ocean, wherein
we must, Traffic, if we intend to make Thriving Husbands Life, and Gain the
least Addition to the too soon fleeting number of our days: It is Sword^ gentle
Aeolus that (...) forth prosperous Gales, (...) the Lobes of our expanded
Lungs, to land us carefully on the Silver Topt Alps of hoary Hairs; but seldom
that it keeps such an Evenness in its Blasts, as not to cause some sensible
Variation in Beauty, that Loadstone of desire; for it variously Affects the
Body, both within and without: Inwardly, as it is drawn into the Lungs, those
panting Bellows, so naturally contrived, to keep the furnace of the Heart
boiling, then its Qualities are Communicated to every Fountain of Life, next to
the Blood, and so Universally to the whole Body: Outwardly, as it continually
beats upon the Superficial Parts, it causes Roughness, Chaps, Blastings, and
^undry other Accidents according to the various Constitutions, so that great
Care ought to be taken to preserve the Body from the Impressions of a corrupt
or ill-disposed Air, whether too Moist or too Dry, too Hot or too Cold; for an
Air too Foggy and Moist, will soon wash off Natures Embellishments; and if
Ladies live too long among Mists, it is the ready way to stain their Dammask
Skins, the Roses and Lillies of their Cheeks, will Fade rather than Flourish:
If too many Dews drop on them. And although it is held, that Venus the Queen of
Love, was born in Neptunes watery Kingdom, yet it seems she would not be Nursed
and brought up there, as knowing the tender Plants of Beauty, would never
thrive in that Liquid Element: Wherefore we are constrained to disallow the
practice of some Ladies; who to allay the petty Exorbitancies of too flaming a
Color, expose in the Evening, wherein Dews and Damps fall, their Faces and
Naked Breasts to Cynthias moistning Rays, as if the Moon (because pale herself)
would make them so, or by spitting in their Faces, scour off the Crimson dye.
-- Certainly Beauty never consents, That Laundress should whiten her Livery,
who uses no other Soap than her own Foggy Excrements: Such practices however
since they occasion rheums Cattarhs and Distillations, may by those Defects,
make the Face White and Pallid, but rather diminish than add any thing to
Beauty, so that we find an Air too dry and parching, does Wrinkle and Chap the
Skin, so that Art must be called in to work it over with a Beautiful
Embroidery. -- Can there be in a manner a greater Enemy than a Bleak and
Peircing Air to a lovely Complexion: it roughs the Skin, constipates the Pores,
hinders the Exhalation of a kindly breathing Sweat, vitiating those Exrements
that lie between the Skin and the Flesh, and by that means renders the
Complexion Livid and Dull. -- Contrary to this Extreme, Heat is prejudicial to
a Fair and Tender Skin; it tempts the Blood to the External parts and there
unkindly Tans it into a Wainscot hew: As if Amber-haired, Hypersion spying
Faces to dawn with a world of dazzling Features, that might Rob him of his
Persian Votaries, or withdraw the Heliotrope from its wonted Homage, to secure
his Brightness, crowds those Beauties in the shady Covertures of Night, whilst
he makes day to all the World beside. L^dies be careful then, not to expose
your Beauties to the ^^^rching Heat, for fear you ^ewaile your oversights in
the ^^ble veil of a Sooty Skin; Therefore you that prize your Beauties, and it
be in your power to choose such an Air as may better your Complexions, make
Choice of a Seat some what raised, if it be not too much exposed to the ill
conveniences of Foggs and Milts, let it be sheltered round with pleasant Woods
and Groves, which may fence you from the blew impressions of a pinching Borcas,
and in the Summer secure you so, that Sol with his Amourous beams may not kiss
away your Beauty. -- Care of this kind, Care to be taken as to Waking,
Sleeping, Repose, Exercise
is the next thing to be considered in tender regard to Beauty for Moderation,
in waking, or sleeping, conduces much to the preservation of (...) Comely Face:
Excessive Sleep makes the Body dull and heavy, changes a fresh color into
paleness, swarthy and livid, and it is easy to know Morpheus's Sluggish
Votaries, by tho^^ sullied impressions, his Leade^ Heels lean on their fleshy
Robe^ So on the contrary, ove^ watching spends and waste the Spirits, dries the
moisture (...) the Body; and if you make i^ a frequent custom to extend (...)
unusual periods, hardly w^^^ it leave you, Ladies, Blood enough to crimson your
Cheek with a Vermillion Blush, (...) the loss of your Beauty. (...) what has
been said of (...) may be rationally enough I^terpreted, of Repose an Exercise;
for Repose is but a kin^ of a Waking Sleep, and Exercise too immoderate, but
(...) more active watching; if (...) too much covet Ease, (...) soon contract
the Rust (...) Idleness, which will certain^^ Iron mould the most curiou^ Skin,
and they that Exercise Immoderately, quickly (...) our Beauties Silken Livery,
and when once you come Ladies, to wear deformity's homspun Garments; you are
(...) broken for Beauties, and you whose stock of Features (...) hardly procure
any to lend you an Amourous Eye, as not thinking you Objects (...) the casting
away a Glance upon, -- Certainly there (...) nothing more disorders and
disturbs the Microcosin, Care taken to prevent Passions and perturbations in
the Mind, Enemies to Beauty.
or little World of our bodily Structure, than Passions of the Mind; and
consequently they do greater Violence to the Features than any thing
whatsoever: Their impetuous Motions raise an Earthquake, which ruins the
stately Structure of Cupids Palace: Grief is the Moth of Beauty, it frets out
the Characters of Natures fairest Orthography, wearing off those Ruddy and
Carnation Flourishes, which her skilful Pencil drew; it makes the Face a
discolourable Blank, and renders those that over much indulge it so wanish and
pale, that they seem to be walking Shrouds, to carry themselves to their own
Gloomy Sepulchers. Anger is Beauties burning fevour, which fires the Furnace of
the Heart with too scorching Flames, that bake the Exterior Fe^tures into
brown Bread Swartniness, and it would be very strange, should such course Fare
ever feast Spectators Eyes. Fear, another passion of the Mind, on the contrary,
congeals the Blood, and Bathes the Body in a chilly Sweat, which often Enlivens
the Hair to an Active, though frightful Erection, but does not at all clear the
Skin, but does Beauty more harm, than Circes transforming Potion: For the worst
that it could do would be to make you handsome Beasts; but fear causes a more
frightful Metamorphosis, by changing you from Beauteous, to foul Deformed
Women. -- Consider again that Melancholy is a sullen and humoursom Spirit, that
raises Tempests in every corner of the Body, which over cast the Face with
thick Clouds of Grief: And the Forehead with Wrinkles, so that it makes the
Lady whom it overcomes to be out of Love with the World, and Beauty to be out
of Love with her, whilst she concludes herself weary of Men's Eyes; they find
little worth in the Object, and are weary of viewing of her: They soon perceive
that Beauty is transplanting her Maiden-Lillies and Blushing-Roses to some more
frequented Elysium; intending that Face to lie fallow which Melancholy frowns
wrinkle into uneven sorrows, and so not only these, but all other passions that
disturb the Mind; are rightly termed the Beauties wasting Consumption, since
they leave no marks or foot: steps of that excellent Comeliness that was wont to
work Astonishment in all beholders, but make the former cheerful and lively
locks give way to^ Meager Sallow Complexion. -- Consider we once (...) and we
shall find that Meats and Drinks, Care to be had in Meats and Drinks in
relation to Beauty.
have a controulling power over the Features and Proportionable Lineaments of a
charming Face, and contribute much toward the making or marring a Beauty, by
Drinking and Eating the humors and more solid parts of the Body, which are in
successive Emulation, are Nourished and kept in continual repair: Certainly if
we may credit Physicians, the moderate use of healthful Diet Coroborates the
Innate heat; and gives a livly color to the External Members, and vigor to
perform those Actions for which nature has intended them; on the contrary, an
intemperate Life indifferently abandoned to all sorts of Meats, not
distinguishing time or measure, ^tiffles the Internal heat and breeds corrupt
Blood, from which proceed obstructions of the most Noble Parts, and a Vitiated
Mass of malignant Humors, which causes a discolored Pale or Tawny Visage, and
infinite other Inconveniences. wherefore we admonish those that would be
Beauties Favorites, not to study too much Kitchen Philosophy, nor busy
themselves about too (...) (...) their Sumptuous (...) nor be too Familiar with
(...): For if Ba^chus (...) with Car buncles, and pitch his Standard, there
Beauty Vermilie^^ Herauldry will soon be Expugn'd; yet we do not (...) this
preach up a severe Abitinency, for that Lady, on (...) other hand, will much
imp^^ your Lusture, and spoil (...) Harmony of well tuned Fe^tures, extremes
are always (...) be avoided, for they are hu^ful in their Contraries. --
Consider we then again, the^ yet remain to be discoursed of other things that
are Medicinal, Physical A^^^plications (...) preserve Beauty.
and perhaps Equally with what has been mention^^ Advance Beauty, for (...) a
thing very difficult, if (...) impossible, to live always such an Air as our
Temp^rament and Constitution ^^quires; and that many ^^welcom Emergencies
neithe^ suffer us long to be with^^^ care and vexation, nor to ke^^ an exact
Diet, or take it (...) such a Mediocrity, or opportune time, as is necessary
the breeding of the best bloo^ it will be expedient to An^^cipate the
Alteration or Corruption that may happen ^^mong the humors of the (...) die
(through excess or any ^ther Misdemeanor in our (...) of Life) by some means
(...) there that has power to ex^^ those vicious qualities, (...) may cause an
ill Complexion that so the color may be preserved clear and lively, the Skin
smooth and subtle. The last means then to effect this, will be to Purge in due
time, with some quick but gentle Medicaments, as Manna, Cassia, Syrup of
Violets, White-roses, or some such Potions. If you are desirous to clear the
Body after too much indulging your Appetite, of the superfluous Humors, your
may take half a Dram of Pillule Ruffi, when you are going to Bed; and the
relics of your Intemperance will be gently carried away. Vinegar of Squils, if
it be taken in the Morning, and you use moderate Exercise after it, beautifies
the Body with a very fresh and lively Color; the like Effects you may expect
from Trochests of Provanceroses, which you may take at your pleasure; nor is
the frequent use of Clysters without Reason commendable, for they not only make
the Body soluble, and purge the Peccant Humors, but also divert those Humors
and Vapors, which Ascending to the Head, much cloud the Beauty of the Face:
Syrup of Agrimony, Fumitory, or Cichory, are excellent in opening Obstructions,
and correct the Intemperature of the Liver; and for this reason are of singular
Use for clearing the Complexion. -- Care is likewise to be taken that the Body
is not guided too hard to produce Slenderness, Care of the Body's good
Digestion.
not much now in fashion; or that the Legs or Arms be too hard bound, but have
free repose and motion, least by such Violence the Blood be too much drawn from
the Face to succor the Inferior Parts; and such as do so, may be observed to
be come pale, and lose their Complexion; who to have a small and slender Body,
girt themselves too close, or to have a hansome Foot and Leg, use Stockings and
Shoes much too strait: And observe yet further, that when the Humors which are
apt to corrupt, are expelled, and the Blood purified in the place of the
Vicious. You must instantly supply the Body with good Humors, by Food of light
Digestion, Concoction and good Nourishment, as Panado's, well seasoned Broth,
and the like: Get up early and take moderate Exercise, that Nature may (...) in
dispersing those Humors, that accumulated during your repose, and make an
equal Distribution of the Aliment which in the last Nights repose has been
digested. It is (we are constrained to decl^re for your good) an ill Custom in
some Ladies that they might meliorate their Complexions to take in their Beds
Goats and Asses Milk, Broths, etc. and then sleep upon it. Such Nourishment,
though it is holden to be good and commendable in it self, yet taken in such
(...) manner instead of breeding good Blood, it soon corrupts and turns into a
Malignant, both because the Stomach when such Food is received, is not as yet,
discharged of its Excrements, Polutions and Superfluities: And the appetite is
not then excited, for that the Animal Spirits, which are the causes of it, are
yet dull and drowsy. And further, Nature in the Morning being careful of its
Economy is employed to force outward these humid Redundancies which were
heaped up the night before in the Body: but such unseasonable Eating diverts
Nature from that Expulsion, and constrains her to retire inward, to promote
Concoction* so that being distracted by such contrary Morion^; she performs
neither, but leaves the body for a time; especially in an ill habit. And thus
much for that course of Life, that those ought to observe who would have their
ravishing Features penitrate the flinty breasts, against which Cupids Shafts
seem to be dul'd and blunted. Your Beauty thus secured the W^rld inflame,
(...) those that see you not ad^re by fame.
And he that dares but look upon your Eyes,
(...) with Love, and not relieved, he dies.
Thus much Ladies, for these Generals and Particulars, which we doubt not but
will be grateful to the Fair-Sex, and by a due regard had to them, redound
greatly to their advantage.

Censure, and Reproaches unjustly cast upon the Fair-Sex wiped off, etc. --
Censures and Reflections are easily made, though frequently groundless, and
unjustly; and the Fair-Sex lie more open to them from the Malice of Men who
having over them the advantages of Learning, fly to that as a sweet Revenge;
when their Addresses are refused, or they cannot gain their Aims or Ends: When
they find themselves not able to have the Fort Surrendered by Parley, than they
raise Batteries of Scandal, and leaves their Artillary of Malicious Eloquence
against it, which we must declare to be very unjust and a sort of a French
Policy to enter upon an unfair War, without any just cause or provocation to go
about to put that force upon a Lady, which no Man would endure to have put upon
himself, viz. to compel her to Love and settle her Affections on him, whether
she can or no, or else the Reputation of the Sex must be wounded, which is so
unreasonable, and carries such a contradiction in it self, that it ought to be
avoided by all that would be thought ingenious, for their Credits sake: For
Malice and Scandal, are highly blameable, and looked upon as' Monstrous by the
sober part of Men, and he can neither be a Wise or Good Man that admits them to
take any place in his thoughts, we must however acknowledge that the fall of
Man broke in pieces the Frame and Evenness of Spirit; and raised a disturbance
in the Serenity of the Soul, since Adam came into compliance with the Serpent,
the whole race of Mankind has plentifully vented the poison of Reproach, our
purpose however is not to create a tedious Discourse by evincing this in its
Latitude, but to bring in Evidence, and inveigh against those Envenomed Arrows
of contumely with which Men unfairly shoot at the Reputation of the Female Sex,
to erect Trophies of a Spightful Ambition upon (if possibly) the Ruins of their
Reputation, and in attempting this, they draw their Malice to the dregs, and
pour it upon them with a flood of evil Words, as if an universal malady
possessed that Sex; and all Women were of an evil Complexion: The repute of
Women has been perplexed with Volumes of Invectives and Similies, drawn from
the most unconstant and unstable things to liken their humors, an
unvariableness of Win^s, Water, etc. Even Old (...) with his hobling ^eet
treads upon Female Credit and Reputation, in these words. Half so bloody there
can none,
Swear and lie as a Woman (...).
-- Others make her the Moral of Pando^^s Box; the Emphatical punishment of the
over bold Prometheus, Aretine, Mantuan, and Petronius have labored mightily to
fully so Beautiful a Creature, yet there is no tongue so impudent as to affirm
that Adams Rib abstracteth wholly from crookedness, that there is no particular
Woman whose Merits has not raised her above the reach of just Reproof: Modesty
abounds most in Woman, and where the habitation of Modesty is, there is the
Tabernacle of Virtue. If the Man may be properly styled the Son of the
Creation, Woman may aptly be termed, Ray and Splendor; for as he is styled, 1
Cor. 11.7. The Glory of God: She is styled his Glory; and how fordidly does he
degenerate from the Innate Dictate of self-preservation, that puts an Eclipse
upon his own brightness. Woman is the Mother of all Living, and shall not Man
rather bless than curse, the Fountain from whence such happiness flows to him
as a Being in this World, an I p^ting him in a state of attaining one more
Glorious in the other? Woman is part of Man and what an intense degree of folly
must possess him who hates his own Flesh, and bites it with the Teeth of
Slander. The Aim^^ God, who judged A^ams Felicity (...) ^mpla^ed till he had
made him another self, and therefore in affronting and dispising that Gift, he
affronts the Wisdom of Heaven, and Scorns the Workmanship of Gods hands, which
is a very high Impiety, and though there may be some bad Women yet; the
darkness of their Vices cannot cloud and benight the bright Virtues of so many
as have adorned the Stage of the World with uncommon Luster, and in their Zeal
for Religion, they have more particularly Exceeded Men. Socrates makes mention
of a Fair Christian Lady, who observing diverse of their profession ready to
embrace the Flames under the Persecution of Valentian; her Zeal in so good a
Cause, made her press through the crowd of People that were Spectators, and
Voluntarily pass through the Fiery Trial with these blessed Martyrs, to the
enjoyment of Thrones and Kingdoms of unspeakable Pleasure and Delight, which
Constancy and Holy Courage, so confounded the Tyrant that he thereupon ^ackned
the Persecution. Eudo^^a Wife to Theodosius the Emperor, did so abound in
Religion and Honorable Practices, that she got her a name more lasting than
the stately Structures, She founded for the use of Piety and Divotion. Eusebius
tells us Theod^cia the Virgin, not Eighteen years of Age too beautiful and
Tender a Morsel for devouring Flames, with Incredible Constancy and Patience,
endured Martyrdom under Diocletian: And mentions two other Virgins, that
Expired by the same Fate; of whom he tells us, that the Earth they had trampled
on, was not worthy longer to bear them. Paula a Noble Religious Lady, is spoke
off with venerable Esteem; by St. Hierom, in these words, Were my Members, says
she, as many Tongues, and all my Joints endued with the Gifts of Elocution; the
Expressions which I could then utter would be low, and fall much beneath the
worth of that venerable Lady, who has not heard of the Patience of Eleonora;
who thrust out to a desperate Fortune by her own Friends for her Religions
sake; endured Commerce with Wolves and Tigers. And Men more Savage in their
corrupt Natures than those untamed Beasts. Xenophon has made Panthe^ famous in
his Writings, by the Character he has given her, viz. That she was so Excellent
a Woman, That when her Husband was at home, or abroad, That she was a Faithful
Wife as well in his absence as in his presence. It was that as it were changed
Sexes with him, and infused Courage and Magnanimity into his fainting Spirits.
Herxes once confessed that Women were his best Soldiers, having turned their
Distaffs into Swords, whilst on the contrary, the Men degenerated, and took the
natural fear and weakness of Women, upon the miseries Egyptian Women of old
Negotiated abroad, and the Men kept house; betaking themselves to deminitive
Labors. Admetus King of Thessally, being ready to breath our his last farewell
Air in the World, was upon consulting the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos; told
him, his Life would be assured to him, if any one would voluntarily undertake
to dye for him: The People loved their Prince, but not so well as themselves;
all his Friends denied to shoot the Gloomy Gulf of Death for him; Even those
that were Aged and ready to return to their Primitive Dust, would not
Anticipate their Fates some few hours to save a King, on whom the welfare of
the Kingdom depended: Till Alceste his Queen (whose tender youth and Beauty,
made all not to expect any such offer from her, as a Bud too fresh and tender
for deaths cold hand to crop) with Joy and Alacrity undertook to die for her
Lord, and performed it with more than Manly Courage. Whose Legends might be
written of Women, who have caused wonder and admiration in the minds of Men,
not prepossessed with Malice or Envy to the Fair-Sex, enough to make them blush
to see themselves so far out done by those they suppose themselves so much
Superior to, and to take of the Edge of their Spleen, and abate the bitterness
some have conceived, upon no other ground than in following the Wild and
Erroneous Opinions and Sentiments of some Satyrists, who have been led to it by
a Fancy to do Mischief. Therefore we could wish that what has been said, may
draw them from su^^ Vanity and Pernicious Folly, and that the stream of their
words may run less muddy in their particular Channel: That they would respect
and not revile that Sex, the absence of which would cause a well Peopled
Universe, to become a Solitary Wilderness. That they would show themselves Men
by Countenancing Women, that they would prove themselves of the worthier Sex,
by indulging and defending the Weaker, which in honesty and reason ought to be
performed, that so their tenderness, and an enlargment of their Virtues, might
make the Fair more Emulous in sanitation of them. Censure, With what Caution to
be Managed. -- Censuring of any ones Person or Actions, ought not be done but
with great Caution; but because we are apt to err in our Judgments: In your
Censures both Care and Skill are very much required, and indeed without them we
may unjustly bring disgrace upon others and ill conveniences upon our selves:
Or on the other hand, too easy enclining to acquit the Guilty, we may be
subjected to the Censures of others, for indeed we are too naturally prone to
bend our minds to one side or the other, that we can rarely avoid giving
Judgment to absolve or condemn, but there is a great difficulty in rightly
understanding; when and where it is proper to pass Censure, we ought to have an
Aversion to what is Criminal, and an Aversion to what is Ridiculous: But must
we judge by (...) and Reason, whether they be so or not, before we presume to
give Sentence? For if we should take an unbounded Liberty in Censuring, it
would not much differ from sending a Herald to Proclaim War against Mankind,
and then we should be sure to be wor^^ed in the unequal contest. For this
Reason we must suppress our Impatience; for fools especially (which over and
above) are too strong a party to be unseasonably provoked, are indeed of all
others, the most dangerous, for though they throw but a Slovenly Untruth, or a
Dull Jest, without a Grain of Wit in it upon us, it may never the less be
injurious to our Reputations, and again a Wiser sort will contrive it with more
Art; and therefore we must not conclude our selves secure from them; though to
all appearance, our Credits seem to stand out of the reach of Ill will: For if
Malice finds a strong opposition on one (...) it will seek and be restless
(...) it find another part less defensible to enter at: If we ha^^ tender
Sides, they will be sure (...) find them; and those Enemie^ our too open
Censuring, (...) raised up against us, will (...) sure to put the worst (...)
struction on all our Words (...) Actions, if we would live (...) disturbed,
then we must (...) run too far into this dang^^ But avoid being the first,
(...) fixing a hard Censure, and other let it pass the (...) Voice, before we
come to ^ Determination; neither then (...) bitter in Censuring, beca^ we may
not be taken for pr^per Judges: Nor must we (...) too hard upon a tender Son
but stroke it gently, and (...) it over: For even a (...) stuck with Bristles,
is (...) rough for this Age, it (...) rather be covered with (...) or Fragrant
Flowers. The A^sterity of Sower Philosoph^^ is not now taking; who (...) none
where they found (...) did any thing Contrary to (...) Rules of Morality, but
ho^ever in this cafe there is an ^^vantage to be gained; (...) where we stricke
softliest, (...) wound ourselves least, and others in more: For being (...)
discerning Faults, and slow i^ exposing them, procures (...) to be ^tiled good
Natured, an^ strick a shame into those (...) commit them; which in (...) of a
harsh Reproof, Ange^ would keep out or stifle, and so we shall find, though
notwithstanding all this Malice, should spend some Arrows of hard Censure at
us, the Wounds they make, will be slight; for a Scandal, goes not deep unless
it has the general Consent. Conception, The Signs to know it, and whether Male
or Female; and of false Conception -- Censure us not Ladies, as if we intended
to salute your Ears with any thing that can be in the least imputed Immodest,
by the Wise and Discreet, and it is to those we chiefly address our selves; but
there are some things that may appear at first Blush to border upon it, when
indeed there is no such thing in reality, and are so necessary to be known by
Young Ladies, when their Conditions call for such Assistance, that we could not
reasonably omit them without breaking our Promise to furnish you with all we
could any way conceive conducing to your Advantage. -- Conception, that is
true, has many Symptoms attending it, yet many Young Women not knowing, or at
least regarding them, have done Injury to themselves upon many Accounts, which
we here pass over. The Signs are gent^e Pains of the Head, swimming or dazzling
of the Eyes; The Eyes sometimes (...) and become of a dim or dusky Color, much
of their former Brightness fading for a time. The Veins wax redder then usual,
and strut with the abundance of Blood, the Eyes sink in, and the Eyebrows grow
loose, sometimes little Pimples suddenly arise in the Face, and the Eyes
Glissen with various Colors. The Veins between the Eyes and the Nose will be
extended with Blood, and those under the Tongue look Greenish; the Neck will
flush with heat, and the Backbone seem cold; the Veins and Arteries swell, and
the Pulses are observed more easily. Many times the Veins of the Breast look
black, and in a while turn Yellow: The Nipples look red more than usual, and to
conclude, there is desiring of things sometimes not fit for Food, a Puking and
the like. This being certainly known by one or more of the mentioned Sympto^^;
We come now to a (...) Paint, which we should be difficultly brought to
undertake, were we not warranted by diver^ Learned Men, who have given their
Opinions about it. They tell us if it be a (...) (...) that when it is come to
some Perfection in the Womb the Right-Eve of the Mother would to appearance
(...) swister, and sparkle more than the other. The Right (...) and swell more
than the (...) and become harder, the (...) sooner changing Color, and the
increase of the Milk be more speedy, and being milked out and set in the Sun,
it will settle to a Pearl Color. Her Right Cheek will often glow and color
more than the other, and she has a livelier Blush on all Occasions, than at
another ^ime. And is more brisk and free from Sadness than if she conceived a
Female. And when the Infant first stirs it is more active and strong in its
Motion, the Concussion of the first motion, being perceived on the right side,
her Belly will be more Accute toward the Navel, and when she goes, though she
regard it not, she commonly sets her Right Leg First, and eases herself on that
^ide oftenest. -- Contrary are the Symptoms of the Females to these their first
motion, Twins, the S^mptoms.
is held to be on the Left-side, and are borne through defect of Heat in the
Womb, with more pain to the Mother, her Thighs swell, her Longings are extreme,
and her Complexion sides, or often changes, and the like. Sometimes there are
Twins, and this is known properly by the Motion of the Infants both ways, on
either side at once; their Soul being agreed on to be received, at one and the
same time; and the Mother's Flanks will rise higher than usual, a Channel or
parting being to be observed from the Navel to the Groin. -- Conceptions that
are false many times delude women, False Conceptions hard to discover.
and make them believethey are with Child, when really there is no such thing;
there is sometimes in this Case contracted a Mass (...) Flesh, resembling the
Gizard of a large Fowl; yet not stimed to a particular bigness, bu^ accordingly
greater or lesse^ according to the time of (...) Continuance, which is usually
four Months, and then they name it a Moon-Calf; some again are deceived by
^word which are twofold, viz. Tr^^ or False; The first of these is a fleshy
Body, filled with many Vessels streaked with Green, white and black Lines, and
(...) not wanting of Membranes, (...) has diverse incompassing it, and although
it receives no Nourishment as a Child does, (...) through certain Veins, by
reason it has no Intervals, yet it Lives, but no better, as w^ may term it,
than the Life of a Plant. The other of these admits of a fourfold
Distinguishment. First it is called a Windy-Mole, when it swe^^ with a
Contraction of Wind. Secondly, when there is a (...) flux of Water, it is
called (...) Watry-Mole. Thirdly, a ^merous one, when the Humors get together,
and Fourthly, A Membranous one, wh^^ there are many Membranes (...) the form of
a Bag filled with Blood. -- Conceptions are False, are as the True, known by
their Symptoms, as Depravity of Appetite, swelling of the Breast and Belly; but
then not as in the other Conception, the Breasts soon fall again, not affording
any Milk; the Face is as it were blown up with Wind, but the Thighs and Hips
wax Lean, and fall away; the Belly almost of an equal Round, proves hard, as if
Dropsical, and her Rest is disturbed and broken. Again, let us consider, That a
Male Infant usually begins to move at the beginning of the Third Month, or at
least for the most part, and the Female at the beginning of the Fourth. Then if
there be any Milk it is a sign of a true Conception, but if not, of a false one.
A true Motion is brisk and lively, and although the other has a Motion, yet it
is dull and heavy, and being stroaked down, cannot move it self to its place
again, nor turn to any other side, for want of inbred Force, than what it is
turned to. -- Conceptions fully occasioned by the Windy-Mole, are discernedly
by the extraordinary streaching or extending the Belly, and yet it is soft and
spongy, especially near the Groin; and being (...), sounds like a Drum,
increasing and decreasing, so that she has thereby a lesser or greater
Proportion of trouble with it. That which is called the Watery one, is to be
observed by the Belly's being distended when the Woman lies with it upward, the
Sides more swelled than the middle or bottom, which grows flatter; for it has a
kind of a Fluctuation. That that which is contracted of Humors has much the
same Symptoms, but dilates not it self so much by reason it is not composed of
so fluid a Matter, but more closely comprised in its Cells; the Water in the
Case of the Last being red, or of a very deep Color, when in Case of the other
it is clear or muddy Pale. -- Conceptions, there are of other kinds, that are
false, occasioned by Tumors, which some have been so ignorant to take for
Moles; when indeed they are no more than Rotundies or Swellings of the Belly,
not well perceived till the Womb is dilated, and then there are small Bags of
Water at one or the other corner, or if they be not there, in their stead there
are knol^s of Kennels like Clusters of Grapes; But of these things we have said
enough to give Young Women a Light into these Affairs and think it (...) to
wade a^^ further, lest we should (...) beyond what we (...) By this (...)
Works (...)
And (...)
^
How first is built the Fabric of Man.
How he from almost nothingness began;
Whose Life when gained is counted but a span.
Chastity art thou fled from Christians, to Pagans? Virginity (thou, in whom
Antiquity did Glory) can thou find no modern Person worthy thy presence? The
Ancients honored the very title of Virgin so much, that they thought Virgo to
be named a virtute: That as Virtue is unspotted; so Virginity should be
uncorrupted. They all concurred in applause of this Estate: But they differed
in degrees of Praise; some of them thinking Virgo to be derived a viro; because
they having passed their tender years, desire the Society of Man. Others
thought virgo to be so nominated a vigore; because they flourish most in those
years Others deduced virgo a virga: Not because they are scourges to Men; but
they called them so ab aetate viridiori: because that as greeness is a token of
the Spring; so these green, tender years are marks of Virginity. Some compared
a Virgin to a Lilly: the Similitude was this; they thought the six Leaves of
the Lilly did represent the heart and the Five Senses of a Virgin, which (like
the former six) should be kept fresh, having no favor of evil: And that as
those leaves are spread abroad; (...) Maiden-actions should be open not close,
nor secret; but secure: As able to endure the most searching Eye. Ho^ many
Plants, Rivers, Springs, Temples, Cities, did they consecrate to the name Virgo
and gave them that name* They thought the same difference to be between
Matrimony, and Virginity, that a betwixt to Sin and not to (...) good and
better. And therefore Hierome in his Exposities of the Psalm. Homines and ^menta
salvabis domine; pe^homines, inquit, intelligu^^ solae virgins, per jumenta^
liqui omnes. Him follows Albertus magnus. Alber. Ma^^de mulie^ fort.
Continentia, inquit, habet fructum triplicom: Scilicet, cen^^^mum in
virginibus, sexage^mum in viduis, and tricesu^^^ in conjugatis. Continen^^
says he, has a three fold ^^^gree, or condition: In virgin it brings forth
an bundre^ in widows threescore, and in the wedded thirty. Scripture runs
clean, and clear on (...) side: Which the passages following demonstrate. 1
Cor. 1 King. 2. Wisd. 3. Mat. 13. Esaias. 56. Syrach. 26. But amongst all other
places, (...) one in the Revelation is most of all to be noted. Revel. 14.
And they sung as it were a new song before the Throne, and before the Four
Beasts, and the Elders: And no man could learn that Song, but the Hundred
Forty and Four Thousand which were bought from the Earth. These are they which
are not defiled with Women, ^or they are Virgins: These follow the Lamb
wheresoever he (...); these are bought from Men, being the first fruits to GOD
and to the Lamb. And in their mouths was found no ^uile: For, they are without
^ot before the throne of God. These are words, that would ^nforce any sober
Soul to embrace that single, simple, and sincere kind of life, approved by God,
Saints and Angels, as ^eing free from uncleanness, and void of all cankering
cares. Yet how many now-adays, would be ranked among Virgins, who indeed are
rank Whores; How many are Courted, who deserve to be Carted? Had Job lived in
our ^ays, he never should have ^eeded To have made a Covenant with his eyes,
^ob 31.1.
least at any time they should look upon a Maid; for, he should ^carce have
found any to look upon; So far is Chastity exiled, ^o much is shame empaired,
as that Impudency, and Woman ^re almost become Relatives. -- Chastity, Chastity
it is Excellence ^n Men and Woman.
is the brightest Jewel that adorns the Fair Sex, nay it is the very Star that
Lights and Guides them to all other Virtues, without which they can lay claim
justly to none of the rest: Considering there is no Vice whatsoever to
overcome, as Carnal Desires, or Lusts of the Flesh: The Conquest must be
allowed the more noble Covetou^ness, indeed is inherent to some, but not so
universal as this; and as that has its ^eat in the mind alone, this seizes upon
the Mind and Body, and draws every part into Conspiracy: Whereas other Vices
usually intrude upon us by our unadvisedly loosing the Reins of our desires;
this is ingenerate and born with us, and having rooted it self, through long
Indulgencies, the difficulty is the greater to pluck it up; or for those that
have been very careful to keep off its Assaults, (...) how much the more
strong; therefore, the Enemy is the more: They deserve Palms and Crowns, that
Triumph over him, which all should do. And many have persevered into their
immortal Fame, of which Historians, as lasting Monuments to their merited
Praise, have furnished out diverse Examples of Chaste Women, who accounted Life
but a trifle in respect of their Humor. -- Chaste Brasilia, Chas^^^ (...), etc.
an Illustrious Virgin of Diraccbium, upon the Town's being stormed was Seized
by a rude Soldier, who inflamed by Lust, attempted to Deflour her; her Prayers,
Tears, and offer of Gold were of no force to cool or moderate his hot desires:
So that finding no other relief, by a feigned slight, she saved her unspotted
Chastity; she told him, if he would not wrong her in that, she would discover
to him a Herb in her Fathers Garden, the Eating of which would render him
Invulnerable: This tempered him a little, yet with a Mental Reservation, after
he had got the secret from her, to pursue his ends, notwithstanding as her
being found, she first tasted it, and then as a proof, desired him to push at
her bare breasts with his Sword, which he did so rudely, according to her wish,
that she exchanged her Life for the safety of her Chastity. -- Chaste Euprasia,
to save herself from being Ravished by a Barbarous Soldier, submitted her Neck
to the stroke of his Sword upon the like pretense; which being sundred with the
blow: Her chaste unspotted Soul ascended to the Holy Quire of those Immaculate
Virgins, that wait upon the Prince of Chastity with Songs and Triumphs, and
have their Garments Undefiled. When Manlius the Roman Consul had overthrown the
Gallogrecians, a Centurion of his Army, took the Beauteous Wife of Prince
Orgigon; and notwithstanding her Prayers and Tears, forcibly Ravished her: Yet
her Ransom being proposed, he carried her (...) him to deliver her up upon the
Receipt of it; but instead o^ a Reward, met an unexpected death for his
Villainy; for a^ Ambush being privately (...) he was Intrapped, and at her
Command, his head stricke^ off, which she took up and laid at the feet of her
Husband, relating the manner of the Injury and the just Resentments she had to
exert her Revenge^ -- Chastity so affected (...) Lucia a Beautiful Virgin,
(...) though a Lord who had power over the Country where (...) lived, became
Enamoured of her; she refused to hearken (...) his Solicitations, so that
gro^ing more enflamed; he (...) to fetch her by force, (...) Messengers told
her, she must go with them, for that (...) Eyes had enflamed their Lord that he
could not rest nor have any peace, except he Enjoyed her; at this she sighed,
an^ trembled, but recollecting her fading Spirits, got leave to (...) up and
Dress herself, or so pretending to do: She coming (...) the Glass, thus spoke
to her Eyes, I know the reservedness and simplicity of your Glances nor have I
upon that account my Remorse of Conscience but however it comes to pass you
appear to me not innocent enough since you have kindled a lustful desire in the
he^^ of one who seeks to dispossed ^me of my inesteemable Chastity, and who for
that cause I ^ortally hate; quench then with your Blood, the Flames you have
kindled: Whereupon with hands piously Cruel, tore ^ut her Eye Balls, and sent
them covered with Blood to him that sought her, saying, behold what he loved I
have sent unto him; but the rest is reserved for a more Glorious Spouse, who
when those Eyes at the last day shall be restored, will take pleasure in my
beauty. The Courage and Bravery of this Chaste Virgin, so sensibly touch the
Lord, that he betook himself to a retired Life ever after. -- Co^umba, a Virgin
of Perusina, (...) reported to be of that Chastity and Abstinence, that she
^ever tasted any other food than the bare fruits of the Earth, from the years
of her discretion till the hour of her death. Amata was a professed Virgin, who
in forty years ^pace never set foot over the threshold of that Cloister,
wherein she had confined her self, in which time she never tasted food, save
bread and ^oots. Sarab lived in the time of Theodosius the Elder, she made a
Vow, never to lodge beneath any roof; but inhabit^ng the bank of a certain
River, removed not from that place ^n Threescore years. The like ^s read of
Sylvia a Virgin, the Daughter of Ruffinus, a Prefect (...) Ruler in Alexandria,
who betook herself to solitude for the space of Threescore years, in which time
she never washed any part of her body save her hands, nor reposed herself upon
any bed save the ground. -- Chaste Timoclea a Thebian Lady, being taken by a
Thracian Captain, when Alexander Sacked that City, he Ravished her, which so
exceedingly grieved her, that she resolved upon Revenge, and thereupon stifling
her discontent, in appearance she seemed as if she was in a better humor,
telling him, that if he would protect her from the rude Embraces of others, she
would show him a Well into which she had let down a great Mass of Gold, the
greedy Thracian, heedless of the Stratagems Women use to compass their Revenge,
went with her, she there showed him a Cord fastened to a Pin on the side of the
Well, about a yard within it; desiring him to pull by that and he would soon
become Master of the Treasure, which the over Credulous Fool, blinded by the
hope of Gain, attempting to do, she tript him in headlong, and allayed his
burning Lust in a cooler Element; which done, with a shower of large Stones she
sent his Soul to accompany the Ghosts of Ravishers in the other World.
Alexander the Great, hearing of this, sent for her, and charged her with the
matter, which she boldly confessed, and being asked who she was, with the like
Bravery, she said, I am Timoclea the Sister of Theagenes, who Valiantly
fighting against thy Father Philip, was slain in the Cheronean Fields. The
Noble Conqueror hereupon dismissed her with Praise, acknowledging her revenge
was just upon the Violator of Honor. Nor is this Chastity so Admirable in
Women alone, but likewise in Men: Of which there are many instances, Panthea, a
Beautiful Lady, being taken Captive by Cyrus, he would not suffer her to be
brought to his presence least his Chaste thought might be injured at the sight
of so Angel-like a Creature. Scipio the Roman General, having taken new
Carthage in Spain, restored a Beautiful Virgin, that was presented to him, to
her Friends, refusing the Ransom they brought, desiring nothing more than her
absence, lest any unchaste thought might arise by too long beholding all the
Charms of her Sex, Centered in one Lovely Face. -- Chastity among all Nations
has been highly Esteemed, and Diana, for her Chastity was Adored as a Goddess:
And indeed it carries a Reward of happiness in it self, and is so Lovely and
Admirable that it sets a double Luster upon either Sex, and gives them an
absolute command over those passions that would otherwise make us uneasy and
frequently very unfortunate; not that Chastity is an Enemy but rather a Friend
to virtue Love; but it places Bars an^ Boundards, to Vicious and (...) ordinate
Affections, preserve Health, secures our Reputation gets us a good Name among
good People, and contrib^^ to the lengthening our (...) A Ray it is of the
Cele^^ Mind,
That lights the Soul (...) happy Land to find.
Where Pure and Chaste shall for ever be,
And join with Seraphius (...) Harmony.
Tread on the Golden Per^^ment and its way,
Pave with more Light by new added Ray.
Each step it makes (...) Angels it embrace,
As a fit Guest for such a ^^^rious place.
-- Concerning Married Peo^^^ over and above the keeping their Mutual faith and
vows with each other, Chast^^^ Rules (...) be obs^^^ed (...) by ^^^^ried
Pe^^sons, (...) Matri^^nial C^^stity.
these particulars are highly necessary and useful. As first, notwithstanding
their Mutual Endearments, are safe within the Pale of Marriage; yet they that
have Wives (...) Husbands, must have them if they had them not: (...) must
indeed have an Affec^^^ greater to each other, than to ^^ny Person in the
World, but (...) greater than they have to God, but that they be ready to part
with all Interests in each others Person, rather than to displease or sin
against him. Secondly, In their Permissions and Licenses they must be sure to
observe the order of Nature, and the ^ends of Gods working in them, ^he cannot
be called a very kind Husband, that uses his Wife as a Man treats a Harlot;
having no other end but sensual pleasure: Concerning which our best Rule is,
that although in this as in Drinking and Eating, there is an appetite to be
satisfied, which cannot be done without pleasing the desire, yet since Nature
intended that desire and satisfaction; for other ^ends, they ought never to be
separate from those ends, but ever joined with one or all of them, viz. a
desire of Children to avoid Fornication, Ease and Lighten the Sadness and Cares
of Household Affairs, or ^o Endear each other. But never either Act or Desire,
with ^ purpose to separate the Sensu^lity from these ends which allow it. --
Considerations (...) be had by Married Persons, to keep such Modesty and
Decency of treating each other; that they take heed ^hey do not force
themselves (...) high and violent Lusts: With Arts and misbecoming Practices;
always minding ^^at those mixtures are most ^nnocent and Efficacions which ^re
most Simple and Natural, most orderly and Safe, it is the duty of Matrimonial
Chastity, to be restrained and temperate, even in the use of Lawful pleasures,
concerning which, though no universal Rule cannot antecedently be given to all
Persons, any more than to all Bodies, one Proportion of Sustenence, yet such
Persons are to Estimate the degree of their Licenses, according to these
Proportions. First, Then to be moderate, so as to consist with Health.
Secondly, That it be so ordered as not to be too expensive of time, and that
precious Opportunity of working out our Salvation. Thirdly, That when Duty is
demanded, it be always paid (so far as is in our power and election) according
to the foregoing Measures. That it be with a temporate Affection, without
violent transporting Desires; or too sensual Applications, concerning which a
Man is to make Judgment in Proportion to other Actions; and the strictness of
his Religion, and the Sentences of Sober and Discret Persons: Always
remembering that Marriage is a supply of the Natural necessities of the Body,
not for the artificial and forced Appetites of the Mind. Socrates was wont to
say, That such Women to whom Nature had not been indulgent in bestowing upon
them, good Features and Complexions, should make it up to themselves, with
excellent Manners, and that those by whom she had done her part by rendering
them Comely and Beautiful* should be careful that so fair a Body was noe
poluted with unhandsom usage; To which Plutarch adds, That a Wife, if she be
uncomely, should consider how extreme Unhandsom she is if she want Modesty, and
on the other hand, let a beautiful Woman think how much more beautiful she is
than Nature has made her, if she be endowed with Modesty and Chastity. --
Conclude we then, that of all the Dangers a Christian is liable to, there is
none more pressing and troublesome, than the Temptations to Lust: No Enemy more
dangerous than that of the Flesh; no Accounts greater than what is to be
Received for at the Audit of Concupiscence; and therefore in all Estates and
Conditions, we ought to be careful and watch over our unruly Lusis and
inordinate Passions; and in as much as lies keep them under, and within the
Bounds of Modesty and Moderation. Charity, or Divine Love Commendable in the
Fair-Sex. -- Charity refined, is Love in its Purity, and Love is the highest
thing that God can communicate to us; for he tells us himself is Love: And
again it is the greatest thing we can give to God for it; if we will also in
conclusion give our selves and carry with it all that appertains to us; the
Apostle calls it the Band of Perfection, it is the old and the new, and the
greatest Commandment; and indeed all the Commandments in Epitome, for it is the
fulfilling of the Law, it does the work of all other Graces, without any other
assistance, but its own immediate Virtues; for as the Love to Sin makes us sin
against all our own Reason, and all the dictates of Wisdom and all the advices
of Virtuous Friends; and without Temptation, and without Opportunity; so on the
other hand does this Charity properly styled the Love of God, in Divine Love;
which Love makes one Chaste without the Laborious Arts of Fasting and Exterior
Discipline: Temp^rate in the midst of Feasts, and is apt enough to choose it
with out any other intermedial Appetites, and reaches at Glory through the very
bosom o^ Grace, without any other Arms but those of Love; (...) is a Grace that
loves God in himself, and our Neighbor for God. The Consideration of God's
Goodness and Bounty The Experience of those p^^^rable and excellent Emanations
from him, may and (...) commonly are the first Mo^^ of our Love. But we once
b^^ing entered, and having tast^^ the Goodness of God, we delight in, and love
the Spirit for its own Pureness and E^cellency, passing from Passion to Reason,
from Thinking to Adoring, from Sense to Spirit, and from Considering our selves
to an Union with God. And this is the bright Image and Representation of
Heaven, it is Beatitude lively painted out of us, or rather the infancy and
beginning of Glory. -- Consider then, there is no Incentives needing, by way of
especial Enumeration to move us to the Love of God, for we cannot Love any
thing for any Reason, real or imaginary; but that Excellence is infinitely more
Emminent in God. If we rightly consider there can but two things create Love,
viz. Perfection and Usefulness, to which, on our part, Answer, First
Admiration; Secondly, Desire, and both of them are centur'd in Love, viz. For
the Entertainment of the former, there is in God an Infinite Nature, Immensity,
or Vastness without Extension or Limit, Immutability, Omniscience, Omnipotence,
Eternity, Holiness, Dominion, Providence, Bounty, Perfection, in himself; and
the end to which all things, and all Actions must be erected, and will at last
arrive; the Consideration of which, may be heightened, if we well consider our
distance, from all those dazzling Glories and Perfections, viz. our smallness
and limited Nature; our Nothingness, our Inconstancy, our Age, like a Span, a
Shadow, a Vapor, etc. Our Weakness and Ignorance, our Poverty, our
Inconsideration and Inadvertency, our Disabilities and Dissatisfactions to do
good, etc. Also our Necessities and Dependencies, not only on God, who is
originally and essentially; but even our need of the meanest of the Creatures
he has made, and our being obnoxious to the weakest and most Contemptible. But
for the Entertainment of the latter, we must consider the Almighty as a Torrent
of Pleasure, the Fountain of Honor, an inexhaustable Treasure; and all that
can be wished or desired of Joy and unspeakable Pleasures flow from him; and
therefore seeing our Virtues have such proper and desirable Objects, it is
highly reasonable that we should turn all into Love: For certain it is, this
Divine Love will turn all into Virtue, and give us here an earnest and taste of
Heaven, and hereafter Joys and Glorys Inexpressible. Child, (when good) its
Character. -- A good Child Reverenceth the Persons of its Parents, though never
so Poor, Aged, Decrepid, or Insirm; as his Parents bare with him when a Child,
so if he be grown up he bears with his Parents. If defective and feeble in
his Understanding, and become a second time a Child by Dotage, he does not
think that his Dignity above him can cancel his Duty to him: So far from any
such thought was the Wise and Learned Sir Thomas Moor, that being Lord
Chancellor of England in the Reign of Henry the Eighth, his Father being then
one of the King's Bench; he would always before he went to the Court of
Chancery kneel in the public Hall, if he found him there, and ask him
Blessing; a rare and singular Example of Duty and Humility in one whose Wisdom,
great Parts, Estate and Office, far exceeded those of his Parents. -- The good
Child observes his Parents lawful Commands, and practiceth his Precepts with
all Obedience, and having practiced them himself, he Entails his Parents
Precepts on his Posterity. Therefore such Instructions are, by the Wise Man,
Prove. 1.9. Compared to Frontlets and Chains, not to a Suit of Clothes, which
serves but one, and quickly wears out of fashion; but to those things that have
in them a real and lasting Worth, and may be transmitted from Generation to
Generation. The same Counsels observed are Chains to Grace, but if neglected,
prove Cords to punish and afflict Undutiful Children. The Good Child is patient
under Correction, not pining nor murmuring at it, but rightly considers it is
for his future good and advantage: In Marriage, he first and last Consults his
Parents, when propounded and concluded, as knowing thereby he does wisely in
acquitting himself of his Duty, and is more assured of his own Happiness in the
sound and solid Advice and Approbation of his Choice. He always bowls best at
the mark of his own Contentment, who besides the aim of his own Eye, is
directed by a Parent, who is to give him the Ground. He is a Stork to those
that brought him up, and feeds them in their old Age of his Substance, if they
be destitute of wherewithal of their own; however he is always at hand, to
protect them from Wrongs and Injuries. He considers his Mother was a Pelican to
him, and fed him with her own Blood, digested into Milk; and if his Father has
been an Estrich to him and neglected him in his Youth yet now is grown Poor and
stands in need of his Assistance, yet he confines him not along way off to a
short Pen^^^, and forfeited too if he passes his appointed Bounds and Limits;
but he will show pity at home, and Learns as St. (...) says, 1. Tim. 5.4. To
requ^^ his Parents; and yet the (...) (we mean only the Principal not counting
the Interest) cannot fully be paid, and therefore he compounds with the utmost
of his Endeavors, which ought to be accepted in good part; such Duty God is
likewise highly pleased with, and frequently rewards it with long Life in this
World. However if he misses length of Days, which many times are the best; yet
he Lives long, because he Lives well, when time misspent and squandered away, is
not lived, but lost; Moreover if his days be shorter than he expects, yet God
is better to him than his Promise, if he takes from him along Lease, on which
he was forced to Toil and Labor hard to pay what was required of him, and
gives him a Freehold of far greater value; even an Eternal Inheritance freed
from all Cares, Doubts, Fears, mistrusts of losing, or forfeiting, Sorrows or
Encumbrances; a Portion worth more than all this Lower World; so that in the
midst of his singing Halelujahs and Songs of Triumph and Joy amidst the blessed
Quire, he may boldly confess with Praise and Thanksgiving, that his Lot is
fallen in a fair Land where he has a goodly Heritage; but if his Days multiply
upon Earth, and he lives perhaps to see his Children's Children, his Parents
dying before him; he must not only honorably Inter them, with a Mournful
Solemnity, but keep their Memories and good Names alive in the Living Monument
of his Mind; and when he must Fall by the Impartial Hand of Death, he transmits
them to be Embalmed in the Remembrance of his Posterity, that they may pass
from one Generation to another, that the Bleding he derived from them may pas
along with them from Age to Age. And they take an Example by the Pattern he has
set before them to imitate, so that a great Happiness in their Duty and
Obedience may attend them to the utmost flight of Time, and be abundantly
increased upon their having passed the Wilderness of this World, and there
entering the Heavenly Canaan. We might Instance many Examples of Dutiful
Children, and the Blessing that have always attended them, as how they have
been wonderfully preserved from the dangers of Fire, Sword, Water, and in the
midst of Famines and Pest^lences, how even the ravenous Beasts of the Forests
forgetting their Hunger and natural ^erceness have been kind and (...) to them;
but since many have already taken pains in this matter, we think fit to
recommend you to their Books of Examples, where you will be plentifully
furnished to your Satisfaction. Compassion, and a Merciful Disposition;
Praiseworthy in the Female-Sex. -- Compassion is that which inclines us to do
Good to all, but more especially to those that are in Misery and stand in need
of our help, and to those that stand in need of our Pardon and Forgiveness when
they are sorry for the Injuries they have done us, and this chiefly should
Reign in the lovely tender Breasts of the Female-Sex, made for the Seats of
Mercy and Commiseration, they being made of the Softest Mold, ought to be most
pliant and yielding to the Impressions of Pity and Compassion, and to redouble
the Horror of any sad Object, when God himself would most Magnify his own
Compassion, he Illustrates it by that of a Woman as the highest humane
Instance. We must confess such a Propension have Women to Commiseration, that
they are frequently taxed with an Excess in it; So that the Cruelty of Men call
a Just Commiseration, a Womanish Pity, however it is commendable, and highly to
be esteemed and valued, since even the Great Creator of all Things prefers
Mercy before Justice and Severity. And in this Virtue Women have in former Ages
eminently Excelled, to that degree, that the Wisest of Kings concluded not
their Character perfect without it, when he says, Prove. 31.20. She stretches
forth her Hand to the Poor, and reaches her Bread to the Needy. And it is a
little observeable, that after he has described her Diligence and Industry for
the acquiring of Wealth, he places this in the Front of her Disbursements, as
the chief Use she made of it; and it precedes her providing (...) for her
Husband, and fine Linen and Purple for herself. The Application i^ very
obvious, and directs all that own the like Title of Virtuous Women, to prefer
the Necessities of the Hungry and Needy before their own Delicasies and
Superfluities, the Poor beholding Ladies in glittering attire, reflecting the
Sunbeams to dazzle the Ey^^ of the Beholders, and finding their Cries and
Prayers cannot prevail with them to drop a^ Alms to supply their craving Wants,
will not only wonder that such Hard-Hearts can be covered in such Soft Garmen^
but be apt to sin, if not by Cursing and Reviling, yet (...) least by Repining
at the u^^qual Distribution of Providence, and ignorantly Tax the Almighty with
Partiality to his Creatures, they imagining themselves as well to deserve it ^^
his hands as others; and so they do not only refuse ^^ supply their Wants, but
(...) them of their Innocence. Their are many ways among those ^^ Ability to
save out of Supe^fluous Expenses, that which would warm and fill the Hungry,
that their Souls might bless them, yet we too sadly see, should many Ladies
(...) up the Account of their Charity it would appear little (...) their own
Eyes, and nothing in the sight of God. But (...) such remember, that whatever
they have is given them by God, and that he only (...) them as his Stewards to
see how they will dispose of it, that he may thereby know them to be worthy or
unworthy Servants, or when the time comes, that their Luxurious Fare shall only
feast the Worms, and render them passive in that Epicurism they were so active
in, before they will wish they had made the Bellies of the Poor their
Refectory; and by feeding them when they had Time and Ability, have nourished
themselves up to a glorious Immortality. The Poor and Needy are only the Hands
of God, who receive what is given for him, and whoever Lends to the Great and
Merciful Giver of Life, Being, and all that we Enjoy and Possess, need not fear
a large Restitution here, and more exceedingly hereafter. -- Compassion
stretches out farther than the relieving the Wants of the Distressed; for
besides this part of Mercy in giving, there is another, and that is, Forgiving
of Injuries and Wrongs, which is of a very large Extent; for whereas the former
is confined to the Poor and Needy only, this has no such Limits, but as it is
possible, Injury may be done by Persons of all Ranks; so this Pardoning Mercy
must reach equally with that Possibility, viz. that part of Charity which we
peculiarly call Clemency, a Virtue which not only Christianity but even
Morality recommends. The Ancient Romans had such a high Esteem and Veneration
for it, that they not only placed it amongst their Deities, and built a Temple
to Clemency, stiling her a Goddess; and though indeed it is no such thing, yet
it is one of God's Attributes, so Eminent that there is nothing can more
assimulate Man unto him, and even all the Noble and Generous Spirits have got
their Fame and Renown by it, more than by the Sword or Bloody Victories; and
those who have had their most inveterate Enemies at their Mercy, and pardoned
them, have gained a greater Reputation in Triumphing over their Passions, than
if they had conquered Armies. King Lycurgus not only forgave A^^xander, who had
struck out one of his Eyes, but took him home to his Palace, and gave him
liberal Entertainment, by which means he worked a Miracle on him, by Reclaiming
him from his former Vicious Life. Phocian being unjustly condemned, left it as
a Solemn Charge to his Son, that he should never go about to Revenge his Death:
Many the like Examples Histories abound withal, but as there have been many
Merciful, so there has been likewise many Cruel, both Men and Women; therefore
the Poets were not much out when they represented the Graces under the figure
of Women, as also the (...) For as there have been many mild and merciful
Women, so those that have deviated from Compassion, and Apostatized to Revenge,
and have even outdone the Furies themselves; and since it is in some measure
in their Election, which part they will Act. They ought to be very jealous over
themselves, for the Declinations to any Vice are gradual, and sometimes scarce
discernable; and in all Probability the greatest Monsters of Cruelty, would in
the beginning have detested the very mention of those Inhumanities, which they
have afterward acted with Eagerness. It highly therefore concerns them to fence
themselves against those Beginnings, whose Ends may prove fatal and destructive
to them. She that is over quick in apprehending an Affront, will perhaps, be
but very slow in dismissing her Resentment of it; and if it be permitted to
continue as an Angry Guest in her Mind, it will increase its forces by
attracting many little Circumstances, and long past Injuries, to blow it up
into a Flame, and from thence it will burn into a Quarrel, and then aspire to
Hatred, and from that to Malice, and so blaze into Revenge, and when that
Implacable Passion has fired the ^ind, Reason and Religion are scorched out;
and so ^hey many times consume themselves and others. -- -- Consider we further
then, how many Mischie^ have followed for want of Compassion, and Tenderness in
forgiving Injuries, that have brought a World of too late Sorrows and
Repentance. Le^ none think this a Scheme of Discourse or Fancy, for certain
it is, there have been too many Tragical Experiments of its Truth; how many Men
otherways brave and tempera^, have been mortally engaged upon the account of
Females, who yet have unadvisedly thought their Honor concerned in their
Resentments, and have satisfied the slender Affronts that have been offered
them with no less an Exp^ation perhaps than the Blood of some or other of their
own Friends or Relations. How have we known the Frant^^^ Impulses of Feminine
Revenge upon an imaginary Injury, push on (in the Vindication of her Wise
Reputation) he Obliging Gallant into a Danger where his body, and perhaps his
Soul is at stake, when she has suffered no Injury, bu^ what her Conceit has
framed and fashioned into Revenge: A madness we must confess it is, somewhat
beyond what we find the Romances, describing of Knight-Errantry, where the
imaginary Heroes undertake with a fancied Courage and Bravery to relieve
distressed Damsels, and to save their Honor from the Prodigeous Lusts of
Tyrants, Giants, and the like, who by Force and Surprise have hurried them to
their Castles and Caves; but that however bears a fairer Color of Generosity
than this: However fabulous it is, for here it is not Distress requires
Assistance and Relief; but the Humors of the Prosperous, Insolent and Proud,
thirsting after bloody and insatiate Revenge, where Compassion and Forgiveness
of Injuries ought to take place. Those therefore that have made their
Observations on the common occasion of Duels, have not ^^^^^ptly divided them
between Wine and Women, it being difficult to detemine which is the most
intoxicating and bewitching in such Cases. The many Modern Examples has too
sadly demonstrated the Mischief, and therefore as it ought to strike Terror
into those Women, who have been in any manner accessory to the death, or at
least-ways the indangering Life on this account; so it ministers a just matter
of Caution to all the unconcerned; so to regulate their Passions, that they may
not come within distance of Implacability: For it is Rare if they can so far
master their Passions, as to give a stop to them when once they are arrived
there. -- -- Compassion and Forgiveness of injuries, even Charms, Rude and
Malicious Tongues, and fixes a Shame and Remorse upon the Consciences of the
injurious, and so punishes them the ways they least expected; as all Anger
should be avoided, so many times it is causeless, some will be angry with those
that Modesty and Mildly reprove them and admonish them to leave such ways and
vices, as being pursued, will prove destructive to them; and this good Office
has sometimes proved very fatal; those commoly who have most Guilt, having the
less Patience to be told of it, though in never so friendly and obliging a
manner: And if there be no other cause of anger, it is the greatest Injustice
in the World to be angry, making that a Quarrel which in good earners is really
an Obligation: We have the saying o^ a Wise Man, that he was less beholding to
his Friends than his Enemies, because they out of too much Lenity, spared to
tell him of his faults, which the other doing, though by way of Reproach; gave
an occasion to Reform his Manners. and proceed with more Caution and
Uprightness, that even so Malicious Accusations* were a kindness to him, and he
studied, to repay them with Favors, rather than Injuries. But again, if we
should suppose in the last place, that the Aspersion be not only unkind (...)
likewise false. It will not then be safe to let loose the Reins to Anger.
First, In regard to Prudence, an Angry Vindication only serving the purpose of
the Enemy, and is mainly conducing to the spreading of the Calumny, when a
Prudent Dissembling and Wise Neglect, frequently stifles it in its Progress.
Secondly, In respect to Christian Duty, for all that have regard to that, must
acknowledge they are under an Obligation, not to Revenge but to Forgive
Injuries: And if they will pay a real Obedience to this Precept, it must
consequently be the more easy the sooner they set to it. When any one
perceives his house on Fire he stands not gazing, as delighted with the
Circling or Curling of the Flames, much less adds Bellows to increase its Rage,
but rather applys himself Immediately with all diligence to the Quenching of
it, and Anger is as little to be trusted, for if it be once thoroughly kindled,
it will be hardly suppressed, till it has totaly overcome the Subject it works
on. -- Compassion should stand then as a guard to keep it from entering the
Breasts, especially of the Fair-Sex; and make them not look back upon the
injury, but forward upon those Mischiefs which a too sharp resentment may
betray them to. If this Caution was had instead of those Manifying Optics
Wherein they too largely view the wrong they would make use of in the other end
of the Prospective, to see the dismal Event at a distance; and then it would
certainly fright them from any nearer approach; and and oblige them to keep
within those bounds their Christian Duty prescribes them; and with much
facility acquit them with a more Ingenious and Larger Pleasure than their
extremest Revenge can give them: did we rightly understand the Pleasure of
forgiving Injuries, and obliging the Injurious; we should find it so Refined
and Pure, so Heroic and Noble that none but Rational Natures are capable of
it: When as that of Revenge and Spite, is Brutal, and fal^y called a Pleasure,
the Act of the most Contemptible Animal is to return a mischief for one
received: We should conclude from hence that it is an easy Determination,
rather to Embrace that Compassion and Clemency, which we find Exemplefied, not
only in the wisest and best of Rational Creatures, but in the Omniscent and
Imortal Being, than to embrace that Savage fierceness of the Ignoblest
Irrational Creatures; and this is certain, that no Woman would have a liking to
assume the outward form of any of those Creatures whose ferocity is too
frequently Imitated: Why then should the Mind the Nobler part appear in so
monstrous a Transformation, for as there are no Monsters so deformed as those
that are compounded of Man and Beast, so among them all, nothing is more
unnatural than Female Anger, when it boiles up into Rage and Fury, for their
Blood thus fermented by an unruly Passion, may probably enough occasion the
Effusion of another swelling, and overflowing in a Crimson Inundatien. Solomon
tells us, Prove. 17.14. The beginning of strife is as when one let^eth our
water, therefore leave off Contention, etc. When by Immoderate Passion, or
Anger; a breach is once made upon the Spirits, all the consequent Mischiefs
will flow in like a rapid Torrent, when the Banks are forced or broken down,
and this happens, unprevented and unavoidable, where great care is not taken to
keep the bounds entire, by Preserving and Cherishing that Tenderness and
Compassion, which God and Nature do equally command and Enforce. -- Consider
then and duly weigh these things, and you will, if you call your Reason to your
assistance, soon distinguish between the Advantage of the one, and the
Mischiefs and Miseries inherent to the other. Contentment, Contentedness in all
Stations and conditions, carries along with it a wonderful Felicity, and
renders humane Life easy and comfortable to the Fair Sex especially: It is a
beam of that happiness darted into their Souls, that shall hereafter be more
fully possessed; but we hold it not sufficient where it is only a senseless
stupidity, or a carelese neglegence, what becomes of our Estate or Affairs; nor
a seeming in Discourse, to despise and contemn the Riches of this World: As
mean and unworthy our Care or Regard, but it is an humble and willing
submitting our selves to Gods Pleasure in all Conditions. And this makes us
carry our selves Gracefully, in Wealth. Want, Sickness, Freedom, Fetters, or
whatsoever it shall please God to allot us: It renders Marriage comfortable in
what condition soever it happens, and is the great Agent and Supporter of Love.
Though indeed we must allow it is no breach of Contentment: If we complain of
unjust sufferings offered by Men, provided we allow them as just proceedings
from God, who uses wicked men's injustice, to correct those he Loves, and
returns them a Blessing for their Afflictions; when he has tried their Patience
and Humility: Nor is it any breach of Contentment by lawful means to seek the
removal of our Miseries, or the bettering our Fortunes; Pious Medi^ations
greatly advantage Contentme^^ in Adversity. And God's Spirit is the bent
Schoolmaster to teach it us, in the School of Sancti^ied Afflictions; the best
place of Learning true Contentment. In Riches it cannot be found, for they
avail not in the day of Wrath: And those that seek Contentment in that, are
deluded with the shadow, and by fondly setting their hearts on it, create more
discontents to themselves, than perhaps would ever have be fallen them, had
they declined it, and been well pleased with a competency. Contentment makes
Homely Clothes and Diet as Gay and Satisfying as the most Glittering Apparel
and Sumptuous Banquets of the most Riotous Epicures. And this is that can only
give a full satisfaction beyond the Limits of craving. And in a word, Ladys, it
is Riches, Beauty, Honor, Pleasure. and all that you can reasonably name; for
there is scarce any thing pleasant, delightful, or to be desired, but is
Treasured up in a Contented Mind. And as the Poet says: Content is all we aim
at with our store.
And having that with little, what needs more?
Childbearing Women, Christian Wives, (says a Learned Author) in a
Childbearing state, that they may Comfortably bring forth the Fruit of their
Wombs, are highly concerned for that good work, to ^^ve their fruit unto
holiness. Then be sure all shall go well with them both here and (...). belongs
to the pure in heart, and the ^^defiled in the course of their lives. What
knows the (...) Wife, whether (if she should be married to a bad Man, by
Parents disposal) she may (...) her Husband? We read of several Christian
Wives, whose Husbands have been brought to real Godliness, by the^^ Zealous
Endeavors; as Cemens by Domitia, etc. For the holy Conversation of a Wife,
has sometimes a great force upon the mind of the Husband, who is thereby
disposed to entertain good: And if a work of Grace be wrough^ upon him, then he
will be more fervent in prayer for his Childbearing Wife; who, (...) she ought
through the whole course of her life, to be da^^^ dying to sin, and living to
rig^teousness; so in her approaching sorrows, she is more especially concerned.
-- It Is the duty of a big-bellied Woman,to be in a readiness for her departure,
that she may not be surpised since the pangs are perilous the she has to pass
through; and the more, if she be but of a weak, and not of a hail Constitution.
Mrs. Joceline when she felt herself quick with child (as then travailing with
(...) it self), she secretly took order for the buying a new Winding Sheet;
thus preparing and consecrating herself to him who rested in a new Sepulcher,
wherein was man never (...) laid; and privately in her Closet, looking Death in
the Face, wrote her excellent Legacy to her unborn Child. -- None ever repented
of making ready to dye. And every Christian is ready, who can entirely submit
to Gods disposal in Life or Death. Yea, and then a good Woman is likest to have
her will in a safe temporal deliverance, when she is most sincerely willing
that God should have his in dealing with her as seems best to himself. -- It
behooves you, as righteous Handmaids of the Lord, To continue in the constant
exercise of Faith, Patience, Sobriety and Temperance. Certainly you who are
blessed in being Instruments for the propagation of Mankind, when you find you
have conceived, and grow pregnant, are highly concerned to put on, and use
these Ornaments. A great work you are usually busy about, in preparing your
Child-bed-linnen; and I shall not discourage, but rather encourage you to make
necessary provision for your tender selves and babes. -- And let every
ingenuous and grateful Mother, whom God has safely delivered from her
Childbearing pains and peril, imprint a grateful remembrance of so signal a
Mercy with indeleble Characters in her mind. Lord, thou have regarded the low
estate of thine Maiden; when I was in an Agony, and well nigh spent with
repeated pains, thou did stand by me and my babe; yea, thou did admirably
help us, making way for it to pass into this world safely, keeping us both
alive; yea, and it may be, when our friends veri^y thought with sadness, that
my Child could not have seen the light, and I should shortly have shut mine
eyes upon it, being ready to despair of bringing as forth, then did thou find
a way for us both to escape. When Mrs. Joceline, was made a Mother of a
Daughter, whom shortly after being baptized, and brought to her, she blessed,
and then gave God thanks that herself had lived to see it a Christian; Having
dedicated it to the Lord in his Ordinance. She accounted it an additional mercy
to her bringing her forth, and so would have it communicated to others support.
-- But you will say, You shall have a rough passage. And if, as Sabina, a
Christian Martyr, when she travailed, being in Prison, you shall cry out, as
she was heard to do in her Childbearing throws: whereupon some asked her, how
she would endure the Torments her Persecutors had prepared for her, if she
shrunk at those? To whom she said, I now bear the Punishment of my sins, but
then I shall suffer for my Savior. It may be answered: Notwithstanding, be of
good cheer; For the Scripture affords many Antidotes against discouragment, and
to cheer up Suspicious and Fearful Women. But remember that the special
Conjugal Grace of Temperance and Modesty, is to be exercised by the
Childbearing Woman in sobriety, chastity, and gracefulness, both with
reference to her Affections and Senses. -- The breeding and big-bellied Women
is highly concerned to take special care for her own, and the child's safety.
Plato determined, That big-bellied Women, above all should so govern themselves
during that space, that they may be neither carried away to many and furious
Pleasures, nor oppressed with grief; but live a mild, quiet, and pacate Life.
Many have miscarried by an inordinate giving way to their Appetites, and
feeding immoderately upon various Dainties. -- Such soft and delicate Women
there are, who like the pleasure, and are impatient of the pain which
ordinarily attend those in a Married state. To say nothing of those bad Women,
who from a lustful cruelty, or cruel lustfulness, as Augustus speaks, do wish
that their Issue should perish rather than live; and therefore do use ill Arts,
either to prevent Conception. or procure Abortion; which must needs be very
displeasing to God, who in his Law, has breeding-bearing Women, much upon his
heart, to provide for their safety. There be some, who from preapprehensions of
their own pains, forbear to render their Husbands their due, not wel^ weighing
the ill Consequen^^ of such forbearance. Others are ready to conceit, it is a
discouragement to them to take pains, when very well able, about the Nursing
and Education of their Children. It Is true, they are not of such Nun-(...)
dispositions, as some others idolizing a single life for their ease, reguarding
not to be serviceable to God in their Generation, according to their
Capacities, when called. For our Apostle in this Epistle, (...) young Women to
marry, (...) Children (not as too many (...) our Age, to bear Children when not
married), guide the (...) g^ve none occasion to the Adve^^saries to speak
reproachful^^ Yet they are so greatly addi^^^ed to sensual pleasures in (...)
Married state, that they (...) not to take pains in going through their
appointed (...) with their Child-breeding, (...) Childbearing; but do so
overeagerly pursue their appetite^ frolicks, and fancies, that they too often
forget the condition into which God has brought them, and so deprive
themselves, and their Husbands, (...) those blessings, which if they did behave
themselves soberly and Christian-like, they might well hope for at Gods hand
supposing them to conti^^^ duly careful (as they should be to forbear excess in
Diet, an^ violent Recreations, and (...) suppress vehement (...) using that
moderation in all things which their condition notably calls for. -- It may be
granted, Men, yea, Husbands, are generally more prone to Incontinency. And were
I discoursing them, I might remember them (as well as their Wives) of that
famous saying of the Roman Orator, That in the Predominancy, or Kingdom of
sensual pleasure, Men can have Commerce no with virtue: and therefore are
concerned to be watchful and moderate, especially considering what the great
Philosopher has said, That of all the desires of the body, Men are apt to be
faulty this way. Yet since the Command of God reaches those of each Sex, both
are under a Religious band in the Marriage State; and (as one says) the
pleasure therein must be mingled with some severity, it must be a wise and
concionable delight. It much concerns the Christian Wife, to give check to any
suggestion, much more to any parley which is in a tendency to violate her
Matrimonial Contract; or to bring her into any carriage unbecoming that
honorable state she is brought into; or the undue use of the undesiled bed. So
that however some of the Pa^ists in magnifying a single Life, would appropriate
Chastity unto Virgins (whom they themselves do debauch in their N^nneries); Yet
we find from Scripture, and the Ancient Fathers, that there is Chastity and
continency in a Marraige-state, as opposed to that in a single Life. In the
Exercise of this, with the precedent Graces, the good Wife having well learned
the lesson of self-denial, can bear her burden in humble confidence of aids
from above, in the hour of her Childbed sorrow, and a safe deliverance in the
best way. -- Next to Christ, the good Wife is above all other, dearly and
constantly to love her own Husband, and that with a pure heart fervently. Yea,
and she should never entertain low thoughts of him in that Relation, whom she
could once think worthy of embracing for her Husband; and whom by the Covenant
of God, in all Offices of Love, she is obliged to please: Without this bond of
Perfectness, all will be loose, uneasy, and unpleasing; yea, the Laws and
Commands of God, who by his wise Providence ordered the Match, will become
tedious and irksom. But where this Conjugal Love is consequent upon the
foregoing Christian Love, there all will become easy. This is the very life of
Friendship; and where it resides in power, no diligence will be wanting to
facilitate all other conjugal Duties. For never-failing Charity, especially in
this Relation, will enable the good Wife to bear all things, to believe all
things* to hope all things, to endure all things. This holy flame therefore (as
the Vestal fire) should be ever cherished, that it go not out. Indeed Love
being as the Soul of Society, and of it self Immortal, it would argue it were
not sincere at first, if it should cease, Dr. Goad recomending the Mothers
Legacy to her Child unborn, written by p^ous Mrs. Joceline, when big with
Child, preparing for her approaching Childbed, faith, What eyes cannot behold
her true and unspotted love to her dearest Husband? In her affectionate Letter
to him, prefixed to that little Book, she declares with thankfulness to God,
her fears of Childbed painfulness, were cured with the remembrance, that
things should work together for the best to those that love God (which cannot
be right in a Wife without this true love to her Husband), and a certain
assurance that God would give her patience according to her pain. And she bare
all patiently. So did Mrs. Wilkinson, a most loving Wife, whose patience was
remarkable in the midst of very sore pains, which frequented her in the
breeding and bearing Children. Yet then her speech was, I fear not pains; I
fear myself, le^t through impatiency I should let fall any unbesitting word.
It Is a blessed frame (said that grave Divine, who recorded it), when pain seems
light and sin heavy. So on the other hand, for want of this prevalent Conjugal
Love, in conjunction with Christian Love, a Daughter of King Ethelred having
found the difficulty of her first birth, she did afterward perpetually abstain
from her Husband's bed (against the Apostle's Rule) protesting from a Principle
of unaccountable self-love, Th^^ it was not fit a Daughter of a Crowned Head,
should commit her self any more to such perish. 'Twas far otherwise with a
young Woman in Euba^a, who being Married to a Man she loved dearly, became
Mother and Grandmother to an Hundred Children. The Story of Mrs Honywood, in
our Age, is not less famous. -- The Wife has plighted her Tro^^ to her
Husband, according (...) the flesh, unto whom the Lord has in the
Marriage-Covenant joined her, and she is obliged to be constantly faithful in
(...) Conjugal Duties to him, (...) whom she has trusted herself and that by
Virtue of the Covenant of her God. Neither (...) enough to be really faithful
but also to seem so, or be seen as much as may be, so to be. Not that any
Christian Women should be like some of those in the Great Moguls Country, (...)
to gain the repute of Modest, Loving, and Faithful Wives, will have their own
Corpse burnt together with their deceased Husbands: but she should show her real
fidelity, as in an honest and prudent concealment of her Husbands Secrets, so
in avoiding all just suspicion, by any familiar Converse with others, of being
false to his Bed; and Religiously keeping till death, the Matrimonial
Obligation, not deserting her dear Yoke Fellow when reduced to straits. For so
it is storied of the King of Pontus his Wife, that she disguised herself to
follow her banished Husband, saying, There she reckoned was her Kingdom, her
Riches, and Country, wheresoever she could find her Husband. The Wife of a
certain Count of Castile, when the King had detained her Husband in Prison,
went to visit him, whom she persuaded to put on her Clothes, and leave her
there in his stead: Of which Fact the King hearing, did much wonder at the
fidelity of the Countess, and sent her to her Husband, wishing he had such
Wives for himself and Sons. -- To this matter in his present to seeming Women,
has very well observed, 'twas his will that in their. Travail their should
ever be while the world stands, that most eminent instance of his power; indeed
that (I may say) which made the great Heathen Phis^cian, Gallen.
after a deep search into the causes of a Woman's bringing forth a Child to cry
out, Oc Sin tail of Nature. Hence (...) her low Estate, the pious Wife who
lives by Faith, alone Nature, when she utters her doleful groans before the
Almighty; concludes, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. If it
seems good unto him, then to call for her Life, and the Life of her Babe, she
can say, Lord, here am I, and the Child which thou gave me. A prudent Wife
abideing in Faith, Charity, Holiness, and Sobriety, may have such support from
the strengthening word of Promise, here and elsewhere, that Travailing in
Birth, and Pain to be delivered, she may have good hope to be preserved in
Childbearing: For tho as the most beloved wife Rachel in her hard labor,
thought she should die. She may have good evidence, from the Exercise of her
Graces, that she shall be eternally saved, and that may be written on her
Tombstone, which a learned Doctor wrote on that of Pious Mrs. Wilkinson, Dr.
Reynolds in her life, relates that she and her Child, were buried together.
who with her Child, went to Heaven from her Childbed, viz. Here lies the
Mother and
Babe, both without Sins,
Her Birth will make her and
her Infant Twins.
-- Hereupon the Upright Woman though frail, can resign up herself to God, being
fully persuaded with the Father of the Faithful, that what he has promised, he
is also able to perform, and not Oliver speaking largely. -- As for those who
have Wives, they should take special care to discharge the duties of good
Husbands towords their Childbearing Wives, with all good fidelity; viz. [1.]
To dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor unto them as the weaker
vessels, and as being Heirs together of the graces of Life, that their prayers
be not hindered. [2.] To endeavor as much as may be to discharge the parts of
good Christians, and tender Husbands, toward their dearest Yoke-fellows in
such a prevailing Condition; laying much to heart those antecedent,
concomitants, and consequent pains such a state of pregnancy involves them in;
which these Husbands themselves, in such a kind, cannot have experience of.
That as it becomes them for the sake of their good and godly Wives, they may,
as is sometimes said of some Sympathizing ones, in a fort, breed with them, and
for them, by putting on, as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, me^kness, long-suffering, etc. and fulfill all the Duties of
the Relation they are in, readily and ^^mely providing for them not only
Necessaries but such Convenienc^es as they can for their longing appetites and
for the ^eartning of their dear and suffering Wives, who are apt to be (...)
down under apprehensions of their approaching sorrows, and to call in the aid
of faithful praying Ministers and pious Friends, to make their requests known
unto God for them. And if God hears their Prayers. [3.] To be heartily
thank-ful to God upon his giving safe deliverance to their gracious wives, from
the pains and perils of Childbearing.
D.
DAmaris, Acts 17.34 perhaps a little Wife, from (...), a Wife. Danae, i.
Laurus, the Laurel or Bay Tree. Dalilah, Judges 16.4.1. poor impoverished.
Deborah, may be rendered a Byword, Speech, Praise or Praising. Denis,
belonging to Baechus. Dido, signifies a Man like or stout Woman. Phoenician
Dinah, (...) Judgment. Dorras, (...), i. a She Goat, (or with Polit.) a Roe
Buck; see Tabitha, Acts 9.36. Dorothy, the Gift of God. or given of God.
Dousabella, i. sweet and fair Maiden. Fr. Douse, i. sweet. Fr. Drusilla, (...),
Act 24 25. G. P. composeth it of (...), i. Ros, the Dew. Damia a Goddess of the
Ancients only worshipped by Women, who were sworn not to reveal any thing that
passed in nine Days and Nights. Revelling with Music and Dancing, etc.
Damodice, she was Sister to Critolaus of Arcadia, which Brother having killed
her Lover in War, she so far exasperated him by Revilings, that he sent her to
seek him in the other World. Damo, Daughter to Pythagorus the Philosopher; he
charged her at his death not to publish any of his Writings, which
(notwithstanding her extreme Poverty, and the great offers made her for the
Manuscripts) she punctually obeyed. Damigella Tribulzi, she was Daughter to
John Trivulzi, a Lady well skilled in Latin, Greek, and Philosophy, and
applauded for her Orations made before the Prelates and Popes, etc. Dane,
Daughter of Acerisus King of Argos, the Oracle foretelling she should bring
forth a Son that should dethrone him, he shut her up in a Brazen Tower, but
Jupiter descending in a Golden Shower, begat on her Perseus; who afterward
slew his Grandfather unknown. Daphne, a Prophetess Daughter to Tiresias,
curiously seen in Verse; insomuch that (...) took diverse of them to Imbellish
his Work. Daphne, a Nymph, hel^ to be the Daughter of the Rive^ Ladon, and
being pursued by Apollo, who was Enamored of her Praying to the Gods for
Succor, they turned her into a Laurel Tree, the word signifying a Laurel.
Deianica, Daughter to Oeneus, and Wife to Hercules; who upon falling in Love
with Jola, sent him a poisoned Shirt dipped in Nessus the Centaur's Blood, which
made him dye distracted. Diana or the Moon taken for the Goddess that prospers
Success in Hunters, held to be Daughter to Jupiter and Latona. She had a
stately Temple at Ephesus, and diverse other Places: She is styled the Goddess
of Chastity. Dido, Queen of Carthage, who being got with Child by Aeneas, and
he treacherously leaving her, she killed herself: She was Daughter to Methres
King of Tire, who flying h^^ Brother Pigma^lion's Rage, builded Carthage, which
warred many Years with Rome. Digna, a Heroic Virago of the Kingdom of Naples,
who being taken by Atti^ King of the Huns, and attempting to force her to his
Lust, she threw herself from the Batlements of her House into a River, saying,
If thou have a mind to Enjoy me, follow me. And so swimming over, made her
Escape to the next Garrison. Discard, a Goddess were shipped more for fear than
love by the Pagans, to avoid Evils, which they fancied the otherways fomented:
She was figured in a frightful Posture as with the Head of a Serpent and snaky
Hair, and is held to be she that threw the Golden Apple among the Goddesses at
the Wedding of Thetis, to set them at Variance. Drusilla Agrippa, the Elders
Daughter, a very beautiful Lady, being accounted in her time a second Venus;
she was contracted to Epiphanes Son to King Antiochus, who promised on that
consideration to turn Jew; but not keeping his Word, she married Aziazus King
of the Emezenians, but Felix Governor of Judea enticed her from him; and she
was present when St. Paul pleaded before him. Dryades Nymphs to whom were
asigned the Care of the Woods and Forests, and such as frequented them. Dorcas,
a Widow, curious in the Art of working Imbroidery and other things, worthy
Admiration. She was raised by our Savior from the dead, her other name was
Tabitha. Debora, a Valiant Matron of Judea; she encouraged the People to fight
against Sisera, and harrazed their Country; and going in the head of an Army
with Barack, she utterly defeated him with a great slaughter of his Host, and
he flying to the Tent of Jael for shelter, was there (...). Daniades, the fifty
Daughters of Danus, who were at once married to Aegyptus's fifty Sons, who were
all but one of them Murdered by their Wives on the Wedding Night, by the cruel
Command of Danus, who had subtly, by this way, drawn them into a Sna^^ to
gratify the Revenge he had vowed on Aegyptus's Family. Distillation, Every
young Gentlewoman is to be furnished (as Mr. Codrington tells) with very good
Stills, for the Distillations of all kind of Waters, which Stills must be either
of Tin, or sweet Earth, and in them she shall Distill all manner of Waters, meet
for the Health of her Household; a Sage-water, which is Sovereign against all
Rheums and Collicks, Angelica-water, good against Infection, Radish-water good
for the Stone, Vine-water for Itching, Water of clo^^ for the pain of the
Stomach Eye bright-water, excellent in weak and dim Eyes, -- Now by the way
observe, you may easily make your Water look of what color you please if you
will first distill your Water in a Stillatory, and (...) put it in a great Glass
of strength, and fill it as full a^ those Flowers whose Colo^ you desire, then
stop it and is it in the Stillatory, and let distill, and you shall have them
perfect Color. -- (...) precious and excellent Water there are thousands,
wherefore I shall only set down here some of the choicest and most valuable. --
Dr. Stevens his famous Water. Take a Gallon of Gascoin-Wine, of Ginger,
Gallingal, Cinnamon -- Grains, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Anniseeds, Carraway-seed,
Coriander-seed, Fennel-seed, and Sugar, of every one a Dram; Then take of Sack
and Ale a quart of each, of Camomile, Sage, Mint, Red-roses, Thyme, Pellitory
of the Wall, WildMarjoram, Wild-Thyme, Lavender, Pennyroyal, Fennel-roots,
Parsley-roots, and Set-wall roots of each half a handful; then beat the Spice
small, and bruise the Herbs, and put them all together into the Wine, and so
let it stand sixteen Hours, stirring it now and then, then distill it in a
Limbeck with a soft fire, the first pint of the Water by it self, for it is the
belt. -- The principal Use of this Water is against all cold Diseases, it
comfort the Stomach, cures the Stone of what nature soever, using but two
spoonfuls in seven days: -- Aqua Mirabilis. Take three pints of White Wind, of
Aquavitae, and Juice of Saladine, of each a pint; one dram of Cardamer, and one
dram of Mellilot-flowers, Cubebs a dram, Gallingale, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace,
Ginger, of each a dram; mingle all these together over Night, the next Morning
set them a Stilling in a Glass-Limbeck. This admirable Water dissolveth the
swelling of the Lungs, and restores them when perished; it suffers not the
Blood to putrify; neither need he or she to breathe a Vein, that uses this
Water often: Take thr^e spoonfuls of it at a time, Morning and Evening twice a
Week. -- A most approved Water for the Eyes. Take a new laid Egg and roast it
hard, then cut the Shell in the midst and take out the Yolk and put some white
Copporice where the Yolk was, then bind the Egg together again, and let it lie
till it begin to be a Water, then take the white forth from both sides of the
Egg, and put the same into a Glass of fair running Water, and so let it stand a
while; then strain it through a fair Linen Cloth, and therewith wash your Eyes
Morning and Evening. -- An admirable Water against the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take of the middle rind of the Root of Asi^ bruised two pound, Juniper Berries
bruised three pound; Venice-T^^pentine of the bell, two pound and a half; put
these into twelve pints of Spring Water in a Glass-Vessel well closed, and
there let them purify in Horse-doing three Months, then distill them in Ashes,
and there will come forth an Oil and a Water; separate, the one from the other,
ten of twelve drop; being taken of this Oil every Morning in four or six
spoonfuls of the said Water, dissolves the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys most
wonderfully. -- An excellent Water for the Worms. Take of Worm-seeds bruised,
eight ounces; the shaving of Hartshorn, two ounces; of Peach-flowers dried, an
ounce; of Aloes bruised, half an ounce; pour on these the Waters of Tansie,
Rue, Peach-flowers, and of Wormwood, of each a pint and half; let them be
digested in a Glass-Vessel three days, then distill them; cohobate this Water
three times. This Water may be given from half an ounce to three ounces,
according to the Age and Strength of the Person. -- -- In the Second Part of
the Ladies Dictionary, I shall insert the Receipts of several precious Waters
and their Use, which I have received from the Fair-Sex, and which were never
yet made public. Dells are young bucksom Wenches, ripe, and prone to Venery,
but have not yet been debauched. Dresses for Persons of different Qualities. --
There are Robes of Distinction, which are clasped on Subordinate Magistrates,
both innocent and laudable in themselves, and are expressive of the Dignity and
Office of such as wear them. Thus we read that Severus allowed his Judges Gowns
to (...) in public Judgment, and others to wear at home in their private
Houses. Our very Quakers were never so impudent to affront the Scarlet of the
Judge or Praetor. -- It is lawful, and in some respects necessary, that Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates, especially in the solemn Exercise of their proper and
respective Offices, be distinguished by their Robes, from private Persons, and
from each other. -- All civilized Nations have so unanimously concurred in this
Distinction, that we may receive it as the dictate of Nature, the vote of
Universal Reason: Jehosaphat wore his Royal Robes, 1 Kings 22.
tho the wearing them once had like to have cost him dearer, than the matter
and making. Solomon's outward Glory was the Admiration of the Queen of Sheba,
and yet when he shone in all his external Luster and Splendour was not arrayed
like the Lily of the Field, Mat. 6. which glorified only in the Bravery of
Nature's own Spinning: So short are the finest works of Art of the coursest
manufacture and meanest pieces of the God of Nature. -- The Famous Burleigh,
when at Night coming weary home from the Crowd, and Business of the Court, and
pulling off his Gown, was usually heard to say to it, Lie there Lord Treasurer:
And indeed when we remember what Cares the Robe of State are lined with, we
shall have little Reason to suspect those of much Pride, that bear them. -- The
same dispensation doubtless extends to each Order and Decree of the Royal
Household. It being not so Honorable for Princes (like him of the Air) to be
attended on by a Black-Guard). When the Queen of the South took her tedious
Journey, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, it is expressly said, The attendance of
his Ministers, and their Apparel, was so glorious, that it ravished away her
Spirit, ( passaest Ecstasin says Junius) there was no more spirit in her. She
fell into a trance to view so glittering a Court, where the great King, as the
Sun; the chief Ministers, as the Planets of the first magnitude, and each
inferior Officer, as the minor Stars (the very least had his Splendour) but all
together were (as our Savior expresses it) Solomon in all his Glory.
Surrounded with all his Nobles and Counselors, and Attendants; each one in his
Sphere contributing to the Glory of so great a Constellation. Indeed God
arrayed Solomon in the brightest Robes of Royalty with full design to make him
the most illussious Prince, that he might unrobe him again, and make him the
most experienced Preacher; that all Princes to the Worlds end, might have the
Word of a King to assure them how much vanity attends the Courts of the most
Magnificent Potentates, and how little satisfaction, or SoulAcquiescence
himself had found in all the Grandeurs of State. -- But above all, how
remarkable is the crowding of at least forty Dukes of the Progeny of Esau (whom
God hated) into one short Chapter, justling them together, three or four into
one line, seven or eight of them into two. Duke Teman, Duke Omar, Duke Zepho,
Duke Kenaz, etc. their whole story lost in the air of an empty Title, their
Persons and Hopes entered together in the dark vault of eternal Oblivion, while
yet above a dozen Chapters are proved in the deciphering out the Excellencies
of but one younger Son, of a Plain man that dwelt in Tents, and gives us the
exact memories of his whole life and actions to the Grave, Gen 37. to 50. --
However we may judge charitably of those, whom rather Reason and Necessity of
State, than any natural Inclination to the folly, does exact from them a more
gay and splendid Appearance and Dress. Dairies, etc. I must now speak something
of Dayries, for the better satisfaction of the Gentlewomen both in City and
Country; that so the one might the better understand the practice in the
Country, and the other being delighted with her own experience, may give a full
consent to the Truth of what we shall deliver. -- In the first place, the Kin^
must be of the best Choice and Breed, that can po^^^bly be procured, the larger
the Cow is, the better she is. The Signs of a Cow that gives good Milk, are a
wreathed Horn, a thin Neck, and a full Udder. But above all things the good
Housewife must be sure the Bull be of as good a Breed, as the Kine themselves.
And it is very good counsel, that if at any time you buy any Kine to increase
your Dairy, you must be careful that they do not come from a Soil that is more
fruitful than your own, but that rather they come into a better Pasture, for
then they will prosper, and thrive with you; when otherwise they will pine
away, and fall into Diseases, as Pi^ing of Blood, and other Inconveniences. --
Those Kine are said to give most Milk, which have but lately Calved, If a Cow
gives at once but one Gallon at a time, and that constantly, she may pass very
well for a good Milch Cow. -- The best time for a Cow to Calve in, is the
latter end of February, and in the Months of March and April, for then the
Grass is either coming on, or springs up in (...) goodness. -- The best and
most approved hours for ^^l^ing, are in the Spring and ^ummer, betwixt five and
six in the Morning and about (...) of the Clock in the Evening And remember, it
is the worst (...) that can (...) Cow half Milk (...) of the Milk, it is the
only way (...) make the Cow dry. -- (...) Profits arising from Milk (...)
chiefly three, Cream, (...) and Cheese: The Cream is (...) Heart and Strength
of the (...) which must be skimmed (...) cleanly, for this Cleanliness such an
Ornament to a (...) Houswife, that if she wants (...) part thereof, she loses
(...) that, and all other good (...) whatsoever. -- How to (...) your ordinary
Clouted Cream Take a quantity of Milk (...) the Cow, and put it into broad
Earthen-pan, and set over a slow fire, letting it (...) there from morning till
(...) suffering it not to boil by (...) means; then take it off (...) fire, and
set it in some place all night to cool, in the mo^^^ing dish off your Cream,
for (...) will be very thick. -- (...) make fresh Cheese of Cream Take a pottle
of new Milk it comes from the Cow, (...) half a pound of blanched ^^^monds
beaten very small, (...) make a thick Almond (...) with a pint of Cream
strained and a little before you go (...) Dinner make it blood-(...) season it
with a little (...) Rose Water, and fearsed (...) and put to it a little Run^^
and when it is Scummed, (...) it up, and whey it, and put (...) into a Mould,
and press it in (...) your hand; and when it is (...) wheyed, put it into a
(...) with Cream. -- Cream Codlins. -- After you have (...) your Codlins, and
peeled off the skins, and scraped the pulps from the cores, with a little Sugar
and Rose Water, strain them, and lay the pulp of your Codlins in a Dish, with
as much (...) Cream as you please about them. -- To make a Junket.- Take E^s or
Goats-Milk; if you have neither of these, then take Cows-Milk, and put it over
the fire to warm, then put in a little Runner to it; then pour it out into a
Dish, and let it cool, then strew on Cin^amon and Sugar, then take some Cream
and lay upon it, scraping Sugar thereon, serve it up. -- Here note by the way,
that you cannot keep Cream above three days in Summer, and six days in Winter
without prejudice. -- The best time to Pot up B^tter, is in the Month of May,
for then the Air is most temperate, and the Butter will take Salt best. -- The
third Profit which arises from the Dairy is Cheese, of which there are two
kinds, Morning-Milk-Cheese, Nettle Cheese: But the Morning-Milk Cheese is for
the most part the fattest, and the best Cheese that is ordinarily made in the
Kingdom. Dairy-Maids, See p. 434. Dalliance, Whether this Kissing, and
Lap-dalliance be through the default of the Husband, or the Wife, it is a great
Offense in either. It pleases not me, though spoken by an Emperor, Give me
leave by the Lust of others, to exercise mine own; though a witty, yet a wicked
Speech. Wise, is not only a name of Pleasure, but of Honor: though our Men
cannot discern this; but rather answer with Aristip^^^ who being told that
(...) loved him not; No more, faith he, does Wine nor Fish, and yet I cannot be
without them: A true Beast, respecting more the sensual Pleasure, and Appetite
of the Body, than the Harmony and Union of the Mind. A Man ought not ^o to
embrace his Wife without a flattering kind of Severity For this public Billing
shows the way to unexperienced Youth, to commit Riot in private. And Ca^o
accused (...) before the Senate, for that (...) had kissed his Wife, before his
Neighbor's Daughter; A short, yet Wise Speech, and of a hidden Use. Neither by
this often, and open Smacking, is shame only diminished; but by little and
little, cha^t^^y abolished. The very Elephant cry out against them; (...) as
Pliny writes, make not the least Love one to another, except they be covered
with Boughs. Diversion, What kin is most suitable to, and (...) in Ladies. --
(...) seasonable (...), mode^rately used, is proper and al^lowable to either
Sex; but (...) must be so chosen and m^^ thodised that it may be (...) and
directed to your good, and not any ways to harm you; for whilst you are in
youthful Years to be too eager in the pursuit of Pleasure, will Entail it upon
you when you go onward toward Eternity, and should move by Gravity, and have
only serious thoughts about you; and indeed all Diversions are not to be
carried too far in the progress of our Lives for their main end is only to
refresh and ease the Mind, over burdened and oppressed with too weighty Cares
or Business; and then the Idle and Supine have no occasion for them, and yet
they are not coveted and pursued by many so much as they even pursue them to
that Excess, that those Diversions that are pleasant to others, become at
length toilsom and uneasy to them, because by an over-doing Eagerness they
sweat and drudge at them more than some do at Harvest-work; they have indeed
few or no Cares, at least, they will not admit them, and therefore cannot be
sensible of the sweet Refreshment the unbending of their Thoughts brings, who
have been stretched upon the Rack of Multiplicity of Affairs, which has
disordered the Mind, by hurrying and confusing it; and to (...) it is not more
natural then it is necessary: But to make a Holiday, or one conti^^ed Scene or
Recreation, is not only Ridiculous, but as we have hinted, rather destroys
than promoteth Pleasure; the Mind to be always in (...) posture, is more tired
and uneasy, than the Body to be ^^^serious breaks it, and too diverting
loosens it; therefore properly affects Variety, which gives a relish to
Diversions, and for that Reason the more prudent Ladies change as often as is
modestly convenient, whilst others go so long to see Plays that having at a
large Expense of Time and Money, gotten a great many Fragments by Heart: They
fancy themselves the Actors, and being bound Prentice to the House, they are
in danger of Correction if they desert the Drudgery. -- Diversions that are
well timed and chosen, are not to be blamed, yet even Innocent Recreations,
when carried to Excess, may grow Criminal in the Eyes of the Censorious World,
and occasion Scandal and Reproach. Some Ladies for their Wit and Humor are so
often bespoke to Merry Meeting, that one would almost conclude they made a
Trade on it, as Midwives do by their Practice; for where Ladies are insensibly
drawn in and engaged in a Circle of Idleness, wherein they turn round all the
Year; They ha^^ their Intelligencers abroad to bring news, where they may meet
with Company to trifle away their time, which for want of Business would seem
otherways tedious to them; such we refer to their Devotions, than in which no
time is so well spent, because we ^ay ^ut the few Moments of a short Life here
to purchase a blessed ^territy hereafter, which will ever steal away from us,
but ^ontinue us in an Everlasting ^ourishing Spring of Youth, ^word ^holy
Pleasures. No Sol^^^^ is more obedient to the ^ound of the Trumpet, when (...)
Commands him to Horse, ^han some Ladies are to the ^^gor of that which
Sum^^neth them to see some mon^^^rous Sight, or Puppet-play. The Spring no
sooner brings ^ut the Butterflies, but they ^re Inhabitants of both the (...),
as if they intended to ^^camp there, and with their formidable Beauties keep in
(...) the Sparks and Fops of (...) Town, that would be o^herways apt to Revolt
from ^he Dominion, they have ac^uired over them: In the ^inter, they are the
Ballast of (...) Playhouse, and the Incum^erance of the With-drawing^^om,
whilst the Streets which they so frequently measure to (...) purpose, grow
weary of those Daly-faces Men's Eyes are ^ver-laid with them, for we must tell
you, that the Sight (...) many times glutted as well (...) the Stomach, the one
with (...) things, the other with over lusscious Dainties; and so when a
beautiful Lady will ^ave herself too much to the World, she loses those
Advantages of being Admired, and rather oppresses than pleases. -- Diversion in
some Jolly Ladies is all their study, they are a cudgeling their Brains as soon
as they wake in the Morning how they shall dispose of themselves the Ensuing
part of the Day, and cast so many things at once in their Minds, that they
forget their Prayers, and are so busy in seeking out and Hunting after
Recreation, that in a little time they grow into a Jest; but are very unwilling
to let it sink into their Memories. That if they were not so often seen, they
would be seldomer laughed at; moreover they render themselves cheap, there
being than no unkind or offending Word to be bestowed upon the Sex. To play
indeed at sundry Games has been forbidden the Fair-Sex, by some more severe
than needful, by Reason, say they, It introduces Men into their Companies, and
gives them the advantage over them, by being of their side, or losing to them,
which they expect should be forgiven or restored, but we ask the Question
whether they may not have equal Diversion with the Modest of their own Sex, or
such of the other as can have no Pretention to (...) any but a Civil Claim to
their Favors; and this they may do to entertain the Company, and divert
themselves and it cannot be reasonably dissallowed, but when it is so often
done and with such Earnestness and Affectation, that a Lady procures to
herself, the name of a Gamester, it must necessarily be avoided, or her
Reputation will suffer, and it will be looked upon next to things that are
Criminal; having consequences of such Natures as are at diverse times not easily
to be born with, it will engage her into a habit of ill Hours, and Idleness,
draw her into mixtures of Company, and hinders her paying her Civilities abroad
and her business at home; engage her to, or impose upon her acquiantance, not
suitable to her Credit, and sometimes to deep play, and the losing of much
money which will give the World occasion to ask spightful Questions, as how she
comes by it or whether she be able to answer such sums, without geting them by
Indirect ways, and sometimes they will be so unmannerly bold, as to guess she
procures them at the price of her Honor; and if she run in debt, by this means
to a single Person it will embolden him to make Pretensions to her Love; and he
will be concluded no unfair Creditor, if where the Estate fails he seizes on
the Person. -- (...) how far it may de^^ (...) Ineffensive. -- Dancing is not,
Ladies, to be (...) ^aulty; whatever some have (...) it, when it is undertaken
and moderatly practiced to accomodate (...) with a Graceful Carriage; (...)
then it sets off your other (...) A^^complishments with a (...) and Winning
Behavior, (...) when it goes a little too far (...) may notwithstanding, be
(...) led, an Excelling mistake, ^^less it run into Extravagan^ and then it can
be allowed (...) great Commendation; and i^ is better never to practice (...)
than to carry it too far, (...) safest and easiest method (...) Acting it is in
private Comp^^nies, and among parti^^^^^ Friends, and not even there (...)
earnestly pursued as if it (...) made Common Diversion in (...) Party
performing it, rather (...) done with an intent to (...) those that desire it;
for when (...) looks like a business, it (...) be so taken, Fortunes played by
Musicians, that make (...) Trade, are not so accepta^^^ as from a private
Person, (...) has studied the Science for (...) Recreation. -- Dancing (...)
indeed something delightful (...) it to the Eye of the Behol^^^ when
excellently perform with Modesty and Moderation but when a Lady begins it (...)
is unwilling to give over till ^^^tire out the Company, it (...) too much like
Vanity and ^^^fectation: Some when the Ears are invaded with the Ha^^mony of
Music, are so r^^^^less and uneasy, that they (...) unable to keep their
Seats, (...) move with it, as if something posessed them, and compelled their
Bodies to that Indecency against their Inclinations, when ^ndeed this will be
taken to ^roceed from the desire you ^ave to show that your Parents (...)
thrown some Money a^ay upon you, to show your ^hape in various Postures, when
^ndeed it ought not to be done ^oluntarily, but rather when is Importuned by
others which will raise your Esteem ^he higher, and make them ^ndebted to you,
for the Obligations you lay on them, in ^omplying with their desires; ^hen you
have done, retire to ^our Seat, and give place to (...) but let no Importuni^
prevail with you too often to (...) it, for by such a for^^rdness, you may be
impos^ion on, as one desirous of ap^^ness and vain Glory. Dancing, a moving
Incite^ent in Love. -- Dancing ^ main Engine to catch a (...) withal, and many
times (...) Dancers by opportunity (...) meetings are catched them^^lves and
lose their Virgini^^ before the Parson gives (...) leave. Petrarch calls it
(...) Spur of Lust, and the cir^^^ where the Devil stands ^^^ghing in the
Center: Ne^^^theless, we find it frequent^^^ used among us, and is ac^^^nted
part of a Gentlewo^ns bringing up; and some^^es they are at their Danc^^g,
Singing, Playing on the (...) etc. before they can repeat their Pater nos^er,
or the Ten Commandments, and this the Parents allow as a Material part of
Accomplished Education, to get their Daughters Rich Husbands. And indeed it has
a great Ascendant over Men. Thais first took Lampridas, by her Dancing;
Herodias so pleased Herod, that he satisfied her Mothers Revenge in beheading
John the Baptist. But History tells us, she Danced not long after it, for going
over a River that was frozen. the Ice broke, and as a signal Judgment, the
pieces as she fell in suddenly closing together took off her head: Dancing has
many times Captivated Princes, and we had a Race of Kings owning to its
Effects. For Robert Duke of Normandy, Riding by Falais, espied Arlette, a plain
but beautiful Country Maid, Dancing on a common Green by the Roadside, and was
so taken with the neatness of her Motion; that he could not rest till he had
enjoyed her, and on her he got William who Conquered England. Owen Tudor, a
private Gentleman won by his Dancing, the Affections of Catharine, Widow to
King Henry the Fifth, and Marryred her: Speusippas, A Noble Gallant, seeing
Panareta, a fa^^ young Gentlewoman Dancing by Accident, cried out, who would
not love her! Who would not admire her! that should but see her Dance! O Divine
Panareta, I have seen Old and New Rome, many Fair Cities, many Proper Women,
but never any like to Panareta; they are all Dross and Dowdies to her. O how
she Danced how she tript, how she turned, with what a Grace; happy is the Man
that shall enjoy her! O most Incomparable Panareta: And so goes on as we find
it in Aristenaeus. -- Dancing has taken with rigid Philosophers, for Xenophon
entertained Socrates, in this manner, he brought forth in an Interlude, a
Beautiful Woman, represented Ariadne, dressed as a Bride, and Bacchus as a
Bridegroom, he entered Dancing to the Music, and she sat down to behold him,
yet appeared so Affected with his excellent Dancing, that she could scarce sit,
he having danced a while, came and bowed to her Knees Embraced and Kissed her
with winning Grace, and much Affection, and then they Danced together, and when
he rose up he raised her with him, and many pretty Gestures, Love Complements,
Embraces and Kisses passed between them, so that the Spectators swore they
Loved in earnest: And were to Inflamed with the Object, that they began to
rouse up themselves, as if they would have flown at last when they beheld them
continue so willingly Embracing and Kissing each other, like two billing
Turtles, and were ready to go to the Bride-chamber: They were so Ravished in
Cont^^^plating such innocent Happiness, that those who were ^^^married, vowed
they woud^ forthwith marry: And (...) who were married, called instantly for
their Horses (...) Galloped home to their Wives that they might quench th^^
Ardour and Imagination it (...) stired up in them: And tho^^^ many have
condemned Dancing when it is Extravagant or (...) used unseasonably or
indecently: Yet our opinion is that this moderately Exercised, (...) an honest
Disport, a lawful R^creation, and a bodily Exe^cise that conduces to Hea^^^ And
Plutarch says, that which has a respect to Pleasure along honest Recreation, or
Bod^ Exercise, ought not to be (...) injected or contemned. (...) Lucian says,
it is an Elega^^ thing which clears up (...) Minds, delights the Spectat^^^
Exercises the Body, and tea^^ many comely Gestures, equal^ly Affecting the
Ears, Eyes and Soul it self: Some are (...) Cynical, that they will not ^^low
Men and Women to (...) together, because it may (...) cite and stir up Lustful
(...) but by the same Rule they (...) as well cut down all the (...) because
the Wine makes (...) Men and Women Drunk, (...) being Immoderately taken (...)
thi^ and all other harmless (...) R^^creations; it may be said (...) are like
fire, good when (...) to it is proper end, but bad when it is applied to destroy
and lay wast, we see therefore no Inconveniency, but that they may so Dance, if
it be done at seasonable times and by fit Persons, most of our Modern Divines
allow it, and we find, Eccl. 3.4. There is a time to Dance as well as Mourn,
or, do any other matters. It is a pleasant ^ight to see the pretty Knots and
Swimming Figures, their keeping time, now tracing, now turning, now parting,
now altogether, now a courtesy, and then a caper, where it is done by young Men
and Women, Fair and Lovely in their flourishing Age; but for old People, pardon
us Reverend Ladies, if we cannot allow it to be very seemly because Age
requires more Gravity, and Seriousness than Dancing will allow: Some are of
Opinion that the Moon and Sun Dance in their Mistick Traces, and unaccountable
Motions in their Circling the Earth; the three upper Planets about the Sun as
their Center: Now Stationary, now Direct, now Retrograde, now in Apogaeo and
again in Perigaeo now Swift then Slow, Occidential Orientia, they turn ^^ound,
and Trace Venus and Mercury about the Sun with ^^ose 33 Maculae, or Burboni^^
Planets, Circasolem, Seltan^^ Cytharedum says Fromun^us^ Four Medicin Stars
dance about Jupiter, two Custrian (...) about Saturn and. And all be like to
the Music of the Spheres, and even all Creation has in it a curious Harmony,
keeping set time and measure: Nature herself taking delight to move and actuate
in due decorum, so that is something rare in it, and many wise and virtuous
People have used it in most Ages; and many Learned Men have Writ in Vindication
of it, and even the Barbarians as well as Civilized Nations have it in great
esteem. -- Dancing Schools are allowed by Plato in his CommonWealth, that young
People may meet together, see one another and be acquainted by the Exercise of
that suitable Recreation and he above all Men, had it been discommendable,
would not have encouraged it; therefore if such grave Philosophers found no
fault with it, why should we. It is confessed, there are sometimes a company of
bawdy Bacchinalians that use, and some by their Apish and Mimical Postures,
labor to turn it into Ridicule; and indeed there are very few things, though
good in themselves, but may be abused, but what is that to you Ladies, who
intend and practice only for your innocent Recreation to set a comely Grace
upon your Carriage and Gesture, and to render each Action, Lovely and Winning:
Go on then, and be as happy as your wishes can make you, for neat Danceting ing
is a great Allurement to those that are given to Love, and takes them as soon
as any thing else; if it be discreetly Managed, many an Amorous Gallant has
fixed his Eyes upon his Mistresses feet when she Danced, with as much
satisfaction, as if he had privately looked over his Mistresses shoulder, and
read the pretty conceits she was writing to him in a Love-Letter. So charming
is the sight Lover forget
A while the Face, admiring most the Feet.
Who by their often indenting seem to write,
Such Love Incomiums as must breed delight.
Neat^y to Dance, Move with a winning Grace,
Takes more with some than does a beauteous Face.
A shaft it is out of Loves Q^iver tam,
And where it hits it seldom strikes in vain;
But gives a wound that does appear too plain.
Deformity, Where it happens Naturally, or Accidentially; how Ladies ought to
bear it with Patience, and Submission to the Will of God. -- Deformity, though
it is unpleasing to all Creatures, but more especially Mankind; when in falls
to our share, and cannot be repaired by Art, ought to be born with Patience; it
happens either naturally, voluntary or Adventitious, either being caused by
Gods unseen Providence, or Ma^^ Cruelty. Therefore if a Lady be not so handsome
as she would be, let her thank God that she is no more unhandsom than she is;
it is his Mercy that she is not made a Mark to be pointed at an Hetroclite in
Nature with some Member defective or redundant. Let her rejoice that her
Cottage of Clay (...) all the necessary Rooms belonging to it, though the
outside be not so fairly set (...) as others. -- Deformity may Lawfully and
Commendably be helped by (...) to Correct the Defects, Encthonus being a goodly
M^^ from the Girdle upward, (...) as the Poets feign, hav^^^ downwards the body
of a Se^pent (or rather as we believe crooked Legs, or stump F^^^ set his wits
to work to inver^ Chariot; in which Riding, (...) Deformity of his Legs and
Fe^^ were hid, it is said (thou^^ without much Ground) (...) Saunders, that
Queen (...) Wife to Henry the Eight, (...) the Ruff, to hide a (...) in her
Neck. However, (...) matters not much whether (...) be in the Right or the
Wro^^ for such a thing might be (...) fully used, on that or the (...)
occasion. Let us not in (...) wise, dare to mock at or (...) those that are
mish^^^ by Nature; those that (...) them, despise God that (...) them: For they
as well as (...) most Beautiful and well P^^^portioned, are Pictures of Gods
own making; but set in a plainer Frame, not so gilded and Embellished; a
Deformed Person is no less his Workmanship, but not drawn with even Lines and
lively Colors. The former not for want of Wealth as the latter, not for want
of Skill, but both for the pleasure of the Maker. Aristotle is uncharitably
cruel, when he advises people to expose their Deformed Children to the wide
World; and not to take any regard of them, as if they were not Gods Creatures,
as well as the other: And though Deformities have taken hold of their Bodies,
frequently the beauties of their Minds, make amends for it, many times
Equaling, and some times Excelling in a high degree: Those of the most Fair and
Beautiful; some people handsome, by Nature deform themselves; by Riot and
Luxury, Excess, or Immoderate Eating and Drinking, being Enemies to Beauty, in
either taking away the pleasing blush by being bloated, or growing over fat, or
convert it into a Bacchinalian hue, which is worse, because it more visibly
exposes the party, and the cause by whose Effects those Rubies are planted
there, as not arising (as they would make us believe) from having but being bad
Livers, when the Woman, in the first of Kings 3.21. Considered the (...) that
was laid by her, by the fly subtilty of the other Harlot, behold when I looked
said she, It was not too (...) which I did bear. How justly may God say the
same of those that deform themselves by their Irregular Courses of Living; and
overtook them as things he created not. But where a Deformity is made by the
malice of Men, it is otherwise, for many times that stands for God's mark and
Seal upon his Children, when they suffer Torments, and Persecutions for the
Honor of his Name, as Confessors who were the Body of Truth, and though they
are Scared or Dismembered, they look more Beautiful in the Eyes of their Maker,
and likewise in the Esteem of all Good Men and Women this contemplation of
suffering Deformity made the Emperor Constantine the Great, did kiss the
places where Paphuntius a Godly Christians Eyes had stood before they were
bored out by the Tyrant Maximinus, because he would not fall down and worship
the Heathen Gods: wounds in War, if honorably received, though they occasion
deformity, are never the less Beautiful to Noble and Generous Spirits however
they may seem contemptible in the Eyes of the Vulgar and Sordid part of
Mankind, Halting through Wounds and Honorable Scars is a Soldiers stately
March: And he who mocks at the Marks of Valor in a Soldiers face, may with
Ignominy at one time or other be Scared with the brand of Justice on his own
Flesh. Beautiful minds as we have hinted, are frequently joined with such
bodies as by Nature, are deformed, their Souls have been the Chapels of
Sanctity, whose Bodies have been the Spittles of Deformity: Many rare and
useful Arts are owing to the Wisdom and Industry of either Sex, whose Bodies
not being very acceptable has made them improve the virtues of their Minds, to
get them an Esteem, and a Name that would be sure to live beyond the longest
continuance of Beauty; some Ladies that have been tollerably handsome, and have
found it much impared by that Irreconcilable Enemy, to a good force, viz. The
small Box, have been so frequently, passionate and uneasy, so displeased and
out of humor with themselves, that they have grown careless and negligent of
their Persons, and Affairs, weary in a manner of their Lives. For that which of
it self in a little time, would naturally have faded, and like a shedding Rose,
have dropped into, and been lost in the Seeds of Old Ages. Wrinkles and
Deformities not at the (...) regarding that their true Beauty which they ought
most to value and improve, was looked up in a Cabinet, the (...) of the (...)
could not open; which being exposed to the best Advantages, would yet set a
greater Luster upon their Faces; than all the Roses and Lillies without it
could do in their flourishing Prime; for an outside Beauty without that which
is Internal, can be reckoned only a Fair Picture set up in the World for Men
only to gaze at: And indeed is of little other use, profit or delight. Our
Advice is, Ladies that you be not dejected or angry with your selves or your
Maker (the latter especially is to be avoided) when a cloud is drawn over the
Luster, only of an outside fading Beauty, no more than the Sun seems to be
displeased, and leave his Road, when a Mist, to appearance, renders him a bold
and beamless Globe of Fire to Mortal Eyes, his brightness in himself is then
never the less: No Mists, Clouds, or Vapors, being capable of Lessening it, or
any thing arising of the Damps and Foggs of the Earth, to his Exalted Sphere.
So the brightness of your Souls, in the perfection of the many virtues that
adorn you, shining as Glitering Gems, in Crowns of Burnished Gold, about the
Eclipse of a Disease; However for the repair of External defects in Beauty, we
have (...) this Work with di^^^ choice Receipts, to restore (...) Loveliness in
fading Beauty and so we conclude this Ho^^^ with a few Lines writ to Lady who
had newly been visited with the small Pox. Sickness Loves Rival, envying the
place,
Where Cupid choose to pitch his Tents (your face.)
Went to write foul, but Venus made it prove,
Spite of his spite the Alphabet of Love.
So as they strove, Love served him in his trim,
For as that set on you, this set on him.
And Love that Conquers all things soon made known,
To him a burning greater than his own.
What pity it is that face, where Love has been,
So often, so proud, to play so sweetly in.
By Sickness hand, should be over turned thus,
As to be made a Campius Martius.
Wherein the angry York and Lancaster,
New Vamp, and do retrive their cruel War;
As if the Red Rose, and the White would be,
Where e're they met still at Antipathy.
A (...) that was as clear as day (...) bright,
Should bud with Stars, like an Enameled Night.
Your Sickness meant to turn Astrologer,
Your Face the Heaven, and every spot a Star;
Or else would write on Almanacks and raise,
By those red Letters, naught but Holy Days.
They blush no more, but let the fair ones know,
They are but Characters wri^ on your brow;
Or Etch'd by skilful hands that they may see,
That Beauties subject to Mortality,
How frail it is, how vain's to adore it,
How weak they are that Love and Marry for it.
Divorce, the manner of it among the Jews. -- Divorce among the Jews, was in
this Form; Divorce, a Copy as it was among the Jews.
The Day, Month, and Year of the Creation of the World, being first named,
according to the Computation we use here in this City. The Son of Rabi, D. but
now I Dwelling near such a River, in such or such a Place, have desired of mine
own Free Will, without any Coaction; And have Divorced, Dismissed, and cast out
thee, I say Thee, My Wife, C. of the Country G. of B. Daughter of Rabi N.
Dweling in such or such a Country, or Dwelling now in such or such a Place,
Situate near such or such a River, which have been my Wife Heretofore: But now
I do Divorce thee, Dismiss thee, and cast thee out, that thou may be Free,
and have the Ri^e of thy self to depart, to Marry to any Man whom thou will,
and let no Man be refused by thee for me, from this Day forward, for ever: Thus
b^th a Lawful for any Man, and this shall be, to thee, from me, a Bill of
Separation, a Bill of Divorce, a Bill of Dismission, according to the Law of
Moses: N. The Son of N. Witness.
N. The Son of N. Witness.
Domry, The Copy of a Bill among the Jews, was in this Form, viz. D^ury^ among
the Jews, the manner of it.
Upon the sixth Day of the Week, being the Fourth of Month (...), in the Year
of the Creation of the World 5234. According to the Comput^^ion we use here at
Massilna, a City which is Situate near the Seashore. The Bridegroom Rabi
Moses, the Son of Rabi Jehuda, said unto the Bride-Wife Dinah, Daughter of Rabi
Joseph, the Son of Rabi Jacob, a Citizen of Madrid, be unto me a Wife according
to the Law of Moses and Israel, and I, according to the Law of God, will
Worship, Honor, and Maintain and Govern thee, according to the manner of the
Husbands among the Jews, who do Worship, Honor, Maintain and Govern their
Wives; faithfully I do also bestow upon thee the Dowry of thy Virginity two
hundred Denairs in Silver, which belong un^o thee by the Law, and moreover thy
Food, thy Apparel, and sufficient Necessaries, as likewise the Knowledge of
thee, according to the Custom of all the Earth. Thus Dian the Virgin rested,
and became a Wife to Rabi Moses, the Son of Jehuda the Bridegroom. Such Virtues
as to Women praises win,
Are sober shows without Chaste Thoughts within;
True Faith and due Obedience to their Mate,
And of their Children honest Care to take,
Dunmow, a Town in Essex. has a very strange Custom anciently settled in it,
Dunmows Bacon, an Encouragement to happy Marriage.
which is upon these Conditions, viz. by a Monastry held there, it was
ordained, That if any Man would come and Kneel on Two Stones, yet to be seen at
the Church Door before the Convent, and solemnly take an Oath, he might
peremptorily demand a Flitch of Bacon as his Right, which would be freely given
him Wherefore, since this is a common saying in Essex, and because we know not
but the Custom is yet good, we shall set down the Form of the Oath, that
Married Men and Women knowing it, may be the better capable of Judging whether
they can safely dispense with it, or not; You shall Swear by the Custom of our
Confession.
That you never made any Nuptial Transgression,
Since you were Married Man and Wife,
By Houshould-Brawls, or any Strife,
Or otherwise at Bed or at Board,
Offended each other in Deed or Word;
Or since the Parish-Clark said Amen:
Wished your selves unmarried again,
Or in a Twelvemonth and a Day,
Repenting Thoughts did never stray;
But continued True and in Desire,
As when you Joined Hands in Holy Quire;
If to these Conditions without all fear
Of your own accord if you will freely swear,
A Gammon of Bacon you shall Receive,
And carry it hence with Love and good Leave;
For this is our Custom at Dunmow well known,
Tho the Sport be ours, the Bacon's your own.
And by an old Book they keep to show there it stands upon Record, that one
Richard Wrighte of Badsworth in Norfolk, in the 23 of Henry the Sixth, when
John Canon, was Prior, Stephen Samuel of little Easton in Essex; on the Seventh
of Edward the Fourth, and Thomas Lee of Coxhal, in the asorenamed County in the
Second of Henry the Eight. The said Oath at the Respective times mentioned, and
had their Bacon with great applause of their being Extraordinary Husbands that
they could keep their Wives in good Humor so long. And indeed this Custom was
first brought up to show the young Nuns that a Married Life consisted not of
such Extraordinary felicity as was supposed by young unmarried People, since it
was apparent by the few that came for Bacon, and those that came perhaps
swallowed the Oath for Lucre of the Profit, that there were discontents and
divisions in it, and thereby confirmed 'em to live contented in a Single Life,
sequestered from the World, and indeed many such Whimseys they had in those
dark times of Ignorance to work upon the youn^er sort, and draw them into a
snare, but being once ^oosed^ in a Monastry, not all their Tears and
Repentance, without a good sum of Money could bring them out again; for to that
end most of the cunning Contrivers of those Orders, laid their Nets; as well
foreseeing most people would be desirous of a Novel or Change in their Course
of Life to live on Plenty, and be at Ease.

Danes, (...) by Women -- Denmark and Norway, over-swarming of those Ravenous
People, they made great Spoil, and used Intolerable Cruelties, not only here,
but in Scotland, being then Pagans or Heathens; so that Churches Abbeys,
Monasteries, were Burnt and Plundered, the Nuns Ravished, and all manner of
Miseries heaped upon the bleeding Nation, that a Barbarous Enemy could inflict.
They shot King Edmund to death at St. Edmonbsbury, his death putting the Town
in awe, and continued their Mischiefs till King Ethelred taking pity of his
Subjects, and finding he could not root out their Enemies by force, used
policy, he had at this time bought his Peace of them for Ten thousand Pounds a
Year: Notwithstanding which, they Compelled him to pay Forty thousand Pound a
Year: And Billited their Soldiers in Al^-Houses, to be a Spy upon their
Landlord, where he lived a lasie Life, and was called in honor, Lord Dane;
which is since corruptly turned, Jut Lurden, for an idle dronish Fellow, nor
were they so contended, but they took the privilege to lie with the Wives and
Daughters of those that entertained them. The Women with whom they lay a
Nights, were acquainted with the Kings design. Generally undertook themselves
to destroy the Ravisners of their Honor: And on November the 13th 1012. being
St. Brices day, the Danes having highly Feasted, and many of them Drunk, were
taken Napping by the Women, who with short. Knives they had privately conveyed
to bed; they destroyed all unless a very few, who were fallen upon by the Rabble
and most of them killed the next day: Seven of their Princes being Buried at
St. Clements in the Strand, which caused the Additional name of Danes to be
annexed to it. Domicellus, -la. Titles given John of Gaunt's Son and Daughter
in their Naturalization. Domino, a hood worn by Canons, also a Woman's mourning
veil. Doudon, o. a short fat Woman. Dorcas, g. a Deer or Roebuck. Doris, wife
to Nereus, and Mother of the Sea-Nymphs Nercides. Dorthy, g. the gift of God.
Dote assignanda, a writ for the Escheator, to assign a Dowry to the Widow of a
King's Tenant; swearing in Chancery not to Marry without the King's leave.
These are the King's widows. Dote, unde nibil habit, a writ of Dower for a
Widow of the land sold by her Husband, whereof he was so seized as the issue of
them both might have inherited, Doted, l. endowed having jointure. Dousabel, f.
Dulcebella, l. sweet and fair. Doucet, Doulcet, a Custard. Dowager, applied to
Widows of Princes, etc. Dower, Dowry, a Wives Portion. Dorie, o. a she-beggar,
trull. Dramatick-Poetry, Comedies and Tragedies. Drape, No. a farrow-Cow, whose
milk is dried up. Draw-latches, Robertsmen, Night Thieves. Disparagements, an
undervaluing, also the marrying of an Heir or Heiress under their degree. Di^e,
No. put Tow on a Distaff. Dodona, a City in Greece, near which Jupiter had an
Oracle in a wood whose trees were supposed to be vocal and to return the
answers of the Oracle. Dissarreation, l. a Roman ceremony at divorcement.
Disguise, f. Put into another guise or form. Deuterogamy, g. second Marriage.
Dey, o. Dairy-woman. Diana, the Maiden-Goddess of Woods and Hunting Twin-sister
to Apollo, by Jupiter and Latona the Moon. Tiapasm, pomander or perfume of dry
powders. Dictionary, l. Lexicon g. storehouse of words orderly digested and
explained. Dido, Queen of Carthage in Africa, she killed herself, because
Aeneas would not marry her, or Prather) because she would not be forced to
marry Jarbas King of Getulia. Denophoon, succeeding his Father Theseus, (in the
Government of Athens) forgot Phillis, whom he had married in Thrace driven
thither by storm, whereupon she hanged herself on an Almond-Tree. Denis, Diana,
a woman's name. Derrero, half woman, half fish an Idol Goddess at Askalon.
Dessert, the last course at a Feast. Drusilla, Dioclesians wife. Dryads, g. Oak
or WoodNymphs. D^^anira, Hercules's Wife, who slew herself, because he burnt
himself, to avoid the torment caused by the Shirt she gave him (to gain his
love) presented her by the Centaure nessus wounded by Hercules's Arrow, for
attempting to ravish her when carried by him over the River E^enas. Democrita,
a Roman Matron who killed her daughters and herself, being forbidden to follow
her banish^ Hu^b^nd A^^ipp^s, Danae, Daughter of Acrisius King of Argos.
Dandy-pr^^s, a small Coin made by Henry 7. also little Folks. Dandru^f, raff,
headseurs. Daphne, flying from (...) lust, was turned into a Laurel or a Bay
Tree. Darling, ( q. Dearling) fondling. Deabona, the Goddess Fortuna, and
sometimes the earth, called also Ops, Fatua, and Fauna, whipped to death with
myrtle by her Husband Faunus, for being drunk with wine of myrtle-berries. Dea
viri-placa, a goddess in whose Chapel Man and Wife were reconciled. Damophila,
the Cousin-German, Associate and Emulatrix of Sappho, and Wife of Damophilus
the Philosopher; she is said to have writ a Poem of Diana. Deborah, a great
Propheress in Israel, of whom such was her Repute at that time, that she was
Judge or Supreme Governess; her Divine Hymn upon the Deliverance of the (...),
shows her to be divinely Inspired with a Poetic Spirit. Debonnaire, ( Fr.)
gentle, mild, courteous, affable. Debosche Debauthe, from the Fr. D^sbaucher)
to corrupt, make lewd, or put out of order, to vitiate. Decorum, ( Lat.)
comeliness, honestly, good grace. (...), Apollo and Diana; the Sun and Moon: so
called from the famous Island (...) Latona at one birth brought forth Apollo
and Diana. Depil^tory ( Depilatorius) that makes the Hair fall; It (...) also
used substantively, for (...) Ointment, Salve, Water, etc which takes away the
(...). Deportment, ( Fr.) behavior, demeanor, carriage. Diadem, ( diadema) a
Kings Crown, or Wreath for the Head; it properly signifies a wreathed Head-band
with which the ancient Kings were contented, as thinking the Crown belonged
only to the Gods Cotgr. Diana, The Moon; Also a Goddess of Hunting, much
honored for her Chastity, having had many Temples dedicated to her; whereof
the chief was that at Ephesus, called the Temple of Diana; which for the
Spaciousness, Furniture and Workmanship, was accounted one of the Worlds
Wonders* It was 200 Years in Building contrived by Ctesiphon, being 425 foot
long, and 220 broad sustained with 127 Pillars of Marble, 70 foot high, whereof
27 were most curiously graven, and all the rest o^ Marble polished. It was
fired seven times, and lastly by Hirosiratus (that Night in which Alexander was
born) to get himself a Name. Hey^. Diapasm, ( diapasma) a Perfume, a Pomander,
a Medicine of dry Powders, that is either cast among Apparel (...) make them
smell sweet, or into a Wound, or superduosly into Drink. Rid. Diaperd or
Diapred, (Fr. Diapre) diversified with flourishes or sundry figures, whence ^e
call Cloth that is so diversified Diaper. Dieu and mon droit, (Fr.) God and my
Right. The Mot^o of the Kings Arms, first (...) (as some affirm) by Henry the
Eighth. Diffarreation ( diffarrea^io) a Sacrifice done between a Man and his
Wife at Divorcement: As Confarreation was at the Marriage. Rider. Digamist or
Digamite ( digamus or digama) a Man that has two Wives together, ^or a Woman
that has two Husbands, also one that marrys after his first Wife's death or
divorce. Dissing, ( procullus) a Child born when the Father is old, or the last
Child that Parents have; in some places called a Swill-pough. Di^chevel, ( Fr.)
to unloose the Hair, to unty, to pull the Hair about the Ears. Dispensatory, a
Book that teaches how to make all Physical Compositions. Dissonance, (
dissonantia) a discord in Tunes and Voices. Ditty, (from the Ital. detto, i.
dictum) a Rhyme expressed in words; and sung to a musical Tune. Min. Divorce, (
divortium a diversitate mentium) the Dissolution of Marriage, a Separation of
Man and Wife, which was (as our Savior witnesses, Matthew. 19.8.) first
permitted by Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 24.1. for the hardness of their
Hearts, that Men might rather put their Wives away, whom they grew weary of,
then use them with too great extremity to shorten their lives, as many did;
The Woman so divorced was to have of her Husband a writing (as St. Hierom and
Jesephus witness in lib. de ant. ^. c. 8.) to this effect, I promise that
hereafter I will lay no claim to thee: This Writing was called a Bill of
Divorce. But with Christians this Custom is abrogated, saving only in Case of
Adultery. The ancient Romans also had a Custom of Divorce, among whom it was as
lawful for the Wife to put away her Husband, as for the Husband to dismiss his
Wife; But among the Israelites this Prerogative was only permitted to the
Husband. See Repudiate. -- In our Common Law, Divorce is accounted that
Separation between two de facto married together, which is a vinculo
Matri^^^^^, non sou d mensa and (...). And thereof the Woman, so divorced,
received all again that the brought with her. This is only upon a Nullity of
the Marriage through some ^^^tial Impediment, as Consanguinity or Af^^nity
within the degrees forbidden, (...), impotency, or such like. Dodona, a City of
Epirus, near which stood a Grove of Oaks only dedicated to Jupiter, called
Dodonas Grove; the Oaks were said to speak, and were wont to give oraculous
Answers to those that came to consult them. Domini or Anno Domini, is the
Computation of time from the Incarnation of our Savior Jesus Christ. As the
Romans made their Computation from the Building the City of Rome; and the
Grecians numbered their Years by the Olympiads or Games called Olympic. So
Christians, in remembrance of the happy Incarnation, and blessed Birth of our
Savior, reckon the time from his Nativity. Domino, a kind of hood or habit for
the Head, worn by Canons; and hence also a fashion of vail used by some Women
that mourn. Dower, ( dos) signifies in Law, That which the Wife brings to her
Husband in marriage, Marriage, otherwise called Maritag^um good. Dower from
dotarium, That which she has of her Husband; after the Marriage determined, if
she outlive him, Glanvi^e 7. ca. 2. Bracton l. 2. ca. 28. Dory, a she Rogue, a
Woman-beggar, a lowzy Queen. Drol, ( Fr.) a good fellow, ^o on Companion, merry
Grig; one that cares not how the World goes. Dulcimer or Dulcimel, ( sambuca)
so called, qua^^ dulce melos i. sweet melody (...) musical Instrument; a
Sambuke. Dentitio, the time that Children breed Teeth, which is about the
Seventh Month, or later; and usually the upper Teeth come first, in some the
under; and amongst these, the Fore teeth first: Many times Fevers, Convulsions,
Loosnesses, etc. attend Children in the time of breeding Teeth. Distillatio, an
Extracti^^ of the moist or unctuous part^ which are rarefied into Mist, or
Smoke as it were, by the force of Fire. Distillation is performed by a Bladder,
by a Chemical Instrument called C^curbita (before described) by a Retort, by
Deliquium, by Filtri, by Descent; etc. and that either in Balneo Mariz, Sand,
Vapors, Dung, the Sun, a Reverberatory, etc. Dispensatorium, a Dispensatory, a
Book useful for Apothecaries, wherein all Medicines, at least the most usual,
are contained and prescribed; that they may be prepared in the Shops all the
Year round.
E.
EAde, for Eadith i. happiness. Sa. Eleanor, i. pitiful. gr. Ellena, ibid.
Elizabeth, i. The Oath of my God, or else it may be Elishbeth i. the peace or
rest ^f my God. Emmet, i. a Giver of help. Norm. Ephrah, (...) 1 Kin. ^ 19. i.
fertility or fruitfulness, (...) rather I will be fruitful. Esther, (...) i.
hidden from (...) sathar, ^e lay hid. Heb. Ethelburg, i. a Noble Keeper. G^.
and Sa. Etheldred, or Ethelred, i. noble advice, Ge. Eve, (...) Chavah, i.
^iving, or giving life; so called by her Husband Adam, because she was the
Mother (...), kol chav, i. omnium viventi^^m, of all living, Genesis 3.20. from
(...) Chajah, he lived. Eugenia, she that is nobly born, see Eugenius in Men's
names. Euphenie, i. she that is well spoken of, and has a good name and
report. Eutychia, (...), i. felicitas, i, happiness. Echiud, Queen of the
Scythians, with whom Hercules lay, and got on her three Sons, leaving a strong
Bow behind him; and ordaining that whoever of them, when they came to years,
could bend that Bow should Succeed her in the Kingdom; which only Scytha the
youngest could do, and so obtained it before his two Elder Brothers. Erho, a
Nymph, who being desperately in Love with Narcissus, and rejected by him, pined
and sighed herself into Air, and so became the shadow or counterfeir of a
Voice. Eg^ria, a Nymph beloved by Number a Pampilius, for her Wisdom, he told the
Romans he consuted her in all his great Affairs, and Compiled diverse Laws, and
Religious Customs, by her Advice, and made her to be in great Esteem with the
People: Some held her to be the Goddess who assisted at, Women's Labors, and
eased their pains in Childbirth. Elizabeth, Daughter of Henry the Eight, by
Queen Anna Bullein, Daughter of Sir Thomas Bullein; she was Queen o^ England
after the death of Queen Mary: And had a long and Glorious Reign. Of her see
more at large. Epicharis, a Woman of a mean Birth* but of great Courage and
V^rtue, ^eing Condemned before Nero for having a share in a Conspiracy ag^in^t
him, and being ordered to extreme torture, to make her Confess her Accomplices;
she bore it with such a Spirit and Courage, she shamed and daunted her
Torture^s, (...) could any (...) by the most viol^^^^ (...) but bring remanded
to (...) she killed herself to avo^d (...) Tyran's (...) Epponiva, Wife to
Julius Sabinus, a miracle of Conjugal Love for her Husband, taking Arms with
others against Vespatian, and being overthrown, hid himself in the Ruins of a
Tomb, where she came to him, supplied him with Food and Necessaries: Lived with
him, and brought him forth diverse Children in that dark and Solitary place; but
at last being discovered, they were put to death, which she bore with great
Courage and Patience, telling the Emperor, she had rather die than live, to
see the wicked days of his Reign. Erato, one of the Nine Mus^s, presiding over
Love Songs and Poems, she is generally painted like a Virgin in the Bloom of
her Youth, Frolic and Gay, Crowned with Roses and Myrtle, holding a Harp in
one hand, and a Bow in the other, with a Winged Cupid placed under her Elbow,
Armed with his Love-procuring Darts. Escher Niece to Mordicai of the Tribe of
Benjamin, when King (...) of Persia, had put away V^s^i his Queen, for
disobeying his Royal Mandate, she being brought unto him among other Virgins,
he was to pleased with her Beauty and Conversation* that he took her to Wife
and she became Instrumental in saving the Jewish Nation, then in Captivity from
the destruction Human had prepared for the^^ and turned it upon himself (...)
his House. Eudoria, Married to (...) dius the Emperor; she (...) a great Enemy
to St. (...), and declared for (...) against him, and (...) him to be banished,
but he (...) soon after re-called, but (...) some words against (...) setting
up of her Statue, she (...) procured his banishment and sided with Theophilus,
(...) soon after she miscarried and (...). Eudoria, Daughter of T^dosius
Junior, Wife to (...) the Second, she (...) Genseric into Italy to Reve^ her
Husbands death on (...) the Usurper, who (...) Rome, and carried her and (...)
Daughters away, but at (...) instance of Martin and (...) they were sent baek.
Eudoria, Daughter of L^ontius an Athenian Philosopher, who for her Wit and
Beauty was married to Theodosius the younger, Emperor of Rome having no other
portion to (...) her off. Eve, the Mother of all L^ing, placed in Paradise, and
there had continued happy, had not the Subtle Angel prevailed against her.
Eulogia, Sister to Michae^ Pelcologus the Greek Emperor, she had a great
Ascendant one her Brother, who dearly loved her, for the Care and Tenderness
she had over him in his Infancy but when he went to join the Greek Churches
with the Western, and she not able to diswade him from it, caused a Rebellion
to be raised in the Empire. Euridice, She was Daughter of Amyntas the third
King of the Macedonians, Married to Aridaeus natural Son to King Philip,
contending with Olim^ King Philips Wife, she was overthrown, and taken
Prisoner, when having sent her by the said Queen, a Silken String, (...)
D^gger, and a Dose of Poison, to take her Choice of what manner of death, she
would dye; she nothing daunted, took the first, and having prayed that Olympas
might come to the same distress, (which accordingly fell out) she hanged
herself. Euttochium, Daughter of Paula a Roman Lady, she was brought up under
St. Jerome and lived 35 Year in a Nunnery at Bethlehem. She was so well skilled
in most Languages, that she was styled the wonder of her Sex. Came, Sa. the
Mothers brother; also Gossip, Friend, No. Can, bring forth [young.] Carn, No.
to run (like Cheese.) Caves-dropper, one that listens under the Windows or
house-Eaves. Eye, how to govern it: -- Eyes are the Casements of the Body, and
many times by standing too much open, let in things hurtful to the Mind; a
wanton Eye is the truest Evidence of wandering and unsteadfast Thoughts, we may
see too much, if we be not careful in Governing our Eyes, and keeping them from
going astray, and returning with vain Objects to the Fancy and Imag^nation,
which making unhappy Impressions, they cannot be easily Obliterated. This made
the Princely Prophet, (when his Feet was betrayed by his Eyes, into the snare
of Lawless Lust) pray so earnestly against the danger, when he said, Lord turn
away my Eyes from beholding vanity, and hence appears our miseries that those
Eyes, that should be Limbecks of Contrition the Celterns of sorrow, should
become the Inlets of Lust, and the Portals to open and betray the whole body
into Sin and Folly by letting in dangerous Enemies to surpize the Soul, and
overcome it with Strong Temptations. -- Eyes thou fix on Ambition, makes Honor
and Greatness, their Objects, which they convey and Represent as a solid good
to the mind, which frames the Project to attain to the Equipage and Grandeur,
who make a splendid show of Gilded Clothes and Titles in the World and then a
To^ment and (...) ensues if the party ^e frui^rated in aspiring to the height
she Aims at; Riche^ sometimes are greedily (...) in at the Eyes, and then
Covetousness winds it self into the Soul and brings along with it a thousand
Inconveniences, as Care, Grief, Fear, Distrust, Pining, Discontent, and an
Unsatisfied Mind, even with largest Fortune. The Loose and Lacivious Eye makes
Beauty its Object; and whilst it sends abroad its Amourous Glances to take
others, it Captivates the Mind of its owner, and binds it in the Chains of
Slavery: Many who have tampered in Jest, have been taken in Earnest; so have we
seen a Cautious Fish nibbling at the Bate, in hopes to get it off without
hazarding the danger of the Hook, till engaging too far he instead of feeding
himself has been made the Anglers food. Therefore Ladies, to prevent the
Malady, which like a spreading Contagion disperses it self into most Societies,
you must keep your Eyes within Compass, from wandering as much as possible, and
resolve with your self, not to set any value or esteem upon earthly things,
more than may be taken off if reason requires it; when the comeliness of any
creature takes up your thoughts too largely: then to remove that Object: Place
the Eyes of your Mind upon the Glorious and Transcendent Beauties, and
Loveliness of your Creator; remember that God alone is the only worthy Object
to fix our Minds on, that we may have no desire to take it off, when earthly
things though valuable, are of (...) duration, and lost almost (...) soon as
possessed, and (...) times create troubles and misfortunes, carrying in
themselves no solid or substantial Conte^ment. Remember what a misery Dinah, by
giving her Eye to wandering, brought upon herself and others. Then (...)
preserve a purity of Heart, (...) Intention too strong to be invaded, or at
least overcome you must keep a watchful Guard over every Sense for if the Eye
that is the light of the Body, be evilly disposed the rest of the Senses (...)
needs be dimmed and darkened: Consult Chastity and Modesty, and as far as their
Rules allow, you may proceed with (...) but all beyond is danger, which is to
be shunned and avoided, though the Eyes of other Creatures, have no Objects but
the visible Creation; and naturally look down on the Earth, (...) which their
irrecoverable (...) must return: Yet we have that more Glorious to Contemplate,
which only can make us truly happy, for Heaven we ought to prepare for, our
sight naturally tends thither, and the Eye of Faith Penetrates and gives the
Upright sense, a conversation there, before it (...) off it is encumbrance of
Clay. Give no occasion then Ladies, for any to tax your Eyes with any thing
that is not modest, comely, and allowable; consider in company at home, if of
the different Sex, nor in your walkings abroad to give them their wanderings,
but let your mind be upon them, to keep them in their due bounds, ^east
becoming a Prey to others, you are Enslaved, or if you make a Prey of others,
your Conquest may however prove very troublesome and uneasy to you. The Eyes
are not the only dangerous things about you. The Tongue many times for want of
good Government, betrays you into diverse Misfortunes and Inconveniences, of
which we shall briefly Treat. Elizabath, Queen of England, her sufferings. --
Elizabeth Queen of England, ^tands to this day the wonder of her Sex, as well
relating to God's Providence in her many Deliverances, in the Reign of Q. Mary
her Sister; as when ^he came to enjoy the Crown herself, for all the open Force
and private Plots, and Con^piracies against her, were frustrated, whilst she
was in the Tower. Bishop Gardener ^ent a Counterfeit Warrant for ^er Execution,
but upon the Leiutenants going to know the truth at White Hall, it was ^et
aside: And such power ^ad that aspiring Priest with the Queen, that he was not
so much as Repremanded, for go^ng about to Murder, under a pretext of Law, the
best of Princesses, and Sister to his Sovereign. -- Every day they Labored to
bring her to destruction, for no other reason but that she was a Protestant;
Once the boards were fired under her Lodgings; and whilst she was at Woodstock,
under the Guard of one Sir Henry Beddingfield, whom she called her Jailer, a
Russian belonging to him, attempted to murder her, but was prevented: At
another time Gardener sent one to dispatch her, but Beddingfield being gone to
London, had left strict order with his Brother, that none should see, or speak
with her till his return: So that the Villain fearing his Bloody purpose was
discovered, returned without success. Her Sister dying, and she coming to the
Crown, never was Queen or King more beloved by Subjects, nor shined more
Glorious in the Actions of a Reign: And when her Clandestin Enemies were
defeated, they brought by their Solicitations, the power of Spain against her,
whose Invincible Armada, was destroyed almost without fighting, and upon the
rumor of this Invasion: She led her Army into the Field in Person: And riding
through her Camp at Tilbury, with her Leaders-Staff; She made this Encouraging
Oration, worthy of so Heroic a Queen. -- Even my Good People, Her Speech to
her Army
We have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed
how we commit our selves to Armed Multitudes for fear of Treachery, but I
assure you, I do not desire to live to mistrust my Faithful and Loving People:
Let Tyrants fear, I have ever so well behaved my self, that under God, I have
always placed my Chief Strength and Safeguard in the Loyal Hearts and Good
Wills of my Subjects: And therefore, I am come among you, as you see at this
times, Not for my Recreation and Disport, but being resolved in the midst and
heat of the Battle, to Live or Dye among you, to lay down for my God and for my
Kingdom, and for my People, mine Honor and my Blood Even in the Dust. I well
know, that I have the Body but of a Weak and Feeble Woman, but I have a Heart
of a King* yea, of a King of England too: And I think it a Scorn that Parma or
Spain, or any Prince in Europe, should dare to Invade the Borders of my Realm,
to which rather than any Dishonor shall grow by me: I my self will take up
Arms, I will be your General and Judge, and the Rewarder of every one of your
Virtues in the Field; I know already, for your forwardness, you have deserved
Rewards and Crowns, and We do assure you on the word of a Princess that shall
be duly paid (...): In the mean time my ^eutenant General Leicester, shall be
in my stead, than whom never Princess Commanded a more Noble and Worshire
Subject; not doubting but by your obedience to your General, your Concord in
the Camp, and your Valor in the Field: We shall shortly have a famous Victory
over these Enemies of my God, of my Kingdom, and of my People. -- Elizabeth our
Famous Queen, when the Fleet she sent against Spain, was ready to set Sail made
this Pious Prayer for their Success, which for an Example to others we have
inserted. Elizabeth Queen of England, her Prayer.
MOst Omnipotent Maker and Guider of the World, that only Searchest and
Fathomest the bottom of our Hearts, and in thom (...) the true Originals of all
(...) intended Actions; that by thy foresight, do truly discer^, how that
no Malice of Revenge nor requital of Injury, (...) desire of Bloodshed, nor
greediness of Gain, has bred (...) Resolution of setting forth (...) Army and
Navy; but a careful Providence, and way Watch, that no neglect of Fo^^ or
over-surety of Heaven, might breed either Danger (...) us, or Glory to them.
(...) being our true Grounds, (...) humbly beseech thee, with bended knees, to
prosper this great Work; and with the best (...)winds guide the Voyage speed
the Victory, and make the Return to be the Advancement of thy Glory; the
Triumph of their Fame, and a means of surety to the Realm, with the least loss
of English Blood. To these Devout Petition's, Lord, give thy Blessed Grant,
etc. Nor was this Prayer fruitless, for the Fleet in a short time returned with
Victory and Rich Spoils taken from the Enemy in diverse places, and were always
Triumphant on the Ocean during her Reign. -- Ever it was observed in this Great
and Glorious Queen, that in all her Victories, and Successes, she was never
swelled or pussed with Ambition or vain Glory, but Atributing nothing to
herself, Gave all the Glory to God, (...) is the alone Giver of Victories, who
by weak things can Confound the Insulting Pride and Boasts of Power, and by a
few, lay Innumerable Armies in the Dust.

Elizabeth Couper, An Example of Christian Courage and Piety. -- Elizabeth
Couper, being a very Religious Woman in the way of the Reformed Worship, in
King Edward the Sixths Reign: Was however, afterward through Temptation,
Persuasion and Fear, prevailed with, to Sign a Recantation at St. Andrews
Church in Norwich; after which she scarce got home, before she found her
Spirits so afflicted, that she was scarce able to support herself, and the
Agony of her Mind; all that Night, she was restless, and though she prayed to
God, she could find no sweet influence of his Holy Spirit refreshing her
afflicted Soul: She labored under this anguish for a time; but perceiving it
increased upon her more and more, even almost to be Intolerable; she resolved
rather to hazard her life, than to continue under the Almighties displeasure,
and so went to the same Church and openly Renounced her Recantation, for which
she was sent to Prison, and soon after found herself full of Joy, and so
continued with a Christian Courage, till she Sealed the Testimony of her Faith
with her Blood. Elizabeth, a King of Hungaries Daughter, and Wife to Lewis the
Landigrave of Tharengia: Amidst the Pomps and Glories that Replenished the
Court, was so Humble, Modest and Meek, that she put off her costly Apparel, and
in disguise made it her Business to Visit and Relieve the Necessities of the
Poor; and when she went to her Devotions, she laid aside her Greatness, and
declining from her State, went and kneeled among the poorer sort of People.
After the death of her Husband, she retired from Populous Cities with a small
Train of Attendance, and even thinking them too many quited all, and (...) her
Fathers House, that the King of Heaven might be delighted in her Beauty. She
went on a Pilgrimage, giving her Riches and Ornaments, to relieve the
necessities of the Poor, except so much as built for their relief an Hospital,
and some small matter to endow it, wherein she in Person upon her return
Ministered to the Sick; and was very diligent that nothing should be wanting
that might contribute to their Relief and Recovery. Her Father ^^ill being on
the Regal Throne of a Potent Kingdom, who loved her entirely, was impatient of
her absence, but she Excused herself, with all Modesty and Gravity, That she
had weaned herself from the World and its Vanities, and entreated she might be
obliged to return no more to it. A Kingdom was but a small Bribe, and seemed
nothing to her, in Comparison to those Joys the had in view. Elphlerda, Sister
to Edward a Saxon King before the Conquest, and Wife to Etheldredus Duke of
Mercia; was so renowned for her Courage, and Bravery of Mind, that few Nations
ever aff^rded a more Famous Virago, She (her Husband dying) overthrew the Welsh
in several Battles, who made Incursions into her Territories, and in bloody
Fig^ts, ^ut the Danes to the rout: She bui^t diverse Ruined Cities, and (...)
her bleeding Country, to a smiling Condition; with whose Fame and Praises our
Histories abound. And King Henry the Fifth, whilst Prince of Wales, admiring
her Courage and Conduct, made certain Latin Verses in Commendation of her. We
might under this head of Examples, mention many more, no le^s Famed for Piety
and Vert^e, than Valor and Renown; but seeing we are to scatter them as
Diamonds and Pearls to Illustrate the whole Work, these they may here (...) to
the Credit and Honor of the Fair Sex. Eleanor Queen of England her Virtuous
and wonderful Example of Love to her Husband. -- Edward Son (...) Henry the
Third King of England, resolving to pass into the Holy Land, with diverse other
Princes, for the Recovery of it, and the City of Jerusalem, which the Infidels
had taken away from the Christians and violently oppressed them. Eleanor
Daughter of Ferdinand the Third K. of Castile, his cha^e and virtuous Wife;
would by no means be persuaded to stay behind, but resolved in that long and
dangerous Voyage to accompany him: No entr^ties, nor the hazards laid before
her, could prevail with her, to be without her Husbands Company, saying, She
knew she must die, and if so dyed in the Land of Promise, she was as near if
not nearer in Heaven, as in any other place. And accordingly she accompanied
him, undergoing cheerfully the hardships that attended the tedious Voyage. This
Prince in Palestine, did wonders by his Valor and Conduct: Making his very
Name a terror to the Infidels, so that they being every where worded, the
Turkish Governor of Damascus, sent a Villain seemingly to treat with him, but
indeed to dispatch him; for as he was delivering his Letters, he stabbed him
three times in the Arm, with a poisoned Dagger; whereupon the prince felled him
With his Fist, and the Guards coming in, cut him in pieces. -- Excessive was
the the pain, yet he bore it with a manly fortitude, and the nature of the
poison such, that his Surgeons concluded them Morral, unless any one would
hazard their Life by continual sucking out the poison; the which when all his
Favorites declined, His virtuous Wife undertook cheerfully; so that God
blessing her willingness, the Prince recovered, and she remained uninjured by
the poison: For which he entirely loved her all her Lifetime, and when he was
King, Erected Monuments to her Memory, in diverse parts of England; which
remained many of them till the time the Crosses, etc. were demolished in the
late Civil War. Eul^lia, a Noble Virgin of Portugal, contemning all Earthly
Glories as transitory things, in which was no solid or substantial good, laid
aside, her Treasure, and Splendid Attire for the Adorning her Body, and only
took care to dress her Soul, That it might be an acceptable Spouse, fit for the
embraces of the Glorious Bridegroom; the made Sobriety, M^desty, Chastity,
Works of (...) and Charity her daily Familiars, she took her Love off from
Worldly things and placed it on those above: And lived the life of a Saint; a
rare Example to those that are young and beautiful as she was, to Pattern out,
if necessity requires it; and the Immortal Soul be at stake for the trifling
vanitie^ of this World: See thus continued in Piety herself to instruct others,
(...) hor Per^ecution arose, and the (...) viz. the (...), mentioned in St.
John's (...), her the (...) to fly into the (...) the Flood, that the Dra^ (...)
out of his (...) resolved with (...) true Christian Courage. (...) those that
were commanded by the Emperors Edict, to Sacrifice to the Idols, or the
Representations of the seigned Heathen (...) To be, (...). And though her
Parents who loved her (...), labored to avert the Danger that Threatened, by
persuading her to do it more privately: Her Zeal drove her to do it in the
Presence of the Enemies of the Christian Faith, saying, that those who out of
Fear or Favor refused to profess the name of Christ openly, were not worthy of
his Love, and the Glories he had prepared for those that Love and Fear him.
They however by Tears and Entreaties prevailed with her to remove, out of the
Populous City, to their Country House; but so great was the fervor of her
Zeal, that hearing many through fear, daily Apostatized: she Escaped the
vigilence of those that were to observe her, and went to their Houses to
confirm and Strengthen such as were not fallen, and to recover such as were;
Which being taken notice of by some Envious Persons, she was delivered to the
Prefect, one superstitiously Devoted to the Heathen Idolatry, and Thristing
after the Blood of the Christians, who Reproached her and Reviled her as a
Sower of Sedition, and a Stirrer up of the People to Trouble, and Molest the
Peace and Quiet of the Empire, and as a Desptser and Con^a^ner of their Gods.
To all which she answered with much modesty and Mildness, but when what ever
she could allege, availed her nothing, she told them, That her Life was all
they could Exact, and she was willing to dye for th^^ Faith she Professed. Then
he began to persuade her to Renounce it, as being Inflamed with her Beauty,
promising to take her in Marriage if she would comply; but she with
detestation, refused his proser in those terms, which so enraged him, laying
aside all bowels of Commiseration to so youthful and tender a Lady; he called
for the Executioners, and ordered them to make ready the Rack, upon which void
of all shame, they stretched her naked, and disjointed those Limbs, the sight
of which would have charmed Barbarians into wonder; yet she took it cheerfully.
and sung Praises, That she was counted worthy (...) suffer for his Name who had
Redeemed her with his Precious Blood. Upon which she was cast to the wild
Beasts, kept in those times one purpose, to make the Tyrrant^ pastime in the
slaughtering and devouring Christians, having before she had been taken of the
Rack, been tortured with another Engine of Cruelty, called, the Iron Grate,
which broke her Arms and Legs; and had her Ivory Breasts (...) with hot Irons,
Yet in all (...), through his strength who supported her weakness, she became
more than Conqueror. Crampies of Female Courage, Constancy, and ma^^^ther
singular Virtues -- Agn^s Gabril, being questioned about her Religion, had
Twelve Articles put up against her, which she denied, and put her Adversaries
upon the proof, when (strange for one to Imagine) they produced her husband and
two Sons, whom they had persuaded before to abjure their Religion, and caused
them to give Evidence against her: But she bore all with a Christian Patience,
and being condemned, she joyfully embraced the flames. -- Anne Hunter hearing
her Son William who lived at Brentwood in Essex, was condemned to the flames by
Bonner Bishop of London, in Queen Mary's days: She together with his Father
came to him, and finding there was no hopes of Life for him* but by a
Renunciation of his Religion, they were so far from persuading him to it, that
they fervently prayed to God, he might persevere in it, and continue constant
to the end; in that good way he had begun: The Mother adding, that she thought
herself happy that she had born such a Child as could find in his heart, to
lose his Life for Christ's sake; to which th^s Son cheerfully answered; For the
little pain that I shall have, which is but for a Moment! Christ has promised
me a Crown of Everlasting Joy: His Mother almost Transported with this
Expression, fell on her knees, and said, I pray God to strengthen thee my Son,
to the end, I think thee as well bestowed, as any Child I ever bore. --
Adelicia, a Gentlewoman about 23 Years of Age, coming from Gascoin to Paris, to
join herself with a Church there, was betrayed to the Magistrates, and
condemned to be burnt; which she bore with admirable Patience, but Gods
Judgment overtook her Prosecutors, for they quarrelling about the price of her
blood, slew each other, -- A Woman and her Son in the Low Countries, being
condemned to be burnt alive, and their Ashes to be sprinkled in the Air: As
they were carried back to Prison, they said, now blessed be God, who causes us
to Triumph over our Enemies; This is the wished for hour, the gladjoin day is
come Let us not therefore be forgetful, to be thankful for that honor God does
us, in thus conforming us to the Image of his Son: Let us remember those that
have trodden this path before us, for this is the highway, to the Kingdom of
Heaven, and being brougt it to to the Stake, they sung Praises to God in the
flames. -- A^ Potten and John T^unchfield, in the Reign of Queen Mary, being
Imprisoned at I^^^ich, one of them before she was apprehended, was by her
Friends persuaded to avoid the threatening danger by flight, but ^rong in Faith,
and Chrian (...), Courageously she reply^d I know very well that being
Persecuted in one place, it is lawful for me to fly to another: But I am tied
to a Husband, and have many young Children; and I know not how my Husband,
being a Carnal Man, will resent my departure from him: Therefore, I am
resolved, for the Love of Christ and his Truth, to stand the worst Extremity
And so being apprehended, was Condemned to the Flames, and dyedeou ragiously.
-- Ama^onians, were a Warlike Women in part of Scythia, who held a Female
Government, and Warred with diverse mighty Princes; maintaining their Laws and
Customs by Policy, and by the Sword. Penthisilia, one of their Queens, came
with a Thousand Virago's to Troy, and assisted Priamus against the Greeks,
where she and most of her Women, Fighting Valiantly, and Acting wonders in
Arms, were at length sl^in. -- Athenias, though of mean Parentage, yet of
Excellent Wisdom, Learning and Education, beyond what could be expected from
the degree of her Birth, was for these and other good. Qualities, preferred to
be an Empress, when diverse Great Princesses, Rich and Powerful in Friends, and
had Kingdoms to their Dower, were refused. -- Aspasia a Meletian Virgin, was so
excellent in all Philosophical Contemplations, and fluent in f^^tori^^, (...)
the Wise and Renowned Socrates, that Mirror of Philosophy; confesses without
blushing, that he imitated her in his Facultas Politica. -- Amalasuntha Queen
of the Ostrogothes in Italy, was not only Learned in the Latin and Greek
Tongues, but speak exceeding fluently all the Languages that were spoke in the
Eastern Empire, now possessed by different Nations. -- Amesia, a Modest Roman
Lady, being falsely accused of a great Crime, and ready to incur the Pretorial
Sentence; she with a Manly yet Modest Courage stepped up and with an Audible
Voice, and Becoming Gesture, pleaded her own Cause so Eloquently and
Effectually, that by the public Suffrages, she was acquitted of all
Aspersions, and her Accuser severely punished. -- Apolonia, a Virgin of
Alexandria, for speaking boldly in the Defense of her Faith, had her Teeth
plucked out in a rude manner, by the Tormentors: She was doomed to the Flames,
and willingly snbmitted, Rejoicing and Gloriously Triumphing over Death by her
Patience and Constancy in suffering. -- Alceste, Queen to Admetus King of
Greece willingly resigned herself up to death, to redeem the health and life of
her Husband, in Sucking a Poisonous Wound he had received in the War. --
Agrippina, the Mother of D^m^^^ Nere, was killed by he^ unnatural Son, and
ripped up that he might see the Womb wherein he had lain; though she had been
so careful of his welfare, that though whilst he was a private Man, she was
told her destiny by a Chaldean Astrologer, if he came to be Emperor; she
however preferred his Advancement, before her Life, saying, I care not, though
I dye, so he may attain the Empire. -- Alice, Countess of Salisbury, being
frequently Importuned by King Edward the Third, to yield to his Lustful desires
and often denied him, he grew impatient of delay, and resolved to take by force
what he could not get by entreaty, when being brought into his Presence, in a
manner by Constraint, and be renewing his Request, she fell at his feet with a
Flood of Tears gushing from her fair Eyes, able to Mollefie the most obdurate
heart, she thus humbly besought him not to violate her Chastity, viz. Whereas
her unhappy Destiny, had brought her before his Presence, as an Innocent Lamb
committed to the Sacrifice; She most humbly Craved that his Majesty could be
pleased to grant her one Request, he provided much a Solemn Oath he would; Then
she humbly besought him to draw his Sword and take away her Life, and (...)
Pray for (...) Breath, (...) Monarch, and that it would remain as a stain upon
his Honor; she renewed her Request, that she might be suffered to dye by her
own hand, rather than to lose her Honor, and pulling out a Dagger, concealed
in her Garments, was about to give the Fatal Blow, which so astonished the
King, that taking it from her, he laid aside his first Resolutions, and as the
Mirror of Chastity, made her his Queen. Eloquence, Eloquence of Speech, Se^^ger
calls it, The Garment of Nature and says it covers the Soldier with Arms for
necessity, or as a Gown the Senator for Profit, and as a more dainty Garment
for the Courtier and Citizen, for pleasure and profit. It consec^^teth the
(...) R^^^ons of Men's Hearts, by the Participation of one another thoughts:
And we can call Discourse by no (...) Title, than the vehicle of the (...)
These were the Ancient Decrees of Truth, they thought it a happiness to have
their (...) (...) enlightened with a weight of Labor to search it, but the
glory or human Nature to speak us Thoughts are but the Children of the (...),
as Speech is of Thoughts: The Prudence of whose (...) of excellent use to (...)
view it either in the (...) or (...) no small Wisdom to be used in the framing,
and the material of ordinary Discourse, every Speech acquaints us with the
matter we ask, or the mind of the Speaker, which is delivered: The perfection
of the Art of Speech to others, consists in a volubility of Application, and if
a Lady could come to the Excellency of it, she may speak to a hundred persons,
and yet vary her style to each; which Art Alexander the Great, seems well to
have known, whilst he Animated his Soldiers against the Persians in various
Dialects. The Avaritious, with hopes of great Treasures and Spo^ls; the
Ambitious, he incensed with aspiring to Honor; and the Malicious, he provoked
with a Remembrance of the former Grugdes and Hatred between the two Nations. --
Thus Speeches that have an Edge or Point, enter sooner the Affections, than
Dull and Slow Expressions; nor would it be unuseful to have the knowledge of
the several Forms of Speech; of sudden Questions, of Suspended Answers, and
great varieties of others, in which it may be thought no small Policy consists:
Together with the apprehensions of the Colo^rs of Praise and Vice, and Virtue:
But in the use of these one would have rather the largeness of understanding,
to turn ours self in with, dexterity; than to be tied to the straightness of a
few Rules of Remembrance. To have Wisdom grounded in the Hea^^ and not too much
in the Tongue becomes Policy; (...) on all occasions ought to become the Person
that use them; as when you speak before a Prince, you must (...) an Oration
worthy of his he^^^ing; if to one of mean Capacity, your style must be suited
to his Understanding, Se^^^ approves not Speech to be Excellent, when words are
(...) quickened with the Life (...) Reasons, but are only uttered with the
Plausibility of (...) Speaker: And again Immitation of others, however useful,
yet is servil, because it should come from the fluence of happy C^gitations,
not Imitations.B^ this is rather to be referred (...) the Characters of Style
and Ora^ory, than to a serious Observator of Eloquence makes for the Credit of
the matter, but to speaking agreeably (...) whom you direct your Speech shows
more of the Wisdom (...) the Person. Those who have the Style of Eloquence,
^^^ther use the applause of it for pardon of faults, than for ^^^frage to
Virtues Merits. T^^^ to know the parts of Speech is not only the part of a good
Grammarian, but a Po^^^^. But where there is not a n^^ral Promptness, it may be
improved (if the speech be (...) disordered with Impediments with Reading of
Books, which will furnish the memory with apt words, Eloquence improved by
Reading of Books, etc.
and the understanding with a true method of digesting and delivering them to
the best advantage. In Books the relations of Affairs are framed in the mould
of the Understanding, by way of Expression, which makes those things that are
writ, have a shape and appearance of a more perfection than those that are
done. Books if well accepted, are only freed from the power of Oblivion; things
that are gained in Discourse, may be length of time slip out of our Memories,
but Books are our Remembrancers, and lay them always before our Eyes,
Communicating to us the Wisdom and Eloquence of the Ancients, as well as the
Moderns; that we may order out Discourse according to the best Rules laid down
for Instruction. The Ancient Poets from hence promised to themselves, an
immortality of Name, as concluding all other things subject to the Inconstancy
of Affairs, and Period of Time: They have Fabled that in the end of the Third
of every Man's Life, there is a certain Coin affixed, upon which is Engraved the
Name of the Deceased Party, which (as soon as the fatal Sister ^as cut) she
throws into the River Lethe, but over the River flies a great Company of
various Birds, which catch up the Coin in their Beaks before it sinks, and
carrying it a little way, drop it carelessly; but among them (they say) there
are some Swans, and if they light on a Coin, they carry it to the Temple of
Minerva, and devote it to perpetuity. Books are the Coins on whom Men's names
are writ, those of an ordinary flight endure but for a time, but being
carelessly scattered are lost in Oblivion; but where they are truly valuable and
praise worthy, they are carried on the wings of Fame to Posterity: Books are
the best Councillors, the best Companions, and best Heirs of any ones
knowledge, they be the Monuments wherein are reposed the Sacred Relics of
Wisdom and Understanding, from whence such Eloquence, may be extracted as may
(...) a very Graceful Adora^^^^ to the Speech, and know how to Express your
words in Season, is the best way to sit you for all Companies, and
Conversations; however, let what is spoken at any time be to the purpose, and
as brief as may be, for long Harangues, though never ^o Eloquent grow ^^esom
and ^^dious for the Art of Speaking, is to speak a l^^^le, that may signify a
great (...) in a few Sentences or Words. Cr^^il^^^ of Women, in the Creat^^^.
-- With an excellent State (...) the presence of a (...) What attractive beauty
in the Eye? What an admirable disposure in the contexture of every part? So as
I cannot sufficiently wonder at the stupidity of that mere Scholastical Wooer:
Who being in the way of preferment, received a very free welcome from a
Gentleman nearly neighboring, whose aim it was to bring him into acquaintance
with a kinswoman of his, hoping it would be a competent advancement for her, by
matching them together. All access, which promised all good success, was
admitted him; with such opportunity, as might have induced another Zen^^^ates
to enter into a pirley of Love. But hear how this amorous Scholar acquitted
himself, as if his Soul by a strange transmigration had passed into that dull
Z^^^^^tes, or Zenophanes into his in thinking Love to be composed of Earth! One
Winter evening was the Q^^ntilian with that lovely Dansel left together;
purposely (if there were left any beatings of Love in his pulse) to break the
matter unto her. She poor Wrench, long expected from this Predicament of Fancy
some pleasing encounter or other; but ^^thing was done by this (...) there
(...) on both sides, without the (...); till such time as (...) apprearing a
little out of her skirts; (...) received from her affectio^^ Scholar, after
some fea^^^^ pumping, this lovely pieced Rhetoric: Surely Mistress you have a
goodly fair Fo^^^ God be praised. How meanly was Beauty bestowed, to become an
object to his du^^ Fancy, who knew not how to value it? Though, no doubt, with
that excellent Geometrician, he could well enough gather by the proportion of
her Foot, the entire Feature; which would wound him as deadly to the Heart, as
Achilles w^^ wounded in his Heel. -- It^^ the Eye that conveys Love (...) the
heart; curious Models (...) to dull Spectators, move (...) admiration, and
consequently leave but a weak impression. To see a Compaspe portrayed in her
Colors; her V^^^ enazured; her sweet Smiles shadowed; her Love-enthralling
Eyes sparkled; and all the^^ with a native Art, and (...) Color displayed,
would make their Apelles to do what he did: Whence we read, that Alexander, the
Worlds Monarch, not only affecting, but adm^^ing the Art of Apelles; to
parallel his skill with an equal subject; commanded him on a time to Paint
Campaspe naked who was then held the Beauty of that Age; which Apo^^^^ having
done, his Pencil purchased him a pen^ive he^^^ falling in Love with her who was
his Pi^^^^ and wh^^^ Love he despaired to compass ever: Which Alexander having
perceived, he gave him her. The like incomparable Art was shown by Zenxes, upon
the Beauties of Croton's five Daughters; which Pictures took more Hearts, than
his Grapes had before deceived Birds. Elizabeth Carew, wrote the Tragedy of
Mariam. Elizabetha Joanna We^^ous, an English Poetess of some repute in the
esteem of Farnaby. Etinna, a Poetess of Tros who is said to have writ a Poem in
the Doric Dialect, consisting of 300 Verses: She dyed at Nineteen Years of Age.
Eurhesia, an unknown Poe^ess except by a fragment of 32 Latin Verses. Echo or
Echo, ( Gr.) a resounding, or giving again of any noise, or voice in a Wood,
Valley, or Hollow place. Poets feign, that this Echo was a Nymph so called,
who being rejected by one whom she lev'd, pined away for sorrow in the Woods,
where her voice still remains, answering the Out cries of all complaints.
Esseminate, ( essoeminatus) Woman-like, nice, wanton. Eleanor, a Woman's name
from Helena, i.e. pitiful. Elizabeth, ( Hebr.) the God of Oath, or (as some
will) Peace of God, or quiet rest of the Lord. Mantuan playing with it makes it
Eliza-bella. Min. ridiculously compounds it of the Hebrew word El. i. Deus, and
the Greek Isa and Beta. Elopement, (a Law Term) is when a married Woman leaves
her Husband, and dwells with the Adul^erer, by which, without voluntary
Submission, and reconcilement to him, she shall lose her Dower, Stat. West. 2.
c. 34. Sponte virum mul^er fugiens, and adultera fa'cta,
Dote sua careat; nisisponse sponte retr^^ta.
Elysium or Elysian fields, ( Campus Elysius) a Paradise, into which the
Heathens believed the Souls of the Just went after their departure hence. This
Elyzium is meant by Virgil, when he says, Devenere locos lotus, and amaend vir^^
For^on nemorum, (...) beaten.
E^bellish, (Fr. (...)) to beautify, garni^h, adorn bedeck, trim up, or set
out unto the Eye. Embryon, ( embryo) a Child in the Mother's Womb, before it
has perfect shape; and by Metaphor, any thing before it has Perfection.
Epithalamy, ( epithalamium) a Bridal Song, or Poem or a Song at a Wedding in
Commendation of the pa^^^^^ married; Such also is that of Stella in Statius,
and of (...) in Catullus etc. It is so called from the Greek (...), i.e.apud,
and Thalamus* a Bedchamber, but more properly a Bride-chamber* because this
Song was used to be sung at the Door of the Bride-chamber, when the Bride
bedded. There are two kinds of Epithalamies* the one used to be sung at night,
when the married couple entered Bed; the other in the morning to raise them up.
Min. Erato, one of the Nine Muses, who (as Ovid says) Nomen amoris habet. Eve
the Wife of Adam; from the Heb. Evah, i.e. living or giving Life. Adam so
called his Wife, because she was the Mother of every living thing. Eugenia, (
Gr.) Nobleness or Goodness of Birth or Blood. Eye-bite, to bewitch with the
Eyes. Erhidne* a Scythian Queen, who had three Children at a birth by Hercules.
Edessleda, Ehseda, governed the Kingdom prudently eight Years after the death
of her Husband Ethelred, King of the Merc^ans. El (...), Cu. a Stepmother.
Emme, a Woman's name, either as Anne or Eigiva, helpgiver. Endomment de la plus
belle (...) Widows dower of Lands ^olden in Soc^age, as the fairer or better
part. Endea^ion, a Shepherd in Enge^-(...). Bright angel. Love with the Moon,
(...) stops every night to kiss him being cast into a perpetual (...) on the
Top of Le^^mus Hill. Ephiatres, g. the Nightmare. Epiraene, g. comprehending
both Sexes under one gender. Erigone, Daughter of L^rus, who hanged herself for
her Father's death, the Constellation Virgo. Eriphile, for a Bracelet betrayed
her Husband Amphi^^as to the Theban Wars, to (...) Destruction. Eros, g. Love,
Cupid. Ester, ( f. Estre) c. Substance, State or Being. Esther, h. Secret.
Eur^dire, being fetched from Hell by her Husband Orphen was snatched back
again, because he looked back on her before she arrived upon Earth Erp^^tant, [
fee-] tail, (...) having Lands given to a M^^ and the Heirs of his Body, (...)
F.
Fabia, a Beam. Faith, a Name commonly used. Felice, i. Happy. Florence, i.
Flourishing. Florida, i. decked (...) Flowers. Flaminea, i. Fiery. Fortune, as
if vertu^^, ^^vertendo, so called for her Mutability and Inconstancy. Francis,
i. Free. Frideswid, i. very free, or truly free. Fa^rada, Third Wife to
Charlemaign, a Woman of such Ambition and Cruelty, that the People not being
able to endure it, and she at the same time being countenan^'d by her Husband,
they deposed them both, and set up, Peppin, one of Charlemaign's natural Sons.
Faussa, the Wife of Constantine the Great, falling in Love with Crispus her
Husband's Son by another Wife, and he refusing to comply with her Lustful
desires; she accused him of attempting her Chastity, whereupon without
sssmination he was put to ^^eath; but the Wickedness turning afterward to
light, the Emperor caused her to be (...) in a hot Bath. Feronia, a Goddess of
the Pagans, to whom they attri^^^e the Care of Wood, and is ^o called from her
Temple ^ear Feronia, not far from a Wood Consecrated to her; and those that
worshipped her are said to walk on burning Coals, (...)-footed without any
hurt; and in (...) Temple they Enfranchised their Cap or Hat, in ^^ken their
Condition was al^^red. Flora, the Goddess of Flowers, said to be the Wife of
Zepherus, or the gentle West-wind, which with friendly Gales in Spring time
clears the Air, and makes Flowers to grow, though Lactantius will have her to
be a Roman Curtezan, who was w^nt to set up a May Pole with Garlands of Flowers
before her door, to allure Young Men to her House by which Stratagem she got
much Riches, which she leaving to the Commonwealth when she died, was for her
Liberality styled a Goddess; and the Games called Ludos Florales celebrated to
her Memory. Fluonia, an ancient Name given by the Pagans to June. Fraud, a
Goddess whom the Ancients addressed themselves to, when they desired not to be
deceived themselves, but to deceive others, she was figured in an unseemly
shape her Face being that of a Woman, handsome and comely, but her Body that of
a party colo^r'd Serpent, with a Scorpions Tail; her smooth Face denoting
specious Pretenses and Flattery to deceive her speckled Body, the different
Stratagems to bring Frands about, and the Tail signified the Sting or bad
Consequence. that attend such Actions. Ferdegunda, Queen to Chilperick the
first King of France, she was at first a Servant to And (...) his (...) Queen,
whom he banished to make room for her, though she had borne five Children'^^.
She created great mischiefs, in France, causing all those the opposed her to be
made away either publicly or privately; and at last her Husband followed those
she had sent before him. She warred upon her own Son and overthrew him in
Battle, killing 30000 of his Men, won Paris, and dying Anno 596, she left
Clotair her Son in quiet Possession of the Throne. Fritigilde. Queen of the
Merconians, she was converted by one of St. Ambross's Sermons to the Christian
Religion, and persuaded her Husband to do the like, making a League with the
Romans, that she might come freely to Millain, where he was Bishop to see him;
but when she came, to her great Grief, she found the City in Mourning for his
death. Fausta, Daughter to Sylla, she was contrary to the Cruel Temper of her
Father, a virtuous, mild and compassionate Lady, endeavoring to save those
Romans of Marins's Faction whom he doomed to dye, and did all the good Offices
she could to prevent the Misery Rome was at that time fallen under. Friendship,
between two Persons or a different Sex cannot be (...)? -- -- Ansia. We look
upon the groundless suspicions so common in relation to matters of this nature,
as base as they are wicked, and chiefly owing to the Vice and Lewdness of the
Age, which makes some Persons believe all the World as wicked as themselves.
The Gentleman who proposes this question seems of a far different Character,
and one who deserves that Happiness which he mentions; for whose satisfaction,
or theirs who desire it, we affirm, That such a Friendship is not only
innocent, be commendable, and as advantageous as delightful. A (...) Union of
Souls, as has been formerly asserted, is the Essence of Friendship. Souls have
no Sexes, nor while those only are concerned can any thing that is criminal
intrude. To a Conversation truly Angelica, and has so many charms in it that the
Friendships between man and man deserve not to be compared with it. The very
Souls of the Fair-Sex, as well as their Bodies, seem to have a softer turn than
those of Men, while we reckon our selves Possessors of a more solid Judgment
and stronger Reason, or rather may with more Justice pretend to greater
Experience and more advantages to improve our Minds; nor can anything on Earth
give a greatest or purer Pleasure than communicating such knowledge in a
capable Person, who if (...) another Sex* by the Charms of her Conversation
inexpressibly sweetens the pleasant Labors and by the advantage of a (...)
Mind and good Genius (...) starts such Notions as the Instructor himself would
otherwise never have thought of. All the fear is least the Friendship should in
time degenerate, and the Body come in for a share with the Soul, as it did
among Boccalins Poetesses and Virtuoso's; which if it once does, Farewell
Friendship, and most of the Happiness arising from it. Athens. Fornication,
Uncleanness, and impudent and shameless Uncleanness in general, being one of
the Reigning Sins of the Age; and for the sake alone of which, in a manner, a
whole Army of other subservient Sins, and some of them still more abominable
than it self, are entertained, as Oaths, Execrations, Blasphemies,
Drunkennesses, Envyings, Murders, and (...) of Cruelties, and an ^nfinite
Rabble of others, mitating under this one Head and Generalissimo; and for the
^etter securing the Throne of his Imperial Vice, Atheism it self is called, or
a more nonsencal and impious Deism pressed (...) the Service; and the Being of
God, himself, as much (...) A lies in the Power of sensual ^ools, destroyed, or
he turned (...) of this lower World, and (...) to the furthermost (...)
^eavens, to lead a lazy Life ease and pleasure like those (...) Miscreants; and
all for^^^ because daring Sinners ^ight the more securely commit chiefly this
one sin; I say, ^ot only Uncleanness in general, being so very prevalent in
this Age and Nation, and the chief Motive, whatever other Pretenses are made of
Men's setting up for Atheists and Deists in our Times. But Fornication in
particular, being either slightly thought of or openly defended or excused; not
only by those that de^ie Religion, but even by a great many Zealous Pretenders
to Christianity, decluded by the Subtilty of Satan, who in favor of their
Lusts, instructs them to be Ingenious to their own Destruction, by wresting and
misapplying several Expressions and matters of Fact in Scripture, to induce
them to believe simple Fornication either no sin at all, or a very small one.
The Apostles words are, Flee Fornication; which are directed chiefly against
simple Fornication, or Fornication in a strict sense; because almost all the
Gentiles, a great many Jews, and not a few Carnal Christians deluded by them,
thought it to be no sin, or at worst, a very little one: Against whose
pestiferous Errors the Apostle chiefly opposes this Precept, Flee Fornication.
As being absolutely persuaded, that if he once convinced Men that the lowest
degree of actual Lust, viz. Simple Fornication, was so far from being no sin,
that 'twas a very great and capital Crime, disturbing Human Society, and
inverting its Orders and Constitutions; and moreover cutting Men off from the
Body of Christ, and excluding them Heaven: There would be little need of
Preaching against the gross and more heinous degrees of the same unruly
Passion, as Adultery, Incest, Sodomy, and other nameless Lusts, already
condemned by the very Heathens, and almost all the World. As to the manner how
we are to flee it, it must be avoided, 1. In Action, 2. In Affection. 1. In
Action, we must not only avoid the gross Act it self, but all subservient Acts
leading to it, though from never so far off: All Acts of all and every of our
Senses, and of all Members instrumental to their Operations, that may in the
least tend to the inciting or pampering this Lust, or to the promotion of the
Execution of its inordinate Suggestions; so that we must keep our Eyes, our
Ears, and our Hands Chaste too, as well as those Members that are the immediate
instruments of Carnal Commerce. Motives against it are there, 1. Its great
hainousness and criminal Nature, proved first by its positive-and peremptory
Condemnation in Scripture, as in Heb. 13.4. Ephesians. 5.5.6. and Rev. 21.8. 1 Cor.
5.9, 10. and that grounded upon these Reasons: And 2dly, By all these Reasons,
viz. Because it is a Sin against the Dictates of right Reason, and tending to
the Confounding of all Human Societies, the destruction of the increase, and
prevention of the Multiplication of Mankind against Human Charity, and
Christian Purity. 3dly, Because it is against a Man's own Body and another
too. 4thly, Because against all the Sacred Persons of the Trinity, dishonouring
God the Father, by abusing his Creature, God the Son, by dismembering him, and
rending his Members from his Body, to give them to a Harlot, against the Holy
Ghost, by defiling our Bodies, and the Bodies of others, which are his Temples,
with the ^^^thiest of Pollutions, and against the whole Trinity, by being a
kind of Idolatry too, that tempts Men to Idolize the fading Glories of Flesh
and Blood before the heavenly God, and pay greater Worship to a (...) White and
Red in a (...) Cheeks, than to the Original Fountain of all Beauty and
Perfection, the Infinitely Glorious and Beautiful Creator of all. -- -- Other
Motives of a (...) Classis, are, 1. Its shamefulness dictated by Nature, (...)
sense of which the most impudent have much ado (...) to smother. 2dly, The
(...) and uneasiness of it, (...) yet its vanity and (...) shortness, together
with its unsatisfying Nature. 3dly, (...) Expensiveness of it every (...) And
4thly, The Mischievo^^ness of it, in all the following Respects, in Spiritual
Mischief viz. -- 1. To the (...) himself, by cutting him off from the Body of
Christ, and Favor of God, and rendering him incapable unless Satisfaction first
be publicly given, to Communicate any more with the Faithful, either in Civil
or Religious Conversation; by depriving him of the Spirit of God, and of the
Protection of Angels, wounding his Conscience, distracting him in Religious
Duties, bereaving him of his Judgment, Reason and Freedom, even to mind but his
worldly Affairs, depriving him of his Peace and a Quiet; and lastly, to apply
deceitful Plaster to which, by disposing him to a feared Conscience, and to
Atheism it self; and the infallibly damning Sir of final Impenitence, and so
totally turning him out both of the Church Militant, and Triumphant, and
Damning him infallibly to Hell Torments. -- And again, In Temporal Mischiefs,
viz. by ruining Body, Reputation, Estates, Friends and Relations. -- 2. Its
Mischievousness to the Woman, whom this ugly Sin involves in all the abovesaid
Mischiefs and Punishments, and in some respects, to more. -- 3. To the Child or
Children so wickedly Begotten, which are often Murdered, or (...) to Pine, or
bred up to but very ill and uneasy Conditions (...), and are always (...),
disgraced, etc. -- (...) 4thly, and lastly, To Human Society, and Christian
Religion in general, and this Nation and Protestant Religion in particular; by
the abominable Murders, Quarrelings, Envies, Lawsuits, Destructions of
Families, Cursing, Swearing, Blaspheming, and a whole Inundation of numberless
other Vices and Debaucheries, and Scandals, and Ruins, and Devastations of
Families, Cities, and Countries with which it is attended. To avoid this Sin, I
advise you, 1. To Marry prudently, so as this Vice may be best restrained.
2dly, Carefully to resist and suppress the first Motions of Lust. 3dly, To
avoid Temptation, and tempting Places, Objects, Employments, etc. 4thly, And
all other occasions to this Sin, as high-feeding, etc. 5thly, And all other
Vices that lead to it, as Pride, Vanity, Luxury, Debauchery, Drunkenness,
Covetousness, etc. 6thly, To Mortify it by frequent Fastings, and a continual
Sobriety and Temperance in Meat, Drink, Clothes, Words, etc. 7thly, By
Meditating upon the Falls of others their Punishments and deplorable Ends: And
again, upon the Constancy and Happiness of others, both single Persons, Cities,
Armies, Nations, becoming Prosperous, Victorious and Happy, by the strict
observation of Temperance, Sobriety and Chastity. 8thly, By considering the
Vanity, Frailty, and manifold defects of the Object loved, and the foolish and
transitory Joy this Sin affords; and how, after all, the worst of Men, and even
Atheists themselves plead for it, it is condemned by them in their own
Children, or near Relations. 9thly, By seriously pondering, how the Eye of God,
and presence of Angels, both good and bad, see a Man in the Commission of this
Sin, and how one's own Conscience will condemn one. And lastly, I recommend to
you the Meditation of the four last things, viz, Death, Judgment, Heaven and
Hell, as also a serious Contemplation on the Purity, Passion, and Love of
Christ, together with the unwearied Use of Constant Prayer, as the victorious
Remedy that must clinch, confirm and crown all your other Endeavors.
Friendship contracted by single Persons, may it continue with the same Zeal and
Innocence if either Marry? -- Answ. That excellent Person, the Reverend Bishop
Sanderson has a Case very near ^kin to this, if not Nicer, which the Persons
concerned will find extremely well worth their Reading and Considerati^^. -- In
the mean time we Answer -- It may, tho Ten to One if it does; since in those
Circumstances there will be a great hazard, that either the (...) will spoil
the Zeal, or the Zeal the Innocence: Not but that there is a great deal depends
on the Characters of the Persons concerned; a Friendship may perhaps be
Innocen^ where it is not safe; but hardly either long, in this Case, unless
between those of great Pr^dence and Virtue, since it is oftentimes only a
Pretense, and as such, one of the most dangerous things in the World. In the
mean time, as Generosity may be Criminal, so Suspicion is base, and one
infallibly ruins Friendship as the other may Virtue and Honor, though a
prudent Caution may perhaps be a Medium between both. The worst on it seems to
be here. -- That seeing Friendship can be only in the heigh^^ (as we have
formerly described it) between two, how shall it remain with equal Zeal and
Innocence, at least Justice, when one is Married? Foreither there must be more
or less tenderness for the Friend than for the Wife or Husband, -- If more,
it is Injustice; for People ought not to Marry any, but such as are fit to make
Friends; if less, the former Friendship must be diminished, as if the Marriage
be happy, it generally perhaps always is. If I amn't mistaken, the pinch is
here, and the (...) accordingly, That if the Friendship between the Persons
Married have but the ascendant, and if that be continued with the highest
degree of Zeal, any lower measure of that and Friendship may innocently remain
where it was before planted. Athens. Fair-Face, its great Advantages. -- The
Sovereignty of Beauty is a Prerogative born with the Sex, and the only thing
whereof we have at no time been able to divert them: The Moroseness of the
Philosopher, the Speculation of the Recluse, the business of the Statesman, nor
the Fatigues of the Warrior, have rendered them insensible of its Charms. I
dare appeal to any Man that has Eyes and a Heart. If Mankind were consulted, we
should scarce find one Individual of so cold and saturnine a Temper, who has
not seen some Face that charmed him. -- It is reported of a Persian Monarch,
who for many years had no Issue, and being desirous to have an Heir of his own
Body, upon his earnest Supplication to the Gods, he obtained his Wishes in the
Birth of a Son; So unexpected a Favor made him more than ordinarily solicitors
for the Education of the Child, and his future Fortunes; wherefore he sent to
the Astrologers for an exact Calculation of his Nativity: They returned him
Answer. That if the Infant saw Sun or Moon at any time within the space of Ten
Years, he would most certainly be deprived of Sight; The King thereupon caused
a Cell to be cut for him in a deep Rock, recommending him to the C^re of a
Learned Tutor to instruct him in the liberal Arts. The Time being expired, and
he permitted to come into open Day, they brought before him a Dog, a Horse, a
Lion, with several others the most beautiful of Creatures, whereof he had been
told, but knew not how to distinguish them. He showed some Complacency in the
sight of them, but without any Transport, and asking their respective Names, he
passed them over. They likewise showed him Silver, Gold and Gemms, which he
surveyed with as little regard. The King at length commanded certain beautiful
Virgins, and richly attired, to be brought into his Presence, whom the Prince
no sooner beheld; but with a strange Alacricy in his Countenance, and Ecitasie
of Spirit, he demanded what kind of Creatures they were, by what Names they
were called, and to what use Created. His Tutor je^lingly replied. These be
those evil Spirits of whom I have so often told you, the great Seducers of
Mankind; To which the Prince warmly made Answer, If you have better Angels,
make much of them, good Tutor; but leave me to be attended by these pretty
Devils. If this Relation be not true in Fact, it is certainly so in Nature; and
whenever the same Circumstances shall happen, I will (says my Author) answer
for the same Event. Females most Religious. To the shame of Mankind it must be
confessed, and ascribed almost wholly to the Female-Sex, That Religion at this
Day is any thing more than a Name. -- This Point, though it be of the greatest
Importance. and makes most for their Reputation, will require the least pains
to vindicate; because, for what I see, we are indifferent how we contend with
them on this Score; We are but too willing to Resign to them this Spiritual
Province: We are for securing the present Enjoyments, no great Traders in
Faith, and care not how seldom we draw Bills of Happyness upon the other World;
We are too busy for Contemplation, and leave it to Women as have more leisure
to observe the Punctilio's in Religion. -- When the Saints of the Earth shall
come to be Numbered, most certainly the Odds will be manifest on the Female
Side. After all our vaunted Courage, and the Timerousness wherewith we charge
them, he that looks into the Martyrologies, will find as many Female Names in
Red-Letters, as others. It cannot surely be denied, that Women are more Firm
and True in their Devotion to God than Men; since in that Occasion where most
Affection was to be showed to God; There were seen Three Mary's under the Cross
where there was but one Disciple. Form of Courtship, for the use of young
Batchelors. -- I am within a short time to wait on a young Lady, who is one of
the wonders of the Age, for Piety, Wit, Beauty, Birth and Fortune, and
therefore would desire a Form of Courtship, in Answer to the following Queries.
-- Quest. 1. After what manner should a Gentleman at the first Visit ascoft his
Mistress? -- Answ. It Is pity to rob the Old Accademy of Complements, and we
will not pretend to set up a New one in its room. We suppose the Gentleman is not
for having a Form of Words for this Occasion, since Extempore Courtship is
certainly the best, whatever Extempore Prayers are. Besides the Lady might
chance to read this Paper, and then he is undone; as bad as the poor Spark who
Complains he has lost his Mistress already by some such thing, unless he can
persuade her, that good Wi^s jump, and that both he and the Athenians deserve
that Name. We suppose therefore he rather desires a Direction for his Behavior
than his Words, which is almost as difficult to prescribe as the other, there
being a Thousand little Circumstances which will extremely alter the Nature of
the thing. Mistresses are to be attackt like Towns, according to their
Fortifications, Sci^uation or Garrison, no general Rule to be given 'em. Some
are weak of one side, some of some which a cunning and Engineer will soon find
out: Some are to be Mined, some to be Bomb'd, some won by Storm, others by
Composition, others to be Starved into a Surrender. The pleasantest way of
Courtship we have ever heard of, was that of a very old, very rich, very
covetous, very foolish, and very ugly Humble Servant, to a fine young Lady --
whom having taken abroad in his Coach, after some prefatory Hums and Haws, and
gentle Leers, he pulls out from under his Coat -- what -- but his great Boss'd
Bible, with Silver Clasps, etc. and turning to the beginning of Genesis, shows
her -- not that Text, Increase and multiply, which it is very likely he held his
Thumb upon; but another a little after it, It is not good for Man to be alone,
and thereupon made her a very seasonable Holdingforth, on the Use and
Excellency of Matrimony. But this Method would go near to displease the
Gallants as well as the Ladies, and therefore we (...) much recommend it. For
the Question in Hand, and the Gentleman's fine Mistress, if she be verily and
indeed such a Non-pareil, as he represents her, in which Case we must tell him
he ought to produce his Vouchers; for Lovers are for the most part errant Liars
as well of their Mistress as to 'em; and besides generally a little Purblind in
the Matter: But if she be such a Miracle for Piety, Wit, Beauty, Birth and
Fortune -- and a Miracle she is indeed if she is but half of all this; we'll
tell him what in our Judgment would be his most proper Method; at his first
accosting her, He ought to express the highest Respect possible, but this more
by his Actions than his Words; and rather to let her know that he Loves, which
if she have Wit she will soon discover, (or at least that he would be thought to do
so) than to put himself and the Lady to the Trouble and Confusion of a Formal
Declaration -- which if at all necessary to be made, there is time enough for
doing it afterward on their better Acquaintance. -- Quest. 2. What Behavior
and Carriage in the Progress of an Amor, will be most Winning and Acceptable
to a Lady of Ingenuity and Fortune? -- Answ. There are different sorts of
Ingenuities -- You shall have some Termagant Wits, like Sylvia in the Soldiers
Fortune, that are only to be won by downright Catter-mauling, that is, Rambling
and Fighting, and Scratching, breaking Legs and Arms, and Necks, and then to
Purring again. But we'll suppose it is a Tame Wit, whose power this Gentleman is
fallen into, and therefore she will pull in her Claws when she plays with his
Heart, and be more merciful to him than to make him break, his own before he
softens hers. A Woman of true sense as she hates on one side a Freakish Lover,
or a supple Fop, that is eternally Kneeling, and Cringing, and Whining; so
she will never endure stiffness. Pride and Haughtiness, which as ill becomes Love
as it does Devotion: And the greater her Birth and Fortune are, something of a
proportionable greater Respect ought to be paid her. In a word a modest
Assurance, a Manly Behavior, a Tenderness for all her Inclinations, a diligent
Observation of her Temper and Humor, (much easier to be pleased than those of
less Wit) Faithfulness, Assiduity, Liberality, and good Sense, will at last
carry her, if she is not pre-ingaged or wholly impregnible. -- Quest. 3. What
Expression's fittest for a L^v^r to make use of to declare (...) Passion? --
Answ. That Is impossible to prescribe* and as needless and as unreasonable to
desire Lovers Language is ^^ite contrary to the Chinese; of which it is reported
that there are many Words impossible to be understood by speaking 'em, unless
they are also written or described on a Wall, over the Air. etc. Whereas the
Language of a Lover can hardly be expressed in Writing; at (...) it thereby
loses a thousand little Beauties which it has when it is spoken: It has not that
spirit which makes it acceptable, it looks stiff and dead, and there are very
few even of our Dramatique Writers; whose Love-speeches read well, or appear
free or natural: Whereas if a Man Loves in earnest, if he be not a perfect
Fool, nay, almost though he is one, were it possible for such a one to be in
Love, he speaks with another sort of a Grace, he is more in earnest, he his
more spirit, he seldom wants Words to express his Conceptions, unless he is a
Dastard and Coward, and so unworthy a Ladies Affections, and he goes very often
beyond himself at other times, and on other occasions. Besides, this Love has
in particular, beyond the other Passions, that it softens the Style, as well as
the Temper (whereas Anger renders it more harsh and rough) and makes even the
Voice more tunable and harmonious. But should a Man be Dumb, he could not want
ways to express his Passion; nay, sometimes a well managed Silence is the best
Eloquence. He has Hands and can write -- he has Eyes, and can say a thousand
charming things with 'em; nay, express all his Passions, especially Love,
Desire, Fear, Despair, Hope, Pleasure, Submission, or almost what he pleases
with them; and that infinitely more to the Life than by any other way. But
since there is Oc^^casion for some louder Language, and a Dumb Mistress of the
two would be more acceptable, than a Lover in the same Circumstances; if he
must speak, his Expressions ought to be of a piece with his Be^aviour before
described: He ought to consider Time and Place, and as much to avoid, being
always dis^^^^sing his Love, and never doing it: His Expressions should be
quick, respectful, tender and lively, more understood than spoken, yet easily
intelligible. In a word, there should be in (...) there -- (...) quo^ -- which
none but a Lover knows what to make of. -- Quest. 4. Whether Tears, Sighs, and
^arnest Entreaties be of greater force to obtain a (...) Favor, than a
moderate D^gree of Zeal, with a wi^e and man (...) ^arriage? -- (...). Still
(...) she is -- and tho such a one as described; yet there are few Ladi^s, but
love to have an Absolute Power over their Lovers, and to be at least able to
bring 'em to what they please; accordingly for Tears, and all that, tho a Lover
ought not to be too free of using 'em; yet he ought to have a secr^t Reserve of
'em, to be at the Lady's Service, if she desires it; Tho we think on her side
too, 'twou'd be better not to put him to it, and suffer her Heart to be wrought
upon by some (...) tedious Method, than such frequent Drops as even wear into
Marble -- least the Scene should change in a few Months, and it should be her
Turn then, as it was formerly her Lovers. -- Quest. 5. Whether Interrupting
Discourse by repeated Kisses, ben't rude and unmanerl^; and more apt to create
Aversi^n than Love? -- Answ.- Not so hally. Good Sir! you have made great
Progress indeed in your Amor, if like the Tartars in their March, you are got
to Plundering already, before there was any News of your being so much as
arrived in the Country. If you get within one Step of the last, before you have
got well over the (...), ten to one but you will make more haste than good speed.
-- To those -- Oscula quae Venus -- Q^inta part ^ui Ne^^aris imbu^t -- as
Friend Horace has it, before you have so much as made your first Addresses. But
we'll be so kind to suppose this is only a Prudential Care you take, that you
may know how to behave your self hereafter; when the Business is thus far
advanced. Taking it then at that Point, the truth is, Killing is a lushious
Diet; it is too high Feeding for a Militant Lover, and besides extremely apt to
surfeit. He must therefore remember to feed cautiou^ly, as if he were e^ting
Mellons Moderation veri^y is an excellent thing, which he mu^t Observe from the
Teeth outwa^d ^s w^ll as inward, and Kiss as well as Talk with Discretion. It
may do like a high Cordial, or a Teaster of Cold Tea, a little now and then --
but he must have a Care how he makes it his constant Drink; unless he has a
mind to burn his Heart out. Then there are certain Times and Seasons to be
Observed: For Example, if a pair of soft Lips are about to pronounce some hard
thing or other -- some terrible repulse or denial -- if they po^t, and look
forbidding and angry -- then a Noli Prosequi may lawfully be issued out, and
one that understands the Methods of that Court, will be for stopping the
Proceedings as fast as he is able -- Quest. 6. How far may Singing and Music be
proper in making Love? -- Answ. There Is nothing which Charms the Soul more than
fine Music. Osborn says unluckily, after his manner, of a fine Woman who Sings
well, that she is a Trap doubly bai^ed; and why is not the same true of a Man?
There being indeed something for ravishing in Music, whether in Man or Woman,
that it is almost impossible for any thing that is humane to resist it; tho in
Vocal still more than Instrumental: It smooths all the rugged Passions of the
Soul, and like Beauty bewitches into Love, almost before Persons know where
they are. But even here, as well as in all other Cases, Extremes are to be
avoided, ^^thing being more ridicu^^^^ than an eternal Fa-la of a L^^er; and a
Lady of sense (...) worth, would as soon ma^^ choice of a Singing Master ^^ one
who is always tiring (...) with hard Names and (...) Ditties. He must then Sing
very rarely or never, unless the Lady desires him; he must be neither too
forward or a^^^^ and must not be of the ^^mour of most Songsters, who neither
know when to begin, nor make an end. His Performances must be natural and
easy, and carry something of a free and genteel Air; and he must never himself
appear too well pleased with 'em, but Order it so, that he may seem to Oblige
the Lady, not himself, by his Melody: At least le^^^^ appear to be accidential
(...), as if by chance, not knowing any hears him, and for his (...) private
Diversion. -- Quest 7. Whether would it be greater Prudence and Honesty for a
Person of a narrow Fortune, to conceal his unhappy Circumstances, 'till after
marriage* or to make his Mistress acquainted with the f^^^^ a^ soon as he has
gained her Affection? -- Answ. Supposing the Lady, such as she is described,
and not only Religious and Witty, and Well-born, but Generous too, which (...)
he may know by narrowly observing her Sentiments in other Cases of this Nature,
we should ^^ink is the most prudent and (...) handsome way to reveal ^^ to her
before Marriage; for Woman of Sense will rather (...) pleased than otherways,
that (...) can make the Fortunes of a Gentleman who wants nothing (...), but
may resent it very ill (...) Cheat should be put upon (...), when the once
comes to (...) it; whereas it must ^eeds increase her Esteem of (...)
Gentleman, especially if (...) really loves him, for him (...) deal so
ingeniously with her -- And this for a Form of Courtship. -- Quest 8. (...)
tells us of Love, that it is a (...) pretty soft thing that plays about the
Heart -- I defire (...) to explain this Definition, and what do you mean by the
Word Thing? And how we may know this thing, from any (...) playing thereabouts?
-- Answ. And here, thinks the (...) Querist, have I blown up the Athenian
Mercury for ever, for this cetainly they can no more answer, than I find out
the Philosophers Stone. However let us try and see who gets first to the Gole.
And first, Love is little because it is a Boy, and pretty because it is little,
and soft because it is young, or if you please, because it has Wings, and
consequently the Body on it must be downy. But the sage Querist asks further --
what do you mean by a Thing, O the Philosopher! Why by a Thing we mean a Thing,
and believe that is all the rest of the World means by it. But if we must be
more Explicit, have at Metaphysics -- and accordingly we tell him for once
that Res and Ens are synonimous Words* and that Ens is -- Quod habet Essentiam;
-- and now we have wonderfully Edisyed the Ladies, who may be apt to think
there is some harm in all this Latin, though there is indeed no more than there is
Nonsense in English. -- But we had like to have forgotten one main part of the
Doubt -- Why does this little pretty soft thing play about the Heart? O Sir!
Because this cunning young Rogue of a god, loves* like Lesba's Sparrow, to lie
in Ladies Bosoms; and besides, whenever he shoots at 'em, he as certainly
splits their Hearts in two, as ever Adam Bell did the Apple upon his Child's
head; for, little Vrchin as he is, he is such a Dad at his Bow and Arrows, that
never a Finsbury Archer of 'em all, can pretend to come near him. But still how
shall we know this thing from another thing that plays about the Heart? What
other thing is it that this Querift finds so troublesome in his Doublet? If it
be a Louse, the rest of the Description shows the difference, for that is not
soft, nor pretty, nor perhaps little neither: If it be a Flea, he has had the
Very Effigies of it formerly, Numb. Quest. 1. And can never sure mistake that
for love, We could make a shift yet to find out another Explanation -- We call
Love little by a familiar and more endearing way of speaking, usual in all
Languages in things of that Nature. Thus the Latins use Corculum -- which may
be Translated, little Heart, little Rogue, or what the Reader pleases. We call
it pretty, because it is so pleasant and agreeable a Passion; soft, because its
Effects are so, and describe it playing about the Heart, because that is the
Seat of the Passions. After all, we pretended not to give an Exact starcht
Definition of it, but a looser Description only; and we are sure a little,
pretty, soft thing comes nearer Love than a great, ugly, rough thing, which
neither is Love, nor so much as like it, any more than a Lover; nor are the
Ladies ever likely to entertain it for such, though it should talk of Love this
hundred Years. Athens. Female-Self-Conquests, How bravely could that Noble
Spartan Lady, when she mounted the Sciffold, to receive the stroke of Death;
hecken to her injurious Accuser, and with a Mild and Graceful Aspect, advertise
him of the wrongs he had done her: Wishing him to lay his hand on his heart,
and make his Peace seasonably with the ^ods* For my life quoth she, as it is of
little use to the State, so (...) prize it in regard I can benefit my Country
little (...) it; Trust me, I pi^ty (...) the indangering of your (...) ward
peace, than the loss (...) my Life: This may be (...) deemed by an Elesian
freedom; yours never to be ^vented, but by perpetual (...)rowing. Indeed I lose
(...) Friends but these are witho^ me. But you should have (...) nearer Friend
within yo^ from whose sweet amity (...) amiable familiarity if you should once
sever, (hear (...) last breathing words of a ^^ing Woman) you are lost forever.
-- So easily did ^he remit that wrong which (...) her life. -- With what
moderation did that Triumphan^ Thomyris bear the death of her Son! A feminine
passion could not extract from her the well tempered eyes one Tear, Not from
her resolved heart o^ Sigh. She knows how to shado^ passion with a Cloud; and
immask the design of a future revenge with the whitest rail. She chooses rather
to perish in herself, than to do oughtunworthy of herself. She could put on a
countenance of Content, when she heard how her Son had paid to Nature her debt,
though in a reflection to his youth, before his time. I was his Mother, and he
is now returned to her, who is Mother to us both; If I loved him too much while
he lived with me, I will make satisfaction for that error, by bemoaning his
loss, now when he has left me. -- But find her moderation in this ^bject,
amongst all others most ^mparallel'd; which I the rather here insert, because
she ^as a raee Phoenix both in our ^ime and c^^^e: A Woman Nobly descended,
Richly endowed, which by her Pious Practice, and works of Mercy became highly
improved. -- She, when she understood how passionately and disconsolately ^her
Noble Husband took the death of his Daughter whom ^e infinitely loved; (for her
promising Infancy gave apparent arguments of Succeeding Maturity:) made it one
of her constant'st tasks to allay his Passion; and by playing the part of a
Faithful and Discreet Con^ort, expostulates with the grounds of his immoderate
sorrow in this manner: -- How is it Sir, that your Wisdom should thus forget it
self? Is it any newer thing to dye than to be born? Are we here placed to
survive Fate? Or here planted to plead a pripriviledge against Death? Is our
Daughter gone to any other place, than where all our Predecessors have gone to?
Yea, but you will say, She died in her blooming Youth; before the infirmities
of a Decrepit Age came upon her! The more was she bound to her Maker. The fewer
her Years, the lesser her Cares, the fewer her Tears. Take upon you then
something more of Man; and partake less of Woman. These comforts which I make
bold to apply to you, might be more seemingly derived to me by you. -- 'To
grieve for that which is Remediless, argues weakness; and not to prevent what
admits a probability of Cure, implies carelessness. Let us neither be too
Esseminately weak in the one; nor too securely remiss in the other: So may we
cure the one with Patience, and redeem the other by a timely Diligence. -- For
the next Object reflecting upon their Fame: Nicetas says plainly, No punishment
so grievous as shame. And Nazianzen yet more expressly; Better were a Man dye
right-out, than still live in reproach and shame. (...) being ready to dispatch
himself, used these as his last words; No grief does so cut the heart of a
Generous and Magnanimous Spirit, as Shame and Reproach. -- For a Man to live or
dye is natural: But for a man to live in shame and contempt, Ambr. Ev. 70.
and to be made a l^ughing* stock of his Enemies is such a matter as no well
bred and noble-minded Man, that has any Courage or Stomach in him* can ever
digest it. And yet bravely-spirited Leonida, (...) those Assailants of her Fame
with less dis-respect then her (...) sought to blemish it. I am more confident
of my Fame, said she, than to suspect how any light tongue should impeach it.
-- Nor was that virtuous Clareana less resolute, who directing her speech to
her Accusers; told them: her fame was so far distanced beyond the reach of
their impeaching: as it ingeniously pitied the weakness of their detraction.
This confirmed the resolution of that Noble Patron; who occasionally used these
words in a grave and great Assembly: -- No Woman's fame could privilege it self
from a dangerous taint, if it were in hazard to suffer or lose it self by a
poisonous tongue. -- For the last, but least, which is Fortune: Many Heroic
Spirits have we had of this Sex, who so far disesteemed this outward rind, (for
no other title would they daign to bestow on it) as one of them freely
professed: What matter is it, whether I be rich or poor, so my mind be pure?
And these instances are not so rare, but we may find another of the same sex,
to second so virtuous and accomplished a filter. The poorest thing on earth, is
to suffer ones enlivened thoughts to be fixed on earth. And we have a third to
make up a Consort. She is of a weak command, who submits her thoughts to the
command of fortune. And ^his a Quatermon of brave resolved Spirits expressed,
in (...) livering the nobleness of (...) thoughts in these proper ^^presses;
which with their ^^monds they left writ in ^^panes of their own (...) Windows:
The device of (...) first was this: It is not in the (...) fate,
To weaken a (...) state.
And the second scorns to (...) short of her resolution:

Fortune may sundry E^gines find,
But none to raze a (...) mind.
The third, in contempt of Fortune, inlargeth this subject*

Should Fortune me ^^stress,
My Mind would be ^ less.
The fourth, to show her affection true Touch, attests be Constancy in this:

Fate may remove
Life, but not love.
Thus have we shown their Sprightly Tempers in their ^tempt of all oppositions
(...) might assail or assault them: Life they slighted being competition with
honor. (...) though it was too high a (...) to lose, yet being not (...) to
themselves of any stain, they neglected with a graceful (...) the irregular
liberty of a loose tongue. And for Fort^, they stood so indifferent, as they
held Content their Crown; and that Crown the absolutest imbellishment of an
infranchis'd (...).

Female Generosity, There was sometime a Person, who weary of the World,
desired to ease himself from all the secular Cares, The like Mortification
appeared in that Virgin Eugenia, during the Confiscate of Eleutherius.
and betake himself to a Religious Privacy: so as, within short time he was
received into the Covent. Now it happened one day, that this Religious Man
walking alone in the Garden, seemed as One much discontented; which the Abbot
observing, came unto him, demanding the reason of his Heaviness, willing him to
impart unto him the occasion of his Grief, as became an inferior Member of the
Society to do unto his Superior. -- Nothing, Reverend Father, answered he,
concerning my own particular; (...) does it repent me to have entered into this
Religious Order: For I find more comfort in one hour within these Walls, than
ever I could in all those Possessions I enjoyed in the World. But I must tell
you, Father, that I have one only Son, which I left behind me; and very dear
was he unto me, (...) I am much perplexed in mind about him; for I know (...)
how the World may deal with him. Tender are his Years, which adds to the
measure and number of my Cares. Nor am I so confident of their Trust, to whom I
recommended him, as to free me from that pious Jealousy which I harbor in my
Breast touching him. Advise me then, dear Sir, what course were best to take,
that my Care may be settled, and his Safety provided, on whom with equal Hopes
and Fears the troubled Thoughts of a Father are many times fixed. -- Is this
your cause of Pleaviness, said the Abbot? To rid you from these Cares, and
increase your hope in his succeeding Years, send him to me, and see what effect
will come of it. -- According to the Abbot's Direction, he causes his Son, who
indeed was a Daughter (which he dissembled for some reasons) to be sent for;
Who after some time of Probation, was admi^ted to the Society. Now it chanced,
that the Daughter of an Eminent Person, not far distant from that Abbey, was
got with Child, and for some private respects to her self best known, desirous
to conceal the true Father, laid the Child upon this supposed Brother (who was
indeed a Sister.) This modest Creature was so far from defending her own
Innocence, as she took unto it, as if she had been the true Father which be got
it. The Rumor hereof so highly incensed the Abbot; holding it to be a great
Scandal to his Society to have any one under his Charge, conscious of such
Impiety; as he straightly commanded that this adulterous Person should be
expulst the House, and to receive no Relief, but such as common Beggars were
wont to have at the Gate. -- This Censure she receives with patience, without
the least discovery of ^er Innocence: And though diverse of the Fraternity
interceded the Abbot in her behalf, acquainting him with the Piety of ^er
fore-past Life, with the patient suffering of whatsoever his Reverend Authority
had enjoined her; yet would not the Abbot relent, nor remit any part of her
Punishment, nor ever be persuaded by all the means that could be made, to
receive her again into the Covent* Thus continued this simple innocent Soul,
free from that sin, yet exposed to all shame; relinquished by her^self, because
undefended, nor justified by her Father, because he had vowed that her Sex
should not by his means be discovered. Till at last, Death imposed an end to
her Misery, and published to all the World her Innocence. -- The report whereof
so highly perplexed the Abbot, as he with the whole Covent continued a long
time sorrowing; not without admiration of her Patience, recommending her
Memorial to Posterity for a Recompense. Fashions, -- If a Man at the (...) was
left to be his own Tailor, and had the Univer^^ to supply him with Stuff, (...)
Trimming, and did make (...) his Clothes, as he himse^^ thought convenient, it
is apparent that the following (...) Fashions is left at liberty, and among^t
wise Men it oug^^ not to be taxed, unless it (...) Inconvenient or Ridiculous.
-- Every Man's or Woman Palate may be as well confined to one kind of Men's (...)
their Fancies to one kind of Fashion: It is not only lawful for ^ Man or Woman
to vary in their Apparel, but even to please themselves in that Variety* since
in it self, one is as lawful as the other; a little Skin which was in Fashion
the la^ Year, is as Legitimate as the large deep one now in Use; and the Hat
with a high Crown is even as unreprovable, as that with a narrow (...) and
which sits close to the Head. -- Apparel, no doubt is an Ornament, and yet they
are not right, that in their Habits are too sordid, or too singular; the one
argues too sullen, and the other too light a Disposition. -- It is not only
convenient, but necessary, that upon occasion young Ladies be braver than
ordinary, as upon their Addresses to Persons of Eminency, upon Causes of
Public Joy, and on solemn and sacred Meetings. Socrates, an auslere
Philosopher, being one day demanded, what was the reason he was so
extraordinary fine in his long Cassock, and his new Shoes, made an answer, That
he might appear handsome to the handsome. We ought in our Clothes* to confirm our
selves to those with whom we do converse. We find in the Epistle of St. James,
that the Gold Ring and the costly Apparel found more respect, than the Man that
was not so richly Arrayed. We do guess at the goodness of the Pasture, by the
Grass which we see upon the Ground. -- There are, who believe that Superfluity
is a necessary Evil in a State, the floating of Fashions affording a standing
Maintenance to thousands, which otherwise would be at a loss for a Livelihood,
and that Men maintain more by their Pride then by their Charity. And surely if
Armenta be not turned into Ornamenta, whole Herds and Flocks sold off to
furnish Head and Locks, and the very Pastures in which they graze follow not to
pay for one Jewel. If the Ancient Manors of the Family, have not exchanged
their Lords, nor are Commanded to do Homage to a Mechanic Master. If the
Accounts of the Steward in the City, do but keep even pace with the Receipts of
him in the Country, and Terra firma be not boiled away into Luxurious Gellies,
and whole Acres be not swopped down for a Mornings Draught: If the Courts below
can but answer Echo to those above: I know no reason why ruder Pens should so
loudly exclaim against the Prodigalities of the Great Ones, when we little know
or consider what others of the same Sphere have acted in Ages before us. -- And
(sure I am) those have greatly exceeded them, in that one engulphing
profuseness of Jewels. Tertullian tells us* in his time, of twenty three
thousand Crowns disbursed for one Rope of Pearl. Saltus and Insulas tenera
cervix fert. One tender Neck of a Lady bears the burden of whole Woods and
Islands. Sir Thomas Moor to a Gentlewoman (complaining of exceeding Heat in her
weighty dress) What wonder (says he) for thou carriest upon theo Meadows,
Vineyards, Mills, Mansions, and Islands in the value of Jewels. But prodigious
was the Luxury of the Roman Paulina, ( Caligula's Widow) who ruined her Father
with setting her out in so pompous Excess, That she moved about with no fewer
Jewels than what cost him a Million of Gold, as Pliny and others have given us
her story. It Is very observable, that the first Jewels we read of in Scripture,
should be found in the Closet of the best Lady in the World, (not but that sure
they were common before that time,) but we read of none till Sarahs Cabinet is
presented to Rebeccah* and Envy it self will never repine at those Arms
wearing Bracelets, that kneaded Cakes for Angels. -- History tells us of one
Ardelio, who himself being of an huge, great and bulkey Body, delighted in
every thing like himself that was great, would live in a great House, lie in a
great Bed, eat in great Platters, drink in great Bowls, ride upon a great
Horse, entertain none but great Servants, etc. However the Story be true or
false, surely it is the most perfect Beauty, when great Persons act
symmetrically to themselves, when greatness of Fortune and generosity of Soul
are happily concerned together; and add yet a Perfection of Felicity, to those
that are the lucky Heirs of it. -- But alas the Ambi^ion of the Ladies and
Youth of our Times is so very high and towering, as speaks them resolved to
consecrate this Age into a perfect Jubilee, and make every Eve to usher in an
Holy Day of Pleasure and Gayness; and I Am sure I wrong not some of them, if I
say they never knew a Working-day these twenty Years, and have forgotten the
old Reverend Custom of their Grand*Mothers, whose Wed^ing Gowns, and H^r^hiefs,
(...) saw Light, but on the ^^^emn Annivers^^ies of Christ^^^ or Easter, while
those (...) an Everlasting (...), and dress on Saturdays for the Stage with
nicer Preparations than the next Morning, for the Church, and begin the Week
with the same Zeal to their Vanity, as they ended it. -- But to direct you in
this nice Affair of observing the Fashions: I shall here insert some of the
Directions formerly given by ^ Learned Pen, which are as follows, viz. Be not
Ambi^ons to appear the first in any Fashion; Affect not to take the Mode by the
forelock; keep some paces behind those that are zealous to march in the front
of a Novelty, when this danger is Sinning, its Valor enough, Tutus latere,
post principia, to bring up the Rear: When Custom has familiariz'd the
strangeness, when Time has millow'd the harshness and common usage has taken
off the fire edge of Novelty. A good Christian may safely venture a little
nearer, provided he leap not over those Bounds prescribed by God, by Nature and
Decency: It is time enough to think of following when the Way is beaten before
us. A modest Christian, in Conscience, as well as Courtesy, will not think
scorn to let others go before him. -- Strive not to come up to the height of
the Fashion; ^udy not the Criticisms the Niceties, the Punctilio's of it; you
may be Modish enough in all Conscience. without straining to reach the (...)
(...), of those Super-fineries, which ill employed Wits have teemed and spawned
amongst us. A general Conformity without forwardness, or frowardness, is one
branch of that great Rule laid down by the Apostle, Let your Moderation be
known unto all Men, The Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.5. There is a Golden Mean,
(had we the skill to hit it,) between the pievish singularity of some, who
morosely admire obsolete and antiquated Garbes, such as came in with the
Conqueror, or perhaps were worn by Evander's Mother, and the precise exactness
of others, who make it Religion to depart a Hairs-breadth from the ^ewest
Fashion. -- He that expresses the general usage of the Nation, without
Curiosity in the finer strokes, and smoother touches of Elegancy, is the Man
whom I would take, and propound to you, for a Pattern. -- Follow no Fashions so
fast, so far, as to run your Estates out at the heels: T^o te Pede metire!
Costly Apparel is like a prancing Steed; he that will follow it too close may
have his Brains ^^^ckt out for his folly, or rather his empty Scull shattered,
for the Brains are supposed to have gone long before. Advise first with
Conscience, what is lawful, then with your Purse what is practicable: Consult
what you may do, and (...) what you can do. Some things may be done by others,
which you may not do; and there are some things which you might lawfully do, if
you could conveniently do them. All things (indifferent) are lawful in
themselves, but all things are not expedient to some, under some Circumstances;
and what is not expedient, so far as it is not so, is unlawful. -- If you will
drink by another Man's Cup, you may be Drunk when he is Sober: And if you will
Cloth at another Man's rate, you may be a Beggar, when he fools not the
charge. But how many have run themselves out of their Estates into Debt, and
from the height of Gallantry sunk to the depth of Poverty, forced either into
a Goal, or out of their Country, whilst they would strain to keep pace with a
Fashion that was too nimble and fleet, for their Revenues. -- Follow lawful
Fashions abreast with your equals: But be sure you get right Notions who are
your Equals; some may be less than your Equal in Birth, who are more than so in
Estates. Pedigrees and Titles will not discharge long Bills and Reckonings: And
some may be your Equals in both, who are not so in that wherein Equality is
most valuable. -- Walk then hand in hand with them, who are Heirs together with
you of the Grace of Life, I Pet. 3.7. Who are partakers with you of the same
precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. With those who have the same hopes with you of the
common Salvation, Jude 3. Why should we zealously affect a Conformity to them
in Apparel, from whom we must separate in a little time for Eternity. --
Abraham was a great Prince, and yet he dwelt in Tents, with Isaac and Jacob,
the Heirs with him of the same Promise, Heb. 11.9. And if a Tent would serve
him and them, why make we such ado for Palaces? Abraham had a Promise that he
should be Heir of the World, Romans 4.13. and yet he confessed he was but a
Stranger, a Prigrim, a Sojourner, even in the Land of Promise; and was always
in a Traveling Garb and Habit, ready at an Hour, a Minutes warning to dislodge
and follow whither God should call him; why then do we Cloth as if we were at
home, Citizens of this World, when we are but Tenants at will, and have here no
certain dwelling Place? -- Come not near those Fashions, whose numerous
Implements, Trinkets and Tacklings, require much time in dressing and
undressing. No cost of Apparel, is so ill bestowed as that of precious Time of
Apparelling: And if common time be so ill spent, what is the solemn Sacred
Time, laid out in such Curiosity? How many (...), Sermons, Sacraments, Prayers,
Praises, Psalms, Chapters, Meditations, has this one Vanity devoured? Let me
recommend the Counsel of Holy Mr. Herbert to you: -- O be Dressed;
Stay not for the other Pi^:
Why, thou have lost
A Joy for it, worth Worlds.
Thus Hell does jest
Away thy blessings, and extremely
flout thee,
Thy Clothes being fast, but
thy Soul loose about thee.
Church Porch.
O the wanton Folly of our Times, when (as one expresses it) its almost as
easy to enumerate all the Tackling of the Royal Sovereign, as the
Accoutrements of a Capricious Lady; and perhaps it requires not much more time,
to equip and rig out a Ship for the Indies, as a whim^^al Madam, when she is to
Sail in state with all her Flags, Streamers, Pennons, bound for a Court Voyage;
with less Labor did Adam give Names to all the Creatures in Paradise, than an
Attire herald shall give you the Nomenclature of all the Trinkets that belong
to a Ladies Closet: And yet all this is but to consume a whole Morning to put
on, which must wait the whole Evening to put off. -- In all Apparel keep a
little above Contempt, and somewhat more below Envy; He that will vere nigh
either Extreme, shall never avoid Offense, either for Sordidness or
Superfluity. Let not your Garments smell either of Antiquity or Novelty: Shun
as much an affected Gravity, as a wanton Levity. There may be as much Pride in
adhereing to the Antic Garbes of our Ancestors, as there is in Courting the
Modern Fooleries. A plain Cleanliness is the true Medium between Sluttishness
and Gawdiness: Truth commonly lies in the middle between the hot Contenders:
Virtue in the middle between the extreme Vices, and Decency of Apparel in the
middle between the highth of the Fashion, and a more running Counter, and
Opposition: Only because our Corrupt Hearts are more prone to the Excess, than
the defect, I said the Rule, to keep a little more below envy, then above
contempt. -- So much for the foregoing Discourse. I shall proceed to tell them
in the words of the aforesaid Author, that all fashions of Apparel, that will
justify themselves by Custom, must be able to plead universality among them,
that in other things make a Conscience of their ways and actions. The Custom of
a few good Men, or of many wicked Men. will be an unsafe Rule, by which to
judge of Decency: One speckled Bird, will not warrant us all to be Jayes and
Mag-(...). A single Cato would abhor those Garments, which (...) calls (...)
and which Suidas terms, Tunicas interlucentes; Latice a Garmenti, wherein under
their pretense of covering the Debauchees of Rome discovered their Nakedness,
nor should a thousand precedents encourage one sober Christian to heard with
those in this, who in many other things give a demonstration that they are
under no ties of Conscience: Further, all fashions of Apparel however lawful in
themselves, that spring from or give indications of an evil heart are sinfully
used: Suct.
Augustus Caesar was wont to say, the Rich and Gay Clothing, was either the
sign of Pride, or the Nurse of Luxury: Perhaps he might be mistaken; nor can
any such necessary Connection between Pride and costly Apparel be demonstrated,
as shall infallibly prove them sinful: Nevertheless, when at any time they do
so spring from an evil Principle, they may without Violating the Law of
Charity, be doomed as evil: It was an Argument of their Sobriety of that Great
Emperor, what the same Author Reports of him, that he never wore any Apparel,
but such as his Wife, his Sister, or Daughter made for him: Nor indeed do we
read of any such Trade as that of a Ta^^or in all the Scripture; which argues
the (...), and pl^^^ness of the (...) tha^ they (...) Art and Skill, little
Labor and (...) to make them up -- But Luxury has Ro^aged every corner of the
Earth, to fetch home Fuel to feed that insatiable are of Lust; which the more
i^ Eats, the more it Hungers: Alexander Siverus, and Aurelianus, those Great
Emperors are reported never to have worn a Garment of entire (...) all their
Lives, which (...) beco^^ (...) ordinary wear of ever^ Nurse of a Village.
Emperors then were not Clothed as Servants are now: It was above 150 Years
after Christ, that some Idle Monks brought into Europe these Silk Spinsters:
And truly its no great Credit to the Ware, that they who first brought in
strange Religions, and new fashions of Worship, should be the Men who first
introduced strange Attire, and new fashions of Apparel but so it is: Whilst we
pursue exotic lying vanities, we forsake our own domestic Mercies. -- And
weigh it seriously, Says the same (...) Author, with a long train of sins wait,
upon this stately Lady, Vainglory. Pride never walks the Streets alone, nor
without a vast Retinue of Lusts to Adorn her Pageantry: He that will be profuse
in one Instance, must be Covetous in another: Riotous Spending, is accompanied
with Penutious Sparing: A great fire must have great ^^re of Fuel to seed it.
And an open Table requires abundance of Provisions to maintain it: Pride must
be maintained by Oppression, Fraud, Couznage. If the Tradesmans Wife lashes it
out in the Streets, the Husband must fetch it in one way or other in the Shop:
They that spend unmercifully, must gain unconscionably: The Mill will not
grind, unless some Lust brings Grilt unto it: A Gentleman anticipates his Rent
in the Country; he comes up to Town, to Vamp his Lady, and fine Daughters with
the newest fashion; he ransacks the Court, and City for the Fashions, searches
the Shops for materials to furnish out the Pomp, he returns home, and then his
poor Tenants go to wrack, the sweat is squeezed out of their Brows to maintain
his Prodigality, so that we may now take up a Lamentation as is the Profane, so
is the Professor; and as is the Harlot, so in this particular, are many whom we
hope to be Chaste: If a Wise Man would not willingly be seen abroad in a Fools
Coat; why should a Modest Virgin walk the Streets in the Garb of the
Debauched, and Prostitute, or if they will needs do it, let them not be angry,
if others judge them as bad as those whom they are ambitious to imitate: I
could wish therefore though with small hopes to see it take effect, that as once
there was a Proclamation, That all Curtezans should be known by their striped
Veyle so we had the same, or some like Law revived, that there should be a
visible mark of Discrimination between two such contrary Parties.

Faces, though naturally Beautiful, are many times foiled and disordered, by
being studded over with Pimples, or put in a Scarlet Livery. The Inundation of
Crimson Blood, often drowns the slowry Eletium of a Charming Face, disfiguring
it with such a Flaming hue, as if the Juicy God had trod his Wine Press there,
or scattered it with Ruby colored Grapes. To abate the fury, of such high
colors, and fright them into pleasing Paleness, call to your assistance the
following friendly Receipts, but to prepare you for them be temperate before
their Application, in abstaining from Wine or hot Liquors, that Enfeavour the
Body by Enflaming the Blood; and when you find temperance in Meats and Drinks,
has allayed much of the heat that glowed within you, than for removing the
defects. -- Take of Rosewater a pint, put it into a Glass and steep an ounce of
Camphire in it, an ounce of Sulpher beaten to powder, Myrrh, and Frankincense,
half an ounce each, set it in the Sun or some warm place, and after ten days
end, wash your Face with the Water, and in often doing it your color will be
restored, then if the Pimples sinking away, have left a Scurff, use some
Pomatum to smooth it over; and like the Sun from behind the Moons dark Body,
you will appear out of your Eclipse as bright as before, or for want of the
former take this; Fine Brimstone Powder an once, the Juice of Limmons half a
pint, Juice of Onions two ounces, Cutle-bone, and Camphire each one a Dram;
pound what is to be pounded, and Incorporate your Powder with your Juices,
anoint the Face with it going to Bed, and wash it off the next Morning with
Water, wherein Bran has been decocted, and by using it a few times, you will we
hope, confess the knowledge of it, worth the buying of this work -- Freckles
are found to be the Product of Fuliginous Vapors, and like smoke, molest those
most who have the fairest Skins, as if Beauty jealous of being outvied, by too
clear Complexions, did bestow that yellow Livery on others, which she rather
deserved to wear herself, but seeing what is done, requires a remedy; the best
means to remove such disfiguring spots are these. Take Figtree Juice, or the
white Milk that comes out of it, Oil of Tartar a Dram, Honey two drams, mix
them well together, and anoint the Face with the Unguent they produce when you
go to bed, washing it off in the Morning with warm Water, and a few times using
it, those Choleric Spots will be dispersed and disappear, or if the
forementioned Ingredients are not to be procured: Take three ounces of Cummin
seed, bruise them, with two ounces of Salt, Brimstone Powder an ounce, Rye-Meal
half an ounce the juice of Celandine and the Gall of a Cock, press out from
these an Ointment, and anoint the freckled part and they will quickly
disappear. -- (...) that the Amourous Sun has Impressed too (...) on, to the
injury of (...), and by his brightness dulled their Luster, in dwelling or
doting too much upon them, as once he he did upon that of the fair (...), may
yet be divested of those Clouds and uneclipsed, shine as bright as ever by
borrowing a renewing advantage from our Art. -- For the obliterating such
casual shrouds to Beauty: Take Rose-Mary Flowers an ounce, the like of Fumitory
flowers decoct them in a pint of White wine, add Benjamine and Cassia a like
quantity each, infuse them in the decoction, and wash your Face with the Liquid
part, Morning and Evening, or for want of these take the Juice of Limmons mixed
with the Juice of Bilm and Rue, heated over a Gentle Fire, and strained that
the grosser part may be excluded, set the Glass wherein you put the Liquid in
the Sun, or in some warm place, for ten days to (...), then pour it into
another Vessel, that the dregs may be left behind, and the Face or Hands being
bathed with it the swarthiness will vanish and the former Complexion appear
more fresh and charming than ever. For fear these come not to your hand, take
another to the same purpose, viz. White Bryony water two drams, an ounce of
Rose Water, the white of an Egg, Oil of Tartar two drams, Verjuice one ounce,
mix them well, and dipping a Linen in the Liquid, supple your face with it,
and then the Beams of your Beauties will break through the Cloudy Curtains, and
make a perfect day in Loves Empire, for Lovers to see their way to the Elysium.
-- Fortunes Envy, or Fate, Faces disfigured with wrinkles, how to smooth.
often so orders it, that the smiling Glories of Beauties spring are too
severely nipt with an early Autum, when sharp Scythed Time cuts those Flowery
Graces down, and shrouds them in the ^urrows of a wrinckled-Face: Now to make
your Verdant Features flourish in spite of Envy, or Accidental decay, and
smooth your Faces for a new Plantation of Roses and Lillies. -- Take our
following directions, Bitter Almonds two ounces, Lilly roots dried and powdered
an ounce, Oil of Roses an ounce. Virgins Wax half an ounce, make them into an
Ointment over a gentle fire, and anoint the Face with it. Again take an ounce
of oil of St. Johnswort, of Water Lillies, Quinces Jessemine, Mastick and
Mirtles, their Oils, take half an ounce each, melt them in an Earthen Vessel,
and being taken off, add two ounces of Rose water, and use it as the former. --
For want of these, wash the wrinkled places with a decoction made of an equal
weight, of Bryony roots, and Figs, or take Incense, the scum of Silver each
half an ounce, white Pepper an ounce, powder them apart, and then Incorporate
them with Mouth Glue, and make them up into small balls; which you must disolve
in Rose water as you use them, and make a Linnement for the Face, or particular
part, where the wrinkles intrude upon your Beauty, and surrow the late smooth
plains of your Faces. -- Faces have various Features, Faces, Eyes, and other
parts Attracting Love.
and it is observed among the multitude of Men and Women throughout the World,
there is something in the Face that differs, though in many other Creatures, it
is not (in the least so much) discernable, and in Love various, are the fancies
of Men and Women, as to their making choice, or being surprised and overcome by
the Lineaments of the Face, some h^lding the dimpl^d Che^ks most Lovely, others
those that are plump, some for the Lillies whiteness, others for the Rosy
blushes, some for the dimpled Chin, others its Oval form, etc. It would be
endless to describe all the Ideas of Fancy, and indeed natural Beauty is a
strong Loadstone of it self, and above all parts the Eyes, are most alluring:
For as they take in Love in some, so in others they send it out again, and
Lovers are most Infascinated, when they directly gaze on each other, so that
many times they have not power to take off their Eyes, but drink, and as it
were suck in Love between them and a fair Eye, will many times take as a sure
snare, when all other parts of the Body are deformed. Leonardus tells us, that
by this Interview or Gazing, the purer Spirits are Infected, the one Eye
piercing through the other with its rays. And many have been those piercing
Eyes, that their brightness compelled their Spectators to look off by reason of
their being near as dazzling, as the Sun beams, for the Rays, as some think,
sent from the Eyes, carrying certain Spiritual Vapors with them; and so insect
the Gazing party in a Moment. And Facinus goes about to prove this from a
Blare-Eye, that the steadfast fixing ones Eyes upon it long, will alone
occasion soreness, and gives this reason, that the Vapors of the Corrupt Blood
does get in together with the Rays, and so by the Contageon, the Spectators
Eyes are Infected. Some hold that the Basilisk kills by her sight at a
distance, which if true, justifies what is said: But our business at this time
is Love, and not of death, and therefore Eyes that destroy in that nature, are
not for our purpose and that Love is Natural appears in this: There is in the
Li^^s of the Fathers, a story of a Child brought up in the Wilderness from his
Infancy, by an Aged Hermit, and coming to Man's Estate, he saw two comely Women
wandering in the Woods, whereupon he demanded of the Old Man, what Creatures
they were, who not willing to let him return to Worldly pleasure, told him they
were Faries, or a kind of Spirits of another World; yet the sight of the
m^raised such a passion in his Mind, that he became restless: And being showed
from a high place, several Curious Prospects, and being asked which was the
pleasante^^ he ever saw, not minding the Question then put, replied, The Faries
he had seen in the Wilderness: So that without doubt, there is some secret
Loadstone placed by Nature, in a Beautiful Woman a Magnetic Power, a Natural
Inbred Aff^i^ion, which moves us, as one Intimates, when he says: (...) I have
a Mistress yet to come.
And still I seek, I Love, I know not whom.
-- This indeed holds very strong in Natural and (...) Love, but not in every
(...) or Lustful Passion, where the Eyes lie in wait like Soldiers in Ambush;
and when they spy an Innocent Spectator, fix on him and shoot him through, and
presently bewitch him, especially, when they Gaze and Gloat, as wanton Lovers
do on each other, and with a pleasant Eye, conflict, Participate each others
Souls, and truly the Language of the Eyes, if rightly understood, is a very
moring Oratory even in the Persons of all sorts that are subject to Love, for
although they may keep their Tongues Barocaded and Locked in Silence, yet their
Eyes cannot, for Inspight of all their Precaution They will express a
Languishment or Joy, According to the Condition or Affection of the party, and
will be darting their Glances of those they Affect, though willingly, the party
that owns them, would restrain them. -- Fair Ladies, when the injurious
violence of Wind, Face chap's how to make smooth.
or Weather, has been so rude with your beauteous Faces, or Hands, by too rough
Kisses, to Fret, or rent your Silken Skins, and you are desirous to make those
breaches into their former pollishedness, you will find these your serviceable
Cements. -- Frame an Oynment of Stags and Goats Suet half an ounce each, two
drams of burnt Borace, Virgins Wax half an ounce, Oil of Roses two drams, make
them up over a gentle fire in a glazed Earthen Vessel into an Oynment, and
anoint your Face and hands when you go to Bed, covering the one with a thin
Lawn or Linen Cloth, and the other with your Glove to keep off the Air, or
for want of the former, take Capons Grease, and Camphire, mix them well, and
anoint the place with Oil of Chamomoil and Marshmallows, both these are good,
but the first we recommended as the best. -- Faces are the Magazins of
Beauties, Faces burnt (...) Scalded ^ Remedy.
and if they be surprised, by catching Flames, and blown up in Bli^ers, your
securest way will be to allay the fury of the Offensive and Deforming Element
in this manner, Take Lead two ounces, let it be burnt and washed, white Wax and
Goats Suet, of each one ounce and a half, six drams of Turpentine, prepared
Lapis Calaminaris, washed Ceruse two drams of each, (...), Mastick and Olibanum
of each one dram, Aloes, Epat, Camphire, Nitre, of each half a dram, mix them
over a gentle fire, and spreading them as a Plai^ter, apply it to the place
grieved, -- Faces are many times in this case Scared by Blistering, therefore
while you can get the other Remedy utterly to take away the fire to keep it
from Blistering by such burns or scalds, take white and fresh Hendung three
ounces, Sage, an handful, fresh Butter six ounces, Plantane Leaves two
handfuls, stamp them altogether then squeeze out the Juice, being a little
warmed to disolved the Butter, and with it anoint the Face, hands, etc. --
Foreheads, are the Ivory Thrones, Forehead, how to beautify.
where Beauty sits in State, they therefore must be smooth, and raised to a
decent height, for if nature has placed a Forehead too low, it appears much
beneath the grandeur of her commanding Majesty, that owns it, and surrowed with
wrinkles, it will put her too much in mind of human Frailty, to let her take a
pleasing Recreation therein. -- Foreheads, then Ladies, that you would have
high, you must order according to our Directions, Eradicate the suppersiuous
Hairs that too much encroacly upon its bounds, and to do it; take as much
Mastick as you think will cover it, being spread, then sleep it in warm Water,
till it becomes so soft that you dilate it on a piece of Silk, bind it on with
a sillet all Night, and next Morning, take it off very quick, and it (...)
bring off the Hair with (...) that it may grow there no more, take half an
ounce of H^nbane-seed, wrap it in a Colvert leaf, and roast it in hot Embers,
bruise it then in a Mortar, and press out what moisture you can, pu^ a little
Or^iment in powder to it, and make a Linement, and apply it to the place, --
Faces that are not Beautiful are of little esteem in the Eyes of Lovers, Fate
how to Beautify, though dis-figured.
and even dise^eeme. I many times by those that own them, who lay the fault on
Natures (...), or at least oversight in (...) them in a tougher (...) than
others, therefore presuming to help Natures de^e^ts by Art, we have furnished
you with (...) Remedies, that will (...) your Faces against the further
injuries of Deformity that (...) upon them, (...) inspight of all Malladies,
that Beauty is (...) it (...) and render them (...), that we may have cause to
fear* that looking in your (...), after so (...) an Alteration, (...) like, you
may fall in Love with your own in (...), and so linger away (...), in those new
(...). -- (...) to (...) in this kind, Take Oil, or Water of (...), by applying
it to the Face; it will make a (...) one, as smooth and white as (...); to
prepare this because all that pretend to sell it, are not provided with the
right; Take the most tender and Transparent Talque you can get, slit it into
thin slices, put them into a Glass-Viol for ten or twelve days, with the Juice
of (...): During the Frost in Winter, make a Bag of the thickest Cloth you can
get, put the steeped Talque into it, with some hard (...), being then closely
tied, rub it together with the Flints, till the Talque become powder, put it
then into a glazed Earthe^ Pot with a narrow mouth, stop the Vessel, and see it
be carefully bound about with strong Wire, then put it into a Reverbatory
twelve hours, then by degrees, take it from the Fire, and being cool, powder it
^^ner with as much speed as may be (to prevent the Airs having too much power
over it) put it then into a bag with a hook at the bottom to hang a Vessel upon
to receive the Liquor* hang the bag then with the Vessel so placed in a Well
about a sathom above the Water, till the Humidity begins to drop, then take it
out, an^ put it in a damp place, where the wind has no force, and suffer it to
hang till all the moisture be drained away; the Liquor so received is the water
of T^^que, and by the same means you may make the Oil if you put what remains
in the bag, into a (...), by (...) giving live to it, (...) all the Oil forth,
and this is so Excellent a Bearti^^r, that Queens and Princesces, may add
Splendour to their Perfections, by using it: But since every one cannot be at
the trouble of this, we shall recite some others, less chargeable and sooner
made. -- Four pound then take of Blanched ^^^monds, Mastick, Sandar^ch, Salpher
vive, and Ceruse, two ounces of each, an ounce of (...) Tragacanth, three
ounces of the whites of Eggs, bruise and well mix them together, ^hen leave
them to Macerate ^ven or eight days, stirring them well once a day, and when
^ou have beaten them till they ^egin to smoke, then by presing them, you will
have an Oil which by anointing, wi^^ Extremely beautify the Face: ^ou may for
want of this Oil (...) Tartar, mingled with a (...) distilled Vi^egar, rubbing
(...) first in the Palms of your (...), and then upon your (...). Again, you
may take ^amphire a dram, Alum, Bo^^, two drams, Oil of Tartar (...) ounce,
all finely powdered, ^^t them into a quart of Rose^uer, and as much of Roseary
flower water, boil and ^rain out the Liquid part, and ^eep it for your use, and
it (...) prove an Excellent whitner (...) the Neck, Face, Breasts or (...) part
of the Body, If you could have a Curious Blushing ^olour, rub your Face gently
(...), with a little Oil of Am^^ with an Equal quantity of Oil of Mirth. --
Faces are very much beautified by this means, viz. take bitter Almonds
blanched, one pound and a half, the whites and shells of thirty Eggs, the young
branches of a Fig Tree cut in small shivers incorporate them well, and distill
them in a Glass Alimbick over a gentle five: Then to the Water you draw off add
Sugar Candy, Borace, and Camphire, each an ounce; Olibanum two ounces, bruise
them small, and then distill them over again, preserving the Water upon this
Second Distillation, as a rare Secret and improver or Imbellisher of Beauty.
Again, take Lithargy of Gold and Silver each a dram, put them into strong
white Wine Vinegar, add Camphire and Alum of each half a Scrupleas much of
Musk and Ambergreece to scent the Composition, boil them in a small quantity of
Vinegar silter, and keep it, then boil a little Roch-Allum in spring water, and
keep it apart from the other, but when you use them mingle them together. Thus
Venus in her brightest form you will vie,
Or all those Female Star^ that guild the Sky*
Who for their Beauties there were (...) and shine,
But you out dazzled now, (...) must refine,
To see their long (...) leave (...).
Faustina was cured of dishonest Love. And of diverse other Remedies against
that Passion. -- That the affection and prison of the Mind, which is ordinarily
called Love, is a strong Passion, and of great effect in the Soul; let us ask
of such Men, which by Experience have known it, and of such whom Examples are
notorious, namely, of very excellent Personages, that have suffered their Wills
to have been transported even so far, that some of them have died. Jules
Capitolin, amongst other Examples. recites that which happened to Faustina
Daughter to Amoninus, and Wife to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who fell in Love
with a Master of Fence or Gladiator, in such sort, that for the desire which
she had of his Company, she was in danger of Death, she did so consume away.
Which being understood by Marcas Aurelius, he presently called together a great
company of Astrologians and Doctors, to have counsel and find remedy thereupon.
At last it was concluded, That the Fencer should be killed, and that they
should, unknown to her, give Faustina his Blood to drink, and that after she
had drank it the Emperor her Husband should lie with her. This Remedy wrought
marvellously, for it put this Affection so far from her, that she never
afterward thought of him. And the History says of this Copulation that the
Emperor had then with her, was begotten Antoninus Commodus, which became so
bloody and Cruel, that he resembled more the Fencer, whose Blood his Mother had
drank a the Conception of him, than Marcus Aurelius, whose Son he was; which
Commodus was always found amongst the Gladiators as Eutropius W^^nesses in the
Life of the same Commodus. -- The (...) and Arabic Physicians, place this
Disease of Love, amongst the grievous Infirmities of the Body of Man, and
thereupon prescribe diverse Remedies. C^d^mus Milesien, as S^yd^^ ^^ports in his
Collections, writes a whole Book, treating of (...) particular Remedies which
Physicians give for this Disease one is, That to him that is passionate in
Love, one (...) put into his hands great Affairs importuning his Credit, and
his Profit; that his Spirit being occupied in diverse matters it may draw away
his Imagination from that which troubles him: And they say further, that they
should (...) him to be merry and conversant with other Women. -- Against this
heat, Pliny says it is good to take the Dust upon which a Mule has tumbled
and cast it upon the Lover and all to be powder him; or else of the Sweat of a
chased Mule, as Cardanus affirms in his Book of Subtilties. -- -- The
Physicians also teach how to know what Person is loved of him that is sick in
Love; and it is by the same Rule that Eristratus, Physician to King Seleucus,
knew the love that Antiochus bare to the Queen Stratonicus his Stepmother; for
he being extreme sick, and would rather die than discover the cause of his
Sickness, proceeding from Love which he bare to his Father's Wife. She came
into the Chamber, just then when the Physician was feeling the Patients Pulse,
which beat so strong when he saw the Queen come into the Chamber, that
Eristratus knew that he was in Love with her, and that was the cause of his
Sickness; wherefore he found the way to make the King acquainted with it, by
such a means as would be too tedious to recite. Which being experimented by the
Father, and seeing his Son in danger, if he did not prevent it, thought it good
(tho contrary to the Intention of the Son, which chose rather Death than to be
healed by his Father's Loss) to deprive himself of his Queen, and give her to
his sick Son. And so indeed the Age and the Beauty of the Lady, and likewise
Marriage, was more proper for the Son than for the Father. And by this means,
Antiochus lived well and gallantly many Years with his well-beloved
Stratoni^^^. The History is very neatly recited by Plutarch in the Life of
Demetrius. And thus you see why Physicians say, that you must feel the Pulse of
those that are in Love, and repeat to them diverse names of Persons, and if you
name the right the Pulse will beat thick and strong, and by that you shall know
whom they Love. By diverse other signs one may know when any is in Love, and
with whom, which I leave to speak of now. Friendship, Friendship well chosen
and placed, is a great felicity of Life, but we ought in this respect, to move
very cautiously, and be certain we are not mistaken before we unbosom our
Thoughts, or make too strict a Union: We see in Politics Leagues offensive and
defensive do not always hold; and being abruptly broken, prove more mischievous
than any thing before they were contracted, because there is a more eager
desire of Revenge and ground of Injury started; and so when a close knit
Friendship slips the knot, or is violently broken in sunder, by the force of
some mischievous Engine set on work to that end; Anger and Hatred ensues all
the Secrets on either side, how unbecoming or prejudicial so ever, are let fly
abroad to become the Entertainment and Laughter of the World; redounding
perhaps, not only to the Injury of your self, but of others, whose Secrets have
upon Confidence of your Virtue, been entrusted with you and by you again, upon
the like Confidence communicated to the Party you entrusted with your own, who
upon breaking with you persidiously, discloses them: Therefore keep to your
self a Reservedness, and try all manner of ways the strength and constancy of
Fidelity before you trust too far; for if you lay out your Friendship at first
too lavishly, like things of other natures, it will be so much the sooner
wasted; suffer it by no means to be of too speedy a growth, considering, that
those Plants which floot up over quickly are not of long duration, comparable
with those that grow flower and by degrees. -- Choice of this kind ought to be
made with the greatest Wariness imaginable, since you are to be responsible to
the World for the Miscarriages of those in some measure that you contract an
Intimacy with; for whatsoever her Character is, you will, in the Esteem of
many, bring your self under the same, being liable to bear your part with what
you have so freely chosen, for Choice imployeth Approving; and certain it is if
in to strict a manner you contract Friendship with one again, which the common
Vogue is given, you may be sure you will not be thought to be averse to her
ways of Living, since it did not discourage you from admitting her to your
Bosom. Resemblance and Inclination being frequently taken for none of the least
Inducemens to Friendship, and some will step a little farther and look upon you
as a Well-wisher, if not a Partner in those Fauls she is cenfur'd for always
concluding if without Reluctance you can forgive them in another, they may take
the freedom to presume you will not be less indulgent to your self; and
therefore how heavily soever you may take it, you will run an equal Risk with
her (...) her lost Reputation: If you make Choice of such a one, you may urge
now what if she should relinquish her Innocence by Men's flattery and
over-powerful Persuasions after the Contract is made between you; why then we
answer upon the Credibility of such a Report, though you must not be over hasty
to believe it; You must begin to prepare your self for a Relinquishment, if it
be more evidently and undoubtedly a manifest Truth, and then neither must you
break too abruptly, but make a fair and modest Retreat, by excusing your self
and giving as little offense as may be. The matter in this point is very nice,
therefore be sure you have sufficient warrant for what you do before you
Censure your Friend though she be accused, and before that upon her being
accused, unless you know her Innocent, you must not appear with too much warmth
in her Vindication, or express your Anger too hotly against her Accusers, for
then if you are in the mistake to think her Innocent when she is not so; you
will by that means draw an ill apperance upon yourself, and that you would not
so much plead her Cause; but that you have a Confideration to your self, they
will be apt to imagine, that you would not carry the anger which you must put
on in the Vindication of a Friend you fancy to be injured so far, and prosecure
it so zealously, if there were not some probality the Case might be your own,
and that her Resentments for deserting her Cause, may lay you open to a
Discovery, which on the other hand you labor gratifying her to prevent; you
(...) not so far difert your Reason by th endearing your self to another, as
not to understand what is for your own (...) and Advantage, nor (...) your
sight where Friendship is concerned for though we must allow that Malice is
(...) quick sighted, yet we must not conclude that it follows, because of that,
that Friendship must be blind, a mean is to be held between those Extremes, or
even your good (...) will not be exempted from such Reflections as will (...)
no wife be pleasing to you, and have such Office preferred upon you, as you
will not be proud of, and though your Kindness to your Friend, and Ignorance of
her Failings, may extenuatete Guilt; yet it doubtless will improve the Jest
upon you, and perhaps it may not be the least part of her pride, whom so kindly
excuse, that she has outwitted you in overreaching and abusing your too facil
Nature, that being Virtuous your self, you conclude that Vice has taken its
leave of the World, or at least think it cannot inhabit where you settle your
Affection; but to draw nearer to a Conclusion of this Section; Let the chief
Ingredient of your Choice be the good Sense of your Friend, otherways by her
Impertinence; a Cloud may happen to over-shadow and darken Lusire of your
Reputation: Let her be of an unspotted Fame, good Education, prudent in
Management of Matters, secret in Council, and sound and sober in her Advice,
and her Birth such as may become your Character; and if ever in any Instance
Formality is to be allowed, it may without a stain to Modesty be put on to
resist those over forward Intruders that would press themselves unto your
Friendship, for if they gain Admittance, they certainly either prove an
Incumberance or a Snare and therefore must be avoided. Fortune Emblem'd, and the
force of Artificial Allurements, Clothes, Gestures, inciting to Love. --
Fortune is painted Naked with slowing Hair, and a Sail swelling as with a
prosperous Wind, stand on a Wheel, which some hold to be the Emblem of a fair
promising Inconstancy, sickle and (...). turnin with every Wind: Some again
paint Her in the same posture, scattering or throwing over her Head carefully
Crowns, Scopters, Gold, Jewels, Robes of Honor and Dignity; Trisles and Toies
mixed intermingled with Axes, Swords, Halters, Gibbets, and the like, whilst
the Suppliant and eager Crowd are greedy in catching what comes next to hand.
And indeed she deals little better with Lovers, for many times we see they miss
their Aim, and either for a Juno, Ixion like, embraced a Cloud or where they
promise themselves Joy and Pleasure, find a bitter root of Sorrow and
Discontent; gay gliterring Apparel, and artificial Embellishments, frequently
captivate the Minds of the unwary and unadviz'd, and a little Beauty so set off
carries a kind of Grandeur or more than ordinary Luster with it to dazzle the
Eyes of the Undicerning Gesture, Rich Apparel, Jewels, P^gments and
Ex^rnations, are a great Addition to Beauty; so that Artificial Objects become
more tempting and powerful than those that are natural. John Lerius, a
Burgundier, tells us, That upon their discovery of Brazil in the West Indies,
they sound the People altogether naked; nor could they persuade them to cover
their Secret Parts, much more entirely to Cloth themselves, which Nakedness
served as an Antidote to him and its Companions against Lust, when had they
been suitably Clothed might have much more prevailed; and continues be. I dare
be hold to affirm, the those glittering Attires, counterfeit Colors,
Head-dresse^ Curl'd-Hair, Silk-Gowns, Enbroider'd-Stomachers, loose (...)
Garments, and other A^coutrements wherewith us Country-Women counterfeit.
Beauty, and so curiosly for themselves off, cause more Inconveniences in this
kind, (...) that barbarous Hom^iness, (...) though they be not no (...)
Inferior unto them in Bea^ty; but not so curicusly (...) out; so that we may
conclude some that pass among us for Beauties, are more beholding (...) Art
than Nature; And stronger Provocations proceed from outward Ornaments, than
such as Nature has provided. It is confessed, that those fair Sparkling Eyes,
Coral Lips, Rising Breasts, Necks like the (...) of Swans, and the Roses and
Lillies striving for Mastery is the Checks are powerful In^^ment to Love; But
when a comely artificial and well composed Look, pleasing Gesture, an affected
Carriage shall be added, it must of necessity be more forcible and charming
than it was when those curious Needle-works variety of Colors, purest Dies,
Jewels, Pendants, Lawns, Lace, Tiffanies, and fine Linen, Embroideries,
Calaminstrations, Ointments, and the like shall be added, they will make
homliest of the Sex seems as a soft Temptation to charm and infacinate Mankind,
though some will have native Beauty, (and indeed with those we agree, where it
is rare and illustriously Transcedent) outshine artificial Adornments, as it
is said of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt viz. The Wealth she wore about her seemed
to hide,
Not to Adorn her Native Beauty's Pride,
Tho there bright Pearls from the Or'ential shoars,
(...) From all the Assyrian Lakes, and wealthy Stores
Of Silver Ganges, and Hydaspes shone,
From Egypts Eastern Isles, the Gold like Stone,
And cheerful Emeraulds gathered from the Green
Arabian Rocks, were in full splendour seen,
Pale Onyx, Jasper, of a various dye,
And Diamonds darkened by her brighter Eye;
The Saphires blew by her more Azure Veins,
Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains,
And blushing Rubies feem'd to lose their dye
, When her more Ruby Lips were moving by;
It seemed so well became her what she wore,
She had not Robbed at all the Creatures store,
But had been Nature's self, there to have showd,
What she on Creatures could, or bad bestowed.
Fashion and Meatness, defended by another hand -- Faces, when clouded by
Poverty, Carelessness, or a kind of disregard, cannot shine so bright in the
Eyes of Lovers, as when they are tricked and trimmed up with all the sprucifying
Advantages, notwithstanding there is indeed something lovely in Beauty, though
in never so careless an Dress; As an unpolished Diamond is a Diamond, but the
polishing sets a greater Luster on it. Daphnis, says Lucan, was a poor tattered
Wench, and was little regarded, and so might always have continued in a kind of
Obseurity, had she not been industrious to get her gay Clothes, which allured
so many Lovers, that by their liberal Offering she soon become Rich and
stately, and had her Maids to wait on her. And these Advantages she had by
setting herself out after the best Fashion by her pleasant Carriage,
Affability, and courteously smiling on her Spectators. -- Fashion sets off
mainly, and if, a Garment be never so Rich, if out of the Fashion, it is not
esteemed but rather despicable, and occasions Laughter. Men are not only
admired by Men for their curious Dresses, but even esteem 'd for them by many
Women, especially if there be added a Fanty Mien Complements, and modish
Behavior. These advantages have instantly won some too credulous to believe
lightly every wanton Suitor, who thus accomplished, makes Addresses of Love;
and when he presses hard to one, she is instantly Enamored and doats, and will
surely Marry, when as he means nothing less, it being his ordinary Carriage in
all such Companies and frequently both Sexes by their outside shows are
Deluders and themselves deluded and among other, an upright, comely Grace,
Courtesies, gently Salutations, a crindging and a mincing Gate, a Pace decent
and affected are most powerful Enticers, and infensibly draw the Affections.
Fortune or Dower, great Incitements to Love. -- Fortune or Wealth is a great
Temptation, and nowadays with many a more powerful Loadstone than Beauty,
though it seldom purchases a virtuous Cordial Love, but rather that which is
Arry and Heroical, for many Men when they hear of a large Portion, a rich
Heiress, could be content to take her without seeing her, merely for the sake
of her Portion; and are more mad, (though she be I Will bred and deformed) for
her, or pretend to be so, than if wanting a Portion she had all those beauteous
Ornaments, and those good Parts, Art and Nature can afoard; they care not for a
good Name, Birth, Beauty, or Education, their Aim is at Money, which makes the
Poet thus discant; Our Dogs and Horses from the best we breed,
And careful are that they may thrive and speed;
But for our Wives, if they but wealthy prove,
Though fair or foul we flater them with Love.
If she be Rich, that covers all faults; Gold that Enchantment that bewitches
the World makes her appear Fair, Fine, Perfect and Absolute, then they burn in
Love's flame, they love her dearly, like Pig and Pie, and will make you believe
they were ready to hang themselves if they miss her: Nothing in these days is
so familiar, for even a young Man to Marry and old Wise, for a Sum of Gold and
although she be an old Croone, and have never a Tooth in her Head, nor good
Conditions, nor a good Face a Natural Fool, if she be but Rich; So Corrupt is
the Age, that she shall be followed and courted, and buz'd in the Ears with the
Amourous Discourse course of a number of Fly fools, so on the other side, many
a lovely young Maid, for Ambitions sake, to jolt it in a Coach and go gay, will
throw her self away upon an old decrepit doting, Dizard, troubled with Rheums,
Gout, Stone, Catarrhs, and twenty other Diseases, and perhaps but one Eye, one
Leg, a flat fallen Nose bearing the Marks of the Sins of his Youth; Baldpated,
and neither Wit nor Honesty in his Brains; If he have store of Land or Money she
will have him, though at the same Infant she Sacrifices her Peace, Content,
Marrimonial Pleasure, and all the chiefest Sweets of Life, for a little gaudy
Foppery, to appear siorrid and gay, that the may out-vye others in fine Clothes
and sumptuous Diet. Aristaenetus telling a brisk buxom Lass of a proper sine
Man that would maker her a good Husband, Hang him (replied the) he has no Money;
'(...) to no purpose to Marry without 'Means, trouble me with no such Motion;
Let others do (...) they will, I Will be sure to have one shall Maintain me fine
and brave. -- Form, Beauty, or good Parts, stands not in the Minds of many in
Competition with Money in any degree. Lucius Lycia, was a proper young Maid, and
was Courted by diverse comely young Men, but the forsook them all for one
Passus, a base bald-pated knavish Fellow; and why? because he was Rich, and had
gotten an Estare by Usury and Extortion; and to add so that, his Father that
had got an Estate as wickedly, left him his sole Heir: This is not alone among
your Dust-worms, whose fordid Soul Adore no God but Mammon; but so it falls out
many times among great ones. The proud insulting Bishop of Ely, being left
Viceroy of England by Richard the First, when he went to the Holy Wars, having
heaped up a mighty Mass of Money, Married a great many of his Poor Kinswomen to
the Nobility, their Sons and Nephews, who took them, though of mean and base
Extract, for the Dowers the Bishop gave, which Policy he used to ^renghten his
Party and cover the wrong he had done the People, in the King's absence (...)
King of Britain Married (...) the Daughter of (...) the Saxon Prince, and his
mortal Enemy, because she had Kent for her Dower. Jagelio, Duke of (...), fell
in Love with Hedenga, and turned from a Pagan to a Christian for her sake,
being Baptized by the Name of (...); but lets see what was in the bottom of it,
why? the was Heireis of Po^and, and he covered to lay the two Countries
together. Charles the Great was an earnest Suitor to Irene the ^^^press; but
faith (...), only to join the Empire of the East to that of the West, which he
then possessed; but what comes all this to, or what is the Event of such
Matches, that are made up thus merely for the sake of Money? Why truly they are
a sort of mad Contracts at first, and afterward as to Love, and the honest end
of Marriage prove but a mere flash, as (...) or Straw, soon fired, burn
fiercely, yet la^ but a few Minutes; so are all those Matches so made where
there is not any respect of Honestly Virtue Parentage, Education or Religion,
etc. -- Faise Fires light the Hymeneal Tapers, that flash Sulpher in their
Faces, instead of comfortable Brightness; they are no sooner Light but
extinguished in an instant, and instead of Love, Hate, Jars and Discontent
enters, and act their parts upon the Stage of Jealousy and Distrust, on the
one part, and ruin perhaps of Body and Soul on the other: For Joy enters
Repentance, and sometimes hands after it Desparation. -- Franciseus Barbarus
tells us a Story, that a certain Person named Philip of Padua, fell in Love
with a notorious common Strumpet, and so raging, his (...) seemed that he was
ready to run distracted for her, which much grieved his Parents; but fearing he
should (...) himself, or quite lose his Senses, his Father having no more
Children, and finding no Reason nor Persuasion would avail, consented to his
Folly, and Married they were; but not many days had passed ere this
extraordinary Passion Wind-mill'd about to the contrary point of the Compass,
even to an extreme Loathing; so that he could not so much as endure the sight
of her, and from one Madness fell into another, nor seldom have such kind of
Marriage other Events, seldom is there better Success upon these kind of Money.
Love Intrigues, as Manelaus experienced by Helen;(...) with Phaedra; Vulcan
with Venus, Claudius with Massalins, Minos with Pasiphe; and many more, which
we might name; and indeed we need not go to former Ages for such Examples,
since our own Nation affoards so many How often are there Bra^^ and Fightings,
Hatred, Heartburnings and Jealousies, among among Married Couples; and
sometimes Blood makes the Fatal Divorce: Wherefore, Ladies, you that would be
truly happy in Marriage, choose not this way, but Marry those that you cordially
can Love, and such as are agreeable to you, though you wallow not in Gold.
Fortune, how to be considered in what it relates to either Sex, in Advancement
or declining, etc. -- Fair Ladies, at the first sight you may imagine, we are
going to tell you many strange and wonderful things, or make discovery of those
past Actions, you would rather have concealed by prying into you Nativites, but
indeed we purpose not to meddle with past, Present, or Future Events of that
kind, we pretend not to be Fortunem^^^^s, but only to Let you see how fickle,
she is and how little to be relied on, though many lay too great a stress upon
that they call her Favor, which is rather Accidential and sometimes Imaginary
than certain or real, and indeed take her right, she is rather a Name than any
thing that is substan^^^lly to the purpose; we will not speak of the Actions of
either Sex, as they are the Children of Divine Providence, nor will we Ascribe,
an Aposthe^is to Fortune, but will only take a survey of the power and Acti^^
of Men and Women's Reasons, in the Nimble apprehensions, and taking hold of
occa^^^^ns, to see how far outward circumstances do conduce to the making of
any ones Fortune: It was the saying of one, that every one might hammer (...)
his own Fortune; however (...) most in Number are (...) at Fortune making, and
(...) it in the working: It is an Art that most Peoples Invention have flowed
into, and yet (...) still capable of Renovation as it were by the incertainty
(...) Affairs, so curiously involved by mutual Relation which is Tacitus his
Observation, of a too superstitious Constancy in that Emperor, into his beaten
way, in which he had proved Fortunate, thinking in that Road he could not miss
being Successful, though he fell into a slough of misfortune at last, when he
least suspected the danger. So some through an Imbecility of Mind, not knowing
how to make a departure from tha Gravity of their usual pace, think all things
will meet them in the common Road, but there is something more, viz. a
Judicious observancy of time required, as well as a prudent making of
occasions. There are some of that temper, the Pulse of whose Affections still
beat after the motion of Honor, who had rather be not good, than great, and
therefore will cast about the mist of Deceit, to blind the Eyes of our
Apprehensions and by corrupt Counsels, Endeavor to rise from the clouds of
disgrace, to see the Sun of Honor; others will bring all the Elogies of their
Worth upon Honors Stage, where they court the Smiles of Fortune, in displaying
themselves to the best advantage, yet is ^he be not in a good mood to pleasure
them, but frowns and turns her back to begone, (...) will cry after her, and
(...) her (...); all they can do makes her but like a (...) the more (...) and
(...) till (...) they prove but swollen Bubles, which the least wind of
Adversity breaks and makes to Evaporate into their own Element. Honor is
Virtues Reward, and is no more than the Reflective beams of that Sun of Virtue,
and gives only to good will in a larger Extent to Exercise themselves in, as in
open Field; and therefore it must be used to the public Advantage, not in the
Enclosures of any ones particular ends. Those Ladies that are Befriended with
Fortune, as they term it, must nevertheless, be upon their Guards, and look
narrowly to her, for she plays many slippery tricks with her Favorites: the
Wind is not more variable, or unconstant, nor the winding Waters, of the Tide
in their motions, more uncertain than she is fabled to be, in setting up and
pulling down; in flattering and deceiving those that most trust and rely on
her; and above all things so settle your mind in Prosperity, that if Adversity
comes it may not shake or disorder it, and then you however secure your selves,
let Fortune do what she pleases; to prostitute your time, too much to the
thoughts of worldly Fortunes, hinders you of a more Glorious Prospect that is
before you: Riches are sometimes Virtues Ornament, and at other times Vices
Punishment, the certainty of having (...) Friend for your Fortune, and a
moderate Competency and Honestly, for your self goes a great way in the
felicity of it. Though its like the Sun when at the highest, that gives a great
light, and outshines the Stars of more inferior Fortunes, notwithstanding they
are many in number; it is no small part of policy to distinguish of Fortune and
Occasion, it is easier to see the one, than to retain the other. Fortune has a
diverse operation, according to the difference of the Materials it meets with
all: The Prosperity or over Lavish Fortune of Fools, says the Wise Man, shall
slay them; some in making their own Fortunes, are well studied in Men, but know
not the Nature of business, nor the worth of Favors; others only wise by Rules
and Maxims of Particular Affairs; look not with narrow searching Eyes into the
Nature and Quality of their Competitors, and those that stand in their way, to
hinder them from becoming the Favorite of Fortune. There are some that despite
Fortune as much as she slights and casts her scorns on them, and those not of
an ordinary Composition of understanding, seeing they can enjoy the Riches of
content in the (...) of an honest Poverty, it is the faculty of the imagination
that can turn it self, and make every thing appear to itself. It is not the
outward thing but the mind, which is capable of Content, and where it is so, it
makes its own Fortune, by being satisfied in all conditions, so that in one
sense it may be said, to command Fortune, who seems to have all things at her
disposal; and he is not blessed who thinks himself not so: for though some have
Riches larger than the Extent of their Knowledge, they are so far from thinking
themselves happy, where an instiate Covet^sness takes place, that even they
lose the use and enjoyment of those they have, by an unruly desire of having
more; when as David says, Man walks in a vain shadow, he heapeth up Riches,
and knows or who shall gather them. A continual craving of Fortunes
Liberality, shows the poornes of the mind, and some who vainly Glory in the
Opinion of being held Rich, advance in Fame what they really find the want of.
Others through a narrowness of understanding would be thought to have no
Commerce with Fortune, because they will reserve a power of getting more from
her. We might proceed Ladies, to show you what slippery tricks Fortune has
played with Lovers, how she has raised hopes, and cast them down; advanced
Clowns to your Favors, when Gentility and good Breeding has mourned your
Angers, but these things being familiar to you, and we having touched upon them
in other places we here omit them. Fame, Her Character, with a Caution to the
Fair. -- Fame Ladies, is a great medler with the Fair Sex, and has many times a
wondeful power over you to raise your Esteem, or sully your Reputations, it is
the Echo of Actions resounding them to the World, save that the Echo repeats
only the last part, but Fame repeats all, and frequently more than all -- Fame
many times has Created some things of nothing, she has found out Countries and
Monsters as well as Stories and reports of Actions that none ever saw or knew.
Politicians sometimes use her in reporting, such things already to be done, as
they have yet in Embrio, and intend to bring upon the Stage that so they may
sound the Peoples minds, to know before hand, whether they will be taken or
not, or to make them more familiar, when brought to light. -- Fame, if she lays
hold of a Ladies Reputation away she goes with it, Fame dangerous to Reputation.
with incredible swiftness, first, she creeps though at a large rate through
Villages, then she stalks through a Town; and after that growning more nimble
runs through a City, and by this time her Pinions being grown, she flys over a
Country, and the farther the faster, and there is no getting it out of her
hands; when she has graspt it: And Ladies, it is happy for you, if she makes
the best of it for if she does otherways, though without reason it is but in a
bad condion, and will not in have pass Current, we allow Fame to be a Liar, yet
she generally gains more credit when she disperses her false reports abroad,
than Truth with all her Verities; Sometimes indeed, she scrapes acquaintance
with Truth and is very serviceable to her, but her greatest Familiarity is with
Error and Falsehood, who send her abroad with Tales and Fables to amuse the
minds of Men and Women; Envy sometimes employs her to seitter her Poison
abroad, and then Ladies, the Ba^^ful drops frequently fail upon your fair
Nones, and blast them in the opinions of many, with whom you stood before in
high Esteem, however your virtues like Crystal, may in a while purge off the
stains; the best way to stun her, is to be reserved and c^utious in having to
do with her Intelligences. Far, (Fr.) a fond and dissolute Play, or Comedy;
also the Jig at the end of an Interlude, wherein some pretty knavery is acted;
also any stuffing in meat. F^^rus, immediately, after the Woman has conceived;
it is called an Embryo. Afterward when there is a perfect Formation it is
properly called the Faetus. Frenulum, Membraneous Ligument under the Tongue; in
Newborn Children, it sometimes spreads over the whole under-side of the
Tongues, that the Midwife sometimes is forced to pell it asunder with her Nails
(which yet ought not to be allowed of) or the Chyrurgion with his Penknife.
Furoz Urerinus, an unseemly Distemper, which is wont to seize upon Maids;
especially those of riper Years, and sometimes Widows too, They who are
troubled with it, throw off the Veil of common Modesty and Decency, and delight
only in Lacivious, Obscene Discourses: They covet a Man greedily, and even
furiously, and omit no inviting Temptations that may induce them to saitsfie
their desires. The cause seems to be in the Seminal Juice, which being exalted
to the highest degree of Maturity, drives the Maids into a kind of Fury; which
is Conspicuous every Year in some Bruits; as in Cats, Bulls, Bucks, Does,
Hearts, D^. B^ancard. Fran^-marriage (Fr. Francmarriage) is a Tenure in Tail
special, growing from these words in the gift, Sciant, etc. Mc. T. B. de O.
dedisse, etc. I. A. filio meo and Marg. uxon esus fill^^ verae. T.N. in liberum
maritagium unum Messagium, etc. West. p. 1. Symb. l. 2 Secl. 303. The effect of
which word is, that they have the Land to them and the Heirs of their Bodies,
and shall do no Fealty to the Donor till the Fourth Degree, etc. Feronia, a
Goddess of the Woods. Famble-sheats, c. Rings or Gloves. Famicide, l. a
Slanderer, destroyer of ones good Name. Farreation, l. a Ceremony whereby the
Priest confirmed Marriage. Fascrination, l. a bewitching by the Eye. Feme
Covert, f. a Married Woman. Feminic, o. the Woman's ( Amazons) Country.
Feminine, l. belonging to the Female-sex. Filiafter, ( Fr. filiaftre) a
Son-in-Law, or Son by a former Marriage. Film, (from the Belgic Felme, quod
idem deno^at) a fine thin Skin within the Body dividing the Flesh, or any near
Member one from the another. Also a Skin like a Cap wherein diverse Children are
born. And the Skin in wraping the Brains are called Films; the inmost, which is
next the Brain, is also called pia meninx or pia matter, the other dura meninx,
or dura matter. The Infant has three Teguments or Membranous Films, which cover
it in the Womb, that is, the Corion, Amnios, and Allantois; Whereof see more in
Vulg. Error. page 269. Flabel, ( flabellum) a Fan. Footing-time, Nf. when the
Childbed Woman gets up. Forfeiture of Marriage, a Writ against one under Age,
and holding by Knights Service who refused to Marry her whom his Lord
preferred, without his Disparagement. Faunrekynes, o. little Infants. Fricasse,
(Fr. fricassee) any Meat fried in a Pan. Frances, a Woman's Name. Frank-bank,
Free-bench, the Dower of Copyhold lands, which the wife (being espoufed a
Virgin) has after her Husband's Decease. Friga, a Saxon Goddess in the shape
of an Hermophradite. Frontal ( frontale) a Frontlet or attire of the Forehead.
Frumenty, (from frumention, i.e. Wheat) so called, because it is a kind of
Pottage made of Milk and Wheat. Froise, a Pancake [with Bacon intermix.]
Furina, a Roman Goddess, Patroness of Thieves. Frussian, stuff made of Cotton,
or the Down of an Egyptian Fruit. Furies, ( fury) three imaginary Fiends or
Spirits in Hell, having Snakes growing on them instead of Hairs. Poets, feign
them to be the Daughters of the River Aenerou and Night, and to have the Office
of Tormenting Souls of Murderers and wicked Men; their Names were Alecio, i.e.
uncessantly Tormenting; Megara, i.e. enraged; And Tysiphone, i.e. the Avenger
of Murder. Fufil, (Lat. fufillis) a little Spindle. Festoon-ton, f. Encarpo, g.
a Garland of Fruits or Flower-works [in Graven or Embossed work.] Figuretto, a
kind of stuff. Figurrd, or flowered. Filly, - foal, a mare colt. Flora, the
Goddess of flowers, otherwise called Cloris. Floramor, flower of Love. Flaunes,
o. Custards. Foraign-project, to provide Maids with Husbands, approved on, with
an Account what that Project was. -- It may justly astonish us to consider how
industrious and careful so great and wise a State as that of Athens was, to
promote the Marriage of the poorest Virgin among them; that of Aristogeton's
Daughter may serve for an instance, who being a poor Girl, in an mean Island,
and living under great poverty, was by the order of the Council brought into
Athens, and there Married at the Public Expense: -- We do not find the
Patriarchs chaffering for Portions: Isaac, that was so great an Heir, (as that
his Father out of his own House did raise three Hundred and eighteen Men born
in his Service.) was at the charge of sending for a Wife without a Portion; and
Jacob with fourteen years Service purchased his: As the World increased in
Money, so it did in this Sin, and both united to hinder the Ordinance of God,
turning the Command of Increasing and Multiplying Men, into increase and
multiply more, of which we may say, as it was in another case, though much to
the same purpose, in the beginning it was not so. -- There are some now living
in these Kingdoms, that remember when Money was the least part considered in
Marriage, when that Sum would have been thought a Fortune for a Lord, that is
now despised by a Merchant; yet then there were few dyed without Posterity, and
as few dyed for want, or that which is worse, lived like Beasts of Prey, on the
Labors of others. -- Lycurgus, among his Laws to the Spartans, enjoined this
for one, That they who lived unmarried and childless, should be debarred from
all sports, and forced to go naked in the Winter about the Marketplace; and in
the Spartan Laws there were the same punishments for bad Husbands, as for them
that were none, both being thought equally mischievous to the Commonwealth, and
neither to be suffered. -- Solon made a Law, That there should be no Jointures,
nor Dowers; and that Wives should bring their Husbands but Three Gowns, with
some other small Trisles of small value; forbidding Portions, which he looked
upon as buying of Husbands: and so making Merchandise of Marriage, as of other
Trades, contrary to the Law of Nature, and first design of the Institution,
which was for the increase of Children; hence was he wont to (...), That Men
and Women should Marry for Issue, Pleasure and Love, but in no case for Money.
-- The Romans were so careful in this matter, that they made Laws vouchsaffing
diverse Immunities and Privileges to such as had many Children, as we may see
by (...) particular Laan, Julia, or Papia, which obliged all Men to take Wives,
and none to be excepted. -- And not only they, but a worse People, the
Persians, had in former times a Custom to Honor Men once a year with some
Gratuity from their King, who had a Child that year by his Wife, respecting him
as a Man that had gained an e^teem in the Service of his Country -- by the Laws
of Lycurgus, Men that would not marry, were to be deemed infamous, and to have
no respect paid to them; consonant to which is that Passage related by Plu^reb
of Dorcillidas, who coming into Prison where there was a young man, who gave
him no respect, not even stirring from his place; and being asked why he showed
him no re^erence, seeing that he was a Man of Honor, made the following Reply,
Because he was not the Father of a Son, who might hereafter do as much for him.
-- We come nearer home, and find at this day in some parts of Germany, a Custom
(formerly more universal) once a year, at a general meeting in the City, or
Town, to present Gifts, and to give public applause with loud Acclamations to
such as were married, and had Children that year; thus Ecchoing out their
Praises. These are they that replenish the World -- As to Widowhood, 'twas
forbidden by the Romans to have any Allowance in the Commonwealth, in case
they were not superannuated. -- The Nostranes in the East, have so vast a
veneration for Marriage, that as soon as the married Couple has a Male-Child,
the Father loses his name, and is called by that of his Eldest Son; as
supposing the Fathers name Isaac, and the Son to be called Joseph, he is no
more named Isaac, but Abba Joseph. -- I have heard of a Custom amongst those
worst of Men, the Irish, which may teach us Charity, and that is, before their
Daughters are thirteen years of age, they go about among all their Friends and
Acquaintance, taking the young Girl with them, to show that she is capable of
Marriage. This accounted sufficient Intimation to their Friends to understand
their Design, and therefore they need do no more, but are immediately answered
with what they can spare, which is commonly in Cattle, for they have little
Money. This I have heard is a frequent Practice amongst them at this day, and so
general, that a poor Man, who may not be Master of six Cows himself, will
commonly get twenty for their Daughters, and make no Provision for their Sons;
by which means the Daughters seldom stay till fifteen, and the young Men Marry
the earlier to get themselves a Stock of Cattle, which they are sure of with a
Wife. -- We find in several Parts of the World, as in Thrace and Assyria, that
they were so possessed with an Opinion of the advantage of Marriage, as
occasioned their making Laws for its Propagation. -- And here (that no Maids
may be left unmarried, either for want of Beauty, Money, or Virtue) I shall add
the Project (mentioned by a late Author) to provide them with Husbands; Which
is as follows, viz. That a Statute might be made, obliging all Men from One and
Twenty Years of Age to Marry, or in Default to pay One Eighth Part Annually of
their Yearly Income, if they be Men of real Estates; or One Eighth Part of the
Interest of their Personal Estates, if it amount to One Hundred per Annum of
Real; or to Four Hundred Personal, as it shall be (...) by Men appointed for
that Affair, and the same to be (...) by all Single Women, who (...) their
Fortunes in their Hands. after that they arrive to in Age of Eighteen; and the
same to be paid by all (...), and Widows who have (...) Children, the Widowers
^^^ to pay after Sixty Years of Age, nor the Widows after Forty, and all these
(...) to continue as long as they are unmarried. -- And because that Young Men
are often (...) from Marriage through Default of their Fathers, (...) the same
Mulct shall be laid on the Father's Estate, as if ^^ were the Son's. -- This
Money so raised, to be disposed in every City and Country, as they find see sir
for Portions to young Maids, who are under Forty Years of Age, and Care taken.
that it be expended every Year, so as no Bank to be kept; and that no Portion
be ever given to any, who have been debaunched, with such other Rules as may be
prescribed. -- These Kingdoms in their most happy days never saw a Law, which
made that immediate Provision for the meanest Soul in it, as this will do; for
'twill set the Captive free, whereas many are now born who have reason to
continue the Lamentation they found out at their first Entrance into the World:
Our greatest Charity for the Poor is at most but to keep them so; but this will
be clothing them with Wedding Garments, and every Corner of the Land will
rejoice with Nuptial Songs, and undoubtedly if it be a Virtuous Act to relieve
the Poor, this must be greater to provide for them for the present, and to
prevent it in their Posterity. -- I Am sensible, that some may be apt to raise
Objections against this Proposal; which to save the Trouble, both of naming and
answering them, I think, this Reply may serve for all, That there can be no
particular Injury done in this Matter, which can stand in the least Competition
with the Consideration of such Public Good, as both Reforming and Peopling of
a Kingdom will necessarily amount to. See a Book called Marriage Promoted.
Female Modety, Occasion and our Nature are like two inordinate Lovers, they
seldom meet but they do sin together; Man is his own Devil, and oftentimes does
tempt himself: So prone are we to Evil, that it is not one of the least
Instructions that does advise us to beware of our selves. -- Now an Excellent
Virtue to restrain or check a Man or Woman from running into Vice, is Modesty.
I am persuaded many Women had been bad, that are not so, if they had not been
bridled by a bashful Nature. There are diverse that have a Heart for Vice, that
have not a Face accordingly. -- Surely the Graces sojourn with a blushing
Virgin. It is Recorded, that the Daughter of Aristotle being asked which was
the best Color, made answer, That which Modesty produced in ingenious Spirits.
-- To blush at Vice, is to let the World know, that the Heart within has an
Inclination to Virtue. -- Now to give a check to such immodest Women, who
proceed from the Acts of Uncleanness, to Murder the illegitimate Off spring; I
shall for the information of these Ignorant Wantons give them a light of the
following Act.

An Act to prevent the Destroying and Murdering of Bastard Children.

WHereas many Lewd Women, that have been delivered of Bastard Children, to
avoid their Shame, and to escape Punishment, do secretly Bury or Conceal the
Death of their Children, and after, if their Children be found dead, the said
Women do allege, that the said Child was born dead, whereas it falls out
sometimes (although hardly it is to be proved) that the said Child or Children
were Murdered by said Women their Le^d Mothers, or by their Assent or
Procurement. -- For the preventing therefore of this great Mischief, be it
Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament. That any Woman (after one
Month next ensuing the end of this Session of Parliament) be delivered of any
Issue of her Body, Male or Female, which being born alive, should by the Laws
of this Realm be a Bastard, that she endeavor privately, either by Drowning or
secret Burying thereof, or any other way, either by her self, or the procuring
of others, so to conceal the Death thereof, as that it may not come to light
whether it were born alive, or not, but he concealed; in every such Case the
said Mother so offending shall suffer Death, as in Case of Murder, except such
Mother can make proof by one Witness at the least, that the Child (whose Death
was by her so intended to be concealed was Born dead. -- Modesty is one the
most natural and most useful Tables of the Mind, wherein one may presently
read, what is printed in the whole Volume. Certainly a good Heart looks out
through modest Eyes, and gives an Answer to any that asks, who is within? with
modest Words; and dwells not at the sign of the Bush or Red-lattice, or
Painted-post. A glorious Soul is above dresses, and despises such as have no
higher, or other thoughts, then what concern their gorget and their hair. This
preserves in tune, and keeps the scale of Affections even. This teaches a
denying and preventing behavior toward Tentations. -- 1. Let the Carriage and
Behavior be modest. Rebekah put on the Vail, ( Genesis 24.64.) when Abraham's
Servant told her, That the Man whom they saw coming toward them, was his
Master's Son, to whom she was intended in Marriage. Contrarily, the Woman with
the Attire of an Harlot of whom S^omo^ speaks, Met a young Man and kissed him,
and with an impudent face she spoke unto him, Prove. ^. 13. -- 2. Let the
Language be modest. Even Aristotle in his Politics, would have all Obsceness
of words to be banished by the Law, because when People take a liberty to speak
ill, they learn to do ill. He would therefore have such as are Young, neither
to speak or hear any thing that is foul, and if any be found faulty, to be
punished with stripes, or some note of Infamy. Therefore I would advise all to
do do with their loose and poisonous Pamphlets, as those Converts of Ephesus
did with their Books of Curious Arts, bring them forth and burn them. I know
one, that took upon himself this Revenge: a Friend of his coming into his
Chamber, took down from off a Shelf a Play-Book, who reading a little, he
perceived his Friend was soon infected, uses this Remedy; You complained
(says he) when you came in of cold; I will make you a better fire. So burnt
the Book before him.


G.
GErtrud, i. e. truly amiable. Gilian, see Julian. Gillet, dim, from Giles, i.
e. a little Kid. Glauce, i. e. Gray-eyed. Glycera, i. e. Duici, sweet. Grace,
commonly used. Grishild, i. e. Gray Lady. Grimtrid, i. e. of a Fair
Countenance. Gorgons appearing so terrible in Fables, for their sweaty Hair and
stone transforming Looks, are held to be the Daughters of Cela and P^^^^s^,
called by the Names of Medusa, Euri^le, and Thenio, having their abode near the
Hesperian Gardens; turning those that came to approach the Golden Fruit into
Stone with their looks; till by Minervas Assistance, Perseus vanquished them:
(...) which seems to be a Fable, alluding to Fortitude, which overcomes
Difficulties and Danger. Graces are those the Gr^^i^^stile style Charities, and
are held to be the Daughters of Jupiter and Euronyme, but some will have them
to be got by Jupiter on Venus, as being the Guardians and Attendants on Beauty,
etc. being three in number, viz. Eupbrosyne signifying Gladness, Aglais Beauty,
and Thalia Youth and Mirth; referring to the delighting of Mankind, and the
faithfulness of Things, and many other Matters, as relating to Joyful Times and
Seasons, Pleasure and Mirth are alluded to by them in sundry Manners. Gray the
Lady June, a Lady though very Young, of admirable Learning and Virtue, she was
Daughter of Henry Duke of Suffolk, and Granddaughter to Mary Daughter to King
Henry the seventh, and being by King Edward the sixth declared his Successor,
she took upon her the Crown after Edwards Decease, but enjoyed it not long, for
Queen Mary prevailing, she was Deposed, and together with the Lord Guilford
Dudley her Husband, Beheaded in the Tower of London, of whose wonderful Virtues
and Pieties, we speak more largely hereafter. Galatea a Sea-nimph, who growing
Jealous that Glaucus, of whom she was inamoured, had gained the Beautiful Nymph
Sylla to his Embraces, when she usually did bathe i his Streams, she by
Inchantations turned her into a deformed foul Monster, compelling her
perpetually to bark in the Caves of the Sicilian Rocks beaten with the Sea,
which is no more than the sounding of the Waters against it. Geruena, A Noble
Italian Lady, seeing diverse Assassins enter her Husbands Chamber to Assassinate
him, threw her self between him and his Enemies, Receiving the Points of their
Swords with the loss of her Life, till her Lord recovering his Sword, that hung
near him not only detended his own Life, but revenged her Death, by killing
diverse of them, and putting the rest of flight. Gabriela, a fair and ingenious
French Lady, flourished in the French Court, in such rare Perfections of
Beauty, that so she far Captivated the Heart of the Warlike King Henry the
fourth of France, that he had a design to have Married her, tho at that time he
was Married to Margaret Sister to his Predecessor; to prevent which, she was
Poisoned by an Italian scented Pair of Gloves, presented to her by an unknown
Hand. Genura, Queen to the Famous King Arthur, King of the Britains, for her
Beauty and Courage stands a famous Monument in Histories, to (...) the Luster
of the fair Sex. Gratiana, a Lady at (...) in Spain, being surprised at the
Sack of the Town by the Barbarians, gave all her Gold and Jewels freely to the
Captain, who had taken her Prisoner, to save her Honor; but the Infidel
breaking his Promise, as over-infiamed with the Charms of her incomparable
Beauty, going to break his Word and force her, she in the first place, stabbed
him to the Heart with a Dagger she had concealed in her Garment, and then to
prevent the like attempt of her Chastity from others, she killed her self.
Gonzaga Julia, a very Beautiful Italian Lady, had her Name so famed, that it
was heard to Constantinople, and found so Charming in the Ears of So^man the
Turkish Emperor, that it is thought the Fleet he sent under Barbaressa King of
Argiers his Admiral, was more to surprise her, than spoil the Country, but
upon their Landing fied to save her Chastity half naked to the Mountains.
Government Female asserted the best, I stick not to affirm, that Domination and
Government is not only lawful and tolerable in Women, but Justly, Naturally,
and properly theirs. First then, though force Crazy Philosophers drunk and
besotted with Aristotelism, have endeavored to devance them from the same
species with Men; and others madder than they, deny them Souls, yet when we
shall oppose Holy Scripture, which makes Man the Consummation of the Creation,
and them the Consummation of Man; if we would cite those high Attributes the
(...) give unto them, or instance those particular Indulgences of Nature, which
Agrippa reckons unto them, or those peculiar advantages of Composition and
understanding, which (...) Lusitanus ascribes to the, (...) to mention that of
Trismegistus who calls them Fountains and Perfections of Goodness: And indeed
this is a quarrel wherein Nature has declared her self a most interested
party, that we need go no farther then the Judgment of our eyes (the quickest
and surest that Man can make) to decide the Controversy. For whom can we
imagine to be so insensible, as not to be presently touched with the delicate
Composure and Symmetry of their Bodies: The sweetnesses and killing Languors of
their Eyes, the Meslange and Harmony of their Colors, the Happiness and
Spirituality of their Countenances, the Charms and Allurements of their Maine,
the Air and Command of their Maine, the Air and Command of their Smiles, so
that it is no wonder if Plato said, that Souls were unwilling to depart out of
such fair Bodies. That this is a Truth, needs so little Demonstration, that
looking but into any Story, you shall find, even the greatest Conquerors, Lusty
and Proud in their Triumphs, humbled and brought on their Knees by some fair
Enchantress. This we account admirable in Alexander and Scipio that they could
avoid, in Caesar and Mark Anthony we pardon it in respect of the greatness of
their other Actions. (...) a Martial-man, you will (...), is a Savage Brutish
thing, thing that knows how to run (...) dangers and to despise them, (...)
whose tho^ghts are always (...) random and abroad, seldom withdrawn and upon
their Guard, and therefore it is no wonder, if such Men be easily surprised
with such dazzling trifles. But when a Man tells you, that even the Wisest Men,
have been strange Doters on this Sex, and absolutely given up to them, it will
change the Case. I suppose there is no Man thinks Solomon a Fool, and it is
well known, how these white Devils seduced him. Augustus, that was certainly
one of the steadiest Men in the World, one that in his Touch outwitted the
Horry Senate, was all his Lite time led by one Livia: But to make this yet
plainer, Age we say begets Wisdom, now how general the Affection of old Men is
to Women, needs no proof, especially the Older they grow, some of threescore,
marrying Girls of sixteen, and therefore it is a clear Argument of the Truth of
this Point, and of the Wisdom of those Reverend Seniors that proceed according.
Now if it be necessary, that Governors should be of good Entertainment,
Affable, open of Countenance and such as seem to harbor no crooked or dark
design, no Men can be so fit for Government as Women are. For besides their
natural Sweetness and Innocence, their talk is commonly directed to such things
as it may easily be inferred, that their Heads are not troubled about making of
Wars, enlarging of Empires, or founding of Tyrannies. How few Men- Prophets do
Histories affords us in Comparison to Prophetesses; and even at this day, who
such absolute followers of the Priests as the Women are? If you wish them
Merciful, these are the tenderest things on the Earth; they have Tears at
command, and if Tears be the effect of Pity and Compassion, and Pity and
Compassion be the Mother of Virtue, must we not think that Mercy rules most in
them, and is the soonest expelled from them? If you wish Affection to the
Country; where can you better have it? Have Have not the Women many times cut
off their Hairs, to make Ropes for Engines, and Strings for Bows? Thus were
this Noble Sex restored to that right which Nature has bestowed on it, we
should have all Quiet and Serene in Commonwealths, Courts would not be taken
up with factions and underminings, but all would flow into pleasure and
liberty. Instead of molding of Armies, we should be preparing of Masks, and
instead of despressing of Factions, we should have balls and amorous
appointments.

Withal we know, how necessary it is in every Statesman to be Master of all the
Artifices and fleights that may be to gain upon them he deals with. Now if any
can be fitter for this than Women, I am much deceived: For what by their
importunities, glances, trains, sleights, ambushes, and little infidelities, it
is as impossible to escape them, as to go -- per ignes Suppositos cineri doloso.



We must therefore conclude, that as Women bring forth Children into the World,
as they mulitiply themselves into these visible and corporeal Souls, and after
they have brought them forth, are most tender and careful to bring them up: So
it is most fitting, having all these preheminences, and indulgences of Nature,
that when they are brought up, they should also have the Government of them:
For a Potter would think it a hard measure, if after the Pitcher were made, it
should fly in his Face.

Generation and Production of Infants. First let us see of what Seed he is
engendered, only of corruption and infection. What is the place of his Birth,
but only a foul and filthy dungeon? How long is he in the Womb of his Mother,
before he be like any thing but a vile lump of flesh unsensible, in such sort,
that when the Nature has retained and taken both Seeds, and being heated by
the natural heat, it creates a little thin skin, almost like to that which is
next the shell of an Egg that it is like nothing but an Egg laid out of time:
Then certain days after, the Spirits and the Blood mingled together begin to
boil, in such sort, that it causes to rise three Bladders like to a bubble
that flaots, and are made in a quick stream, which are the places wherein is
formed the three most noble parts of this superbious Beast, the Liver, the
Heart, and the Brains, which is the most excellent part of his work, the seat
of all the functions, the true fountain of feeling, the moving of the most
mightiest Palace of intelligence and memory, the very Ark of Reason. If we
consider likewise by their order, the creation of all other parts, and how they
be formed, and how the Child being in his Mothers Womb, begins to void Urine
by the conduct of the Navel, and how the Urine falls into a little Member or
Bladder, separated from the Child, ordained of Nature to that Office, and how
he has no purgings by the Fundament, for that he receives no sustenance by
the mouth, and that the little Belly or Stomach does not yet his Office, by the
which means nothing is transported into the Bowels. And how that the fix first
days he is as Milk, the nine days following Blood, the other twelve days after
flesh, and the eighteen days that follow, the Soul is enclosed. I know not
therefore so Diamond a Heart, which is not moved and ravished with great
admiration to contemplate things so pitiful and strange. And yet this that we
have spoken is very little, if we will consider more near ly the things that
follow, who is it that will not marvel, considering in what manner he is
nourished, and with what guiding, without having the use of the mouth, until he
be born into the World; then how much his Nature is tender, frail and weak, in
such sort, that the Mother be never so little hurt or smitten, or if she smell
the smoke of a Candlesnuff, it is enough to kill the Fruit in her Womb. But
whilst he is in the Womb of his Mother, with what Food is he nourished, what
junkers has Nature prepared for him? If that his Creation have seemed unto us
strange, no doubt his sustentation will ravish us in more great admiration,
seeing that he is sustained of Blood and Corruption of his Mother, the which is
so detestable and unclean, that I cannot without great horror rehearse that
which the Philosophers and Physicians have written, that have written of the
secrets of Nature. Those therefore that are curious of such things, let them
read Pliny, which has put in writing in his Natural History that which many
others before him have fore-shewed. And after that he has been long sustained
with this Venom, and that he is formed and becomes in quantity sufficient,
seeking therefore for more greater nourishment, and that he cannot not receive
by the Navel so much as is needful, by great pain he striveth to seek
sustenance, which is the occasion that he moves and breaks the panicles and
sustainments that he has always had till that time, then the Matrice feeling
it self pained, will keep him no longer in, but seeks means to bring him
forth, and therefore it opens, and by the said opening, the Child feeling the
Air, follows it, and straineth more and more to draw toward the opening of
the Matrice, and to enter into the World, not without great violent dolors and
pain of his tender and delicate Body. Gentleman Usher. There is a conceited
Treatise composed by an Italian (as what Wits more pregnant or present)
entitled a Supplication to Candlelight, discovering the abuses committed and
curtained by the silent and secret Shade of Night; where it might be demanded,
as God in Esaias did sometimes ask the Devil our Wathcman, Custo^, quid de Nocte?
What see thou? What discoverest thou? Tho Lanthorn and Candlelight hang out;
tho the Bellman traverse the street; tho the Constable and his rugged Gownmen
after a nod or two, take care for discharge of their Place, and punishment of
Vice, to put out a peremptory Question to a Night-walker, From whence came you?
or whither go you? whom do you serve? or what business have you so late? Yet it
seems they have no Commission to examine Coacted Sin: These may hurry along by
their Noses, and shroud a loose Gentleman Usher with as light a Curtezan in a
running Broshell, from those conniving Eyes of Endymion and his Brotherhood.
And this light piece must be conducted to his Lord, while he is to be admitted
to his Lady, to present both their Actions on the stage of Folly. With what a
commanding posture rides this Foot-cloath Sin? How apt to forget his
composition; and how confident in the privilege of greatness? These generally
have their Purveyors, to furnish them with such stuff as may content their
liqu'rish appatite, and feed their intemperate desires with fresh fuel. In
every Solemn or Festival Show, these Forragers take their stand, eying what
Beauties are of most attractive quality, then enquire they of their places of
habitation: Occasions they take to converse with them, and in short time so to
win in upon them, as they begin to commend their Masters Suit to their too
easy attention, and with long Battery, according to the strength of the Fort,
so seize on their affection, as they make way to their Lords admission.
Green Sickness in Virgins and Young Widows, cause, symptems and Remedy. --
Green Sickness is a Capital Enemy to Beauty, it comes shadowing over it like a
dark Cloud, and hides it is luster from the Eyes of Men, Elcipsing that Adorable
Splendour that a little before Animated the World of Love, to guide Lovers to
the blessed Elysium of Joy and Delight, displacing the Roses and Lillies that
fairly flourished to a wonder, and planting Beds of Leeks in their stead. This
happens more to Phlegmatic Constitutions than others, because the Humors more
abound, making the face and other parts of the Body look green, pale, dusky,
yellowish, etc. proceeding from raw indigested Humors; nor does it only appear
outwardly in the discoloring the Body, but it very sensibly afilicts the
Parties with difficulty of breathing, pains in the head, palpitation of the
Heart, unusual beatings and small throbbings of the Arteries in the Temples,
Neck, and Back; many times if the Humor by very vicious, casting them into
Feavors, creates a loathing of Meat, and the distentions of the Hypocondriack
part, by reason of the Inoridnate Efflux of the Menstruous Blood to the larger
Vessels; also by the abundant Humor we find sometimes that the whole Body from
the Effects of these Causes is pestered with, swelling at least the Thighs,
Legs and Anckles, and a universal weariness overspreads the Microcosine, or
little World.

Galenical Physicians tell us, that this Distemper chiefly proceeds from those
Vessels that are about the Womb, proceeding from the abundance of Crude and
Viscid Humors, arriving from several Inward Causes, and many times from
outward ones, as eating raw Fruit, catching wet on the Feet, drinking too
excessively of Water, and Intemperate Diet of any kind, but above all by the
solly of such Virgins, who covet to eat Coals, Chalk, Wax, Nutshells, whited
Wall, Starch, Tobaccopipes, and such like unaccountable Trash, that certainly
hurts, but cannot nourish, but on the contrary, dry up and consume the best
Nutriment drawn from wholesome Diet, and cause a Suppression of the Menses and
obstructions through the whole Body: So that the victims Humors are turned
upon the outward parts, whilst others of the same kind, not capable of being
dilated, oppress the Internals. To remove this Malady, enter into a wholesome
Course of Diet, and bleed moderately in the Arm or foot, as the Age requires
it, take then Decoction of Gaincw^ with Dittany of Creet, made in Whitewine
fasting; and for want of these, take Aloes, Senna, Agrie, Rhubarb boiled and
well mixed with Whitewine, but drink not Vinegar, nor very Stale Beer or Ale,
for sharp things shut up the passages, and retard the Humors from flowing to
those places where they may be Evacuated; and if the obstructions are not to be
opened or removed without requiring great difficulty, take prepared Steel,
Roots of Scorzonera, Bezora stone, and Oil of Chrystial, of each a dram, powder
the Roots, and mingle the Powder with the rest, and beat them well together,
then take a dram at a time in a Glass of small Wine, and by a short using of
these measures, the Humors will decrease, and in the end the force of Nature
will recover it is power to operate In a temperate calm manner, and then the
Complexion will return, and the Body be full of Vigor and Liveliness, and by
Leagueing with Temperance and Sobriety, be ever after more Healthful.

Green Sickness has yet another Cure, when it can be had to advantage and
liking, but it seldom can, unless it be dearly bought, because Beauty that
should allure it, is faded. You may guess Ladies at our meaning, for you have
often, we suppose, heard it said, It Is pity such a one is not Married she is now
very handsome, but alas she is going into the Green Sickness for want of a
Husband, and then Beauty,

As some fair Tulip by a Storm oppressed,
Shrinks up, and folds its si^ker. A^ms to rest.
Bends to the blessed all pale and almost dead;
Whilst the loud Wind sings round it is drooping bead,
And ore it is luster a ^ull darkness spread.
^o shrouded up, her (...) disappears,
Who this Diseases (...) Livery wear.
We must a flow, that Marriage greatly contributes to the removing this Malady,
for by Nuptial Embraces and Caresses the Humors are stirred, the Menses that
were obstructed flow according to their Natural and due course. The Humors by
this means being wasted, and no more Maver administ'red to the increasing them,
they will cease: however we advise neither Vir^^^^ (...), to be too hasty upon
this account to III match themselves, least the Remedy be by far worse than the
Disease, but rather take what we have before prescribed; wait with Patience,
and Converse with Temperance, and so you may do well in all particulars, to
your own Content and Satisfaction, which is what we most Cordially wish to the
Fair Sex, yet we confess,

Some when this Cloud they see a coming on,
Too fondly grasp worse Mischiefs than they shun:
As Flowers peep out too soon, and miss the Sun,
By the cold nipping Frosts are quite undone.
Gate or Gesture to be observed by Ladies, etc. -- Great Notice is taken of the
Gate and Gesture of Young Ladies, and Observations made thereon by the Nice and
Cenforious: They guess at the Disposition of her Heart by the dimension of her
Motion, concluding a light Carriage most commonly discovers a loose
Inclination, and that jetting, (...) the Head, bridling up the Chin, and
walking stately, (...) a haughtiness and Selfmoceit. They will say, were a
Ladies Body transparent, she could not more perspicuously display her levity of
Mind than by wanton Gesticulations; this then must be avoided, to avoid offense
and scandal; nay, we must confess that Decency her self beholding a Lady whose
Modesty should be the Ornament of her Beauty, demean her self in the streets,
or elsewhere, more like an Actress on the Stage, than Virtues (...), she
endeavors to reclaim her, by soberly admonishing her to look back to precedent
times, or to the wise and grave hurt of the Sex, and she will be convinced her
Gestures are inseemly; consider, you are (...) Earth, and seem not to (...)
that Earth you tread on from whence you was Originally taken, and in whose Dust
the most Exalted Beauty must lie down, and set in shades of Darkness. If a
Virtuous Lady seriously considers the Apish Gestures of Light and Loose Women,
they must needs not only make her detest an Imitation, but utterly put her out
of conceit with any that shall be so vain to Imitate them. A Swimming Gate, or
an affected Pace, as if you were treading out, or measuring the ground by the
Foot as you pass along, and that your Mind kept pace with every step, is to be
avoided, lest it be looked upon as a studied measure to be singular in your
walking, and consequently draw more Eyes upon you than others. A shuffling or
rigling motion is likewise discommendable; it gives a suspicion that you are
crookleg'd, or have received some hurt in your Limbs that has distorted them,
when it is nothing so, but that they are fair, straight and beautiful, as
Pillars of Alablaster or Ivory, but move with an Unaffected pace, which when
you see convenient, you may change to slow or swist; but beware of taking
stradling steps, or running a head, for those are Indecent in a Lady, and more
becoming the Rural Girls that tread the Summer Dews and Winter Snows.

Gracefulness, etc. Grant we that Beauty External in Women is exceedingly to be
admired, yet more by the Vulgar, than those who see with clearer Eyes into the
chief Graces and Ornaments of the Fair Sex. As from the well mixed Elements
arises bodily Temperament, and from the Blood mingling with lively humors in
the face, Beauty, so from a well tempered Spirit arises Gracefulness. If
Virtue could be seen in her proper Lovely and Comely Form, it would above all
Objects ravish the Beholders: We see Gracefulness very highly prized when but
breaking through a dark Cloud, and appearing with a little brightness in a
Ladies Conversation. Graces are like the links of a Chain fastened to each
other, all of them making but one Entire Complement when united, tho some are
larger and more lasting than others, more befriending and Beautifying. The
first of these may reasonably be Humility, and a Meek Spirit, it carries a
Luster and Adornment with it, like Rubies that shine on their Native Rocks in
the darkest Nights, or Diamonds in their Quarry. To be little in her own Eyes,
is the ready way to her Exaltation in the Eyes and Esteem of God and Man.
Secondly, Stedfastness and firmness of Mind add another Jewel to her Crown.
What a pleasing sight is it to see a Woman who can overcome her Passions and
Affectations, and consult Reason in all her Actions and Undertakings, having a
sufficient (...) of Wit and Abilities to carry on her Designs and Purposes And
again, is the Center of all her other Virtues; it is the Jacob's Ladder whereon
Blessings descend to her, and on which (...) ascends to Heaven in steadfast
believing, and Divine Contemplations of the Adored Mystery. No Gold is so
precious, nor will bear such a Trial of Faith; it bears the Test against all
Calamities, no storms (...) Tempests of Persecution, Temporal Miseries or
Affliction, tho they rage and beat never so fierce upon it, can shake (...)
foundation when fixed on the Rock of Salvation: It has always its Eye fixed on
the Center to which it tends, and nothing can remove it, or (...) benighting
Clouds between in piercing Rays, and the Object it is fixed on, to interrupt or
dim the Glorious Prospect from whence a Luster is again rejected on the Soul,
and gives it a dazzling brightness. Innocence and Truth are likewise exceeding
Graceful to the Fair Sex, a Compound of two in one; the one is a Breastplace of
Defense, the other a Golden Zone, to Circle in all other Graces, startling
approaching Dangers and Calumnies, and putting them to a shame^ retreat: Armed
with these Celestial Armories Woman is made strong for the Battle, and capable
of encountering the Legi^ of Darkness, and storming all the Batteries the World
can (...) against her, for there is an Invisible assisting Hand strengthening
her, that no power is able to resist, who by break things confounds the
strength the Mighty, and kings the exalted Vain glori^ to the Dust. A Woman
(...) she may not put on Man's Apperel, yet she may be clad in the same Armor
of Light, which will rebate the Eyes of sharp^expand^ Envy, and stands
Invulnerable against all Assaults. (...) is another Grace joined with Piety,
which makes her (...) in God's Cause, reasons for his Honor, and can by to
means hear his tremendous time reproached or blasphemed without being wounded
on the Soul with Horror and Detestation, whilst a Holy An^expand^ burns within
her, as being truly Jealous for the Lord God (...) Hosts, tho in her own
Concerns Meekness and Humility is (...) suitable to her. Let those then hear
who are over angry, hot or fiery, to turn them to God and to his Cause, and it
will make them cool and calm In their own; for as bleeding on the Arm by Art
stops Natural bleeding by Flux, so Zeal (...) God cools the corrupt Passions in
us, as the bright blazes of the Sun dim and allay the heat and splendour of
Earthly fires. This Grace becomes the Fair Sex, the rather because it argues
truth of Grace, for else calmness of her Frame may denote flatness or folly, or
want of Spirit. It must therefore be with most Women doubcless, were there
nothing to allay it as with the Females of the Creatures; Nature has put a
fierceness into them beyond that of the Males, tho not furnished them with so
great a strength to exert it. The She-bear, Tygeress and Lyoness are by the
Naturalists always accounted the most fierce and cruel, but Grace tempers and
cools this fierceness in Woman, making her humble, mild and gentle, affable,
courteous, tender, charitable and compassionate. We must acknowledge Men's
Spirits are hardier, and cannot without a great humbling, if ever, be so
pliable as those of Women's; so that a Woman being in the way of Virtue, pursues
it with more Earnestness, and overcomes by her Humility and Meekness, in
suffering all the obstructions and difficulties she meets with. The Charity of
this Sex is much to be admired and applauded, of which many worthy Monuments
remain in this Kingdom, have Enrolled them lasting Names, not only on Earth,
but even in the Book of Life; no Ornament is so becoming the Sex, as a merciful
and tender Heart in giving, and giving in Compassion, it is a sweet smelling
Savor in the Nostrils of the Almighty; and gives swifter Wings to those
Prayers and other Holy Duties that ascend up with it, and place it as a
Memorial before him. God is the Author of the Spirit of Gracefulness, and where
it is sought with Care and Diligence, with good Works, and a steadfast
Perseverance in doing well, it will not be withholden, he that has given so
excellent a Gift to so small and inconsiderable Insect as the Be, to dispose
that Honey she has gathered from all Flowers in so wise a manner, that her
Workmanship makes all the beholders to admire it; does in a higher kind favor
Woman the Fairest part of the Visible Creation with his Goodness and Graces,
and teach her to make them into one Compound and Temper, enable her to lay them
all so sweetly together, and Order not only her Marriage Course, but the
Affairs of her Life so well by the help of them, that both every one many
afford her special influence into it; and all of them together adorn her with
the Beauty of the Kings Daughter, who was not so much admired for her Rayments
being made of fine Needle Work, as for her being all Glorious within, that only
can make her appear Graceful in earnest to discerning Eyes, when (...)
Ornaments are only (...) bravery, to take and please the shallow Fancies of the
^^ thinking Crowd; and to (...) and keep this substantial (...) unfading Beauty
and Come^^^^ she must have the Spirit of ^^riness, and Wisdom to gird the loose
Loins of her Soul, and teach her to accommodate her self to every occasion
offered a suitable Correspondence, (...) there may be no unequalness (...)
disproportion in her Con^^^^ and Management; and this will make all things
easy and pleasant to her, for that which comes from a Hypocrite with Toil and
Swear, comes from that Soul that Grace has adorned, with Sweetness and Facility
however the more careful Woman shall be to Mark the Circumstances and Seasons,
and all the occasions of her Life, so much the more wisely she will be able to
apply each of tho^^ Graces to their Objects, and shewforth the Luster of all in
her General Carriage, and (...) as are the Ingredients, such must needs the
compound be, it Skill and Discretion order it well. Now the Expression of all
these in one, is Amiablenest, that is the way whereby she utters her self, and
in it the lovely Blush of them all appears; as humbly amiable, mercifully
amiable in the comely Carri^^^ of all (as her Body is in wearing the most
costly and suited Attire) most comely and pleasing: Especially when the Grace
of this Grace is added to it. This proceeds not from any Contingencies, but
from a Principle within, which causes her to go on in a uniform Course. So that
observe, how you see her at one time, you will find her the same at another,
she is always her self; and as a Virgin that is Comely, will look beautiful
even in Tears. So although her Course of Life is not always Serene and Calm as
the Seas, thereon the Halcions Brood; but sometimes clouded, and overcast with
thickning Tempests of Cross Affairs and Events, which fall out many times
suddenly; as when the struggling North wind breaking from its Rocky Dungeon,
rouse by surprise the drowsy Deep in Tumultuous Waves and Darts 'em at the
Stars; yet in all Cross Accidents, her firmness of Mind bears her up; (...)
seems unmoved and unconcerned for her self, when she is pitying others, who
perhaps are less afflicted that her self, because their Spirits are less able
to sustain the Miseries that attend on humane Life; and therefore the burden
to them is the greater to be born; she looks upon all Affliction as sent from
Heaven, and takes them patiently, as the Fatherly Cha^^^sement of that Gracious
God under whose Charge and Care (...) is. The Gracious Wife is not only a
helper to the Estate of her Husband, and to the well being of her Neighbors,
but she is a Comfort and Contentment to their Minds and Spirits. As from the
Comb the Honey drops distill,
So from her Lips Words gently fall,
With Golden Sweets her ravished Ears to fill,
And shower down Blessings on us all.
Whilst in her Breast, Celestial Beauties lie,
That make the Wonder in the Harmony.
Solomon the wisest of Kings, ransacks all the precious Stores of Nature, to
find fit Similes and Emblems for a Virtuous Woman; and all to show that
Loveliness and Gracefulness, is that principal Excellency that commends a Wise
to her Husbands Esteem and Affection, without which the rest would be of little
Value or Moment; in other things she has a mixture of her self, but in this
she resembles him, who has restored her to her first Order and Comeliness in
Creation; a Creation which no External Value can purchase, nothing in the World
can equal the Reflection of those Graces a loving Wife makes her Husband
Partaker of with her; since all her Actions and Undertakings redound as well to
his as her Praise, and turn equally to the Credit and Advantage of them both;
as on the contrary a Vicious Wife is a Discredit, a Disgrace, and a hurtful
Evil to a Husband, she creates abroad to him dishonor and shame; and at home
Discontent and Trouble; yet the best Man so afflicted shall hardly avoid one of
these Imputations, viz. that he is unworthy of a good one, because he knows no
better how to Order her, and make her better, by sober Counsels and Advice; or
Unhappy, because such a one is thrown into his Arms, as a Punishment of his
former supposed Transgressions; but let us leave perverse Wives, and treat of
those that make Men's lives comfortable in a Marriage Estate.

A Good Wife sets the Crown of her Merits upon her Husbands Head, and expresses
the temper of her inward Virtues in the amiableness of a Loving and Sweet
Carriage, no Afflictions nor Frowns of Fortune can make her forget her Duty and
Tenderness toward him, but her pleasing Influence breaks through all
Oppositions and Sorrows, as the Sun through the thick Mists or dark Clouds,
darts its rays of Light and Heat to revive the Solitary Earth; after she has
been long encumbered and enfeebled in the Icey embraces of a tedious Winter;
and almost suffocated by the raw Damps and Fogs he has breathed upon her. It is
not so Praiseworthy for her to cheer her Husband, when there is no such
Apparent need of her Consolations and Comforts; but it is highly honorable in
her (...) do, when the shades of Adversity have eclipsed his Splendour and
thrown a Mantle of Da^^ness over his Content^^^^, when all other earthly
Comforts have forsaken him; as i^ the season of Sickness, or the breaking in of
some one dangerous or various Calamities upon his Spirits, to the wounding
(...) his Soul, and casting him (...) Agonies of Sorrow and Confusion: Then the
kind Endearments and Tenderness of a Wife, is better that the Melody of the
most Pleasant Music, and that is the best Trial of her Faith and Constancy;
then she truly understands the Grace that God has given her, and it appears
Graceful and Ornamental in her, sets her off with an uncommon Luster, and adds
to the Excellencies of her Beauties; she makes a Husband truly Happy and Exalts
her value above the price of Rubies, she is a Crown and Ornament to him, and a
glorious Pattern for the Sex to imitate, and he that values not, and highly
esteems such a Treasure, is unworthy of it, and of seeing good days; If God has
thus blessed any Man, as no doubt he has several with such a Wife, let him
seriously consider the Happiness he enjoys, with thanks to him who has so
framed and brought her to his Bosom: Let him labor to encourage her cheerfully
to persevere in her well-doing, and give no occasion (...) of scandal or
offense: Let (...) Seal her a bond of faithful respect and cordial Love, that
he may see that her Virtnes (...) her worthily Esteemed and (...) Valuable: Let
him count her as the Signet on his right hand, place her near his Heart, as a
costly Jewel of great Price: Let it not be enough, that he (...) Love one who
has honored him more than all his Wealth or Birth could do, but (...) must as
far as in him lies, procure her Honor in all places, and suffer none to
eclipse her worth: Let her possess the fruits of her Labor, and let her Works
Praise her in the Gates. -- And to sum up the Character of a Virtuous Woman,
take this borrowed ^ilimode, though perhaps not so good Verse, as a true
Description of her.

1.
Let the Violet which alone
Prospers in some Happy shade,
The Virtue in her has it is Throne,
(...) no looser Eye betrayed.
For she is to her self untrue,
(...) delights ith public view:
(...) her Beauty as no Arts
(...) enriched with borrowed Grace;
(...) high Birth no Pride imparts,
The Modest blushes spread her Face.
2.
When Folly boasts, Illustrious Blood,
This foe is noblest being good.
Curious, she knew never yet
What a wanton Courtship meant;
Nor speaks she loud to boast her Wit,
But's in her Silence Eloquent.
Of her self survey she takes,
But 'tween Men no difference makes:
She obeys with speedy Will
All wise and innocent Commands;
And is so innocent that ill
She Acts not, neither understands.
3.
Women's Feet may run astray,
If once to ill they know the way.
She sails by that great Rock, the Court,
Where Honor often has split her Mast,
And in retiredness finds a Port,
Where her Fame may safe Anchor cast.
Pure Virtue cannot safely fit
Where Vice is found enthroned for Wit.
She holds that days Pleasure best,
When Sin waits not on delight;
Without Mask, or Ball, or Feast,
Sweetly she spends a Winter night.
4.
She her Throne makes Reason climb.
Whilst would Passions captive lie;
And (...) Article of time
Her pure thoughts to Heaven fly.
And all her vows, Religious be,
And she from, vain Conceits is free.
No center knows, she for her Love,
But that Eternal fixed above.
But we need not stand too nicely upon this Point, seeing few regard the
Complexions or Proportions of this kind when they couple, but if they are
healthful, young and vigorous, we see those of all Complexions and
Constitutions have Children, it is convenient however in some measure to assist
Nature in taking Care to be Temperate, and to feed upon wholesome Diet, to
cherish the Body as you find occasion with Restoratives, and to charm the
Imagination with Music, to wash away Cares by chearing Refreshments, that the
Mind being elevated to a Pitch of Joy and Rapture, the Body being discumbered,
the sensual Appetite may be the more freely encouraged to gratify it felt in
the delights of Nature; Melancholy and Grief being utter Enemies to
Generation, by drying up and consuming the Prolifick Moisture; therefore
whatever is troublesome to the Fancy and Senses must be avoided; excess of
Eating and Drinking likewise are to be omitted, for the superabundant humors
and fumes created thereby, dull the Spirits and render the Body unactive;
therefore Moderation in choice of Meats and Drinks breed more and better Blood,
because the Digestion is more Easy and Natural, and the Concoction more freely
distributed, and this good Blood creates good Spirits: So that all things work
and concur to the best end of answering your Expectations to have healthy and
beautiful Children, and when you have obtained them, as the lasting Pledges of
Chaste Love, and the best of Temporal Blessings, and so to bring them up in good
Education, that they may be (...) true Comfort to you, and (...) Grace and
Ornament to their Country.

Generation, a natural (...) on, whereby an Animal (...) another like it of the
same (...), of convenient Seed. In Generation, the first thing we see is a red
Speck, which is clothed with a little Bladder next a little Heart, whence
Veins and Arteries flow, at the Extremity whereof you see the Viscera, the
Bowels, etc. afterward the whole Faelus is formed and clothed with Membranes;
before Generation the Seed of the Male being cast into the Womb, enters and
prepares its Pores, afterward sweats out a Viscous Substance, like the white
of an Egg, which moves the Egg out of the Testicles and Tubes; for the Woman's
Eggs being impregnated by the influence of the Seed, are emitted out of the
Testicles, and received by the Fallopian Tubes. Generation more particularly
considered in the making a (...) choice in Marriage.

Generation is the chief end of Marriage, and for which it was principally
ordained, but is many times frustrated by unsuitable Matrimony; Hypocrates in
reference to a Woman's being capable of Generation, tells us that to Experiment
It, she may take Incense or Storax, and make a Suffumigation with a Garment
loose wrapped about her, hanging to the Ground, in such a manner as no Vapor or
Fume may easily scatter, and after about half an hours continuance over the
smoking Incense, if she find the Fume of it in her mouth, it has by it is quick
penetration passed through the Vessels, and shows them to be open; so that there
being no obstruction, there can be no Barenness, as this famous Physician
concludes: However notwithstanding this, regard ought to be had to the
Complexions and Consticutions of the Parties that marry, that it may in a great
measure be discerned how nearly they are corresponding a d agreeing, for it
has happened that a Man who has been Childless by one Wife. though Young, and to
appearance apt and capable, has had diverse by another; and on the other hand
the like has befallen Women.

Grant we must then, in some measure, what the same Physian gives as his
Opinion, That such a Correspondence ought to be between the Married Couple; and
his Reasons are That the hot answer not the cold, the moist, the dry in measure
and quality: And then the Cultivature is in vain, and there may be Pleasure,
but no Generation; for so mavelous Work as the formation of a man, (continues
he,) could not be performed without a proportionable Comixture of Seed: and to
Exemplify this Assertion on of his, other Physicians proceed to tell us, that
a Woman very Ill-conditioned, shrill-voiced. Twarthy Complexion and enclining
to Leanness, suits best for the Work of Generation.

Gentleman, ( generosus nobilis) seems to be a compound of two words, the one
French ( gentile, i.e. honostus, vel honesto loco natus;) the other Saxon, mon,
as if you would say, a man well born. The Italian follows the very word,
calling those Gentil-homini, whom we call Gentlemen. Galanthis, Alemena's Maid
turned into a Weesel. Galathea, a Sea Nymph beloved of Polypheme, who killed
Acis whom she preferred before him. Gallus, a Young Man punished for suffering
Sol to discover the Adultery of Mars and Venus. Gillet, Aegidio the Woman's
Nature. Gilt, Jilt, a cheat, a fly defeating ones intent. Glycerium, a
Courtesan of Thespia. Godina, Wife to Leosvic Lord of Coventry, (who to gain
them a release from his Impositions) rode naked through the City. Geloum, a
Lake is Sicily, at two Fountains, whereof one makes Women fruitful, the other
barren. Grishild, gr. Gray Lady. Guastaliens, a Religious Order of Men and
Women, began 1537. by a Mantuan Lady, Counsels of Guastala. Gule, Goule, or
Yule of August, St. Peter ad Vincula, Lammas-day, when they say Quirinus's
Daughter (by kissing St. Peter's Chain) was cured of a Disease in her. Gummilda,
she killed her self, because her Husband Asmond King of Denmark was slain in
Battle. Gunora, a Norman Lady who held the Hamblet of Lanton by the service of
a barbed Arrow to the King when he hunted in Cornedon Chase. Graeae, three
Sisters of the Gorgons, they had all but one Eye and one Tooth, which they used
by turns. Gallant, (Fr.) goodly, noble, virtuous. But it is now substantively
applied to that person who si Servant or Plato^^^ to a Lady. Galatia, a Sea
Nymph, for whose love Polyphemus flew himself. Ganymede, ( Ganymedes) the Name
of a Trojan Boy, whom Jupiter so loved (say the Poets) as he took him up to
Heaven, and made him his Cupbearer. Hence any Boy, loved for carnal abuse, or
hired to be used contrary to Nature, to commit the detestable Sin of Sodomy, is
called a Ganymede, or Ingle. Gertrude or Gerritude (a Woman's Name) compounded
of the old Saxon Gar, i.e. All; and trude i.e. Truth or Tro^h. Gorgon, (Gr.) a
terrible fighting Woman. Poets feign there were three such, Daughters to King
Phorcbus, their Names were Medusa, (...), and Euryale. Gossip, (from the Saxon
Gorsib) our Christian Ancestors (understanding a spiritual affinity to grow
between the Parents and such undertook for the Child at Baptism) called each
other by the Name of Godsib, which is as much as to lay, as they were Si^
together, that is, of Kin through God, or a Couzin before God; And the Child in
like manner called such his Godfathers or Godmothers, etc. Verst. Graces, (
Charites) three Sisters Poetically supposed the Daughters of Jupiter and Venus:
They were callled Aglsis, Thalia and Euphrosyne: The Moral was, to express the
mutual love, and cheerful Conversation, which ought to be among Friends, for
they were painted naked, to signify friendship ought to be plain without
dissimulation; smilling and merry, to show Men should do good willingly; young.
and Maiden-like, to teach, Friendship should consist in honest things; and
holding hands together in a round ring, to show a Benefit bestowed, returns
again to the giver. Gyazcia, in general, are the Accidents incident to Women.
Guabr-merched. Br. a fine to the Lords of some Manors upon the Marriage of
their Tenants Daughters; also as Lair^^^ Gy, o. a guide. Gybr, o. any writing
or pass. Gyges, a Lydian Shepherd who killed the King Can^aules (his Master)
and enjoyed his Crown and Wife (whom he had shown him naked) by the help of --
Gyge's Ring, taken from a dead Giants finger found in the belly of a brazen
Horie in the Earth, whose co^ler (turned inward) made him invisible.
H.
Hagar, (...) in the Arabic signifies to flee, perhaps a Name given her from
the face of her Mistress Sara (...). 16.6. or as others, ^ a Stanger. Hinnah,
(...) Channah, i. (...) or merciful. Hai^is, see Avice. Helena, a (...). dict.
So called from her beauty. Hephzi-bah, (...) (...), 2. King. 21.10.1. ^^
delight, or properly will ^^ in her. Esther, see Esther. Huplice, was Daughter
to (...) King of Thracia, and gave her Mind to Warlike Exploits, to which the
was inci^ed by often hunting wild Beasts, and when the Guests made an inroad
into her Fathers Dominions, overthrew his Power, and took him Prisoner, she
with certain Troops purified the Enemy, roated them, and ^ave him a famous
(...). Harpics, Monsters fabled to have the Bodies of Birds, and Faces of
beautiful Women and are said to be the Daughters, of Neptune and the Earth,
they greatly disturbed Aeneas at his Banquet, and presaged the hardship he
should meet withal in his Voyage from Troy to Italy. Hebe, styled among the
Ancients the Goddess of Youth, and is said to be the Daughter Juno. She was
made Cup^earer to Jupiter, but slipping ^^ a F^ast, her Coats flew over (...)
ears, and discovered her Nakedness in an unseamly part, which caused the
Thunderer to appoint Ganimedes to officiate her place; but afterward, she was
Married to Hercules, when he took his place in the Skies. Hecata, called the
Goddess of the Night, (...) in Poisons and Enchantments; she was painted with
three heads, one of a Dog, one of a Horse, and one of a wild (...). Some call
her Proserpina, or the Queen of Hell; she is said to Poison her Father, and
flying to her Uncle for Refuge, he Married her, and on her begat Circes and
Mede^, both Inchantresses. Helen, the Daughter of Jupiter by Ledea, Married to
Menelaus Brother to King Agamemnon; her Rape by Paris, Son to King Priamus of
Troy, occasioned the destruction of that famous City by the Greeks, after a ten
years Siege, and great Effusion of Blood; she was accounted one of the most
beautiful Women in the World. Helen, Daughter to Constantine the Great, a
Virtuous and Heroic Lady, Married to Julian the Apostate. Helen Queen of
Adiabene, who first embraced the Jewish, then the Christian Religion. Helen,
Daughter of King Coilus, a British Prince, married to the Roman Emperor
Constantinus Chlorus, and Mother to Constantine the Great; she was a great
Encourager of the Christian Religion, found out the Cross where the Jews had
hid it, and caused many places of Religious Worship to be builded; she was
called Augusta and Imperatrix, and relieved the Poor wi^h all the Treasure that
came to her hand, and was a munificent Patroness to the before afflicted
Christians. Hell was Daughter to Athmus King of Thebes, who flying from her
Mother-in-law with her Brother Phryxus, was drowned in the Narrow Sea that
parts Asia from Europe, and by that Misfortune gave to it the Name of
Hellespont. Heliades, Sisters accounted the Daughters of the Son, and Celymene,
whose Brother Phaeton was, who unwarily aspiring to guide the Chariot of the
Sun, was destroyed by Jupiters Thunder, for firing the Earth and Skies by his
misguiding it, for whom these Sisters wept till the Gods turned them into
Poplar-trees, and their tears into Amber. Here Is Martia, or the Martial Heir; it
was accounted amongst the Ancient Romans as a Goddess of Heirs, and held to be
one of M^^s's Companions; she took her Surname of Martial, by reason in those
times Quarrels frequently arose about Inheritances and Successions, and when
they were decided, either by Arms of contesting in Law, they supposed, a right
decision. Hermophrodite, An ancient Idol bearing the Resemblance of Venus and
Mercury, called otherwise Aphrodite, as Joining, trading and Eloquence with
delights, etc. Hersilia, Wife to Romulus first Founder of Rome, a Virtuous
Sabian Lady. Herta was accounted a Goddess among the Germans, worshipped in a
thick Grove, and her residence when she pleased to appear, was a Cart with a
Carpet over it, her Victims were menial Servants or Slaves, who were thrown
into a Lake and there perished, in hopes of enjoying Pleasure and Plenty in
another World; her Cart upon general Processions was sometimes drawn with Oxen,
and sometimes by Lions. Hesione the fair, was Daughter to Leomedon King of
Troy, and by reason of the raging of a Plague, the Oracle being consulted, it
told them, that to appease the God of the Sun, and the Sea, with whom the King
had broken his word, a Virgin must every day be tied to a Rock, where a Sea
Monster should be sent by Neptune to devour her; this being done by Lot, it
fell upon Hesione: but Hercules returning from his Hysperian Voyage, in a
dreadful Combat killed the Monster, and freed the Royal Maid. Hildigardcan,
Abbess of the Order of the Benedictines, famous for her Learning and Piety, but
more for her Prophecies of the Errors that should creep into the Romish Church.
Hannah, the Mother of the famous Prophet Samuel, who obtained him of God by her
servent Prayers, after she had been a long while Barren. Hiparthia, Married
Crates only for his Wisdom and Learning, being otherways deformed, and
unfightly, and poor, (...) could all her Friends or (...) offers of Rich
matches (...) her from him; She was ^^r self very Learned and In^^^^ous, so
that their Souls, rather than their Bodies coveted to be near together.
Hippodamia, Daughter to Briseus, and fell among other Captives at the taking of
Tenedos to the share of Achilies; but Agameamon falling in Love with her, took
her from him, which made him refuse to assist the Greeks till the Trojans had
near vanquished them, and came to set fire to his Ships. Hippodame, Oenomaus
the King of Ellis's Daughter, being very Beautiful, abundance of Suitors
crowded to gain her in Marriage, which made him consult the Oracle about the
success, which gave Answer, That whoever married his Daughter, should came his
Death; whereupon he made Decree, that whoever could outrun him in a
Chariot-Race, should have the fair Hi^podame in Marriage, but being vanquished,
he should dye: Many declined it, but some being vanquished, were put to death.
Till P^l^ps having bribed the King's Chariotier, to leave a Pin out of the
Wheel, that it might fall off in the Career, by which fall the King was wounded
to death. Hortensia, a Roman Lady, Daughter to the Orator Horlensius. At the
time a great Tax was laid upon the Matrons of Rome, she notably pleaded their
Cause before the Triumvire, that a great part of it was remitted. Hostilina was
by the Pagans accounted a Goddess taking care of their Corn, that it should
grow to an equal length and be full Eare^ without Blasting. Hours, by some
Reputed God esses begot by Jupiter (...) Themis, and were called Eunormia Irene
and Di^ce, or Good Laws, Peace and Justice. Howard ( Ci^^erine) she was Married
to King Henry the VIII and was Daughter to the Lord Edmond Howard. Son to
Thomas Duke of Norfolk: she was one of the two Queens that he caused to be
beheaded, upon suspicion of Incontinency, though neither against her, nor Anna
Bullen, who felt the same Fate before her, any thing deserving Death appeared,
only the Kings Pleasure must be obeved to make way for more Wives.
Hyacinthides, six Daughters of Erichtheus, who succeeded Pandion King of
Athens, taking their Names from the Village Hyachithius, where they all se^^ a
Sacrifice for their Court v. for the Oracle having declared that the Thracians,
who were Warring against the Athenians, could not be overcome, unless one of
their Ladies was offered up as a Sacrifice to Dima; they all contented so
earnestly to have the Honor to dye for their Country, and the Love they bore
to each other, that they would not have one to dye, unless ^^w all participated
in the same Death, and their Wishes being granted, the Athenians gained: most
notable Victory; their Proper Names were Pandora, Procris, Clithonia and
Orithia, and are fabled to be placed among the Stars. Hyades, are a Company of
Stars, to the number of seven, placed in the Neck of Taurus; they are tabled to
be Nurses to Ba^chus, and by him in return of their Kindness, fixed as
Constellations, and are called the Weeping Stars, as having great Influence
over Rains and mo^st Clouds. Hypermenstra, one of Daraus K. of Argo's fifty
Daughters, who married the fifty Sons of Egytus, whom Daraus ordered them to
k^ll on their Wedding Night, which they all did but this Lady, who saved her
Husband Lynceus, for which her Father Imp^^^tioned her, but soon after (...)
her, and restored (...) to her Husband. Hysiphile, ho Queen of the Island of
(...), was banished by the Cruel Women, who had killed all their Husbands,
Fathers and Brothers, for sparing her Father Thaos, and being taken upon the
Sea by Pirates, she was sold to Lycurgus King of Ne^e^, who understanding who
she was, gave his Son Archemrus to be Nursed by her; she having a little before
brought forth Twins, whom Jason had begot on her in his Voyage to Colobis, when
he fetched thence the Golden Fleece. Housekeepers to Persons of Honor or
Quality. Those Persons who would qualify themselves for this Employment, must
in their Behavior carry themselves grave, solid and ferious; which will
inculcate into the beliefs of the Persons whom they are to serve, that they
will be able to govern a Family well. They must endeavor to gain a Competent
knowledge in Preserving, Conserving, and Candying, making of Cates, and all
manner of Spoon-meats, Jellies, and the like: Also in Distilling all manner of
Waters. They must likewise endeavor to be careful in looking after the rest of
the Servants, that every one perform the Duty in their several Places that they
keep good hours in their up-rising, and lying down, and that no Goods be either
spoiled or embezzelled. They must be careful also, that all Strangers be Nobly
and Civilly used in their Chambers, and that your Master or Lady be not
dishonored through Neglect or Miscarriage of Servants. They must likewise
endeavor to have a competent knowledge in Physic and Surgery, that they
may be able to help their maimed, sick, and indigent Neighbors; for commonly
all good and charitable Ladies make this a part of their Housekeepers business.
House-Maids, Your principal Office is to make clean the greatest part of the
House; and so that you suffer no room to lie foul; that you look well to all
the stuff, and see that they be often brushed, and the Beds frequently turned.
That you be careful for, and diligent to all Strangers, and see that they lack
nothing in their Chambers, which y^^r Mistress or Lady will allow; and that
your Close-stools and Chamber-pots be duly emptied and kept c^ean.

That in the Afternoon you be ready to help the Housekeeper or the
Waiting Woman in their Preserving and Distilling.

Housekeeping Expenses: The Husband abandoning his Pleasures and Hony-moon
Delights, and that is the greatest pleasure in the World, for a Man to be able
to deny himself; he brings home his Wife, puts on his ordinary Weeds, and
begins to consider what he has to do. And I hope there is never a Manichean of
'em all, but will confess it to be very great pleasure to a Man to look after
his own Business; and if he sees his Wife no less diligent in her Station,
that is as great a pleasure as any can be. There is no Man in the World so
silly, but that before he goes about to Marry, he has so much insight into the
World, as to know that the best House-wife in Nature can never be able to show
her Art, her Education, and her House-wisery upon bare Walls. I would lain
know, which a rational Man would take for the grea^er pleasure, to see his wife
always industriously employed at home, or never at home but a Nights, and that
not till the Watch cries, Past twelve a Clock neither but still whipped out of
Doors, as soon as she gets dressed and spending her time at the Play Houses, or
else losing Money at Cards at this or that Gossip's House, where she finds
Company most suitable to her Humor. Now there is no Woman in the World can
show her House-wisery, and her Ingenuity in an House where there is nothing but
bare Walls. They that go a borrowing, go a sorrowing, says the Proverb. That
Woman is in an ill Condition, that must be forced to send to her Neighbors for
every Skillet, or Stew pan, or Washing.Tub she wants, which are many times
denied, and as frequently lent with an ill will. But she that has all things
necessary about her need never be beholding to her Neighbors. And therefore in
my Opinion, it ought to be so far from being an undergrateful Sound, that it
should be like the Music of St. Pulchers Chimes in his Ears, when his Wife ask
him for Money to buy Necessaries. If she aim to be a little more gay and
sumptuous than ordinary, that ought to be another pleasure to him: For the best
is the best Cheap. She becomes the Envy of her Neighbors that come to visit
her, an^ her Reputation runs through the Parish like Wildfire. The brightness of
the Bosses of her Fire-L^ons, and the glaring Luster of her Pewter, and
Preserving-pan, are the Discourse of all her Acquaintance. Habit, By the Habit
we understand all sorts of External Ornaments, as well for Men as Women; as
Garments of fine St^ff enriched with Gold-plated Buttons, curious Veneti^s
Points, and other Toys which make the Accoutrements complete; but here are
certain Maxims to be observed. First, That all the Garments worn be Ala-mole,
that they be always New, and that you have variety for change: To avoid all
Extremes, and extrav^gant Fashions, an^ not to be concerned with the
introducing of new ones, but follow those that are most generally approved; to
change when others ^hange. and never to have any thing that is extraordinary,
or affected: Not but that H^bili^ments are very advantageous, especially to
Women; for that Lady may be judged as extraordinary Beauty, whilst she is se^n
in a Noble Dress, who will lose the greatest part of her charms, when divested
of her Apparel. And those that are experienced, do not love to be seen in a
careless Garb. In the morning as soon as they are up, the first thing they do
is to salute their Glass, and consult with it, to know whether they have gained
or lost any Graces since they last conversed with it. Then they immediately
bridle in their Chin, and make horns upon their Heads with their Hair, the
Looking-glass, that is like an Ape, counterfeits them, and shows them the horns
also, when they smoooth their Hair, the Looking-glass smooths it also; and when
they raise it, it raises it likewise, and generally does every thing they do.
After that they have spun away the Morning in ordering their Hair, and their
Pendents, and making little rings upon their Foreheads, which they fasten with
mouth-glew, and rightly placing their Earrings and other Toys, and that the
Galss acquaints them their Head is well dressed; then they begin to commit their
Body to a close Imprisonment, and pinch it in sotarrow a compass, that the best
part of it is plumpness is forced to rise toward the Neck, ^o emancipate it self
from such hard Captivity: and being groun of her liberty, appears with a kind
of pleasant briskness, which becomes her infi^^tely. As for her fair Breasts,
they are half imprisoned, and half free; and do their utmost endeavor to
procure their absolute liberty, by shoving ^ack that which veils the one half;
but they are too weak to effect it, and whilst they strive to free themselves
they cast over a Veil, which perfectly hides them. The desire they have to be
exposed to view, makes them beat it back continually, and not being able to
remove the small obstacle, they look quite through it: there is nothing
constantly free but the upper part of the Neck, which is also more
vainglorious than all the rest, and is adorned with a Neck-lace of great
value, which adds to it is vanity. When the Fair One is thus accoutred, the
turns on all sides before the Glass, as if she would ask the Question, What it
thinks of her? And when he likes it, she takes her leave, and orders the Horses
to be put in the Coach, and then she goes to bestow a Visit upon some Assembly
of Ladies, that she may not altogether lose the pains she has taken in her
attiring.

Hadarezer, Aderezer, Beautiful, Healthy. Haggs, Vapors like Flame about the
Hair, or Horses Manes, not so much flaming as reflecting light. Halebrede, a
Lout, or Lubberly Man, or Woman. Halicarnassus, the chief City of Carta, where
the famous Tomb of Mausoleus was built by his Queen Artemisia. Halifax, ( sa.
holy hair) Horton, a Town in Yorkshire, from a Malds head cut off by a Priest,
and hung upon a Yewtree there. Halonesus, an Aegean Isle defended by Women when
all the men were slain. Huff. The Huff hereto^ore usually kept his Whore, which
upon a plotted occasion must acknowledge her self his Wife, who having drawn in
some Young man to iie with her, gives Intelligence thereof to the Hector, who
watches the minute, catches them in the Act; and with threats frightens the
Young man into a compliance of recompencing the Injury, either by present
satisfaction, or by a Bond, or so forth; but this has been so notoriously and
commonly used, that this practice is absolute and quite out of fashion. Yet
still he has a being, though his way of living be somewhat different, for now
he at first sets up by taking a Purse on the Road, which not only puts him in
stock, but furnishes him with good Apparel, that may qualify him to keep
Genteel Company, as occasion shall offer. He understands a Dye very well, and
well he may; for, for some Years that he was a Footboy, or so, there was not
an hour in the day past, in which he did not exercise his Hand with the Dice,
either for naughty halfpence, or Coffee-pence when Fortune smiled, or else by
himself, that he might the better cope with his Livery-Companions, Lace-coated
Gamesters; besides, three parts of every Nights dream is spent in, Come at
seven, what chance of the Dye is soonest thrown, in topping, slurring, palming,
napping, with how to fix a Dye for any purpose. Practicing thus Sleeping and
Wak^ng, he becomes an excellent Proficient in all sorts of Gaming, by which he
enedeavours to bubble all he meets with, but if unkind Fortune by meeting with
his match, has robbed him of his Money, he knows where to borrow or steal an
Horse, with which he may rob the Traveller to Re-instock himself. In short, his
Cloister is a Bawdy House, where all his Devotions are tendered. He is a
Protector to all distressed Damsels called in our Vulgar Tongue common Whe^^^s;
and that he may put a better gloss not on the matter, calls them Cousins, and
swears he will vindicate their (stinking) Reputations with the Hazard of his
Life, and that he may strike terror into the fearful, he will draw upon any
slight occasion, not with an intent to hurt, but to wipe off the suspicion of
being a Coward; for this he knows, that the Opinion of Valor is a good
protection to him that dares not use it. In Company there is no man more
Exceptious and Choleric, but seldom lets his anger swell into a Quarrel, but
hopes by his Huffing to blow over a sound basting. Yet if he discovers a
Coward, be will not rest still he has found (...) some means to quarrel with
(...), and there must not be ^^pected a reconcilement, till (...) Gentleman
has given him (...) with a Silver Sword. (...) Man more constantly (...) his
Brains than this (...)-Huff; for his Life is a (...) Invention, and each Meal
(...) stratagem. When his Whores will not or cannot supply him, (...) borrows
of any that will (...) him money, which sometimes is lent him, not so much
(...) a Repayment, as that (...) will never trouble them (...). Husband,
Whether lawful (...) a Young Lady to pray for one, (...) when shall she obtain
him -- (...). He must renounce Huminity, and confess himself a (...) of an
Aggressor upon the ^riviledges of Nature, that ^ould not make it as immortal
(...) as possible, which is only ^^urably effected by Murri^^ whereby we
survive in (...) Children. Misery without Friend to bear a part is very (...),
and Happiness with (...) Communication is tedious, and (as Seneca has observed)
(...) inclines us to make a (...) Choice of Misery for No^^. We should be
vagrant (...) of Animals without Marriage, as if Nature were ashamed (...) our
Converse; We should ^^ribute to the Destruction (...), condemn the Wisdom (...)
first Institutor, and cen^^^ the Ed^cts of such Commonwealths, who upon very
good grounds have discountenanced and punished Caelibacy. Nay, supposing all
the Miseries that Marriage haters suggest should fall upon us, it is our own
Fault, if with Socrates we don't learn more by a Scolding Wife than by all the
Precepts of Philosophers. -- Now if it be lawful to Marry, it is lawful for
Ladies to pray for good Husbands, if they find their Inclination, Concerns in
the World, or other Motives (which they are to be Judges of) consistent with
the Ends of such Society. As to the Form of Prayer required, they may if they
please, use the following if they are not better furnished already. -- From a
profane Libertine, from one affectedly Pious, from a profuse Almoneer, from an
uncharitable Wretch, from a wavering Religioso, and an injudicious Zeallot --
Deliver me! From one of a startch'd Gravity, or of ridiculous ^evity; from an
ambitious Statesman, from a restless Projector, from one that loves any thing
besides me, but what is very just and honorable -- Deliver me! From an
extacy'd Poet, from a Modera (...)i it, from a base Coward and a rash Fool,
from a Pad and a Pauper -- Deliver me! From a Venus Darling, from a Bacchus
Proselite, from a Traveling Half, from a Domestic Animal; from all Masculine
Plagues not yet recounted -- Deliver me! But -- Give me one whose Love has more
of Judgment than Passion, who is Master of himself, or at least an
indesatigable Scholar in such a Study, who has an equal Flame, a parallel
Inclination, a Temper and Soul so like mine, that as two Tallies we may appea^^
more perfect by Union. Give me one of as Genteel an Educations as a little
Expense of time will permit, with an indifferent Fortune, rather independent of
the servile Fate of Palaces, and yet one whose Retirement is not so much from
the Public as into himself: One (if possible) above Flattery and Affrones, and
yet as careful in preventing the Injury as able to repair it: One, the Beauty
of whose Mind exceeds that of his Face, yet not Deformed so as to be
distinguishable from others even unto a ridicule. Give me one that has learnt
to live much in a little time, one that is no great Familiar in Converse with
the World, nor no little one with himself: One (if two such Happinesses may be
granted at one time to our Sex) who with these uncommon Endowments of Mind may
(naturally) have a Sweet, Mild, easy Disposition, or at least One who by his
Practice and frequent Habit has made himself so before be is made mine; but as
the Master-perfection and chiefest Draught, Let him be truly Virtuous and
Pious; that is to say, Let me be truly Happy in my choice. As to the second
Question When this Young Lady may expect a Husband take this Answer? viz. We
read of a Waggish Boy, that were to the Delphick Oracle, with a live Sparrow in
his hand, and proposed this Question, W^^ther the Sparrow was dead or alive?
designing, that if the Oracle had answered dead, to have shown it alive, or if
the Oracle had answered alive, to have crushed it in his hand, and produced it
dead, but the Oracle answered, In ^^ situm, etc. It Is in thy power to produce
it either alive or dead. I am sensible the Lady needs not to be instructed in
the Application, which if she designs in the Affirmative, I would not have her
to neglect her Form of Prayer. Athenians. -- Husband Indifferent, or how to
make your Life easy and pleasant with him. Having entered the State of
Matrimony either by your own Choice, or the prevailing Authority of Parents,
over your natural Inclinations or Affections; it is then your business (as the
Country Phrase is) to make the best of a bad Market; for indeed, not without
some Melancholy Resentments, we must declare it one of the greatest
disadvantages of the fair Sex, that many times their Liberty is restrained in
making their own Choice, their Friends Experience and Care being by a kind of a
Custom allowed in that (though frequently very unagreeable to their own
Fancies) with which however through Modesty they are seemingly constrained to
concur and acquiess, though their internal Consent goes not along with their
External Profession of a liking and Agreement; but when by their publicly
Signing and Sealing, they have passed the Rubicon of Marriage, and cannot
retire without greater inconveniences, then it is their main concern to look
forward, and prepare themselves to pass on in the State they are entered into,
and endeavor to make that Lot easy, which is now unavoidably fallen to their
share, which cannot be better effected than by a Wise and Prudent Management of
what they have undertaken, and are embarked in, in turning every thing as much
as may be to their Ease and Advantage, banishing all Peevish and Froward
Considerations from their Minds, to render that supportable which otherways may
appear intolerable. And now Ladies, we Address our selves seriously to try your
Patience, which in the end you will confess to turn to your Advantage; we
therefore in the first place build our Foundation on the inequality of the Sex,
considering that for the better Occonomy of the World, Man who was to be the
Lawgiver, had the larger ^^are of Reason assigned him; and for the same Reason,
the other Sex is the better for the Compl^isance and Compliance that is
necessarily required in the performance of those Duties which most properly
seem to be assigned to it, which notwithstanding, however at the first fight it
may look something odd, gives Encomium of Praise and Advantage, which could not
otheways be easily gained by the Female Sex; they have it (by this means) not
only in their Power to free themselves, but to subdue and gain the Ascendant
over those that claim a Superiority. The Sexes indeed are made of different
Tempers, that by a mutual Society, their defects might be the better supplied;
the fair Sex want (generally) the Reason of the other for Conduct, and Strength
for Protection; and in lieu thereof, the communicate Gentleness to soften,
entertain and divert the Cares and Troubles of men; to which their multiplicity
of Affairs in the World expose them. It is true, the Laws of Marriage run in a
very harsh strain, when by them you are enjoined to obey, but then it is made
amends, when the Husband is under as strict a restraint, not only by being
obliged to endow the Wise with all his Worldly goods, but to worship her with
his Body. That is, to make her next God, the chief Object of his Affections, to
have a tender regard and respect toward her, to (...) in all reasonable
matters by Le^^res, tending to the Ends of Generation, and to stand as a Bu^^^
in her Defense against all Injures and Wrongs; or shall we strain it further,
to admire her, as the beautifullest fullest part of the Visible Creation, and
to have an Esteem and Veneration for her, in any degree beneath Idolizing her,
and thereby rendering her the Principal in Affection, which ought to Center
only in the Supreme being; and again, you have all the Advantage imaginable,
when married, by having the honorable Descent of Families in your keeping, and
that is a trust so great, that nothing in the world can be greater, or of more
weighty concern. -- Husbands ill Nature, or flying out into extravagancy, have
frequently been reclaimed by the meekness and modest behavior of their Wives
toward them; the Patience of Wives have overcome the frowardness of Husbands,
and they have seen their Follies, in the Mirrors of their Virtues, and the
shame of being outdone by those they Term the weaker Sex, has reformed them;
when indeed it would be far other wise, where Women declaim and Recriminate in
Cases of Failures and Misdoings in their Husbands, Men being generally of that
Temper, that they are easier persuaded than compelled; (the which, Ladies, if
you look unto your own Sex, you will find something not disagreeable) Men are
hardened, when Wives make known their Crimes in a clamorous manner to the
World; though were it between themselves, the fear of Public shame would past
all peradventure, (...) them from running into the like Errors or occasion of
(...) which in the main, reflects upon the Wife in (...) degree, though in a
greater upon the Husband; She is (...) for making so bad a choice, and more for
exposing those weakneses in him, which she ought (...) have concealed, since
she has weak such a choice; the Secrets of Man and Wife in some measure are
held Sacred; locked up in the Arcana's of their Breasts, and when they are
unadvisedly divulged, there is a kind of a Profanation of Trust; however it
grows into uneasiness and dislike, and from thence breaks out into Feuds and
Animosities, no right understanding after that being to be had or obtained,
without a greater return of Credulity than we can reasonably propose. If you
gain the Victory by Mildness, Patience and Suffering, it will be lasting, and
you work thereby a kind of a Miracle in reclaiming a bad Husband, but if it be
done by insolency and reproach, we cannot assure you an entire Conquest, for
with the first Advantage he will rally, and perhaps in a ruder Manner than you
expect, over-feet your supposed entire Victory; and by that means making you
his Prisoner at War, or Discretion, oblige you to uneasier Terms than you are
willing to undergo, though you have no Appeal from the Conditions, the Victor
has a right to impose on the vanquished. -- (...), sometimes we must confess
are lured by hope of ^ain, or Insascinated by bad Company to engage too far in
Drinking, it is especially in this Town an Epedemical failing; if this (though
we could with it might not) should be (...) of the Inconveniences in a (...),
yet so Order your Affairs within the Rules of (...), that Persuasions may be
the greatest Arguments you use to convince him of his Defect, and by Mildness,
la^^^ to let him see the Unman^^ and Deformity of such ^^ unreasonable
Extravagancy, ^^ makes Man (for a time (...) the Fumes are predominant (...)
over the Senses) degene^^ beneath the Creatures, (...) by the Laws of the
Creation were subjected to his Do^^: for certain it is, could (...) Man (which
indeed is not ^^ be done) view himself, and consider with Reason his Fol^^, and
ridiculous Actions (...) over-pow'red with the sumes of Wine, he would detest
and labor them; these in mild (...) without Reflection or (...); a modest,
Patient Wife has the opportunity of presenting to him in such (...) Images and
Representa^^^, that he may see them (...) so great a Degree, as to make him, if
not presently, yet in time (by meditating (...) (...) the many inconveniences
such debauches draw upon him) be reclaimed and grow more Temperate, and that
for two Reasons; viz. First, Because it destroy his health, and hinders his
Affairs: And Secondly, Not only so, but renders him ridiculous to those 10 whom
when he is Serious, he is much Superior in Wisdom and Understanding: there is
nothing more enarvates the Bodies and Minds of Men, and this we suppose is the
Reason, why Homer Fabled, Circie to turn Men into Beasts, when perhaps (though
she is seigned to be the Daughter of the Sun) being only a Tavern Woman, she
had a winning exchanting way to draw in Customers and make them drunk; insomuch
that being by that means bereaved of their Senses, they acted more like Bruits
than Rational Creatures, and so consequently by the Sober and Judicious were
properly termed Swine; and if by any means you Work his Conver^^sion and
reclaim him, you (...) a stronger Obligation on (...) to oblige you in all
their Reasonable and Convenience and incline him the more readily to hearken to
your Pertwasions and Advice in other Matters; when on the other hand, bitter
and passionate Words make the Disease, instead of Curing it, much worse; for
Man that are given up to such faults, are not to be reclaimed by Contradictions
and Reproaches; for they not giving them leave to consult their Reason, or what
may be best for them, Passion gets the upper-hand, and a disdaining to be
controuled makes them fly out into worse Extravagancies. In some Cases, Wives
gain great Advantages to themselves through the faults of their Husbands, which
may seem to some a Paradox, however we shall explain it, and make it apparent:
first then, -- Husbands without faults (if such black Swins there be) are
always strict and dangerous observers, they have penetrating Eyes, and see
every thing so plain, that their Wives least failings or oversights are exposed
to their Censure. And though we will not doubt, but that the Female Virtues
will for the most part disappoint the sharpest enquiries; yet few Women can be
easy, when all they do or (...) shall be represented in the clear Glass of
understanding, where notwithstanding all their Caution some faults will appear;
nothing better softens the Natures of men, than the mixture of some failures;
by them it is that they are best informed, they must not strike too hard upon
others, because they do often deserve blows themselves, they pull men's rage by
the Sleeve, and whispers Gentleness to them in their Censures, when they are
rightly applied. The Faults and Passions of Husbands brings them down to the
Wives, and make them the better Content to live upon equal Terms, make them
less uneasy in that, than faultless men would be; for man is generally found
very haughty and proud of himself, till humbled by common weaknesses and
defects, which in the corrupt State of humane Life do work more toward's the
reconciling us to one another, than all the Precepts of Divines and
Philosopher's; so that where the Errors of men's Natures make amends for the
disadvantages of yours, it is properly, Ladies, your business to make your
Advantages of the Benefit; but then it must be done discreetly, and not by such
sinister ways as may afterward create offense and disturbances, considering
there can be no lasting Happiness, where there is not a lasting Peace and
Quite. Husbands sometimes are Choleric and Passionate, or Ill humoured, yet
this by an ingenious observant Wife may be so tempered and ordered, that they
at the (...) of the Account, may be brought to make amends; for if a Husband be
angry to day without Sense, he will perhaps be tomorrow as kind without Reason;
so that by having regard to the movements of such a man's temper, you may by
degrees easily bring over his Passions to your Party; the strongest Poisons
being many times the best Remedies in some Diseases; but then they must be well
Corrected, Temperiz'd and allai'd by a skilful Artist or else they kill instead
of Curing. There is a great deal of nice Care to be used in dealing with a Man
of a Choleric Complexion, for Choler proceeding from Pride and Haughtiness of
Mind, makes a Man puffed up and swell against Contradicting, by being too
Partial to himself, concluding he is lessened, if he be opposed: In such a Case
the Wife must be Prudent, and wary, taking heed not to throw out such
Expressions as may increase the Storm, but rather seem to acquiess, and yield
to humor him, till he grows cool, and then by flow Degrees she may rise again
upon him, so that her Gen^leness in time will prove a Charm to dispell his
Anger; Smile operate more powerfully than (...) and Gentleness will sooner
reclaim than Frowardness; and when other Remedies appear too weak, a little
flattery will not be amiss, if it be not carried too far, that it may be
(...)ed; especially, if ill humor and fullenness take place for there is a
mixture of surliness even in a good Sense, and the Folly that is so predominant
in the World, gives frequent Temptations to raise Men's Spleens; wherefore that
which may be generally called ill humor, is not always to be accounted a
fault, and only becomes one, either when it is applied wrong, or too long
continued when it is not so; for which Cause be not overhasty in fixing an ill
Name upon that which may not perhaps deserve it: For put the Case, a Husband
should too severely resent any failing or dislike, it may be that more blame
may belong to the Wives mistake, than to his ill humor; and if a Husband
behave himself with that indifference which a Wife may resent as offensive, she
is not much in the right to put the worst sense upon it, if it can reasonably
admit of a better: some Wives (if their Husbands change their style and
Countenance, different from what they were in their first Addresses) would call
it by the Genteel Name of their humor, Bec. and that it would be too (...)
always to stand stretched on Lo^es Pinnacle: A Man may without blame sometimes
in little things be less careful than as others, whilst a Wife that is so
nicely expecting, may draw upon her self the Centure of too much Craving and
(...). But if this Husband be really Sullen, and that it unavoidably comes upon
him by fits, then the Wife must be watchful to (...) the first appearance of
Cloudy Weather in his Brow, and to have an Eye when the (...), and then with
solid (...) and gentle (...) (...), labor to prevent its return; for the cure
is always most successfully undertaken when the black humor begins to be very
weak. -- Having thus far proceeded, we come now to let a Wife see, how she
ought to manage a Covetous Husband; but let her take care in the first place,
that she mistakes not Frugality and Thrift for Covetousness; and concludes him
so Covetous, only because he will not allow her a superfluity of things
unnecessary; examine then well the Circumstances of his Fortune, weighing the
Reason of every thing you expect from him, before you have a right of
pronouncing the Sentence; for indeed too many complaints of this Nature are
unjustly made by Wives, when they are Abridged of gratifying their
extravagancies: The mean then, between Nigardliness and Extravagance, is to be
observed, in sparing in what is less necessary, and to lay out more largely, in
what is more required in our several Circumstances. Some Wives for all this,
will call their Husbands Kindness in Question, if any other Measure beside that
of their own Fancies is set to bound their Expenses, which ought to be avoided,
and the Husband not to be esteemed Covetous or Unkind; because he better knows
what is fit and reasonable: but to come nearer to the purpose, we will suppose
the worst, and say the Husband is Niggardly, close Fisted, and over-sparing,
when his Fortune would reasonably give a larger Allowance; the Wife in this
Case must labor to make it less afflicting, and observe seasonable hours of
speaking; take him in a pleasant humor, when she would require any thing; as
when he is on the getting Hand, or in the midst of Love Endearments, but never
when Losses or Vexations hang about him, nor contrive by Sinister ways to
constrain him; for this, though it may at one time Advantage you, will never
hold at another; and what is given grudgingly, is worn with the Envy of the
Donor; you must the better to humor him, pretend a^ least to be as Covetous
and Savings as himself; yet tell him things that are necessary ought and must
be had to keep up Credit and Reputation in the World; and what is expended one
way, your Provident Care and double Diligence shall bring in another; and if
your Reasons and Arguments are not forcible enough to prevail, you must get
some intimate Friend of his, to advise him to live answerable to his Character,
and do that in his Family that may be for his Honor and Credit, and prevent
the Reproaches that will otherwise be thrown upon him; for the Passions of Men
are very unequal, and are apt to be raised or lessened as they work upon
different objects, and in some things more tractable than in others, giving ear
to Reason with Patience, and admitting a fair Dispute: and moreover in matters
of avarice, there are but few Husbands so entirely abandoned to it, but may at
some times better than at others be wrought upon, to do what is Convenient, or
in Reason can be expected, from them; sometimes an Anger to be outdone by
others of less ability, carries a main stroke with it, and sometimes a Pride to
gain applause, and be admired, raises them to a liberal profuseness. A fit of
Ambition, Vanity or Kindness may produce the like, by suddenly opening and
enlarging a straight Mind, and a Wife Minding Critical and Seasonable Times,
may by many other ways bring their ends about, and make her self easy under
this Grievance. The last Supposition we will make, is, Put the Case a Husband
be weak and incompetent, and not capable of making use of the Privileges that
belong to it; it must be concluded then, that such a one yields room for a
great many Objections; yet so God Orders humane Affairs, that he seldom sends a
Grievance with out a Remedy, or at least some Mitigation to take off the
sharpness of it; and to lessen such a misfortune: you are first to bring your
Observation, that a Wife very often makes the better figure, for the Husbands
making the lesser in the World, which is the thing most Wives mainly aim at,
that standing the more fan in sight, they may be the better taken notice of;
and though a Wife may be sometimes ashamed of foolish Actions in such a
Husband, she will however be less afraid of him, than of one that is wife, and
more circumspect in his ways: A weak Husband gives the Wife an uncontrolled
Dominion, which it she be Prudent in managing, gets her a high Esteem and
Reputation among Men, as having an opportunity to Grace her Sex, by showing how
fit they are for the Management of weighty Affairs, did not men generally put
them by in such Matters; least their Lusty shining too bright should overcome
theirs; however such a Husband must have due and civil Respect paid him by a
Wife in external matters, whatever inward thoughts she may have of him; leaft
he prove Cross and (...), and bring a Vexation upon her that may be avoided;
^^^ must hide his weakness as much as may be, and forbear to throw out any
Jests upon his Awkardness and unseemly Behavior; or to speak or act
slightingly of him in Company; for that not only gives Encouragement for others
to do so, but will make some imagine her Light and Inconstant; and being
thought one of easy access, there will not be some wanting to lay Temptations
and Snares in her way, in which she may happen to entangle her Virtue beyond an
easy disengagement; however, there may be said to be more Comfort with a Wife
Prudent Husband, because less care and more Credit in his Company and
Conversation, and knowing how to be Master, he will not suffer her to feel the
weight of Government, yet give her all reasonable Liberty, as it she had the
Power in her own hands; one whose Authority is so softened by his kindness,
that he finds his tenderness gains him a just esteem in return of it: insomuch
that she will never want Power, though it may be of little use to her, as
having no occasion to exert it; and such a Husband is as much above all others
kinds of them, as a Rational Subjection to a Prince Magnificent in himself, is
to be preferred before the uneasiness and disquiet of an unlimited Liberty. --
Having brought matters thus far, and showed the best ways to make a Life Easy
and Comfortable in a Marriage-state, by turning seeming disadvantages to the
advantage of a Wife under her various Circumstances, we now come to consider,
what is to be considered, and therefore a Wife the better to endear a Husband
to her, must carry her self friendly and obliging toward his Relations and
Friends, which requires the most refined part of her Understanding to manage
her self in as she ought, for she must Study how to live with them, with more
Care than she is to apply to any other part of her Life, especially at first,
that she may not stumble at her setting out; for the Family into which a Young
Lady is to be ingrassed, will be apt to expect she should conform to their Mode
and Method, as is exacted from a Stranger in a Foreign Country, and not bring
in a new Model by her own Authority, for that will not be admitted without
great Contesting; for they will stand up against such an Invasion, and not give
over till they have frustrated the design of it, and made void its purposes:
Therefore, if she would live in Peace and good Esteem, she must be Cautious to
avoid the least appearances of any thing of this Kind, but rather by avoiding
to give the least offense, strive to strengthen her Interest by gaining them to
her side, and that she may afterward with less difficulty give her Directions,
she must at first be sure to receive them from her Husbands Friends, that they
may be the better satisfied in them; and by so doing, she will soon see a kind
of an Emulation amongst them who shall best direct and most commend her; so
that taking Root by degrees, the power in a little time will wholly devolve on
her; so that she then being settled in her Husbands Affections, may Act
Independent of his Relations; for she must consider, if when but a New Comer,
she begins too brisk at first, they will how prudently soever she manages her
self, be finding faults, and magnify little Failings; and sometimes if they
have Power and Interest with him, incense the Husband to a dislike of her
Carriage, and so plant the first Seeds of Domestic Jarrs and Discontents; and
if this happens not, yet all prudent Husbands for their own sakes will have
their relations respected and considered, whereby a higher value is set on the
Family; for he takes it upon him as his own Concernment, not to have his
Relations neglected, because it makes way for a neglect to break in upon
himself: And here if a Wife bring any Servants into the Family with her, she is
in a great degree answerable, for their Failings in their respects, if she does
not reprove and reform them; and therefore it may be more advisable for her to
gain the Servants she finds in the Family, than to tie her self too fast to
those she carries with her, for that will rather make parties, and those
Parties raise disturbances, which will be of Ill consequence; and when any
appearances of such things put forth, she must labor to prevent their growth,
if she would secure her own ease: for it may be said, that the greatest streams
are made up of the smallest drops at the head of the springs from whence they
are derived: So the greatest Circumstances of Life will in some degree,
directed by these seeming Trifles, which having the advantage of being the
first Acts of it, have a greater Effect than in their own Natures singly they
could pretend to. But to conclude this Article, our Advice is, that a Wife as
much as Nature will give her leave, ought to forget the great Indulgence she
has found at home from the gentle Discipline of tender Parents; because what
she finds abroad at first, will be of another Nature, though upon her being
transplanted into another Family, the Usage may prove very kind, and afford no
justifiable reason to complain; her Mind must be however composed to entertain
and welcome it, and not start and fall into disorder at the appearances of
different Scenes; for being a while used to the alterations, it will become
more Natural and agreeable, and grow more suited to her Temper, which being
made up with a Husbands Kindness, will continue to increase upon her, till she
is under sail in the prosperous Ocean of Happiness, and Matrimonial Comforts.
Hypathia, Hypathia of Alexandria, the Daughter of Theon, had made so large a
progress in Learning, that she exceeded all the Philosophers of that Age, and
not only succeeded in the School of Plato, but also explained the Aphorisms and
Precepts of all Philosophers, so that an Extraordinary Concourse was made to
her by those that were desirous to improve themselves in that Science, by which
she was famed in the Courts of Princes, and there behaved her self with
singular Modesty, as not doubting to present her self in public amongst them
in the Assemblies of their Learned (...), whereby her Temperance and promptness
of mind, she was received by all (...), and by most highly admired; but her
singular Endowments could not protect her from Envy, when a Faction of Envious
Persons bandyed against her, only for seeing themselves outdone by a Woman,
insomuch that going home in her Coach, they laid an Ambush for her, Petreus of
the Church of Casaria being their Ring leader, and pulling her rudely out of
it, they carried her to that Church, where having stripped her naked, they then
fell foully upon her tender Flesh, and by scratching her with shells,
occasioned so great an Effusion of Blood, that she dye; their Malice ceased not
here, but they proceeded to tear her dead Body in p^eces, and to hide their
guilt, b^ryed the dismembered parts at Cynaros. Thus Learning meets from Envy
bad returns,
And kindles flames with which the Envious burns;
Till basely he does work his Hellish ends,
By Leaguing with the black Infernal Fiends.
Go Learned Maid, thy Fame shall ever live,
Their unjust spite to it a death cannot give:
All times shall rescue it from Envy's hand.
It shall (...) bright, and fix on (...) brand,
That shall remain till Earth and Sea disband.
Husband, a good one his Character: Having occasion to describe a Good Wife, we
should be very odd if we should not mark her out a good Husband, and such a one
Ladies we with every one of you, when you will condescend to dabling. His Love
to his Wife lesseneth not his Rule, and his ruling her lesseneth not his Love.
He is constant to his Wife, and confident of her; he allows her sufficient
Maintenance, but measures it by his own Estate, nor will he give less, nor will
she reasonably desire more; which allowance, if shorter than her deserts, and
his desires, he lengthens it by his Exraordinary Kindness, and Courteous
Behavior, as well in Sickness as Health. -- He, that she may not entrench upon
his Prerogative, maintains her Propriety in Feminine Affairs, and takes her
Advice in all things that are reasonable: for the Soul of Man is so lofty, that
it overlooks many low Matters that lie level to a Woman's Eye, and therefore he
considers her Counsel therein may better hit the Nark. He allows her as the
weaker Vessel, and therefore bears with her Infirmities, without repining or
regret, declining all reproaches, or hard usage, desiring therein to do not
what may be lawful, but (...); remembering that he Enfranchised her by
Marriage, and that she is priviledg'd from any servile Labor or Punishment. He
is careful that her Infirmities shall not be publicly known, and is always
ready to vindicate her Reputation, yet he keeps her in the wholesome Ignorance
of unnecessary Secrets, too heavy for her Sex to bear, or may injure her by
containing them, in raising per^urbations of doubts and fears in her Mind: and
in fine, he cherishes her as his own Flesh, makes her the Delight of his Eyes,
rejoices when she is merry, and labors to comfort ^er when she is heavy and
sorrowful; he thinks nothing his Ability will purchase too dear for her, nor
any thing he does too much to please her. If Death prove unkind, and take her
from him, he mourns her loss immeasurably, and if he dies first, he leaves all
to her and her Children. Husbands Duty toward his Wife. Having given a brief
Character of a Good Husband, it is now requisite, seeing all are not such, to
instruct such as intend to Marry, or are already in possession, how they oug^^
to behave themselves toward their Wives. First then, consider the State of
Marriage is Sacred, first ordained by God in Paradise, and many times confirmed
and expressly commanded so to be esteemed, therefore not to be trifled with, and
looked upon as a thing Indifferent: First then, you must resolve to Love and
Cherish your Wife as your own Flesh, or never expect to be really happy in your
Marriage, Love is like Salt or Sugar, which does season and render acceptable
those Occurrents which else would be of no pleasant taste, but beget digests
mosts indispensable. We cannot therefore conclude those Husbands overwise, who
imagine to have the Subjection of their Wives, not by the Exercise of
Affection, but by the asserting their own Authorities; for whatever is
compelled, waits for an opportunity to cast off the Yoke, and those that reign
over the unwilling, find it as great to keep them in Obedience, as pleasure to
be obeyed. All Compulsory being a violent motion, which upon every Cessation of
Vis Mo^iva returns again to it is Natural bent, when that which is spontaneous,
has a regular motion within the Mind, moves the Body to act and put its
dictates in practice; so that nothing that is reasonable is refused, for Love
that is as strong as Death, and can not be Quenched by many waters, acts then
very Powerfully and overlooks many Faults and sailings; therefore the wise
preserve and cherish Affection, whilst the simple go about to destroy it, and
with it their own peace, magnify each Failing, and aggravate each petty
Circumstance, as if Women could be altogether without some slips or sailings,
unless they expected them to be made in Heaven, and so drop down into their
mouth; however, we leave him that hopes for such a Bargain, gaping till he
catches such a one, without setting him any time for his acquiring such a
Felicity, and say, that Men who are so proud of being Rational, should let
their Reason sway their Passions, and weigh in sound Judgment what is fitting
to be done for securing their quiet, and rendering them happy in their States
and Stations; for doubtless they are inexcuseable, who upon occasional
Discontents affect a Sullenness, and labor to give a weight to their Anger by
the continuance of it, when all the while it only frets upon the Heart, and
dis^^^^ themselves, goes about to poison the Root of Love, and not only hinders
its growth, but makes it decay and wither, if not speedily recovered. Husbands
therefore when they have any Disputes with their Wives, ought to avoid all
words that carry reproach or bitterness in them, ^or they sink deep into the
Mid, stir up Anger or Melanchol^y Discontent, to wound Affection, and lay Love
a bleeding; they grate upon the Heart, and will hardly be obliterated: So that
what might easily have been composed as to the matter of the Offense, proves
almost remedile^s, by reason of these S^^ca^^ins. It is beyond the Rule of
Breeding or Manners, when any dispute happens, to rip up past Reproaches,
Failings or Misfortunes, it is only the practice of the Billings gate
Rhetoricians, when Anger and B^andy inflames them. Some Men and their Wives in
their unbridled Passions have been so much overseen in divulging one another
sec^et failings, that they have become a Byword, and be^n ashamed of themselves
all their lives after; for when once Gossips get a Story by the end. It (...)
like wild^^^. Your Wives Reputation should be as Sacred as yours, for seeing
you are Embarked in one bottom, the Shipwreck is equally hazardous. If you
divide your Interests, and make Parties, there is little hopes but that by such
ban^ying you weaken your selves to let in Ruin and Misery. When you ^un into
these Extravagancies, look upon your Marriage Vows and Promises, and see if you
can find any such Actions and Procedures warranted there; consider that those
Promises were made before God in this Holy Place; Perhaps you will say, you
would not take a false Oath if any one would give you the World, and that you
abhor and detest Perjury; bet know those Promises are as equally binding
before God as an Oath before a Magistrate, and will in Heaven, if not on Earth,
be as severely punished; dividing of Stocks, and drawing that way from one
another, (...) many times created by di^^^ust, which ought to be avoided; and
as one Bed is de^^red for Genual Recreation and Enjoyment, so one Common
Traasure should reserve Apprehension of Defrauds and Waste on either side,
un^^^s it too palpably appear, and (...) if it be not stopped, you (...) run down
Ruins Hill. To keep a Wise poor and nee^^^ that is, short of Money to ^^chase
such things as it is not ^^ays reasonable to acquaint (...) with, we promise
you may (...) her Virtue to a great Try^^ especially if she be young and
handsome; for knowing he can have it for bestowing (...) Favors, which you
regard (...), on others, it will run such in her mind; and perhaps having
overcome those (...) and scruples at which her Conscience ^or a while started,
Anger for being so used, and (...) of gain more than pleasure, may render you
by this Diana's means another A^^^on. No Woman ever gave her plight in Marriage
with an intent to be a Slave, or ^ordidly abridged of what is convenient; but
in that promised themselves Pleasure and Convenience in the Society of a
Husband, which they believe themselves incapable to Enjoy without him, which if
they want from you, their own Wit induces them to seek elsewhere, Whence we
have seen some that have come to the Bride-house with the greatest Affection,
promising to themselves as much Felicity in a Husband, as their Love and good
Opinions had raised their Expectation to wish, but afterward having been
utterly frustrated of their hopes in the Trial and Experience, finding the
Tavern and Company sharing ^o deep in what they looked for, they grew at first
Melancholy and Discontented; but after having cast many things in their Minds,
Requital, a kind of sweet Revenge, has taken place, and having first lulled
their Consciences into a slumber, to balance the neglect; they have not long
wanted those that would entertain them with all the soft Endearing Obligements,
Courtship, and Complacency they expected, though in vain, from their Husbands;
and all this by their not behaving themselves as they ought toward their
Wives, they have brought upon themselves. How can we imagine, that a Woman,
whose Creation was for Society, and with the intent that Man might not be
alone, can endure with any Patience to be mewed up till Midnight, whilst the
Husband perhaps is abounding with Mirth and Jollitry at a Tavern, or it may be,
giving her right to another in wanton Dalliances; should Men be so served by
their Wives, they would grow out of all patience, and even were they (...)
would break them to get loose, and go in search of their Wanderers. Woman is a
noble Creature, and though here God gave Man a power, yet it is with Condition,
that he use it mildly and gently, as he ought, and not in Tyranny; or else he
gives a contradiction in Man, when he lays claim to a superior Virtue. Having
thus far proceeded, consider then again how long you think that Love is like to
last, where the Husband, though no Scrivener, makes Indentures all the way, and
then rowls in adoors like a soused Hogshead, with a steam of Smoke and Drink,
enough to stifle a Dutchman. Imagine how acceptable such a Beast in a Man's skin
can be to a delicate Neat Woman, who must be compelied to lie pensively awake
to hear him snore all Night, and find him perhaps doing something worse:
therefore this is to be avoided, if you expect to cherish Love in your Family;
for it is not only a grief to your Wife, but a bad Example to your Servants,
who if they do not imitate you, will at least despise you, and so will your
Children, if it be not prevented by good Education. Bad Examples to Young
People are very dangerous, strive then to keep your self serious and sober,
managing your Affairs prudently; and if you have any weak part, as few are
without, strive as much as you can to hide it from ^our Wife, and every body
else, that it make you not cheap to them, or mean in their Eyes. Command
nothing unreasonable or over difficult, lest it be done unwillingly and
grudgingly, and then it can never be well done: Besides, it breeds
Discouragement and Discontents. Impose no foolish or ridiculous Task upon her,
for she will either take it as an Effect of your weakness, or a purposed
Affront; for the Discretion of the Husband conduces much to the marring, or
making the Wife; for of how many hopeful Women does daily Experience give us an
account, whom their Husbands folly and self-will'dness have miserably undone,
whilst they have cared rather to be serviceable to their own present Humors,
than to their future Content, which might easily have been ordered by a prudent
management to a lasting Continuance; and we are apt to believe, that Wives are
more tractable by leading than driving, and there are very few, even of the
best of them, that can well relish, being sharply told and reproved about those
things they are otherwise willing to mend, when once sen^ible of their Error or
mistake. Lenitives in this case make the speedyest Cure, when Corrosives not
only delay it, but make the Wound worse. Husbands ought to be tender of their
Wives Reputations in the Conduct and management of their Affairs, especially
among those over whom she exercises any thing of Command; for it is too
frequently found that a very small matter gives those occasion to despise her
Authority, who by your Conviction shall be judged worthy of blame: And if you
will needs be meddling with her Household Government, let it be rather by way of
Advice and Assistance, than Superiority, for they must needs be accounted
overcurious, or rather mean spirited, that cannot let a Woman alone with
Pipkins, Pyes and Puddings, but must be peeping, prying, and finding fault with
the Feminine Jurisdiction, and Esteem is one of their Eminent Virtues, that
they are very frugal in Dripping and Kitchin-stuff. And in giving them their
liberty in these Affairs, let it be freely and willingly, not making them stay
to watch your Humor, or Work it out of you by their own Arts and Insinuations,
which will make them ascribe it to their Dexterity in wheedling, and not to
your Kindness; when on the contrary, it would lay a stronger Obligation of Love
and entire Respect upon them. If Providence so orders it that you Marry a Widow
with Children, use them for her sake and your own Reputation, with what tender
regard is required; and in respect to Affection, count them your own, as being
placed by Providence in the room of a Father, and do by them in all things as
you would have your Successor do by yours, should you Decease and leave them in
the like Condition. Defraud them not by any means of what is left them, but
rather increase it, which will bring a Blessing on your Endeavors for such a
Paternal Kindness, and cause your Wives Love to be greater toward you, taking
what is done to them as to her self. Head Neck and Breast. Here we must mind
you Ladies, that you who intend to subdue Hearts, and command with Sovereignty
in the Mint-house of others Affections, must be Careful to keep in tune the
Harmony of those Parts that are most Charming, Remembering, that they were
Intended for Beauties glorious Frontispieces, to allure Spectators Eyes, and
with a Phaebean Luster make them it is obsequlous Heliotropes, and being kept in
such order by directions found in this Work, you may learn to give them such a
Commanding Beauty, that all that view you shall yield obedience, and none
rebel but those who cannot see how your Eyes may be made Cupids Crystal
burning-glasses, to kindle Devotion in your Captives Hearts, and your comely
Hair Venus's Grove, in whose Twyning Meanders a pleasing Imprisonment shall
breed a dislike of former freedom, whilst your Features are advanced to such a
pitch of dazzling Glory, as shall make Beauty it self out of Countenance, and
put Cupid hardly to it among so mauy Fair Ones, to know his Mother. Hands, how
to Beautify them, etc. Hands that are fair and Beautiful, are highly admired
and esteemed; they are, Ladies, the fleshy Altars where your Superstitious
Inamorato's offer to you as Female Deities the first frui^s of their Devotion
in Zealous Kisses; your care should be therefore to keep them in such a
Soul-Enchanting Symmetry, that might confirm your Idolizing Lovers in the
Opinion they have conceived in Admiration of you. Hands in the first place that
are chapt, as sometimes the most Curious will, musts in the morning be rubbed
over with your own Spittle, then anoint them with Duck or Capons grease, well
washed in Rose Water; or take a little Powder of Mastick and Incorporate it
with Oil of Roses and white Beeswax, mingly them over a gentle Fire, (...)
anoint the hands with the Composition pretty warm. The^ have the same success
(...) to the Arms, that have undergone the like Injury, by (...) too rudely
Imprinting his Northern Kisses on their tender (...) Hands Warty are very
unseenly with Ladies, therefore to remove them, make small pla^sters of
Cantharides, and lay on the Warts, but let them touch no other parts, and (...)
will make them dye away, (...) peel off, or bathe them (...) with the Milk that
Issues from the Fig Tree: For want of these you may use Oil of Vitriol, lightly
touching them with it, but beware it come to no other part, and beware you lay
on no great quantity, lest in consuming the Warts, the force not being spent,
it eats deeper, and does an Injury to the Bo^e. Warts at their first coming are
tender, and may then be eaten away with black Soap mixed with burnt Salt, Salt
Nitre, Milk of Spurty, Juice of Celandine, Juice of wild Cucumbers, or Marygold
leaves, with other various ways: But if these remove them, as they certainly
will, if properly applied, we need Enumerate no more. Hands, how to make them
fair and white, with small Veins. -- Hands, Ladies, are not only an Ornament,
but wonderfully useful, and more exposed to (...) than any part except the
(...) therefore that they may beautiful and tempting, ought he your care; So
that their (...) whiteness may dazzle Spe^^ors Eyes, that they may go on (...)
in the fond Humor of (...) you, and then we (...) secure, that Men will be
(...) close Captives, that you (...) never fear being disdain^^ any Apostate
Lover, and (...) best means to bring your (...) to such a Lilly white^^ we have
set down. Hands (...) whitened several ways, viz. (...) of sweet and bitter
(...), that remain after the (...) is drawn off, four Ounces, (...) meal two
Ounces, sine (...) Barley ground and (...) the like quantity, meal of (...) an
Ounce and a half, (...) of Florentine Iris one (...), red Roses dried, and
(...), each six drams, Salt white Tartar, and the whitest (...) washed and
prepared, (...) Ivory, and fresh Sperma (...) of each half an Ounce, (...) of
Rhodinum one Scruple, (...) Cloves and Lavender, of (...) half a Scruple, mix
them well and fine together, and (...) a little of it rub and w^sh Hands and
Arms, and it ^nake them exceeding white ^mooth, and of a Curious (...) Having
not these Ingre^^ you may take the (...) viz. Venice Soap (...) in the Juice of
Lemmons, and of white Virgins Honey, ^^ Ounces, prepared Sublimatum, the Roots
of Florentine Iris, white Sugar Candy, of each an Ounce, whitest Sperma Caeti,
Salt of white Tartar, Sugar, Alum, Venetian Borace, of each half an Ounce,
true scented Balsom of Peru; two drams Gallia Moschata, one dram Oil of
Rhodinum, Cloves and Cinnamon one scruple, mix them well, and you will find the
wonderful Effects of it, even to the softening of their hands who have of Joans
been made Madams, by marrying their kind, good Natured Masters. Hands swollen,
or looking red or blew, how to cure them. Having already made an Encomium upon
the Excellence, Use and Beauty of Hands, it would be looked upon as Tautology,
or dull Repetition to go over it again; therefore when they are impaired of
their Beauty by the means abovesaid, all we have to do is to tell you Ladies,
you may reapparel them with their Native whiteness by the following Directions.
Hands that have suffered Injury by swelling, etc. must be often bathed in Wine,
wherein Nettles and Rosemary must be boiled, with Time, Rue, and Pennyroyal,
and the use of this decoction will not only assuage the swelling, but keep them
from so doing, and as soon as they at any time begin to swell or rise into
knobs, apply a repercussive Plaster made of Barley-meal, and the Juice of
Lemmons, or take Litharge, Oil of Rose and Vinegar, work them well together
into a Lineament, to anoint your hands. Having not these materials at hand,
Take Oil of Dill, and Oil of sweet Almonds, Gum, Tragaganth, made with
Pennyroyal Water 3 drams, powdered Starch 8 Drams, and make them into an
Ointment; or the yolks of five Eggs, calcine them, and mix them well with
Barrows grease, and going to Bed, anoint the hands with it, then draw on a pair
of smooth Gloves, and keep them on till you rise; or take Turpentine mixed with
half it is quantity of Salt, mix them well over a gentle Fire, and stir them
together till they are pretty thick, and then apply it Plaisterwise: And so the
cold swellings of the hands will be removed, the blackness and blewness will
disappear, and the lovely smallness and whiteness will return: That those that
see it will admiring stand
To see the Metamorphose of your hand:
And proud to kiss what they did once despise,
Are double Captives to your Hands and Eyes.
Hair of Scurf and Dandriff how to cleanse the Head of it. Hair is much
impaired in it is Beauty by the Excressencies of Nature. Dandriff or Scurf is a
mealy Dust, that overclouds the Hair of the Head, (...) etc. and proceed from
corrected serous Humors, which reason of their Acrimony, (...) rode the
Cuticle from the (...) jacent Skin, and fret into (...) pieces like Meal or
Bran; (...) that are subject to them, they would be eased of (...) unseemly
Nausences, may (...) these Methods. Having co^^^dered well whether the (...)
has been a long time (...) to these, or that they (...) lately encroached; if
the (...) mer, then the Body above with ill Humors, and (...) be purged with
some con^^ent Medicine; after that, we the Head, or other parts (...) with Lie
thus made, (...) Take the Ashes of the (...) Beets, and Coldworts, make
Lixivium with them, (...) boil Lupins and Beans a (...) quantity, then strain
the coction, and add a sixth (...) Honey. When the Head been well washed with
(...) dry it well, and rub it (...) with a Coarse warm (...) then take this
Unguent anoint it, viz. bitter (...) lightly heated in an Oven Stove, and old
Walnuts, (...) six Ounces, two drams of Honey of Squills, two (...) of the
dreggs of old Wine, (...) half an Ounce, (...) two drams, make it into Unguent
for your use with Wax. Having not these gredients, take Oil, Rue, (...) Ounce,
Soap an Ounce, finely beaten half an Ounce, work them together into a Mass, and
anoint the Head, etc. after washed with the following Compound decoction, viz.
(...) Beets, Fenugreek, BrionyRoots, Bean-meal, each a good handful in a Gallon
of Springwater, till it be consumed, then take it off, and when it is cool use
it three of four days succesfrely, and your Expectation will be satisfied. Hair
how to order and preserve (...). Hair is a very necessary Ornament for Adorning
the H^ad, being Comely and Beautiful: So that Puelus thought the Hair of the
Head to be so great and necessary a setting off, that says he, the most comely
Woman is nothing without it; though she came from Heaven, (...) born of the Sea,
brought up in the Waves as another Venus, though surrounded with all the Graces,
and attended with all the Troops of little Cupids; though Venus Girdle be about
her, and she breath Cinnamon, and the most odoriferous Balm, yet if she be bald,
she cannot please (...) not so much as her own (...). As a Field without Grass,
a Tree without Leaves, a Beast without Horns, such says Ovid, is one without
Hair. It is without doubt a considerable Ornament, and additional Beauty, and
most Nations have contended in managing their Hair, in Pleiting, Breading,
Curling, Shading, some short and some long: But seeing Ladies you are not
ignorant of the Fashion in Mode, to manage it to the best advantage, we shall
only give you a touch out of Ovid, what is best becoming and so proceed to
other Matters. Prove every shape, but ere it current pass
See thou before take Counsel from thy Glass:
A long and slender Visage best allows
To have the Hair parts just above the Brows.
So Laodamela, surnamed the Fair,
Used when she walked abroad to Truss her Hair.
A round plump Face must have her Tramels tied
In a fast Knot above her Front, to hide
The ll'yre supporting it, whilst either Ear
Bare, and in sight with Golden Bobs appear.
Hair, Ladies, we may further add to be as a silken Fringe to Beauties Bed; or
if you please, the slender Sleeves that Nature spins for Cupid to weave his
Heart-surprizing Nets withal. If it decays and falls away, the little Amorous
God loses a part of his Artillery, and ever after acts but weakly for ye: So
that it highly concerns you who triumph over entangled Captives, to tender and
preserve it, Natures Curious Ornament; and that we may not be wanting to
instruct you how you may keep it as a fast Friend, take these Directions to
secure it on your Heads, etc.

Hair, how to fasten, and keep it from falling off. Have in a readiness, or
procure Myrtleleaves, Myrrh, the Bark of a Pine Tree, and Maidenhair, of each
half a handful, bruise them well together, and add to these a double quantity
of pounded Labdanum, put them into a sufficient quantity of White Wind to steep
them well, then add an Ounce of the Oil of Radish-seed; and being sufficiently
steeped, strain out the Liquid part, and anoint your Head, or any place where
the Hair is defective, going to Bed, and have next Morning in readiness a Bath
to wash your Head in, made of Sorrel, Maidenhair, Myrabolans and Emblick,
these are to be boiled in Water, and a little pounded Myrrh added, and in a few
times using it will fasten your Hair extremely; or for want of these take
Willow-leaves, Plantane, Roch Alum, and Hyssop, of each a moderate
proportionable quantity boil them in Water, and add some Powder of M^rrh and
Tutty. Hair is secure this way (...) Golden Water ^rawn from Honey in a Glass
St^ll; or take the Roots of Vervine, together with the Leaves, stamp them well,
and pu^ them into Oil of Green Grapes, and set them in the Sun ten days, then
strain out the moist part and anoint your Hair with it, as you see occasion, or
for want of any of the former, take Juniper Berries, Nigella-Seeds, Wor^^ wood,
Labdanum and Vervine, each a like quantity, bind them well, bruised in a linen
Cloth, and Macerate them five days in Oil, and it will not only by anointing
faste^^ the Hair, but make it grow comely. Hair, wanting how to make it grow on
a Bald Place, etc. However Ladies, if some disasters have trod too hard on your
Heads, and killed those pleasant Plants that were used to flourish there; you
may again by the following helps, attire with their Native Beauty, and repair
all former ruins, and render it more fair and lovely than Nature before had
planted it. Indeed the Hair is a very great Ornament, and where it is wanting
in it is proper Places, it throws a kind of an Eclipse over the Face of Beauty;
to recover it then take Fern Roots, burn them to Ashes, mingle with them
Linseed O^l and bruised Almonds, B^^^ of Wheat, and half an Ounce of Mastick
Powder, spread them well tempered together upon a piece of fine Leather, and
lay it as a Plaster to the place where the Hair is wanting, and in three or
four times applying, and washing with Rose Water and ^^tter of Orange-flowers;
the Hair will appear, and grow up very full, decently, and in order; or take
the stilled water of Couslips, Fumitory and Pe^^-royal, boil them unto the
thickness of an Ointment, with Oil of Roses, and a little Deers Sword^, and
when it is cool a^ot^ the bare place with the Ointment, and in often so doing,
and washing it with Hy^^^ water, the Hair will re^^^; or you may make an
Ointment of Housleek Juice (...) ounce, Beeswax half an (...), the Kernels of
Walnuts (...) an ounce, Citron-peel well (...) two drams, Oil Mug^^^^ two
ounces, bruise and (...) them all together, till an Oil come from them, which
(...) soon thicken into an Ointment, with which you may a^^^^ the place. This
likewise will give it lighter Color and (...) curious than before. To (...)
Hair from falling off a Case of Sickness, or too (...) dryness of the Brain;
take (...)-hair, Hore-hound and (...), bruise them together, (...) boil them in
White Wind, (...) out the liquid part, and (...) the Head with it Morning and
Evening pretty warm, (...) dry it with a warm Cap (...) it, and it will fasten
the (...) of the Hair, by closing (...) Pores from whence they (...); the like
for want of (...), may be done with Cam^^^^ and Fennel Roots, (...) in
Spring Water with a little Powder of Allom dissolved in it, and the place
washed, etc. Hair, how to take it away, and prevent it is growing again. Hard
Fortune, Ladies, it is, when the Lillies and Roses of your Faces Elysium, are
over-top'd by the hasty growth of superfluous Excrescensies; yet by Art we
teach you to secure the glorious Line of your Beauties Pride, and eradicate
those aspiring Weeds that would over-shadow it is Luster, and this may be done
by taking of Auripigmentum an ounce and half, quick Lime four ounces,
Florentine Iris Roots an ounce, Sulphur, Nitre, of each half an ounce, these
must be laid in a Quart of Lie made of Beanstalks, and being well mixed and
tempered, boil them in a glazed Pot, till putting in a Feather, you will find
all the Shag come off the Stalk, then add half an ounce of Oil of Mirrh, or any
Fragrant Oil, and well mixing all, anoint the part of the Body from which the
Hair is to be taken, it not being a place that is sore, and you will in a short
time find the Effect; but have however some Oil of Roses, or Cammoile to
succeed it, to Cool and Mollify the Heat, etc. Hair is taken off in like
manner, by Orpiment and quick Lime each an ounce and a half, Henbane and
Fleawort Seeds half an ounce, and half two drams of Sublimate Gum juice one
dram and a half, Opium a Scruple, steep these well bruised in common lie,
covering them about two Inches, then boil them over a gentle Fire, and with the
liquid part anoint the place, and have cooling Oil as before. -- Hair, if you
would have it grow no more in the place, after it is taken away by the means
aforesaid, must be secured from so doing, by taking Gum of Ivy, Emets Eggs,
Colophony, Orpiment, an ounce of each, mingle these with the Blood of a Frog or
Tench, and make them into an Ointment; or for want of these, take the juice of
Henbane, Gum Arabic, Sanguis Draconis and Frankincence, of each three drams,
and with the Juice of Night shade make them into an Ointment, and it will
effectually perform your desire. Hair, how to cause it neatly to Curl. Hair
twining in curious Curls is very graceful and modish to the Ladies, but
especially to the other Sex, whose Faces if any thing comely, it sets off to a
wonder, and these kind of Curls were once so taking with the Fair Sex, though
now reduced much shorter, that none were thought Paragons for Beauty, save
those whose graceful Locks did reach the Breasts, and make Spectators think
those soft tempting Ivory Globes of Venus, were upheld by the friendly aid of
their Crispy Twirls; wherefore seeing it is not as yet utterly laid aside, if
any one affect the Fashion, they may by our Directions serve themselves so
advantageously, that none shall desire to be free, that may have the honor to
be fettered with their Curled Hair. Hair, i^ you would have it curiously to
Curl, must be first washed and cleansed well; that done, take Oak-galls to the
number of twenty, two ounces of Maidenhair, boil them well stamped in a small
quantity of Water and Salt, till the Water be boiled to the Consistence of
Honey, work them well together, and then at sundry times for two days anoint
the Hair with it, and on the third day cleanse it in this Bath, viz. Take
Beet-Leaves and Fern-Roots, of each a handful, bruise them in two quarts of
Water, till a third part of the Water be consumed, then taking it off, put in a
little piece of Gum-arabick, and use it cool; after which on Twirling Irons
turn up your Hair, in what Curls or Ringlets you please, and it will continue
so a long while; but finding i^ begin to fall and grow Limber it must be
renewed: or for (...) of the former Receipt, take the Oils of White Henbane and
Fenugreek Seed, and with them mix a little Gum-arabick and Mirrh, and over a
gentle Fire make it into a flowing (...) soft Ointment, and anoint you^ Hair
with it before you turn it up, and it will be curiously Curled. Hair Bushey, to
make it Lank and Flag. The stately Bushy Forest of the Head, like Atlas Crowned
with Pines, is sometimes Labirinth'd with Mazie and rude Meanders, whilst the
Locks themselves retreat in ^^ch Recoiling Twirls, as if they took the Breasts
for the Alpin bills covered with Snow, and were afraid their tender Tops should
touch them. But that they may be forced to extend themselves to a pleasing
length, follow the Rules we have prescribed. Hair is reduced from this
stubbornness, by taking the Oils of Roses, and White Lillies, each an ounce,
two ounces of the Oil of Violets, Marsh Mallows a good handful Green, beat
these together, squeeze out the liquid part, and over a gentle Fire, make it
into an Ointment, and by anointing the Hair often with it, will render it soft
and pliable; or Oil of Roses worked well in a Pint of Spring Water, will go a
great way in this Matter. Hair, how to lengthen it: Hair though it is accounted
but an excremental Superfluity, yet we see it is cherished carefully as a plant
of value, since most fancy it to be the Microcosmical Flax, whereof Cupid
twists his Bow-strings: To see it, we acknowledge in the Female Sex, of a more
than usual length, is a pleasing Spectacle, therefore those Ladies that are
desirous to be so accommodated, may prove our Directions, and find in that an
ample Satisfaction. Hair is cherished and lengthened by taking Vervine, the
inward back of an Elm and Agrimony, each a handful, boil them in two quarts of
Water, till the third part be consumed, and often wash your Hair with it when
warm; or for want of these take Politrick, Reed Roots, Flax-Seed, and the Ashes
of Maidenhair, bruise these, make them into a Lie, dissolve into it a little
Mirrh, and add a third part of White Wind, and wash it as the former. Hair,
that is harsh and stiff, how to soften it. Hair that hangs on the Heads of
some, like Sedge or Thatch on a homely Cottage, and serves more for use than
Ornament, to secure them from the Impetuous Injuries of Wind and Weather,
rather than with it is soft and tender sheaves to delight the admiring Eyes;
such stiff bristles are usually Attendants to a harsh and churlish Disposition;
however, those then that desire a more graceful covering, and would alter those
harsh Conceits that others are apt to entertain of their Hoggish Nature, may to
their great Advantage, use these Directions. Hair, if you would reduce to a
comely shape, take black and white Helebore Roots, long and round
BrithwortRoots, and the Roots of Briony with the Leaves and Roots of Wake Robin
make these by drying into (...), and rub the Hair well (...). For want of these
(...) burn the Twiggs of (...) and making a Lie of (...), put into it the Meal
of Vetches, Beans, Lupins, and Barley, strain after it be well soaked the liquid
part, and add about half a Pint of White Wind, then wash your Hair with it,
cleanse it, and comb it out well and often. Hair splitting, how to prevent it
for the Future. Hair that is very slender, when by Nature it is Spun to it is
utmost length, must be well regarded, and carefully kept, or by sundry
Accidents, it will be fray'd and ravell'd at the ends, which seem to envy that
work they cannot mend; then take as a Provision against such Injuries these
Instructions: Mix Oil of Roses and Water a like quantity, anoint the Hair with
it going to Bed, and turn it up against the next Morning; boil the Bark of a
Willow Tree, Flebane, and Marsh Mallows, in running Water, and wash your Head
with the Decoction: or if it be already very much split, take Mirrh and Willow
Leaves, two ounces of each, Labdanum in Powder six scruples, Emblick Mirabolans
powdered half a Dram, Oil of Myrtle four ounces, and half a quarter of a Pint
of Whitewine, boil them gently to the Extremity of a third parts Consumption,
and anointing the extreme ends of the Hair with the Liquid part, it will stop
the Cracks from going further, and render the Hair fresh and lively. Hair, how
to make it of any Color. Hair of a yellow or shining golden Color, was in
highest esteem among the Ancients, the Poets rarely delineating any excellent
Beauty without appropriating that to her as a singular Ornament; yet since the
time of the Danes, it has been (in spite to those cruel Invaders, who turned up
almost all the Women they came near) loaded with Obloquies, and is held as a
sign of a lustful Constitution; for it is a Fancy generally received, that the
Locks can never sparkle with golden Flames without, unless there lodges some
cherished heat of that kind within; but indeed though black is now in Vogue,
amongst the most celebrated Beauties; yet in this as in all other Colors,
Peoples Minds and Fancy vary, some are for the Curious Flaxen, others for the
Light brown, and so what best suits their Humors. Hair, Gray or otherwise, to
make it black. Hair to render it black, take the Bark of an Oak Root, the Green
Husles of Walnuts, three ounces of each, the deepest and oldest Red-wine a
Pint, boil them, bruised and well mixed to the Consumption of half a Pint,
strain out the juice, and add of the Oil of Myrtle a pound and a half, set
them six days in the Sun in a Leaden Mortar, stiring them well, and then
anointing the Hair, it will turn any Colored Hair as black as Jet in often
doing. Hair, Red, its Vindication from the Censure and Reproach it undergoes,
proving it as Beautiful and Ornamental as any other Color. Hair is allowed as
an Ornament and Beauty, and God that gives it as such, cannot be thought in his
various Distribution of Colors, to design any difference, or let a Mark of
Distinction by it on Creatures of the same kind, though some take no rest in
the Point of Reflection; and this is often done on such trivial Grounds, that a
due Prepension would cause to abashment in the Face of the Practiser, for
putting a disesteem upon Persons, merely because of their Native Color; though
it is scarce Con^^ctural, whence this Oppro^^ium should take its rise, there
being no rational Foundation for such a Superstructure: perhaps it owes it is
producement to the mutual Semblance between some Entities in Nature and the
Color of Hair, as (...) that is barren; if so it must be built upon a very
Sandy Foundation; seeing in that Case, Experience shows the contrary, those the
Humors of whose Bodies produce it, being most fruitful Ladies in former Ages,
that have been described as excellent Beauties, have been set off more by the
flowing Gold of their Tresses, than the Roses and Lilly of their Cheeks: it was
held by the Ancient Poets, as the chiefest Ornament of the Fair Sex, and that
which gave a Luster to all the other Accomplishments in Nature, and was so
admired and coveted that every one strove to imitate it by Art, where Nature
had not bestowed it on them; and the first Eminent Painters, viz. Apelles,
Euchion, Melanthus and Nichomachus, prized this in their drawing of Fair and
Beautiful Women above all others. The Stately Sabina Poppoea Wife to Domitius
Nero, had Amber colored Hair, and it was attributed to her as her chiefest
Ornament of Beauty, though a Lady otherways extremely accomplished in what can
render the Female Sex Lovely and Charming; Cleopatria Queen of Egypt, who
charmed Caesar the Worlds great Conqueror, and Roman Anthony Emperor of the
East, had her Beauty illustrated by this Ornament, to bind their Love the more
securely to her in the Fetters of her Golden Tresses, as Noble Lucan testifies
in his Pharsalia: viz. Laden witht Pearls, the Rich Sea spoiled Store,
On her red Hair, and weary Neck she wore.
Her Snowy Breasts their Whiteness did display,
Through the Thin Sidonian Tiffany, etc.
And in those times, it was held in a high esteem above all others. This Color
was in so much repute in Tertullians time, and in the days of St. Hierom, that
even Artificial Red was deemed an Ornament to the Hair. Publius Lentulus Vice
Consul, in his Epistle to the Roman Senate, written from Jerusalem, among the
other Bodily Beauties he deciphereth in our Blessed Savior, assures them that
his Hair and Beard were Red; and the Learned Spaniard in his Interpretation of
Isaiah 63.1. is of the same Mind, from these Words, viz. Who is be that comes
from the Red Land. The Excellencies of the Creation resemble the Red Head as to
it is Tincture: the Fire the most agil and aspiring Body; the Sun, which
Heraclitus ascribes to the true Sovereign Majesty, has this Color in the
Illustration of its Brightness, and Gold which is brought to Perfection by it
in the Bowels of the Earth, so much coveted, and so much admired, and of which
Scepters and Diadems are made, has it is shining and glittering Glory, which
raises it to so high a value and esteem, from it is Parent, who blushes not to
own it self to be a Body of Fire, which in it is Morning and Evening blushes is
more amply manifested. Hair upon the account of it is Color to be despised, is
a Declamation by those that do it against Nature, and a Grand Affront upon the
Supreme Creator. It reflects unworthily upon his Power, and calls into
Question his Contrivance; for it is He that made us, and not we our selves, nor
can their slender performances attain to the making of one Hair of any Color
whatsoever; and those that Cavil at this, derogate from the Divine Majesty in
their base Imputations, and go about to espouse his Impiety who said, That had
he been at the Creation, and in Consult with the Divine Being, he would have
put things in better Order. This is for Dust and Ashes to dare to fly in the
Face of their Maker, through a windiness of Pride, and self-conceited
Understanding. This may reasonably make us ask, What Man is, that he should
dare to control the Artifice of God, when his own Wisdom is so shallow, that
he is forced into Admiration, whilst he Contemplates the Workmanship of
Inferior Beings, even the Spiders Web, or the Hexagony of a Honeycomb, the
Labor of the Silkworm, or the curious Building of a Birds-Nest; much less is
be able to penetrate into the Works produced by an Almighty Mind, who draws a
Curtain of Cloudy Ignorance over his Understanding, when he goes about to pry
too narrowly into his Secrets, and turns his Wisdom into Foolishness. -- Hair,
though of this Color were it granted (as it cannot be) a Disease of the Body;
yet it is not to be desired, for where any thing that comes by the hand of
Heaven is ridiculed, there is not a Revenger wanting to make such Scoffers
know, that he can overtake them, let them fly never so fast: we find that those
who pretended to Comfort Jub in his Affliction (when the Trial of the Almighty
was upon him) and under that presence took the greater Liberty to revile and
reproach him in his Miseries, had not escaped had he not been so good natured,
after all their reproaches, as to have prayed for them, and so by an Act of
Charity and forgiveness, prevailed with God to absolve them from the Divine
Wrath, that would otherwise have broken in upon them to their greater
Confusion: some will ground this Aversion to Red Hair from the coming in of the
Danes, who mixing with our Women, left a Race behind them of that Color, which
by propagating descended to our Times; it so, we cannot but wonder, why those
in that Age, when the Danish Government expired, and in whose Memories the
Cruelties of that Nation were fresh and bleeding, never made any Distinction in
this manner, or objected against Colors, but approved the one as well as the
other; nor do we find the Danes at this day peculiar to this, but as other
Nations participating in Mixtures; and we do find it Recorded, that the Ancient
Britains were many of them Yellow-Haired, and those that were so, took a great
Pride in it; we must confess, that we are undoubtedly a Mixture of diverse
Nations: But these Matters are too remote, and not worth arguing, but only to
be looked upon as Fancies and Conjectures; we have been since Conquered by the
Normans, and one Conquest ought to jostle such Chimera's out of their Heads,
who make such Imputations: it is a little ocd, that this Age should pretend to
take particular Exceptions against that which was never excepted against in any
of the foregoing Ages as ever we read of. These things considered, we must
attribute this Aversion to the Fancies only of those who are much taken with
them of their own Complexion, or to the spite of some Dowdies, who (perceiving
all those that are Yellow-haired to have fair Soft, and Clear Skins, which is
natural to them, as also a perpetual Spring (unless by the defect of Sickness
or Age) of Roses and Lillies blooming in their Cheeks) have made in their
business, industriously to impair their esteem and value, that they might
engross those to themselves, that otherwife would have left them sighing in
Languishing Expectations to go off, when they could Accidentally happen on a
Chapman at the Closure of Loves-Market, and made more Agreeable and
Advantageous Purchases; some again tell us, that the Fashion-mongers and
Critics in Beauty, have only set it aside a while for the Gratification of
their Humor; and that as it has been highly in esteem, it will, though now in
the Ebb, with as strong a Fluctuation return again. But be it how it will,
Ladies, you to whom Nature has given this Color, ought not to have a less
value or esteem for your selves; we hope, it you were to make your own Markets,
you would choose Wife and Ingenious Men, and such are not so soon caught by a
Fair outside of what Complexion soever, as by a Beautiful Mind; they regard not
your Hair, but your Virtue; keep but up to that, and you need not despair of a
Happiness, transcending what any thing else can afford you; she that Marries
one that admires her outside only, Marries a Picture-Gazer, and a Bartholomew
Baby may as well serve him in one respect, as a Wife; we declare, Ladies, we
highly approve of this Color, and if over much Modesty draw not the Curtain of
too great an obscurity, no Clouds of Despair in speeding, ought to over shadow
your Fair Faces, but Triumphs of Joy and Success be ever attending on your
Smiles, to Crown you in the Elysium of Love, and give no common Felicity to
those that will admire you. Hotchpotch, Fr. Hochepot. Belg. Dutspot, i. e.
flesh cut into pretty pieces, and sodden with Herbs or Roots, not unlike that
which the Romans called Ferraginem, (a Gallimaufry.) Littleton says, it
literally signifies a Pudding mixed with diverse Ingredients. Huke, A Dutch
attire, covering the Head, Face, and all the Body. Humfrey, or Dumphrey, (Gr.)
for Humfred, i.e. house-peace, a lovely and happy name, if it could turn
home-wars betwixt Man and Wife into peace. The Italians have made Onuphrius of
it in Latin. Came. Hamadryades, g. Wood-Nymphs. Hamkin, a kind of Pudding made
upon the Bones of a shoulder of Mutton. Hanjar, a rich Dagger worn by the
Bashaws Wives. Hannah, h. gracious, merciful. ^arlot, ( q. Horeles) a little
Whore. ^rlotta, l. a proud Whore. ^rletta, Arlotha, Duke Ro^^^^ Concubine,
Mother to Duke William the Conqueror. Harmonia, the Wife of Cad^^, Daughter of
Mars and Venus. Harpalice, a great Huntress who (by force of Arms) rescued her
Father Lycurgus from the Cetans. H^belock, a Danish Fond^^, and Scullion in the
King's (...), preferred by degrees (...) the Marriage of the King's daughter.
Hymen, properly a Membrane; it is taken also for the (...) Membrane in a
Virgin, such arises from the wrinkle^^ of the lower part of the (...); and in
Women with (...), when the Womb grows ^^cker, it disappears. Dr. Blan^^.
Hysterica Passio, Fits of the (...), a Convulsion of the (...) of the Par
Vagum, and ^costal in the Abdomen, ^eeding from a pricking Ir^^^, ation, or
Explosion of Spi^^^: This Distemper does not always depend upon the Womb (...)
is commonly thought; we we seen it more than once in (...), because the Spleen,
Pan^ and other adjacent Bow^^ often the cause of it. Dr. (...).
Hysterotomototica, or Se^ (...), a cutting the Child out of the Womb, which is
done thus; You make a Semilunar Section under the Navel, along the White-Line,
the Cavity whereof looks toward the said Line; then according to the leading
of the Fibers, the Foetus being extracted after the Section, the Wound in the
Womb contracts it self, so that the Blood scarce flows more plentifully than in
a Natural Birth; but if the Mother be dead, choose the most convenient place you
can. Dr. Blanchard. Hadegynes, ^. a Country-dance. Haylayks, Tu. the
Women-slaves. Hebe, Goddess of Youth, Daughter of Juno, without a Father,
Jupiter's Cupbearer, till she fell and was removed. Hecale, an old Woman and
Theseus's Landlady, who had devoted her self for his safe return from the Wars.
Hecate, Apollo's Sister, Luna, Diana, Proserpina, [with three heads] also a
Thracian Witch. Hecuba, Priams Wife, who is feigned [after the taking of Troy]
to be turned into a Bitch. Heir-lome, -loom, Household-stuff, as Tables,
Presses, etc. which having belonged to the House for certain Descents, do (by
Custom, not Common Law) accrue to the Heir. Helena, Wife to Menelana, stolen by
Paris, occasioned the Trojan Wars. Heliades, Daughters of the Sun, and Sisters
to Phaeton, who for his Death wept themselves into Poplar-trees. Heliconiades,
the Muses. Hell, Daughter to Athamas King of Thebes, falling from the back of
a golden Ram into the Pontick Sea, occasioned the naming of it. Hedyle, a
Samian, or as some say, Athenian Poetess, of whom there are remembered two
Poems, her Scylla, and the Loves of Glaucus. Helena Flavia, the Daughter of
Coil King of Britain; she is said to have been the first finder out of the real
Wood of the Cross upon which our Savior was Crucified. Helpis, the Daughter,
as faith Ranul^hus, of a King of Sicily; there are extant of her composing, as
Giraldus affirms, several Hymns upon the Apostles; famous also and well known
is her Epitaph upon her Husband. Histiaea an Alexandrian Poetess. Hypatia, the
Daughter of Theon, the famous Geometrician of Alexandria. Habiliment, (Fr.)
Apparel, clothing, array, attire; also Armor or Harness. Habit, ( habitus)
the outward attire of the Body, whereby one Person is distinguished from
another; as the Habit of a Gentleman is different from that of a Merchant, and
the Habit of a Handy-crafts-man from both. Hans-en-helder, is in Dutch as much
as Jack in a Cellar; and by Metaphor it is taken for the Child in a Woman's
Belly. Hermione, the Daughter of Menelaus. Hermitress, a Woman-Hermite or
Eremite. Heroine, g. a Noble or Virtuous Woman. Herophila, the Erith^^ Sibyl,
who being (by Tar^^^) denied the price of her three Books of Prophesies, burnt
two, and received the whole price for that which was left. Her^^lia, the Wife
of Romulus, worshipped by the Name of Hera, the Goddess of youth. Herthus, a
Saxon Goddess, like the Latin Tellus. Hessone, Daughter of Lumedon King of
Troy, whom Hercules delivered from a great Whale. Hibride, mongrel, of a mixed
Generation. Helicon, a hill of Phacis not far from Parnassus, and much of the
same bigness, consecrated to Apollo and the Muses: Hence. Helitoniam,
pertaining to that Hill. Hillutim, h. praises, a Jewish wedding-song. Heppece,
f. I. Cheese made of Mares milk. Hipparchus, an Athenian Tyrant, slain upon his
deflowring a Maid. Hippe, Daughter of Cbi^^^, a great Huntress, got with child
and turned into a mare. Hippiades, g. Images of women on horseback.
Hippoctenides, the Muses. Hippodamia, Daughter to (...) King of Elis, whom
(...) won at a race with her father by corrupting his chariot driver.
Hipoliyta, a Queen of the Amazons, whom Hercules gave a Theseus to wife.
Hippolytus, their Son, torn in pieces by his chariot-horses is he fled, being
accused of adultery by his wives mother ^^edra, whose solicitations he refused.
Hippomenes, and Atalanta, (won by his golden apples drown in her way) were
turned to a Lion and Lioness for lying together in Cybele's Temple. Hippona,
the Goddess of horses and horse-coursers. Hip^^crataea, followed her Husband
Mithridates in all his (...) and dangers. Hermaphrodite (Hermaphro^^^) one who
is both man and woman. Hermitress. A woman Hermit or Eremite, one who lives in
a wilderness. Hesperides, the daughters of Hesperus, brother to Atlas, called
Aegle, Aretbusa and Hes^^^busa: They had Gardens and Orchards, that bore Golden
fruit, kept by a vigilant Dra^^^, which Hercules slew, and ^^bbed the Orchard.
From this story, we find often mention of the Gardens and Apples of Hesperides.
Honorificabilitudinity, honourableness. Horae, l. Hours, Goddesses, daughters
of Jupiter and Themis. Hillulim, ( Heb.) Praises, a Song sung at the Jews
marriages, by the Bridegrooms intimate Friends. Hippona, the Goddess of horses.
Hyades, Atlantides, Suculae, the seven Stars, daughters of Atlas, lamenting of
Hyas their brother devoured by a Lion. Hyena, a Beast like a Wolf (with a Mane
and long hairs) accounted the subtlest of all beasts, changing sex often, and
counterfeiting Man's voice. Hylas going to fetch Hercules some water, fell into
the river, or (poetically) was pulled in by the Nymphs in love with him.
Hyllus, Hercules's son, who built a Temple (at Athens) to Misericordia the
Goddess of pity. Hymen, aeus, son of Bacchus and Venus, the God (or first
instituter) of marriage; also a Nuptial or wedding song. Hypermnestra, one of
Danaus's 59 daughters, commanded to kill their Husbands (the 50 sons of
Aegyptus) she only saved her Husband Lynceus who afterward killed Danaus.
Hyp^^phile, Queen of Lemnos, banished thence for saving her Father Thous, when
all the men of the Island were killed by women. Hony-moon, applied to those
married persons that love well at first, and decline in affections afterward;
it is Honey now, but it will change as the Moon. Min. Horse-ballet, a Dance or
Ball performed by Horses; such was that at the Emperors wedding. 1666.
Hypermeter ( Lat.) a verse having a redundant syllable, or one syllable above
measure, called by some a Feminine Verse. Hysterical ( hysterious) troubled
with fits of the Mother.
I.
JEan, i. Gracious or Merciful, see Joan. Iennet, der. from Jean. Ioac, or
Joanna, Gracious, Luke 8.3. the same with John in Men's Names. Ioice, i. Merry
or Pleasant. Iael, (...) Jagnel, Judge. 4.21. perhaps (...) Jagnalah, a Roe, or
Goat. Isabella, or Jezebel (...) 2 King. 9.30. i. Woe to the dwelling, or the
Province of dwelling. Julian, i. Soft-Hair'd. Judith, or Judah, i. praising, or
confessing. Joan, Countess of Montford, Daughter to Lewis of Flanders, and
Count of Nevers, she w^^ married to John the 4th. (...) of Britain, and Count
d'^^^ford, she Warred after her Husbands Death upon the (...) d' Blois, and
took diverse Town from him in Britain, and being besieged in Hennebor^, (...)
sallied at the head of 60 men and burnt the Enemies standard, and following
this success with greater Numbers, not only raised the siege, but recovered
all the Duchy of Britain. Joan d' Arc, the Valiant Maid of France, who of a
Shepherdess became a Leader of Armies, and by her Courage, Conduct and success
raised the drooping spirits of the French men, that were at a very low Ebb, by
reason the English had gained the greatest part of France, so that under her
Conduct they beat them out of several strong holds; but after she had done
wonders, always fighting on horse back in man's Apparel, she was taken as she
sallied upon the English, and venturing too far in Confidence of her Fortune,
she was taken, carried to Roan and there burnt for a witch, though no such
thing appeared against her. Joan d' Valois, she was daughter to Charles King of
France, by his first wife Margaret of Sicily; she was Married to William Earl
of Holland, Hainault and Zealand, who died before her, leaving William the
Second his Son, and four Daughters, after which she (...) a Religious Habit in
the ^^bby of Fontenele, and by her Prudent Intercession stayed the battle at
the point to be given, between the Kings of England and France, dying each
Lamented of the People. (...) 1400. Iocasta Daughter of Creon the Thebean King,
she Married King Laius and was Mother to (...), who by reason of the words of
the Oracle, that he should Dethrone his Father, was in his Infancy cast out to
a desperate Fortune, and she (...) knowing him when grown (...), Married him,
by whom she had Polynices and Eteocles, who falling out about the Succession,
Killed each other in a Com^^ce, for whose Deaths and the Discovery of the Error
(...) committed in Marriage, pi^^^ away with grief and died. Joan the female
Pope of (...), Called by them John, (...) finding her self with Child and ready
to be delivered, desperately killed her self with her Dagger. Joan Queen of
France and (...), the sole Daughter of Henry the first King of Navar, and left
Heiress of her Fathers Kingdom, she was Wife to ^bi^^^ the fair King of France,
transcendent for her Piety as well as Beauty, very Liberal in Charitable Deeds,
for she founded diverse Charitable Houses, and left at her Death great Treasure
to be bestowed among the Poor. Joan de Albert, Queen of Navar, a woman of a
Martial Spirit, she was Mother to Henry the fourth, called Henry the Great,
King of France, who was Grandfather to the present French King, she being a
Protestant highly Espoused their Cause, for which she is said to be poisoned at
Paris, with a Pair of perfumed Gloves presented her at her Sons Wedding with
Margaret Sister to Charles the Ninth of France, and soon after her death, the
horrid Massacre of the Protestants ensued, in which perished about 300000. Joan
of France Daughter to King Lewis the Eleventh, was Married to Lewis Duke of
Orleance afterward King of France; she was a Princess of Great Virtue, she
Instituted the Order of the Annuntiation, forming it upon the ten Virtues of
the Blessed Virgin, Viz. Prudence, Humility, Chastity, Verity, Devotion,
Obedience, Poverty, Patience, Compassion, and Charity. Joan the first, Queen of
Jerusalem, Naples and Sicily, was Daughter to Charles of Sicily, Duke of
Calabria, who after having successively Married four Husbands, Andreas, James,
Lewis and Otho, was deprived of her Kingdoms and Life by Charles d' Durass, her
Cousin, whom she had adopted her Heir, as having no Children of her own. Joan
the second, Queen of Naples, a Woman of great Courage and Conduct, but had a
very troublesome Reign upon William of Austria, her Husband retiring into a
Monastery upon Discontent, occasioned by her being too Prodigal of her Favors
to others, and dying without Children, she bequeathed her Kingdom to Rene Duke
of Anjou. Joan, Infanta, and Regent of the Kingdom of Portugal, she was
Daughter to Alphonsus the fifth, who for her Prudence and Courage left her
Regent, when he went to War against the Moors, yet at last she retired into a
Monastery. Ioia, a Woman of Spain, who preached to the People in the Cathedral
of Barcelona; and is said in the time of the Papacy of Pope Paul the third, to
Convert diverse Jews at Rome, and to explain in the presence of the Cardinals
the Books of John Don Scotus, commonly called the Subtle Doctor. Iole, Daughter
of Eurytus the Oechalian King, with her Hercules fell desperately in Love, but
her Father would not Consent he should have her, unless he could gain her by
Combat with him; which when he had done, he still denied to give her to him;
which so enraged Hercules, that he slew him, and took her away by force, and
afterward gave her to his Son Hillus, but Dejaneiza Jealous of Hercules, she
being his first Wife, sent him a Shirt dipped in Poison, and Tinctured in Nessus
Blood; which in Pains and Torment put an end to his Glorious Achievements with
his Life. Iphianassa, Daughter (...) Praetus King of the Argines, who with her
Sister being in the Temple of Juno, and despising the homeliness of it, as also
the Beauty of the Goddess, she thoroughly nettled at the Contempt, so Changed
and Disordered their Minds, that they fancied themselves to be Heifers; and
could by no means be persuaded out of that Opinion, till Melampus the Physician
restored them again to their Right Senses, and for his Reward had Iphianassa in
Marriage, and a part of the Kingdom for her Dowry. Iphis, she was the Daughter
of Lygdus and Theletusa, whose Sex her Mother kept secret, and from her Infancy
brought her up in Masculine Apparel, for that her Father had doomed the Infant,
if a Girl to be made away; when under this disguise she came of Years, Lygdus
concluded a Marriage between her and Janibe a Beautiful Maid, which made her
Mother almost at her Wits end, because that by this means a Discovery would be
made; but however, upon her invoking Venus, and offering in her Temple, she on
the Wedding Day was changed into a Man, and did the Office of a Bridegroom to
the Satisfaction of her Fair Bride. Iphigenia, she was Daughter to King
Agamemnon by Cly^^^nestra, and is said by Homer to be offered up to Diana, for
the successful Passage of the Grecian Fleet to Troy, but as she lay on the
Altar ready to be sacrificed, the Goddess wrapped her in a Cloud, and bearing her
thence made her her Priesteis. Irene, Empress of Constantinople, Mother to
Constantine the seventh, whose Eyes she put out that she might Reign alone;
upon which, as if Heaven demonstrated a Detestation of the Cruelty, the Sun for
eighteen days shined so dimly, as if it had drawn in its Light as it Thyestes
Feast; but Nicephorus having wrested the Empire out of her Hands, banished her
to Metylene, where she soon after died of Grief. Irene, the Fair Grecian Lady,
that was presented to Mabomet the Great at the Sack of Constantinople, on whom
he doated so much, that he spent whole Days and Nights in her Company, and
neglected his weighty Affairs; but being reproved by his Bassas, he in a rage
cut off her Head with his Scymeter, but repenting it, betook him to the Wars,
to put the cruel Act out of his Mind. Iris, Messenger to Juno, said to be the
Daughter of Thaumus and Electra; she is painted with a Rainbow circling her,
her Name importing the Painted Bow, so often seen after Showers in the Clouds.
Isaura, ( Clementia) a Lady of Toulouse in France, famous for her Learning and
Ingenious Parts; she appointed the Floral Games yearly kept there, and in the
Townhouse her Marble Statue stands Crowned with Flowers. Ius, a Goddess
worshipped by the Egyptians, her Sacrifice and worship was Infamous and
Obscene; insomuch that the Priests were forbidden to speak any thing of them,
and the Romans forbid it in their City. Isota of Verona, a Lady of great
Learning, she wrote five hundred sixty four Books, which are to be seen in
Thaurus Library, and held diverse Disputes with the most Learned Men, yet dyed
at the Age of thirty six Years a Virgin. Judith, a Holy Widow, who by
destroying the Tyrant Holyphernes delivered the Jews. Judith, Daughter to Velpo
Count of Ruensburge, she was made Recluse by the People. Judith, Daughter to
Charles the Bald, and Wife to Ethelwolfe and Ethelred, Kings of England. Iulia
Wife to Severus the Roman Emperor, and Mother to Geta, she after the Death of
her Husband Married Bassianus Caracalla her Son in Law, who fell in Love with
her upon seeing her naked Thigh. Iulia, Wife to Pompey, and Daughter to Julius
Caesar, she died in Childbed before she could compose the differences between
those great Captains, which afterward caused such Distractions in the Roman
State by a Piteous war. Iulia, the Daughter of Augustus Caesar and Scribonia,
^he greatly perplexed that Emperor in the height of his Fortune, by her loofe
Carriage and Wanton way of living; she was Married to diverse Husbands, by whom
she had several Children, but Wedlock not being capable of satisfying her
Lustful Desires, and she continuing her lewd Courses, her Father Banished her,
after that she was Married to Tyberius, but disdaining him, he coming to be
Emperor revenged her Pride and Scorn, by confining her so straight, that she
pined away for Hunger. Iulia, Daughter to Agrippa and the beforementioned
Julia, she followed her Mothers steps in her lewd Inclinations, though her
Punishment had been visible; however she was Married to Aemylius Lepidus, and
had by him two Children, but being banished to Apulia, she there dyed in much
Misery. Juno, Sister and Wife to Jupiter, and Daughter to Saturn and Rhea, held
to be the Goddess of Kingdoms and Riches, she is Fabled to have had diverse
Children; yet was always very jealous of her Husband, and persecuting the
Nimphs he was enamoured of, though she is generally taken only for the Air.
Iustina, first Married to Maxentius, and then to Valentinian the Elder, she was
a great Friend to the Arians, and an Enemy to the Orthodox Christians; she
persecuted St. Anbrose, because he refused to let that Sect have a Church, and
free Exercise in the City of Milan; but when Maximus came to the Empire, she
was obliged to that Good Father for her Safety: she was Mother to Valentinian
the Younger, and dyed at Thessalonica. Iustitia, or the Goddess of Justice,
worshipped in the figure of a Virgin, with severe looks, holding Scales in one
Hand, and a Sword in the other; sometimes she was painted Blindfold, and
sometimes without a Head, and had her Temples in diverse places. Iubentus, the
Goddess of Youth, her Statue was placed by Servius Tullius in the Capitol at
Rome, and prayed to for the Continuance of Youth, Strength and Beauty, etc.
Ianthe, the Daughter of Telessa, who (on her Wedding day) was transformed to a
Man. Illegitimates. Marriage increases Arts and Industry, but a base Issue
forces Nature, and coming into the World like Criminals, there is rarely that
Care taken in their Education, is for the Children of a lawful Bed: which
Ushers into my Memory, a passage not many years since of a Person of Quality,
who had no lawful Issue; a (...) Son he had, whom by Will he had constituted
his Heir, but a Reverend Divine coming to him, asked his Lordship, how he had
settled his Estate; he answered, upon the Person beforementioned: The Divine
replied, My Lord, I can Administer no Comfort to your Lordship if you die with
this Sin at this time; since that you have been the Instrument or bringing him
into the World you must make some Provision for (...) in it, but so as in may
rather be a Mark of Penitence than Contumacy; you must not (...) your sin with
Garland, etc. And upon this (...) the Lord (...) and let^ it to his nex^ or
B^^ood. There were mo^e Souls in England heretofore, then there are at this
Day; nor will the Co^^^^ Reason given for it answer the decay of our Numbers;
neither the Wars, which add (...) our Foreign Loss but the true Reason it
(...), is to be att^^^b^ted to the neglect of the Material Fund (...) Creation,
a regular Construction of Men and Women; for unlawful Embraces are not designed
for, neither by those that use them are they admitted to, Procreation: And that
which adds to this General Blast of the Fruit of the Body, which the mist of
darkness disperses throughout the Nation, is, that the Antidotes which are
frequently of that lasting Operation, are used against Conception, and effect
upon the Bodies of (...), as to prove to all their Lives after; by which means,
though the Women should afterward so reform, as to enter into Lawful Marriage,
yet she cannot be profitable to the Commonwealth, but on the Contrary, is not
only useless as to her own individual Person, but renders the Man that Marries
her so al^o. See a Book called Marriage promoted. Importunity, Time,
Opportuni^^ (...), Cause Love. -- Importunity if not too unseasonable or
unreasonable, c^rr^es with it a kind of a Force or Violence to ^^orm Affection;
for whilst other A^^uments are in a manner a far off, standing at a distance,
this crowds close, and brings us to those degree of Love, which are Conference,
Dal^^nce, Kissing, etc. which wonderfully operate in Love and stea^ away the
Heart and Affections of Men and Women. Tacitus makes his observations, that the
Eyes are not altogether a (...) Tr^al of a (...) Affection, but there is
something required that is make available, therefore for a further proof, take
her by the Hand and gently Squeeze her Timers: Let a Sigh now and then escape
as it were by (...), tread gently upon her (...), and growing bolder lay your
hand upon her Knee, and of she takes all this in good (...), and seems to be
little averse then (continues he) call her Mistress, take her about the Neck
and Kiss her. etc. -- Importunity must be ushered in by Opportunity of coming
together, and having Freedom in the place where the Lady of your Affection
dwells, which by the Intercession of Friends or Letters must first be brought
about, which being accomplished you may the better play your Cards and Manage
your Game, when a too bold or rough Intrusion many times marrs your
Undertaking: Many an Apprentice and Servingman by the help of Opportunity and
Importunity, have Inveigled away their Masters Daugthers, and sometimes the
Mistress has been Captivated Many a Dowdy by this means has gained a Gallant
Lover Chamber-maids have won their Masters Affection, and Lad^^ have doted upon
their Footmen. In Ariosto we find a Beautiful Queen that had as Beautiful a
Husband doting upon her deformed Dwarf, and always Melancholy when he
neglected her Embraces: It is unaccountable what advantages happen to some Men
and Women hereby, many Matches by this way of dealing are made in haste, and
the pa^^y compelled as it were by necessity to Love in that manner, which if
they had been free and seen the Variety of Beauties that populous places
afford, they would altogether slight and reject what they had seen before, on
whom they are fatally driven for want of other Objects and a better Choice, and
by long Conversation fall to loving and sometimes to doting; for many times it
is observable that those who at the first fight have no liking to each other,
but have been rather harsh and disagreeing for want of other Objects, and to
Engage or Keep their minds steady, have by living together, long Conference,
Kissing, Toying, and the like Allurements, Insensibly fallen in Love with each
other: and therefore where your reason tells you beforehand it is no fit match,
these kind of familiarities are to be avoided, lest you are taken-Infensibly,
and Love cuts off the retreat you had before proposed for your security.
Clitiphon by this means doated upon and was almost mad for Leucippe his Uncles
Daughter. Ismenius the Orator, confesse^ he was strangely Entangled by Ismene,
Sostenes Daughter, waiting at the Table, (...) the Greek fashion was, with be^^
Breasts open, and her (...) half bare; which she perceiving, summoned all her
little Arts to snare him faster; she come and drank to him, and withal trod
softly upon his Toes, and was exceeding diligent to wait upon him, and when the
Company hindered her from speaking, she would give him a sign of her Love by
wringing his Hand, and Blush when she met him at every turn, she would Kiss the
Cup and Drink to him, and smile and drink on that side he drank on, till he
Acknowledges (...) sipt and sipt so long till in the end he was drunk with
Love: Aristaenetus tells us, he meeting a Fair Maid though a stranger, looked
back at her, and she looked back at him and smiled, which first kindled that
^^ming Love that undid him. -- If you make a Choice, be sure let it be by
Daylight, that you may see what you do, though the Enjoyment may be perhaps to
the more agreeable Canopy of the Night, for Women and Gloworms shine brightest
by glimering Tapers; as your Course Wares are put upon people to Cozen them by
the help of false Sky-lights. A Florentine Gentleman having made a Choice by
Candle light, deceived by her being raidiantly set out with Jewish, Rings,
Lawns, Scarves, ^^lace, Gold, Spangles, and Gau^^ Devices, took his Mistress
(...) an Angel, and was so Impatient of delay that he would (...) be married
presently, but her Gaudy Trapings laid aside, in the morning when he viewed her
undressed, she appeared a perfect Hagg, Lean, Yellow, Rivel'd, etc. and such a
one as palled all the pleasures and delights he had promised himself in that
Marriage, so that he could not endure to look upon her. In Italy such Matches
are usually made, most of their wooings being in the Churches, and those
Windows generally cast false Lights to make things seem fairer than they are,
Interchanging but few words, and are much addicted, especially if they be not
very Fair and Lovely, to have their Faces for the most part Clouded with Vails
or Masks. -- In the Old Lacedaemonians time, the Bride was to be brought into
the Church or Chamber, with her Hair girt about her, and the Bridegroom untied
the Knot, and was not at all to see her by day light, till such time she had
Conceived; but thanks to our prudent Ancestors who have made no such Law, that
we should be compelled to have a Pig in a Poke; we are a Freeborn People, and
have free Liberty in our Choice, may talk with Freedom and Familiarity, and use
any Modest Expressions or Recreations, that may tend to the Accomplishing our
desires. Here Ladies one Complements you, and holds you up by the Arm to
prevent stumbling, Wrings your Fingers, drinks to you, and tenderly Embraces
you, another Kisses you whilst the Fiddler plays, and perhaps sings, a Third
singles you out to dance, another accosts you with dumb signs as not daring to
trust his Tongue with relating his Passion, whilst you walk up and down in
state, and by the ruffling your Silks and Tinsels make men turn their Eyes upon
you. In these you have Advantages above other Nations, and increase your
Trophies by new and unforbidden Conquests at pleasure. We only put you in mind
that you ought to be merciful to those you overcome. In this we find that Women
who are made such soft Temptations ought not to be Cruel, where their Charms
have made a Conquest over the hearts of Men, nor be boastingly proud of their
Triumphs, when being Compassionate in dispensing their Favor, gains them not
only Applause but even the very Essence of Love it self, and furnishes you with
such ravishing pleasures as are unaccountable; but in the Enjoying Marriage
when suitable to either Party, brings many Blessings with it. Cornelia a
Virtuous Roman Lady being Challenged by a Light Housewife to number Jewels with
her, produced a great many beautiful and well educated Children, saying they
were her Jewels, which she Esteemed of a greater Value than all the Jewels
India or Arabia could afford; and indeed they are the Blessing of God, the
sweet Recompenses and Pledges of Chaste Conjugal Love. Inconstancy, and it is bad
effects. Inconstancy is very uncommendable in either Sex, because it shows not
only a wavering, but a Treacherous Disposition, a Sandy or Wavy Foundation on
which no Trust or Confidence can have a Foundation. In the Country of the
Trogloditae, Geographers report that there is a Water or Lake, the Taste
whereof is bitter and Salt thrice a day, and again returns as often to be
sweet, so that for its continuing at no stay, it is termed the Mad-water; even
such may we reasonably term those Men and Women, that give themselves up to be
turned about with every Wind and Fancy, being no less unequal and inconstant in
their Manners, than those Waters are in their Taste; sometimes Courteous, and
sometimes Rough; now Prodigal, and then Sordid, seldom being many hours in one
stay, one while being extremely kind, and in a while vehemently hating where
they Passionately Loved, or seemed so to do before blowing like the Traveller
in the Satyrs Cave, hot and cold with the same breath: in Consideration of
which Circling, an ingenious Person thus Descants upon his inconstant Fair one.
(1.)
Unconstant, that Word strikes me more
Than the bright Lightning of your Eyes
That made my yielding Heart your prize
^ou'd ever do before.
(2.)
Ab like a cruel Murthress you
Fly from your Lover slain,
Some other booty to pursue,
And proudly kill again.
(3.)
But why should I for this despair,
Or at Inconstancy repine,
Since only change can make you mine,
Now you another are.
(4.)
What though the Heavens beauteous frame
Daily delights to move,
It still returns again the same,
All Harmony and Love.
(5.)
It Is Pity too methinks that she
(By Duty sure designed,
To cherish all Mankind)
Should be confined to me.
(6.)
For should the Suns all Smiling Light
To his loved Rhodes display,
All other parts must Mourn in Night,
And never enjoy the day.
Incest, incestus did signify all kind of Pollution, committed by undoing or
untying the girdle called Cestus or (...), but now in a more strict acceptance
it signifies only that kind of Naughtiness, which is committed between two of
near kin, Godwin. -- Incest, the Evil that attends it. Incestuous Love and
Marriages are to be avoided among Christians, though in the first Ages of the
World, they were in some measure winked at, for the speedier way of peopling of
the Earth. The Words of St. Augustine are, that the Commixture of Brothers and
Sisters, the more Ancient it is in respect of Compulsion of Necessity, the more
damnable it is now afterward become, through the Prohibition of Religion.
Amongst those with whom Religion has but little to do, whole Nations are
delighted and polluted with all sorts of Incestuous Copulations, the Persians
and Parthians allow Incest in their Royal Families, which warrants others by
Example to commit it, though this evil has been severely punished; as for
Example: Incestuous desire so possessed a Moor in Persia, named Hajam Mojam,
that coveting to enjoy his own Daughter, though her Mother was alive, he went
to an Ecclesiastical Judge, informing him in general Terms, that in his Youth
having taken Pleasure to plant a Garden, and Dress and Order it with great
Care, it now brought forth such excellent Fruits, that his Negihbours greedily
coveted it, importuning him every day to communicate unto them; but his design
being to make use of it himself, he desired according to Custom to have a
License so to do. The Kasi or Judge not able to comprehend the true meaning,
unfortunately made answer that he had all the Reason in the World, (since he
had been at such Pains to bring it to Perfection) to have the Pleasure of
enjoying it, and so gave him his Permission in writing; but neither that nor
his own Authority prevailed with the Daughter to yield to his wicked Embraces,
so that enraged with Lust, he took an opportunity to ravish her; of this
Brutish Act she informed her Mother, and the report of it coming to the
Knowledge of King Mahomet Begeraus Ear, he caused the unnatural Father to be
Beheaded, though he was a Man of great Substance. Incest with the Greek Race of
the Ptolomies, Kings of Egypt, was usual, for they Married their Sisters, and
sometimes their Daughters, but most of them came to unfortunate ends of either
Sex. Incest had such an ascendant over Artaxerxes Mnemon King of Persia, that
he Married his Daughter Arcssa a Beautiful Virgin, but never prospered after
it. Lucretia the Daughter of Pope Alexander the sixth, not only committed
Incest with her Father, but with her Brother the Duke of Candy, who was slain
by Caesar Borgie, another of that Popes hopeful Offspring, for being his Riv^l
in that Sister, he soon after poisoned his Father, and was himself slain by the
Multitude. Many Instances of the like Nature are recounted in History, but
always attended with some fearful Judgment or sad Calamity, to manifest the
displeasure of the Almighty. Infants, crying in the Womb or Wonders in Nature.
Infants crying in the Wombs of their Mothers, have occasioned various
discourses among the Learned, as to it is Signification, but in this they
differ; however it is a thing very unusual, and therefore strange; Sorrow
indeed is incident to Mankind, and we begin it with Weeping before we know what
it means, but that is very rare, 'till we come to breath in the open Air; now
whether such untimely Cryings may signify something extraordinary in the
Course of Life; or that Provident Nature would have them Practice in the dark
Cell of Generation, what they shall afterward seldom want so long as they
enjoy the Light, viz. Sorrow and Affliction, we undertake not to determine; but
such Relations of these little Prisoners that have been so heard to cry in
those close Appartments, take as we find them in credible Histories. In
Holland, a Woman had a Child cried and bemoaned it self in her Womb with little
in^ermission, for the space of fifteen days. In Leydon, a Gentlewoman being in
Bed with her Husband, on a sudden hearing the Child cry in her Womb was
greatly terrified, so that in two days after she fell in labor, though she
expected to go a great while longer. In Kathstadt, a Town in the Norick Alps, a
Child was heard to cry in his Mothers Womb fourteen days before it was born.
And indeed a great deal more of the like Nature is testified by credible
Persons of Candid Reputations, that the Truth of them is not to be doubted, but
by those that their own Failings and Romances have stupefied and rendered so
incredulous that they will scarcely believe what they see and hear themselves:
the Cause ^f this prot bably may be, because ^here is more Air contained in the
Membranes of some Wombs than others, which drawn in gives the Organs a Sound or
Noise, etc. Jealousy and its evil Effect, etc. -- Jealousy if the Bane of
Love, and the grand distu^^er of either S^x; f^r where its Poison once
tinctures, though in never so small a proportion, it insensibly spreads to the
impoisoning of the mind, and changes a Heaven of Contentment into a Hell of
Disorder and Con^^sion; it is the G^^gon's Head, that with a look changes
Pleasure into Pain, and raises Storms of Disquiet in those Breasts where
Halcion Joys and Pleasures were brooding the true satisfactions of Life and
happy days, and all this for the most part is groundless and unreasonable in
its original Contraction. Bonaven^^ne, a very learned and famous Man of his
time, looking wishfully upon a Beautiful Woman in his Company, the Husband
being present, could not forbear to demand with some trouble of Mind, which h^
labored to stisie, the reason why he so earne^ly fixe^ his ^yes upon her, who
modestly re^^^yed, that he admired the Exce^^ency of the Cre^to^ by
Contemplating the Beauty of the Creature, and if Mortals were so amiable, ^ow
infinitely more lovely should we be at the Re^^rrection! This was an Example,
says Boschier, that was rather to be admired than imitated seeing the Husband
was ^atisfied with the reason he gave; for Jealousy is rightly compared to the
Indian impoisoned Arrows, if they race the Skin they endanger Life, but drawing
Blood in^vitably destroys it; the first motions that arise from this root of
bitterness have their evil Effects, but where the Disease is improved it
empoysons all our Com^or^s and throws us Headlong unto the most Tragical
Resolutions, and is incident to either Sex. Justina a fair beautiful Lady of
her time that Rome could boast of, was married to a Man of a large Fortune, who
finding her so excellent a Creature, suspected every one that cast his Eyes
upon her, and at length began to suspect that she was prodigal of her Favors
to others, and careless of her Honor, upon no other ground than that a Woman
so accomplished with all the Perfections of a celebrated Beauty, must Charm all
Mankind as well as himself to delight in her, which made him grow Envious and
Furious, so that one day discovering her curious White Neck as she was stooping
to ^ye ^er Sh^ce, he wickedly drew his Sword, without any other Resentment or
Provocation, and separated at one blow her Head from her Body. -- Jane Queen of
Spain, and Mother to Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, as likewise to
Ferdinand who succeeded him, was so exceeding Jealous of King Philip her
Husband, that she suffered him to have no rest nor quiet, but by her continual
persecuting him with Clamours, Reproaches and insufferable Abuses, supposed
causlesly, it was thought she shortened his days, and withal brought her self
to that Weakness of Mind, that she could not discern of my Matters that were
propounded to her. -- Jonuses one of Selimus's great Bassa's and Favorites,
stabbed his Wife, because she was so Beautiful, though Virtuous, that he
thought it was impossible for him to keep her to himself only. -- Joan Queen of
Naples, though she was wickedly lewd and debauched her self, yet she caused two
Husbands to be murdered, upon bare suspicion they had to do with other Women,
because they could not satisfy her Lust, Yet all these with many more we might
Name, came themselves to Violen^ Deaths and untimely Ends, being pushed Head
long down the Precepice of Ruin, by Judgments that suddenly overtook them. --
Jealousy being like a raging Feavour, Jealousy more particularly considered.
that makes Men talk i^lely by ^^ing the Head light giddy, etc. and enflaming
the Blood, it is but reason we should prescrib such things as may contribute to
the Cure of a Ma'ady that has done we know not what Mischief in all Ages, and
those we have an account of are almost innumerable. -- Jealousy is by diverse
Learned Men put for a main Cause of Melancholy; some again only allow it to be
a Sympt^m; and they give this Reason for it, because melancholy Persons among
these Passions and Perturbations of the Mind lie most exposed to it; but if we
may give our Opinion, it seems to us to have a Prerogative and Latitude above
all other ordinary Symptoms, and therefore requires to be treated off as a
Species apart, being of such extrao^dinary note, so great a Passion, that it is
held almost to be of as large extent as Love it self; for which Reason we will
dilate upon it apart, as a kind of a Bastard-branch of Melancholy Love.
Jealousy is the greatest Enemy to Marriage in the World; Jealousy an Enemy to
a married Life.
and as Heroical or Love Melancholy Torments before hand, this comes with a
Scorpions Sting in its Tail, to poison all the Joys and expected sweets, not
only of Marriage, but of Life; and therefore requires a greater Care and
Industry in rectifying it, because its Contagion disorders a whole Family, when
the other afflicts but a single Person; so that by our delineating it, a
Jealous Man or Woman sees His or Her Error as in a Glass, and those that are
not tinctured may find Reason to avoid it. Jealousy is defined to be a certain
kind of a Suspicion possessing the jealous party, that the party chiefly
beloved by him, is enamoured of another, whom ^he loves as he imagines better
than himself, and scatters those Favors on him which she ought to reserve for
himself alone; and this many times extends to the Case of a Mistress as well as
a Wife. Scaliger says, it is a fear of losing her fa^our, whom he so earnestly
Affects and Desires to have proper to himself only. But Cardan styles it a Zeal
for Love, and a (...) of an Envy, least any one should beguile us. Jealousy,
you see by this is a mere Monopolist, a Coveter of all, and will not spare the
least Morsel to the dearest of Friends. It is the married man's Hell, where it
takes deep Root in his Soul, and the same to the Wife, if she be infected; for
as there is no Condition in the World, Sweeter, Pleasanter, or Fuller of
Cordial-happiness than Marriage, if they live Peaceably and Lovingly together,
as has already been hinted; so if this Fiend get in between, farewell to all
Quiet and Repose, he pulls in after him Grief, Sorrow, Disasters, Mischiefs,
Mischances, Gripings, and Discontents. A Fury (says Aristo) it is full of
Suspicion and Fear, the Martyrdom of Mirth and Marriage, a Corrosive that Gnaws
upon the Heart, and indeed there is no Name that can well suit it so bad as it
deserves; yet we see some that have the esteem of wise, so weak as to indulge
it, to harbor and nurse it in their Bosoms, though like the Tytanian Vulturs,
it feeds on their Livers. Jealousy, in preventing it, Jealousy, sundry ways
prescribed to prevent its bad Effects.
could it be Effectually done, is more Advantageous to men and Women, than
easing or removing it when contracted; and indeed there are some probabilities
of it, though many have prescribed a sort of extravagant Methods to be
observed. Plato would have Wives and Children in common, as once it was a
Custom among the Ancient Britains, and then where there was no absolute
Propriety, there consequently could be no Root for Jealousy; but this
Promiscuous way is not held a good way in our days; many others are of Plato's
opinion; but seeing it is condemned as wicked and monstrous by all civilized
Nations, we pass over their Arguments for it, and refer the Vindicators with
their weak Reasons to Mahomess Paradise, where it is held (if you will believe
it) that Men possess all or the greatest part of their Happiness in the
Embracing as many handsome Women as they please. It is indeed the Custom of some
Countries, to be such Strangers to Jealousy, that they prostitute their Wives
so such as pay them Visits, and conclude they have in no manner welcomed them,
unless they can fasten that Favor on them; and this amongst others the
Babylonians did not only by their Wives, but also their Daughters. The Kings of
Calecut in the East Indies will not meddle with their Wives, 'till the Biarmi
or Highpriests have made them Cuckolds, by which means they superstitiously
hold that their Wombs are sanctified by the Sanctity of the Priest. Kings have
been so far from Jealousy, that they have Married Common Women, knowing them
to be such. (...) had Thaeis a Harlot, and Hiroem King of Syracuse, Pitbo ^
Keeper of the Public Stews: by which we see Jealousy is not so universal, as
some would have it. Policy it is in the Italians, as themselves give out, to
allow public Stews, for thereby they conceit they keep their Wives honest,
since those Men that are fleshly given, having cheap opportunities, will not
run those hazards and expenses that attend on close Intreagues; and this they
further hold, is done to keep out those disorders of Mind that Jealousy would
other ways occasion; however they allow their Wives their Confessors, and if
you will believe those that have traveled, they will tell you there is no Man
more lascivious than an Italian-Priest, they making it a great part of their
business to promote and stir up Lust in themselves and others, by Philters,
etc. They take not the way of Origin, nor of Comb^lus; the first is spoken of
elsewhere; and as for the latter, being a very beautiful young man, that he
might take all occasion of Jealousy away from King Selucus, when he was to
Conduct Stratonice his Queen into Syria, he ^elded himself before he set out
with her, and left his Genitals Sealed up in a Box behind him; this great Lady,
we find had more Honor and Beauty than Chastity, for as be suspected, she did
tempt him by the way to amorous D^lliances, and upon his refusal, like Joseph's
Mistress, falsely ^^cused him, so that upon his return he was cast into Prison,
and a day appointed for his hearing, but he cleared himself by producing the
Box with his Movables in it, and by the loss of them saved his Life, and got
applause among the Men, but how the Queen and the rest of her Sex resented it,
we are ignorant. Passing over such like Relations, we now come to show, that to
prevent Jealousy is the best way to make equal Matches, that is proportionable
in Years, for certain it is nothing sooner Creates Jealousy on the one hand,
and loathing on the other, than an old Man to be Married to a Young Woman, or a
Young Man to an Old Woman; yet Money we see makes these Matches frequently, and
brings on a World of discontent and vexation, which no Money is a sufficient
Cordial to Cure or Remove; yet Sophocles, though otherways a wise Man, at an
extreme Age fell in Love with Archippe a brisk Young Girl, even when his Heat
and Moisture was decayed; so that we might believe that Jealousy could not be
among such men, but we find it will creep into their Bosoms, notwithstanding
their utmost endeavors to keep it out, and has proved very Tragical; but of
these sort of Marriages, you will find the ill-conveniencies more at large
where we treat more particularly of Marriages: Some on the other hand in their
Matches are over-curiously Nice and Critical, which has something strange and
unusual in it. Francis Siorza Duke of Millan, was so Curious, that though the
Match was far carried on between him and the Duke of Mantua's Daughter, he
would not receive the Young Lady as his Bride before he had seen her Naked,
that he might be satisfied whether any blemishes or imperfections in Nature
were covered under her Garments; and it not only has been, but is now a Custom
in some Places, that to avoid any discontent after Marriage, the Parents of
either side search the two parties, to observe if there be no Impediment to the
hindering Generation; and after this search they are compelled to Marry if they
refuse it: In a part of the East Indies, they have a Custom, that the Bride
shall put her hand through the hole of a Partition, and take in the Bridegrooms
hand, where her Mother or some near Relation pricks his hand, whilst he holds
hers, all over with a sharp Bodkin; and if for all that, if he hold her fast,
so that she squeak again, it is a sign of lasting Love and Constancy, as they
term it; but it through the pain it occasions, he timerously lets go his hold,
then the contrary is expected, and accordingly it most commonly occasions the
breaking off the Match, though never so near Consummation. It is to be wished
for weighty Reasons, that Young People could well understand each others
humors, before they come to tie the lasting Knot. Plutarch says, one must eat
a Bushel of Salt before he makes choice of a Friend, that is, it must not be
done Rashly or Unadvisedly, but upon Mature Deliberation: so to prevent
Jealousy, and the Misfortunes that attend on it, ought we to do in Cases of
Marriage, to weigh every thing that we scruple will not answer our
Expectations, and when the Parties who are to have their Lots are well assured
of her or his (for it may extend to either Sex) Behavior and Qualities, etc.
they are not, if they intend it a Happy Marriage, to prefer Riches, Birth or
Beauty, before good Education and good Conditions. A merry Fellow says, that
Conquage styled the God of Cuckolds, is to Accompany the Goddess Jealousy,
they by the appointment of Jupiter, being always to follow the fairest: So that
Beauty is not always accounted the happiest Lot, though very much coveted;
straight and comely Personage; have many times crooked and deformed Conditions,
yet it is something hard, if men should marry deformed and ill-shapen Wives on
purpose to prevent Jealousy, or go on purpose for that Reason to fetch one
from the Temple of Cassandra, which was once held to be a Sanctuary for homely
Maids, and yet when he has done all that, he may be deceived, as the Thracian
was, who having a deformed Dowdy to his Wife, and catching her one Morning in
Bed with a Fellow, he cried out, O thou miserable wretch! what necessity
brought thee hither, as he had Reason, for the Cuckold-maker must needs have a
good Stomach to breakfast on so course a Dish: he who marries a Wife of a
suspected Fame, if she play false with him, ought to lay his hand upon his
Heart, and rest contented, by Reason his Bargain is no worie, than he had
Reason to expect it would be; but when all is done, if you would not be Plagued
with Jealousy, marry a Virtuous Wife, though but tollerably handsome, and behave
your self toward; her as a good Loving Husband ought. Jealousy by those it
possesses, Jealousy its Cause, and many things considered therein conducing to
it is Remedy.
being acknowledged to be a strange disorder, and an extravagant Evil, they
would lessen their own Folly and Madness by laying the fault upon the
Celestial Bodies, through whose influence say they, it is inevitable to some
Persons; and there are not wanting some who pretend to Astrology, who lull them
in this opinion to compass their own ends, in causing diverse to resort to them
for no other design than to gull them of their Money, when indeed the wisest of
them all cannot tell, how often their own Venus's are in Conjunction with the
Mercurial and Martial Sparks of the Town in the lowest Orb, should they reduce
the Essence of their Art into a Nutshell the better to be informed. Indeed hot
Countries, that are most Subject to Lust, give greatest Causes of Jealousy,
but what can we say, when it is known for the most part to be incident to those
that have no cause at all to be Jealous: we are not ignorant, that the greatest
Cuckolds are the most Contented, Quiet and Peaceable Men, the most kind and
endearing to their Wives; this indeed they urge, though lamely, in Vindication
of the Starry influences, which say they, predominate over some more than
others; but leaving these wide or rather wild Notions, we now come nearer to
the Point, and conclude it to be an unreasonable Madness that Men and Women
bring upon themselves, by giving too much Scope to their Passions, and
indulging the Temptations that the grand Enemy of Mankind lays to destroy their
Peace, and the quiet repose of their Minds, as well knowing such disorders will
hinder them from entertaining good Thoughts, Meditations, Prayers, etc. and
truly any thing that may further them in the way to their Eternal Happiness,
and indeed we cannot Conjecture otherwise than that the Devil is the source and
Fountain of such bitter Streams, and those that are possessed with it, if their
Reason or Serious Thoughts would give leave to make a true Judgment, would
agree: Some hold that Women are more prone to it than Men, by Reason of the
weakness of their Sex, and by a Modern Poet it is thus further described: Pale
Jealousy, brat of insatiate Love,
Of Heart-sick Thoughts, which Melancholy breed;
A Hell tormenting fear, no Faith can move,
By discontent with deadly Poison fed.
With beedless Youth and Error vainly led,
To rout the Pleasures of a Marriage Bed:
A Mortal Plague, a Virtue-drowning flood,
A Hellish fire that drinks our vital Blood.
Strange it is to observe with any Seriouness, that an old Man marrying a Young
Woman, immediately grows Jealous, suspecting his Wives Virtue; this makes him
rave and grow Mad without a Cause, he fancies his Antlers shadow his Brows,
and hinder the light of the Sun from shining on his Face, as it was wont. If
she chances to cast her Eye on any one more comely than himself, he concludes
that an Assignation is made by the Language of her Eyes, and a smile in Company
goes to his Heart with as Keen a Point as a Dagger. Mendoza the Jealous
Spaniard, when he remained as Legate in England, complained of Men and Women's
being at Church together, without high Blinds or Partitions between them,
according to the Custom of his Country, the most Jealous Nation under Heaven,
saying it was a filthy Custom; but had a Tart reply, that it was so in Spain,
where they could not contain themselves from wanton and lascivious Thoughts,
even in their Devotion, but not so in England, where Modesty was a sufficient
restraint; but we wish this last saying may hold good among the Ogling Sparks
and Ladies that come to be admired in their fine Clothes, more (if we censure
not too hard) than out of Devotion; if a Woman have an itching Inclination to
part with her Honor, according to the Italian Proverb, if a Man had more Eyes
than Argus, or they equalled the number of his Hairs, he would be as
successless in preventing her Scapes as Argus was in securing Io; they have a
thousand Wiles, Pretenses and feigned Excuses to give him the slip, sometimes
an Aunt is just come to Town, and she must go meet her at the Inn, at another
time such a Cousin is sick and must be visited, an old procuring Nurse comes
perhaps to call her up at Midnight to such a Kinswomans labor. A Child abroad
is Sick, and in danger of Life, and a thousand other sleights. Then what
signifies Jealousy, were there a real Cause for it, since it is so
insignificant a Guardian; and indeed Jealousy and Restraint makes one that
otherwise perhaps would have had no Inclination to dishonesty, do in revenge
what he suspected she did being innocent, as thinking it can be no worse with
her Reputation, if she be discovered, comforting her self with the old though
false Proverb, A Woman had as good be a Whore as lie under the scandal of it:
when honest Apulcius an old Gouty bald-pated Curmudgeon, though very Rich, having
married ^ brisk Young Lass, and conceiting she only married him for his Wealth,
and must be better pleased with others than himself, kept a hard hand over her,
but it availed him nothing, for having bemoaned her oversight and misfortune,
as too many Young Women of our times do, that marry the Money more than the
Person, she changed his causeless Suspicion ^^to plain Matter of Fact, and to
put him out of doubt, by letting him know his fears were at an end, since what
he was so long afraid of was come to pass. And let this Notice be given to all
Husbands, whether Jealous or not, the more a Woman is forbidden or denied any
thing, the more she desires and covers it, nor are men in many particulars to
be excused in this Point. Jealousy, though (...) extreme, in Hypocrates the
great and learned Physician, made him when he traveled (...), leave Dyonisius
his Friend at home in his house to look after his Wife, that she should not in
his absence run astray; he had sure great Confidence in his Virtue, when he
left him to the assault of so fair a Temptation. In Abstemius is a Story, that
a man being married to a Young Woman, was persuaded by one he supposed to be
his Friend, who pretended to great skill in Astrology, that if he meddled not
with his Wife the first night, his Cattle should wonderfully increase and he
thereby become exceeding Rich; the foolish Man believed him, but the Bride was
not so satisfied, for she Cuc^olded him with the same party the second night,
and as Dia^^ in revenge turned Acteon into a Stag, for looking upon her naked,
as she was washing with her Nimphs in a Fountain, so she on the contrary
wilfully uncovered her nakedness and turned him into a beast by grasting Horns
on his Forehead. But whither wander we, alas by stumbling on these kind of
Digressions, we are almost turning out of the Road of Jealousy, therefore it
behooves us to keep the reins more Tight, that Headstrong fancy may not carry us
forcibly into by-ways, from whence we are compelled to return again with the
loss of so much time, as would set us much forward on our intended Journey.
Jealousy then is by us here undertaken to be handled, not only to show it is
Causes and Symptoms, but to lay down such Rules and Methods for its Ease and
Cure, as may prove effectual. Jealousy is such a strange sort of a
Melancholy, Jealousy its Cure, and the circumstances attending it.
that some have doubted, whether it can be absolutely removed or not. Aristo
seems to affirm, it is an incurable disorder, when he thus descants upon it^
This is that cruel wound, against whose smart
No Cordials force prevails, nor any Plaster;
No skill of Stars, or secret Magic Art,
Deviz'd by the most learned Zoro-after:
A Wound that taints the very Soul and Heart,
And all our Sense and Reason quite does Master.
However our Opinion is, it may be cured or mitigated, and as the Devil is
dispossessed by Prayer and Fasting, how strong Possession soever he has got in
the Party, so this in time, by avoiding occasion, idleness, and listening to
sober and wholesome Advice, may be rooted out, and the Bedlamite being restored
will wonder how he came to be so mad, detesting his Folly more than he ever
hugged and embraced it; then you shall see him condemning that in others which
once his Frenzy made him so highly approve in himself, unless he be like the
Madman who during Lunacy fancied himself King of all the World, and was angry
they brought him to himself, because then he plainly perceived he was but a
Private Man. -- Idleness avoided, is one great step toward the Cure of this
Distemper, serious Business jostles Follies and Fancies out of a Man's Head,
removes Suspicions that Idleness before has bred, and makes the party grow so
calm, he will by degrees be in a temper to hearken to the Persuasion of those
that wish him well, and begin to see himself discredit his Family, and bring
himself into disreputation, intailing the shame upon his Posterity, and that he
shall leave his Estate to be torn in pieces after his Death; for if himself
suspect his Wife to be a Whore, others whose Interest it will be to improve the
scandal, will not be wanting to Basterdize his Child^en, and throw them out of
their rightful Possessions, if they can; so that for their Fathers foolish
Jealousy they must become wretchedly miserable, lose their inheritance and
esteem amongst Men, for the humor of their Parent; when it seldom comes to
pass but the Jealous party is of a vicious Inclination himself; seldom a^ an
old Whoremaster marries a handsome Young Woman, but he is troubled with this
Plague; for having found many of the loose debauched sort coming, and very
tamely yielding, he can scarcely believe there is any honest, though we affirm
he is wonderfully mistaken, and indeed such a Husband by his loose and
lascivious Example is enough to make a Woman fly out, though otherwise with a
chaste Virtous Husband she would never have attempted it. A Man ought to be a
Pattern and Guide to his Wife in Virtue, so that if she be otherwise she may be
left inexcusable, and rendered more blameworthy. But methinks we hear some
replying, there is a vast difference in this Case between Men and Women; If I,
says one, am guilty of this Tickling Sin, my Bastards Heir my Estate, I can put
them off with little, but if my Wife be faulty, I must be a drudge for other
men's Children, which is insufferable: and why pray Sir Fopiing will you put
that upon your Neighbor, that you are unwilling to bear your self, this is a
great way out of the road, of doing as you would be done by; there is something
of Justice in it, that a Man that in this manner wrong^ his Neighbor, should
be retaliated in the same kind, and when he is in the raving (...)^y of his
Jealousy, deserves a less degree of Pity than others, though many times this
Jealousy is without a Cause; the Woman not taking Example by his
extravagancies, is Chaste and Virtuous, and he will not believe her to be so,
but measures her by himself; Jealousy is a great Sign that the party it
possesse^ is dishonest, whatever fair pretenses may be made; and indeed their
Jealousy, and the restraint they lay upon their Wives, makes them many times
dishonest, for no other end than a sweet revenge on their Jealousy, not to let
them continue in it without a Cause. Aeneas Sylvius says, the Italians are much
to blame in locking up their Wives, for Women generally are of a Disposition to
covet most that which is denied most, and offend least where they have the
greatest Liberty and Freedom to Act and do as they please; it is in vain to
lock her up, if she be dishonestly inclined, for she has so many Wiles to
accomplish her desire, that she will, as the old saying is, make you if
possible a Cuckold through the Keyhole. And Virtue can only be the secure
Guardian of a Woman's Honor, if that be mistaken, you need fear nothing, but
force and violence can overcome her, and that very seldom happens to Women,
though a little push as some will have it, throws them down when there is a
kind of an Inclination to fall backward: When Mark Anthony left his Chaste Wife
Octavia, to wanton in the adulterous embraces of Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, she
was far from revenging her injury in giving up her self to another, though he
had utterly forsaken her. Turn a virtuous Woman loose to all the Tarquins and
Satyrs, their Persuasions, Flatteries and Promises, shall never shake her
virtuous resolves. Archidamus Consul of Antioch, offered a Young Woman a
hundred pieces of Gold, and to free her Husband, who then lay a Prisoner in a
dark Dungeon, if she would satisfy his Lust; but neither her Husbands
Sufferings, nor Poverty could induce her to be Unchaste. Cure of Jealousy, one
would think should be wrought by considering what has been said, yet that there
may be nothing wanting on so Urgent and Necessary an Occasion, a composed
Temper is very rarely subject to Jealousy; for there Reason stands Sentinel
and keeps it out, and if Men who are subject to passion would but use Reason,
would but labor by degrees to Compose themselves, and be of a sedate and calm
Temperature, they would in time be Masters over their Passions, and find the
Humors that feed them abate, and then they need not fear to shake off
Jealousy, if it should at any time suddenly surprise them. Iilt, o. to
deceive or defeat ones expectation, especially in the point of Amors. Illia,
Daughter of Numitor, King of the Albanes, a Vestal Nun, but Mother of Romulus
and Remus by Mars. Imps, Witches, little Familiars. Incontinency, want of
Moderation in Affections and Desires. Incubus, l., the Devil (in Man's shape)
lying with Women, as Succubus with Men; also the Nightmare, or raw Humors
from the Stomach, troubling the Brain and Animal Spirits, that the Body cannot
move. Indecorum, unseemliness, unhandsome Carriage. Ino, Daughter of Cadmus,
Nurse to Bacchus, and Wife to Athamas K. of Thebes, who (in his madness)
supposing her to to be a Lioness, drove her headlong into the Sea. Io, Daughter
of Inacbus, turned into a Cow by Jupiter, that she might not be known of Juno,
who drove her into Egypt, where she recovered her former shape, and was made a
Goddess. Iocasta, Daughter of Creen King of Thebes, after the Death of her
Husband Laius, she unwittingly married her own Son Oedipus. Iointure, a
Settlement upon the Wife in respect of Marriage. Iopas, a Musical King of
Africa, one of Dido's Suitors. Iphianassa, Iphinoe and Lyssppe, Daughters of
Pretus King of Argos, preferring their Beauty to Juno's, were by her struck
with madness, imagining themselves to be Cows. Iphigenia, Agamemnon's Daughter,
which should have been sacrificed to Diana, because her Father had slain a Heart
of hers, but the Goddess pittyed her, and sent an Heart to be offered in her
stead. Iphimedia, ravished by Neptune, brought forth Ephialtes and Otus, who
grew (every month) nine Fingers in length, 'till (helping the Giants against
the gods) they were slain by Apollo. Irene the Mother of Constantine the
seventh, reigned with him Nine Years, he expelled her Reigned alone seven
Years, again she took him by craft, put out his Eyes, cast him into Prison
(where he dyed) and reigned alone four Years. Iris, Juno's Messenger, the
Rainbow, also an hexagonal precious stone. Irus, a beggarly Messenger between
Penelope and her Suitors, whom Ulysses killed with his Fist. Ischuotes, g. a
slender child (...) or Faeminine pronunciation. Ills, an Egyptian Goddess made
of Io. Isota de ^ugarolis, a Virgin of Verona, famous for Philosophy, Philology
and Poetry. Ifsue, an Effect, Children, Profits of Fines or Lands, the matter
depending in suit. Itylus, slain by his own Mother Aeton instead of Ama^eus the
Son of Amphion. Itys, slain by his Mother Progue, and set before his Father
Tereus (King of Thrace) at a Banquet for deflowring her sister Philomel; he
perceiving the murder, with his naked Sword pursued them, but (in their flight)
they were changed, Progne into a Swallow, Philomel into a Nightingale, and Itys
to a Pheasant. Iulep, A preparative (of Syrups, etc.) to open the inward parts
and prepare for a Purgation, from Iulap, a kind of Rose Water. Iulian-na,
Cilian, a Woman's Name. Julian Law (among the (...)) made Adultery death.
Iumbals, certain Sweet^^^^ts. Juno, Twin-Sister and Wife to Jupiter. Iussel, a
minced Dish of several meats. Iuturna, the Daughter of Daunus, made by Jupiter
(for the Loss of her Maidenhead) the immortal Nymph of the River Numicius.
Ixion, Son of Phlegias, thrown to Hell, for boasting that he had lain with
Juno, in whose stead Jupiter had placed a Cloud, on which he begat the
Centaurs. Infanta of Spain, every Daughter of that King not being Heir, whether
first, second or third, etc. the Heir is called Princesa, and the rest
Infanta's; of the Sons are called Infantes, and the Heir Principe, of the Latin
Infans a Child. Innocents-Day, or Childermas-day, a Feast celebrated on the 28
th. of December, in memory and honor of those innocent Children Herod slew,
not long after our Saviors Nativity, when he sought for Christ himself,
thinking to destroy him. Interlude, ( interludium)a Play or Comedy. Iurden or
Jordan ( matella) a double Urinal or Chamber Pot.
K.
KAtharine, perhaps Pure, Chaste, Undefiled, from Katharos, Gr. Keturah, Genesis
25. sweet Perfume or Incense. Kinburga, i. e. the Strength, or a Defenderess of
her Kindred Kinulpha, i. e. the Help or Stay of her Kindred. Ketura, Abraham
the Patriarch's Wife, he married her to Comfort him after the Death of Sarah;
and though he was very old, he had diverse Sons by her, who growing up,
increased so well under the Blessing promised their Father, that their
Posterity became great and mighty Nations, many of which bore their Names.
Kisomena, an Indian Queen, who always lead her Armies in Person to Battle, and
usually by means of her Courage and Conduct returned with Success, so that the
greatly enlarged her Borders. Kiosem, an imperious Sultaness of Turkey, she was
Wife to Achmet the Turkish Emperor, and Mother to Sultan Ibrahim, who when her
Son came to the Throne, she by the Party she had made among the great ones, not
only governed him, but the whole Empire, he minding his Women in the Seraglio
more than the Public Affairs, being the most devoted to the Pleasures of Venus
of all the Turkish Emperors; but for ravishing the Musti's Daughter, he was by
the Soldiers whom the Conspirators had gained to their Party, (the Queen Mother
consenting to it, because he had a little before for reproving him Confined her
to the old Seraglio,) and being Imprisoned, he was soon after strangled, and
his Son Mahomet the fourth, a Child, succeeded him in the Empire, over whom
Kiosem governed as Regent of the Empire, placing and displacing the great
Officers as she pleased, putting diverse to death; that stood in her way; but at
length the Mother of young Mahomet, encouraged thereto by the Janissaries, took
Heart to oppose her Proceedings, making a Party against her, so that many
Mischiefs happened in the Empire during the Contests, the Janissaries or
Footmen being for the young Queen, and the Spahi's, or Horsemen, for the old.
During these Bickerings many great Heads went off to appease the one side or
the other, but at last the young Queen's Party became too strong for the old,
so that taking an Opporunity in the Night, Sians Bassa, Grand Vizier, entered
Kiosem's Apparment with a Guard, and found her hid in a Chest under some Bales
of Silk, from whence not without much difficulty they dragged her to Prison,
and got the young, Emperor to Sign her Execution, and accordingly she was
strangled. Kirchief, (from the Fr. Couverchief, i.e. to Cover the Head) a
Linen Cloth that old Women wear on their Heads; and hence Handkerchief, though
improperly. Kersey, ( Kerserye, and Karsaye a kind of Stuff or flight Cloth.
Gods Kichel, a Cake given to God-children at their asking Blessing. Kichin, a
little Child. Kitt, a Milking-pail like a Churn. Kyachin Morts. Kynchin Morts
are Girls of an Year or two old, which the Morts their Mothers carry at their
backs in Slates or Sheets; if they have no Children of their own, they will
steal or borrow them from others. Kissing. Pliny in his Natural History, faith,
that Cato was of Opinion, that the use of Kissing first began betwixt Kinsman
and Kinswoman, howsoever near allied or far off, only by that to know whether
their Wives, Daughters or Neeces had tasted any Wine; to this Juneral seems to
allude in these Verses: Paucae adeo cereris vitas contingere dignoe
Quaram non timeat pater oscula.
As, if the Father were jealous of his Daughters Continence, if by Kissing her
he perceived she had drunk Wine: But Kissing and Drinking both are now grown
(it seems) to a greater Custom amongst us, than in those days with the Romans:
Nor am I so austere to forbid the use of either, both which, though the one in
Surfets, the other in Adulteries, may be abused by the Vicious; yet contrarily
at Customary Meetings. and laudable Banquets, they by the Nobly disposed, and
such whose Hearts are fixed upon Honor, may be used with much Modesty and
Continence. -- Kissing, among other Incitements to Love, Kissing an Incitation
to Love, also Coyness, etc.
is not the least Charming; to Kiss and to be Kissed, where there is a pariety
or equality of Comeliness, is as a Burden in a Song, a Battery very forcible,
that makes a Breach in the Fort for Love to enter; it Insuses a Kind of a
spirit that generates Affection. Aretines Lucretia, when she designed to
overcome and put Chains upon her Admirers, took them about the Neck, and with
her soft Lips tenderly pressed theirs, often repeating it with pleasing
Murmurs, Intermixed with kind Expressions, as, O my dear, how pleasing are you
to my Eyes! how I dote upon you, etc. And by this means she made them speedily
and willingly Condenscend to what she desired, moving thereby the inmost part
of their Souls with her Nectoral and Ambrosial Kisses: And these, says another,
Change Hearts and mingle Affections in the raptures of their sweet Kisses, they
producing rather a Connection of the Mind than the Body. The Rose and
Gilliflower are not so sweet,
As sugared Kisses when kind Lovers meet.
Kissing and Embracing are proper to Men and Women, and worthy of Commendation,
when they are decently and modestly observed; but when unseasonable and too
violent, not to be approved; because they tend more to Lasciviousness than pure
Affection, and indeed often end in that; for when you come to such Kind of
close and often repeated Kissing, you have passed the long Entry of other
Ceremonies, and are come to the Gate of the Palace of Enjoyment, as the Poet
somewhat describes, though a little Lamely. With Becks and Nods he first began
To try the Wenches mind;
And Answer he did find,
And in the dark he took her by the hand,
And wrung it hard, and sighed grieviously,
And Kissed her too, and wooed her as he might,
With pity me my sweet or else I dye;
And with such Words and Kisses as there past,
He won his Mistress favor at the Last.
Kindness finds out many allurements to bring Kissing in; Winks, Nods, Jests,
Smiles, Tokens, Valentines, and the like, are Introductions, though many seem
Coy, and protest against Love Kisses, yet press them to it, and as Experience
satisfies us, you will find but a feeble Resistance: She seems much Coy, but won
she is at length,
Women in this strife use but half their Strengh.
Kisses are Coveted by most, however some seem averse to them, yet many there
are that lie open, and are most Tractable and Coming, Apt, Yielding, and
willing, drawing back and then half meeting, to strengthen the Temptation and
heighen the delight: Some have more Art in it than others, Insensibly to draw
on their Lovers to play and dally, and when they spy their advantage seign
Coyness, then Close again, and upon every little turn of Fancy or Humor
changable as the Wind to outward appearance, though Inwardly the same; at some
times you may have the Freedom of her Lips till you are tired, at other times
no Entreaty will prevail, not a Kiss for a Kingdom; though I, says one of the
fair Sex, was by Art and Nature Beautiful and Fair, yet by these Tricks I
seemed to be far more Amiable than I was; for that which Men earnestly seek and
cannot Attain, draws on their Affection with a most Furious Desire: I had,
Continues she, a Suitor that dearly loved me, and the more Presents he made me,
the more earnestly he loved me, the more I Neglected and Scorned him; the more
desirous he was of my Favor, some times I treated with Pouts and Frowns, and
would not let him have a Smile or a Kiss for a considerable Time, and then he
Bought it very dear; and all this I did to Chain him to my pleasure, and Gull
and Fetch him over; and it effectually wrought my desire. Nor is this way
unpractised in our Age with success; and moreover when the party they design
upon is in their Company, they Cause one or other to bring them Presents as
from Great Men, and show them Gloves, Rings and rich Attire, which they say was
given them by such a Rich Merchant, such a Courtier, and the like, though
bought with their own Money; this creates a fear of Rivalship, and that a more
ardent Affection, and then nothing is too dear for her; no Service, how painful
or hazardous soever, to be refused, if she Command it. Philena in Lucian was
her Arts Mistress at these kind of sleights; for she frowned at Diphilus her
Sweetheart, and would but rarely vouchsafe him her Company, though she had a
Kindness for him, but kissed Lampridus his Corrival before hs face, and all
this, as she Confessed to her Mother, who Chid her for it, to whet his Love by
Jealousy, and make him come with greater Appetite, believing her Favor was
not so easy to be had; she would take occasion to fall out with him, and pick
quarrels with him, upon no other Account, than that he might sue to her to be
reconciled again. Love (as the old saying is) is increased by Injuries, as the
Sunbeams are more glorious after long cloudy weather, and many hold, if a Lover
upon flight occasions be not Jealous, Waspish, Angry, or apt to fall out, sigh
and protest, he is no true Lover: To Kiss, Collogue, and hang about a
Mistresses neck, are but ordinary Sypmtoms; but if he be Jealous, Angry, or Apt
to Mistake, then, Lady he is your own; but if you let him alone, Humor and
Please him, without any Corrival, finding no opposition to whet it, his Love by
degrees will Languish. Ampelis tells Chrisis, that she knew this way to be the
most taking by Experience; for says she, I had one Demophantus a rich Man that
Courted me, yet I seemed to neglect him, and gave Entertainment to Callsades a
painter; at this he was Angry and went away in the great Chase; but soon after
came and humbly begged to be reconciled, protesting he loved me most dearly,
and all that he had was mine, for a Smile, or a kind Kiss, or if I refused him
these Favors, he swore he would Kill himself; therefore (continues she) dear
Sister Chrisis, and all you Maids that are Beautiful, or but Indifferent, I
advise you not to use your Suitors over familiarly Kind, lest they grow Proud
and Insolent, but now and then Estrange your self, and Reject them: and by this
means you shall bring him, if he truly loves you, to yield to what Conditions
you will propose. Some seign Letters to themselves, and care lesly drop them
that their Lover may take 'em up, and find there a supposed Rivals Name
subscribed, and by this means many a Love that has been in the wair, has been
recovered: Some such usage occasioned a Young Gentleman thus to complain. (1)
Never yet any Parthian Bow,
So many Painted deaths did throne;
So many darts as you Comprize,
In the two golden Quivers of your Eyes;
But ah tos like the Cruel Parthian you,
No sooner gave the fatal Wound, but flew
(2)
Yet though you fly, still in my Mind
You Have left your (...),
My heart would sigh, but does not dare,
For fear to soil your pleasing Picture there.
Some unseen Angels work in Phancys Theme,
And glorious Nothings please us in a dream.
(3)
Ah me, how vain this Shadow is!
Can I Content my self with this?
Or as the famed Pigmalion do,
And make a Mistress of thy likeness too.
No, I in this should quite as vain appear,
As Cephalus who used to Court the Air.
Keeping House, and the ordering and Governing a Family, etc. Keeping a house
well ordered, and the family affairs well Managed, and Regulated, is no such
easy matter as some Ladies Imagine it; and therefore there is a great
reputation to he gained in the prudent performance and discharge of such a Care
and Trust, more especially Incumbent on those that are entered into a married
State; for it not only turns to advantage, but procures a true Respect and
Esteem, as likewise an Imitation of your Frugality and Decency in Management of
affairs, in those that are under your Jurisdiction: for there is no respect
sincere, or at least wise lasting, but that which is produced by our being in
some degree useful to those that render it us; and that failing, the respect
goes along with it: for even Children and Servants will have little Regard for
those that do not think them worth their Care; and you shall many times find a
Worn Housekeeper making a better figure in the family than my Lady in all her
Bravery; because the one keeps up, and the other neglects the Government. Good
breeding we must allow to be very Commendable, yet being carried too high, very
much Impairs is value, lessening still as it soars, especially where the Lady
is Conceited and Proud of it; many there are that take it for a fine Air, to be
above Incumbering their Thoughts with such ordinary things as Housekeeping and
a Family; others fearing Wrinkles, keep off Cares to preserve their Beauty; and
^ mistaken Pride makes some again imagine they must keep themselves up in a
station above descending to such Duties as do not seem enough refined for great
Ladies: If so they can preserve respect, it is more than great Princes can do,
when they neglect their Business, and give themselves up wholly to their
pleasures: and we will not only consider the Disesteem of the Servants, when
she that should govern them is Careless and Supine, but we will come a little
nearer, viz. to that of a Husband; for what Account can he make of a wife, whom
he took to assist him in his affairs, or at least as a Supervisor, with Care
and Diligence to see that part more properly belonging to her Inspection and
Trust, performed as it ought; when he sees instead of a Careful Woman, only an
Empty airy thing, that sails about the House, and only carelessly sweeps it with
her Train, moving about to no purpose, and looking in all respects as if she
came thither only to pay a Visit, and rising at Eleven her mornings Business
has been to eat her Breakfast about half an hour before Dinner, that she may
have the greater Liberty to persecute the Company with her Discourse, and then
her Emptiness calls for a Coach, that she may be yet more troublesome to her
Acquaintance, who out of Complement must accompany her, and endure her Prattle,
that had but too much cloyed them before: Then on the top of the stairs she
stops, not so much to debate who shall go down foremost, as to throw out a few
Compliments she has learned by heart, expecting Applause in return; and so
setting out like a Ship from a Harbor, laden with Trifles, she shows her
spreading Sails and Pendants at the Port she sets out for, and so returns
without the trouble of unlading, or traffiquing for the least advantage in
understanding; and only satisfies her self in boasting her Waiting Woman the
Triumphs of the days Impertinency, and so having supt, wrapped up in flattery and
clean Linen, to bed she goes, so satisfied with her proceedings, that it casts
her into a pleasing Dream of her own Felicity: Such a one is rarely serious but
with her Tailor and her Dressing-box; we will allow her Children and Family may
sometimes have a random thought, but when she takes direct Aim, it is at some
very Impertinent person, who seems more pleasing to her than all the sober and
wife of her Acquaintance. -- Kind Ladies, pardon us for this bold truth, which
is only levelled at those who think they have no other Business in the World
than feeding high, going fine, passing Complements, and swiming about in
Visitations, whilst their Families lie neglected and run into Disorder; what
pleasure can a Husband have, whose province is without doors, and to whom the
Economy of the House would in some degrees be Indecent, when he finds the
Harmony of his Family broken, and has his Ears pestered with Complaints of
diverse Kinds, whilst the mistaken Lady fancies she can make all amends by
having a well Chosen and Fashionable Petty-coat and Head-dress; but when she
sees her Neglects have caused Disorders to run high, she will perhaps grow
angry with her self, and wish she had better bestowed her time, more prudently;
but then being set so far back in the Respect due to her from those that are to
Manage affairs under her, it is ten to one if ever she recovers the Repute of a
Wise and Discreet Lady, though she reforms very much, and calls home
Seriousness to her Assistance. There is an old Saying, that when it is too far
gone, we can no more have Wisdom than Grace whenever we think fit to call for
it: there are times and periods fixed for both, and being too long neglected,
the punishment is, that they are Irrevocable, and nothing remains but a useless
Grief for the Folly of having thrown them out of our Power. Think then, Ladies,
what a mean figure such a person makes, when she is so degraded by her own
fault; whereas in those Duties that can reasonably be expected from you, there
is nothing that is a Lessening to you, unless it be made so by your want of
Conduct: if you are desirous, as all Virtuous Mothers are, to Love your
Children, you may do it without Living in the Nursery; and your Care may be
never the less for them, if it serves not to fill up the Discourse in Company
-- Kindness and tenderness of Mothers to their Children, Kindness to Children,
and their Education, etc.
are the least deceitful Evidences of their Virtues, and yet the way of
Expressing how endearing they are to them, ought to be subject to the Rules of
good Breeding; and although a Lady of great quality ought not to be less kind
to her Children than Women of the meanest Rank, yet she may well distinguish
her self in the manner, and avoid the homely Methods which in the Inferior
(...) is more Excusable; Attract by Moderate Blandishments their Loves early to
you, that their obedience may be more Firm and Regular, when they arrive to any
degrees of understanding their Duties. Their first Insufficiency makes them
entirely lean upon their Parents for the Necessaries of Life, and the Habit of
it makes them continue the same Expectations for what is unreasonable; and as
often as you deny them, they as frequently think they are Injured, and whilst
their Reasons are yet in the Cradle, and their Desires strong, their Anger
sees no farther than the thing they desire and cannot posses; and to be
displeased for their own good, is a sign they are but slow to understand; from
whence you may conclude, your Childrens first thoughts will have no small
mixture of mutiny, which so naturally happening, you must Keep in your Anger,
unless you would be so Imprudent as to Increase it, and by seldom denying their
Cravings, where you see it necessary, you may in a short Time ^atter away their
Peevishness and ill Humors; especialy if you take the Opportunity to please
them in the next thing before they ask or require it; and by these means you
will strenghen your Authority, in making it Soft and Easy to them; and thereby
their obedience in the future will be Confirmed to you, they seeing it is for
their Interest to obey -- Keep a strict Guard upon your Words and Actions when
you are among your Children, as if you were amongst your Enemies; for they are
too prone to make wrong Inferences, and to take too large a Liberty and
encouragement in the misapplying your Words and Actions, either to Extend their
Freedom, or Extenuate their Duty; something of awe is required in Kindness as
well as in Power, and operates more Effectually of the two; above all things
beware of Indulging one more than another, and by that means giving too large a
Liberty to its Impertinence, lest the rest claiming the same Right and
Privilege, and not being gratified, there spring up a Division and Disorder
amongst them, which many times has turned to mortal Hatred, and been not only
the grief of the Parents, but either the Ruin or Disgrace of the Family; and be
always vigilant that they when growing up, fall not into the Company of Naughty
Children; or those that are more grown, that you keep such Servants as in no
wise corrupt them by Examples or Discourse: in case of Offenses let it not be
their penance to see you grown sour upon them, lest it Harden them, rather
than Mollisie their Tempers into meek Relentings and Resolves to be Cautious in
offending: and although occasion doubtless will be ministered for Severity and
Kindness to take their turns, yet the larger mixture must rather be Love than
Fear, it being the proper root from which their obedience should shoot up and
continue flourishing, and so shall they be Blessings and Comforts to you, a
grace to your Family, an Ornament to their Country; whilst those whose
Education is not regarded, because the Mother will not spare so much time from
her Recreations, or thinks it beneath her Quality, and the only Business of a
Nurse whilst young, and a Tutor when grown up, or what is as bad, are spoiled
with too much Cockering and over Fondness, prove most commonly quite the
contrary. -- Knowledge of things fitting is to be obtained, Keeping House, in
so doing what is to be considered as to Servants.
and what is reasonable ought to be had, so that there may be no want by Reason
of Nigardliness, nor waste oocasioned by Superfluity. Servants are the Wheels
of your Family, by which your Affairs move, and therefore they ought to have
every thing regular, that no Stop or Hinderance may happen, lest the whole
frame of business stand still: Nor let any Lady think because she pays her
Servants wages, that they are so very inferior to her, as not to be worth her
Care and below her Regard; since even her Credit and Reputation is concerned in
their well or ill management of domestic Offices; for the disorders or
standing still of the Movements will be Imputed to the defect in the Spring or
chief Mover, which should put them into Motion, and cause them to move regular;
and now although there is an Inequality between the Lady and her Servants, yet
it must not make her not to remember, that Nature makes no such distinction,
but that they may be looked upon though Servants, as humble Friends; and that
returns of good Usage and Kindness are as properly due to such as by their good
Service deserve it, as their Service is due to those they have devoted it to.
Imperious Commands and Haughtiness in speaking, is very undecent in any of
Quality, and rather shows a sudden rise to Greatness, or more becoming an
Upstart from Meanness; besides, it creates an Aversion in them, of which the
least ill Effects to be Expected must follow, that they will be careless and
slow in the Performance of all that is Enjoined them; when an affable obliging
Temper will so far win upon them, if they be any thing Ingenious and
Apprehensive, that they will proceed with Alacrity, and think nothing too much
nor too well performed, and this Experience will demonstrate. -- Keep your self
always in a good Temperature of Mind, and let (...) Passion sway you; Consider
likewise seriously, and Ponder well the orders you give; if of any great
Consequence, be not too hasty in giving them, lest Mistakes happen, nor too
angry if they are not altogether observed to your Mind; much more avoid being
Loud, by which you may disturb your self or others: an Evenness in
distinguishing when things are well or ill done, in time becomes a Rule to the
Family, by which it will move without Noise, and your Expectations will be
answered to your wish, so that a great part of your Care will be taken off; but
then however, be you vigilant there be no Relapse, and this may be done at such
leisure Times that by Custom it will become a Recreation, more suitable to a
Married Lady than Plays, Balls, or Hombre; and by such methods she will put her
self in a Possession of being valued and highly Esteemed by her Servants, and
then their Endeavors to please, and obedience to her Commands, (which are
delivered in so ob^^^ing a strain, that they rather seem to be requests) will
Consequently follow. Keeping House, Keeping House the expenses considered.
as to expenses, varies according to the quality or number in Family; yet we
shall lay down such Rules as may reasonably serve in any case; and a well
stated Rule is like the Line, and when that is passed, we are under another
Pole; when on the other hand, the first step we make in straying from it, is
making what was a Virtue before to change it is Nature, growing either into a
Vice, or according to the fairest Construction an Impertinency: we must tell
you, there is an Art in laying out your Money prudently, which is not so easily
attained to as some Imagine: Observe amongst other things always to keep the
mean between indecent Thrift and a too loose Lavishness or Profusion; and if
you find you cannot well hold the Balance equally poised, let it the rather of
the two incline toward the liberal side, as most suitable to those of Quality,
and less subjects you to obloguy; for a little matter though misspent, is a great
deal sooner recovered than ones Credit lost, by ones unhandsomly going about to
save it; and a prudent Husband will sooner overlook it, than a shameful
Parsimony that brings him reproach; yet such Extravagance must be as seldom
repeated, as stands only good with the Occasion that requires it: you must
consider your Fortune in the world, and according as you think it will
reasonably bear, so regulate your Expenses; we do not mean to live to the
height of your Estate, nor would we have any stretch it beyond its Line, but to
keep a great way within the Compass, that your Children Portions, especially
your Daughters, be not to seek when they come to years of Marriage, lest being
delayed, or overstanding by that means their Fortunes, it proves Injurious to
them, and their Beauties too much blown upon, become like fullyed Roses, of
little regard Clothes must be had according to the Quality of the Person, but
where they are over Modish and Gaudy, they are to be disapproved; why should a
Lady value her self upon her Clothes so much, when an obliging Look, and a
reasonable Word, will gain her more Respect and Esteem among the wiser sort,
than glittering Tissue of rusling Silks, which may be rightly compared to a
Peacocks spread Tail, fit for the vulgar to gaze on, and make the Creature
proud by their admiring him. We do not, Ladies, by this go about to restrain
you from a decent Compliance with the world, suppose you take the wiser and not
the weaker part of your Sex for your Example and Pattern, for distinctions are
to be allowed according to Quality or Fortune, and it seems to us, that in the
distribution of Expense, full attendances, and Ornaments well chosen for your
House, will make you a much better figure than a little gaudy Glittering
abroad, which those Inferior to you may imitate; and let every thing in it is
degree be so distributed, that there may be nothing wanting to the meanest
Servant: Let every thing be fit and in decent order, for nothing is truly fine
but what is fit, and justly so much as is reasonably proper for your
Circumstance, is by much finer than all the Superfluity you can add to it:
therefore be caustions of breaking those Bounds, lest Launching too far into
the wide Sea of Extravagancy, you shipwreck your Fortune, and the Reputation
you had gained of being a Prudent and Frugal Lady, and a worthy Pattern for
your Sex to imitate. There are many times strange Extravagancies by way of
Emulation, for some having been upon Visits and seen Fine Things, are restless
till they have the like, if not such as shall exceed then, and put themselves
thereby to unnecessary Charges, because they will not seem to be outdone by
others, whom they conceive less able or less mariting such Furniture; this
Ladies Logic trips up the heels of Reason, and sets it on its head, by
Carrying the Rule from Things to Persons and Appealing from Right to the (...)
and Capricio's of those that are in the wrong; and in such cases the word
necessary (...) applied; the best way (...) to avoid such Error of this (...),
is to try things first in your Judgment, before you give (...) too large a
place in your Desire. There are again some Ladies who little Consider how their
own figure agrees with such (...) things as their Desires reach after, and
Covet too eagerly; others, when they have them in their possession, will
scarcely allow them to be visible; or when you are ushered into their dark
Ruelle, you will find it done with such State and Solemnity, that you would
Conclude that there was something extraordinary in it, till the Lady breaking
Silence, and beginning to (...) out the show, you find it mere Pageantry, or
like a Popper-play, with gaudy Scenes: Some again set a high Estimate on things
rarely to be gotten, enough of little Value either in Worth or Beauty: Truth
(if we should say a great part of their own Value depends in the Minds of the
unthinking) would be very often Censured as unmannerly, and might derogate from
the prerogative great Ladies would (...) to themselves, of being Creatures
distinct from those of their Sex that they Conclude inferior to them, and in
other things less difficult of Access. But to those we pretend to prescribe,
their Condition must give the Rules to them, and therefore it is not the part
of a Wife to aim at more than a bounded Liberality, and an acquirement of
things convenient. A Princely mind will ruin a private Family, and if things be
not suited, they will not deserve Commendation, though in themselves they be
never so valuable. Kuntgunda, Cu. -- Wife to the Emperor Henry II. to clear her
self from the Imputation of Unchastity, went barefoot and blindfold on red hot
Irons. Kyth, Sa. kindred or alliance, whence we say, though corruptly, Neither
kit nor kin. Knights Batchelour, our simple or plain Knights, the lowest but
most ancient Order. Knights of the Garter, or St. George, the most Noble Order
of England, instituted by King Edward III. after many notable Victories. Under
the Sovereign of the Order [the King] are five and twenty Companions. They
always wear their George and Star, or rather the Sun. Knights of the Post, whom
you may hire to swear what you please. Kidknappers, Fellows, that pick up
People for Transportation, commonly called Spirits.
L.
LAis, i. Lascivious, lustful; and indeed she was a notable Harlot of Corinth,
as it is storied. Laodice, ((...)) (...), i. the Justice of the People.
Laurana, dim. from Laurus, the Laurel or Bay Tree. Laurentia, i. flourishing
like the Laurel or Bay Tree. Laureola, i. a little Bay Tree. Leah, (...) i.
wearisomness, or weary. Letice, a laetitia, i. joyfulness or mirth. Lois,
(...), melior, better, 2 Timothy 1.5. Lora, i. Discipline or Learning. Lucie, or
Lucia, so called prima Luces, from the Morninglight. Lucreece or Lucretia, from
Lucrum gani, a Name fit for a good Husband. Lydia, Acts 16.14. i. born -- in
Lydia. Lactucintia, a Goddess of the Heathens, to whom they assigned the Care
of Vegetables. Laeta, Daughter to Albinus a Roman and Pagan High Priest, she
was Married to Toxatius the Son of Paula, she turning Christian by her Husband
means, Converted her Father; to her St. Jerome sent an Epistle, instructing her,
how to educate her Daughter in the Articles of Belief, and Grounds of the
Christian Faith. Lais a Sicilian Lady, who prostituted her Beauty for Money,
upon Demosthenes addressing himself to her, she demanded 10000 Drams of Silver,
for a Nights Lodging, but he told her, he was not willing to buy Repentance at
that price, she was afterward murdered in the Temple of Venus by some Women,
who were Jealous that their Husbands doated on her Beauty. Lamia, Mistress to
King Demetrius, he for the Love he bore her, Dedicated a Temple to her called
Venus Lamia. Lamia another of the Name, with whom Jupiter had familiar
Conversation, and often got with Child, but Juno destroyed them in the Birth,
which so enraged Lamia, that she destroyed all the Children, that came in her
way. Lamperia, Daughter to Apollo, begot by him on Climen^, who with her other
Sisters bewailing the Death of Phae^^^ their Brother, were turned into Poplar
Trees. Laodicea, Mother to Selacius, and Wife of Anticchus, when her Husband
after he had served Alexander the Great in his Wars, he built the City of
Laodicea, in Memory of his Mother. Lara one of the Naides, said to be the
Daughter of the River Almon, and that on her Mercury begat two Daughters called
Lares. Latona, she was held to be begot on Phebe by Cocus her Brother, on her
Jupiter became Inamoured, by whom she had Diana and Apollo. Lauerna a Goddess
worshipped by the Romans, she had a Temple built her in Rome near the Gate,
because she was supposed to defend the City from Thieves and Robbers. Lavinia,
Daughter to Latinus King of the Latins, for whom Aeneas and Turnus contended,
till the latter was slain, she had a Son by Aeneas, whom she na^^red Silvius.
Laurea a Lady of Provence, she was famous for Learning, and her Fancy
particularly lead her to Poetry, and amongst other works, she composed the Poem
called the Court of Love. Lydia, she was Daughter to Thestius. Married to
Tyndarus King of Oebalia, which after was deceived by Jupiter, who came to her
in the shape of a Swan, and at a Birth begat on her Castor, Polux, and Helena
afterward Wife to King Menelaus, who being ravished by Paris, occasioned the
Destruction of Troy by the Greeks. Levana, a Goddess of the Romans, to whom
they recommended the care of their newborn Children. Lencothoe, Daughter of
Or^^amus a Babylonish King, she was deceived and destow^ed by Apollo in a
borrowed shape, and upon her being discovered to be with Child, her Father
caused her to be buried alive, after which Apollo caused Frankincense Trees to
Spring from her Grave. Lucippa, she was Daughter to Thestor Prince of Creet,
held to be a very Learned and Virtuous Lady. Lovisa, Duchess of Angoulesme,
Daughter to Philip Count of Bress, and afterward Duke of Savoy, she was Wife to
Charles Count of Angoulesme, she was Mother to Francis the first King of
France. Libertas, or the Goddess of Liberty, was honored by the Romans as a
Deity, being represented as a Woman clothed in White, with a Hat in one hand,
a Scepter in the other, and a Cat standing by her. Libussa, Daughter to Crocus
the first Prince of Bohemia, she coveted a single Life, but her Subjects
importuned her to Marry, and when by Arguments she found she could not
otherwise satisfy their Clamours, she caused her Horse that was tied at her
Palace gate to be let loose, vowing that into whose House soever he first
entered, the Man of the House should be her Husband, at last he went into the
House of Primislaus a very Poor Man, yet she however kept her Vow and Married
him, by which means he was saluted the first King of Bohemia. Libitina, a Roman
Goddess of the Ancients, in whose Temples, things necessary for Funerals were
kept, which were bought or borrowed of the Priests, as the People had occasion
to use them. Limona, Daughter to Hypomanes Archon, or Prince of the Athenian
Commonwealth, she being with Child by a Young Gentleman of Athens, her Father
so highly resented the dishonor done to his Family, that he caused her Gallant
to be drawn in pieces by Horses, and put her up in a Stable with a Horse,
allowing neither of them any Food, so that the Horse growing enraged by hunger,
killed her and eat her. Liriope, the Daughter of Thetis and Oceanus, she was
Married to Cephesus, by whom she had Narcissus, the fair Youth, who flying the
Courtship of the Languishing Virgins, at last seeing his Face in a Fountain, as
he stooped to Drink, he fell in Love with his shadow. Litae, a sort of friendly
Goddesses, who were wont to do good Offices for Men in procuring them their
wishes, and desires of things necessary for them. Livia, Daughter to Drusius
second Son of Livia the Empress. Livia ( Drusilla) she was Daughter to Livius
Drusus Calidianus, who killed himself after the loss of the Philippi field, she
was Wife to Tiberias Claudius Nero by whom she had Tiberius afterward Emperor
of Rome, and Augustus having divorced Scribona, took her from her Husband, when
she was great with Child, and Married her, but having no Children by her, he
adopted Tiberius to succeed him. Lutgarda, or Luidgarda, a German Lady, Wife to
Charles the Great, she was of a Masculine Spirit, and took especial delight in
Hunting Wild Beasts, in which she was as forward and daring as the stoutest and
bravest Hero. Locusta, a Woman that bent her Mind to Study the Power and
Effects of Poisons, she served the Tyrant Nero in carrying on his wicked
designs in poisoning all that he ordered her, and amongst other the Prince
Germanicus, and least she should be destroyed by the People for her hellish
Practices, he set a Guard over her, to attend her Person wherever she went.
Losa de Cardona, a Spanish Lady, who by Acquirement in Learning, was skilled in
the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and so profound in Divinity, that the Doctors
admitted her a place in the University; when she died, she conjured her Husband
to bestow whatever he could spare to Charitable uses, giving all her own Rings
and Jewels to that behoof before she died. Libentina or Lubentia, a Goddess
held to be the overfeet of Pleasures, Sports, and Merriments, and a Protectress
of Libertinisus. Lucilla, a Spanish Lady, who assisted the Schismatics against
Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, with great Treasure to carry on their Cause, for
that the Bishop had angered her by a Reproof, for Kissing the bones of a Martyr,
as she was going to the Communion. Lucina, a Goddess thought to be very helpful
at Women's Labors, and then was called the Goddess of Childbirth, also the
Name of a Noble Roman Lady, who turning Christian Dedicated her stately Palace
to be a Church or Meeting Place for the Assembly of Christians. Lucretia, a
Roman Lady, who being ravished by Tarquin, killed her self, which occasioned the
Expulsion of King out of Rome. Labda, the lame Daughter of Amphion, despised by
the rest of the B^tchidae. Lachesis, one of the three Destinies. Lactary, l. a
Darie-house. Lactucina, a Roman Goddess over Corn, when the Ea^s began to fill.
Ladies-bedstram, an herb in dry pastures with small leaves and yellow flowers.
Ladies-bomer, a plant with abundance of small branches and leaves, fit to make
Arbours for Ladies. Ladies-mantle, with a neat indented leaf almost like a
Star. Ladies-smocks, a kind of watercresses. Lady-traces, a kind of S^tyrium
or Orchis. Lair-wire, Lerherwire, Leger-geldum, an ancient Custom of punishing
Adultery and Fornication, by the Lords of some Manors. Laius, Jocasta's
Husband, after whose death she married his Son Oedipus. Lamia, a Harlot to whom
the I^ebins built a Temple. Lamiae, l. Fairies or Female Spirits. Love, What is
it? Answ. It Is very much like Light, a thing that every Body Knows, and yet
none can tell what to make of it: It Is not Money, Fortune, Jointure, Raving,
Stabbing, Hanging, Romancing, Flouncing, Swearing, Ramping, Desiring, Fighting,
Dying, though all those have been, are, and ^ill will be mistaken and miscalled
for it. What shall we say of it? it is a pretty little soft thing that plays
about the Heart, and those who have it will know it well enough by this
Description. It Is extremely like a (...) and could we find a Painter could draw
one, you would easily mistake it for the other: It Is all ^ver Eyes, so far is it
from being blind, as some old Dotards have described it, who certainly were
Blind themselves: It has a Mouth too, and a pair of pretty Hands, but yet the
Hands speak, and you may feel at a distance every Word that comes from the
Mouth, gently stealing through your very Soul. But we dare not make any further
Enquiries; least we should raise a Spirit too powerful for all our Art to lay
again. Athens. Lactea Febris, the Milk Fever; that which comes upon Childbed
Women on the First Days. Lobers Logic, is the Art of discerning true Love from
that which is counterfeir, and of arguing exactly upon all things that may
befall them. Love-spots, there is one thing only that I cannot think of without
indignation; nor speak of, but with Passion, that is, of Love-spots and
Painting. Oh the earnest and holy zeal of the Ancients against this. I would
rather speak in their words, than mine own. Tertullian bitterly, he calls
painted Women, Ancillas Diaboli, The Devils waiting-women, I remember I once
made use of, and alluded to a Similitude of Cyprians, in the presence of some
great Women of quality; suppose one should come into the Kings Gallery, and
daub some other colors over a Picture that the King had hung there, being the
work of an excellent Artist, would not the King be much displeased at it? You
are Gods own workmanship, do ye despise his hand, that ye presume to alter it,
and pretend to mend it? Painting and Spotting make a discovery of an unchaste
Mind. Yea, the Fathers do generally speak in the manner; when the case was put
to Augustine by his friend Possidonius, he determines it to be an Adulterous
fallacy. And Ambrose goes so far, that he says it is worse than Adultery, and
he gives Reasons for it. Modest Woman, I allow her a lawful difference of
apparel, according to the difference of her Quality and Estate. Letters,
Directions to Young Ladies in writing them. First, what a Letter is? It is or
ought to be the express Image of the Mind, represented in writing to a friend
at a distance; wherein is declared what He or She would do or have done. This
excellent use we have of Letters, that when distance of place will not admit of
Union of Persons, or converse Viva voce; that deplorable defect is supplied by
a Letter or Missive. Let me now show you the parts of a Letter; the common ones
are Superscription and Subscription. The Superscription of Letters is twofold,
the one external, the other internal; the outward Superscription is that when
the Letter is folded up, and contains the Name, Title and Abode of the Person
we write unto; but above all you must have a care that you give proper Titles,
such as befit the Quality of the Person. The Title of a King is, To His most
Excellent Majesty. To the Queen the same, altering the Article. To all Sons or
Brethren of the King of England, To His Royal Highness. To a Duke, To His
Grace. To a Duchess the same. To all Earls, Marquesses, Viscounts and Barons,
To the right Honorable. To Marchionesses and Countesses by Patent, To the
Right Honorable. To all Lords, To the Right Honorable. To Knights, To the
right Worshipful. To all Justices of the Peace, High Sheriffs, Counselors at
Law, Esquires, either by birth or place, etc. To the Worshipful. If Kindred
write one to another, the greater may express the Relation in the beginning of
the Letter; but she that is of the meaner Quality, must be content to specify
it in the Subscription. Besides Superscription and Subscription, you must set
down what year and day you write this Letter in, and the place from whence it
came; yet it is not always convenient to mention the place, nor the Relation
the Person has to you to whom you write. For the style of your Letters, let it
not be affected but careless, not much differing from our usual way of
speaking. In Letters of Complement supply the barrenness of your matter with
the smoothness of your Rhetorical Exornation. Consider seriously what best
befits the things you are to write of, regarding Person, Time and Place. It
would be absurd for any one to write to a Superior as to a Familiar, we are
not to use the like expressions to a Soldier, as we do to a Scholar or a Lady.
Be not too prolix in your writing, nor too short; do not study for had words,
but such as are either plain, or very significant; this perspicuity of writing
is to be measured according to the capacity of the Person to whom the Letter is
directed; for some will easily conceive what is difficult and hard for others
to comprehend. Lastly, be curious in the neat folding up your Letter, pressing
it so that it may take up but little room, and let your Seal and (...) be very
Fair. Lying-in, if some Men might have their Will, Women were in the worst
Condition of all Creatures; for Nature has taught the Birds of the Air, against
they are ready to Lie in, to frame their Bed-Chambers with that Art and
Curiosity, to make their Beds, and draw their Curtains about them with so much
Neatness and Artifice, that their Nurseries seem to be so many petty Palaces;
and the Winds themselves are forced to rock the Cradles of their Young ones:
But Women must never be taken care of while they are breeding, nor provided for
against their Delivery. It Is true indeed, when we see a Poor Woman reduced to
that miserable shift as to be Delivered in Rags, we are apt to believe that the
Woman misses somewhat of Matrimonies Pleasure; but then again we take her for
some forlorn Creature abandoned by all Mankind, and forsaken even by Charity it
self. But we find all Creatures as Nature instructs them, making king some
Provision or other against their Delivery; the Male doing his, and the Female
her Duty in all respects; only Women must shift for themselves; for after the
Men have once got'em with Child, they have nothing to do but to drink and
guttle, and Whore or Roar, or if they will be such Fools to compassionate the
Sufferings of their Wives, this must be looked upon as the disturbance and
inconvenience of Matrimony. But these upholders of Paradoxes consider not, that
in the same Chamber where the Wife Lies in, the Effect of the Husband's Manhood
comes to light; and would you have the Parents want a great Candle or two to
see what God has sent 'em? Man is Born naked; all other Creatures come into the
World with their Clothes on, and their Clothes grow as they grow, without the
help of Tailors and Coat-sellers. Do you think it is not greatly for the
Reputation of the Man, that his Wife has been with Child, and that she is
delivered at length of a lusty Boy? Suppose it be a Girl, that Girl may bring
Boys in time; for so the World goes round. The Name of Da, Da, is now as pretty
a pleasing Name as Mr. Bridegroom was before. Why we have heard of many Fathers
of Children, that have been Fathers of Nations, and the first Wife has had
always equal respect with the first Husband. Lacedaemonians highly beloved by
their Wives. The very Heathems, were in their Cities and Government, strengthened
by the prosperous effects of Marriage. Plutarch thus relates the Story in the
Life of Pyrrhus, that when the City of Sparta was besieged by that Prince, with
design to assault it the next Morning, the Lacedaemonians resolved that Night to
send away their Wives and Children into Creta, but the Women themselves opposed
the Decree, and one among the rest called Archidamia, went into the Senate
House, with a Sword in her hand, in the Name of all the rest, and told them,
That they did their Wives great wrong, if they thought them so Fainthearted, as
to live after Sparta was destroyed; upon which the Council determined their
Stay, and the Wives, and Daughters did that Night work at the Trenches, sending
the Young Men that were to Fight the next Morning to sleep; and at break of
day, when the Enemy began the Assault, the Women fetched the Weapons, and put
them in the Young Men's hands, delivering them the Trench ready made, and
praying them valiantly to keep, and defend it; telling them, how great a Glory
it must be to overcome their Enemies, Fighting in the sight of their Wives and
Country, and what Eternal Honor it was to die in the Arms of their Mothers,
and Wives, after that they had fought valiantly like honest Men for their
Country; and these Women did not only encourage the Men in words, but during
the Fight stood by, assisting them, and taking out of the Battle such as were
wounded, by which means they repulsed the Macedonians. Here we have an
unparalled Example of that Force, which attends Conjugal Love: See a Book
called marriage promoted. Love, fully treated on. Love has very ample Limits,
Loves Original Object Division and Definitions.
and though his walks be very spacious, yet they are beset with Thorns. If we
take Love universally, it may be defined to be a desire, as being a Word of
more ample Signification. It is a voluntary affection, and desires to enjoy
that which is good; whilst desire only wishes, Love enjoys the end of the one,
being the beginning of the other; the thing loved is present, and the thing
desired is absent; and indeed all that may be termed Love, arises from a desire
of what is Beautiful, Fair and Lovely, and is defined to be an Action of the
Mind, desiring that which is good; and exerts a Sovereignty over all other
Passions, and defines it an appetite, in which some good is earnestly desired
by us to be present, or as some will have it, it is a Delectation of the Heart,
for somewhat that we are desirous to win, or rejoice to have, coveting by
desire that rests, is Joy. Love varies in its Object, though that Object is
always good, amiable, gracious and pleasant; and indeed there is a Native
tendency of desire to those things that are so; for no one Loves before he is
in some measure delighted with Comeliness and Beauty, let the Object be what it
will, and as the fair Object varies, so frequently Love varies; for indeed
every thing that we do Love, we think at that time to be amiable, by which
means it becomes gracious in our Eyes, and commands a value and esteem in our
Affections. Love has always amiableness for its Object, and the scope and end
of it, is to obtain it, for whole sake we so Love, and the which our Mind
covets to enjoy, Beauty shining by Reason of it is splendour, that shining
Creates Admiration; and the more earnestly the Object is sought, the fairer it
appears: If we take Plato's rule to define it, he tells us, that Beauty is a
lively shining or glittering brightness, resulting from effused good; by Ideas,
Seeds, Reasons, Shaddows, exciting our Minds to be united by this good, and
centring in one, by setting a just value upon what is good: some again give
their Opinions, the Beauty is the Perfection of the whole Composition, caused
out of the congruous Symmetry, order, measure and manner of parts, and the
comeliness proceeding from such Beauty is styled Grace, and from thence all
fair and beautiful things are accounted gracious; for Grace and Beauty being
mysteriously annexed, gently and sweetly win upon our Souls, so strongly
alluring our Affections, that our Judgments are confounded, and cannot
distinguish aright, for these two are like the radiant Beams of the Sun, which
are diverse, as they proceed from the diverse objects in pleasing and affecting
our several Senses; for the species of Beauty taken in at our Eyes and Ears, is
conveyed to and stamped upon the Soul; and of all these Objects, though so
innumerably various, beautiful Women are the most attractive as to material
beings, which caused the Ancients to allow Venus the Queen of Beauty, three of
the Graces to attend her. Love is divided by Plato into good and evil, or a
good and bad Angel; because sometimes Love is misused and corrupted, till it
degenerate to evil ends, and Lucian in like manner says, that one Love was born
in the Sea, meaning Venus, who is said to spring from thence, and therefore is
as various and raging in the Breasts of the younger sort, as the Sea it self,
occasioning Fury and unlawful Lust; and that the other is, that which was let
down in a golden Chain from Heaven, ravishing our Souls with a Divine Fury, and
stirs us up to comprehend the innate and incorruptible Beauty, to which once we
were created, which Opinions occasioned these verses. If Divine Plato's tenants
are found true,
Two Venus's, two kinds of Love there be;
The one from Heaven in its bright Radiance flew,
The other sprung out of the boisterous Sea.
One knits our Souls in perfect Unity,
The other famous over all the Earth;
Yoo often soars on Wings of Vanity,
And gives wild random projects still new Birth.
Love, in her twofold Division, is allowed by Origin and others, and there is
degrees of Love in all Creatures; even in the coldest Element, Love generates a
kindly heat to support it self, and some will allow even Vegetives to have some
sense and feeling of Love, as that the Male and Female Palm Trees will not bear
nor flourish asunder, and many other the like Relations. The Loadstone by a
wonderful Sympathy attracts the Iron, etc. the Vine and the Elm are best
pleased with each other, and there is a great an Antiphathy between the Vine
and the Bay Tree: the Olive and Myrtle, if they grow near embrace each other in
their Roots and Branches: we might mention the Sympathy and Antipathy of fundry
irrational Creatures, but being little to our purpose we omit them. Those
things as we have already hinted, Loves pleasure Objects.
that infascinate and charm the Soul, are the proper Objects of Love, and where
we place our entire Affections, there our Heart not only Centers, but our
Diligence and care is to serve and oblige, and are pleased and delighted in so
doing; but when we fix an immoderate Eye on my Earthly thing, and dote on it
over much, it many times instead of Pleasure turns to Pain and Sorrow, works
our Discontent, and causes Melancholy; so that nothing in the end can afford
us any Pleasure or Delight to the Purpose, as too many have found by sad
Experience; for setting their Hearts on things of which they have been deprived
or disappointed, has Crazed their Senses, and rendered them Melancholy, past
Recovery, if not Distracted; whilst some are mightily taken with fair Houses,
Pictures and (...) Recreations; others find ^o delight in them, but fix their
(...) upon other Objects, as Gold, Silver, Jewels, etc. and other upon fair and
beautiful Women; and so every one has his proper Object, with which he is best
pleased; some are for chaste Love, which is above all the best; others are not
pleased with it, but take a kind of a Pride in lascivious dalliance in the
wanton embraces of a Harlot; Love of Parents to Children, and Children to
Parents ought to be entire and unseigned, free from mixture; but this kind
naturally descends, but does not so well ascend; for Poverty or Affliction many
times jostles it out of doors; but the Love of Women is the highest and most
predominant; the affected part herein is held to be the Liver, and this sort of
Love being most to our purpose, we shall treat of it more largely in the next
Head. Love borrows its flame in this Case from Beauty or Merit, Love its honest
Objects.
wherewith it inflames the Soul, and then as the Loadstone draws Iron, so does
Beauty attract Love; and where Beauty and Virtue unite their forces in one, it
is very hard to make Resistance; the Luster is so great that it dazles the Eyes
of the beholder, and through the Windows of his Body da^^s those rays into his
Soul, that makes him pleased to become a Captive; however it is dangerous to
let loose the Reins to this Passion (if it can be avoided) too soon, before you
know whether there is any possibility of obtaining your desire, by which many
have been ruined. Homer tells us, that though Ulisses was very desirous to hear
the Melodious Songs of the Sirens, but foreseeing the danger he should hazard,
for the delighting his Ears with their Harmony, he would not trust himself
loose, least at that ravishing Melody he might leap overboard, and perish as
they intended his fate should be, as many had been served before; and therefore
he caused himself to be tied fast to the Main Mast, and his Men to stop their
Ears with Wool and Wax. That brace of Venus Twins, Errors and An^e-Errors, are
very busy in Love-matters, and do a great deal of Mischief; for sometimes when
our hopes are raised toward our wished Happiness then we are often
disappointed by the changeable Chamelions, and flattering (...), who guild over
with fair pretenses their Hypocrisy, and are great Protestors of Love and
Honesty, Modesty, Virtue and Zeal, framing counterfeit Gestures, and affected
looks, and with a well dissembled countenance, steal away the Hearts of Men,
and then deceive them, and indeed such Objects are not worth fixing our Eyes
on. Love and hatred in the opinion of some, may be implanted in our Minds by
Philters, Characters, or the like, but if so, which we grant not, they cannot
be lasting, for the operation once over, the Passion raised by it must cease;
but the true Object of honest Love, is Wisdom and Virtue, plain, open, simple
and naked, without any ingredient of a Counterfeit; and these being lasting,
will render Love so too; where these are, there is some particular Grace, as
Eloquence, good Discourse, Honesty, Wit, which attract the Eyes and Ears of
Men, gaining their Affections, Favor and Good Will; as a cunning Orator steals
away the Affections of his Auditors, and engages them on his side: for this
purpose Mercury by the Ancients, is said to attend upon the Graces, that by the
Favor his Eloquence should gain them, they should be the more admired and
prized by Men. Ab^^lominus for his Honesty and open heartedness, of a poor
Gardener was made a King; whilst many Rich and Noble ones were set aside; and
when he had washed himself, they clothed him in Purple, and desired him,
seeing he was worthy of the Dignity, to take upon him the Title and Spirit of a
King, to continue his Continency and Frugality. There is internal Beauty, which
we cannot see, but with the Eyes of our Mind, which is a fit Object for our
Love; and there is a peculiar Beauty even in Justice, and a bright Luster
shines even in the constant dying of Martyrs; which attracts our Love, and
makes us in pain for their Sufferings. the Stoics held it as a Maxim, that
only wise and virtuous Men and Women could be fair, and that the (...) of the
Mind are fa^ (...) than those of the Body; ^^ these Xenophon puts Valor (...),
they (...) the Name (...), and d^nomi ate (...) and Lovely to all; but the
(...) of the Envious (...) Daughter of Scotland and Queen of France, walking
one (...) in the Garden with her (...), espied Alanus the Kings (...), a
decrepid hard (...) old Man asleep in an (...), to the Amazement of (...) with
her, she stepped to him and kissed him as he slept, and (...) asked the Reason of
it, (...) reply was, that it was not in Person she had the respect (...), but
with a Platonic Love (...) admired the Divine Beauty of his Soul. The Queen of
(...) took a long and painful journey, to be satisfied with (...) Divine
Beauties of King (...) flowing from a wise and understanding Heart. The beau^^
of the Body may be expressed by a Picture or Image, but (...) Artificer can
express the (...) Luster of a Virtuous (...), which spreads its rays to (...)
end of the World, in good (...), learned Labors, and good Name. Love once
(...) place where Virtue Reigns, (...) a sweet Harmony to (...) it, a perfect
Amity, an (...) Correspondence, (...) a perfect Diapazon of (...) Vows; the
harmony (...) Souls, as were between Da^^ and Jonathan, Damon and Pythias,
Pylades and (...), and this pleasing Harmony is as usual with the fair Sex; and
where it is, it always brings or creates a Happiness; and where this true Love
is wanting, (...) can be no firm Peace or Friendship, what outward shows or
pretenses soever there may be, for by ends, which once obtained, the shadow
vanished, and discovers Envy, Heart-burning, open (...), domestic Brawls,
Railings, R^vilings, ^uck-bitings, Whisperings, Melancholy and Discontents,
which make a Separation, or what is worse an uncomfortable Cohabitation. This
borders very much upon Divine Love, Love which Charity commands, is composed of
Three kinds, viz. Honesty, Profit and Pleasure.
and holds a Character even from the Law of Nature, including Piety,
Delectation and Benevolence, and Friendship, being sumptuously arraied in these
virtuous Habits, it shines with a dazzling Luster: Love being the Circle of all
other Affections, and this chiefly Centers in Heaven on the Alwise and Almighty
Object of all Love and Eternal Felicity; yet dilates and darts its ravs into
the Breasts of Men, to fill them with Joy and Comfort to a very high degree,
and gives us some glimmering of the perfect Joys above, as the Sun is in the
Firmament, communicating heat and influence, to nourish and make things grow;
so is this kind of charitable friendship in the World, in its good Effects and
Operations on the Minds of those that really possess it; you would think it
hard for one Person to lay down his Life for another, when he may be free from
danger; and for but proposing it, some might look upon him as rash and foolish;
yet the strong Agitations of this kind of Love has produced such Examples; for
the Cords of Love bind faster than any other Bands whatever, and are even as
strong as Death. If Love was once called up to Heaven, as they Fable Astrea the
Goddess of Justice was, what a miserable Condition the World would be in, what
a Wilderness, what a Chaos of Confusion! And thus the Noble Spencer in some
sort describes the three Branches united in one Stock. Hard is the doubt and
difficult to deem,
When all three kinds of Love together meet;
And do dispart the Heart with power extreme,
Whether shall weigh the balance down to wit.
The dear Affection unto kindred sweet,
Or raging Fire of Love to Womankind;
Or Zeal of Friends, combined by Virtues meet,
But of them all the Band of Virtuous Mind,
Methinks the gentle Heart (...) firmest bind,
For natural Affections soon (...) cease,
And quenched is with Cupid^^ greater flame,
But faithful Friendship does them both suppress.
And them with Mastering Discipline does tame,
Through thoughts aspiring to Eternal Fame;
For as the Soul does rule the Earthly Mass,
And all the Service of the (...) frame,
So Love of Souls, do Love of Bodies pass,
As purest Gold, exceeds the (...) brass.
Love, Love (...), its Original Power and extent.
such as we call Heroic, must as well as others be confessed to be of a noble
Pedigree, possessing the Party with generous undertakings, and brave Resolution
inspiring them as it were with a Celestial flame and ardour, breathing after
virtuous greatness, bestowing an honorable Gallantry wherever it takes
Possession; spreading its Power and extent very wide; its Pedigree as ancient
as the World, and it is Parentage of such Antiquity, that the most searching
Poets could never find them to call them by their proper Names. Hesiod would
have (...) to be Terra and Chaos, which he Fables to be the Parents of Love
before the Gods were (...): others would have it the (...) Prometheus fetched
from Heaven, and so on, but to no purpose; for God himself is the (...) Parent
of all virtuous Love. The Reason why Love (...) still painted Young by the
Ancients, as Phornutus delivers it, was because young People being Fat, Soft
and Fair, are most apt to Love, and are soonest taken in his Nets; but rather
we conjecture it was so (...), because all true Affection should be naked,
simple and (...), without the covering of (...) Vase woven with the threads
(...) Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; he smiles, say they, because given to Mirth
and Pleasure, and bears a Quiver to let us see his Arrows will at one time or
(...), surely hit us; and he was painted Blindfold, because he should take his
aim at random, not seeing who he hit; which denotes the blind Affections of
some, who being overswayed with their Passion, cannot use the Eyes of their
^eason to make their choice right. But a further Description, take in these
Lines writ at the Command of a Mistress (...) be satisfied what Love is, (...)
(1.)
^^^sterious Query, for it is ^trange that she
(...) Ignorant be
Who gave this Knowledge first to me;
But so the less bright fire does warm^th beget;
And what it wants it self distributes heat.
(2.)
Well then, I am resolved i will boldly tell,
What Pains I feel;
And what I know of Love too will.
It Is that of which none ignorant can be,
Who have but had the least dear glimpse of thee.
(3.)
Love is the pretty babe that proudly plays,
In your bright face,
And wounds him who presumes to gaze:
And Painters say, Poets with them agree,
He in no dress, but Nakedness should be.
(4.)
The Darts be uses here and glowing Arms,
Are only charms;
With which some meaner Beauty warms,
But when h' enflames the Gods and fires the skies,
He Lights his Torch at your all dazzling Eyes.
(5.)
Wings are to him, I know not bow assigned;
But now I find,
He uses them in Womankind;
But when he Stormed my Heart be laid 'em by,
And never, never from by Breast will fly.
Love is called by Plato, the strongest and Merriest of all the Gods; and
Euripides says, we must all do Homage to him. I had rather says an Ancient
Poet, contend with Bulls, Lions, Bears or Giants, than with Love; for with them
I have a Lot in the hazard, but by Love I am sure to be overcome; he is so
powerful, that he enforces all to pay Tribute to him; and can make Mad and
Sober whom he List, the Palaces of Mighty Kings, as well as the Shepherds
lowly Cottage feel his Power. Hercules, who was invincible to all things else,
could not resist him; as the Poet says. Him whom, nor Beasts, nor Enemies could
tame,
Nor Juno's spite subdue, stoopt to Loves flame.
The most Valiant of Men have been disarmed by it, even in the midst of Blood
and Slaughter; and hastened from the cruel Camp of Mars, to the Soft tents of
Venus. Alexander was Conquered and overcome by the Excellent Beauty of Statira
Daughter of Darius, whom he had taken Captive: Caesar and Mark Anthony by
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt; and many others, that we might mention; and many in
our own Nation. Cupid in Lucian boasts to his Mother, that he was grown
familiar with Lions, and could handle them as he pleased, showing the evenness
of those Creatures. Love extends an absolute Dominion; his Mother Venus in
another place, complains of him for forcing her to go from one Lover to
another, till she was quite tired, though she had beat him for it, threatened
to break his Bow and (...) his Wings: but to pass over Fables as lightly as we
can, (...) come to what is more substantially Material: Love in it self, is the
most excellent of that Mankind enjoys, and without it his Life would be
comfortless and altogether undesirable, as appears by a Gallant that Courting a
fair Lady, who stood too nicely upon Honor in yielding, thus expressed
himself. A Happiness so nigh I cannot (...),
My Love's too fierce, and you (...) killing fair.
I grow enraged to see such excellence
If Words disordered give you such offense,
My Loves too full of Zeal to think of Sense.
Be you like me, dull Reason, hence remove,
And tedious forms, and give a loose to Love.
Love eagerly, let us be blessed ^ night,
And with half yieldings, do not dash Delight.
Then from my Joys, I to my (...) would run,
And think the business of my Life well done.
Love, as it is reported, so prevailed upon the Tritons, who were seigned a
kind of Sea-gods, that watching upon the Shoars, they would seize upon Women to
satisfy their desires; and thinking to enjoy them in their watery Kingdom,
carry them into the Waves and unkindly drown them, though against their intent;
as not knowing that Element was contrary to their Nature of subsisting; (...)
have held that Demons (...) Spirits of the Air, have been ^moured of Women; as
in the Case of Tobit, and many who have been reputed to be pregnated by them in
this manner; it is related, that Merlin (...) Famous English Prophet, (...)
begot by a Spirit cohabiting at sundry times with his Mother; but in this Case,
you have not our Consent, as to the Approbation of the Verity; but we leave it,
as we find it: (...) tells us of a strange Story, that a Gentleman of (...),
having Mourned a long time for the Decease of his beautiful Wife who was dead,
a Spirit in her Snape came to (...) and comforted him: Saying, she had got
leave to come from the dead to live with (...) a limited time of Years, (...)
he would new Marry her, provided he would leave off (...) Habit he had got of
Cursing and Swearing, for which (...) she said, she had been taken from him;
the over-joyed Gentleman Consented, and promised all this; and she brought him
children, governed his House, but was still Pale and Melancholy; when one time
falling into a fit of his accustomed swearing, she vanished, and was never
after seen. And he confirms this, even from the report of Persons of good
Credit. At Japan in the East Indies, it is reported by Travellours, that there
is an Idol called Tenchedy, to whom one of the Fairest Virgins in the Country
is every Month presented, and left in a Private Room in the Fotoquy or Mosque,
where she remains to satisfy the Spirit that Image represents, who knows her
carnally, and every Month a fresh one is put in, but what becomes of those that
are there, they know not, they being never after seen; many of the like
instances we might give you, but not to be tedious, we conclude this Head, and
proceed to the next. That Love in some Cases, Loves Power and Tyrannical sway
further described.
plays the Tyrant, many even in this Age have experienced; a Young Gentlewoman
not long since in Covent Garden, being sent out of the Country by her friends
to prevent her Marriage with a Young Gentleman of a small fortune, to whom she
was Contracted, and entirely Loved, receiving a Letter though forged in his
Name, that he was married, took it so hainously, that notwithstanding the Care
taken of her, upon the visible Change and Melancholy it occasioned, she
strangled her self with one of her Gatters, though this Stratagem is sending
the Letter was only to wean her Affections from him; so that Love in this Case,
proved as strong as Death. Love has had such an ascendant over the Indian
Women, that where there have been more Wives than one belonging to a Husband,
and which the Custom of the Country allowed, when he dyed, they have
contended, which of them should leap into the Funeral Flames to bear him
Company, as they fancied in the other World; and she to whose Lot it fell by
Decision, has embraced it with Joy and Triumph, and counted her Fate most
Glorious. Love in its Operation, works stupendous matters, it has built
Cities, united Provinces and Kingdoms, and by a perpetual Generation makes and
preserves Mankind, propagated Religion; but in the height of its Rage, it is no
more than Madness or Frenzy, and turning into Lust, turns the Glorious
Fabrics it has raised into Confusion, Ruins Families, and brings a crowd of
Miseries upon Mankind: Sodom, Troy and Rome have felt the Effects of its
outrageous Fury, much Blood has been shed upon that account, as well in Private
as in Public, it has tumbled Kings from their Thrones, and laid much Honor in
the Dust; Wives have destroyed their Husbands, and Husbands turned Barbarians
toward their Wives; it has opened a door for Jealousy, and that has let in
revenge, and all the cruelties that witty horror could invent; yet knowing all
these things, some will wilfully suffer themselves to be carried away with a
violent Passion, as with a Rapid Torrent into the deep Gulf of Misery, where
they inevitably perish: this by the way; but now we come to something more of
Love Heroical, incident to Men and Women, Chaste Nuptial Love, of which we may
truly say. Thrice happy they who give a heart,
Which bonds of Love so firmly ^;
That without Brawls till death them part,
Is undissovl'd and cannot die.
Rubenius Celer was proud to have it Engraved upon his Tombstone, that he had
continued in the bonds of Marriage with his dear wife (...) forty three Years
and eight Months, and never had any Contention with her: should our Age boast
of such strict Love, the Censorious would scarce believe, though more the pity
is, that all Conjugal Loves are not of the same then there would be no pleasure
in this world Comparable to it; some curious Searchers into Nature, and
observers of the Faculties of the Mind, are of the Opinion, that in woman there
is something beyond humane delight, something of a Magnetic Virtue, a charming
Quality, a hidden and powerful Motive, that attracts a more than ordinary Love
and Favor, and dispenses if rightly understood, a more than ordinary Pleasure
and Delight; though the Husband rules her as head, (...) has the Dominion over
his heart, and makes him pleasingly yield to her Modest Desires; and rate her
at a Value equal with himself; and when his good natured Passion boils up, it
overflows in raptural Expressions; as if the fair Sex had so much the Ascendant
over man, that they in a high degree participate something of the Nature of
Beautiful Angels, always Fresh and Charming; it was the wish of the Poet, to
Love to the end of his Life, when he says,

Dear Wife, let us live in Love and die together,
As hitherto we have in all good will;
(...) no day Change or Alter our fair Weather,
But let us be young to one another still.
Love of this Kind shows that Beauty has not the sole Dominion over it, for
when tha is faded like a blasted Rose ruffled by the Breath, there remains
something within that apears Beautiful and Lovely, standing at Defiance with
time, whose rugged hand has no power to press it into Deformity, or with his
Iron Teeth (that ruin the Monuments of Kings, the Temples of the gods
themselves, and the magnificent Trophies of Conquerors) give it the least
Diminution or Impair: and this is excellently described as to the Beauty of the
mind, by a young Gentleman, who fell in Love with a Lady for her Wit and
Virtue, though no ways externally Accomplished. viz.

(1.)
Love thus is pure which is designed
To Court the Beauty of the mind.
No pimping dress, no fancied Air,
No sex can bribe my Judgment there.
But like the happy spirits above,
I Am blessed in Raptures of seraphick Love.
(2.)
Such chaste Amors may justly claims,
Friendship the Noble manly Name.
For without Lust I gaze on thee,
And only wonder it is a she.
Only one Minds are Courtier's grown,
Such Love endures when Touth and Beauty's flown.
(3.)
Who on thy looks has fixed his Eye,
Adores the Case where Jewels lie.
I Have heard some foolish Lovers say,
To you they give their hearts away
I willingly now part with mine,
To Learn more sense and be informed by thine.
Long may such Love flourish in the world,
And then Love will be Love and not dissimulation
Love is a sharp spur to prick men on to valorous Exploits, Love inciting to
sundry Accomplishmets.
even those of a rural Education, Love makes men valiant.
for their Mistresses sakes, have oftentimes ventured upon such daring
Exploits, as would have made them upon any other account to have trembled; Some
are of the opinion, that if it was possible to have an Army of Lovers, and
their Mistresses to be spectators of their Courage, they would do more than
could be reasonably expected by men, prove extraordinary valiant, prudent in
their Conduct, and modesty would detain them from doing amiss: Emulation
incites them to noble Actions, and carries them on like a rolling Torrent over
the swords of their Enemies, to bear down all before them; there is none so
dastardly Pusillanimous, that Love cannot inspire with a Heroical Spirit: when
Philip of Macedon prosecuted his Conquests in Greece, he observed in one Battle
he fought, that in the Enemies army was a small Band of men fought
courageously, and held so close together, that they made ten times their Number
give back; nor could they be broken till oppressed by multitudes, and then like
chased Lions killing a multitude of their Enemies, they expired upon their dead
bodies, not one seeking to fly, or submitiing to quarter. The Battle being
over, the King demanded, what those brave men were that had fought? and was
answered, their Band was called the Band of Lovers; which made him admire, and
praise their Courage. A young Gentleman being mortally wounded in defending a
Town, wherein his Mistress was, and falling on his Face desired an other to lav
him with his Face upward, left his Mistress should see him in that posture, and
conclude him a Coward, by turning his back to receive a wound behind. It is
held, that the Ladies Queen Isabel brought in her Train to the siege of
Granada, facilitated the taking of that strong City, and wresting the Kingdom
from the Moors, by Inspiring the spanish Knights and Commandders beyond what
was natural to them; so that when their Ladies were present, they with a few
overcome multitudes: -- Love refines the Soul from it is dross, Love causes
Gentility.
and renders it lively and active, accomplished and fit for gallant things, of
which we will give you an Example out of Beroaldus. There was, says he, one
Simon of a very proper, and somewhat comely personage; but withal so Foolish
and Ridiculous, that his Father who was Governor of Cyprus, being ashamed to
keep him at home, sent him to one of his Farms, to be brought up, as thinking a
rural Education might best suit his Humor; long he had not been there, but
walking alone in the fields, coming to a little Brook pleasantly surrounded
with shades, be espied Iphigenia a Gentlewoman of that Country, fast asleep in
her smock, as having newly come out of the water from bathing. This Lady being
exceeding handsome, and part of her nakedness appearing, he was so charmed, that
he could not move from the place for a time; but stood leaning on his staff,
Gaping and Gazing at the sleeping Beauty; after that, he retired and hid
himself, till she waked; and then watched her to the City, and continuing his
Love; the more to Ingratiate himself, he threw off his natural rude behavior,
Learned to be Civil, Dance, Sing, Play on Instruments of Music; and in a short
space acquired all those Gentleman-like Qualities and Complements, that now
instead of being ashamed of him, his Friends were proud of such a Son; who from
a Clown was become the most accomplished Youth in the Island, he did many
worthy things becoming his high birth; and all this mighty Change was by his
Love to the fair Iphigenia. -- Let the Party be never so regardless of attiring
before, Love occasions neatness in Apparel.
yet when Love seizes him, he begins to spruce himself up; the Invention is
wrecked, for what is most Modish and gracefully wining, and hours are spent in
tricking and sprucifying: A flowery mead, and Painters shop, afford not such a
variety of Colors and Ornaments, as either Sex; when in Love procure to deck,
and set themselves out to the best advantage: A young Maid desirous of a
Husband or Suitor, composes her Looks, Gate, Clothes, Gesture, Actions; her
best Robes, Lawns, Ribbons, Jewels, Linnins, Laces and Rings, must be put on,
with all the Graces, and Elegancies imaginable. It is all her Business, all her
study, how to wear her Clothes neat, to be Terse and Polite, and to set her
self out; and on the other side, no sooner a young Man sees his Sweetheart
coming, but he rouses and makes himself as smug as he can; hitches up his
Breeches that were falling about his Heels, Careens his Wigg, Cocks up his Hat,
and puts every thing in the best order, that he may be the more taking in her
Eyes, as the Poet says: He puts his Cloak in order that
the Lace,
And Hem and Gold-work all may
have their grace.
When Hermophroditus came to visit Salama his beloved Mistress, though she
earnestly longed to see him, yet she would not leave her Closet, till she had
spruc'd her self up; that she might be the more Attracting, as it thus
expressed. Nor would she come, although 'twas
her desire,
Till she had dressed her Self in Trim
attire,
Composed her Looks, to make him
more admire.
Some tell us, though we believe few will Credit it. That a young Gentlewoman
in Trimming up her self, to Receive and Entertain her Sweetheart, takes up as
much time as the Rigging of a ship: When Aeneas was to appear before Dido,
Virgil fables, that Venus her self set him out, that he might look the more
Lovely in her Eyes. Love makes Men and Women Poets.
-- Love inspires the mind with Harmony, and supplies us with fit Numbers to
oompose Madrigals, Ditties, Elegies, Love-sonets, etc. and makes them so
Musically given, as to sing them to sundry delightful tunes which would be but
little minded, did not Love entice us to it. Calisto asks the Question, and
answers it, viz. Who would learn to play or give his mind so intent to Music,
learn so Dance, make Rhymes, Love-sonets, etc? Why few or none would, if it
were not for women's sakes, because by such means they hope to purchase their
Love and Favors: This may be verified too in young Women that are married, for
though they took great pains, and put their Parents to much Charges in Learning
to Sing, Dance, Play on the Music, etc. that thereby they might get them such
graceful Qualities as might win them Husbands, yet having attained their Ends,
they grow weary and regardless of what before they seemed to admire; for being
married, they will hardly touch an Instrument, unless it be to draw on a
Gallant; and indeed we find that most of our Excellent Poets have tuned their
strains to love matters, as if they were delighted with no other Theme: one of
which writes to Love in this manner. Love a Poem on it.
O Love in what School are thy Precepis taught? Who has thy Art into a method
brought?
Or could himself so great a Monster prove,
To give sure Rules that Love cannot remove?
Or trace the mind, when with thy wings it flies,
And hides its's soaring head above the skies?
This Learned Athens never could declare,
Nor Aristotle's School, when he taught there:
Apollo in Parnassus reads not Love,
Like one that has't by Instinct from above:
He speaks but coldly, has no voice of fire,
As those that Love in person does Inspire;
Nor can his Elevated fancy rise,
Equal to tb'hight of Loves grand Mysteries:
It Is thou, O Love! thy only Master Art,
Thou only thy own Precepts caust impart,
Teaching unlettered Souls in a fair Eye,
To read (what thou wroughtst there) their destiny;
It Is thou unty'st their Tongues and make them break
Not silence only, but in Numbers speak;
And what is more strange, O hidden Eloquence
Of Love, and it is more powerful Influence,
Make an half unspoken word do more
Thou sweetest strains of Rhetoric could before,
And with a sigh can greater passion on move
Than a set speech from one that knows not Love;
For silence has it is voice and can beseech
Coming from Love silence it self's a speech.
Then let who will turn over Philosophy,
And search for Love where Love did never ly,
I Will learn by rose in some fair Ladies Eye.
And though my rural Muse can not rehearse
Like those that Grace their Love with lofty Verse,
Yet the most lofty Verse shall to my strains
Stand up like barren Hills to fruitful plains.
For though they are only carved on some rough Tree,
Yet growing like my Verse, my Love shall be.
Love has many tickling Conceits attending it, Love Enquiries or Questions.
which are so sweet and pleasant to the Fancies of those it possesses, that
many would willingly think or talk of no other subject, and this stirs up in
them a desire of Enjoying what they Love, and that puts them upon Enquiry and
asking many strange and frivolous Questions of Star-gazers, Fortune Tellers,
Figure-slingers, Gypsies, and the like, in which they throw away their Money
and Time; some require to see the Pictures of them in a glass who are destined
to be their Husbands? when married, how many Husbands they shall have? whether
kind or unkind? when they shall be married, what Children they shall have, and
how fortunate they shall live? and such Fooleries; which the Party can no more
tell them than they can tell him, or could inform themselves before they came
to consult him, Some of the female Sex, forsooth, undertake to resolve
Love-questions, and be styled wise Woman, which brings an odd Fancy into our
Heads. -- It happened once upon a time, A story of a wise Woman.
that a Mother would needs carry her Daughter, who was Ripe for Love-Enjoyment,
and Courted by a young Spark, to be resolved whether it would be a lucky Match:
This woman's Son about six years old, seeing them dressed fine, and going
abroad, was very inquisitive to know whither they were gadding, she put him off
at first with a Sugar-plumb or two, but growing more earnest, and crying to go
with her, Come, Peace, says she, there is my brave Boy, we are only going to the
wise Woman's, and will be here again presently, and bring you home a fine thing:
Yet this satisfied him not, but set him in a louder Bawling, to this tune, O
Mother let me go with you; O pray good, dear Mother, let me go with you, I
never saw a wise woman in all my born days; and so she was compelled by his
Importunity to take him with her, and satisfy his Curiosity with the sight of
one she fancied to be so. -- Love has been the occasion of finding out many
curious Arts, Love the Founder of Arts and Orders.
for what will not a Lover study to please his Mistress: It Is held, the first
Picture that ever was drawn, was taken by Deburiade's Daughter, for her Love
about to go to the Wars, Coming to take Leave of her, she to Comfort her-self
the better in his Absence, drew his Picture on the wall with a Cole, which her
Father afterward finished in lively Colors. Vulcan is held to maKe the first
Curious Necklace that ever was seen for Hermione the Wife of Cadmus, of whom he
was passionately Enamoured. The Stockin Engine of a later date, was the
Projection of a young Lover, who jesting with his fair Mistress, happened to
pull out her needles as she was knitting, which so angered her that she
banished him her presence, and he was constrained to mourn in his Exile, till
Love quickened his Invention to bring his engine to perfection, and with it made
an Atonement and was restored to Favor. -- Love is held to be the first
Inventer of all our Tilts and Tournaments, Love the Author of Court and Country
Sports and Pastimes.
Orders of the Golden Fleece, Garter, etc. By which Inventions, Emblems,
Symbols, Impresses, and the like, they labored to show and express their Loves
to fair Ladies, when they came to be Spectators of any private or public Shows
or Entertainments; even the Rural sort, when they once sip Loves Nectar, are
all apish and sprightly on a Sudden, Menacles and Carydon, Swinherds and
Shepherds, tasting this Love Liqour, are inspired in an instant, and instead of
what has been mentioned, they have their Wakes, Eves, Whitsun-Ales, Shepherds
Holy Days, Round-delays, Capering-Dances, and then at more leisure times, those
that can write, cut their Mistresses Names on the Rhine of some spreading
Beech, or Aldertree, with his own under it, by some road side, that she may be
sure to see it as she passes along: Those that are less learned cut a true
Lovers Knot, and set their Mark under it, in the figure of a Pair of Pot-hooks,
The Choosing of Lords, Ladies, Kings, Queens, and Valentines, they owe to Love,
that first invented such merry Meetings that he might more liberally and
oppotunately bestow his Shafts, as the old saying is: With Tokens, Gold
divided, and
half Rings,
The Shepherds in their Loves are
blessed as Kings.
Nor do they want Poetry to Garnish it, though a little home Spun, which makes
the Rural Girls like it the better; because it is the Native Product of their
Sweet-hearts brains, not stole or borrowed, and pretended to be their own; a
Trick many of our Town Sparks frequently use, but run to this purpose. Thou
Honey-Suckle of the Hawthorn hedge,
Vouchsafe my heart in Cupids Cup to pledge;
My hearts dear blood, sweet Ciss, is thy Carouse,
Worth all the Ale in Gammer Bubbins house.
I'se say more, affairs call me away,
My fathers Horse of Privinder does stay;
Be thou the Lady Cresset light to me,
Sir Trolly Lolly will I prove to thee;
Written in haste, farewell my Vi'let sweet,
On Sunday pray let us at an Alehouse meet:
Love's sovereignty extends every where, Loves force and Mystery.
and let some Stoics pretend What they will, yet in spite of all they can do,
they cannot resist him, at one time or other he will be too hard for them, and
show them strange Vagaries, make them melt into a passion, notwithstanding
flintiness We see that slints are melted, and run down with Material fire, and
if so, consequently the fire of Love being more pure and subtle, cannot miss to
mollify the Heart on which it fixes. Some Emperors and Kings have built
Cities, that they might be called by their Mistresses Names, and stand as
lasting Monuments to their Memories; Dionisius the Sicilian would bestow no
Offices nor places, consult of no Affairs of State, without the Advice and
Consent of Mirrha his Mistress -- Constellations, Temples, Statues and Altars
have been Dedicated to Beauteous Women by their Admirers; for Love indeed is
Subject to no Dimension, cannot be surveyed by any (...) or Art; so that the
greatest pretender must be of Haedus's opinion, if he has not had large
experimental Knowledge, viz. No Man can (says he) Discourse of Love-matters, so
as to Judge aright, that has not in his own Person made Trial, or as Aeneas
Sylvius says, has not been shot through with Loves Arrows, Moped, Doated, been
Mad Love sick; so that you may find, Experience is the best Master when all is
done. Ovid Confesses, that Experience taught him to discover so many of the
intriegues of Love, as to instruct others in some things relating to it is
mysteries. Love when all is said that can be alleged, is best satisfied with
the Fruition of that beautiful Object, Love Melancholy cured by enjoying the
desired Object.
that occasioned it. The last and surest Refuge and Remedy to be put in
Practice, in the utmost place, when no other will take effect, is to let the
Young couple have their mutual Wishes according to the Poet. Julius alone can
quench my hot desires,
With neither Snow nor Ice, but
with like Fires.
When all his done, says Avicenna, there is no safer or speedier course, than
joining the Parties together according to their Desires and Wishes; as the
Custom and Form of Law allows, and so we have seen those quickly restored to
their former healths, that languished till they begain to stumble at the brink
of the Grave, and wanted but another step to be in it: After their desires were
satisfied, their Discontents ceased; and we thought it strange: our opinion is
therefore, that in such Cases, Nature is to be obeyed. Aretus gives us an
instance of a young Man, who was so relieved and restored, when no other means
could prevail; but this Happiness is many times hindered by Parents, Guardians,
want of Fortune, Nobleness or Gentility. The Germans hardly allow any
Marriages, but in their Degrees of Birth and Fortune; then again many times the
dislike of one, frustrates the wishes and languishing desires of the other. The
Spaniards decline Widows, and care not to Marry with them, though Young,
Handsome, and Rich; and among the Turks, if any live unmarried to twenty five
years she is accounted an old Woman, and not regarded as to matters of Love;
some young Women are Proud and Scornful, as Callyrrhoe, who being dearly
beloved by Choresus, the more his Love increased, the more she had an aversion
and hatred toward him, she made him Pine and Langguish, till of a beautiful
Youth she reduced him to a Skeleton; then on the other hand the fair (...)
Loved, but he rejected her to fly into the embraces of Adulterous Arms, which
ruined him and all his race: it is sometimes found that Lovers languish,
because they dare not speak, or make their Case known; the Heart sends up the
(...), but the Words are stopped and cannot get utterance. It is said of
Elizabeth Daughter to Edward the Fourth, and afterward Wife to Henry the
seventh, when she first saw that Prince after his Victory at Basworth^old she
passionately fell in Love with him; and though there had been overtures of
Marriage proposed before; yet he could not forbear uttering this soliloquy: O
that I were worthy of the comely Prince, but my Father being dead, I want
Friends to motion such a Matter; what shall I say? I am all alone, and dare not
open my Mind to any; what if I acquaint my Mother with it? O bashfulness
forbids that! Well then, what if I should tell some of the Lords the Secrets of
my Breast? No, Audacity is wanting: O then that I might confer with him in
Person, perhaps I could let fall such Words as might discover mine Intention.
Love in such a Case fires the Breasts of many and yet fear and bashfulness
keeps in the Flame that torments them: How many modest Maids may this referr
to: says one, I am but a poor Servant, what shall I do? I am, says another,
Fatherless, and want means: I am, says a third, Buxom and Blithe Young and
Lusty, but alas. I cannot tell what the matter is, I have never a Suitor? though
I stand in the Market upon Sale, no Body cheapens me; this is a mournful Song
for Young Persons to sing or rather sigh out. Love, thus we see Dances in a
Ring, and Cupid hunts it round about; one that Doats is perhaps Doated on at
the same time, and knows it not, or at least where he Loves, though he is not
beloved again, yet another whom he despises, doats on him; but when all is
done, the only Happy Love, is to Love where one is, or doubts not but to be
beloved again. It is the Folly of many Young Ladies, to think the longer they
stay, the more Felicity they shall have in being Admired and Adored; and that
at last, they may pick and choose, and make their Fortunes as they please; when
alas it is no such matter; for time will steal upon them and dim those sparkles
in their Eyes, that gave such a Diamond Luster, and set such value upon their
Beauties; the Roses and Lillies in their Cheeks will fade beyond the repair of
Art; and the natural sprightllness, heat and vigor will decay, and then their
Admirers like Swallow will fly to a brighter and warmer Sun; and then good
Madam to all your exalted Expectations, your Mountain will then bring forth but
a Mouse; therefore be advised, and let not Youth that can never be recalled
again, slip away; for the Poet tells you true, She that was er'st a Maid as
fresh as May,
Now Is an old Crone, Time swiftly posts away.
Then take time, while you may make Advantage of Youth and Beauty, and let not
your Lovers pine away, whilst you linger and delay their Happiness; but kindly
meet, whilst you are in the flower of years fit for Love-matters. Fair Maids go
gather Roses in the
Prime,
For as flower Fades, so goes in
your Time.
Half our Lives are frequently passed over in sleep, or what is next to it, in
pursuing Trifles; and yet we scarce perceived how time spins away, till we come
within two steps of the Grave, and then we are apt to start and begin to
bethink our selves, that we have in a manner dreamed away our Lives, and let
time slide through our hands without improving it in the Pleasures and
Enjoyments of Life. Danus of Laced^^^ being exceeding Rich, and having many
Beautiful Daughters, would not let them lose their Time in Expectation of
extraordinary Rich Matches and suitable Conditions; but chose out as many
handsome Young Men of Virtuous Lives and inviting them to his House,
distributed his Daughters among them in Marriage, and gave them great Portions,
and was highly commended, that he esteemed a virtuous Mand though Poor, before a
Rich Vicious one, of which they might have had choice: Rhodope a beauteous
Egyptian Lady, was very curious in making choice of a Husband, and at last a
very strange accident procured her the Diadem; for as she was bathing her self
in a Fountain, an Eagle stooped and catched up one of her Shoes; and as
Psammeticus was in an open place, sitting on his Throne in Memphis, he dropped
it into his Lap; the King admiring the Beauty and Comeliness of it, caused it
to be proclaimed, that the Lady that the Shoe belonged to, should repair to
Court, and when he had beheld her Beauty, he made her his Queen. But we would
not, Ladies, have you decline Marriage, in hopes that such a thing may befall
any of you; for such a wonder may never happen again; be kind therefore and
Pity your Languishing Lovers, Cure those wounds your fair Eyes have made in
their Souls, and the Affliction your neglects and slightings have thrown upon
the Body; Pity those that sigh for your Favors, and think they have all Heaven
in a gracious Smile, do as you would willingly be done by, if your Condition
was the same; since you were born to make men Happy, decline not to Answer the
one main end of Creation; but let men be convinced, that you are better natured
than they take you to be; and you will find a World of Felicities in a Happy
Marriage-state, wherein you, though the Husband is reputed the Head, will be to
him as a Crown and Ornament above the price of Rubies. Man's best Possession is
a Loving Wife,
She tempers anger, and does hinder Strife.
There is no Joy, no Sweetness, no Comfort, no Pleasure in the World like happy
Marriage, where there is a Union and Harmony of Sculs, as well as Conjunction
of Bodies; but more of this under the particular Heads of Matrimony. has a
universal Dominion, Love Queries, Resolved on sundry occasions.
extended over all Creatures, as well irrational as rational, according as they
are capacitated to receive its power and influence, and like the Loadstone,
draw Affection even at a distance: some may demand how it comes to pass, that
there is a Harmony in the Minds of Parties only by report, when distance of
place or opportunity never allowed any interview: to which according to the
Opinion of the Learned, we answer, Love of this kind is not frequent, yet
sometimes happens, and powerfully operates: Recommendation has a great force,
and Fame obliges us many times to admire great Actions on the bare report of
them, and paints them so to the Life in the Relation, that Fancy forms them to
our Imaginations, as if we were present and Spectators of them, moving our
Passions to favor or dislike them, according as they are represented; so those
that by good Report, we believe to have some Perfection in Virtue, Science or
Beauty, attract or draw our Affections to admire or love them; or on the
contrary, to despise and have no regard for those that are represented to us,
as vicious or deformed either in Body or Mind. Lovers many times breaking off
upon little differences and Cavils, sometimes upon Jealousy of Rivals or the
like, return like a low Ebbing of the Sea, with a greater Fluctuation of
Passion; and the Reason we give is, because Love is in this Case to be compared
to flame, that is increased the more, the stronger Impression the gathering
blasts of Wind make upon it with united force, by whose feeble defect it before
seemed for a time to expire, or to the same purport: Love augmenteth by some
disfavour, that one Lover receives from another, so as they are for some time
unassociated and retired; but after they desire a Reunion of their Affections,
it is reinforced with greater Ardour, and a Passion more irresistible, as
fearing again to hazard what they were so near losing, through Inadvertency,
Peevishness or Ill-humour. Love again is found to augment where Rivals are in
the Case, and though but cool before, grows hot and is inflamed; and the Reason
we give you for this, is, because that Jealousy blows up and kindles that
affection, which before lay as it were securely sleeping, as it were in its
Embers, without expecting any Disturbance or Molestation, or dreaming of any
Prevention; which now it is forced to rouse and stand upon its guard to hinder
by Interposition. Love sometimes is attended with extreme bashfulness in either
Sex, and takes away the power of Free-speaking; so that though we are willing,
we cannot at least without Haesitation or abrupt Stammering, utter our Mind;
when in all other Matters we are Volatile, open and free. And this is, because
and amorous Appetite is not necessary in matters of free Conversation, as the
others are, and open, Practice thereof is abashed, by being frequently
subjected to Censure: Love that is modest, fancies it ought to be very Private,
and more than all this, the Mind being preoccupied in its retirement upon a
matter of so great moment, cannot so suddenly dilate or communicate it self to
the faculties, or through timerousness of speaking amiss, and so consequently
giving offense, is not so ready to frame apt-words into Expressions, that it
fancies sufficiently pleasing. Love has strange habits, various Effects upon
the Bodies of Men and Women, sometimes casting a pale Shroud over them, at
other times a rosy Blush; and again, sometimes they seem to be in a dead Calm,
and at other times in a very quick Motion; sometimes hot and sometimes cold: To
this we answer, they are pale and wan, when the parties are in fear or despair
of the Success their Love had hopes of, or aimed at; because such Passions
constrain the Blood to retire to the Interior parts, to give succor to the
afflicted Heart; by reason whereof the Extremities of the Bodies are left
destitute of sufficient heat to maintain a lively Color; but when on the
otherhand is an Expectation of what is so earnestly coveted and desired, then
the Blood flowing into the Exterior Parts, gives a Vermillion Blush, and the
Heart being disencombered of grosser Matter, attracts the more rarefied
Spirits, which enliven and give it quicker Motion; of which by its dispensing
Operation, the whole Fabric participates in a greater Measure. Love in Men and
Women, has been variously censured, and disputes have arisen, over which of
them it has the chiefest ascendant. Virgil and other Poets, have accused the
fair Sex of extreme Levity and Inconstancy; nevertheless it seems evident to
us, that Reason and Experience declare the contrary, viz. Reason, in as much as
they are colder than Men, and the Nature of Cold is to include or shut up; when
heat which abounds more in Men, disunites and dissolves; and by Experience it
is generally perceived, that they are more Firm and Constant in Love, and Men
less faithful and permanent, being oftener deceived and disappointed than they
deceive or fail in their Love and Affections: from this we proceed to a very
nice Query, yet seeing it falls in our way, we must answer it as well as we
can; and that is, Why Women bear a more ardent Affection to those that have
first enjoyed them, which is many times seen, than to any other, though upon
second Marriage, etc. Our Opinion in this Case, is, Because the Female receives
her Perfection in Copulation with the Male, as a matter by Union with the Form,
which inclines their Love more strongly to those who were Instrumental in
giving them a beginning of Perfection: Or because those who have depucillated
them, hold the fairest and richest Gage of their Love, which is their
Virginity. Love we frequently find, is more powerful in Mothers toward their
children, than in the Fathers; and the Reason to be given for it, is, that they
cost them more Dear in carrying them in their Womb, and bringing them forth;
and not only so, but that they contributed toward them in a larger degree, by
so long nourishing them with their Blood in the dark Cell of Nature and
produced them in the World with the Peril and Hazard of their Lives; when on
the contrary, the Fathers have only the Pleasure in begetting them, and after
that little or no other concernment relating to them, till they are grown to
strength, and in a manner able to shift in the World; unless the providing
necessaries, which usualy pass through the Mothers Hands. Love again is to be
considered in another Case, and that is, why it more fervently descends from
Parents to Children, than ascends form Children to Parents; and in this Case,
three Principal Reasons are to be assigned. The first is, that the Parents Love
their Children as part of themselves, and begin early to do so, even from their
Birth; for which Reason their Love is more strongly settled and fortified, and
Children Love springing up afterward (abating Childish fondness, which lasts
but for a time) from Judgment and Knowledge, which many times a
misunderstanding, or some fancied illusage very much hinders in its increase,
takes not so firm a root in the Affections. Secondly, Nature has so ordained
that all Creatures shall have a special Care to their Helpless Young, least by
their neglect they perish through their inability of subsisting, and the ends
of Creation cease; when as Parents grown up in years of understanding, so
provide for themselves, that they rarely stand in need of their Childrens
assistance, and only require from them Duty and Obedience, which God enjoins
them to yield, in Love of long and happy days, etc. And thirdly, the like Love
remains in them to descend to their Posterity, which verifies the old saying,
that Children cannot be fully sensible of the Love and Tenderness of their
Parents toward them, till they become Parents of Children themselves; and have
experienced that Cordial Affection, by which Nature has linked them together;
for she always has regard to the Conversation and Promotion of the Species,
which she maintains in the continual Succession and upholding of her
Individuals; looking still forward to carry on her workings regularly to the
end of the World, that so keeping all things in their proper Order, she may
finish her great task, and give up her account fairly stated to him whose
Vicegerent she is, in managing the Generative part of Affairs in the lower
World; however, though Nature does not so strongly incline the Love of Children
to Parents, as that of Parents to Children, yet we conclude, they ought to Love
and Reverence them to the utmost of their Power, assisting them to their
abilities in all that is reasonable and requisite, to stand by them in Poverty
and Affliction, and to what Promotion soever they are raised, to own and
acknowledge them under God, as the genual Authors of their Being. Love is
subtle and experienced as well at undermining as battering, Love, brief
Instruction for the Guidance of Ladies Phancies therein.
and therefore Lady's, though you are Triumphantly seated in the Fort of Honor,
yet Loves Artillery will reach you there, or if they carry too short, with a
Mole-like diligence he will work his way till he can spring a Mine in your
hearts, and blow up your Affections into a flame of desire; Beauty can hardly
be secured from Attempts in its greatest strengths: However, we would you have
so constantly firm in your Resolves, that you make the best resistance you can,
be cautious and stand upon your guard to prevent Surprises, and if you must
yield at last, let it look noble and generous, like a Victory, through the brave
resisiance you have made: that all or mostyoung Ladies are prone and inclined
to love, nothing is so certain, yet they must not give their Passion the Reins
too soon, least it run away with the Reason and Discretion. -- Love is an
Affection privily received in at the Eyes, and speedily conveyed to the Heart;
the Eyes are the Harbingers, but the Heart is the Harbourer of it, look well to
be sure then before you like. Love conceived at first sight seldom lasts long,
therefore deliberate with your Love, least it be mis-guided; for to fall in
Love as it were at first Look comes rarely to any good conclusion: Portion may
woo a Worlding, Proportion a youthful Wanton, but it is Virtue that wins the
Heart of Discretion: admit he have the one to purchase your Esteem, and the
other to maintain your Estate; yet his Breast is not so transparent, as to see
through it the Badness of his Disposition; if you then take his Humor on
Trust, it may prove so perverse and peevish, that your expected Heaven of Bliss
may be turned into a wild Wilderness of Confusion and Sorrow. Themistocles the
brave Athenian General, being asked by Nobleman, whether he had rather marry
his Daughter to a vicious Rich man, or an honest Poor man, returned for Answer,
That he had rather give her to a Man without Money, than to Money without a
Man: whence it was that the beautiful Porcia being asked when she would marry,
replied when she could find one that sought her and her Riches: there is no
time requires more modesty from a young Lady, or Gentlewoman, than in wooing
time, a bashful Blush then best commends her, and is the most moving Orator
that speaks in her behalf, like Venus Silver Doves, she is ever brouzing on the
Palms of Peace, whilst her Cheeks speak her love more than her Tongue; there is
a pretty pleasing kind of wooing drawn from a conceived, yet a concealed
Fancy; might they choose, they would converse with them freely, consent with
them Friendly, and impart their truest thoughts fully, yet would they not have
their bashful Loves find Discovery, according to the old Verse: Cloris to the
Willows like a cunning Flyer,
Flies, yet she fears her Shepherd should not spy her.
Whatever you do, Ladies, be not upon any Account whatever induced to marry one
you, have either Abhorrency or Loathing to; for it is neither afluence of
Estate, potency of Friends, nor Highness of descent, can allay the Insufferable
grief of a loathed Bed; wherefore, to the Intent you may show your selves
discreetest in that which requires your Discretion, discuss with your selves
the Parity of Love, and the Quality of your Lover ever respecting on those best
Endowments which render him worthy or unworthy of your best Esteems; a curious
eye guided by understanding, will not be taken only with a proportionable Body,
or smooth Countenance. Justinian a noble Roman Lady, being unadvisedly Married,
grievously exclaimed against her hard fate, in being Married to one more rich
than wise: and this is the Case of many Ladies of our times, which frequently
brings them to a too late Repentance. Let Deliberation then be the Scale
wherewith you weigh Love with an equal Poise; there are many cousequent high
Circumstances which a discreet Woman will not only Discourse, but discuss
before she enters into that hazardous, though honorable State of Marriage;
Disparity in Descent, Fortune or Friends, do often beget a Distraction in the
mind; Years disportionable beget a dislike, Obscurity of Descent begets
Contempt, and Inequality of Fortune, Discontent; if a Lady is at Years of
Discretion, and will Marry to one younger than her self, that is, if he has not
attained to a Manly Gravity and Soberness, she must bear with him till riper
Experience bring him to a better understanding. Let your usage be more easy
than to wean him from what he affects by Rigor or Extremity; youth most
commonly will have it is swinge, time reclaims it, and then Diseretion will
bring him home; so conform yourself to him as to comfirm your Love to him; and
undoubtedly this Conjugal Duty, mingled with Affability will completely Conquer
the Moroseness of his Temper: If he be old, and you have made it your Choce,
let his Age beget in you the greater Reverence, his words should then be to you
as so many aged and time improved Precepts, to inform you; his Actions as so
many Directions to guide you, his kind rebukes as so many Friendly Admonitions
to reclaim you, his Bed, you ought so to Honor, as not to defile it with an
unchaste thought; his Counsel to keep, that is, of any weight (...) moment, as
not to trust it to the Breast of any other; be a Staff in his Age to support
him, and a hand upon all occasions to help him; his being rich must not exalt
or puff up your mind; but let your Desires be, that you employ that bounty of
Heaven for the best advantage, to Gods Glory and your own Credit; Communicate
of your wealth to the feeding and clothing of Christ's poor needy Members,
that by so doing you may heap up a durable Treasure in Heaven, and be received
at the last day to enjoy it Eternally. -- Let not the poor condition of your
Husband into which he is fallen by accident or Misfortune lessen your Love or
Esteem for him; but let his Poverty make you rich in Virtue, least repining and
growing less in Love and Fidelity, upon such a Trial, you meet with the reproof
we find in Luter, which Pompey gave Cornelis when she lamented his overthrow in
the great Battle, fought with Caesar in the Pharsalian Fields, for the Empire
of the World, which threw her into Confusion, Shame and Blushing viz.

Why is thy noble strength of Courage broke,
(Women descended from so great a Stock,)
By the first wound of Fate? Thou have the way
To purchase Fame that never can decay.
Thy Sexes praise springs not from War or State,
But faithful Love to an unhappy Mate;
Advance thy thoughts, and let thy Piety
Contend with Fortune, Love (...) now cause I
Am vanquished, sure it is more true Praise for theec
To love me thus, when all Authority,
The Sacred Senate, and my Kings, are gone,
Begin to love thy Pompey now alone:
That Grief extreme, thy Husband now alive,
Becomes thee not, thou should that sorrow give
To my last Funerals; thou art berest
Of nothing by this War, thy Husband's lest
Alive, and safe, his Fortune's only gone;
It Is that thou wailst, and that thou love alone.
Let the old Proverb be crossed by you, that says, When Poverty forces rudely in
at the Fore-door, Love retreat at the Back one. Let your Affections
Counterpoize all Afflictions, no Adversity should divide you from him; before
you are Married, you are in a manner your own Lawmakers, but being once entered
into a Matrimonial Estate, you must be very mindful of the solemn Promise you
have made before God and the Assembly in his Holy place; none can absolve you
from the performance of that Honor, Obedience and Love you enjoin your self
toward a Husband; therefore whilst you are your own, it is good to sit down
and seriously consider of so weighty a Matter, sift him before as narrowly as
you can, and if you cannot conveniently do it your self, get a faithful Friend
to do it for you; and whilst in a single State you are free from all
Engagements, carefully avoid the Acquaintance of Strangers, if you think they
have a Design to make Love, till if possible an Equiry may be made into their
Conditions and Circumstance; neither affect Variety, nor Glory in the
multiplicity of your Suitors; for there is no greater Argument than that of
Mutability and Lightness: have a care of Vows, unless you are solemnly resolved
to keep them; constant you cannot be when once you deviate from them, nor can
you easily if ever recover a Reputation lost by such a Violation. -- Let your
care be, before you arrive at this honorable State, to lay aside all wanton
Fancies, for it can never promise you good Success; because the effect cannot
be good, where the Object is not ^ending that way; wanton Love has a Thousand
ways to purchase a few Minutes of penitential Pleasures; your Eyes, and by them
the Senses of your mind, are averted; your Ears, and by them the Intentions of
your Heart are perverted; your Mouth speaks, and by that others are deceived;
your touch warms and kindless Desires, and every small occasion blows up your
Love into a Rage. These Exhorbitances must to your utmost Endeavors be
remedied, and therein you must use the method of Art, to remove the Cause, and
the Effects will cease: Let us then give you suitable Direction in these
Matters; and to do it, we must first discover the Incendiaries of this Passion,
next the Effects arising from them; and Lastly, their Cure or Remedy; the
Original grounds of this wandering Fancy, or wanton Frenzy, are concluded in
this Distick,

Sloth, words, Books, Eyes, Consorts and Luscious Fare,
The Lures of Lust, and Stains of Honor are.
For the first, Sentensius has it, viz. He had rather be exposed to the utmost
Extremities Fortune could inflict on him, than subject himself to Sloth and
Sensuality. For it is this only that makes Men and Women in some degree a kind
of Bruits or irrational Creatures. As for lewd Books, they are Nurseries of
Wantonness, and therefore to be avoided, lest like the Snake in the Fable,
being too much warmed in your Opinion, and use of them, they become dangerous
Enemies to your good Name and Repose; again then your Eyes are those Windows,
by which many hurtful things enter: our first Female Parent greedily fed her
Eyes on the bainful Fruit, before your Heart desired or coveted it; she fixed
the desire and motive to Transgression there, and that to consummate the Grand
offense, communicated it to her Appetite, and rendered it impatient of delaying
a Satisfaction in the Curiosity; seeing she desired, and desiring coveted, and
coveting she tasted; in a fatal hour for Mankind, who had eternally perished by
that single Act of Folly, had not the rich redeeming Blood of God atoned for
the Transgression, had not the offended laid aside for a time his dazzling
Diadem of Stars, and disrobed himself of his visible Glory, and by dying set
the Offenders free again. Consorts are the Purloyners, and Wasters of time;
their insignificant Conversations rob you of many precious Opportunities, which
if well improved might mainly contribute to the Happiness of Life here, and
hereafter; choose them, if any such, as in whose Conversation you may have
assured hope of being bettered in both Estates; choose such as you may worthily
admire, when you see and hear them; when you see them live up to what they
prosess, and hear their cordial Advice, and wholesome Instructions. -- Lastly,
Luscious Fare inordinately taken, is the fuel of inordinate Desires, which must
be abstained from; you must in this Case be very temperate, if you intend to
have your understanding strengthened: and now we come to the evil Effects of a
wanton Fancy, we will not however here draw the Curtains of Honor, to expose
those amazing Tragedies it has occasioned. Histories abound with the mournful
Calamities it has ushered in, to the ruin of many, whose Fames it has Eclipsed,
and whose flourishing Lives it has untimely caused to set in Blood; but rather
proceed to give some Directions for its prevention or Cure: The best and
Soveraignest Antidote is, for the fair Sex to fortisie their weakness with the
strength of Resolution; they must not be too liberal in bestowing their
Favors, not too Familiar in public Conversation; especially when entered into
a marriage State, they them must make a Contract with their Eyes, not to wander
abroad, lest like Flies they are catched in the infectious Snares, that will
hinder their innocent Retreat; they must beware how they enter into Dialogues,
and Love Negotiations, treating though in a kind of Railery or Banter too
freely; for the blind Boy, as they term him, has a Thousands traps laid for
such a pretend to stand at Defiance with his Power, by too much depending upon
their own strength; and being stragled into the Road where he lays them, it is
a wonder, nay a Miracle if they escape them all: they may fancy he has no Eyes,
and so think to make Pastime with him, as the Philistines did with Samson; but
ahas, they may for all that too late find themselves overwhelmed past Recovery:
Pray Ladies, mark how a Fly plays about the senseless Flame, fanning with her
Wings in sport, as if she intended to extinguish its Brigthness by the
percussion of the Air she forces upon it, when all on a sudden her jesting is
spoiled, for coming to near, it singes her feeble Fans, and for want of their
support down she drops, and lies helplesly grovling on the Table, despoiled of
her best Helps and Ornaments, and disabled for ever to relieve her self; to
which purpose we thus find it vesified, So long the foolish Fly plays with the
Flame,
Till her light Wings are signed in the same.
You need therefore be very (...) and vigilant, and like a General encampimg in
an Enemies Country, keep your Out-Centries upon the watch, to take and give the
first Alarm, for the Prevention of danger and ruin; your Judgments, your
Reason, your Prudence, joined with your utmost Caution, are all little enough
in some Cases, to avoid the Baits and Nets that are laid for you by the
Students in Loves Mystery, to take a entrap Female Credulity. They can tip
their Tongues with Rhetorical Protestattions, on purpose to gain more easily a
good Liking, Credit and Belief with those they intend to allure and wheedle
into the danger of Loves Pitfalls. The Purchase of an unlawful Pleasure makes
them many times set their Souls at Stake to gain it, with Vows and
Protestations never intended to be kept, but breathed like common Air, dressed
in the softest Tones and Accents of languishing Lovers, into the credulous Ears
of the fair one: they whose Honor they design to betray, whose Virginity they
intend to Sacrifice to their Lusts, and whose good Name despoiled of it is
Beauty and Luster, spotted and sullied with Infamy and Disgrace, they are proud
to bear in Triumph, as a Trophie of an inglorious Victory. Ladies, be not
altogether without some Suspicion, where there may be no occasion for it, as
those are who suspect the watchword to be betrayed by Deserters, and therefore
may as well be in the Mouths of Enemies as Friends; but however, in such Cases
you must conceal it to the utmost, for avoiding offense, where in the end their
may be no Reason for it. Be sure, if your Fancy be apt to Rove and straggle
abroad, to Check and call it back er'e it goes too far, and is past the reach
of your Command; however, think not that by what has been said, we go about to
tie you up to a severe Strictness, to lay heavy Chains upon your Wills and
Affections, to bind under too hard Restraints: No, we only pretend to give such
Cautions as are necessary for the preventing Dangers and Inconveniences, rash
and overhasty Engagements are to late Repentances; too much slighting, where
notwithstanding many false Attacks, there may be a sincere tender of Love and
cordial Affection, if you have any liking or incline to Marriage, looks too
much like scorn and disdain, and may by some be interpreted an unbecoming and
ill-timed Pride, from whence a growing Discouragement may arise to a Gygantick
Stature, that may over-shadow the prospect of your Fortune. There is a great
difference between a Wise and an Extravagant Love; the one ever deliberates
before it fixes, or so much such as soberly likes; the other likes and resolves
before it deliberates; the one sees with the discerning Eyes of Reason, the
other with the Moon-blind ones of Passion. There is a modest Coynels that can
no ways give offense, but rather attracts Love (as the Needle touched by the
Loadstone, is by the Magnetic Virtue is retains, compelle'd to attend on the
North) and gains Applause and Esteem rather than Distaste, and laying a
Foundation for offense: indifferent Courtesies may be showed, Affections may be
opened like Scenes, drawn to give a Prospect of pleasant Objects, which painted
by a curious hand, seem though near, yet at a vast distance; but may be closed
again, if Intruders attemp too narrowly to pry into what you would have them
conclude is remoter than indeed it is. Seneca gave Advice to his Friends, to
order and carry the Actions of their Lives in such even Scale, that none should
justly find fault with them; set therefore always before your Eyes, the
Examples of those that have gained Esteem and Reputation, in the prudent
Management of like Concerns, and Copy out what they have left for your
Instructions; trodden paths of that kind are the best and safest to travel in,
to prevent the losing your way; or if there you should happen to die, it is
more excusable; because you have Precedents to produce in your Justification,
that have been allowed and approved of by the Virtuous and Wise of diverse Ages,
for Modesty, Chastity, and all manner of Virtues; yet have been Affable,
Humble, Courteous, and Condescenders to lawful Love. Moreover, it is a course
kind of Quality, That throws a Woman lower, when she covets to rise higher in
opinion, degrading her from the Rank of those that are more refined; some
indeed lift up their Voices like a Trumpet, because they resolve to be heard,
or weary out those that mind not to give them Audience; and some again with
their Drum rather make a noise, as if they were beating up for Volunteers, and
are very much out of Countenance, if none come in to them; Pardon us Ladies, if
we yet find out another sort (since what we undertake is intended for your
Good, that having such Examples before you, you may avoid falling into the like
Folly and Error) and those are such as have no farther design than the Vanity
of Conquest, striving by all the little Arts they can study to outdo and
overcome others in Wit, Gaiety and Honor; and if they do it not in the
opinions of others, they will be sure to do it in their own; and thereupon grow
not a little proud of their Parts. -- Beaviour ought to be exempted from these,
if you would have it approved, for these are the dangerous Experiments, and
being generally built upon a Sandy Foundation, totter and all when they are
blown on by the least puff of Sense and Reason; Love indeed when generous, is
to be accounted a Passion, but it is not safe for Ladies o play with it, no
more than with Fire, but where it comes clad in Virtue, and you resolve to
entertain, and cherish in a Matrimonial way; some are so hardy to suffer
themselves, for their Diversion, to be made Love to in jest, when at last the
sly Insinuate starts into a Passion on a sudden, and in spite of all resistance
changes into a troublesome Earnest, not be put off or avoided by too late
Repentance; and for this Reason you must keep all appearances of it at a
distance, and not vainly fancy You can be too strong for it, and beat it out
again, when in the disguise of a fawning Friendship, it has been admitted, and
treacherously surprised unawares the Fort of your Breast: in suffering this,
you act the part of an Enemy, by conspiring against your self, and opening an
Inlet to your Ruin; for the Spark who is at first only admitted as a Tfsropie
of your Victory, the humble Captive of your fair Eyes, finding his drooping
Spirits raised a little by the easy Doom you intend him, will soon take
Courage and Invade you in your strongest hold, till he become the Victor, and
you the vanquished. The first Resolutions of stopping at good Opinion and
Esteem, usually by degrees grow feebler, and less unable to resist the Charms
of Courtship, when cunningly and pressingly applied. For many Ladies, whilst a
Man is commending their Beauty, Dress and Parts, fancy by the aid of the
Self-flatterer they carry about them, that he speaks so much Reason, and come
so near their own Sense and Opinion, that he ought to be listened to, and they
have much ado to believe him in the wrong, when he is making Love in down
right Earnest, contrary to his Engagement and Protestations when he was first
admitted to the Freedom of Conversation; his Musical note, though as dangerous
as the Sirenes, is charming in their Ears, and every soft Accent strikes the
Strings of their Souls already tuned in Concord, and at last they are whistled
like Birds into the Net. Conquest indeed is so tempting and desirable in some
Women, who are naturally Ambitious, that they are apt to mistake Men's
Submissions, and not discern that their fair appearances are made up with a
lesser Ingredient of Respect than of Art; though indeed there is less danger in
some Men, who say extreme fine things, and are always buzzing and fluttering
about Ladies Apartments, than in those that lay their Design covert and close,
with little Noise, but with more Intriegue; for the first sort are many times
so vain, to be as well satisfied in the Pleasure they take to throw away their
Complements on you, as they would be with your kindnest, and most obliging
Answers; but where this Ostentation fails, which indeed is never used by the
other sort, you ought to look about you, their smooth Surface has a depth to
overwhelm you; if playing too near the Brim, the ground unexpectedly slips
away, and plunges you into it; you must then be always watchful and upon your
Guard, for a profound Respect has more danger in it, than Anger or Raillery, by
its jostling the most exalted understanding out of place; for till Second
thoughts come in to its Assistance, and restore it, it insensibly steals upon
us, and overturns our Defenses, and takes us Prisoners, when we think we are
most secure, when Anger and Raillery gives us warning, and passes over in
Noise. -- Love, Love, its uncontrollable Power and Force.
or the Passion of the mind enclining to it, is very strange and unaccountable
in many Respects; it is of such Power in its Operation, that it has often taken
the Diadems from Kings and Queens, and made them stoop to those of obscure
Birth, and destitute of Fortune; working such wonders as is scarce credible to
any, but those who feel its Power; it takes the Sword out of the Conquering
hand, and makes him a Captive to his Slave and has such Variety of Snares to
in. tangle the most wary and prudent, that few have at one time or other
escaped them: it is (an Author says,) like the Smallpox, that in Youth, or
riper years very few escape. As for this Passion, it sprouts into diverse
Branches, of the Fruit of which all are desirous; some indeed pretend to Arm
themselves against the Charms of the fair Sex, but whilst they are giving
Advice to their wounded Friend, are frequently wounded themselves. Love so
entangled Eurialus Count of Augusta, Love Examples.
that at the first sight, falling in Love with a fair Virgin at Sienna named
Lucretia, she at the same Instant had the like Passion for him, and they
entirely united their modest Affections; but before the Marriage was
Consummated, the Emperor Sigismund in whose Service he was, hastily marched to
Rome, so that he was forced to leave the Lady behind him; which struck such a
Melancholy to her Heart, and possessed her with an Impa^itience of his
Absence, that she died for Excess of Love; of which unhappy Disaster he had no
sooner Notice, but all his Friends had much ado to persuade him from laying
violent hands upon himself; and though by their Tears and Entreaties, he was
compelled to Live, yet a Cloud of Melancholy always surrounded him, so that he
was never seen to be Merry, or Laugh afterward. Love so enchanted the Daughter
of Charlemain the Emperor, that she fell passionately in Love with her Fathers
Secretary, and admitted him to give her private Visits in her Chamber, though
she knew by the Law it was Death if discovered; when one Night it so
unfortunately happened, that a great Snow Fell, and Eginardus fearing that the
Prints of his Footsteps from the Princess Stair-Caise-door might betray him,
she undertook for the preventing it, to carry him on her back to his Apartment;
which Frolic the Emperor being up late, espied by Moonlight, and the next day
in Council sent for his Daughter, and demanded of his Nobles what should be
done to the Man who made a Mule of their Emperor's Daughter, to carry him
through the Snow upon her Back, at a very unseasonable time of Night? To which
they unanimously answered, He deserved Death. This made the two Lovers tremble
and change Color, finding they were discovered; but the Emperor being given to
understand, the Sincerity of their Affections, said, Well Eginardus, had thou
loved my Daughters Honor, thou ought to have come to her Father, who is the
proper Disposer of her Liberty, you have justly deserved to dye, but I give
thee two Lives; take thy fair Portress in Marriage, fear God, and love one
another. As for the Joy they conceived at this unexpected Declaration, we leave
to Lovers in such a a like Condition to Judge of: And now since Holy Writ tells
us, what Love is, I shall give you one more singular Example, and so proceed to
the rest of the Branches of this excellent Passion, that so much enobles the
minds of Men and Women. In the Seventh Persecution of the Christians, when
Rivers of precious Blood were shed in all the Roman Empire for the Gospel Truth
one Theodora a beautiful and chaste Virgin was taken, and the barbarons Judge
perceiving she preferred her Chastity before her life, Condemned her to the
Stews, with an Order she should be ravished by as many as pleased; upon News of
which a great many lewd Fellows came Crowding to wait the appointed time, when
one (...) a young Man, who bore her an extraordinary Love for her Piety, though
he suspected the Attempt would be his Death, nevertheless resolved to free her
from that Shame; and therefore pressing in in Soldiers habit before the rest,
he prevailed with her to change Clothes with him, and so make her Escape; but
he staying in her stead, was doomed to die. The Virgin hearing this, resolved
to save him if possible, by surrendering her self; but so cruel was the Tyrant,
that this stupendous Miracle of Love and Friendship prevailed not, for he
doomed them both to Death, which they suffered joyfully; and ascended to the
Quite of eternal Harmony. -- Though the fair Sex be counted the weaker; Love of
Wives to Husbands.
yet in this glorious Passion, they prove the strongest, superseding the
Fidelity of of their Nature by the strength of an incredible Affection, so that
being born up with that, they have often performed as worthy things as could ^e
expected from the Courage and Constancy of mankind, even the most generous of
them. They have despised Death in all the Variety of his terrible Shapes, and
forced the strong opposing Bars of Difficulties and Dangers, to make way to the
Center of invicible Love, and in which they seemed proud to let it appear more
strong in the greatest Extremities of their Husbands; of which a few Examples
will not be amss. Love in Aviz the Wife of Cicinna Poectus was exceeding; for
having knowledge that her Husband was condemned to die, yet Liberty given him
to choose was Death he pleased, she went to him, and exhorted him to contemn the
fear of Death, and die Courageously, and then giving a kind Farewell, she with a
Knife hid in her Garments, stabbed her self, as resolving not to outlive her
Husbands fall and then whilst strength of Life remained, reaching him the
Knife, she said, The would I have made, (...), Smarts not, but that which thou
art about to give thy self is I^tolerable to me, and so they both died
Embracing each other with all the tender Expressions of a constant Affection.
At the time the Emperor Conrade the Third besieged the Duke Ou^tsus of Bavaria,
in the City of Wensberg in Germany, the Women perceiving the Town at the point
of being taken, Petitioned the Emperor that they might depart with each of them
so much as they could carry on their Backs; which being granted, and every one
expecting they would come forth with their rich Apparel, Vessels and of Gold
and Silver, and the like, they on the contrary neglecting them, brought every
one her Husband on her Back; at which so extraordinary Love and Tenderness in
these Virtuous women, the Emperor was so moved, that he could not refrain from
Tears; and thereupon not only forgave them all, though before he had doomed
them to Destruction, but received the Duke into Favor, and highly praised the
Women. And we find diverse others in Story, that have equalled, if not exceeded
these we have mentioned. Portia the Daughter of Cato, and Wife to Brutus,
hearing of her Husbands overthrow and Death in the Philippi Field; she for the
great Love we bare him, determined to die, and though her Friends apprehensive
of her Design kept all manner of mischievous Instruments from her, she founds
means to Cram burning Coals down her Throat, and so expired; others have leaped
into their Husbands flaming Funeral Piles, and so expired. Eumines burying the
dead that had fail'n in the Battle of Jabbins, against Antigonus; amongst
others there was found the Body of Ceteas, the Captain of those Troops that had
come out of India. This Man had two Wives who accompanied him in the Wars, the
one of which he had newly married, and another which he had married a few years
before, but both of them bore an entire love to him; for whereas the Laws of
India require that one Wife shall be burnt with her dead Husband, both
proffered themselves to Death, and strove with that Ambition as if it was some
glorious Prize they sought after. Before such Captains as were appointed their
Judges, the younger pleaded that the other was with Child; and that therefore
she could not have benefit of that Law. Tht Elder pleaded, that whereas she was
before the other, it was also fit that she should be before her in Honor,
since it was customary in other things, that the Elder should have place. The
Judges, when they understood by Midwives, that the elder was with child, passed
Judgment that the younger should be burnt, which done, she that had lost the
cause departed, rending her Diadem, and tearing her Hair, as if some grievous
Calamity had befallen her. The other all Joy at her Victory, went to the
Funeral Fire magnificently dressed up by her Friends, led along by her Kindred,
as if to her Nuptials, they all the way singing Hymns in her Praises. When he
drew near the Fire, taking of her Ornaments, she delivered them to her Friends
and Servants, as tokens of Remembrance; they were a multitude of Rings, with
variety of precious Stones, Chains, and Stars of God, etc. this done, she was
by her Brother placed upon the (...) Matter by the side of her Husband; and
after the Army had thrice compassed the Funeral Pile, fire was put to it and
she, without a word of Complaint, finished her life in the Flames. Again, some
Wives have lived with their van^^^shed, or bansshed Husbands (...) Woods,
Rocks, Cave, etc choosing to undergo all manner of Hardship and Misery, rather
than be separated from them. Julius Sabinus, who had caused the Galls to Rebel
against Vespatian, flying his wrath, accompanied with a Servant or two, to a
Tomb, or Burying-place of the dead, there dismissed one of them, to spread the
news abroad, that he was slain in the Field, or had afterward poisoned himself;
this coming to the Ears of Epo^^^^ his wife, she wept and would by no means be
comforted, resolving to die; this made the Servant so far pity her, that after
she had fasted three days, he told her of his Lords Safety; after he had
acquainted him; with the Misery she was in, it was agreed she should come to
him, and there consorted with him for the space of Nine years, bringing forth
Children in that Solitary place, no Entreaty of her Husbands prevailing with
her to forsake him. At last they were discovered, and brought before the
Emperor, where Eponina producing her Children, said, Behold, O Caesar, such as
I have brought forth and bred up in a Monument, that thou might have more
Suppliants for our Lives; but this great Act of Love and Constancy could not
move cruel Vespatian, for he caused them both to be put to Death, she dying
joyfully with her Husband. Hota was the Wife of Rabi Benxamut, a valiant
Captain, and of great Reputation amongst the Alarbes, she had been bravely
rescued out of the hands of the Portugals, (who were carrying her away
Prisoner) by the exceeding Courage and Vavour of Benxamut her Husband. She
showed her thankfulness to him by the ready performance of all the Offices of
Love and Duty: Some time after Benxamut was slain in a Conflict, and Hota
perfomed her Husbands Funeral Obsequies with infinite Lamentation, laid his
Body in a stately ^omb, and then for nine days together she would neither eat
nor drink, whereof she died, and was buried (as she had ordained in her last
Will) by the side of her beloved Husband.

He first deceased; she for a few days tried
To live without him, liked it not and died.
King Edward the First, while Prince, warred in the Holy Land, where he rescued
the great City of Acon from being surrendered to the Souldan; after which, one
Anzazim, a desperate Saracen (who had often been employed to him from the
General) being one time, upon pretense of some secret Message, admitted alone
into his Chamber, he, with an empoyson'd Knife gave him three Wounds in the
Body, two in the Arm, and one near the Arm-pit, which were thought to be
mortal, and had perhaps been so, if out of unspeakable Love the Lady Eleanor
his Wife had not sucked out the Poison of his Wounds with her Mouth, and
thereby effected a Cure, which otherwise had been incurable. Thus it is no
wonder that love should do wonders, seeing it is it self a Wonder. -- Love of
Parents to their Chilren is a natural Affection, Love of Parents to their
Children.
which we bear toward them that proceed from us, as being part of our selves;
and indeed almost all other Creatures have a strong Impression of this kind of
Love to their young, though in their proper Nature never so fierce and cruel to
any thing besides, according to the Poet,

Seeing her self Robbed of her tender Brood,
Lies down lamenting in her Seythian Den,
And Licks the Prints where her lost Whelps had lain.
But this Affection with Reason has greater Power in the Souls of humane
Parents; tho indeed it is Impression is deeper in some than in others, so that
sometimes it extends even to a fault, where it is placed on such Children whose
stubborn Natures turn such tender Indulgence to evil purposes; yet we see when
it so happen, as it does too freequently, the Parents fondness decreases not.
Love toward his Sons and Daughters, had so settered the Affection of Charles
the Great, that he could seldom endure them out of his fight; and when he went
any long Journey he took them with him; and being one time demanded, why he
married not his Daughters, and suffered his Sons to travel? with a Sigh
replied, He was not able to bear their Absence. Selucius King of Syria, being
told that his Son Antiochus Sickness proceeded from that extraordinary Passion
he bare to his beautiful Queen Stratonice, though the Father loved her
entirely, yet fearing his witholding her might occasion the loss of his Son, he
freely resigned her to him. Aegtius by a mistake thinking Theseus his Son to be
dead, threw himself from the Rock where he stood to watch his return, and there
perished. Love in Women on this account has always exceeded that of the Men,
who to save their Children have rushed through Flames, and on the points of
Swords, regardless of their Lives, as the Poet expresses it. (...) Lyoness,
when with Milk her Dugs do ache,
Seeking her lost Whelps hid within some Brake,
No^ the sharp Viper does more Anger threaten,
Whom some unwary Heel has crushed and beaten;
Than woman when she sees her off springs wrong,
She breaks the Bars of the opposing throng;
Through Swords, through Flame she rushes, there is no Ill
So grievous, but she Acts it with her Will.
Love to her Infant, so inspired the Daughter of Sponderebeus, that Mahomet the
second having caused his Vizier-Bassa to murder it, as being one of the Sons
of his Father; she never left crying in the Sultans Ears till he had delivered
the Bassa bound to her, and then she cut him up alive, and cast his Heart and
Liver to the Dogs. -- Love of Children to their Parents, Love and Reverence of
Children to Parents
is required by the Law of God and Naure, and it is their indispensable Duty to
Love, honor and obey; yet Love it self contains all these: for what we love,
we will consequently labor to please to the utmost, since it is to the great
Credit and Advantage of Children, entailing a Blessing on them here, and giving
them in a great measure, an Assurance of an eternal Blessedness hereafter. For
wherever we find Piety and Reverence, that is due to Parents, there is a kind
of Earnest given of a prosperous and worthy Person; for the Child having this
way entitled himself to the Promise of God, whatsoever happens to others, he
shall find Happiness and Comfort in it. It is certainly a very great and
grievous Sin to be unmindful of those, who next to God are the Authors of our
Being, and have taken care of us, when we were not able to help our selves. --
Love in this Case appeared extraordinary in Antipas and Amphinomus, who when
Mount Aetna sent out Rivers of flaming Sulphur, and by the Eruption the Earth
trembled under them, every one minding to hurry away their Goods, and flying in
confusion; these pious Brothers mindful of their aged Parents more than all
earthly Riches, took them on their Backs, and carried them through Torrents of
Fire to places of Safety, leaving their Goods to be destroyed; saying, What
more precious Treasure can we secure than those who begot us; and this Acts of
Piety by diverse Antiquities is said to be attended with a Miracle; for the
burning stream separated, and made way for their safe Passage, whilst other
places were scorched up. Love and Duty appeared excellent in the Daughther of a
noble Roman Lady, who being condemned by the Praetor, her Execution was delayed
by the Jailer to starve her in Prison, that the People who were offended with
the Sentence might not see her public Execution; her Daughter all this while
had leave to Visit her, but was narrowly searched that she should bring no Food
with her into the Prison; however, her Mother subsisting beyond what could be
suspected, the Jailer watched the Daughter, and at last found she had supported
her with the Milk from her Breasts; which known, the Consul pardoned the
Mother, and highly praised the Daughter; and in Memory of this, An Altar was
raised to Piety in the place where the Prison stood. -- Sir Thomas Moor being
Lord Chancellor of England, at the same time that his Father was a Judge of the
Keng's Bench, he would always, at his going to Westminster, go first to the
King's Bench, and ask his Fathers Blessing before he went to sit in the
Chancery. -- There happened in Sicily (as it has often) an Eruption of Aetna,
now called Mount Gibel, it murmurs, burns, belches up Flames, and throws out
its fiery Entrails, making all the World to fly from it. It happened then, that
in this Violent and horrible breach of Flames (every one flying and carrying
away what they had most precious with them) two Sons, the one called Anagias,
the other Amphinomius, careless of the Wealth and Goods of their Houses,
reflected on their Father and Mother, both very old, who could not save
themselves from the fire by flight; And where shall we, said they, find a more
precious Treasure then those who begat us? The one took up his Father on his
Shoulders, the other his Mother, and so made passage through the Flames. It is
an admirable thing, that God, in consideration of this Piety, though Pagans,
did a Miracle: for, the Monuments of all Antiquity witness, that the devouring
Flames staid at this Spectacle, and the Fire wasting, and broiling all about
them, the way only through which these two good Sons passed, was tapistried with
fresh Vendure, and called afterward by Posterity the Field of the Pious, in
Memory of this Accident, -- Love in former times when Sacrifices attended the
Hymenial Rites, Love of Husbands to Wives
as part of the Ceremony, that it might not be imbittered, the Gall of the Beast
was not used but cast on the ground, to signify, that between the young Couple
there should be nothing of that Nature to disturb their Felicity; but that
instead of discontent, Sweetness and Love should fill up the whole space of
their Lives: and indeed it is the best Harmony in the World, where a Man and
Woman have the pleasant Mu^^^^ of Contentment and Peace to refresh them in
their dwellings, whilst they make their study to increase their Happiness. This
is as comely a sight as Apples of Gold set in Pictures of Silver, or Brethren
living together in Unity. -- Love was so powerful with Plautius Nu^^^, that
hearing his Wife was dead, he killed himself. Darius after he had grievously
lamented the loss of his Wife Statira, as thinking she had perished in the
General (...) Alexander had given his Army, was so over-joyed when he heard she
was safe, and honorably used by the Conqueror, that he prayed that Alexander
might be fortunate in all things, although he was his Enemy. Two large Snakes,
Male and Female being found in the House of Titus Gracchus, the Augurs or
Soothsayers told him, That if the Male was let go, his Wife should die first,
but if the Female himself should die first; Then, pray said he, let the Female
Snake go, that Cornelia may live by my Death; and so the Historians say it
happened, for he died in a few years after, and leaving her a Widow, she
refused the King of Egypt in Marriage, the better to preserve the Memory of her
deceased Husband. -- Ferdinand King of Spain, married Elizabeth the Sister of
Ferdinand Son of John King of Arragon. Great were the Virtues of this admirable
Princess, whereby she gained so much upon the heart of her Husband, a valiant
and fortunate Prince, that he admitted her to an equal share in the Government
of the Kingdom with himself: wherein they lived with such mutual agreement, as
the like has not been known amongst any of the Kings and Queens of that
Country. There was nothing done in the Affairs of State, but what was debated,
ordained, and subscribed by both: the Kingdom of Spain, was a Name common to
them both; Ambassadors were sent abroad in both their Names, Armies and
Soldiers were levied and formed in both their Names, and so was the whole Wars,
and also Civil Affairs, that King Ferdinand did not Challange to himself an
Authority in any thing, or in any respect greater than that whereunto he had
admitted this his beloved Wise. -- Love so bound the Soul of a Neopolitan to
his fair and virtuous Wife, that she being surprised by some Moorish Pirates,
who privately landed in a Creek, and then put off again with their Prize, that
whilst they yet Cruiz'd near the Shore he threw himself into the Sea and swam
to their Ship; and calling to the Captain, told him, He was come a voluntary
Prisoner, because he must needs follow his Wife, not scaring the Barbarism of
the Enemies of the Christian Faith, nor Bondage, for the Love of her who was so
near and dear to him. The Moors were full of admiration at so great a proof of
Affection; yet carried him to Tunis, where the Story of his conjugal Affections
being rumored abroad, it came to the Ear of the King of that Country, who
wondering at so strange a thing, and moved with Compassion to such a Lover,
ordered them their Liberty, and placed the Man as a Soldier in his Lifeguard.

Love in this, a Passi^n is so strange
It hides all fauits and never is gi'n to change;
it uneclips'd in it is full Blaze shines bright
Pure in it self, it wants no borrowed Light
Nor sets till Death draws the dark Scene of Night.
Liberty is so sweet and pleasant, Liberty desirable more than Life.
that all Creatures naturally cover it and though irrational, are uneasy under
restraint or Confinenmet. The Romans of old had so high an Esteem of it. that
they prized it before all things in the World, and thought it worthy of
Veneration, making it one of their Goddesses, erected and dedicated Temples in
Honor of it, and esteemed Life in Golden Chains of Bondage, not worth
regarding; and their greatest Offenders were punished with Interdiction,
Religation, Deportation, and such like, accounting it worse than any other
Severity, as knowing without it the mind becomes a tormentor not only to it
self, but to the Body, by wasting and consuming it with Grief and Anguish: and
that a Man will refuse no kind of Hardship nor Danger to secure his Liberty;
but Sacrifice their chiefest Ornaments, and even Life it self as precious as it
is, to the uttermost hazard, to preserve it. Many Cities, rather than fall into
the hands of their Enemies, and become Captives, have been turned by their
Citizens into an Acheldama of Blood, and spread Ghastly Scenes of Death, to
amaze and slartle their most cruel Enemies. When Hannibal had besieged the City
of Saguntum nine Months, and Famine warring within their Walls, so that they
found themselves in a great straight, and without hopes of Succor, but that
they must fall into the hands of their Enemies; they pulled down their Houses,
and heaping up the Timber in the Marketplace, together with all their Riches
and Furniture, they set them, together with the rest of the City, Wives and
Children, on fire, leaping into the Flames they expired on one great Funeral
Pile, and left the Conqueror a bootless Victory. -- Lucan in his Pharsalia
gives us a strange Instance of the like nature, viz. That a Ship of Caesar's, of
which Vulteus was Commander, being stayed by Chains and Ropes fastened to
either Shore lying under water, when they saw Pompey's Ships ready to affault
them and there was no hopes of flight, no nor of noble Death, from the hands of
their Enemies, who had taken them in a Toil; the Captain prevailed with them to
prefer Death before an inglorious yielding; and accordingly, they every man
sheathed his Sword in each others Bowels, so that not one was left alive.
Scipio being overthrown by Caesar in Africa, flying by Sea, and perceiving
some of the Enemies Ships ready to intercept him, preferring Liberty before
Life, fell on his Sword, and then leaping overboard Crimsoned it with the
Blood of that illustrious Family. Cato in Vtica hearing of the defeat of his
Confederates, killed imself: Thus was Liberty prized at the highest rate by the
Ancients, but they ought to be no Examples to Christians, who are to bear with
Patience, and not to lay violent hands on themselves, when such Afflictions
overtake them, but rather wait Gods leisure, who in his good time will relieve
them, as he did the Children of Israel, when they groaned under the heavy
Burdens of their Bondage.

Lady Olympia Glara, an Italian Lady, no less noted than her Name imports, for
what she has writ in Verse. Lady Hildegardis an Abbess of the Benedictine
Order, she wrote several Volumes in prose, both in Theology and Medicine, she
writ also a Book of Latin Poems. Lady Jane Gray the Daughter of the Duke of
Suffolk, far more happy in her Learning, for which she is highly commende^,
than in her being proclaimed Queen of England, which Honor brought her to an
untimely end. Lucia a Rom^n Poetess surnamed Mima, from her Mimic or Comical
Writings, mentioned by Pliny. Lachesis, Atropos and Clotho, are the three
Destinies. Lactary ( lactarium) a dairy-house; and may be used for a dairy-man,
milk-man, or Cheese-monger. Br. Lampoon, a Libel in Verse. Latinus, an ancient
King of Italy, who married his Daughter Lavinia to Aeneas. Latona, Daughter of
Caeus, one of the Titans, on whom Jupiner begat the Latonian-lights, Apollo and
Diana, the Sun and Moon. Lavender, Spiknard, a common plant, also a Laundress.
Laurentalia, Feasts in honnour of Acca Laurentia, wife to Faustulus, who nursed
Romulus and Remus, when exposed by command of Amulius King of the Latins.
Lascivious ( lascivus) wanton in behavior, dishonest, lecherous, womanish.
Lavolta ( Ital.) a Dance so called. Laodamia, a daughter to Bellerothon, she
brought forth Sarpedon (King of Lycia) to Jupiter, and was shot with her own
arrows by Diana. Laodamia, Daughter of Acastus, desiring to see the Ghost of
her Husband Pro^esilaus. (slain by Hector) died in his arms. Larestan, a
Province (bearing the fairest Dates, Oranges and Pomgranates) in Persia. Lara,
- runda, one of the Naides, on whom Mercury (instead of carrying her to Hell
for revealing to June the Love of Jupiter to Juturna) began two twins called
Lares Penates the houshold-gods. Poet-Laureate, is he, who (as principal Poet
in his Country) was wont to be crowned with a Garland of Laurel. Leander, a
young man af Abydos, who was wont (in the night) to swim over the Helespont, to
Hero (one of Venus's Nuns) at Sestos, till at lengh he was drowned. Lechnus an
Arcadian spring good against abortions. Leda, being deceived by Jupiter in the
form of a Swan, she brought forth two Eggs, whereof one produced Pollux and
Helena, the other Castor and Clytemnestra. Leman, o. ( q. lead-man, or rather
L'Annant-te, f.) a Sweetheart or Lover (He or She) but vulgarly, the Concubine
of a Priest or married Man. Leucothoe, turned into a Frankincense-tree by
Apollo, who had gotten her with Child, for which she was buried alive by her
Father Orchamus King of Babylon. Libethrides, the Muses. Lilith, was held by
the Jews to be a kind of she-Devil, that killed Children, Glossae Ta^^. in
Nidda. fol. 24. b. Lucretia Marinella, an Italian Lady, who wrote a Poem of the
Dignity and Pre-eminence of Women. Lozenge, ( French) a little square Cake of
preserved flower herbs, etc. Lucina, Juno and Diana, so called because they
ruled the travel of Women, and helped them in that business. Lupercal, (Lat.) a
place dedicated to the god Pan, from Lupa; because there a she-Wolf nourished
Romulus and Remus. So the Sacrifices and Plays dedicated to Pan were called
Lupercalia or supercal Sacrifices, and the Priest of Pan (Luperci) who on the
day of their Sacrifices fices ran up and down the City naked, and stroak'd the
hands and bellies of Women great with Child with a Goats-skin, thereby to
signify both fruitfulness and easy Deliverance. Rider. Lotis, the Daughter of
Neptune, who flying Priapus, (to save her Chastity) was turned into a
Lote-tree. Love-days, whereon Arbitrements were made, and Controversies (among
Neighbors) determined. Love-apple, a Spanish root of a Color near Violet.
Louting, ( q. saluting) honoring. Lua Matter, the ancient Goddess of
Lustrations, or purgings. Lucrece, retia, being ravished by Sextus the Son of
Tarquinius Superbus, caused the Banishment of him (and Kingly Government) from
Rome. Lineae Finales, certain Wrinkles in the Forehead, whereby many things
are vainly foretold. Long-Meg's Daughters, seventy seven stones erected round
about. Long-Meg, a stone fifteen foot high, near Salkela in Cumberland
Lothebrook, ( q. Leatherbreech) a Dane, whose Daughters were so skilled in
needlework, that the Danes bare a Raven of their working, as an invincible
Ensign. Lues Venerea, Morbus Gallicus, the French Pox is a malignant and
contagious Distemper, communicated from one to another by Coition, or other
impure Contact, proceeding from virulent Matter and accompanied with the
Falling of the Hair, Spots, Swellings, Ulcers, Pains, and many other direful
Symptoms. Lycomedes, King of the Island Scyrus, among whose Daughters Achilles
lived in Woman's apparel, to keep himself from the Trojan Wars. Lycus, a King of
Baeotia, who married Antiope, and put her away when gotten with Child by
Jupiter in form of a Satyr. Lydia, a Woman's Name from the Country, Lydia
Moeonia, a Kingdom of Asia the less. Lymphatick. Distracted, l. by seeing (as
it were) a Nymph in the ^^^er. Lysidice Daughter of Pel^^s, M^^her of Alemena,
and Grandmother of Hercules. Lilly, the Rose of Juno, a speciou^ flower.
Limning, a kind of Painting in watercolors.
M.
MAbella, i. my fair Maid-en. Macaria, (...), i.e. bea^^, b^essed. Macrobia,
long-lif'd. Magdalene, Luke 8.2. in the Syriack it is (...) Magdeletha, i.
magnified. Marcella, dim. a Marca. Marca, Martial or Warlike. Margaret, from
(...), i. a Pearl, or precious Stone socalled, found (as some write) in the
Belly of a little Shell- fish. Margery, from the Herb called Marjoram. Mary, in
the Hebrew (...) Miriam, Exodus 15.33 Mat. 1.18. some make it the Sea of
bitterness, of (...) Mar bitterness, and (...) Jam, the Sea. Maud, i. Noble or
Honorable, Lady of the Maids. Maudlin, see Magdalin. Medea, i. Counsel.
Mehetabel, (...) Genesis 36. ver. 39. as if it were (...) Mehtcb-el, i. how good
(is) God. Melicent, i. sweet Honey, Fr. Meraud, perhaps by Contraction from the
precious E meraud stone. Milchah, (...) Genesis 11.29. as it were (...) Malchah.
i. a Queen. Modesta, i. Modest or Temperate. Mickerel, a Pandor or Procurer.
Mabel, Mabilia, (q. amabilis, l. lovely, or Mabelie, f. My fair one) a Woman's
name. Macarons (Fr.) little Frirer-like Buns, or thick Lozenges compounded of
Sugar, Almonds, Rose Water, and Musk, pounded tog^her and baked which a gentle
fire. Also the Italian Macaroni, lumps or gobbers of boiled paste, served up in
butter, and strewed over with Spice, and grated cheese; a common dish in Italy.
Maturnia a Roman Goddess who overawed young Brides, and kept them from gadding
abroad, or giving their Bridegrooms the slip on the Wedding-night. Marcella an
illustrious Lady, Daughter of Albion, she was brought up under St. Jerome, and
faithfully instructed by him in the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion; and
being a Wife only of seven Months, she afterward led a Contemplative Life in
Widdowhood, and never would be persuaded to Marry. Marcelina a beautiful, but
lewd Lady; she in the time of Pope Avecetus embraced the Doctrine of the
Gnostick Heresy, and drew many of the Orthodox to follow it, that they might
keep in favor with her. Marcelin Sister to St. Ambrose, she took the Veil of
Virginity from Pope Liberius, and lived a virtuous Life in a Monastery.
Margaret and Valois, Duchess of Alanson, etc. She was first Married to the
Duke of Alancon, and afterward to Albert K. of Navarry, and of her descended
Henry the IVth. of France Margaret Countess of Holland; this Lady upbraiding a
poor Woman that came to ask an Alms, because she had two Twins in her Arms,
saying, such a thing could not be, unless she had lain with two several Men;
the Woman upon this prayed the Counsels might have as many Children, as there
were days in the Year at one Birth, to convince her of her Error; which
accordingly sell out in 1276. there remaining to this day an Epitaph in the
Abbey of the Bernardines, half a League from the Hague, where she and her
Children lie buried, that expressly mentions it. Margaret Duchess of Parma
Florence and Plaisance, Governess of the Low Countries, she was a Lady of
admirable Wit and Beauty, she was Married first to Octavius Farnese, Pope Paul
the Thirds Nephew, and afterward to Alexander Fernose Duke of Florence; she had
a Masculine Courage, and delighted more in manly Actions, than in those more
proper to her Sex, and managed the Government in her Charge with great
Prudence. Macareus, the Son of Ae^clus, who got his Sister Conace with Child;
whereupon her Father fe^t her a Sword with which she killed her self. Marcaria
Daughter to Hercules, who for the Safety of her Country devoted her self to
Death, by being Sacrificed to appease the anger of the Gods, for the
Preservation of whose Memory the Athenians in generous Gratitude, because she
had freely offered her Life to prevent their falling into the hands of their
Enemies, built her a stately Monument, which they adorned with Garlands of
Flowers, to show she died a Virgin, Ma, one that was entrusted by Jupiter with
the Education of Bacchus: Rea the Goddess was likewise called Ma, and went
under that Name among the Lydians, who usually sacrificed to her a Bull, at the
Altar erected to the Honor of her. Magdalen Sister to Laz^^us, and Martha to
her; to whom our Blessed Savior showed himself after his Resurrection, before
he appeared to the Disciples. Magdalen, Daughter to Francis the first of
France, and Married to James the fifth of Scotland; she was a Lady of admirable
Virtue and Beauty, but she enjoyed not long her Marriage, dying seven Months
after she Landed in Scotland. Mahaud Countess of Damartin and Balonia; she was
Married to Philip of France, Son to Philip the August, and in his Lifetime to
Alphonsus King of Portugal, the Third of that name. Mamea ( Julia) Mother to
Alexander Severus the Emperor; she governed the Empire whilst her Son was
Emperor, having an entire Ascendant over him; she held a Conference with
Origin, and did diverse good Offices to the Christians, but her Cruelty and
Covetousness at last caused the Death of her self and her Son, by an
Insurrection of the Soldiery. Mandane Daughter to Astiages; she dreamed her
own water overflowed the Face of the Earth, and out of her Bosom came a Vine
that overspread it, after that she was Married to Cambyses the Persian King,
and brought forth the great Cyrus, who won the Babyloian Kingdom and many other
Countries. Mariamne the Virtuous and beautiful Queen of Herod, the great King
of Juda; she was of the Royal Blood of the Asmonaean Family, and though in her
Right he gained the Crown, yet at the Instigation of his Sister, and other
Conspirators against her Life, he caused her to be publicly beheaded, after
which he never enjoyed himself. Morosia a beautiful Lady of Phoenitia. Martia
Wife to Cato Vticensis, he after she had born him Children, gave her to
Hortensius, that he might have an Heir to his Family by her, but he dying she
returned again to Cato, and was a second time married to him, about the time
the Civil War broke out between Pompey and Caesar. Morosia a Roman Lady very
beautiful, which gained her such an Ascendant over the chief of the Roman
Clergy, that she made and unmade Popes at her Pleasure. Martha Sister to
Lazarus and Mary Magdalen, said among other Christians, to be put into a Boat,
and turned out to Sea, but by Providence the Boat arrived at Marseilles in
France, where she lived and died a Saint. Martina Wife to Heraclius the
emperor; she poisoned her Husbands Sons by a former Wife, to make way for
Heracleo (who was her Son by Heraclius) to the Throne but er'e two years were
expired the Senate adjudged her to have her Tongue cut out, and her Sons Nose
to be cut off, least the one by Eloquence, and the other by Beauty, should move
the People to compassionate them, and afterward being banished to Cappadocia,
they died in Exile. Mary the Blessed Virgin, Mother of our Savior according to
the flesh. Mary of Aragon, Wife of Otho the third, Emperor, being a Woman of
insatiable Lust, and causing many Mischiefs in the Empire; she at last was
Sentenced and burnt alive. Mary Q. of France, Daughter to Francis, d' Medicis
great Duke of Tuscany, Married to Henry the Fourth of France, after the Divorce
between him and Margaret d' Valois Sister to his Predecessor. Mary d' Guise
Daughter to Claude the first Duke of Lorrain; she was Married to Lewis Duke of
Longueville, and afterward to James the first King of Scotland. Mary Queen of
England, Daughter to Henry the Eighth, Marred to Philip of Spain; she was a
great Persecutor of the Protestants, and caused many of them to perish in the
Flames, by Tortures, Imprisonment, etc. She died Childless of a burning Fever,
or as it was then called the Sweating Sickness, November, 17th 1558. and was
succeeded by Elizabeth, Second Daughter to Henry the 8th, who abolished Popery,
and restored Protestantism. Mary Queen of Scots, Daughter to James the fifth,
promised in Marriage to Edward the Sixth of England, but the Scotch Nobility
after the Death of Henry the Eighth breaking their word, and sending her
privately to France, she was Married to the Dauphin, who soon after dying, and
she returning to Scotland, she Married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, and Duke of
Rothsay, by whom she had King James the Sixth, but he being murdered, viz.
blown up by a Train of Powder laid under his House, great troubles arose, which
forced her to fly for England, where she was unhappily put to Death being
beheaded at Fotheringay Castle upon suggested Fears and Jealousies.

Mathide Daughter to Bonijacius Marquess of Tuscany; she succeeding her Father,
incited thereto by the Pope, warred upon Henry the Fourth Emperor, and so
devoted she was to the Roman See, that she bestowed all her Hereditary Lands
upon it; she was a Woman of great Courage, and died at the Age of 76. Anno.
1115. Maud, she was Daughter to Henry the First of England, who Married her to
Henry the Fourth Emperor of Germany; but he dying and leaving no Issue by her,
she returned again to England, and afterward Married Geoffery Plantagenet Earl
of Anjou, by whom she had a Son, who after long Wars and contending for the
Crown of England succeeded King Stephen, by the Style of Henry the Second.
Mavia Queen of the Saracens, she Conquered or spoiled Palestius and Arabia, in
the time of the Emperor Valens, but being converted to the Christian Religion,
she made a Peace with him, and Assisted him with a powerful Army against the
Goths, that had broken into Italy, and other parts of the Empire. Maximilia,
she was Disciple to Montanus the Herenick, and kept him Company in an obscene
manner; she at lenght joined to her Pri^cilla who made it their business to
seduce and draw others into the Error, using their Beauties as a Snare for the
men, and by their Riches and soft deluding Tongues they enticed the weaker Sex;
but at last she and Montanus falling out killed each other. Meditriva a Pagan
Goddess whom the Ancients concluded to take care of Physic, and it is Operation
in the Bodies of Men and Women; and at her Festivals they mixed Old and new
Wine which they drank moderately by way of Cordial or Physic. Medusa one of
the Gorgons, with whom Neptune fell in Love, till Minerva turned her hair into
Snakes, and her Head being cut off by Perseus Minerva, placed it in her shield,
and whatever living Creature looked on it, was turned into a Stone. Magera, one
of the Furies, Daughter of the Night, and Acheron, she instilled Madness into
the minds of People. Melania Wife to Pinienus Son to Severus, a noble Man of
Rome; the Destruction of that City being revealed to her two years before
Alaric laid it waste, she removed with her Family to Carthage, and was there
Instructed by St. Augustine, then lived a Monastic Life, after she had
persuaded many to turn Christians. Melenia, a Roman Lady Daughter to
Mercelinus; she burying her Husband when she was very young, in sorrow forsook
all worldly Pleasures, and went a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, carrying one of her
Children with her; she confronted the Arrians, and undeceived many of their
Errors, when building a Monastery at Jerusalem, she dwelt Twenty five years in
it, and died in that City. Melissa, she was Daughter to Melissus King of Creet,
said to Nurse Jupiter, and bring him up with Goats Milk. Melpomene one of the
Nine Muses. Mellona, a Goddess, who had the care over Bees, that they should
not fly away in their swarming time. Merrades, Bacchinalians, or Women that
attended on Baschuses's Drunken-Feasts or Revels, who did much mischief in
their Wine. Mean a Goddess worshipped by the Roman Women, for the better
ordering their Bodies in their monthly Purgations. Meplictis, the Goddess of
Pools and muddy Lakes. Merope, one of the Seven Pleiades, Daughter to Atlas,
and Pleione, said to be married to Sysiphus. Messalina, Wife to the Emperor
Claudius, who not content to keep Gallants in the Court to satisfy her Lust
(if such a thing could be done) but in her Husbands Absence she publicly
married C. Silius, a handsome Roman Knight, for which the Emperor caused her to
be beheaded Metra, she was Daughter to Ercysichthon, a Lord of Thessaly, who to
save her Fathers Life, who was ready to Famish, prostituted her self for Food
to sustain his Life. Minerva, styled the Goddess of Arts and Wisdom, said to be
conceived of the Brain of Jove, delivered thence by Vulcan, who cleaving his
Skull, this Goddess sprung out in bright Armor; she is often taken for Pallas,
who in some Cases is styled Minerva. Miroselde a poor Weavers Daughter, of whom
King Charibert was so Enamoured, that upon her refusing to comply to be his
Concubine, he married her, and after her Death he married her Sister, for which
he was Excommunicated by St. Germain. Mirrah Daughter to Cyni^as King of the
Cipriots; she fell so desperately in Love with her Father, that making him
drink Wine she lay with him, but the matter being discovered by her being with
Child, she fled into Arabia, and brought forth Adodonis, but she dying of that
Travel, Venus turned her into a Mirrh-Tree, and put Adonis to Nurse to Nymph
Herclea; when being grown up and proving very Comely, Venus fell in Love with
him, and often enjoyed him in the Idalian Groves; but at last contrary to her
persuasions undertaking to hunt a wild Boar he was slain by the furious Beast,
and greatly lamented of the Goddess, who turned him into an Enemy. Molza
Tarquinia, a Lady of Modena, very Learned and Skilful in the Languages, she
much haunted the tops of Parnassus, and bathed often in the River Helicon* to
them the invention of Songs and Sciences are attributed, they are called, viz.
Clio, Urania, Calliope, Vterpt, Erato, Thalia, Melpomene, Terphiscare and
Polylymnia; they are held by some to be the Daughters of Coelum and the Earth.
Mirriam, or Mary, Sister to Moses, she was smitten with Leprosy, because she
and Aaron murmured against him, and shut him out of the Camp; but being a
Prophetess, all the People stayed till her days of cleansing were fulfilled,
and she again received into the Congregation, Aarons Punishment was remitted
upon Moses praying for him. Malhatun the fair Wife of Othoman the first Founder
of the Turkish Empire, who falling out about the Grecian Governor of Eskichisar
by way of Rival-ship during his Courting her, was the first Motive of taking up
Arms, which has since proved fatal to Christendom, he being before only the
Master of a few Herdsmen. Monfort Bertard, she was Wife to Hugh Earl of Anjou;
afterward Philip the first of France fell in Love with her, and Divorced his
Wife Birthe to Marry her, for which the Pope Excommunicated him, but he was
absolved by the Council held at Clermont, Anno 1104. Montenai Georgette, a
beautiful Lady of Honor to the Queen of Navarr; she Composed a Book of Emblems
and Mottoes, which she presented to the Queen, and gained great Applause for
her Learning and Ingenuity. Morel Julian, a very learned Lady; she is said to
have spoke fourteen Languages, and to be very well skilled in Philosophy when
very young, but at last turned Nun, and lived a very strict religious Life.
Murria a Goddess whose Statue was set up in Rome, covered with Dust and Moss,
by reason she was held to preside over idle Lazy Persons, to show that of
Sloth and Idlenese comes nothing that is good: her Temple was at the Foot of
Mount Avetine. Muses they were Nine, reputed to be the Daughters of Jupiter.
Manners, Directions about them. It would be unnecessary to advise (what is a
common document for Children) That when you answer Yes or No, you must always
add Madam or Sir, etc. It is obvious also, that when you answer no in
contradiction to some person of quality, you must not say bluntly or
positively, no, but by way of Circumlocution. You will pardon me Sir. You will
excuse me, Madam, if I presume to say so and so. -- It is unmannerly to make
comparison with the Person to whom you are speaking, to discover the
imperfection of another, as to say, I know such a Man very well, I have seen
him drunk; he is thick Shouldered or grey-headed like you. Or to tell a Lady,
such a Person is of no good reputation, I know her well, she is fat and
swarthy, like your Ladyship. -- It is unhansome likewise (as many do) when a
thing is spoken obligingly to you, to say rudely, You are mistaken, Sir, it is
not so. You must rather turn the Phrase, and say, Sir, Your favor amaezes me,
I have done nothing but my Duty. -- A Person pretending to the least competency
of discretion, would Betray himself very much to hedge in a discourse of his
Wife, his Children, or Relations, before strange Company. If occasion be
offered, he may speak of them, but it must be modestly and not long. -- When a
Woman makes mention of her Husband, she may use his name with the addition of
Monsieu^ unless his condition be very inferior: But if the Company before whom
she speaks be much above his Quality, she is to say only my Husband. -- It is
not civil when a Person of Quality hesitates or stops in his discourse, for you
to strike in, though with pretense of helping his memory; as if he were telling
us how Caesar defeated Pompey at the Battle of of of, you must not say
Pharsalia, it is better to attend till he recollects, or asks you himself. -- It
is likewise indecent, whilst you are speaking, to address your self often to
one person, in these or such like words: You understand me, Sir; am I
intelligible? I know not whether I explain my self,etc. this arguing a
suspicion of his Intellect, and is by all means to be avoided. -- It is not
becoming coming a person of quality, when in the Company of Ladies, to handle
them roughly, to put his hand in their necks, or their bosoms: to kiss them by
surprise; to pull off their Hoods; to snatch away their Handkerchiefs; to rob
them of their Ribbands, and put them into his Hat; to force their Letters or
Books from them; to look into their Papers etc. You must be very familiar to
use them at that rate: And unless you be so, nothing can be more indecent, or
render you more odious. -- When a Jewel or other Curiosity is shown in Company,
it is very ill breeding to clap your hands upon it first. -- For thereby many
People discover the weakness of their judgments, that they have not been used
to Curiosities, and know not how to value them right. -- And here it is not
improper to advertise, that you must always pull off your Glove, and k^ss your
hand, when you take from, or present any thing to a person of Quality, or when
you return any thing to them: But if he desires you to reach such a thing, you
must do it presently without making him attend, and having presented it, not
forget to kiss your hand. -- It Is rude likewise when a man is reading, or
writing a Letter, to peep over his shoulder, or to open any Papers that you
find upon the Table of a person of Quality. -- When a new Person comes into a
room, and any of the Company rises to meet or salute him, though the Person so
entering be your Interior, it will be but civil in you to rise up too and
salute him. If a Messenger comes in to speak with you, though it be but a
Footman, yet coming from a Person to whom you are obliged to pay respect, you
are to rise from your seat, and receive his Message standing, and uncovered. --
In Assemblies upon any public Ceremony, you must have respect principally to
two sorts of people, the outhors of the solemnity, and the persons invited. --
The Authors of the Ceremony (if the action be serious) are always to precede,
though perhaps their condition be Inferior. For Example, at a Wedding, the
Bride, Bridegroom, their Relations, and the Ecclesiastical Officers may
challenge that privilege, and it is but civil to allow it, though they be much
beneath you. If at a Christning, the Midwife, the Godfather, and Godmother, and
Child, and all that are essential to the Ceremony, go before. At a Funeral, the
Children and Relations of the defunct have the same. But some will of
Complement ask what we are to say to these great Lords and Ladies in our
V^^^ts; whether any thing or nothing? If there be design in our Visit, then we
may enlarge, but if our visit be only to show our selves, and let his Lordship
know we are alive, we need do no more. The Story told in merriment of a
Courtier (who making a visit to a Noble Man upon that score only, and accosting
him thus, I am come to wait upon your Lordship only to pay my respects, was
answered thus bluntly by the Lord, Do it then and be gone.) -- There are
several ways by which we do usually insinuate our Compassion, either by
Congratulation, which is a civil intimation of the joy we conceive at some good
fortune that has befallen him: Or Condolency, which is a signification of our
sorrow and regret for his affliction or misfortune: Or Thanks for some favor
received: Or Protestation of service, respect, submission, obedience, fidelity,
etc. Or Complaint, in which Case, there is no need of Precepts: It is natural
language of the heart, and we may let her alone to express her self: If she be
sincere, she will suggest nothing but what shall please and persuade too, for
that is an infallible effect of verity. -- And indeed whatever is studied and
elaborate, does rather lessen and question our affection than evince it: -- So
that those Persons are infinitely mistaken who make all their Complements with
lostly and hyperbolical Exaggerations, contrary to their own thoughts, and as
destructive to their designs, as they do who make Caesar, and Alexander, and
Scipio, truckle to the first Person they intend to commend for his Bravery: Who
prefer the Beauty of a Lady, before the luster either of the Stars, or the Sun,
and put the poor Snow and Lillies out of Countenance, by a Romantic repetion
of the whiteness of her Hand. -- If it be a Lady of Quality, you cannot address
your self to salute her with respect, unless she vouchsafes to advance, and
tender her Cheek, and in that Case too, you are only to pretend to salute her
by putting your Head to her Hoods. -- If there be other Ladies in the Room, and
they of equal condition, and independent upon the Lady you saluted, you may
salute them too: But if they be inferior, and depending in any wise, you are
obliged to forbear. -- W^^^ we are to observe at the Table: -- If a Person of
quality, detains you at Dinner, it is not civil to wash with him, but by his
express Command! -- Whilst Grace is saying, it is decent to stand up; when it is
said, you are to attend till you be placed. -- When you are at the Table, you
must sit upright, and not loll upon your Elbows You must not by any awkward
gesture show any signs that you are hungry, nor fix your Eyes upon the meat, as
if you would devour all. -- Whoever Carves, you must be cautious of offering
your Plate first, you must rather stay till it comes to your turn, and excuse
your self if you observe any body passed by, of more quality than your self; If
you be pressed to receive it, you are to tender it to those persons your self,
only you are not to press it upon the person that offers it to you, if it be
either the Master or Mistress especialy. -- No man is to be pressed to drink,
for excess of Wine does no body good; others are disordered with a little;
others are obliged to sobriety by their Characters and Functions, as the
Clergy, Magistrates, etc. and to see either of those over-taken, would be a
very ill spectacle. -- It is not civil to call for any thing you like,
especially if it be a dainty; nor is it better, when you are offered your
choice of things that are good, to lay hands upon the best: you must rather
answer, which (...) please. -- It Is not manners as soon as you are set at the
Table bawl out, I eat none of this, I (...) none of that; I care for no Rabi^;
I love nothing that tastes of Pepper, Nutmeg, Onyons, etc -- How hungry soever
you be, it is indecent to eat hastily or ravenously, as if you would choke your
self. -- if you happen to burn your Mouth, you must endure it if possible, If
not you must convey what you have in your Mouth privately upon your Plate, and
give it away to the Footman: For though Civility obliges you to be neat, there
is no necessity you should burn out your Guts. -- If your Fingers, Knife, or
Fork be greasy, you must never wipe them upon the Cloth, or Bread, but always
upon your Napkin: And to keep your Fingers clean, it is the best way to eat
with a Fork. -- To blow your Nose publicly at the Table without holding your
Hat or Napkin before your Face, to wipe off the Sweat from your Face with your
Handkerchief, to claw your Head, etc. to belch, hawk, and tear any thing up
from the bottom of your Stomach, are things so intolerably sordid, they are
suffilcient to make a Man vomit to behold them, you must forbear theem
therefore as much as you can, or at least conceal them. -- You must never drink
any persons health to himself, unless it be begun by a third person; and in
that Case, if it be to the Wife or other Relation of a person of quality, you
must do it by her Titles, not thus, My Lord, a good health to your Lady, your
Brother, etc. But, My Lord, a good health to my Lord Marshall, to Monsieur le
Marquis, etc. If a Person of Quality drinks a health to you (especially if it
be your own) you must be uncovered, and bend a little forwards with your Body
over the Table, till he has done; but you must not call to pledge him, unless
he requires it himself. -- But this pulling off the Hat, is not to be used but
to Persons of extraordinary Quality. -- If a Prince or Princess does you the
Honor to dine with you, you must not sit down with him at the Table, but wait
behind his Chair, and be ready your self to give him drink or Plates as he has
occasion -- What we are to observe at a Ball. -- If you be at a Ball, you must
know exactly (if not how to dance) at least the rules observed in dancing,
especially in the place where you are (for in all places the rules are not the
same) and by no means be defective in any of them. -- If you be taken out and
can dance, you cannot refuse it without being thought singular and m^rose. --
If at length, to show their authority, or give themselves diversion, they will
force you to dance, you must not refuse them, for it is better to expose your
self to a little involuntary confusion to render your self Complaisant, than to
be suspected of declining them in contempt. -- Having done your dance, you must
carry that Lady back to her place, and take out another; observing when you are
taken out again, to challenge the Lady, that you took out first, if it be the
Custom of the place. -- If the King or Queen dances, all the Company is to
stand, and be uncovered, unless those whose function exempts them. -- The
Civility to be observed by a Superior to an Inferior. -- Order would have
conducted us to say something in this place of Civility due from a Superior to
an Inferior; but because it would be to prescribe Laws to those who should
give them, we shall wave it. -- Yet I shall presume to advertise, That if they
be not so wise as to consider, that the poorest and most Inferior Creatures
are Men as well as they. -- And as having this privilege above them, that to
sanctify Poverty Christ made choice of that condition before theirs; yet for
their own proper interest they are obliged to be good in Example to their
Servants, and, civil to others who are not of their dependence. And indeed what
a monstrous thing it is to see a Nobleman without Civility! Every body shuns
him, every body despises him, so that he had as good be out of the World (...)
be beloved by no body. And this is not to be admired; for Civility being the
effect of modesty, modesty of humility, and humility being a true mark of
greatness of the mind, and indeed the true greatness, it is that which obliges,
which gains upon the affections, and makes a Man beloved wherever he comes. --
Railing or Bantering. -- Because, according to the humor of this Age, our
Conversation runs much upon Railery, it will not be amiss to let you know that
there are two sorts of Raileries. -- R^ilery is naturally a pleasant and witty
discourse, expressing something agreeable, without offense to any Man's Person
or Reputation. -- But because by abuse the signification of the word is much
enlarged, there is another sort of Railery, of which most People make use to
render any vice or infirmity ridiculous or contemptible, either by manifest but
ingenious derision. -- The art is, to use Railing handsomely, for we must not
only have a good fancy, and a pleasant Wit, but our Wit must be present and
^ust, to give it a proper application. In effect this railery consists not in
fooling, jesting, or provoking laughter by little puns or conceits, abstracted
from mean and pitiful subjects, nor from old obsolete Proverbs, long since laid
aside upon very good reason: but we are to think beforehand what we are to say,
and when we do speak, to bring forth something that is new, smart, or sublime,
answerable to the quality of the Person to whom we speak, and not impertinent
to our subject, -- Imitate not the rashness and vanity of some who will rather
lose their friend than their jest: and common sense will teach us, that common
applause is no competent recompense for the loss of a Friend. -- To avoid
therefore the inconvenience of being offensive in discourse, the following
directions are to be observed. -- First, We are not (how pertinently soever
they may come in) to make any personal raillery that may re^^ect particularly
upon any Man living, or but lately dead, because they may be said to be still
alive in the esteem or memory of their Friends. -- Secondly, we must
distinguish voluntary and natural defects: It would be rude and unbecomeing to
railly upon a Man for being Blind or Lame. -- Again, we must not be immodest in
our raillery, touching upon things that ought to be concealed, though it be
wrapped up in never such clean Linen. -- Another thing with all accuracy to be
eschew'd is playing upon the infirmities or misfortunes of any Man; For a
generous mind will never insult upon the afflictions of another. It is baseness
in respect of the World, and it is impious in respect of God. -- Great Caution
is to be taken how we reflect upon any man's Religion, Reputation, or Infirmity.
-- In other things we may take our Liberty, that is to say, not transgressing
the Rules of Modesty, which ought to be an inseparable Companion of all our
actions and words. -- For people are generally so far from taking snuff at what
is spoken freely and wittily, without reflection, that every Man is pleased:
Innocent gayety being almost an infallible mark of a good Nature. Moscobian
Women, their Nature, with an Account of a contrary Temper. I have read of a
Man, who the more he labored to Soveraignize over his Wife, the quarrel ever
became more implacable; for she ever ended that days conflict with this
peremptory close: Trust me, Husband, this will not do it. At last, as later
Considerations prove ever wisest, he recollected himself: Beginning to
expostulate the cause with himself in this manner. How long shall I entangle my
self in this intricate Maze of endless miseries? To what purpose is it, that I
contest with my own Flesh? Raise a Pad in the straw, and awake a sleeping Lion?
It may be her Disposition is more generously tempered, than to be thus haled.
Turn then the Scale; and let her enjoy the Freedom of her self. This will
relish better to any well conditioned Nature, than ever to be contending for
Mastery: and make the whole Country Ring with our Folly. Upon which
Resolution, they closed together in such an equal Concord and Harmony of their
Minds, as they were never known to be angry both together: The one giving way
to the others Passion with such Sobriety and Discretion, as they never
afterward needed any neighbourly Mediation. This I have the longer insisted
on, because I am not Ignorant how many furly and rough Dispositions do abuse by
their harshness the easy and well-tempered Natures of their unhappy Consorts.
Indeed, were all Women of that servile Condition, whereof the Ingenious
Barcley, in his Mirror of Minds, reports those Women to be of, who cannot be
persuaded that their Husbands love them, unless they beat them: Correction then
would be found the only Introduction to Affection: But these Nations are more
Civil, and our Womanish Spirits more Virile, to endure such affronts. It is
worthy our Observation, to relate what happened to one Jordan, in his Marrying
in those parts; being a Native German, and one who had accompanied Barcley in
his Travails. He reports it thus, being in those parts, one Jordan, a German,
and who had kept me Company in my Travails, fell in Love with a Woman there,
and Married her: Demeaning himself to her as became a loving and respectful
Husband; but the m^re she was tendered by him, the more she seemed to be
discontented with him. No dalliance, nor all the Tokens of Love or Affection
that he could show to her, could either win or wean her from that discontented
Humor, to which his too much kindness had brought her. At last, seeing that
the more he labored to Content her, the less she seemed to be pleased; he
takes her aside one day demanding of her the Reason of her distaste? O SIr *
says she! how should I be wel^ pleased, when you show no Argument of Love
toward me? Not of Love, r^plied he! what more Signs of respect can I show you,
than these I already do? I am sure you want nothing. Yes, Husband said she, I
want Correction? And if you did truly Love me, you would beat me, as you see
other Husbands in these parts use their Wives: for I must freely tell you, for
all your Professions of Love and Respect toward me, till you begin to beat me,
I shall never be persuaded that you Love me. This could not choose but beget
Admiration in him: yet, least he should lose his Wifes good Opinion, at last he
began to follow the Country- fashion, and to give her such Correction, as
might sufficiently persuade her of his Affection. Although, in the end, his
disciplinary Love grew to be too bitter: For he brake her Neck before he left
her. But no modest care can endure any such break-neck-Love: Wives are not to
be made Slaves but Companions. And as their Constitutions are Soft and
Delicate; so should their usage be mildly tempered and affectionate. Mumpers
are both Male and Female, a Gent^^ler so^t of Beggars, for they scorn to beg
for Food but Money or Clothes, the Money they lay out to pamper the Gut, and the
Clothes they fell to reimburse the Pocke^. The Male Mumper in the times of the
late Usurpation, was clothed in an old torn Cassock begirt with a girdle, with
a black Cap, and a white one peeping out underneath; with a formal and studied
Countenance he steals up to a Gentleman, and whispers him softly in the ear,
that he is a Poor Sequestered Parson, that he has four small Children with a
sick Wife, all ready to perish. Sometimes he appeared in the habit of some
decayed Gentleman, and then he pretends what a great sufferer he that been for
his Majesty, but lately come out of Gaol, and not a Penny to help himself.
Sometimes he appears with an Apron before him, and a Cap on his Head, and begs
in the Nature of a Broken Tradesman, who having been a long time sick, has
spent all his remaining Stock, and so weak he cannot work. The Female Mumpers,
with a torn black Hood and Scarf, will go confidently to an House, and knock at
the Door, demanding to speak with the Mistress of the House, where after an
Apology made for her boldness, she acquaints her how urgent her necessity is;
having an Husband very sick, with two small Children, ready to give up the
Ghost; that she was born a Gentlewoman, but Marrying against her Friends
Consent, she was by them thrown off and disowned, and so by her Husbands
sickness reduced to this miserable Condition. Sometimes she appears as if big
with Child, and so begs Clothes or Linen to make Clouts: She is very busy in
the Palace-yard in Term-time; but if she be young, tolerably handsome, and she
find Charity grow cold, she will endeavor to repair her pretended misfortune
by nightwalking. There is yet one Gent^eler sort of Mumpers than any yet named,
of which Qualification I never knew but two; these had their Horses, and agreed
between themselves as to their particular tidings. Their business was to
enquire out among Booksellers small Treatises not long Printed, yet ^^saleable,
of which they would buy a quantity of a sort for waste Paper, or little more
and having drawn up or caused to be drawn, a general Epistle Dedicatory, they
left space at Top to insert the Name and Dignities of the Person they intended
to Dedicate the Book unto, carrying Letters and Ink with them, which they
speedily did Print, and tolerably enough for that purpose; the Epistle was
Printed before, so that they need add nothing but the Name and Dignities. I
have heard them confess they had from the meanest Donor, thrice the value of
what the Book was sold for at first, and most commonly fix-fold. Their
traveling Time was in the Summer, wherein they got so much to keep them drunk
all the Winter; but they being deceased, I believe the Trade died with them.
Matches unequally made. It Is the principal Study of all Persons to pass their
time with most ease, and to avert as much as possible the Miseries which sin
has subjected us to. This occasions a continual Inequietude in Men, and makes
their Lives so uneasy, that nothing can satisfy them but the prospect of
those flattering Joys which hope presents to their longing Eyes. When a
thinking Man seriously reflects on his past Actions, he finds nothing but vain
^^oleries, and would sooner choose any sort of Life than have 'em played over
once more. For this Reason we can never be at rest; for we are always
contriving and inventing, expecting and desiring better things than we possess.
And for this it is that all men pursue after some sort of Pleasures or other;
some the delights of the Sense, others Wealth and Riches, others Books and
Knowledge; others the Airy Charms of Honor, and Fame, etc. All which depend
upon the Natural Temper or Education. But the surest way to gain quiet in this
World* is some honest Employment suitable to our Quality, attended with an
unstained Reputation. And I do not Question, but I may bring in Marriage for a
large share, since of all other Blessings it seems to be the most durable; yet
I prefer a single to a Married Life, provided it be attended with an unspotted
Chastity, since it is divested of all the unhappy Cares of this World, and
resembles the Life of Angels. But these are Blessings, God only bestows on a
few, and therefore a single Life is generally so far from being good, that it is
a dangerous Trap for our Virtue. If the great Blessing of Matrimony does so
frequently frustrate men's Expectation, it is because the principal ends of it
are pe^ve^ted; and if it be rashly gone about, it is no wonder if it end
foolishly and desperately. Since then this is so weighty a State, it will be
the highest fo^ly to venture upon it without Consideration. But the chief thing
that makes Marriages so unhappy, is the inequality of them. As for Unequal
Marriages, 'twill be very hard to determine any thing that may please all;
there is usually such a vast disagreement between Parents and Children in this
Case* that there is no hopes of ever reconciling them, when perhaps both are to
be blamed. But before I come to particular Matte^s, I premise this, that to
complete a true and happy Marriage, are required (...) In^linations, Hearty
Love, and True Liking, so that they may both be of the same mind* and have one
and the same interest; and to make up this, there must be a suitable agreement
in Ages, Humors, Breeding, R^li^i^n, Families, and (...)* which when they
conc^r, we may expect all the Satisfaction this Wo^ld can afford; but when any
of these are wanting, Marriage but seldom proves comfortable. But particularly
I shall chiefly insist on the^e three sorts. 1. Of old Persons Marrying with
Young 2. O Marrying without F^ie^^^ (...). 3. O^ Marrying without (...) own
Consent, of all which I shall give a brief Idea. To ^ye Old Age and Youth
together, is a thing that may be accounted one of the greatest Extravagancies,
which neither Nature, Justice or the World can justify them in: since nothing
is more ^^natural than to unite brisk and sprightly Youth with dull and
senseless old Age: And there can be no greater br^ach of Justice, than to join
two such different Natures together, as will almost certainly be the
Destruction of each other: And for the World they can expect nothing from them
but S^offs and Laughter; such Marriages look like some very extravagant Farce,
intended only to set all the Spectators into huge ^it of Laughter, and that one
that observes it well, would think they rather designed to make Sport for
others, than to procure any manner of satisfaction for themselves. But to
expose the Folly of this the more obviously, suppose one of either Sex, who
seem to be on the brink of the Grave, yet longing for to be coupled with Youth;
exposed to the Life in all their ^opp^^i^s, as Garb, Add^ess^^* Courtships and
Fruits of it afterward. But to be Graver, such Marriages are undoubtedly as
Unlawful as the^ Unnatural* answering none of the Ends of Matrimony, there
being no more possibility of mutual Society and Comfort than anything else.
Indeed it is a kind of Incest, worse than that of Oedipus, who unwittingly is
said to have married his Mother, but here is one who with his Eyes broad open,
is content to be hobbled with his Great-great-great-great-great Grandmother,
for which he does not deserve so much as the Good Wishes we give a Felon or a
Murderer, God send him a good Deliverance! Athens. The Imprudence and Impiety
of all such as run rashly, or without their Friends Knowledge or Consent, on
Matrimony, is more frequent in our Nation, than in Neighboring Countries: And
though some more care has been taken to prevent it of late years, yet we cannot
expect it will be wholly put a stop to, so long as there are so many
Privileged Places for Marriages. As to such Persons as steal Persons much
above themselves in Fortunes, it is the most ba^e and ingenerous Act in the
World; to Marry purely for Money, seldom fails of causing an unhappy Life. I
would have all high Lookers and Pretenders to great Fortunes to consider, 1.
What a vast piece of Injustice it is to rob a Loving Father of a Daughter, in
which he places so great a part of his Delight, to take his dearest Jewel from
him* and violently to (...) a blooming Sprig, which he has nourished with so
much care and tenderness; what showers of Afflictions fall upon both
afterward! 2. Consider what a high piece of Imprudence it is for a Man so
dangerously to venture himself with a Young Creature, whose fickle Fancy turns
like the Wind, and whose Love quickly may turn into Hatred, which may bring his
Life at her Mercy. Again consider the greatness of the Offense of Marrying
without Friends Consent, from this, that Nature has given to Parents an
extraordinary Power over their Children, making far greater Distinction here
than in any other Persons whatsoever. As Parents Authority is great, so ought
Childrens Obedience to be great too. And as Marriage is the greatest concern,
and that which a Parent takes most care in; so for a Son or a Daughter to be
disobedient, in this we is the greatest piece of Rebellion, as well as
Ingratitude. Next proceed to consider the Female Sex: And as they are of a more
soft and flexible Disposition than the Male, they are more adapted to
Obedience: And that Obedience and Compliance in them seems more convenient and
necessary. This will more easily appear, if we consider the unsteady Nature,
and unsatisfied Disposition, especially of the Female Sex, whose Reasons are
generally biased by their Humors, and not strong enough to search into those
things that are best for a Married Life: again if we consider the Modishness of
the generality of Young Ladies; when we consider many of their Tempers, a
Person that would gain them, needs only fine Clothes* an Impert^nent Tongue
overlaid with Bombastick words, and a Maggotish Noddle well stuffed with
Impudence. Of such Persons Dancing-Masters, and Singing-Masters have frequently
made a Prey. The chief Spring, that moves so many young Men's Affections, is
Beauty; but this is so far-from procuring their Imaginary Consent, that it many
times is the primary Cause of the greatest Miseries that befall a Married Life.
Again consid^r Beauty in it self, and see the Infinite Folly of those that
expect Satisfaction from thence. There are other things, which may attract Men's
Affections, and cause them to transgress the Duty they owe to their Parents; as
good Nature, a sine Carriage, a quick Wit, and a sweet Voice. Yet when all
these meet together in one Woman, they are many times Misfortunes rather than
Advantages, and Plagues rather than Blessings. I doubt this will not meet with
^ kind Reception from Parents, since it is to show the unreasonableness of
their forcing their Children to Marry one they don't Love. This is a
Misfortune, that lights more upon the Heads of great Persons than others, and
more on the Female Sex than on Men. I might show the greatness of this Injury
by several Arguments, I shall only mention one or two. 1. All the Pains and
Cares that a Parent is able to take or perform for a Child in this sad Case,
can never make amends for it, the misfortune being often so great that it is
beyond the Power of Man to relieve or give ease to. 2. For a Parent to show all
the kindness, tenderness and care imaginable toward his Children, from their
very Birth up, and yet by his over-violent Zeal and too eager desire after his
Sons Happiness, by an unlucky blow to ruin him at once beyond all relief, is
most unaccountable. Parents Lives are often like those of Poets, and G^mesters,
who can very rarely arrive to the Pleasure of being cool and at rest, their
b^sie Souls, and overwhelmed desires are continually in flame, which never
^uffers them to have a calm and even Temper. -- It Is their overdoing of things
that commonly ruins their designs, and breaks all their Measures, etc. I cannot
suppose, that any Parents wish their Children the least hurt or injury; but as
I acquit them of this vice, I must needs accuse them of an insufferable Piece
of Folly, when they think to make that Match happy which begins with Hatred and
Loathing. The main and principal cause of this severity in Parents, is Money;
and Covetousness, (says an Ingenious Gentleman) is not so much a Vice (...) of
Madness. That this is at the bottom of all will (...) from hence, that they
will never consider of, nor suffer any thing, th^^ never so estimable and
valuable to stand in Competition with Money. Let me conclude all with a few
Words of Friendly Advise. 1. For old Persons who are above Sixty, not to Marry
at all, but employ their thoughts on another World. 2. For Children, That they
dare not to venture on this Sacred Order of Matrimony without their Parents
Consent; but to have a strict and more than ordinary ca^e to avoid all
Temptations, till they have leave, as they would a most deadly Precipice. But
for the Young Person* that have a larger Power of disposing themselves, twill
be the highest Piece of Folly to Marry one that is much beneath them (except
upon the account of some extraordinary Excellencies.) 3. For Parents, I would
have them seriously to consider the great account they must give at the last
day, for many of their Childrens failings; especially those woeful misfortunes
they have brought upon them by their own means, with the Heinous sins of
Perjury and Treachery; therefore let them dread the thoughts of all such
unhappy Matches. To conclude, I advise every Person, Old or Young, to beware of
Marrying to one of a different Religion: For, whatever other good things attend
a Marriage, this one thing is enough to ruin all. Myrmice, a Maid, who for
contemning Ceres was turned into an Ant Myrrha, Mother of Adonis, who is said
to fly into Arabia, and to be there turned into a Tree of that Name. Maids,
(Laundry) in Great Houses. If you would have the Esteem, Credit and Reputation
of a complete Laundry Maid, you must observe these following Directions. First,
You must take care of all the Linen in the House (except Points and Laces) and
whatever you wash do it quickly, and do not let it lie and stink, and grow
yellow, and so create to your self the trouble of Washing it again before it be
used. Secondly, You must take care that all the Bracks and Ren^s in the Linen
be duly mended. Thirdly, Keep your certain days for Washing of such Rooms as
are appointed you to Wash and keep Clean. Fourtly, You must be sparing and not
lavish and wastful of your Soap, Fire and Candle. Fifthly, Entertain no
Chair-Woman unknown to your Master and Mistress. Sixthly, Be careful that your
Tubs and Coppers, or whatsoever else you make use of, be kept clean, and in
good repair. Seventhly, You must be careful that you rise early every Morning,
but more especially on washing-days. Maids (House) in Great Houses. 1. Your
Principal Office is to make clean the greatest part of the House, and see that
you suffer no Room to lie soul. 2. That you look well to all the stuff, as
Hangings, Chairs, Stools, etc. And see that they be often brushed and the Beds
frequently turned. 3. That you do not mis-place any thing by carrying it out of
the Room to another, for that is the way to have them lost, or you soundly Chid
for not keeping them in their proper places. 4. That you be careful and
diligent to all Strangers, and see that they lack nothing in their Chambers,
which your Mistress or Lady will allow, and that your Close-stools and
Chamber-pots be duly emptied, and kept clean and sweet. 5. That you help the
Laundry-Maid in the Morning on a washing-day. 6. That in the Afternoon you be
ready to help the Waiting Woman or Housekeeper in their preserving and
Distilling. Maids (Scullery) in Great Houses. 1. You must be careful to keep
sweet and clean, the several Rooms which belong to your Charge, as the Kitchen,
Pantry, Wash-house, etc. 2. You must wash and scowre all the Plates and Dishes
that are used in the Kitchen, likewise the Dressers and Cupboards, also all
Kettles, Pots, Pans, Chamber-pots, with all other Iron, Brass, Tin, and Pewter
Materials, that belong to the Chambers and Kitchen. 3. You must wash your own
Linen, keeping your self sweet and clean, re^^mbring always, so soon as you
have made an end of your dirty work, to wash, and dress your self Neatly,
Titely and Cleanly. Now if you be careful and diligent, and cleanly in
performing this place, you will have notice taken of you, and you will be
Advanced ^o a higher and more profitable Employment. Meekness. Meekness may be
ranked with Humility* and both of them are very comely and adorning to Bi^th
and Beauty; commanding Love and Affection from all; but then this Meekness must
be true, and not feigned, for although the Adulterations of Art can represent
in the same Face, Beauty in one Position, and Deformity in another; yet Nature
is more sincere, and never intended a clear and serene Forehead should be the
Frontispi^e to a cloudy and Tempestuous Heart; it is to be wished therefore
that no outward appearance of this kind might take place, unless it be really
internally so; and therefore, those that would be adorned with Meekness, in
which no defect may be found, must look i^^ard, and examine what Symetry is
there held with a fair outside, and narrowly observe, whether any storms of
Passion darken and cloud their Interior Beauty; and use at least an equal
diligence to rescue that as they would to clear their Faces from any stain or
blemish. Meekness is not only recommended to all, as a Christian Virtue; but is
in a more peculiar manner enjoined to Women, as one main accomplishment of
their Sex; and is not only esteemed by Men, but very highly by God himself; his
Holy Word attesting, that a Meek and Quiet Spirit is in his sight of great
Price; and therefore to all that will not enter Dispute with God, and Contest
his Judgment, it must likewise be so; however, though Meekness in it self be no
more than a single entire Virtue; yet it is diversified, according to the
diverse Faculties of the Soul, ove^ which it spreads it is influence; so that
there is a Meekness of the Will, a Meekness of Understanding, and another kind
of the Affections; which must all concur to sum up the Meek and Quiet Spirit.
Meekness then in the first place of the Understanding, consists in a
pliableness to Conviction, being directly opposite to that sullen adherence
which possesses diverse, who Judge of Tene^s not by Conformity to Reason and
Truth, but their Prepossessions, and Tenaciously retained Opinions; only they
or some in whom they Confide, have owned them; but certain, such a Temper is of
all others the most obstructive to Wisdom; this throws them into hazard and
chance, and what they first happen on, they draw and determine that merely upon
the Privileges of it is Precedence: we find, that the Mind that adheres but to
one Opinion, can be guilty but of one Error; but where it is exposed to the
E^luxes of all new Tenants, it may successively entertain an Ocean of
Delusions; and to be thus yielding, is not true Meekness but a Servility of the
Understanding; we must confess, it shows a great weakness of the Mind. It is
therefore of the most important concern, to fortify that part which lies so
easy to assaults, that it may be secure against all Attempts and Insinuations.
Meekness in the second place, is that of the Will, which lies in it is just
Subordination and Submission to the Supreme Authority, which in Divine things
is the Will of God; in natural, those of Mo^al Reason and Right, and in humane
Constitutions the command of Superiors; and so long as by these, the Will
governs it self in their respective Orders, the Meekness required of it is not
transgressed; but Experience attests, that in its Deprivation is an Imperious
Faculty, ready upon every Advantage to cast off that Subjection, it was
designed to, and independently Act from those Motives which should influence*
it; and this being very much imputed to the Female Sex, it is very necessary,
that by their making the contrary evident, they should wipe off such a stain
as^ullies the Candor of their Virtues; and indeed we know nothing more
incentive to the Endeavor, than the having a right estimate of the Happiness,
as well as Virtue of a governable Will; then they may see with delight, how
calmly they may glide through the roughest events, that can but Master that
stubborn Faculty; it will enervate and enfeeb^e a Calamity, take away it is
afflicting force and power, Triumphing and Commanding over even wh^t it
suffers. It was a saying of the Philosophers, that a wise Moral Man could not
be injured, or made miserable by any Calamity; and if this Maxim held good, how
much a greater advantage have they, who possess the Divine Wisdom of Christian
Resignation: that inwraps and twists all their choices and desires with Gods,
and are neither a^ the pain or hazard of their own Elections; but are secure,
that unless Almightiness can be frustrated, they shall possess what shall be
best to their Advantage: proportionable, though not equal to this, is the
Happiness of the Will regulated by Reason, in things that are contained within
it is Sphere; it is the Dignity of Humane Nature, and that which distinguishes
it from that of Beasts; yea even those grow more contemptible in their kinds,
the farther they are removed from it; for the dull, sluggish or otherwise
restiff and untractable Creatures, stand not in Competition in our Opinions
with those that are active and tractable, which in some sense are accounted by
many, but a few degrees from Rationality: moreover, Reason affords somewhat of
a Basis and Foundation for the Will to fix on; those that take Reason for their
Guide, will act equally and Consonant to themselves; but those who this Moment
do things because they will do them, may the next have as wise an Argument to
do something quite contrary; and so may spend their time at Penelopes rate, in
weaving and unweaving a Web that is never to be finished to any purpose.
Meekness is seen in a Will duly submissive to lawful Superiors, and thereby it
not only avoids much Trouble and Contest, as to it self, but is rendered an
amiable thing in the eyes of others, and renders the party exceeding Happy; it
is the Parent of Peace both Public and Private; a Blessing so condiserable, as
is cheaply bought with a little receding from ones own Will or Humor; whereas
the contrary temper is the source and original of Infinite Confusions, the
chief Incendiary that sets, not only Families, but Kingdoms, Churches and
States in a Combustion; and is a kind of an Antecreative Power, which reduces
things in a manner to that Chaos from whence God drew them into Order: And as
the Will refined to Reason and just Authority, is a Felicity all Natures should
aspire to, so more especially the fair Sex, whose Passions naturally incline to
impetuosity, ought to place their Reason as a guard over their Passions, to
keep them under and in due Order; for where this is omitted, and a Woman has no
guide but he^ Will, and her Will is nothing but her Humor, the event is
consequently disasterous to her self, and often to others that depend upon her,
and the Hazard of this renders that other restraint of the Will, viz. Obedience
to Superiors, a very happy Imposition, though it is not perhaps always taken
so; for such as will resist the Government of Reason, are not very apt to
Subject themselves to that of Authority; yet certainly God and Nature do attest
the particular expediency of this to the Female Sex, as appears by their being
placed in a Degree of Inferiority to the other; and further Observations being
made, we find that there are two States of the Tree of Life through which they
can regularly pass submitted to Subjection, viz. That of the Virgin and Wife,
the first to Parents, the second to a Husband, and the third, which is
Widowhood, as it is casual whether ever it be arrived to or not by many; so if
it be, we find it accounted by God himself a Condition most deplorable and
desolate; and if we should say this happens upon the score of their being lest
to their own guidance, the sad Shipwracks and Disasters of of too many Widows,
would but too Melancholily justify the Comment we might make upon it; but one
thing it does, for it evince^, that God sets not the same value upon their
being so at their own dispose, because they are ever accounted and pronounced
more happy in the other States and Conditions, under Guides and Supports: those
are wonderfully mistaken in their measures, who allege meekness unsuitable and
too mean for their Birth and high Spirits, looking upon it with false Optics,
as a thing too vile and unbecoming them; which if truly discerned in its proper
Excellency, is their greatest Glory, whereby they are enabled without trouble
or perplexity to encounter and overcome the adverse events of Life; when a
stubborn and untractable behavior, is only the mark of a great Stomach; and in
some sense mere Mo^oseness, and savours not at all of a great Mind; the cruelty
of a Coward, may when he gets the Advantage by surprise, as equally denominate
him valiant, as the untractableness and ungovernableness of a Woman denotes her
great and generous; for what value soever they put upon themselves, nothing
thing renders them less acceptable to others; every Contradiction of little
weight and moment (which Meekness passes over) insensibly inflames such as are
unruly tempered; and throws them into a transport, so unruly and extravagant
that it tends to mischievous Effects; when on the other side, if she be
humoured and complied with, it only serves to make her more confirmed, that
such wild freaks are graceful to her, and makes her humors arise to such
gigantick Sta^ures, that she grows dizzy with looking at the heights they are
raised to by her over-fond indulging them, till her Brains swimming, she is not
capable of teling what will please her, though she expects should find our ways
sufficiently obliging to give Satisfaction unmingled with disturbance in all
Cases; so that to such a one, we may aptly apply that of Hannibal to Marcellus,
viz. That if he were vanquished, he never gave rest to himself, nor if he were
Victorious* to others. And certainly the unquiet of a perverse Spirit is so
great, that could those whose pe^^^^^cy raises them in themselves, compare it
with the Calm and Happy Serenity of Meekness and Obedience, there would need no
other incitement to make them price and value it at a very high Rate, and rank
it among the great Blessings of Life. Meekness in the last Branch is as lovely,
and as much to be admired, as in the former; and this we place in the
Affections, and it consists in reducing the Passions to a Temper and Calmness,
not suffering them to raise a civil War within, nor breaking out violently turn
to the disquie^udes of others; and to this Regulation, Meekness is generally
subservient; however, because the correcting some particular Passions are more
immediately assignable to other Virtues, we may more aptly insist on one which
has a more direct and peculiar influence, viz. Anger, and this Passion has two
Edges, wounding more fatally within, whilst it deals its strokes without; for
the Vexation and Commotion that afflicts an angry Person, is more painful to
himself than any thing he can ordinarily inflict upon another, and is properly
termed by the wise a short Madness; for who, the Wits being rightly moving in
their proper Sphere, would to do a less, incur a greater Mischief; we must
needs confess, is is so great a Distemper of the Mind, that were it takes an
absolute Possession, it renders the party incompetent of sober understanding or
undertakings. Plato, when one of his Servants had done an extraordinary fault,
going to chastize him, and at that instant finding the unruly Passion of Anger
too Predominant, he forbear it; and a Friend coming in and demanding what he
was doing, he replied, I am Chastizing an Angry Man; and then turning to his
Servant, he said, I would beat thee, but that I am angry, as judging himself by
that Passion to be in a fault, and therefore unfit to correct another for his
Offenses: we might enumerate the Protests of all the Moralists against this
Passion, but they would swell too large for our design; however, let it suffice
to take the suffrage of the wisest of Men, one that had by his own Expression
acquainted himself to Know Madness and Folly, as he tells us Eccl. 1.17. and
again Eccles. 7.11. That anger rests in the Bosom of Fools. Meekness we find in
all things contrary to the Passion of Anger, etc. And since that passion is
universally unbecoming to humane nature, it must be certainly most of all
indecently, lodged in the soft and tender Breasts of the gentler Sex, every
thing contracting so much more the deformity, by how much the more it deviates
from it is proper Kind: Even nature her self has befriended the fair Sex with a
cool and temperate Constitution, and subjected them to less fire, and
consequently choler in their Compositions, so that their heats of that Nature
are adventitious and preternatural, raised often by Fancy or Pride, and so
looked upon as the more uncomely and indecent, being allowed the slenderer
Excuses to cover the deformity: moreover, women by nature are feeble, and the
less able to assert or maintain their angers with any effectuous Force, which
might make them see it was never intended they should loose the Reins to
passion, which Nature seems by that very unability to have straightened; but
when they do it, not only distort and cloud their Beauties by the violence
ag^tations of their Minds, but render themselves monstrous by using what is
unseeming and unbecoming Creatures cast in so fair a Mould, and made for Love
and Complacency; their Tongues we must confess in general are their most
formidable Weapons, and how ill becoming is it, for a woman that pretends to
Breeding and Parts to be found noisy and clamourous, disturbing herself and
gra^ing the Ears of others, sullying thereby her fair Reputation, and betraying
her Weakness; therefore this indecency ought to be avoided by those that would
be accounted Wise and Ingenious, and be found by none but the off-scowring of
the Sex, who in their ^ordid Manners and Behaviors distinguish themselves but
in a small degree from Bruits, and we might take them for such did not their
shapes evince us, they were made rational Creatures, but had corrupted
themselves, and were become deformed in their Minds by degenerating from
Virtue, and all that should proclaim them worthy of the end for which they were
created: Pardon us Ladies, if we say, that such a sort there are in the world,
and think not we reflect upon the whole, if we should proceed to ma^k out this
part of the sex; but as we do not purpose* to be Satirical, so we think to omit
their Characters, for the sake of those whose Virtues have so powerful an
ascendant over us, that they cover those Blots and Stains to such a degree,
that we can pass them over without a severe Scrutiny to the prejudice of the
Sex in general. Socrates was of the opinion, that a scolding clamorous wise,
was the best disciple for a perfect Patience, and the Trial of a meek spirit,
and so he chose Xantippe, who gave him all the satisfaction he could desire
therein; and though it profited him and rendered him more famous than otherwise
he would have been, because his Meekness and Patience could not have spread so
wide in the World, yet she much inu^ed her self by it, by reason it has stood
so many ages and Disgrace, her Name becoming a byword and a proper Term for a
clamorous Fishwife. Let them then upbraid their own Madness, that to gratify
an impotent, nay a most painful passion, have degerated from what their nature,
their Education, and their Qualities designed them; and if they can reverse
their displeasures, it will be surely more generous and noble than any thing
they can enterprise for their health and quiet: Anger we allow then to be a
Corrosive, and i^ it be kept only to feed upon it self, must be it is own
devourer; allow it not then to go abroad for food, nor ^eed it with suspicions
and surmizes of others, nor suffer it to make any sallies at the Tongue, and it
will by such usage in a short time pine away and dye. -- Melancholy Lovers,
Causes of Love: though some hold they all Center in one, are notwithstanding in
their Effects and outward appearances various, and there are those that hold,
that a settled Melancholy of this kind, is incurable, yet Censure us as idle
and vain if we go about to give the best, and most suitable Directions and
Advice, not only to prevent dangerous Consequences, but to give case to those
that too eagerly pursue a fruitless Love. The sweet Tongued Ovid, when he had
informed either Sex, how to proceed in the most curious Methods, and cunning
ways to attain to their wished Happiness, closes his Art of Love with a Remedy
or Cure; when there is* a great necessity for it, when the Lover languishes,
and has not the least Glimmering, of hope to gain one favorable, Smile, from
his Peevish, Proud, and too severely Coy Mistress, and thus begins his Remedy
for such unrequited Love. When Cupid read this Title, straight be said,
Wars I perceive against me will be made;
But spare, O Love, to tax thy Power so,
Who o^t has born thy Ensigns 'ga^^^t thy Foe.
I am not he, by whom thy Mother bled,
When she to Heaven in Marses's Chariot fled;
I o^t like other Youths, thy Fame did prove,
And i^ thou ask what I do still? I Love:
Nay, I have taught by Art, to keep Loves Course,
And made that reason which before was force.
I seek not to betray thee, Pretty Boy,
Nor what I have once written to destroy;
If any Love, and find his Mistress kind,
Let him go on, and Sail with his own Wind,
But he that by his Love is discontented,
To save his Life my V^rses are invented;
Why should a Lover kill himself, or why
Should any with his Love, Grief wounded dye.
Thou art a Boy to Play, becomes thee still,
Thy Reign is soft, Reign then but do not kill;
Or if thou wilt needs be vexing, then do this,
Make Lovers meet by ste^lth, and steal a kiss,
Make them to fear* lest ^^y over watch them,
And tremble at each noise, least some should catch them;
And with those tears, that Lovers shed all Night,
Be thou Con^ent, but do no^ kill Outright.
Avenna proposes Seven ways for the Cure, or at least easing this Malady;
Savanorola chief Observations, and some more and some less: And the first they
prescribe, is Exercise and Diet, and there is an old saying, That without Ceres
and Ba^^b^^, Venus grows Cold; a lazy Life and high feeding are great Causes of
this kind of Love, so their Opposites must needs decay and wast it, for as the
Poet says, Take Idleness away, and put to flight,
All Cupids Arts, his Torches give no Light.
Cured by Business, Cure of Love by Exercise.
or harmless Recreations, imploys and takes it off from the thoughts of Love,
puts to flight those Whimsey^ that wander about the Heart and Brain, like the
Atoms in the Original Chaos; for when it is imployd, the old saying is, The
Devil has no power over him, because his thoughts being wholly taken up with
his Business, there is no room for a Temptation to enter; but the mind being
unoccupied lies open to all A^^au^^s, which many times as easily prevail, as an
Army against a City when the Drawbridges are carelessly left down, the Gates
open, and the Port-Cuillis drawn up, or as a Stream getting at first a small
passage by degrees, throws down the Dam that opposes and overflows all before
it. If no Business offer, Exercise your self in Walking or Running, do it
vigorously, and not leisurely and musing; keep your Eyes as much as may be off
fair Objects, as imagining Crafty Love lays every where a Snare to entangle
you, and in time as the Course of mighty Rivers with much Labor are turned,
you will find an Easement, and the burning Flames of Love having spent in your
Bosom the matter whereon they ^eed, may expire, or much abate of their
vehemence. -- Cured is this kind of Love by extraordinary Temperance, Care of
Love by Diet.
Spareness and ordinary Diet; Fasting allays the hot Desires, and hinders
Concupiscence; for as Physicians hold, that the Bodies of those feed high and
live at ease are* full of bad Humors, and those gross Humors operate on the
mind, and stir up Lustful thoughts and desires, which Abstinence would prevent,
by wasting, and at length removing those Causes, so that the Effects would
cease. St. Ambrose tells us, That Temperance and Abstinence are great Friends
to Virginity, and Enemies to Lasciviousness, when abounding Luxury overthrows
Chastity, and fostereth all manner of Provocations to Lust; and this method the
wise Philosophers observed, as did the Fathers of the Christian Church; and
Origin, because he had no due regard ^o this, found the Temptation so strong,
when he Preached in an Assembly, where there were handsome Women, that he
supposed there was no possible way to remove it, but by gelding himself, which
he put in Practice to his disgrace, when Abstinence might have been as
Efficacious. -- Consider that to tumble in a Bed of Down, Care of Love by hard
Lodging.
is a great Contributer; Lascivious thoughts, and Imaginations, it gives soft
^^pose, and that Drowsiness and Sleep, and therein wanton Ideas are
represented; one Dreams he is Courting his Mistress and she Smiles upon him,
another that he is Embracing her, and finds an imaginary Heaven o^ Contentment,
in the Charming Phantom, and this makes them burn with a desire to do that
waking, which they only Fancied sleeping; these delusive Dreams, by lying hard
and somewhat uneasy might be prevented, the Pamperedness of the Body being
brought under. For this very Cause the Indian Brachmans, a kind of Priests
among them, keep themselves Continent, and will have no other Lodging, but the
ground covered with certain rough Skins of Beasts, as the Redshank do on
harder, and Diet themselves very sparingly, and in that spare Diet they avoid
such Roots, herbs and other Food, as they know by any Phisical Virtue or
natural Operation, provoking to Lust, as if they had observed the Poets
Prohibition. Eringo's are not good for to be taken,
And Lust provoking meats must be forsaken.
Certain it is that the Athenian women in their Solemn Feasts called
Thesmopheries, Cure by herbs, Physic, etc.
because they were to abstain from the Company of men for nine days, they did,
says Aelian, lay a herb named Hanea in their beds, which by a secret virtue
que^^^ed the flames of desire, and freed them from the Torments of any violent
Passion: Some hold that Melons, Cucumbers, Purflain, water Lillies, Ammi
Lettice, and such cold fruits and Herbs are, of a Phisical virtue; to allay the
feavour of a violent Passion, Mizaldus prefers Agnus Castus before any other.
-- Care what ever rules we have prescribed, Caution in Case the party be far
spent.
must notwithstanding be taken, that by their Passion ^re much dejected and
brought very* low and feeble in their bodies; they must not go through these kind
of hardships, but as fainting or languishing distempered Persons must have
Cordials and Restoratives: A Lover that has, as it were lost himself, through
Impotency and Impatience, must be called home as a Traveller by Music,
feasting and good Wine, Sports and Merriments, and viewing of pleasant objects,
but not those that occasioned his Melancholy, but curious prospects of Gardens,
Orchards, Rivers, Flowery Meads, and the like* And sometimes Hunt, Hawk, hear or
read merry Tales, pleasant Discourse, and use moderate Exercise in any manual
Occup^ation, that so new spirits may succeed those that are wasted and decayed,
and by that means those Angers, Fears, Cares, Suspicions, etc. may be overcome,
that a too violent passion had created in the former; and the pa^ty be weaned
from his ill habit of Body and Mind. -- Melancholy Symptoms are
accountedtwofold, Melancholy it is Symptoms.
affecting both in Body and Mind; the first of these are plain to the Eye, by
the Dryness, Leanness, and Paleness, occasions holloness of the Eyes, wistful
looks, etc. They pine away and look ill with Restlessness and Sighs, there is a
dullness in the sight, and a cloud of sadness hangs upon the Brow, and there is
a feasible decay of Appetite; and the reason the Learned give for this is, that
the disorder of the spirits obstruct the Liver from the performance of it is
office, by means whereof it cannot turn the Aliment into any reasonable good
Blood as it ought, and for that cause the Members weaken and shrink for want of
their due sustenance, as trees and plants wither and pine when their roots draw
not sufficient Moisture from the Earth to supply them. And this, Ladies, falls
in a great measure your share in the bloom of youth, because you are put upon
longing and languishing many times, when Modesty and Bashfulness charms your
Tongues from uttering what we verily believe you wish at the same time were
known, so your selves were not the relators of it; and it is very hard indeed
that you are tied up to so nice a point, that you must not ask for that which
you no doubt might have for speaking, but must endure because you will be too
severely strict to the rules of Modesty; there is reasonable allowance in all
things that are not dishonest or of^ensive. These longing desires bring the
Green Sickness often upon young Virgins and Widows, and strangely alters their
Complexions, as they do the C^^^xia, or evil habit to men, which is increased
by S^ghs, Complaints and secret Laments. Many there (...) who have undertaken
to find out an extraordinary Passion, by the alteration of the pulses bea^ing,
though never so many Endeavors are used to stifle or keep it secret; and in this
kind they give many Examples of discoveries so made: some again have observed
it, by the trembling of the heart, short Breathing, Sweating, Blushing, etc.
when the Party is named or is present that occasions this distemp^ature; and if
there be a Mutual Love though not divulged, it happens so to both the Parties;
if they suddenly or accidentally m^et, there is startings and tremblings; their
hearts, as the vulgar phrase is, are ready to leap out at their Mouths, they
shiver and sweat almost at one and the same time; for the Poets hold Love to
participate as well of the Nature of Ice, as of the fire; and indeed may be
said to transform it self, Proteus-like, into what it pleases, as Hot, Cold*
Itch, Feavour, F^ensie, Pleurisy, and the like. -- Many hold bleeding at the
No^e when the Party is talking to the Party beloved, is an apparent Symptom;
and give this reason for it, that it is occasioned by the violent Agitation of
the spirits, moved by a passionate Love; but let them say wh^^ they will, the
Eyes carry the greatest signs of Love in them; such eager and wishful gazings
are between Lovers, as are not common to any other persons; they seem to ravish
each other with Eyes. Eyes, by Sta^ing, Gazing, Stealing a half forced Look,
Glanceing and the like, and many have confessed it was not in their Power to
keep off their Eyes, when they were in the presence of those they loved, but
they have been constrained to look ^istly and steadfastly, as if they were
looking through each other, whilst the more powerful rays overcame the weaker,
and made them give out. The Sultan Sana's wife in Arabia, took such delight in
gazing upon Ver^omanus a beautiful man, that she could scarcely endu^e him out
of her sight, and would cause him to come into her Chamber several hours in a
day, only that she might feast her Eyes with looking on him; and such as are
thus taken in Love, are always uneasy till they see the object of their
desires, and then they feel a pain mixed with the pleasure of beholding, uneasy
in any thing till they obtain the wished Enjoyment of the party beloved: and
indeed the Symptoms of Love enclining to Melancholy, are various and almost
innumerable. Melancholy Love some say is not subject to fear, though frequent
demonstrations make it evident to the contrary, the affairs, the composition of
Love matters have always some Ingredients of fear in it. Res est soliciti plena
timoris amor.
Hesiod styled Fear the Daughter of Venus, because Fear and Love are held to be
inseparable; the great part of a Lovers life, let it be of the best sort, is
full of Fears, Cares, Doubts and Anxieties. The Poets are full of stories to
that purpose, few that write any thing of Love, but take notice of them;
Charmid^s in Lucian was so impatient, that after Sighing, Sobbing, and ^areing
his hair, he cried out, O I am undone, O Sister ^ryphen^, I am not able to
endure these Love pangs, what shall I do? O ye Gods, free me from these cares!
He seems to be wholly animated by the breath of his Mistress, and when she
withdraws he seems to be expiring, as if she kept the Keys of his life; his
fortune ebbs and flows with her Favor, her Smiles and Frowns give him Joy or
Misery, raise him up to Heaven or tumble him down to Hell: Let his state be
displeasing or pleasing, it is continuate, and so long as he loves, he cannot
mind his Business to any purpose, or think of any thing but her, she is his
Morning and Evening Star, the Planet by whose Influence he moves and subsists;
his Life, his Mistress, his Goddess, and what not; Waking or Dreaming she
possesses his Mind; she is always in his Mouth; his Heart, Eyes, Ears, and
every part is full of her Idea. One being over Head and Ears in Love, having
done so much that he knew not what more was l^ft to do, demanded out of a
Conformity to her humor, if any further service remained? to which he had this
reply: D^st ask my Love, what service I will have?
Your kindness day and night I still must crave:
Dream, Dote, Expect, and always think on me,
Depend and Hope, Cover my face to see;
Delight thy self in me, be wholly mine,
For why, my dearest, I am wholly thine.
No Soldier in an Army is upon more duty, or has less rest than a Lover;
between whom we have an excellent Comparison to our purpose, the which not
without some pleasure to the Reader may therefore well be inserted, Comparison
between a Lover and a Soldier.
as not being common Rhymes. Believe us, Friends, all Lovers Soldiers are,
For Cupid has his tents, and Lovers war;
Both rise up early and both sit up late;
Both stand as Sentinels by equal (...)
(...) at his Captains t^nt, that ^t his Mistress Ga^^*
The wretched Lover and the Soldier goes
Through thickest troops where danger does oppose;
Through Midnight watches, and strong Guards they pass,
One for his Fam^, the other for his L^ss.
And he that for the War or Love is sit,
Must be a man of Courage, Sense and ^^it.
At Loves Command we through all dangers love,
The m^n that wants Employment let him Love.
Much may be gathered ^^om this as to the uncertain and turmoiling state of
Lovers, their Body and Mind being variously Employed. The old Greeks painted
Cupid with Jupiters Thunderbolt in his hand, because he wounds, and it is
difficult to see whence it comes when it penetrates, etc. Many of either Sex
have been strangely taken with the Picture of a Beauteous Person, so that when
a country Fellow set little by the picture of Helena, drawn by Xe^xis that
Famous Master, Nicomachus who was of a more amorous Inclination, said, Take but
my Eyes, and you will think it represents the most Beautiful of the Goddesses;
and then you will immediately dote on the fair person it represents: Count her
Vices Virtues, her Infirmities and Imperfections the rarest of Perfections. If
flat-nosed Lovely; if the Nose rise and then decline, Majestic; If of a low
stature, Pretty; if tall, of a comely stature; so that to the Eyes of a Lover,
all things appear Lovely in the objects admired; for Love over-looks all
defects: how often in our Age have we seen a Beautiful and Virtuous Wife
neglected, for the lascivious Embraces of a mere Doudy: how long has an
amorous-keeping Spark ratled about the Town in his Coach and Six with one of so
mean a Beauty, whose Charms were not of force sufficient to captivate his
Footboy? from which we must conclude that the Ancients who painted Love blind,
were in the right of it; yet such a one, whilst the Love ague holds, which is
not easily shaken off, has all the Graces, Eleganoies, Veneries and Pleasures
attending her, and is by him preferred, before a Myriad of the rarest Beauties,
nay before all the Goddesses he has read of; or are told in Fables: when a man
or woman is so taken, it shows the Symptoms of Love in an extraordinary manner,
and denotes a kind of witchcraft in Love: A Gordian knot that is altogether
difficult, if not impossible to untie, and requires the Sword of Alexander to
cut it in sunder: That is, a man must do violence to himself in breaking such a
slavish Chain, take himself away as it were whether he will or no, from the
Temptation, and be weaned by absence, 'till with the Eyes of his Reason he is
capable of discerning his Mistake and Folly; and then there is hopes of a cure
for his Frenzy, but till then his Recovery is despaired of. Melancholy Lovers
of all sorts, are thus entangled like unthinking Indians; they barter Gold and
Diamonds for Beads and painted Glass* If I did, says Lucre^ia, but let my Glove
fall, I had one of my Suitors, nay two or three, ready to take it up, and as a
Favor kiss it, then with a low Congy deliver it into my hand; and if I walked,
another was ready to sustain me, a third provided Pears, Plumbs, Apricocks,
Cherries, and the rarest of Fruits to accommodate, and proud was he from whose
hand I accepted them: nor is the other Sex less dotingly overseen; for come to
me (says a fair Lady in Arist^^etus) Come quickly Sweetheart, for all other men
are mere Clowns, Block-heads and Satyrs in my Eyes to thy lovely self, thy
Gestures, Looks and Actions are incomparable beyond all others, Venus never so
admired her Adonis, (...) pleased with Hipolytus, Aria^ne with Theseus, or Hero
with Leande^, as she was taken and Enamoured with her Mopsus, though Characters
of deformity were Engraven on him by the hand of nature, and vice had slamp'd
Imperfection on his mind. O Call me Sister, Call me Servant, choose,
Or rather thy dear Love, (...) thine to use.
What shall we say, when all these things are seriously weighed and Considered,
but that the best name we can give these sorts of Love, is a noble madness?
though some will have it that amongst the many absurd and irksom Symptoms,
Fantastic Fits, Passions and Inconveniences incident to persons thus
infascinated, there are some Beams of pure Light, penetrating the Fogs and
Mists, and shining bright, some graceful Qualities in these Lovers which this
Affection causes at certain times; for as it sometimes makes wise Men Fools,
so again by dear bought Experience it opens the eyes of Fools and renders them
Wise, it makes the Sordid become Generous. Cowards Courageous, the Covetous
Liberal and Magnificent, the Clown Civil, the Cruel Gentle, the Profane
Religious. Slovens Neat, the Lazy Active, observant and the like. Marriage,
it is Joys and real Comforts, etc. Marriage or Matrimony derives it is Honor and
Antiquity from Paradise, where God himself joined the first and most Lovely
pair that ever entered into that Comfortable State, and has enjoined it as a
great Happiness to Man, to distinguish him the more nobly from irrational
Creatures; though it is not nor has been so exactly observed as the happy
Conveniences of it require. In the first Ages of the world, People were rude
and boisterous, having corrupted their ways, and in a great manner thrown off
this ^oly State, living promiscuously. Therefore some of great Antiquity will
have it, that C^crops King of Athens, some hundreds of years after the Flood
reformed Men's manners in Europe, by persuasions and wholesome Laws, showing them
the Inconveniences of brutal Lust, and the Praise and Advantages accruing by
living Chaste and Virtuous Lives. It is indeed, the happy sweet of Life, where
the Married Couple met upon such Terms as the State was first designed for: To
be a help and comfort to each other; to be tender, kind of goal Natured; the
Man striving to do all for the Woman's good, and she Laboring as much as in her
li^s to requite his Care and Industry, never to give cause of Anger or
Disturbance, but to stifle or bridle those Passi^ns that would make it uneasy,
and disturb it is Quiet: There is not only your own Proneness ^o hinder the true
Felicity that arises from his State, but there are Satan's Instruments,
malicious People, who take a Pleasure in mischief, and labor to disturb and
hinder so sweet a Harmony, as a Constant and unshaken Love makes in the Souls
of those who take care to keep it pure. -- For although in several parts of the
World Marriage is highly prized, yet they have such Fantastic ways in the
Celebration and Continuance, that they make it appear ridiculous. The Persians,
Partbians, and most of the Eastern Nations, having by the Customs of their
Countries, liberty to marry as many Wives as they can maintain, and live in
common among them; and in some Countries the Bramins or Heathen Priests always
have the Brides Maidenhead, or the Profit of it, by assigning her over to any
one that will give Money for the first Nights Enjoyment. It was a Law in
Scotland, that the Landlords should have that advantage over their Tenants
Wives, and it held a long time, till Malcolm the Third abolished it: among the
Romans, Mar^rage was kept Inviolable, and as a most Honorable Estate, till
such time as they got the knack of Divorcing, which now none use more often. --
Amongst the Indians of the East, it was a Custom many Years, that all the
Brothers should have but one Wife in common; and therefore, when he that went
unto her, set his staff at the Door, which any of the other seeing, retired
till it was removed. The Assyrians and Babilonians were either very Proud, that
they would not sue to the Female Sex for their Favors or else Awkard or Lazy
in the Art of Courtship; for we find they generally, especially those of the
more inferior Rank, bought their Wives; some of their Parents privately, others
in the public Market: and indeed Ladies, we must own that obtaining them at
such a rate, they held an absolute Tyranny over, and abridged them of those
Liberties and Privileges which by Prerogative in Nature and Merit, is justly
due to your Sex; but through the happy influence of your more Auspicious Stars,
you live in a Climate more temperate, and not subject to such misfortunes, but
sit Commanding on the Throne of your Beauties, compelling the stubbornest of
Mankind to pay you Homage. -- Marriage was formerly attended with other
Ceremonies than at present, even in England; for upon the Wedding Day there was
carried before the Bride, who was led by two young Persons, as a Basin of Gold
or Silver, whilst on her Head she wore a Garland of Corn-Eats, signifying
Riches and Plenty* and Wheat was scattered upon her by other Attendants, in
token of Fruitfulness; and upon the Bridal Night before she entered the
Streets, a Censer with Fire and Incense was put in one hand, and Water in the
other, as Emblems of Piety, Virtue and Chastity, being lifted or born by two
Virgins, thereby signifying, she was going to lose her Virginity unwillingly;
but now we find that Custom is laid aside, and the matter is managed with less
Ceremony and more Decency; the good natured Bride not expecting such
fantastical Attendance, as knowing the main end of Matrimony, is to increase
and multiply, and to bring up her Children in the fear of God: She is, or ought
to be Frugal, Chaste and Modest, Respectful, Dutiful and Obliging, as far as
consists with reason, and the Obligation of Marriage to her Husband, owning him
her Head, Protector, and Support of her Honor and well-being, (...) to
Protection against Injuries, and providing what is convenient for her; he in
all things behaving himself toward her as he ought, in Sickness, as well as in
Health, per^orming in every thing as far as he is able, his Nuptial Promise;
for though in Law it is not an Oath, yet so solemn a Protestation before God and
those present as Witnesses, is as binding, and ought to be as Religiously
observed, lest pretending to mock or trifle with the Almighty, his fearful
Judgments scatter Ruin and Desolation upon the Guilty, and his Posterity. We
shall proceed yet further to speak of the Duty of Marriage* in particulars,
from which proceeds so universal a Good, to the not only Peopling the World,
but to the Peace and Refreshment of the Mind, as well as the Body; and to show
what real Com^orts attend it, though some Liber^ines have labored their Brains
to create an Antipathy to so great a Felicity, ^in suggesting Inconveniences
that are not reasonably to be conceived, and indeed are only Chimera's, and
Whimsies arising from Immature Thoughts and Imaginations -- Mind then and
regard it seriously; Woman was prepared, as we may in some measure term it,
upon Mature Deliberation, or Second thought* as a help meet for Man, who else
must have continued in Solitude for the greater part, even with an imperfection
of his Felicity, in his so glorious a Paradise; seeing all other Male Creatures
had their Similitude of another Sex: and then again without some new
found-out-way of Peopling it, so fair a Fabric as this Word, built with no
less Power and Wisdom, than that of an All-powerful and All-wise God, would
heve become the Habitation of irrational Creatures; and certainly the joining
of Hands and Breasts in a Matrimonial Estate, is of all other temporal
Conditions the Happiest, especially where Reciprocal Love, and inviolate Faith
are concentered; for there no cares, Fears or Jealousies, Mistrusts, Hatred,
can enter to disturb the sweet Repose and Harmony of Minds; there is a strict
Union wherein a Man and a Woman so joined are said to be one Body, one Flesh,
and as we may term it one Soul, because their Souls move jointly in an
Harmonious Consent: nor was it the least Care and Goodness of the wise Creator
to ordain so near a Union; and especially for these two Causes the first for
the Increase of Posterity, and the second to Bridle and bound Man's wandering
Desires and Affections: and in this near Conjunction God pronounced his
immediate Blessing. Columela tells us, out of the O^conoms of Zenophon, That
Motrimonial Conjunction appointed by Nature, is not only the most pleasant, but
profitable Course of Life, that may be entered on for the Preservation and
increase of Posterity; wherefore since Marriage is the most safe* sure and
delightful Station of mankind, who by the Dictates of Nature is prone to
propagate his like; he does in no wise provide amiss for his own Tranquillity
who enters into it, especially when he comes to Maturity of years; for we must
allow there are many Errors and abuses in Marriages, contrary to what is
ordained for the Felicity or either Sex, of which we shall treat hereafter. Our
Blessed Savior has pronounced dismal Woes against those that give themselves
up to unlawful Lusts, and the worst of all Miseries is, that without timely and
sincere Repentance, it exludes them the Kingdom of Heaven. -- Marriage is
objected against but by a very few, unless such as refuse it, that they may
live with more Security, and less interrupted in their Lawless Courses:
However, in those Courses of Life they find Disappointments, Anxieties and
Disquiets, the loss of their Reputations, Health, and Lavishing away their
Money and time, beside the throwing their Souls into an eminent hazard; nor do
we at all see what Pleasure they can ^^ke in the treacherous Smiles of ^n
Harlot. Mercenary Love c^n never be cordial, and therefore consequently breeds
no true Content even in the Enjoyment, but rather a Snare to overwhelm and
finally destroy such as press upon it. Solomon the wisest of Men, who had in a
great measure experienced this, tells us by sad Experience of a remorseful
Conscience, that such fly as a Bird to the Snare of the Fowler, and go as an Ox
to the Slaugter, till a Dart strike through the Liver. If in this way they have
Children (the sweet pledges of chaste Love) which seldom happens, they rather
become a reproach and scandal, than a Comfort to them. Harlots are fitly
compared to Swallows, who when the sharp Winter of Adversity or Sickness comes,
sing no longer to their Morning wakes, but on expanded wings leave the Coast,
and fly to a warmer Sun; when a Virtous loving Wife is a cordial Friend in all
Adversities, and her greatest Love is proved and found in the greatest
Affliction, and like a faith^^l Companion, not only shares with him pariently,
but assist him in all Adversities, cheerfully passing through Difficulties and
Dangers to serve and oblige him, never disputing his lawful Commands; but
readily, and with a willing mind obeying and performing them to the utmost of
her Power: Sickness or Poverty makes her not start aside; but she takes them as
occasions to manifest her entire Affections; when the proud imperious Harlot
will do but what pleases her even in his prosperous days; and when a Cloud
over-shadows him, she leaves him Comfortless, in Darkness and Misery; she sucks
him indeed whilst he has any Blood of Substance left, like a Horseleech, always
craving, but never satisfied, displeased at every thing he does, if he grants
not all her Desires, and they very ^nreasonable ones; even her best Pretendings
are only Flatteries, and her Allurements only artificial Charms; she regards
not his growing Ruin or Miseries, but rather pushes him into them, and the
sooner she undo's him, the greater is her advantage, because then she is at
leisure to lay her Snares for another, and so goes on till her feet take bold
of Hell; her Vows and Tears, and Swoonings are all seigned and artificial, like
Beauty. Gesner, tells us a Story, That a young Man traveling from Athens to
Thebes, by the way met a beautiful Lady to appearance, Glittering in gaudy
Attire, shining with Gems and Gold, as the spangled Arch of Heaven with Stars;
she saluted him, and seemed to be much Examoured of his Person; declaring she
had a long time watched the oppurtunity to find him alone, and thereupon
invited him to her House, which appeared stately, and richly furnished with all
things desirable, which she proposing to make him Master of, the Proposal so
wrought upon his Courteous Inclination, that he put off his intended Journey,
and complied with her Desires; b^t long he had not done it, er'e a Holy man*
whose eyes were better open to the deceit, warned him of the danger he was in,
and by his Prayers removed the Enchantment* for it was no other, and then he
perceived her loathsome, deformed and ugly, to Detestation and Abho^rence; all
the deluding Temptations disappeared, and then she with some unwillingness
confessed her D^sign was to get him into her Power, that she might destroy him.
This however, the truth of the Story may be credited, or disbelieved, may be
fitly applied to a Harlot, who is the grand Enemy and mischief to the happy
State of Marriage, the Instrument of Satan set up to hinder it, as much as in
her lies; he well knows it is Diametrical to his Kingdom, and the Power of
Darkness, for Men and Women to solace themselves in chaste Love, wherein they
only find true Contentment and Felicity; he looks upon it as a main batering
Engine, bent against him, and therefore labors to overthrow or frustrate it by
sundry Devices, and where he cannot do that, he seeks to sow Divisions and
Mistrust between Man and Wife, as being Wife and of long Experience* well
knowing that where Discord thrusts i^, and scatters it is Poison, Heavenly
Cogitations are removed or little regarded; and by this he occasions many
unhappy Marriages, raising Disquiets quiets and Discontents, false Reports and
Scandals, Dislikes and Disaffectations; but these may be prevented by applying
your selves for Refuge and Protection against his fiery Darts, to one that is
mightier than he who holds him in a Chain. -- Marriage from this may be counted
a Blessed Estate, because he who Envies all Happiness, has such an Antipathy to
those that enter into it; though we may Paint the resemblance of Fire, we
cannot give it a heat; no more can any conceive the Felicity attending a Happy
Marriage, except they are Partakers of it. Solomon tells us, a Virtuous Wife is
above the price of Rubes, and she is elsewhere allowed to be the Crown and
Ornament of her Husband; and happy is he who has such a Jewel, and knows aright
how to value and esteem it. Matrimony being a matter of great weight and
moment, Marriage State further considered, etc.
tending so much to the benefit of mankind, that it seems next to the care of
those things that were to secure an Immortal State; the prime end of mankind,
especially in the difference of Sex, is not to be so briefly passed over as
those of less Concern; therefore we must entreat Ladies, your patience, if we
debate upon this matter. It is the Nature of Honor to love Attendance, and
they who have found an honorable Marriage must wait upon it, and keep it so;
and it is a true Speech, That it is no less Virtue to keep a Man's Wealth, Name
and Honor, unwasted and fair in the World, than to purchase them. St. John
Wills the Lady he mentions in his Epistle, 2 John 8. not to lose the good
things she has gotten, but to get a full Reward: it had been better that some
had married with far less shows of Goodness and hope of Thrift, unless they had
been more careful to preserve them better; for there is nothing so miserable as
to have been happy, and to fall into Misery afterward. The Praise of that good
Woman, Prove. 13. is not, That she was Virtuous before Entrance into Marriage;
No, it was her Proof and Practice, which made her honorable, and her Husband
in her; many great Conquerours have gained a Crown, but have not long held it.
St. Paul does not only tell us, That we must be Married in the Lord; but how we
ought to live together, and maintain Conjugal Affections, by Compassion,
Tenderness and Faithfulness. -- Marriage is preserved chiefly in Four Duties;
Joyntness in Religion, Mutual Love, Loyal Chastity, and Suitable Consent. As
for Religion, we suppose they are already entered into it, and so they must
continue not only to be Religious, but to cleave mutually together, in the
Practice of all such means of Worship and Duties of both Tables as concern
them; and this we mean in the parts of Religious Conversation to God: First,
That they be joint in the Worship of God publicly, both ordinarily upon the
Sabbath, and occasionally at other times and Seasons; as also, Extraordinary;
the Word ought to be heard by both jointly, Sacraments mutually received,
Prayers frequented, and all the Worship attended. Secondly, Family Duties
concern not only themselves, but their Children and Servants; as reading of the
Scripture, Prayers and Thanksgiving, exercising those whom God has committed to
their Care, in the Principles of Godliness, and the several Duties of
Inferiors. In the absence of the Husband, it is incumbent on the Wife to
discharge the Duty: Thirdly, And more especially, those several Duties, which
in private, and apart from the other Family-ones, are of most Concernment;
which although they ought to be performed alone also, yet not always, but
jointly and mutually; as to conferr, Read, Pray, acknowledge their Sins, and
give thanks: Fourthly, They ought to be joint in Duties of Charity, relieving
those that are in want, or on whom God has laid his afflicting hand, whom by
occasion God offers to their regard; mutual Harmony in all religious
Relations must be kept up and Consorted; and there is especial reason for this
Duty: First, God is not the God of them apart, as before, but jointly as
Married, and made one Flesh, as likewise of their Seed; and therefore he must
be sought jointly by them both: Secondly, The good things which they receive
from God, though they pertain to their several Happinesses, as their Faith,
Hope, Knowledge, etc. yet they reach to the furtherance of each others Grace;
if they be bound to have Intercourse with the whole Communion for the increase
of Grace, how much more then ought it to be one with another? Thirdly,
Whatsoever they enjoy, good or evil, in a manner they enjoy it in common. Their
Infirmities are common, each suffering and feeling a share of the Calamity that
falls: Their Blessings, as Health, Wealth, Success, etc. are common, their
Calling and Business common, tending to the common good of them and their
Children, their Crosses, their Misfortunes, their Dwelling, their Posterity,
and the like, are in common; Why then should their God be several, their
Relighion and Worship disjoynted? certainly it must be mutual, Wants and Needs
must reconcile and unite them to one God with common Consent. -- Fourthly,
Religion is the Golden Cement of all Fellowship and Unions, both to knit and to
sanctify the same more firmly and closely together; that Union that is not
thus fastened, is but like the Foxes tied together with fire Brands between
their Tails; which uniting dissolved with pain and loss. The Jews have a pretty
Observation upon the Hebrew Name of Woman; the first and last Letters whereof
make up the Name of Jah, God, which if they be taken from the middle Letters
leave all in Confusion, for they signify Fire; so if God encloses not Marriage
before, and after, and be not in the midst of of it, by the Band of religious
fear, and dread of breaking out, it is nothing save a fiery, Contentious and an
implacable Condition: But this Consent of both in the Lord, is the most firm
and blessed of all; what a pleasant Glass it is for a Husband and a Wife to see
each others Faces in! yea, even their Hearts, and to be acquainted with each
others Graces or Wants! to be assured of each others Love and loyal Affection!
Then to look how they stand affected to the Band of their Union (we mean
Fellowship in Religion) Faith, Hope: now let us Examine this Truth, but only in
one Prime and chief Act of Religion, and that is Faith in the All Sufficiency
of Providence, and that will teach us the rest; what is the Marriage Estate,
some only a Stage of worldly Care to act her part; single Persons never come
effectually to understand what Care means, but married People, let them be
never so wealthy and loving, have peculiar Cares and Consideration of this: in
some Countries they were used to hang a Cloth in the Bride. Chamber on the
Wedding Day, called a Care-Cloth, that it might allay the Excess of Joy in the
married People, by minding them they must expect some Bitterness to be mingled
with their Sweet; and indeed it may always be Fancied to hang in every
Bride-chamber, unless Faith take it down, and fastens their Care upon his
Providence that cares for them, cutting off all superfluous Care of things in
worldly Matters: now this Grace belongs jointly to both of them, to prevent
great Evils, that else may follow in being over careful for the things of this
Life, and by a too eager pursuit of them (perhaps by unlawful ways) to heap up
Riches, they squander away that precicious time allowed them to barter for
eternal Happiness; till a Cloud of Age comes on, and at it is Heels the Night of
Death, in which none can work out their Salvation; and then the main end for
which they were made is utterly lost, and it had been better they never had
been made. But when the Burden of their care by Faith, and a firm Relyance on
God, is thrown upon him, he will sustain them, and make their Cares easy and
seasonable to them. Let the Lord be their Portion, Rock and defense, and what
can distract them? they will draw sweetly together in the Matrimonial Yoke,
committing to God the Care of their Bodies as well as their Souls, remembering
the wonderful Effects of his Providence; how it feeds the young Ravens, Clothes
the Lillies, and satisfies the Lions hungry Whepls, when they cry for lack of
Food; and these Considerations are more strengthened in a joint Consent to all
Graces, as Hope of Salvation, a fit Preparation for Death; Mercy and
Compassion, Love, Fear, Meekness, and the rest, all which in their kind under
Faith, serve to furnish the married Condition with Content and Welfare; what
can so assuredly bring in Blessings to the Bodies, Souls, Families, Posterity
and Attemp of each other, as Joyntness of Religion, when both are agreed, and
one builds up as fa^t as the other? when no sooner the one Enterprises any
lawful thing, but the other joins in a commending it to God for a Blessing; and
when they espy any Infirmity in each other, it is reserved for matter of
Humiliation till the next time; and no sooner they meet with a Mercy, but they
lay hold on it as an occasion of rendering Praise and Thanksgiving for it, To
the God of all Mercies and Comforts, keeping the Altar ever burning with the
fuel of Sacrifice! what a sweet Derivation is this to both of Pardon and
Blessing! what a Warrant is it to them, that either shall share in all Good,
when as they do equally need it, so each seek it of God, and when they
voluntarily make him Privy (though indeed nothing is hid from the Eyes of his
Observation, yet is most pleased when Man is willing he should see his inmost
thoughts) to their Doubts, Fears, Wants and Necessi^ies, what can so well
assure them of a happy Condition? when Censuring, Condemning and Quarrelling
with each other, is altogether laid aside; or if any such matter should by a
strong Temptation prevail over them, suddenly it is turned into a mutual
melting in Gods Bosom, by the Griefs and Complaints they make against it, when
in Christ their Advocate they sanctify all to themselves, and are in a happy
State when they walk close with God, and cast their Care on him. Marriage
without a Pre-ingagement or Contract looks so odd, Marriage Promises and
Contracts in what Cases they are binding and what not, Advice about Marriage,
etc.
that it appears more liker the Coupling of Irrational than Rational Creatures;
and it must be by a Miracle if a Marriage hurried and clapped up of a Sudden
almost, without the Consent of either Party, but as it were acted in a Comedy,
only in Jest, to please or amuse the Spectators, ever proves happy or
successful, though Loves flames are violent in their full Blaze, yet they must
have time to kindle, and by degrees rise to that height of Ardour; for his
Infant fir^s scarce warm the Bosom, and for want of diligent Tendance many
times die almost as soon as born; wherefore our advice is, there ought to be a
settled Love, before the Joining of hands; or Cupid, who loves to make Sport
and Pastime with poor Mortals, when he has as it were by surprise, thrust their
beads into the Noose, will retire laughing and leave them tugging and struggling
with dislikes and discontents, when you are too fast to get loose. Move then
with Caution and deliberation, first to consider the Fitness and Equality of
the Person, in Years, Lineaments and Fortune, and by degrees settle your
Affection, which if you can cordially do, then be not over Scrupulous or
Timorous, as many have been, and thereby lost great advantages, to enter into a
solemn Contract, which is a binding and uniting your hearts in the sight of
Heaven: and since this word Contract has startled some, and stumbled others,
and has been construed diverse ways, sometimes to advantage, and sometimes to
prejudice, and indeed has made a great Noise in the world, in Relation to
Marriage, where those who have no regard to solemn Protestations, or are Light
and Unconstant, have had to do with it; to gratify their own Desires and
Lusts, and decoy and deceive and betray such as have credited their Oaths and
Vows: but to come nearer to ou purpose, we mean to Explain and Expose it
honestly, and as in it self it bears, that it may not stand up as a Scarecrow
in the way of Matrimony, where there are real and cordial Intentions sending
toward it, and in such Cases as it may be lawful, not hindered by
Proxsanguinity, too near affinity, Impediments in Nature, or the like. Marriage
being really intended between Party and Party, after Liking, Courtship and
Settling of Love, promises are the Antecedents to the Contract; for we must
know, that although an Explicit or Express Contract has in it the greater
force, external before men, to tie the Parties to Marriage; yet the Mutual
promises of them both Jointly made, before or after, seriously and with
solemnity of mind, are binding before God and in their own Consciences; and
indeed the difference between such a promise made between Party and Party only,
and a Contract before Witness, is not formal but accidental, and both are true
real Contracts and Covenants; and if there be something in the expressed
Contract which is not in the other, in respect of outward Obligation, the being
of the Express Contract rests in the Deliberate, Voluntary, Mutual and Honest
Resolutions of the Parties among themselves, which being past give the Essence
to Marriage before the other came, and is the Foundation and Ground of the
latter; for otherwise it might be said, that any passage of Expression between
two, before Witness, falling from Parties in Rashness or Sport, or upon a
Question demanded, might carry the force of a Contract, which no one of any
Sense can imagine, by reason that the Express Contract before witness implies a
Formal, Mutual Consent between themselves, not now to be questioned, yet for
special Causes to be more solemnly, publicly testified, for the avoiding ma^y
Inconveniences that might otherwise arise. The Parties who before such promise
made were at their own dispose, but after such a mutual promise they cease to
be their own, and pass over themselves each under God to the other, insomuch
that whatsoever other promise should be possibly made, by both of them or
either of them, to any other besides themselves, if confessed, does disanul it
self, and is ipso facto void by virtue of the Preingagement; but although it be
denied, yet nevertheless they are bound before God, so that they shall be ever
culpable before him without extraordinary Repentance; for we must allow that a
private Promise ought to have the same force as a public Contract; for though
man cannot make a right Judgment of the sincerity of Intention in such cases,
yet God discerns their most secret thoughts, and if they invoke him to witness
what they intend not, or though they really intended, and yet upon intervening
disgust perform it not, they in so doing dishonor his holy Name, and he will
most assuredly punish the Affront done to his divine Majesty; for the true
nature of self-renouncing and self-resigning, resides as fully in a private
solemn Promise, as in a witnessed Contract; therefore they are not two things,
but the same with diverse Circumtances, as we shall show hereafter. Many times
it happens, that Love is depending between two Parties, and there are some
reasons to be given why the Marriage is delayed, as not of years to possess an
Estate, make Jointure, or the like; and then if the young man comes to hear any
one is Courting his Love, though as yet he has made no certain Promise to her
of absolute Marriage, and they remain free at their own dispose, if he then
comes to her and desires her not to accept the offer, because he is resolved to
marry her as soon as is convenient, and she again promises him she in such
Consideration will admit the Addresses of no other to any effect, then such a
promise is binding in Conscience, and ties the Party to marry her before God,
and if there be any withness of it, stands good in Law; because by the hopes he
has given her, that she shall be his wife, he defrauds her (if he deserts his
promise) of a possibility of equal Advantage, by putting off those who were
desirous to enjoy her in such a state: and so again when a man has desisted
from prosecuting his Love-suit for some time, though a kind of an amicable League
continues, and the woman, (for what cause we determine not) is minded to go
beyond the Seas, or to reside at a great distance; and the man hearing of it,
and fearing by that means to lose her, goes to her, and ^^esses his Love with
more Earnestness, telling her that it will be a great affliction to him, to
part with her so far out of his reach, he really intending to marry her, if she
will stay; and upon that if she puts off her intented Voyage or Journey, it
implies a Consent, and is Equivalent to a promise of Marriage; though before
she was tree and at her own dispose; and in Conscience she cannot break off.
And now it may be demanded by some, what promise does realize marriage before
God? To which we answer, That such a promise so binding must first be mutual,
Secondly, Voluntarily made, with free Consent, without Compulsion, Aw or Fear:
Thirdly, It must be without Error, that is, such an Error as overthrows and
contradicts it self. First, then again it must be mutual, and equal, not of one
to the other, but of both reciprocal to each other; for if such a promise be a
putting one's self into the power of another, then as no one can put him or her
self into another power, without an act of the Resignation of the Liberty
before had and possessed, so can neither each of the two parties give up their
Liberties without mutual Consent, each to other: For in marriage the yielding
the right of one receives a right in another, and therefore it must be mutual
and reciprocal, if one shall lay claim to the promise of the other, and yet
suspend his own, as thinking thereby to tie the Party to his own time, and
leisure, himself being free, he is deceived: For Marriage Consent must be
mutual, and that party withdrawing as it were by such delays, his Consent does
in that respect Extinguish and make void the others promise from the snaring
the promiser, except afterward the other party shall as freely come in as the
other did, and so make the promise mutual and equal. We have read of a sad
Accident upon this Account, that befell a Suitor to a young Gentlewoman, for
having won her affections, he had no regard to marry her, but growing proud of
his Conquests, boasted of her Easiness, and so left her without any deep
Engagement or Concern on his side, which slight neglect in a little Time,
changed her Love into Hatred and Disdain, and being of a good Family and Rich,
she wanted not Suitors, but quickly gave her self in Marriage to another, of
which he had no sooner Knowledge, but at a time when he was playing upon his
Lute he suddenly starting up broke his Lute to pieces, and ran destracted,
being justly punished by his own folly.
N.
NEst, contracted for Agnes, cha^t or holy. Nichola, a conqueror of the
people. Niphe, i. fair, Nahomi, (...) Nagnomi, i. beautiful, pleasant. Naides,
a certain sort of Nimphs or Virgins held by the Ancients to ^e Goddesses, and
worshipped by them as such, having their charge assigned over Rivers and
Fountains, perhaps being Spirits that haunted those places, and as they saw it
convenient, put on pleasing shapes to gain adoration from those that wandered
in a melancholy posture to or by those solitary places. Naprae, a sort of
Wood-Nymphs fancied or fabled like the ^ormer, and held by the rural people in
the like Veneration, upon the same account, their name being taken from the
Greek word (...), signifying a Wood. Nev^u, Surnamed Magdalen, was a very
Learned and Ingenious Lady of Roches, in Poitu, famous for her parts and
ingenuity, leaving diverse of her Writings of considerable use behind her, and
had a daughter no less accomplished in Learning and Ingenuity, which was
improved the more by her great industry in the Arts and Sciences she had
brought up in by her careful mother, to the praise and lustrution of her sex.
Niobe, Daughter of Tantalus, wept for the death of her children so
immeasurably, because they were slain for boasting themselves equal in birth to
those of the Goddess Lat^n ^^iz. Appolo and Diana, that she is seigned to be
turned into a perpetual weeping Marble Pillar, and that sympathizing with her
grief, the natural Marble has ever since wept against Rainy and cloudy weather.
She was Wife to Amphio^, King of Thebes, who was said by the melody of his Harp
to bring together the stones that built the walls of that City, and from her
came the saying of a mourning Niobe when any of the fair sex is too much
overwhelmed with tears and grief for the loss of children or relations. Naomi
was mother in Law to Ruth the M^abitess, who was married to Booz, the Father of
Obed, the Father of (...), who was the Father of David, from whom, according to
the flesh, Christ took upon him, in the fullness of time, by a Lineal Descent,
our humane nature, to redeem lost mankind, and reconcile us to a state of
happiness. Nox, Night, or the Queen of Night, was by the Ancients styled an
Heathen Goddess, and accounted the daughter of Primitive Chaos, and darkness.
Some likewise held her to be the Daughter of Heaven and Earth, married, as
Poets fable, to Erebus, the God of the lower Region of Hell, by whom she had
four children, viz. Fate or Destiny, Old Age, Sleep and Death; and she was
painted by them holding two infants in her arms, one sleeping and the other
waking; the one fresh colored ^^^e other pale or inclining to blackness,
deno^ing sleep, the office of night, to be the Image or representative of
Death. Nitocris, Queen of Babylon, was mother of Lebinetus, whom Cyrus, the
great King of Persia, thrust from his Throne though to prevent that City
falling into the Enemies hands, caused the great River Euphrates to be turned
from its wonted course, and brought it through the streets of Babylon an other
way; that by the rapidness of its course it might frustrate the Entrance of
the Persians, causing a Bridge likewise to be laid over it, and her Tomb to be
erected over the principal Gate of the City, the which when the Persians saw,
she was notwithstanding buried in; and when some time after Darius hoping by
the promise of a Superscription to find great store of treasure therein, sound
nothing but a sharp reproof engraved on a stone, for disturbing, through
covetousness, the Repository of the dead. Numbers were of so great account
among the Greecians for their usefulness, and the harmony and agreement as to
mysteries, and parts of the Creation sound in them, that in their Heatheni^h
Times they set up an Idol which they called Numeria, or the Goddess of Numbers,
or accounts, and paid Adoration to it. Nymphs in general were accounted in the
time of Paganism of an immortal Race, fabled to be the daughters of Oceanus and
Thetis, and were distinguished into Nereides and Naides for the waters, their
Dryades and Hamadryades had the care of the Forests assigned them, the Napeae
of the Meadows and Groves, the Oreades of the Mountains; some supposing them to
be departed Souls haunting places they most delighted in when they lived in the
body. Nursery-Maids. If you intend to fit your self for this employment, you
must naturally incline your self to love Young Children, otherwise you will
soon discover your unfitness to manage that charge; you must be very neat and
clearly about them, and careful to keep good hours for them, both to arise and
go to bed, likewise to get their breakfasts and Suppers at good and convenient
time: Let them not sit too long, but walk them often up and down, especially
those who cannot go well of themselves; you must also be extraordinary careful
and vigilant, that they get not any falls, thorough your neglect; for by such
falls many (the cause at first being unperceivable) have grown irrecoverably
lame or crooked. Therefore if any such thing should happen, besure you conceal
it not, but acquaint your Lord or Lady, Master or Mistress thereof, with all
convenient speed, that so means may be used for their Child's recovery before
it be too late. You must be extraordinary careful that you be no^/ churlish or
dogged to the children, but be always merry and pleasant, and contrive and
invent pretty sports and pastimes, as will be most suitable and agreeable to
the childrens age; keep their Linen and other things always mended, and s^^ter
them not to run too fast to decay. Do not let the children see that you love
any one child above the other, for that will be a means of dejecting and
casting down the other. -- Be careful to hear them read if it be imposed upon
you, and be not too hasty with them, have a special care how you behave your
self before them, neither speaking nor acting misbecomingly, le^ your (...)
Example prove the Subject of their imitation. Night-Walkers and Diverse. I join
them together as being but one and the same thing; for she that is a Diver or
Pickpocket is an infallible s^oler or Night-walker, This Occupation is contrary
to all other, for she opens her shop-windows when all other Trades are about to
shut them. The Night approaching she rigs her self in the best manner she can,
with some apparent outward Ensign of her Protection; having weighed Anchor, and
quitted her Port, she steers her course for some one principal street, as
Cheapside or Cornhil; with a gentle breese she first sails slowly on the one
side, and if she meet never a Man of War between Snow-hill and the Poultry, she
tacks and stands away to the other side; but if she be a tolerable right
Frigar, she is laid aboard before, ma^e fast with the Grapplings, and presently
rummaged in the Whold; sometimes she sheers off and leaves my Man of War on
fire. -- You shall know her by her brushing you, s^riog in your face, often
hastings in the street by gazing about her, or looking after some or other she
has brushed; but the most infallible sign is asking of Questions, as What is it
a ^l^ck? or, I am a Stranger, which is my way to such a place? -- If she is
picked up, she will make an hard shise but she will give a man something whereby
he shall remember her as long as he lives; besides it is ten pound to a penny
but she plays the Diver, and picks his pocket. I shall conclude this head with
the following relation. It chanced one time, that a Nightwalker (who shall be
nameless) traversing the s^re is; and with other Associates exposed to the like
looseness, entering an House of Good fellowship, where any light commodity might
be purchased for money: the Protrectress of that brittle Society, to discover
her Office and Quality, demanded of these Cavalieros if they would have a
Withdrawing-room and a Mistress? By all means ((...) these Gallants) for what
end came we hither? And having bestowed them in several rooms; Every one was
readily furnished with his light Curtezan. But this prodigal young Gallant on
whom the Subject of our Discourse is here Sce^ned, had of all others most
property in his for she was his own wife. What a strange kind of passion or
Antipathy this intrview begot, I leave to the strength of your imagination; who
can to life present two such Objects, as if you had been in presence of them.
Lon^^as in ^re the one could utter one words, to the other (...) sometimes
disclosing passion, sometimes shame. A^^^tion was far from giving way to any
amorous encounter: and though Looks might speak, their Tongues had quite
forgot all Dialect. At last, after a long continued silence, in an abrupt
disjoynted manner, her Husband addresseth himself thus unto her. Ha, Minion,
have I found you? Have your many Curtain-Lectures edified you thus? Have I
found your way of trading? And are these the Fruits of your teaching? Well! go
on. We are now both so far entered the high beat-path of folly, as it were
madness for us to hope ever to wipe off our dispersed insamy. No, Sir, quoth
she: To despair of recovery, were to conceive a distrust in Gods mercy. But
believe it, Sir, howsoever you esteem me, I am not what I seem to be. There are
no places I af^ect; nor trading I conceit. I am what I have been ever, careful
of the render of mine honor, Now, the occasion of my coming hither, was the
knowledge I received, how this House was your familiar Rendezvouze. A place
which you mightily frequented; and where your Fame stood dangerously engaged.
Your Person I described to the mercenary Governess of this hateful Family; that
if I might be exposed to any, it should be to such an One as I described, which
upon hope of sharing with me, she Promised. Now, Sir, reflect upon your self,
in me: how vo^^ous would these soul actions of loosnesse appear in me! how
contemptible would they make my person appear to any modesteye? And are these
such inexpiable crimes in the Weaker Sex: and must they be esteemed such light
Errors in you whose strength is greater? Is modesty too effeminate a quality
for man to retain? Is the Spirit of man to be employed in that most, which
detracts most from man? O, recollect your self, Sir, and you will see, nothing
can more transform you from your self, nor blemish your inward beauty; nor
enslave you to servile fancy; nor deprive you of future glory, than aflecting
of these Consorts of ^n and shame. The only conduct that these will afford
you, is to the Hospital, where they will leave you. Be pleased to put off your
self a little: and with a s^ngle eye to observe their li^ht Embraces. Proceed
these, think you, from a resolved love? Will they not for base lucre, show as
much kindness to their next Sui^er? And can there be any true affection, where
the Party makes no distinction? Nay, tell me, would the faithfullest
acquaintance you have among all these, relieve you, if your Fortunes had lest
you? Or afford you one nights Lodging, if want surprised you? Have they not got
the art of professing what they least intend: and sacrificing love where they
have none to bestow? Return then to your own house: and find that in a lawful
love, which you shall never enjoy in hateful lust

This advice delivered by so deserving a Creature; and in so winning a manner,
might have wrought singular effects in any pliable or well-disposed Nature, but
so strongly steeled was his relentless heart unto these, as with a disgraceful
and uncivil Kick he pusht her from him.

Natural modesty and affection. Intemperance is visible in but few of the very
worst of Females; Meekness is seldom disordered in them without great
provocation; and as their Sex is generally more difficult to be exasperated,
they are more easy to forgive than ours: It Is for the most part our Fault if
they injure us. Modesty is so inherent to their Frame, that they cannot divest
themselves of it without Violence to their Nature. We have heard of some Ladies
who have been modest almost to a Crime. -- Candaules had the Vanity to expose
his Queen Naked to the View of his Favorite Gyges, to show him what a Treasure
of Beauty he was possessed of: The practice was not so dexterously managed, but
the Lady was sensible of the Abuse, and requested her Husband to kill the
conscious Spectator: which he refusing, she applied her self to the Other,
engaging him to kill the King. We hear of no former disgust that she had to her
Husband, but since he would not dispatch his Friend, her Modesty could not bear
to have Two Witnesses of her undressing, alive at the same Time. -- Some have
been so tender in this Point, that they have severely revenged the most
harmless Accidents upon themselves. In most uncultivated Nations, the Women are
not without a sense of this Value. An Indida Girl, in one of our Plantations,
while she (...) at Table, according to her custom, it happened that in taking
off a Dish, she slipped upon the Handle of a Knife that dropped out of her Hand,
and in her Falling discovered Part of her Body, whereof being sensible by the
Company's laughing, she gave them as sudden Occasion to be serious; for she was
no sooner removed from their sight, but she drenched the same Knife in her
Lifes-blood. And a late Historian tells us a Story not less remarkable of a
certain Prince, who to divert the uneasiness of a fruitless passion, betook
himself to Travel. Returning after several Years Absence, his first Enquiry was
about the Lady, who he would have debauched who then lay desperately sick. He
straight hastened to her house, and fearing to come too late to find her alive,
he pressed abruptly into her Chamber, and the Attendants being at a little
distance, he kneeled at her bedside to crave her dying Pardon. She had for some
hours before lain speech less, but her surprise at the sight of him, recovered
her so much breath as to utter softly these Words: Prince, I dye for You, which
I have now only confessed, because I have therewith spoke my Last. Which being
said, she immediately expired. Here we see an Example of their Continency, and
a sacred Respect to the Marriage-Vow: This, and innumerable Instances beside,
sufficiently demonstrate their Truth and tha^ they can be just even where they
cannot affect. -- Let us therefore take a little pains to examine how they have
acquitted themselves in this Particular. Certainly there needs no better
Argument for Chastity in Women, than Love to their Husbands; and I dare appeal
to the generality of Wives in all Ages for a joint Consent for putting the
Trial of their Virtue upon this Issue. -- I might carry you into Greece, and
there show you the Ashes of Evadne, who cast her self into the Flaming rile of
her Husband. The Web of Penelope was too strongly wrought for Time or Slander
to unravel. I might produce the Cup wherein A^misia drank the Ashes of her
Husband. -- The very sight of Pompey's bloody Garment was enought to s^ike
Julia dead without enquiring into the Disaster. -- Sus^itia being strictly kept
by her Mother lest she should follow her Husband Lentulus into banishment,
putting on the Habit of a servant, past through the Guards and Watches, and
came by secret flight to the place where he was proscribed; leaving all the
pleasures of Rome to participate in the miseries of a Husband. -- Pliny the
Younger informs us of an Acquaintance of his in Italy, who was perpetually
afflicted with a most tormenting sickness: his Wife impatient to see him
languishing so long in misery, took advice of all the skilful Physicians, and
being assured from every one, that her Husbands Distemper was incurable, and
without so much as any possibility of the least Ease or Relief, she resolutely
advised him to be his own b^st Physician, and rid himself from his Malady at
once by a sudden and voluntary Death: But finding him a little surprised and
backward ^o ^o violent a method. Do not thank (said she) that the Torments I
see thee endure, are not as sensible to me as to thy self, and that to deliver
my self from them, I will not make use of the same Remedy I have prescribed to
thee. I will accompany thee in the Cl^e, as I have done in sharing all thy
Pain; Fear nothing (my Dear) but believe that we shall have pleasure in this
passage that will free us from misery, and we must certainly go happily, going
together. Having thus spoken, and rouzed up the Courage of her Husband, she
resolved that they should cast themselves headlong into the Sea, from a
precipice that hung over it. And that she might maintain to the last that
vehement Affection wherewith she had embraced him during his Life, she would
have him die in her Arms; and lest they should break their hold in the Fall,
she ^ied her self to him with her Girdle: In this manner she plunged down with
him, having no other fear upon her in this Adventure, but of being separated
from him in her last gasp. -- Naked Breasts. We find by lamentable; if I may
not say, fatal Experience, that the world too much allows nakedness in Women:
and it is now passed into a custom so general, that it is become common almost
to all Women and Maids of all sorts of conditions, and has spread it self
abroad into most parts of the Earth. But however, let us labor to imitate the
zeal of St. Chrysosi^me, and if we cannot prevent this disorder, let us strive
with him to make these Women know how great their Fault is in coming to Church
in such undecent Habit, and if I may presume to say, so as it were half naked.
Do you come into the house of God as to a Ball? says that great m^n to them.
Does this pomp, this soft and wanton Delicacy, this affected nakedness any whit
suit with or become the state of Supplicants and Criminals? But let me not only
pour out my Laments for those who appear vain and light in sacred places, but
also let me show my fear for them who do not fly their company, or who turn
away their Eves from those places where God more immediately bestows his
gracious presence to cast them upon those Idols that are so ga^^hly and
immodestly dres'd up. There is always danger in attentively looking upon a
Naked Breast, and there is not only a great danger, but a kind of Crime in
beholding it with attention in the Churches. The sight of a fair Neck, and
pretty swelling Breasts, are no less danger^^ for u^ than (...) of a (...) and
it is then we may say with the Scripture, that the Devil makes use of the
Windows of our Bodies for Death by sin to enter into our Souls; and I believe
that the Patriot Job had a mind to teach us this Truth, when he declares, that
he had made a covenant with his Eyes, to the end that he might not think on the
beauty of a Maid. Let us then remember that maxim of the Great St. Gregory,
that it is a mighty piece of impudence to look upon that which we are not
permitted to desire. David sinned for being too prodigal and free of his looks,
and one single Glance sufficed to make him fall into sin. That Prince was holy,
and Bathsheba, on whom by accident he cast his Eyes, was innocent; but she was
naked; David saw her in that posture, and there needed no more to make David
loose his Holiness, and Bathsheba her Innocence. Who is this proud one that
will refuse to be instructed by so great an Example, and who, after this
Example, will not avoid with care the sight and address of a Woman that openly
exposes all those Charms which she thinks are most beautiful and surprising.
Surely then they cannot be exempt from blame who do show their Breasts and
Shoulders at so extreme a rate, since they cannot possibly be ignorant that
that nakedness must needs be much more powerful than words to excite the
Motions of Concupiscence; for who does not know that the Eyes are the Guides of
Love, and that it is through them that it most commonly steals into our souls.
If the Devil sometimes makes use of the Ear to seduce our Reason, he does a
most always make use of the Eyes to disarm it, and to bewitch our hearts. A
naked breast and bare shoulders. are continually speaking to our hearts, in
striking and wounding our Eyes; and their language, as dumb as it is, is so
much the more dangerous as it is not understood but by the mind, and the mind
is pleased with the understanding it. The Beauty of a Neck which is presented
to our Eyes, has nothing but what attracts and allures us, and as it does not
cease speaking to us in its way and manner, nor cease soliciting us, and being
pleasing to us, it at last triumphs over our liberty, after it has abused and
betrayed our senses -- Men do very well know how dangerous it is to look upon a
naked bosom, and your vain and light Women are sensible how advantageous it is
to them to show it. Men say, and say again to the Women how much they are
smitten at the sight of their Necks and Shapes; The Women know the pernicious
Effects which the beauty of their Shapes and Necks produce in the minds of men,
when by their naked Breasts they do not only expose themselves to the loss of
their Reputation, but they do greatly run the hazard of losing their Innocence
too; Their Chastity is even struck and wounded by every glance of a loose and
wanton Eye, and their modesty is shockt by the vain Approbations which are
given them; the Idea of their Breasts does not less enter into their
imagination than into that of the men, who consider it attentively, and commend
it; and, as they most commonly do, join the Idea of all the Body to that of
their Breasts, being persuaded that they show the beauty of the one to make
that of the other be better judged of. There is no Age nor Quality which
exemp^s a Man from being tempted by the sight of a naked neck or breast, and
the Inclination that Nature inspires into us for our Neighbors, proves
oftentimes a disposition to the dishonest Love which the Devil suggests to us.
After this what can there be alleged for the Justification of those Maids and
Women who affect going with naked Necks? Will they say that they ought to be
suffered to uncover their Necks, etc. since it is lawful that they should go
with their Faces bare? It may be answered them, it is only through
condescension that the Church allows them to go without a Veil over their
heads, and that this relaxing of the modesty of the First Christians cannot
serve for a reason to give them greater liberty, and to conform themselves
wholly to the Vanities of the Age. In my Opinion, nothing discovers lightness
so much as to make strange Eyes familiar with the knowledge of your Breast. No
serious Judgment can conceit less than lightly of such exposed beauty; which
that Epigrammatist glanced at happily, when seeing one of these amorous Girls,
who had no meaning to lead Apes in hell, but would rather impawn her honor
than enter any Vestall Order, attyred in a light wanton Habit, and breast
displayed, and this in Lent time; when graver attire and a more confined bosom
might have better becom'd her; he wrote these Lines: Nunc emere hand fas est
(est Quadragesima) carnes;
Quin mulier, mammas, contegu ergo tuas?
With breasts laid out, why should I Shambles tempt;
"It Is held unlawful to buy flesh in Lent.
Dainty Nipples (said that excellent Moralist to a wanton Gallants) why do ye
so labor to tempt and take deluded eyes? must not poor wormelins one day tugg
you? Must those enazured Orbs for ever retain their beauty? Must Nature in
such ample measure show her bounty, and you recompense her love with lying
snaires to purchase fancy? -- These instances I the rather insist on, because
there is nothing that impeacheth civil same more than these outward fantastic
fooleries. Where the eye gives way to opinion: and a conceit is conveyed to
the Heart, by the outward sense: For, as by the Countenance, piety is impaired;
so by the Eyes is chastity impeached. Where this is and has been ever held for
an undoubted Maxim: Immodest eyes are Messengers of an unguarded heart. The
principal means then to preserve reputation, is to avoid all occasion of
suspicion. And forasmuch as we may suffer in our same through trifles, as well
as motives of higher importance; we are to be cautious in the least; lest we be
censured in these, though we send not in the greatest.

Nuns, their Institutions. Nuns, The end of Constituting them was a design of
continued Chastity under certain Vows, that once being entered into, were not
to be Violated, but to continue Virgins, that so the Cares and Troubles of the
World which too frequently happen in a Married Life, might not hinder them from
Dressing and Adorning their Souls with Robes of Righteousness, to be fit
Spouses for the Glorious Bridegroom at his coming into the Marriage-Chamber of
Eternal Rest; but tho it was intended to a good end, in like manner other Pious
Institutions was corrupted in time; Pope Pius the first, among the Christians,
allowed Nunneries, Decreeing that none, till they were of Understanding, should
be admitted, and that then it should be done Voluntarily, not by wheedling or
compulsion, and they to be twelve years old at least, and their Consecration to
be on Epiphany, Easter-Eve, or the Feast of the Apostles, except when any that
had made that Vow of Chastity fell sick without hope of Recovery; and that none
should meddle with a Cup, or put Incence into the Cenior, was the Decree of
Secherus, in the year 175. St. Paul Intimates it to be a good Institution when
he says, Let no Widow be chosen before she be threescore years of Age; and
Jepthas Daughter is not allowed by the best Writers to be Sacrificed, for that
would have been an Abomination to the Lord, as strictly forbid by the Mosaic
Law, but that she was made a recluce, and kept a single Life, which occasioned
the Daughters of Israel to go up to visit and comfort her in her solitary
state. Nunnery, a College of Nuns that were Christians, were usually
Consecrated by the Bishop or Priest, who covered them with a Veil, the Abot or
Abtress, upon pain of Excommunication, not being to meddle in it; the Virgin to
be Consecrated, was presented to the Bishop in her Nuns Attire, standing at the
Altar, with Tapors burning and Music, when at the putting on the Veil these
words were expressed, viz. Bohold Daughter, and forget thy Fathers House, that
the King may take pleasure in thy Beauty, to which all the People present
saying Amen, the Veil was cast over her, and the Religious Women that were to
Enjoy her Society Kissed and Embraced her, after which the Bishop blessed her,
and Praying for her, she departed to her place, there to be Instructed by her
Seniors in good Works, and for this purpose many Nunnerys were erecte^ in all
parts of Christendom, and at first there was something extraordinary of
Devotion in it, but at length it has degenerated and corrupted, as many things
whose Original Institutions were very commendable, have done, for no Cloister
or Stone-wall can keep out (...) thoughts where the mind is impure, for Love
and Lust will find a way to be satisfied, even in these retirements, of which
many give large instances; but we not so much as dreaming that the Ladies of
our Nation will be over hasty to part with their sweet Liberty for such
unprofitable Confinements, it matters not whether we enlarge upon this Subject,
or briefly touch upon it for the sake of variety. Nose, Rem^dies for such Vices
as are Incident to it. -- Noses, are the ornaments of Faces; beauty is a nice
and cleanly Dame, who loves to have the Nose (tho but the sink of the brain to
convey from it what is noxious) kept neat and handsome, as well as the other
parts, which are designed for more Honorable uses. If there be any
obstruction, soreness, or any thing that appears unseemly, or occasions offense
to the smelling in the Nose, as being afflicted with some sore or ulcer, take
Calamus Aromaticus, Gelingale, Damask roses and Lavender, dry them that they
may be reduced into a fine Powder, sift it well, and snuff it into the Nostrils
proportionably at sundry times. -- Next, take one Scruple of London-Tre^cle,
disolve it in White Wind, and snuff it several mornings up the Nose; you may,
for want of the former, take Cloves, Lignum, Alloes and Roses, each two Drams,
Spicknard a Dram, Musk two Grains, pulverise what is capable so to be, and put
them into a Past, and with White Wind, make them into little Pills; and to use
them, dissolve one in Rosewater, and force it up into your Nostrils; but first
wash them well with White Wind, wherein Rose-Leaves and Lavender have been
boiled, and it will not only cure the Distemper, but render your breath and
smelling pleasant. -- Noses that are much charged with Excrements of the Brain,
to clear them you must, if the Rheumetick Distillation be cold, anoint the
forehead or Temples with some hoaring Oynment, or hot Oil, or if the Rheum be
occasioned by heat, then cold Oynments, etc. and use suffumagations of Mirrh,
Frankincense, or the like, and by these means the Handle of your Face will be
restored to its former beauty and pleasantness, unless you have been in any
dangerous dark Counterscuffle, and for that we give no directions as to cure,
but refer you to others. Niples, their Caps and Soreness, how to remedy.
Nothing is so sure as when some intestine heat impairs the Radient Whiteness of
the Snow-hills, or curdles the Milkey Necture of the Breasts into such a hard
and compact thickness, that not being able to get forth, it lies and generates
sharp corroding streams, which fret the tender outlets of Cupid's Fountains;
yet here Ladies, you may furnish your selves with recuring Remedies. Now take
the green leaves of Plantain and Mallows of each four handfuls, Earthworms new
prepared, six Ounces of Roses, three Ounces of Melliot, and Oil of Cammomoile
one Ounce, Early-meal three Ounces, boil these together, and with a sufficient
quantity of this decoction, adding Bedellium two Drams dissolved in Vinegar,
make a Plaster, and apply it to the Breasts, and if after this the Paps remain
hard, apply some repercussive Medicines, that the Breast may not draw more
blood than they can digest; bath or anoint the Breasts and under the Armpits,
with what we prescribe, viz. An Ounce of Bolearmonack and with a sufficient
quantity of Oils of Roses and Myrtle make an Unguent, thinning it a little with
sharp Vinegar, then take dried Mint two handfuls, one handful of Wormwood, boil
them to mash, then straining, add the Meal of Lupins and Beans, each half an
Ounce, make them into a Pulsis, with the Oil of Lillys, and apply it to the
place grieved; If the Blood be curdled in the Breast, thus you may dissolve it,
take of Smallage an handful, Oxymel two Ounces, Meal of Red Vetches and Lupins,
of each two Ounces, make them into a Cataplasme; and when the Paps are subject
to clecks and and chaps occasioned by hear, use things mollifying and
attenuating before the Milk comes to the Breast^, wherefore it will be good for
the Married Ladies, before they Lie in, to use some mollifying Pulrises, or to
anoint the Paps with Beeswax and Oil worked together with fresh Lard. Nails,
to Remedy the Vices incident to them. Nails of the Hands, etc. are peerly
Helmets wherewith prudent Nature has armed the active Fingers, to which if
they be nearly burnished, they give a commanding Comeliness, and may at a
pressing Exigency be fit materials to head Cupids penitrating Shafts. -- Nails
that are Spotted, remove the Spots with these Medicaments, Incorporate M^rh
with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine, and lay it on the Spots, and they
will be removed; or bru^se Flax-seed, and mixing it with Honey and Wax, lay it
on the Spots. -- Nails bruised and becoming black, be reason of the Congealed
Blood underneath, must have applied to them a Serecloth made of Sheeps Grease,
Capons Grease, Oil of Cammomile; or to dissolve the Blood, use Goats Dung mixed
with Sulphor, or Incorporate Cummin-seed with Diaculum I^^atum, and Oil of
Cammomile in form of an Unguent -- Nails being so much bruised that they come
off, to make them grow speedily again, soment them with Whitewine wherein Dates
have been boiled. -- Nails cleft and roted, ^^icking still on, to remove them
that new ones may succeed, take an ounce of Flax-seed, three Drams of
Cardamens, and as much Honey, incorporate them well together, and lay them
Paister-ways. -- Nails that have the skin growing unseemly over them, to make
it retire, take a drop or two of Milk of Spourge Laurel, a little Salt,
Barly-meal and Costus Poudered, mix them with as much Honey as will make them up
into a Plaster, and apply it to the Fleshy part; observe also to pair your
Nails smooth and decently, but not with so much overstrictness, that you
cutting too near your Fingers, cause them to be sore, and so instead of seemly
render them unseemly; if they grow muddy or cloudy on the Sup^rfices, you may
gently scrape them with a piece of fine Glass, and they will flourish and be
the more lively. Neck, How to Beautify, etc. Nothing more commends the Neck for
comely than to be White and Smooth, for it is a part that may in Modestnes
strictest Rules be exposed to sight, and ought to represent a Pillar of
Polished Ivory, which supports the Globe of Beauty and Wisdom, with a suitable
Luster and becoming Grace; yet sometimes its Beauty is impaired by Kernels.
King's Evil, hard Tumors and swellings. The first of these usually breed in
those places where the Emunctuaries of the nobler parts are. If ^ernels be in
the neck, after the body has been moderately purged, and the Cephalic Vein
opened in the Arm, apply mollifying and discussive Fomentations with Spunges
dipped in strong Vinegar; then apply a plaster of Oxcycroceum, adding a little
Gum Ammoniac, Bedellium, Opoponax, Sagapenum, and powder of Euphorbium; but if
it be a swelling or Tumor of the Neck, which arises between the Skin and the
Aspera Arteria. In the first place Purge the Body with Cephalaick pills, using
a drying and temperate Diet; take after this Sal Gem, burnt Alum, Amber, Cutle
bone, Nutgalls, Cinnamon, Ginger, long and black Pepper, Pelitory of Spain, each
half an Ounce, made all into a fine powder, and then add to them of Rose Water
four Ounces; begin to take this in the Wain of the Moon, and take every morning
a Spoonful, and if you be Temperate in eating and drinking, the swelling will
decrease, and leave your neck as smooth and white as before; and to hasten it
the sooner, foment the place with the Decoction of Bryoniae, wild Cucumers,
Melliot, Beet, Sage and Cammomile; or these Herbs thus boiled may be put into a
bag, and applied as hot as may be to the place grieved, and a plaster of
Diaculum laid on afterward. We might give you directions as to the Kings evil,
but few will believe it can be Cured by Applycations, therefore we pass it
over, and leave them to the Men of Art, whose business it more properly is to
take care of such as are so afflicted. If the neck be impaired of its beauty by
spots, freckles, leanness, wrinkles, or the like, what in such cares are herein
prescribed, for the Face will remove them. Nakedness an ornament to women, or
persuasion by way of Paradox, to renew the first fashion in going naked. --
Ladys you will take this (we doubt not) for an odd kind of a whim, and unfit to
be ranked with more serious matters, but being brought to us by a young
Gentlewoman, Just as the fit of Anger with her Tailor was op^n her for spoiling
her a new Man^^^, by bungling it into a shape that put a deformity upon her
delicately proportioned body, in making her seem bunch backed, we could not
forbear gratifying her Earnest request that it might have a place in this work,
Though we do not believe it will answer her Expected revenge in spoiling the
Tailors trade, or that you will follow her directions. Look upon it then as a
paradox, and it will not be unpleasant in the perusal. -- Women's beautys (says
she) and rare perfections are such that ornaments, rather cloud and shadow
than add to their native Lusture. To be huddled up, and as it were bur^^ in
Clothes is a kind of (...), or as if guilt or shame made lovely woman shro^d
herself up in Covertures of obscurity, The Sun seems to mourn and Loose his
brightness as to our sight, when he is muffled up in Clouds; Nakedness was the
primitive ornament when Reason was not depraved with long and Traditional
Customs, nor tinctured by any prevalescent humor; wh^^ is most co^sonant to
the Law of Nature, ought most to be followed; Adam and Eve we know were so far
from being Clothed, that it was the greatest mark of their Liberty and
uprightness; and the first brand that stigmatized them after their Fall, was
their making themselves Aprons of Figleaves, which implied a guilty shame, upon
the forfeiture of their naked and native Innocence: however their Garments were
so few that they skreened but a small part of their Majestic Comeliness from
the wondering Eves of the Creatures, not indeed did the Ages that presently
succeeded, grow up into Garb or Fashion, but continued with a very litlle
variation, and possibly what their progenators did only with Fig Leaves, they
supplied with ^idskin, or some such thing; and those nations who have not
alienated their naked simplicity either by Commerce, or busy Inventions, do as
yet re^^^ this open Integrity, and decline nor to those unseemly
Sophistications of beauty, viz. Garments. Our Historians tell us, that upon the
discovery of the Indies, the Natives were found Clad in the beauteous Robes of
Nature and naked Innocence, who living merely among themselves, and by their
own peculiar Customs, it is to be supposed they retained among them that which
nature desired to be kept pure and unvaried, not to say that all People
naturally desire to go naked, yet certainly it is a shrewd suspi^ion of it,
that when the Sun returns to this s^^e of our Horizon, they know no better way
to Congratulate the approach of that glorious Light so near them, than by
putting on thin or open Garments, and cool themselves by frequent Bathings,
which seems no other than a desire of nakedness, and since the Tyrant Custom*
absolutely prohibits it them, they will approach it bu such ways as near as
they can, and surely it must be either an happiness or excellent duty that that
they strive to perform on that occasion; but in Women we have seen these
desires far more Intense, they having made it their delight to uncover the
parts of their chiefest Beauty, as their Faces, Swan white Necks, soft rising
Breasts, Ivory Shoulders, and Ala^^after Hands, so that they do endeavou^ in
part to break that restraint that hides the rest of their Glory, and to set
forth their delicate tresses, cur^d and frounced in the most curious Inviting
manner; and though possibly Jealousy may cause all these to be hid; yet it is a
violation of their Wills, and the wea^hers coldness sometimes may oblige them
to it; yet this is but providence, or possibly the Company may distaste it; yet
that is but compliance for what beauteous Woman is there that could not wish
all her Garments of Lawn, and Transparent, that their delicate shapes might
charm the Wondering Spectators in Love and longing desires, rather than lie hid
in rich and gorgeous Apparel; for if, as Plato says, Souls unwillingly depart
out of the fair bodies, that must needs be a Curious Mansion which so fine a
substance as the Soul is in love with; Who then can blame the Owner to delight
in it? And what a torment is delight if it be shut up in one Breast, and not
diffused into a lively communication? For all kind of blessings are multiplied
by their division; and what greater blessing is there than a rare simetry, and
Contexion of feature which can charm knowledge into admiration, and Majesty
into Love -- We give to all the virtues, the habits and visages of Women; and
of all the virtues Truth is the best; for Truth is the mother of Justice, and
Justice, they say, Comprehends them all; yet she is Painted Naked, and Naked
truth is always in high Esteem among the good and vituous; and is it not very
fit, that all the sex should Imitate so Excellent a pattern and mistress? It
may doubtless be objected, that this would produce Infinite provocations and
Enticements to Lust; but I say, no; for I dare affirm what by Painting and
washing, and Looseness and Change of Garments, what by gaudy Inventions of
dressings, Gaite and Air, Port and Mien, there is much more fuel added than if
all went with no more mantles than nature thrust them into the world withal,
their Hair hanging Loosly down, or carelessly gathered up into a fillet and
almost perhaps a Little apron to hide the pudeuda from being too much gazed at
and blown upon; those men that have been often among the naked Indians confess
there is a Less temptation in nakedness, than in Artificial adornments and
Embelishments for if indeed it be considered aright, there is nothing that does
so much puff up (...) as the circumstances of rich apparel, Curious dressings
and pleasing scents and perfumes, which screw up the apprehention and fix the
Imagination upon somewhat that is great; so that by this means a number of
Great persons are zealously, courted to have their appetites satisfied; whereas
if they were either left naked or rduced to a vulgar garb, the temptation would
vanish: nakedness restores a ^men to themselves; for what an Irregular height
does the venetian Chippius mount them? what To^rs of Turkish Tires have they
now in fashion, so that the face of a short woman, seems to stand in the
middle, her stature is so Augmented by the building of her head so many story
high; how does the dressing of all nations disguise them that that they must
put off their masking habit, or like watches be taken to pieces er'e they can
be enjoyed? and to what other end I pray were they made, as to their worldly
Felicity? The Customs of Countries are different, and the Garb is Majestic at
one plac^ which is Sordid and (...) at an other: All People have not the same
Conceptions of Beauty; White is as hateful to an Ethiopian as Black to us. But
once uncloath Women, and according to their Complexions, they are all the same;
but the Conception about the harmony and measures of a body, differs not: And
what greater Right can I do my Sex than to bring Women to be Judged by one
Rule; and since every Woman judges herself the Fairest, she that would be
backward to this Arbitrament, would be diffident of her self, and consequently
a Renegade from her Sex. The Three beautiful Godd^sses, we find, ^ript
themselves in Mount Ida, when they came to Paris to pass his Judgment upon them
which was the Fairest. And Co^inines tells us of a Princess who permitted the
Ambassadors wh^ came to demand her in marriage, to see her only in a Lawn
Sm^ck, that they might give a better Report^ of her Beauty, telling them she
would even put off that too, if they were not satisfied. For as there is an
inextinguishable Jealousy and Emulation among some Women, so there is an
unmeasurable Pride, and Pride arising out of Confidence, all will not decline
Judgment. And what better way than these Rules which the Voices of all conclude
on? for a Woman may paint a Blue or Yellow Cheek as well as a Red one; but the
sweet composure and measure of her body, her limbs, and comely shape, cannot
alter; and how imperfect are they to be seen through Clothes, which may hide
and falsify many things, which in a Veracious Nakedness may be truly discerned.
Men have cast two ^reat blemishes upon our Sex; First, Uncertainty, and Change
of Judgment; and, Secondly, Inconstancy in Clothes and Carriage; and how can
either be better remove than if the fair ones were reduced into such a posture
as they should all necessarily agree in, and that they had not liberty to
change? And, I pray, what other way is there, unless they be brought tobe all
Naked? But then they may complain, Take away their Arts and their Ornaments,
and they shall want of their Complacency and Provocations to their Husbands.
But notwithstanding, they have liberty enough left them; They may dye, or
pounce, or figure their Skins, after the manner of the ancient Britains. In a
word, since the Sun, the Moon, and all the Glorious Battalia of Heaven, appear
as Nature made them, and everything but men and women are contented with what
Nature allotted them, why should Woman, who is the Masterpiece of Nature, hide
her beauty, out of mere Humor and Fancy to enrich Tailors, Weavers and
Sempstresses who, if the Naked Fashion be followed, may hang themselves? Nature
considered in her wonderful Operations in the producing of mankind, and other
things. -- Nature is powerful in her Operation upon things subject to her
Dominion. The Philosophers and Sages searching* and narrowly prying into her
Secrets, found continually new wonders, to crea^e in them admiration, and lift
up their thoughts in contemplation, esteeming her the Queen of the World, and
the careful indulgent mother of all things in it, who never sleeps nor slumbers
in her charge, but performs every thing under it with great Diligence and
Industry. ^rn^ing things with such exactness and beauty, in their respective
Kinds, that the Royal Prophet when he looked into himself, and considered the
Comp^^ition, and admirable Frame of his Body, seemed to be astonished at the
exactness and harmony he found therein, so that it caused him to cry out, that
he was featfully and wonderfully made; and also holy Job contemplating his
beginning, and from a kind of Nothing he came, says, Have thou not (meaning the
God of Nature) poured me out as Milk, and curdled me as Cheese? Thou have
clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones and sinews: Thou
have granted me Life and Favor, and in thy visitation has^ preserved my
Spirit. Behold but the beauty of the Universe, and its Order and Harmony, and
then it plainly appears it is all one great wonder to raise astonishment in our
minds; and being taken in Parables and Individuals, it produces no less
admiration: There is nothing so small as not worthy our regard; nothing but
what in one measure or other brings benefit to mankind; the least Herb or
Insect is proper to some use: Nature has so prudently provided and furnished
this great Storehouse, the Word, that Man, the possessor of it, may not have
any Reason or Cause to complain of, or for any thing she has not placed in it,
but above his own Frame is excellent even in it. Whilst it is forming and
making in the Womb, there Nature, in the Gloomy Cell of Generation, works with
wonderful cunniog, to raise from a Lump, or indigested Mass of Corruption, a
stately and beautiful Structure, adorned with all the Ornaments of Loveliness,
pleasing not only to it self, when it comes forth and grows up; but also
gracious in the Eyes of the Creatures it is born to rule over: Though, for all
this, we see she sometimes, though unwillingly, works preposterous and misshapen
births; and sometimes, as the Learned tell us, she, by one accident or other,
is compelled to make one body participate of either sex, as in the case of
those they call Hermophrodites; and the Reason they give for this particular,
is, That the Womb contains three Cells, one on the right, another on the left
side, and a third in the bottom, or middle, into which last, when the Seminal
matter falls, an Hermophrodite is held to be begotten in this manner, because
Nature does ever tend to that which is most complete* willingly inclining to
male Generation, or the producing male Infants; and therefore when the male is
sometimes formed in the principal parts, and yet through the evil disposition
of the Womb and Object, and inequality of the Seed. when Nature, for want of
Heat, and same other the like O^structions, cannot perfect the male, she
continues as much however of the male part to it as may be, yet the female part
joining likewise, the body participates of Two Natures, on different Sexes; and
so the Hermophrodite is produced, partaking yet more of the one sex than the
other; for we remember not that we have read of any that could use both members
of Generation so distinctly as to beget and concieve Children, most commonly
inclining to the latter. However, we believe there has been some mistakes upon
this account, and that some have been reputed Hermophrodites, that have not
been reasonably been to considered as such, through some defects that might
happen, and do frequently happen to Women that have much heat in them. We have
heard of diverse who have been taken to such kind of Creatures, by being
troubled with a Puzlement, or coming forth of the Generation member, which have
by the care of skillful Physicians and Surgeons, been restored to their proper
office and use; and of one of the like Nature we shall give an account, as it
is taken out of the Academy of Paris, being the Copy of a Petition delivered to
the Present French King, to restore a Woman who had been judged an
Hemophrodite, (by the mistake of unskillful Physicians who viewed her) to her
Christian Name, and proper Gatb of the female sex, which she was forbidden to
own, or wear, they supposing her to be a Man, and s^ caused her to alter her
Name and Habit, upon pain of being whipped, as by her Petition will more fully
appear in these words:

Sir,
Margaret Malaure most humbly shows, That by an unparalled misfortune having
Lived hitherto without knowing her parents. She finds her self under a
necessity of making her sex known. -- Your Petitioner was scarcely come into
the World, before she lost both her Father and Mother; but having been baptized
by the Curate of Pourdiac, in Guyenne, he was so charitable as to take care of
her Education; but whether through the negligence of the Nur^e, or though the
weakness of her constituion, she found her self inconvenienced with a certain
imperfection, called by the Physicians Prolapsus Ureri. Your Petitioner never
remembers that she was otherwise. She became accustomed to this Infirmity, and
no body taking care to cure her of it when Yonng, she thought all Women had
been in the same condition. In 1685. being then One and Twenty Years of Age,
she fell sick at Toulouse, in the House of a Lady, whom she served, upon which
she was carried to the public Hospital, where her Infirmity being perceived,
by chance, the Physician, who doubtless had never seen the like, was so far
mistaken, that he took ^o^r Petitioner for an H^rmophrodite and such an one as
seemed to partake more of the Boy than the Girl. He made a great noise of this
discovery, and the Vicars general were consulted, who ordered your Petitioner
to put on man's Apparel. -- This disguise being no way convenient for her, she
went to Bourdeaux, where, resuming Woman's Habit, she served a Lady till the
year 1691. at which time a private person recollecting her for the same person
that the Vicar's General had ordered to go in man's clothes, caused her Lady to
turn her away, and constrained her to return to Toulouse, where being put in
Prison for being discovered in Woman's habit. Sentence was passed against her
the 21 st of July 1691. by the Twelve Magistrates of the City, called Capitols,
that she should call her self by the Name of Arnold Malaute, and should go clad
as a man, with strict Injunction, prohibiting her to take upon her the name or
habits of a woman, upon pain of being whipped; and being served with this Order,
she gave obedience to it, not well knowing w^ at she was her self. -- Being
th^s become destitute of any way is get a livelihood, in regard she understood
no sort of work that was fit for a man to undertake, she wandered up and down
from place to place, only sub^^^ing upon the Charity of well-^^^sed people, yet
behaving her self with modesty and discretion, as appears by sundry
Certificates of the Magistrates of several places. (...) Petitioner was
extremely (...) be pitied, uncertain her self of her condition, and being taken
^^ others for one of those Ch^^^ called Hermophrodites. -- 'T^^ great doubt
whether there ^^ such things in reality; but this Question is rather to be
examined in Philosophers Writings (...) here to be handled; the Opi^^^ most
follow, is, That though Nature proceed not so far (...) Metamorphoses, that she
never defaces the Character she has given to distinguished both Sexes, that she
never confounds (...) Marks or Seals, conie^^^^ that there are no true
Herm^phrodites, wherein both Sex are perfect. -- It must be granted however,
that s^metimes some certain pers^ns are (...) formed and sh^ped, that they who
have not been able to di^tinguish the real sex have been in some measure to be
Exc^sed. -- (...) there is nothing to support this conjecte^re in your (...),
^^ly if there be any t^ing in this Accident, ^t has befall^^^^^, which
res^mbles a prog^^^. I dare be b^ld (...) it is (...) mistake of the (...), and
Surg^o^s that viewed it full, and who by their ^^^mination of it, have made not
no other (...) but that of their o^n ignorance your ^etiti^^ner h^s had always
the shape, vi^^^* Inclinations and M^ltadies of the ^^^^le se^, only she was in
truth a Little disfi^ured b^ the puzlement that happ^ned in her person, which
made her be taken for a man. But in the month of October Last, coming to Paris*
to consult the Learned and Experienced, she was no ^^^ner viewed by the Si^^r
H^l^^^ius, Doctor of Physic* b^t he p^^^ently A^knowledged her for what she
was, and the Sie^ur S^viard Swo^en Surgeon of the Hospital, to whose care the
said Do^^or Committed her, has so well restored and settled all things in their
proper place, that the Enigma, which was occasioned only by the displacing of
the parts now disapearing, there nothing more remains to your petitioner, in
doubt but that she is a perfect Virgin, acc^^ding to the Authentic
Certificates, which she has to show. Therefore seting aside such refle^ctions,
as naturally f^l our thoughts upon an Accident so Extraordinary, all that is to
be ^one. is civily to restore your Petitioner that Sex, which Nature has
^^^^^owed upon her, the Name that was given her in baptism, the Ha^ it which
the L^ws C^vil and Canonical oblige (...) to wear, which are the three things
in the W^orld that we have the le^^t reason should he ^ravish^ from us, yet
(...) of (...) (...) ^^ken from you^ ^e^^^^^ by their Decree. -- It (...) true,
th^^ the (...) of ^^olou^^ may, by an ^^^^al made to them, reverse the Judgment
of the Capitols; but your Petitioners poverty will not perm^t her to take so
long a Journey without ex^^^^^ her self to new di^^races. Her modesty is an
unsurmo^ntable Obstacle, in regard, that by a particular privilege belonging
to the Jur^sdiction of the Capitols, their Decrees having ^ower to seize and
distrain, notwithstanding the Appeal; Your P^titioner dares not appear at
Toulouse in Wom^^^ H^bit, without rendering her self liable to an Infamous
Punishment, which she no ways deserves. Nor can she any more appear in man's
apparel, without in^ringing the Laws of De^^^cy, without transgressing the
Ord^rs of good Government, and incurring the C^n^ures of the Church. -- Her
modesty also would suffer much more, by another Review, and an Ex^mination*
which they wou^d certainly subject your P^ti^^ner to, wherein she would be the
less spared by the Physicians of Toulouse, as being the first that viewed her;
So that she can expect nothing from them but severe Usage, not without danger
of her Person, as being she that has been the Cause, though the innocent one,
of the discovery of their Ignorance. -- Therefore the Error in Fact, which was
the occasion of the Decree of the Capitols, being now entirely removed, your
S^ppliant having neither Parents nor fixed Habitation, and labour^ng under
Extremity of Want, nor having any friend, either public or private, that will
concern himself to preserve her from the punishment that may be inflicted on
her, she has Reason to hope from yo^^ Maje^^y's justice, whose Sov^^^ign
Authority is above ne^d^^^^ Forms of proceeding; that you will be pleased to
grant her such a Decree as may secure her condition. -- For these Reasons, Sir,
considering the occasion to be so singular, and remote from being drawn into
Example, may it please your Majesty to Cancel, Revoke and Dis^^^l the Decree of
the Capitols of T^^louse, Bearing Date the 21st of July, 1691. as being
grounded upon a mistake in Fact, of the personal Condition of your Suppliant,
to the end she may resume her Name, her Sex and Habit of a Virgin, etc. and
your Petitioner shall ever pray for the health and prosperity of your Majesty.


-- This Petition was signed by M. Lauther, Advocate* and presented; but what
Effects it had as to reversing the Sentence, we are as yet to learn, nor
matters it much to our purpose. But however it might happen to this woman, or
whatsoever may be alleged in her behalf, 'ris apparent there are those that in
some degree participate of either sex, though again well allow there may be
mistakes made by unexperienced Midwives, who have been deceived by the Evil
conformation of the parts, which in some male births may have chanced to have
had a Protrusion, not to have been discerned as appeared by the example of a
Child Christened at Paris, by the name of Joana, as if it had been a Girl, when
upon a more narrow inspection it proved a boy, and on the contrary, the over
f^r ex^en^ion of the Clyto^^s, in female birth's, may have occasioned the like
mistakes. Gallen however allows a transmu^ation of sex, when he says a man is
nothing different from a woman, but in having his Genital members without his
body, and that if nature having formed a man, and would convert him into a
woman, she has no other task to perform but to Invert his members, and a woman
into a man, by doing the contrary; but this we cannot allow, because it seems
to us Impossible to be done, unless we understand him of the Embrio in the
womb, which is yet as soft wax* Liable to take any impression, or be molded
and altered as nature pleases, and then by Extraordinary heat, Suddenly coming
into the womb, and Increasing in the Geni^al members, a female was d^signed and
had been so* had not that heat helped nature in her formation; a change may be
pu^ upon it, and it maybecome a male, yet it will upon such an Alteration
retain some certain Gest^res unbeseeming the male sex, as female Actions, a
shrill voice, and more feeble than ordin^ry, very fair, but Little or no hair
on the face when grown up: and contrary wise, nature having often designed a
male in the womb, and cold humors fl^wn in the Genitals, have been Inverted
yet when brought forth, as it grows up, it shows more and more of a masculine
temper, in G^re, Voice and Inclination to such things as women rarely accustom
themselves to, and of this sort we believe many Brave Virgoes, so samed in
story, were.

Natural Causes, conducing to the Advantage of mankind, etc. -- Nature has many
Agents, if we may properly term them so, that she employs in her workings, and
sometimes calls in our care and art to her assistance. It falls out a matter
of wonder, that Nature being very Ingenious, of great Art, Judgment and Force,
and mankind a work of so special regard, yet she many times miscarries in the
rigth froming the body, and disposing the mind; which defect is not so much to
be at^ributed to Nature, in her common workings, who aims to make every thing
perfect, as it is in the Parents, who apply not themselves to the means of
Generation, wi^h that order and concert which is by Nature established, or know
the conditions which ought to be observed to the end their children may prove
beautiful in body and mind: for by the same Reason for which one shall be born
very witty (having always rega^d to the self-order of causes) many hundred will
in a temperat^, or distempered Region, prove of slender capacities. Now if by
Art we may procure a Remedy of this, it may be much available, especially to
the Fair Sex; which we will labor to do within the bounds of modesty; and for
the better unders^^nding of it, we shall place it distincly und^^ Four Heads,
or principal parts. The first is to show the natural Quality and Temperature
which man and ought to posses, to the end they may use Generation. The second
is, to consider what diligence the Parents ought to employ when they are
desirous of male children. Thirdly, How they may become wise and discreet. And,
Fourthly, how they may be dealt withal, after their birth, for the preservation
of their Wit. And as to the first of these, it is necessary that a Woman be
cold and moist in the contexture of her frame, that so she may be temperate and
fruitful, and that the fruit she produces may be without any natural defect;
For all Philosophers and Physicians hold, that cold and moisture, moved with a
little temperizing heat, produce the most effectu^l Generation, as the Earth so
ordered produces the best crop of Grain. The Womb is the Field of man's
Generation, and according to the state and condition it is^n, so it produces
the birth? therefore women intending to have fair children, without deformity,
or blemishes, should have great regard to be temperate in eating, drinking and
exercise, from their conception to their uprising, that the humors may be
agreeable, and the contribution kept in a moderate temperance, and then Leave
to nature the rest, which having good materials to work on, never fails to
produce very curious pieces, set out and exactly completed, beyond the
Exception of the greatest Critics. And indeed it is past, all Exception that
the qualities that render a woman fruitful, are mainly cold and moisture, that
might she be capable of breeding much Phlegmatic blood, to be serviceable for
the forming and supporting the child in the womb, and breeding store of milk;
for should there be much beat* the blood would be made unfit for the Gendering
of milk, and so the babe would pine a way for want of Norishment; for with that
Hypocrates and Galen affirm it is nourished and Relieved all the time it
remains in the mothers womb. -- And now, though we Consider, women cold and
moist, in the General, made so for the sake of Generation, yet the fruitfulness
and Advantage or disadvantage, is more or Less, according to the degrees of
cold and moisture, for some are so in the fir^, others in the second, some
again in the third, and in each of those they may kindly conceive, if the
masculine Effects answer them, in proportion of h^ar since we find not that the
Philosophers, or Phisi^ians have so exactly distinguished these degrees, that a
woman may Expressly know in what degree she is, and so the better dispose and
order her self for the bringing forth fair and wirty Children, we will confider
something to give them a Light into it, from the Effects these Qualities do
work in women; and these are diverse; therefore we may reasonably divide them
under these seven particulars, viz. The first, by the wit and abilities of the
woman. The second, by her manners and Conditions. The third, by her big or
small voice. The fourth, by her spareness or Corpulency. The fifth, by her
color. The sixth, by her Hair; and the seventh, by her fairness or
swarthyness. As to the first, we may know, that although the wit and Ability of
a woman flow chiefly from the brain, yet the vessels of Generation are of great
force and vigor to alter; for if they be found hot and dry, cold or moist, or
of what soever temperature, the other parts, says Galen, will be of the same
Tenor. Now if we grant that cold and moist are the Qualities that work an
Impairement in the reasonable part, and that their contraries, viz. Hot and
dry, give the perfection and Encreasment of understanding, we shall find her
who shows much wit and ability, partake of cold and moist but in the first
degree, and if she be deficient in understanding, and of a very shallow brain,
it is a sign that she is cold and moist in the third degree, and this too may
be known by sound sleeping, and much dreaming of pleasant things, though much
pleasantness of conceit, is ordinarily accompanied with Little wit; but if she
pertakes of both these Extremes, then she stands in the second degree. A voice
hoarse, big and sharp, says Galen, is a token of much heat and dryness, and a
manly voice denotes a woman but cold and moist in the first degree; but if a
very fine delicate Effeminate voice, then in the third degree; and if she have
the natural voice of a woman, then the partaketh of the second degree, as being
between the two Extremes. Much flesh or corpulency, denotes much cold and
moisture; and to be Lean, on the contrary, denotes heat and dryness; and to be
meanly fleshed, neither over much nor over little, denotes her to be in the
second degree; between the extremes and their pleasantness and Courtesies,
shows the degrees of these two qualities; much moisture makes the flesh
supple and soft, and the want of it makes it rough and hard, the mean is the
most commendable; the color also of the faces and body discovers the
extended or remiss degrees of these two qualities. When the woman is very white
( says Galen) it betokens much moisture and cold* and on the contrary, she
that is swarthy and brown, is in the first degree thereof, of which two
extremes is framed the second degree, of white and well colored; to have much
hair, denotes the first degree of cold and moist, for hair requires much heat
and Dryness to Engender it, and the black more than any other; and she that is
in the second degree, is not overloaded with hair, but it is however decent and
very comely, and those that are in the third degree, their hair many times comes
off, by reason of the great cold and much moisture. Foulness and fairness helps
us likewise to make a true Judgment of the degrees of cold and moist in women.
It is a miracle, to see a woman of the first degree very fair, by reason the
seed whereof she was formed being dry, hindered that sweetness of complexion,
that a better tempered matter would have produced; and in the second degree, of
cold and moist, a woman proves very fair and comely; but in the third, by
reason of too much cold and moisture, she becomes unwieldly, and wants a good
color and complexion; and therefore those in the second degree are to be
preserred for beauty, good condition; and fruitfulness, before the other two.
And thus having* in some measure, given women an Inspection into the state and
conditions of their bodies, as to their tempers and constitutions, contributing
to fruitfulness and producing of fair children, It comes next to be considered
what tempers in men come nearest, and most agreeable to them, in begeting
children that may answer their expectations, and be pleasing in their Eyes.
They must understand then, amongst the many Excrementious Humors, that reside
in the body of man, that nature according to the opinion of Galen, uses only
one to serve her ends mainly in Generation, and that is termed whey or wheyish
blood, and whose Engendering is in the Liver and veins, at such time as the
four humors, Blood, Phlegm, Cholour, and Melancholy do assume the form and
substance they ought to have, and thus Likewise nature uses to resolve the
Norishment, and to work, that it may pass through the viens, and through the
straight passages, conveying subsist^nce to every part of the body. This work
being finished, she again provideth the veins, whose office is to draw unto
them, the over abundant humor, and purge it out again, for the Exoporating the
body, and keeping it free from any afflictions, by the too much pressing of
Excremen^ious humors; for she advizing, that man has certain qualities
convenient for Generation, provided two veins or vessels that should carry part
thereof to the Genitals and seminal vessels, together with a small quantity of
blood, whereby so much might be formed as was requisite for procreation, and in
that end she placed one vein or vessel in the Reins, on the right side, which
ends in the right testicle, and of the same is the right seed vessel framed;
and the Like on the Left, and according to the greater or Lesser Quantity of
heat communicated, the male or female births are produced. Some Historians tell
us, but by what warrant we know not, that women, in the beginning of the world,
and a Long time after, had generally two children at a birth, viz. A male and a
female; which might be indeed, that there should be an Equality of sexes, to
answer the Institution of Marriage and people, and replenish the world in a
Lawful way of chaste Love. But however it might be then, we see it is otherwise
now; and females, through an Infeabling of Nature, by Intemperance, or
nonobservance of order, and fit Seasons in the undertaking the work of
Generation) are more frequently born than males; and therefore those Ladies,
that are desirous of an Heir, or the like, to transmit, the name of a family to
posterity, which by Fame cannot be rescued from oblivion, Let them consider for
themselves, and the kind partners of their kind enjoyments, That their diet
intended to prepare them for such a purpose be hot and dry, and to take such
things as may make for a kindly digestion, and to be considerably in moderate
Exercise, that so the body may be kept in a good Temperature if healtd; and
then the heat being predominant, Nature will be capable of bringing about her
Ends and Purposes. Much Wine is a great Enemy to Nature in this matter, because
by its heat and inflaming it chills and disorders the orderly moving, and
natural heat of the body, which is that alone which works to farther the Ends
of Generation. Excess likewise impairs the health; and Plato commends the
Carthaginians for prohibiting it to married people by a Law, for a limited
time, when they were to prepare for conjugal duty. However, moderately taken,
it refreshes and helps Nature. Nature and Art considered in Wisdom and
Understanding, -- Now as to the Observations made by diverse upon children, that
they may be brought forth so as to be of wise and understanding capacities, are
as various as their Opinions. Some pretending to Astrology, hold, that it is
because the Infant is born under the influence of such Stars as have power to
give Wisdom; which follows not; for we may, upon Enquiry, find diverse born
perhaps in one and the same minute, and yet growing up, they exceedingly many
times differ in their Understandings, as likewise in their Fortunes, Manners
and Conditions, which they likewise annex to the former cause. Hoppocrates,
Plato and Galen, hold, That an Infant receives the conditions of his Soul at
the time of its forming, and not of his birth; for then ( continue they) the
Stars do superficially alter the child, giving him heat, coldness, moisture and
drought, but not his substance, wherein the life is contained, as do the
Elements of Earth, Air, Fire and Water, who not only yield to the body
composed, what is consistent with their Qualities, but the substance that may
maintain and preserve them, during all the course of Life; by which menas, that
which most imports in the producing the Infant, is to procure the Elements
whereo^ it is compounded, may partake the Qualities which are requisite for the
Wi^, and Largeness of Understanding; for these, according to the weight and
measure by which they enter into the composition, must always so endure in the
mixture, and not the Alterations of the Heavens or Heavenly bodies. Galen
further given his opinion as to what the elements are, in what manner they
enter, to produce, and perfect the ^ormation of a body in the womb, he tells
us; that they are no other than what compound all other natural things; That
the Earthly and watery parts are from the substance of the meat and drink the
mother takes in to support Nature, when concocted in the stomach, and ordered
by Natures kind preparation, into a proper and suitable matter, and that the
Air and Fire are likewise mingled by her order, and enter into the body by the
Pulse, Pores and Respiration: and of these Elements mingled and digested by our
natural heat, are made what is fi^ and necessary for the Infants Generation;
and therefore to meats, drinks and airs the Parents ought to have regard, the
siner and most delicate the better, because the thinnest and most ^arified
blood is by that means produced, and that is chiefly instrumental in producing
the composition for the brain, wherein we hold the chief seat of Understanding
to be placed, being temperate, and compounded of a substance sub^il and
curious. The Learned are of opinion, that the Wit will participate of its
fi^eness and become like unto it. That is, such a brain will produce an apt and
sprightly Wit, because there it has all manner of freedom to operate w^hout
Obstruction; no foggy fumes, damp clouds, or gross Vapors being there to
stifle or oppreis it, but a pure thin and rar^^ied air still moving and ^^lling
the vacancy. And further i^ is allowed by them, that a reasonable soul, though
Immortal and Incorrup^^^l^, (...) corresponds ^ith the di^pos^^on of the Brain,
which not being such as is requisite, the soul cannot influence i^ as it is
desirous to do, as being a defective Organ, that hinders the excellency of its
proper operation, and tendency to a perfect harmony, i^ some measure suitable
to the divine mind, who gave it as a guide to the natural body, till re^^ring,
leaves it to be laid up in the Repository of the Grave, waiting a second Union
in the Resurrection -- When children are brought forth, and Nature has done her
part in furnishing them, and furnished them with such materials as may
capacira^e them for large understanding, there is something more required, not
only to train them up in what is most material, from their Infancy, but to
confirm it to them by Rules and Precepts, that they retain and improve it; ^or
the matter whereof mankind is compounded, proves so alterable, that we find it
has frequent variations in one sense or other, and is so subject to corruption,
that in the state of man's life he ^asseth under many degrees that d^ffer one
from the other. Temperance and Society are the great continuers of the
Understanding, when Riot or Luxury very much impair it, sending those g^o^s
Fumes to the brain that dull and discompose it. Nature, we find by Experience,
is ^^^sfied with a little, and gros^ ^eeding is an Enemy to her. It may indeed
make the body s^ell, and mountainous with flesh and uncom^liness; but then, by
ill digestion, those noxious humors superabound that afflict and disorder the
whole Fr^me with distempers and diseases, that turn even Life, and that
Tranquillity we might otherwise enjoy and po^^^ss* into uneasiness and ^estl^ss
perturbations. Anxie^ies and cares cannot easily be debarred, because they flow
from accidents and casualties; but by moderation the other nay be avoided; yet
a firmness of mind, which a good temperature of body creates, may mainly
contribute to a sedate calmness in all Emergencies. Health is the richest Jewel
in Nature, yet rarely ^rized or esteemed but when we are wanting of it; we know
not how rightly to value or esteem it till we are made sensible by a miserable
Experience, how precious it is. Let us consider then seriously, w^^^st we are
possessed of it, what great advantages it affords us; and if our considerations
are duly weighed, we cannot but conclude we ought to study all manner of ways
to preserve it and secure it to our selves, as the greatest temporal blessing,
when it brings with it, and continues to us so many advantages. A crasie,
sickly body cannot be the Receptacle, at least the container of a solid and
sound Judgment; many impertinencies, and peevish sollies, will be breaking in*
which ought to be shunned and avoided. Why should we not then consider what
best ^ui^s our conditions, and earnestly to be c^utious in preventing our
mishaps? Parents then that regard their Posterity, ought so to bring them up,
that their Early Nurttiture may be a pattern to their riper Years, that every
thing may concur to their advantage. The Graces which God bestows upon mankind,
do ordinarily require, that the Instruments with which they are to be
exercised, and the subject whereinto they are to be received, do partake the
natural qualities requisite for every such Gifts* and the Reason is, because
that the reasonable soul is an Act of the body, and operateth not without the
service of the bodily instruments. We must confess, that the brain of an Infant
has much moisture nature then so ordering or requiring it, but Years coming on
by degrees, lessens it; and then the memory, imagination and understanding grow
stronger, gathering the perfection designed them (unless hindered by
Intemperance;) and the reasonable soul manifests it self more and more, by
infusing Wisdom that is contained in it from its first entrance into the body.
It is true, beside any thing that we may reasonably call supernatural knowledge,
or that proceeding more immediately from the soul, our natural senses instruct
us in some things which contribute to the furtherance of our understanding, as
our keeping in memory what we heard whilst we were children, or what our Eyes
gave us a prospect of, or that was communicated to us by feeling, smelling,
tasting, etc. But none of these can give that understanding which may be
properly taken for Wisdom, or a discerning Knowledge of things on a sudden,
that have been strangers to our natural senses, as penitrating into abstruse
matters, and what the learned term Arcana's, or Secrets, or making right
Judgments where we are left to gain a light into what is before us. Solomon's
Wisdom was not so much manifested in knowing Herbs and Plants, as he confesses
he did, even from the Shrub to the Cedar, as in discerning where the falsity
lay in the case of the Two Harlots that came to him for Justice. But, Ladies,
perhaps you may think we are wandering too far, and some of you may censure us,
as undertakers to coin understanding for those that know not how to pass it
away for current. Yet this we dare say, That God, who is the Author of all
Knowledge and Wisdom, having designed it to good Ends, never was unwilling that
mankind should partake of it so far as is convenient for him; and therefore he
has commanded us to apply our hearts to it, and that we should search for it as
for hidden treasure. And therefore the Earlier it is imbibed, and the more care
that is taken to capacitate us for it, the more attainable it is; and the
Parents caution and industry, may further it in their children. Narcissus, (
Gr.) an herb called white La^ tibi, or white Daffodil. Poets seign, that
Narcissus, a fair Boy, being in love with himself, was turned into a Lilly.
Niwshala, or Carmenta, the mother of ^-nonder, an ancient King of Italy, even
before the arrival of Aeneas into that country. Nows, an Epigramatick Poetess.
Neread ( Nereides) a Maremaid, or Fish, like a beautiful Woman down to the
girdle, the rest like a Fish. The males of these are called Tritons. Nereides,
are also ^ken for Nymphs, or Fairies of the Water, and comes from Heb. Nahar,
i. a Flood or River. Nun ( nonna q. non nupta T^u^. Nun) is a holy or
consecrated Virgin, or a woman that b^ Vow has bound her self to a ^^ck and
chaste life, in some place and company of other women, separated from the
world, and devoted to an especial service of God, by pray^r, fasting, and such
like holy Exercises. Neckabout, Y. any woman's neck-linen. Neif, ( f. Naive) a
bond^^man, or she-villain. Neogamist, g. a new married man. St. Neots, a Town ^
Hu^tington, and another in (...), with a Well dedica^d to St. Keyne, whereof,
they ^, whether Busband or Wife ^^k first, they get the ma^r^. Nephele, g. (a
cloud) ^e mother of Hell and Phryx^ Athamas. Nescock, Nesscock, ^ wanton
fondling, that was ^ver from home. See Cock^. Nessus, a C^ntaur slain ^
Hercules for attempting to ^^ish his wife. Nicia, g. victorious, a (...) name.
Nightmare, ( D. ^^ Mare, Night-evil) as In^^. Nigh-spell, a prayer agains the
Nightmare. Nixit, Feigned Gods assisting childbed women. Nominalia, Roman
Feast-days, when they gave names to children (to females on the eighth, to
males on the ninth day.) Novatus, ( Ann^ 215) he condemned second marriages,
received not Apostates, tho penitent, etc. Novels, 168 volumes of the civil law
(added by Justinian) to the Codex; also little Romances. Novercal, belonging to
a stepmother. Nuptialist, a bride, bridegroom, or one that makes matches.
Nydimene, having (by her Nurses help) lain with her Father, and flying from his
wrath, was turned into an Oak. Nuptial Dowries, Nuptial Dowries, by some
nations approved, by others interdicted. Lycurgus and Solon, because they would
not have the Virgins oppressed by the covetousness of men, forbid by their
Laws, that any man should demand a dower with his wife (a necessary and
profitable decree) by which he was condemned, that being a long suitor to the
Daughter of Pysander, and promising her marriage in her Fathers life time,
repudiated the contract after his Death, because he dying poor, her Dowry did
not answer his expectation. Amongst the Hetrurians it was held base and
ignoble, and absolutely forbidden by their inscribed Statutes, for a man to
send tokens or gifts to her whom he affected; accounting them no better than
bribes or mecenary hi e, nor fit to be thought on in such a sacred commixion,
where nothing should be mediated save uncere Love and conjugal Piety. Nuptial
Gifts or Presents. Now touching bridal gifts and presents. It was an ancient
Custom among the Greeks, that the Father, the day after the Solemnization of
the Marriage, sent to the Bride for some Spousal-Offerings, which they called
Epanlia Dora; they were ushered by a beautiful young lad attired in a long
white Vesture reaching to his heel, bearing in his hand a bright burning T^per.
In order followed after him all such young men and maids youthfully Attired,
that brought the Presents; one presented Gold, another Gems, a third a Basin
and Ewre, with other Plate-dishes, a fourth Boxes of Alabaster full of sweet
Oils and Unguents, a fifth rich Sandals or Slippers, with other necessaries
belonging as well to the whole house, as to their private Bedchamber. -- Solon
to this Marriage O^ering allowed only three sorts of Garments for the Bride to
bring with her, besides such small Gifts as were tendered by the kindred,
Friends and household Servants. A Damosel of Lac^na being poor, and demanded
wh^^ Dowry she had to bring to (...) Husband, and to marry her with? Answered,
That (...) w ^ left me as an Inherit (...) from mine ancestors, nam^^ Virtue
and Modesty. -- In a^ent times the Husband wo^^ their Brides with a Ring (...)
Iron, without any Stone (...) Gem, but merely circular (...) round; by that
(...) parsimony of diet, and fr^^lity in living. Homer ((...) Prince of Poets)
having (...) wealth with which to bes^^ his daughter upon a (...) Citizen, gave
her only (...) Epithalamium, with ce^^ Cyprian Elegies. Amo^^ the Indians none
can claim greater Dower with his (...) than the price of a (...) Oxen: neither
can he m^^ out of his own Tribe. ^^ Assyrians brought their (...) blessed Virgins
into the (...) place, and their prices (...) publicly proclaimed by (...)
Cr^er, whosoever wanted wife, and would reach to^^ sum propounded, might (...)
be furnished; and he (...) had not ready money, if (...) could put in good
secu^^ it was held sufficient. (...) like custom was amongst (...)
Babylonians; in which (...) observed this order; T^ first set out to sale the
m^ ingenious and beautiful, (...) those at an high rate; and when they were put
off, they brought forth the worser featured, even unto the degree of deformity,
and the Crier proclaims, That who will marry any of them. He shall have so
much, or so much, to recompense her souless or lam^ness. Nuptial-ornaments
Amongst the Greeks, the ^^ide was crowned with water-Mints, or Cresses: her
head was ^embed with a piece of a Lance or Spear of a Fencer, with which some
man had been slain. In other places of Greece the Brides heads were covered
with a Veil, to signify her Bashfulness and modest shame: It was of
Clay-coloured Silk, by which color the Matrons of the most temperate life and
modest carriage, denoted unto the world their continence and virtue. The Law of
Ly^^rgus amongst the Spartans was, That the Bride should cut her hair, and
putting her self into man's habit, be brought into her chamber by the
Bride-maids, who had before prepared it. In B^eo^ia their Virgins were crowned
with a wreath made of the herb called Sperage. In the Isle Cous the husbands
were tempelled to enter the Bride ch^mber, attired like women. It was an use
amongst the Locrenses* for the Matrons to pick and gather selected flowers to
make garlands for the Brides; but such as were bought for ^ony, were held vile
and ^o^temptuous. All marriages amongst the Lustranians were celebrated in
Rose-coloured garments, or else not permitted. The Chelidonian women that had
prostituted themselves to strangers, went with half of their faces open, the
other half covered, else it was not lawful for them to be seen abroad. The
German Virgins, when they prepared to give meeting to their betrothed, and so
to proceed to the Conjugal ceremony, put on a straight or plain garment, such a
one as they in some places call a Huk, and over that a Cloak without spot or
stain, bearing a garland woven of Vervain. At length comes forth the Bride (in
all parts rare)
-- To meet the Bridegroom:
A Virgins face, a Virgins chaste attire
She wares. Now modest blushes kindle fire
Within her bashful cheek, which by degrees
Grows stillmore hot, and warms all that she sees.
The youthful fry, dispersed her^ and there,
On tip-toe move, to see this star appear,
And rise with such refulgence on each hand
The aged Fathers and the Matrons stand,
And make a reverend Lane for her to pass:
She makes them think upon the time that was,
Their prime, their youth, their Strength (now gone and wasted)
And Nuptial sweets, which they before have tasted.
A Nuptial Song.
All that is sweet and lost attend
All that is calm, s^rene and bright,
That can please, or pleasure mend,
Or secure, or cause delight.
Li^^^e C^^ds come and move
Round the Bridesgrooms greedy Eyes,
Whilst the stately Queen of love
Round the Bride her Cest^^ Eyes.
Golden Hym^n bring the Robe,
Bring thy Torch, that still inspires
Round the stately a^^rous Globe
Vigorous flames and gay desires.
Sister Graces all appear,
Sister Graces come away,
Let the Heavens be bright and clear.
Let the Earth keep Holy day.
I^^^nd Nature does prepare
To salute the Charming Bride,
And with Odours fills the Air
Snatch from all the World beside.
Virtue, Wit and Beauty may
For a time refuse to yield,
But at length they must obey,
And with Honor quit the Field.
Their efforts in vain will prove
To defend their Freeborn State,
When attack't by mighty Love They must all Cp ilate.
Marble-hearted Virgins, who
Rail at Love to show your Wits,
So did one Eliza* too.
Yet with Pleasure now submits
You too envious S^ains, who would
Follow Cupid if you might,
Like the Fox that gaping stood Discommend the Grapes for spite.
Since Experience teaches best
Ask if mutual Love has Charms,
When the Bride and Bridegroom rest
Locked in one another's Arms.

O
OLive, from the Olive Tree. Olimpia, 1. Hevenl^ Omphale, 1. Lascivious and
Wanton. Orabilis, 1. Easy to be in^rea^ed. Ogna Sancha, a Coun^els of Castile,
who Falling in Love with a Mo^^ish Prince, about the year 99^, being then a
Widow, and resolving to have him, being opposed in it by her Son Sancho Garcia,
she resolved to remove him by Poison; but when at the Table the Poisoned Wine
was offered him, he having notice of the Plot against his Life, gave (...) his
Mother, who presently drank it up, which with (...) greater ^^ame, quickly
quen^^ed that of her Lust with (...) Life; and for this reason (...) Women of
Castile at (...) Feasts are always obliged (...) Drink before the Men, (...)
now it passes only as a Ceremony. Olimpias, the Sister of Alexander, King of
Epirus, Wife to Philip of Macedon, and Mother to Alexander the Great, who
Dreamed when the first Conceived of him, that Jupiter Ammon turned himself into
a Dragon and Embraced her, which made that Monarch afterward fancy him self to
be the Son of Jupiter, and require to be esteemed as a God, for opposing which
Vanity, Clytus and many other of his faithful Friends were put to Death. This
Queen likewise, after the Death of King Philip, put all his other Wives and
Concubines to Death, as also all the the Nobility that stood in her way to the
Throne; for which Cassander Besieged her in the Castle of Pindus, and having
taken her, he put her to Death. Olimpias, a very Devout VVidow, who was
Deaconness of the Church of Constantinople in the time of St. Chrysostom; she
was Wife to Nebridius, who Dying, lest her great Riches, which she as freely
bestowed upon the Poor, and was at length banished with St. Chrysostom, by the
prevailing of the Heretics in those parts: the Greeks and a great Veneration
for her, and after her Death, Celebrated her memory every ^5th of July.
Omphale, a Lydian Queen, who Captivated Her^^^^ so much with her Beauty and
Voice, that laying aside his Fierceness, he learned to Spin among her Maids.
Occasio, or Occasion, was accounted by the Heathens a Goddess, and Worshipped
by them, that she might be Propitious to them in putting into their hands the
fittest season and opportunity to accomplish and bring their Affairs to an
happy issue, and was represented by them naked, bald on the head behind, but a
long foretop streaming with the Wind, one of her Feet on a Wheel, and sometimes
a Globe, and the other in the Air, having a Sail in the one hand, and a Sail in
the other, to show that we ought to take all advantages of opportunity, lest
giving us the slip, it returns no more. Octavia, she was Daughter to Octavius,
and the Emperor Augustus's Sister; she was first Married to Marcellus, and then
Mark Anthony; she had diverse Children that came to be great Men, and was
admired by the Romans for her Virtue and Prudence; so that her Brother
Dedicated a Temple and Porticoes to her in Rome, as we find it Recorded by
Dion. Octavia, Daughter to Claudius and Messalina, was Wife to Nero the Emperor
of Rome, who, without any apparent Cause, Divorced her; and having Poisoned her
Brother Britanicus, he caused her to be put to Death. Oenoe, a Beautiful Nymph
that resorted Mount Ida, where, when Paris was Shepherd, she fell in love with
him, but he coming afterward to know that he was Son to King Priam of Troy,
slighted her for Hellen of Greece; yet she continued her Love toward him, and
bewailed her self in the Mountain for being so Deserted; but when Paris was
slain by the Greeks, and his dead Body sent to her to be buried, thinking
thereby to comfort her, her love was so extreme, that as soon as she saw it,
she fell upon it and Died of Grief. Orgiva, or Orgina, Wife of Charles the
third, King of France, and Daughter to King Edward the first, before the
Conquest of the Normans, a very learned and virtuous Lady. Orbona, a Goddess of
the Ancients, held to take care of Orphans and Children in Distress; she was
Worshipped by the Romans that they might not be afflicted in their Widowhood, or
in the loss of their Children; her name is derived from the word Orbus,
denoting any one that has lost Father or Children, etc. Her Altar was near to
that of the Lares, in the City of Rome. Ordeal, an old Saxon way of trying of
Women that were suspected to be unchaste; yet no proof against them, they laid
nine hot bars of Iron, about a yard asunder, and the party suspected being
blindfolded, was to pass over them, the which if she did without touching any
of them she was accounted Innocent, but if otherways, then guilty and Sentenced
by the Laws, which in those times were Death in case of Adultery. Orithia,
Queen of the Amazons, who was Queen after Marpesia, and did wonders in ^eats of
Arms in all Battles she fought, especially against the Greeks, who invaded her
Territories; to her succeeded Penthesila, who with her Female Troop, signalized
her noble Bravery at the Siege of Troy. Orithya, Daughter Ezichtheus, an
Athenian King, said to ^e Ravished by one of the Gods of the Wind, and by him
conceive Lethis and Calais. Obedient Wives, If their Husbands be pleasant, they
rejoice in his pleasure. If he suffer in any evertu^^ which he neither
expected, nor his actions deserved, they bear a part in his Lachrym^. Husbands
to such Wives are made happy in their choice; and have good cause never to wish
a change; Por they may consort with those they affected, without fearing of
being called to an Evening account. If their days expense should chance to be
too immoderate; they need fear no fingers but their own, to dive into their
Pockets, or to make privy search for more than can be found. These need not
fear to receive discipline for their laist nights error: Or to wear their
night-Caps after the o^^ fashion, with both their Ears through them; These can
play the merry Mates with their Wives and never laugh till their hearts ache: If
they come home late (tho sooner were better) they are entertained with a
cheerful Welcome: They find no Pouts in their Dish; nor amongst all their
necessary utensils one Chasing-dish. Out of this precious Mine, was, surely,
that good Burgomasters Wife cut out, who ever met her Husband at the Portel
with a gentle word in her Mouth; a sweet smile on her lip; a merry look on her
cherry cheek; a pair of slippers in one hand, and in the other a rubber (not
at cuffs) but a Towel to rub him after his Travel; whereas the old beldam
Tbestylis would have exchanged that rubber with an halter, if she might have
had her will, rather than be bound to such a Task. And to such a one, without
all doubt was ^o matched; who in a pensive plight, all full of discontent,
published to the World, from whence he desired a speedy dismission, his hard
Fortune in this Bridal Br^wl. Married! whereto? to distaste;
Bedded! where? all grief is plae't;
Clothed! how? with Woman's shame;
Branded! how? with loss of Name;
How wretchlese is that Man that is disgrast.
With loss of Name, shame, grief, and all distaste?
Imprisoned! h ow? to woman's Will;
Engaged! to what? is ill;
Restrained! by whom? by jealous fear;
Inthral'd! to whom? suspicions care;
How hapless is that wretch that must fulfill,
A false, Suspicious, jealous woman's will?
Taxed! for what? for modest mirth;
Exposed! how? a Stale on Earth;
Surpised! with what? with discontent;
Professed! as how? times penitent;
How can that forlorn Soul take joy on Earth,
Where Discontent and Penance is his Mirth?
Threatened! how? as he're was no man;
Fooled! by whom? a foolish woman;
Slav'd! to what? to causeless pleen,
Sprite-affrighted! when? I dream;
How should the Infernal Pri^^e more Furies summ^n,
Than lodge in such a spleenful, Spiteful, Woman?
Cheered most! when? least at home;
Planted! where? ^'th Torrid Zone;
Chased! how? with oil of tongue;
Hardened! how? by suffering wrong;
How wretched in his Fate who is become
Contented most, when he is least at home?
Urged most! when? she is near;
Vsher'd! how? with fruitless fear;
Shielded! when? when I do fly;
Cured! with what? with hope to dye;
How cureless does that cure to sense appear,
Whose Hope is Death, whose
Life is fruitless fear?
Old man's notions of Love. I would not, says the Old Men, be to run through the
miseries of life again for a great sum; for when I come toward Man, the Women
will have me as sure as a Gun, for to catch Woodcocks; and if ever I come to
set eye upon a Lass that understands Dress and Raillerly I Am gone, if there
were no more Lads in Christendom; but for my part I am as sick as a Dog of
Powdering, Curling and Playing the lady Bird: I would not for all the World be
in the Shoomakers Stocks, and Choke my self (...) again in a straight Dublet,
only to have the Ladies say, Look what a delicate shape and foot that Gentleman
has; and I would take as little pleasure to spend six hours of the four and
twenty, in picking Gray Hairs out of my Head or Beard, or turning white into
black; to sl^^d half ravished in the Contemplation of my own shadow; ^o Dress
fine, and to go to Church only to see handsome Ladies; to correct the midnight
air, with Ardent Sighs and Ejaculations, and to keep company with Owls and
Bats, like a bird of evil Omen; to walk the round of a Mistresses Lodgings, and
play at bo-peep at the corner of every street, to Adore her Imperfections, or
as the Song says, (for her ugliness, and for her want of Coin) to make
bracelets for her locks, and Truck a Pearl Necklace for a Shoo-string. At this
rate, for my part, I would not be to live over again so wretched a life: being
come now to write fall man. If I have an Estate, how many cares, snits and
wrangles go along with it; if I have none, what murmuring and regret at my
misfortunes; by this time the sins of my youth are go^^^ into my bones, I grow
so^^ and melancholy, nothing pleases me, I mutter at old Age, and the Youth
which (...) can never recover in my v^^^^* I endeavor to fetch out of the
Barbers Shops, from ^^ruques, Razors and Patches to conceal, or at least
disguise all the marks and lucidenses of Nature in her decay; nay when I shall
have never an Eye to see with, nor a Tooth in my Head, Gouty Legs, Windmills in
my Crown, my Nose running like a Tap, and Gravel in my Reins by the bushel;
then must make Oath that all this is nothing but mere accident, gotten by lying
in the Field, or the like, and outface the truth in the very Teeth of so many
undeniable Witnesses. There is no Plague comparable to this hypocracy of the
members, to have an old Fop shake his heels, when he is ready to fall to
pieces, and cry, these Legs could make a shift yet to run with the best legs in
the Company; and then with a lusty thump on's breast, fetch ye up on Hem, and
cry, Sound at Heart boy! And a thousand other fooleries of the like nature; but
all this is nothing to the misery of an Old fellow in love, especially if he be
put to Gallant it against a company of young Gam^sters. O the inward shame and
^^^tion to see himself scarce (...) much as neglected. How often must I be put
to the (...) too, when every old Fool shall be calling me (...) acquiantance,
and telling me, of, Sir, it is many a fair my since you and I knew (...) another
first, I think was in the four and 30th the Queen that we were Schoolfellows,
how the world's altered since? And then will every old Maid be calling me
Grandsir. -- Again, Is it not nauseous to see a Lady of eighty, smug and spruce
up as if she was in the flower of eighteen, to trick and trim as if they were
new come in, when they are just going out of the World; to harness out as if
for a Wedding, when they should be preparing for a Winding Sheet? When the
Coffin is making, and the Grave a digging, Worms ready for them, but they ready
for neither: And hence I infer (says a learned Author) That for Aged persons
by any habit or dresses to represent themselves as young and youthful, is
sinful: Their Glass tells them they are Old, but they believe it not; time has
snowed gray Hairs on their Heads, and they acknowledge it not: would they have
others believe they are what they would seem? Then they would have 'em believe
a lie: A lie may be told by visible as well as audible signs: or are they
ashamed of their hoary head? Oils, Essences, sweet waters. -- Oils in the Art
of beautifying are of use, as are the others mentioned, for such as the
Efficacy of them that they will rather Cherish than Extinguish the flames of Love,
they will put you Ladies in so sweet a pickle, as will make the dainties that
shall sharpen the Appetite of those that have no Stomach, to Loves banquet; and
to be sincere with the Pope, and all his Conclave, ye, with their holy waters
and holy Oils, shall never do so many wonders as you may do with these
materials. -- Omit not to use what is directed, but take Oils of Musk, one
Dram of Cloves, six grains of Lillys of the valley, a Little Virgins wax.
Icorporate them, and you will have an Oderiferous unguent, with which the
Nostrils being anointed, it comforts the brain, and revives the Spirits, gives
a fresh and rosey Color to the face and hinders vapors. Or take Cloves,
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Lavender, of each two drams, Oil of Cloves, Angelica,
Spike, and Lavender, of each half a Scruple, Musk, and Amber, of each three
grains, wax, four drams, make them into an oily balsam, and you will have a
very pleasing scent, Exceeding delightful, and healthful, curing pains in the
head, removing fits and vapors, etc. -- Oil of the Most noble scent and
Excelent for beautifying the face, and hands, is obtained thus. Take of
Benzoin, the best, twelve ounces, ponder it very fine, then take Liquid Styrax,
as much as will suffice to make into a past, being well mixed put it into a
glass Alimbeck, with a glass head, set in ashes or sand, and to the nose of the
Alimbeck, Cement a Receiver with well tempered Clay, and the whites of Eggs, so
close that the vapors may have no vent, then kindle a fire under it leasurely,
and make it stronger by degrees, at first there will come a yellow water, of a
small quantity and of no great value, but after it will Arise a vapor as white
as snow, sticking to the Alimbeck the which perceived, keep the fire at an
Equality, but when it rises no more, make the fire stronger but not too
violent, and then you will perceive an oil Ascend Exceeding sweet, and
according to the color of your oils, you must observe to change your
receivers, your Last oil will be the best; but to make it yet a rarer perfume,
take an ounce and half of the white snow, oil of sweet Almonds, newly drawn,
four ounces, melt both over a gentle fire, stirring it continually till the
snowy part be dissolved, and to give it a redish color put in a small piece of
the root of Alcanet, and so you may have a perfume of no Excellent scent. If
you would yet have this oil of a Richer Odor, dissolve in it a scruple of
Ambergris, and you will find at the bottom of your Alimbeck, a kind of a
black oil, which will be of a very strong smell, but being mixed with Liquid
storax, (...) will make excellent scent^^ Pomanders; if you keep it by it self,
the best way is to keep it open, that air by degrees may draw away the over
strongness of the scent. Obedience of Virgins, etc. to Parents in matters of
Marriages, etc. -- Obedience in young virgins is very comely, and brings along
with it a blesing, that is Entailed on them and their posterity, nor is it more
their duty than their Interest to pay obedience where the Laws of God and
nature require it; youth is often headdy and would frequently Miscarry in the
pursuit of many things, were not care taken by their parents, or some that
oversee them to prevent the miserties they would unadvisedly plunge themselves
into. And therefore God, who permits not the fowls of the Air to destitute
their young, till they attain to the perfection of their kind, has put children
under the Indulgence and protection of their parents, till by the maturing
their judgments they are qualified to be their own Conductors. This obedience
then is to extend it self to all things that are good, or Indifferent, there
being no clause of Exception but where the Commands in themselves are unlawful,
and in so wide a field of Action there will accure so many particular occasions
of submission, that they had need of a great Reverence for their parents
Judgment, and a distrust of their own. Children that will be too forward in
going alone before their times, often get dangerous falls, and when those who
are not very far removed from Children in years, shall Lay by the wiser conduct
of others, they often too sadly miscarry by their own rashness and Imbicility.
It will be easy for those to have Ill company Intrude upon them who are
destitute of a guard, to keep them out; and being entered, will not fail by
Little complyances and flatteries to Insinuate into their favors, who have not
the sagacity to discern to what perfideous purposes, those blaudishments are
cuningly directed; and when they begin to nibble at the bait, to be delighted
with the courtship, it is a great odds if they escape the hook. -- Obedience
being laid aside, many young innocent Creatures, have undiscernably run into
the snare, having at first perhaps only liked the wit, and rallery, then the
Language and address, afterward the affability, freedom, and good humor, till
at last they have come to like the person, and not only to like him, but to
fall desperately in Love with him, past recovery; which had never happened, had
there been ba^^ and boundards set by vigilent parents, to hinder the too free
Access. It behooves therefore young Ladies not to Lay too great a stress on
their own conduct, and to Look on it as a restraint or an uneasyness, to have a
dependence on those who are properly their shelter and protection, for in
counsel, as the wise man says, there is safety, but where it is disregarded,
danger. It is agreeable to Virgins Modesty, even in cases of Marriage, to make
it rather an Act of obedience than choice. And they that conclude their friends
too slow in the matter, and press eagerly forward to out run them, give cause
for suspicion that they are spurred on by some what too warm desires. --
Obedience we must allow to have a Large circumference, yet it does not give
parents a power to compel their daughters to Marry, where they can neither Love
nor like; for a negative voice in the case is certainly as much their right as
their parents; however it is Reasonable the virgins should well examine the
grounds of her Aversion, and if they prove only fancyful and frivilous, she may
endeavor to correct them by sober consideration, but if after all she cannot
do it, she ought not to proceed to Marry against her Inclination. The Parents
Indeed have a Lawful Authority to hinder her from Matching where they are
convinced it will be unfortunate to her, though her self approve it, because
they have a right to her, and consequently to her preservation. But in the
other case, what greater Injury can parents do their children, than to prompt
them on to commit a sacrilegious Hypocricy, so solemnly to vow they Love, when
at the Instant they actually abhor the parties they wed; and where it is begun
with such perjury, it is no wonder that it continues at the same rate. That
other parts of the vow be also violated, and she observe the negative part no
more than the positive, and as Little forsake others as she does heartily
cleave to her husband; then however obedience is to be observed, and this to be
avoided. Obedience to Parents, in general and particular. -- Obedience is so
highly prized by God, that in the Jewish Times he accounted it better than
their sacrifice. He has strictly enjoined it toward himself, our Parents, and
such as are set over us; for without being obedient to his Commands, none can
serve him in purity of spirit; and if we say, we obey and serve God, and are
disobedient to our Parents, and those he has set over us, we contradict our
selves, and cannot reasonably gain credit with men. And this obedience, or
duty, extending to children of either sex, may be branched out into these
particulars, etc. Reverence, Love, Obedience, and all these are considered as a
due debt, even to the worst of Parents, so far as stands with what is lawful
and reasonable to be done, and no way repugnant to the Will or Word of God. And
though their Infirmities, and Failings, may be such as may give others just
occasion to despise them, the children must be no means, suffer so much as a
thought of meaness and contempt of them to harbor in their minds, nor in any
manner of behavior toward them, let it appear they have any slighting or
neglect of them; but rather, if they cannot redress them, they must labor to
cover their Infirmities, and conceal them, as much as is possible, from the
Eyes of the World, always having in remembrance the Curse that sell upon the
younger son of Noah for deriding his Father, though he saw him in a very
ridiculous and unseemly posture; and how the other Two were blessed for
covering his Nakedness with a Garment. We wish we could not say, it is too
frequent in our days for children to have too low and mean a thought of their
Parents, and rather carp at their Vice than imitate their Ventures, dwelling
upon their Imperfections; and as Michael did by David, when he danced before
the Ark, many times misconstrue their Actions, and despise them. But such as do
so, must, like that Lady, have the Curse upon them, to be childless, or if they
have children, to expect a retaliation of disobedience. We meet with a pleasant
story of an Age. Country Gentleman, who to advance his son in Marriage to a
Considerable Fortune, made all his Lands over to him, reserving to himself
nothing, but the privilege of Living with him, and dieting at his curtesy; but
having thus weakly given the staff out of his hand, the young Lady being
brought home, grew in a while squemish at his coughing, and spiring, and found,
or rather took many causeless occasions to cavel with him, filling her husband
ears with complaints of the trouble his father gave the house, and servants,
who listening, to her, removed him to an apartment, over the gateway in the
fore Court, and caused his diet to be brought to him at usual times, with which
the good old man, to avoid any difference that might arise upon the matter, was
extremely contented; and here he Lived, like a Hermit in a wilderness some
years* till the Lady had a son that began to tattle and talk prettily, with
whom the father playing one day, and pleased, with his childish Innocent
discourse, told him, that if he would be a good boy he would buy him a
Cockhorse, a Sword, and a hat and feather, and one day he should be master of
that Great house, pointing, at his own; to which the child Innocently replied,
That will be brave, father, but then you shall lie in the Gate House, as my
Grandfather does. This coming so unexpectedly, from one so young. made a strong
Impression upon his mind, and as if the hand of Heaven had Immediately touch
this heart, he could have no rest, or quiet in his Thoughts till he had
restored his Father a great part of his Estate back again, and with it his
filial duty and obedience. And indeed we may justly suspect, that those who
have disobedient children have in one degree or other been so themselves; and
so Heaven repays them in their kind. But this is no sufficient ground or
warrant for children to transgress the express commandment of God. He threatens
them with very severe punishments, besides the shortening their days. In the
Old Law the punishment of death was inflicted upon disobedient, stubborn and
rebellious children, if brought and accused by their Parents before the
Magistrates. And we find it, Prove. 30.17. That the Eye that mocketh his Father,
and dispiseth to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pluck it out,
and the young Eagles shall eat it up. That is, many Calamities shall upon them,
and even the Fowls of the Air shall rise up as a Reproach against them; for it
is observed, especially by the Eagles, when the Old ones Bills are grown over,
so hooked, and distorted with Age, that they cannot feed themselves, the Young
ones get the Prey for them, and nourish them, in requital of the care and
tenderness they had in bringing them forth, and feeding them when they were
helpless. And it is reported by some Authors, That the Old Ravens being sick,
and spent with Age, the Young ones keep them Company, and take all kind care of
them, mourning in their manner at their Death, and burying them in the
secretest place they can find. -- And as the behavior of children (in which we
include even those that are grown up) ought to be respective toward their
Parents, so likewise ought they to show them all the demonstrations of Love
imaginable, striving to do them all the good they can, shunning every occasion
that may administer disquiet. You must consider them as the Instruments of
bringing you into the World, and those by whose tender care you was sustained
and supported when weak and helpless. And certainly if you could make a true
Judgment (not being yet a Parent) of the Cares and fears required in bringing
up children, you would judge your love to be but a moderate return, in
compensation thereof; But the saying is certainly true, that none can truly
measure the great love of Parents to Children, before they are made truly
sensible of those tender affections, in having Children of their own. -- love
and affection to Parents Obedient is to be expressed several ways; as, first,
in all kindness of behavior, carrying your selves not only with Awe and
Reverence, but with Kindness and Aflection, which will encourage you to do
those things they affect, and so you will avoid what may grieve and afflict
them. Secondly, This filial love and affection is to be expressed in praying for
them, and imploring God's blessing on them, and their Endeavors; for indeed
you stand so greatly indebted to your Parents, that you can never acquit your
selves with any tolerable satisfaction, unless you invoke God to your Aid and
Assistance, in beseeching him to multiply his blessings toward them; and
indeed in so doing you labor for your own happiness, in desiring they should
be so, because the blessing reflects from them to you. If they have been any
thing rigid, or severe, let not that grate upon your memory, but rather turn it
to the increase of your love toward them, in concluding they did it for your
future advantage, since too great an indulgence ruins more children than
severity. If they be over severe, you must be industrious to let them see you
deserve it not; and by your patience and humility in suffering, without any
reasonable cause, you will molisie and oversome the most rough and unpolished
Tempers. Hearken, by no means, to any that speak Evil of them, or would incense
you to think hard of them. -- In no wise let so much as the lea^t desire of
their Death take place in you, though they cross you in your purposes, in
relation to marriage, or other things you earnestly wish or desire, or though
by their decease great riches would accrue to be at your own disposing, Nor can
any Growth or Years free you from the Duty and Obedience you owe whilst you
live. Thirdly, If you are grown up, and have abilities, and your Parents are
fallen to decay, you must, to your utmost, assist them, and not imagine any
thing too much for them that have done so much for you. If they are weak in
Judgment, you must assist them with your counsel and advice, and protect them
against Injuries and Wrongs, advising them always upon mature deliberation,
that you put them upon nothing that is rash, or to their disadvantage, ever
observing that Riches or Poverty, Wisdom or Imbecility, in a Parent, must make
no difference in the Obedience and Duty of the Children; and if any could be
allowed, they would approve themselves best to God and Man, when it is paid to
those who are under the Frown of Fortune, or to whom Wisdom is in many degrees
a stranger. We cannot see how any one can pretend to God's Favor, who comply
not with his Commands of this Nature: He, indeed, is properly our Father, for
he made us, and da^ly supports us with Food, Raiment, Health and Strength, and
therefore since he who has the supreme Right, has commanded was to be obedient
to our Earthly Parents, in obeying them, we obey him, and in displeasing them,
we displease him. If the Sum of the Commands consists in loving God, in
admiring and adoring him, as the prime Author of our being, and well being, and
in loving our Neigbour as our selves, as we have it from the best and wisest
Oracle that ever spoke, no doubt they are so dependant one upon the other, that
they are not to be separated. And then where can our Love and Affections better
center, as to Earthly Concerns, than in our Parents? Marriage indeed claims a
share of our affections, but that must not lessen them to those that had the
first right to them. Occations of falling in Love to be Avoided. Change place
for the cure of Love, fair and foul means to be used to withst and beginings,
etc. Observe to shun, as much as in you Lves, the occasions of being ensnared;
and if it so happens, (be it eiher sex) the party lights by chance upon a fair
object, where there is good behavior, Joined with an excellent shape and
features, and you perceive in your eyes a greediness and Languishing, to pull
to them the Image of beauty, and convey it to the heart, so that the Influence
begins powerfully to move within, and you perceive the suitable spirit
sparkling in the partys Eyes, to add more ^euel to the fire; then is it time
wisely to withstand the temptation, sortify your heart, rouse up your reason,
and shut up all the Inlets to keep out the formidable Enemy. Stop as when you
are in a swift Career.
An unexpected danger d^ appear.
Occasions to be shunned in the beginings of Love -- Shun all occasions,
especially of voluntarily coming into such company; some indeed have
unaccountably fallen passionately in Love with those that were so high above
them in Fortune and Merit, that there remained not the shadow of a hope to
reach them that way, and that fruitless passion has brought them into a very
bad condition, which has notwithstanding been recovered by a timely discovering
their passions to some Judicious friend, who with his wholesome counsel and
Advice, has set it aside, and reconciled the parties to their reasons, and
rendered 'em themselves again. Amorous books or tales that may occasion any
remembrance of a Love subdued, must be avoided, Lest it rebel and grow stronger
than at first. The son of Syrach tells us there is danger in gazing on a Maid,
and bids us turn our Eyes away from a beautiful woman; that is, not that we
ought not to look upon a woman, but not so to Look upon her at to Lust after
her, or do^e upon her to our own harm and detriment, for these kind of desires,
as a snowball is Enlarged with Rouling, are increased by sight. Petrarch says,
there is nothing sooner revives or grows sore again than Love does by sight. As
Gold renews Coveteousness, Pomp, Ambition, so a beauteous object that has hurt
before, being seen again, blows up the dying sparks of Love into a flame more
fierce than before, as some grow dry at the sight of drink, and greedily covet
it, the which were it not in their way, they would not perhaps at that time
think of it* so meat, many times increases appetite, and if not easy to be had,
creates a Longing desire after it: If Eve had never seen the fairness of the
forbiden fruit, she had never covered it, and by Eating of the Interdicted
Luscious bane, have brought a world of woes upon her self and her posterity.
Ismenes says, that by reason of long absense when these had almost weaned
himself, no sooner he saw his Mistress again, but like fire put into dry
stuble, the flame blew up more raging than before. Though Mertila swore she
would never Love her Pam^^^^ more, and by absence had almost weaned her self,
yet no sooner did she see him, but regardless of her vow, she run into his Arms
and embraced him. -- Oftentimes these things have happened to the part^es
Against their strictest resolves, have been carried away with their passions,
Like a violent torrent overthrowing the houses, trees, people, and ca^tle that
stand in it is way. Alexander the great, when he had taken Queen Statira, wife
to Darius, Prisoner, being Informed of her Excellent beauty, his favorites had
much a do to persuade him to see her, and his reason was, Left he should fall
in Love with her, and not be able to master his passion. Scipie, though but a
young General, at the fiege of a city in Spain, he had a very beautcous young
Lady brought to him as a present, by one of his Captains that had taken her
prisoner, but he so bridled his passion, that hearing she was betrothed to a
Prince of that country, he delivered her black Ransom free, refusing the Gold
they brought to redeem her. It is a great happiness in some men and women, that
Passion has not so great an Ascendant over them as it has over others; Yet it
is good, even for them, to avoid such Temptations as may by degrees, like water
continually dropping on a stone, we^ into their hearts, and overcome them, when
they think they have set the surest Guard to oppose them. -- Occasions sh^^^n'd
by change of place -- Occasion, as we have said, is very much contributing to
Love-Melancholy, because that although all other sights lessen in our Esteem,
the oftener they are seen, yet, on the contrary, a Woman's Beauty breeds more
delight, ties and chains affection safter to it. Traveling, by many now adays
is held a cure for Love; for if the Spark finds his Mistress hard hearted, and
cruelly bent, if he has the power to take himself away from her, and he
immediately sets our to see the Varieties of Foreign Courts and Countries,
absence, and change of Objects, will contribute much to the Cure, as the Poet
says. Then haste with speed, the least delay don't make;
Fly from her far, some Journey undertake.
I know thou'st grieve, and that her Name once told,
Will be of force thy Journey to withhold,
But when thou find'st thy self most bent to stay;
Compel thy feet with thee to run away
Nor do you wish that rain and stormy weather,
May stay your steps, and bring you back together.
Count not the miles you pass, nor doubt the way,
Lest those Respects should turn you back to stay.
Tell not the Clock nor look thou once behind,
But fly like Lightning, or the Northern Wind;
For where we are too much over matched in might,
There is no way for safeguard, but our flight.
Opportunity, and Idleness, made Iseus the Philosopher, in love with all the
fair Women he came near; but by often changing his place, and at last betaking
him seriously to his study, he was quite altered, neither caring for Women, or
any Jovi^l Company; no Songs or Verses would go down with him, as before. But
we cannot allow, that this kind. of change so easily happens to all,
notwithstanding study and retirement are mainly available. St. Ambrose relates
a passage, That a Young Man leaving a fair Virgin, whom he dearly loved,
because she was then coy, peevish and disdainful; after a Long absence he
returned again, and then the repenting that she had overstood her fortune,
would have yielded to his desirse; but he shunned her when he met her, but she
thinking he had forgot her, made up to him and told him who she was. Ay but,
replied he, I am changed, and am not the same man I was. Petrarch tells us that
a young Gentleman falling in love with a Maid the was born blind of one Eye, he
was ready to go out of his (...) for her, till his Friends, (...) opposed the
Match, persuading him to travel, he returned without his Fever, and (...) her
one day with (...) unconcernedness asked her (...) she came to Loose her eye,
since be left the town; to which she replied, she had Lost none in that time,
but she perceived be had found his own again. (...) that Lovers, in the height
of their passions are unaccountably blind, and cannot see those imperfections
in the parties they Love, that others easily discern, and themselves when
returned to their proper senses, detest their weakness and solly, not being
Judges of beauty, no more the (...) reason when they are in their fits, but
being out of them they are quite other persons. -- Observations from fair and
foul means. Absence not taking place to blot out the Idea of a mistress, fair
or soul means are many times used as remedies, persuasions, provides, threats
and Terror may be of moment, or by some contrary passion strive to break or
divert it. We see that a stream has less force by being drawn into many (...)
St. Hierom tells us, that there was a young man in Egypt. (...) by no Labsur,
persuasion (...) Continence could be diversted, (...) the Abbot of a Monastery
(...) a trick upon him, viz. He (...) of his Covenant to quarrel (...), and with
some scanda^ reproach to defame him (...) the company, and then to (...) first;
the witnesses here^ being sunmoned, the young (...), wept, and when all of them
(...) in accusing him, Abbot seeming to compassionate him took his part, Lest
Immoderate (...) should overcome him, which made the youth so much in Love with
the Abbot, that it drew off by degrees his other passion, and in a while quite
cured him of those disorderly Affections that were before peredominant over
him. Opinions of the scared relating to Love and Marriage. Of all the matters
we have yet handled, you will, no doubt, at first view take this to be beyond
our Province, and perhaps with contracted brows demand what we have to do to
meddle with so nice a point that so nearly concerns your Honor and Reputation.
Under submission the, we humbly conceive it may turn to the advantage of your
Sex, which hitherto has been our Endeavor to promote. We must in this case be
plain, and tell the World, That many chaste Virgins have undergou hard, and
unmerited censures upon the account the columnies, raised by the Ignorant; it
is necessary then, for their future repose that we clear the point, that the
conceited may not be Indulged in their Errors. -- Opinion many times Leads men
Astray, Like wandering fires, till they loose themselves; many have waded so
far in their own conceits, that no reason or Argument can draw them out of the
Mire of self willed obtancy Virginity to some is a very misterious word and has
puzl'd to define it in all the circumstances that attend it, for it has
properly a double dependence as well upon the mind as the body, but since the
former is elsewhere treated on in this Elaborate work, our present business
points more directly at the latter. The curious searchers into this secret
therefore find that in the sinus Pudoris, or in that which some Name the neck
of the womb, is placed that which many call the Hymen, but more properly termed
the Claustrum virginale, and the French call it the Buttowd Rose; or the Rose
bud, it much by it is foldings resembling it, or Expounding a Clove Gilly.
flower, from whence destore to desflowr, is Alluded to the deflowring A virgin,
because they are of opinion that the virginity is destroyed, when this
duplication or folding is disspated, and fractured by violence, either in
Matrimony or rude compulsion; but when it is found Entire, nothing of that
nature can be pretended by the severest Critics in these affairs. It consists
properly of four Caruncles, or little buds like Mittle berries, placed in the
Angles of the sinus Pudoris, Joined and held together by little Membruines, and
Ligatures, like fibers either of them placed in the Intesticies or spaces
between each Caruncle, which in some measure they proprotionably distend, and
these Membraines when found to be delacerated, say they denote the party
Divested of Virginity, though this does not allwaies hold to be done by
unlawful means, even in those that are not Married, though some overcurious
husbands, who have given themselves up to too much Licenciouness in their
rambling days, have caveled about it the first night, and sometimes it has
occasioned continued feuds, and heats (...) the Imbittering the pleasures of
Marriage, the wives (...) of her Innocence and (...) little availing to
convince the obstinacy and over-conceited opinion of the husband, or their
concluding they have them but on the second hand; sometimes it caused returning
them to their (...) rents, or laid a foundation for a divorce, by a strong
(...) sumption, that they have (...) sacrificed their honor to (...) when
indeed they are (...) Priestesses to Diana, (...) the Goddess of Chastity,
(...) we show them then (...) Errors, and restore them (...) of mind, if they
are (...) whirled away by the (...) Jealousy, beyond the (...) of Reason or
consideration Opinions there are (...) learned Physicians; nor (...) those of
our age (...) aver it, that such (...) or fractures, may (...) sundry
Accidents, as (...) moderate sneezing, (...) coughing, vehement (...)
strainings, struglings, and (...) tendings, Infirmities (...) final stoppage of
the Urin, and violent motions of the Vessels forcibly sending down the humors,
which like a Torrent too rapidly breaks what opposses the passage, compelling
the Ligatures, or Membrains, to give way to theirimpetousiry; So that the
Entireness or Fracture, cannot in the strictest sense absolutely determine the
being, or loss of that which we properly call a Virginity; for it no lascivious
Act has ^assed, we pronounce her chaste and free from any just scandal or
reproach; for the most lovely and chaste cannot be always enforced against
Accident and C^^nalties; and so leaving what has been premised to a candid
construction, when a Woman protects her Innocence, and the whole course of her
life makes nothing apparent to the contrary, we conclude she ought to be
credited (...) freed from suspicion grounded on so slender a furnize.

Opinions of the Learned about Legitimate Children. Opinions of this kind are
not (...) grounded, though ma^^ ignorant persons have heaped up trouble and
vexa^ion to ^^selves, by an unjust (...), that might have been (...), if well
weighed and (...); and all those (...) and contests than an unjust (...) has
occasioned in families, might have been (...) to their habitations and repose.
Many husbands have gotten the bare Notion, That a Woman ought to go 9 months
with the birth before she can delivered, or else they conclude she has been
taking her pleasant Recreation in Venns Grove, before the Gordian Knot of
Marriage was tied; when indeed, in many cases, it is only a Vulgar Error; To
remove which hindrances of Peace and Quite, we shall endeavor to lay dowu the
Opinions of those judicious men who made it their study to unravel the mystery
of Nature in her various and wonderful Operations. And though some alleged, and
we allow, that it is not very usual for a Child to be so long born and live
before the usually accepted time, yet we must aver, it is probable and
possible, because it has evidently been demonnstrated. If a controversy ariso
on this matter, in law, the Physicians are to pass their Judgment upon the
Child, who beiog Judicious Persons, can by their Skill, in inspecting the
apparent Symptoms and Deficiency of Nature, which not having supplied it with
Nails, or something else that is proper to it, tell how long it has been in the
Womb, and their Opinions in such cases, are usually taken. Paulus, the
Counselor, has a passage to this purpose in the Ninth Book of his Pleadings.
where he tells us, That it is Received Truth that a perfect Child, as to the
Limbs and Lineaments, may be born within seven months, and live; and he quotes
Hippocrates for his Authority, and diverse others, who affirm, in lawful
Matrimony seven months will produce a Child, which in time will be lusty and
strong. Gallen in his Third Book, Chap. 6. argues upon the same matter; but
rather according to men's Opinions than according to what the matter will
reasonably bear; as supposing there is no certain time limited for the bringing
forth of children; and Plinny says, a Womun went Thirteen months with Child;
and another, that it may be any time between Seven and Thirteen months. but as
to the seventh month, Lemnius tells us, That he knew diverse married People in
Holland that had Twins, who lived and flourished, their minds apt and lively;
not upon their first being married, which might there, as well as here, have
bred suspicion; but when they had been married many Years, and no ground or
room for so much as the shadow of it was left of their being spurious, because
born within that time. He goes on, and tells us an Example of his own
Knowledge. There was, said he, a great disturbance, which had liked to have
occasioned much bloodshed, and some was spilt about it, happening upon the
account of a Virgin, who descending from a Noble Family, had her Chastity
violated, and this violation of her Honor was charged upon a Judge, President
of a City in Flanders, who absolutely denied it, and having seen the Child,
said, he could make it a appear to be a child of seven months, and that at the
same time he could prove himself to be some hundred miles off for a continuance
of Time. Physicians were hereupon consulted, as also Experienced Women, by
Order of the Judges before whom the Hearing was; and they made diligent Enquiry
into the Affair, and without respect to any thing but their own Consciences,
they made their Report, That the Child had been carried in the Womb but Twenty
Seven Weeks and some odd Days; but that if it had its full time of Nine months,
it would have been more firm and strong, the body more compact, the skin
faster, and the breast bone, that had a kind of a Ridge, like that of the
breast bone of a Fowl, would have been more depressed. It was a Female Infant,
and wanted Nails, having only a thin film or skin instead of them; and this
they concluded was for want of heat, which more time would have matured. We
might produce a cloud of Testimonials to remove these Falling out, Charges and
Suspicions, that make Marriage unease and uncomfortable; but these we hope may
suffice as to these particulars.
P
Palatina, a Goddess supposed by the Romans to govern over the Palace. Palatula
was the Name of the Sacrifice offered to her, and her Priests who sacrified
were called Palatualis. Pallades, were Young Virgins dedicated by the Thebeans
to Jupiter; after this sort of the first born, and most beautiful, was
consecreated to him, who had the li\berry the lie with whom she pleased, till
the time of her Natural Purgation, and after that she was to be bestowed on a
Husband; but from the Time of her Prostitution, to the time of her Marriage,
her Parents and Friends lamented her, as one out of the world; but at her
Wedding they made great Feast, and exceeding rejoicing. Palladuim, a Stame of
the Goddess Pallas, having a Lance or Javelin in its Hand, and Eyes so artifica
lly placed in the Head, that they seemed to move as if alive. The Trojans
persuaded them-selves, that this Image was made in Heaven, and fell down from
Jupiter, and going to consult the Oracle of Apollo about it, they had Answer,
that the City should remain impregnable Whirst Image remained in the Temple of
Pallos; but in the Ten Years Wars with Greece, Diomedes and Ulysses,
undermining a Way beneath the ground, into the Temple, and killing the Guards,
stole it away; soon after which the destruction of the City followed. There was
likewise a Statue of Pallas at Rome, and in diverse other places. Pallas, other
ways, called Minerva, the Godness of Arms and Arts, or Wisdomm who is fabled to
have sprung from the Brain of Jove, and was a great Patroness of the Greeks at
the Wars of Troy. Phillippa, a Noble Italian Lady, who for the Love she bore
her Husband, put on Armor, and followed him unknown to the Wars, and in The
Battle of the Pavy, sought between the Imperials and Italian Confederates,
against Francis the French king, fighting Courageously by his side, she saved
his Life in the press of the Enemies. Parnel, contracted for petronella, a
little stone. Penelope, so called from cerrain Birds she sed. Philadelphia, i.
brotherly Love. Phil, or Philip, a lover of Horses. Phillis, a (...), i.
folium, a little leaf. Phillida, dim, a Phillis. Phoeke, Romans 16.1. i. Moon,
see the Etym. of Phoebus in men's Names. Polyrena, she that entertains many
strangers. Prisca, i. ancient or old. Priscilla, Acts 18.2, dim. a Prsca, i.
ancient or old. Prudence, i. Wisdom, knowledge, a Name commonly used.
Pamphilia, an Egyptian Woman of great Learning; she flourished in the Reign of
the Emperor Nero; she was the Daughter to Solerides, and married to
Socratides, a learned man from whom she gained her proficiency in Languages,
leaving to Posterity 8 books of Miscellanous History, besides other Works that
were lost, end not transmitted to Posterity, of which only mention are made by
Suidas, and several other Credible Authors. Paranimphs, Maidens that undressed
the Bride to her Nuptial Bed, and lead the Bridegroom to it; or, as we call
them, Bride-maids. Parcae, called the Goddesses of Destiny, by the Names of
Clotho, Lachesis and Athropos, by some said to be the Daughter of Athropos and
Themis; by others, of Necessity, the Night and Chaos, who had power to spin out
and cut the Threads of the Lives of mortals; The Youngest spun out the Thread,
the next in Years the Distaff, and the Third cut it off; which waan Emblem of
the stages of man's life, from Youth to Manhood, thence to Old Age, and
consequently Death. Parthenope, one of the Nymphs or Land- Syrenes, who
endeavored to destroy Ulysses in his return from Troy, by Shipwracking him on
the Rocks of the Coast where they resided; but was prevented, by his causing
his men to stop their Ears with Wax and Wool, and tying himself to the main
Mast, she (in Anger to miss her Aim, which had never failed upon others) threw
herself into the Sea, and there perished; and being cast on the Shore of Italy,
her Tomb, by the order of the Oracle, was erected were now the City of Naples
is situate. Partula, to whom the Romans assigned the care of Pregnant Women
near their time; called by others, Lucina, the Goddess of Childbirth.
Parisatis, Sister to Xerxes, the Persian King, and Wife to Darius Ocohus; she
was of a cruel nature causing Satira, her son Attaxerxus Wife to be poisoned,
because she out-vied her in Reav^y. She put diverse others to death in her Son's
Reign, who conselled him to suppress her Tyranny. Pasiphe, Daughter to Apollo,
or the Sun. She was Wife to Minos the King (...) Creet;yet falling passionately
in love with a Young Buli, (...) framed a Cow of Wood, covered with the Skin of
an Heifer. She found means to enjoy her bestial desire. She was brought to bed
of the Minotaur, half Man and half Beast, which did great mischief in the
Country, till Theseus came and destroyed it in the Labyrinth, Patalena, an
H^athenish Goddess taken notice of by St. Augustine in his book de Civitate
Dei, and her Care was assigned her over Corn just coming out of the Earth in
its Sprout or Blade; the word being derived from Patera, to open or disclose
the Earth at its first coming up. Pavence, was styled a Goddess in ancient
Times, much adored by Mothers and Nurses, to whose Care and Protection they
recommended their Infant Children; others say they made a Bugbear of her Name
to fright them into quietness when they were froward. Paula, a Pious Matron,
remark for her good works and Alms-deeds. She made it her business to do good,
and died in the high Esteem of all good Christians, at the age of Fifty six
Years and Eight Months. Paulina, Wife to Seneca the famous Philosopher, Nero's
Tutor; when she heard that the doomed him to Death, and that he had chosen to
bleed to Death by cutting his Veins, resolved to accompany him in Death in the
same manner, and ordered her Veins to be opened at the same time her husband's
were, that she might at company him to the other world; but Nero, through a
Tyrant delighting in blood, out of pity commanded it to be prevented. Penelope,
Wife of Ulysses, and Daughter to Icarius, was Mother to Telamachus. She was
wife and beautiful; and though in her Husband's absence, Twenty Years at the
wars of Troy, and his dangerous Voyage home, many Rich and Powerful Sweethearts
courted her, she put them by till her husband came home, who with the help of
his Swinherd and Son slew them. Penthesilia, Queen of the Amazons, who came for
the love she bore to Hector, Son of Priam, with a gallant Army of women to
fight for the Trojans agaiust the Greeks, and did wonders till she was stain in
pressing too far into the fight, by the hand of Aechilles. Peta, a Goddess
adored by the Ancients for that they believed she took care of Suits, Petitions
and Requests made in Law, Coures and to Kings or other greatmen. Phaetusa,
accounted one of Heliades, aod Sister to Phaeton, and as seigned to be turned
into a Poplar Tree during the Extraordinary Lamentation she made for the Death
of her brother, thrown headlong from the Battlements of the Skies by Jupiter's
Thunder, for burning a great part of the word by misguiding the Chariot of the
Sun. Phedima Dotanes, a Lord of Persia's Daughter; she married smerdis the Son
of Cyrus King of Persia, and after his Death she was Wife to the Magician, who
usurped the Persian Monarchy by declaring himself to be the same Smerdis that
was supposed to be put to Death by Cambyses, his brother, upon the account of a
Dream he had, wherein he fancied he sat on the Persian Throne, and his Head
reached the Sky. But this Lady being charged by he Father to make a discovery
of the Impostor, did so, by taking an opportunity when he was asleep to feel
for his Ears, but finding none, she then concluded it was the Magician
Spandabalus, whose Ears Cyrus had cut off for his Crimes; of which having given
Information, the Lords of Persia assembled, and forcing his Guards, killed him
together with his brother, and chose Darius King. Pherenice, she was Daughter
to Diagoras King of the Rhodians; she took great delight in the Olimpick Games,
and coming thither disguised in man 's apparel, often bore away the price in
running with the nimblest Youths of Greece; and brought up her Son to be so
expert in it, that he was always Victor. Philippa Catenisa, of a Laundress came
to be Governess of the King of Naples Children. She it was who incited Queen
Jane of Naples to consent to the death of her Husband, Andrew of Hungary, by
somen^^ing the differences between them, and had an hand first strangling him,
and then hanging him out at a Window in the City of Aversa; for which she
afterward suffered a cruel death by torments, Phyllis, she was Daughter to
Lycurgus King of the Thracians; she fell in love with Demophoon, the Son of
Theseus, in his return from the Trojan Wars, and granted him her choicest
Favors, upon promise, when he had settled affairs in his own Country to return
and marry her; but being detained too long by contrary Winds in his way, she
thinking he had flighted and forsaken her, after much lamenting her folly and
misfortune, committed greater in hanging her self. It is fabled that the Gods,
in compassion, turned her into an Almond Tree, but without leaves; yet
Demophoon no sooner embraced it but it shot out leaves, and flourished
exceedingly. Periades, held to be the Daughters or Pierus, Prince of the
Macedonians; she being given much to Poetry thought her self more expert in
Numbers and singing than the the Muses, thereupon sent them a bold Challenge
for a Trial of the Skill; which they accepting, and remaning Victors, they are
said to turn this Lady into a Magpy, and sent her to chatter in the Woods and
Hedges, etc. Plety, worthily held by the Pagans for a great Virtue and Good,
and for that cause they ^i^led her a Goddess, and paid her Adoration, and to
her care they committed their good Thoughts and Actions, also the Education of
their Children. etc. Pyrene, a Lady whom Hercules got with child, upon promise
to return and marry her; but he delaying, and her Womb increasing, she fled
from the Father's anger to the Mountains between Spain and France, where she
was thought to be devoured of Wild Beasts; yet lest a lasting Monument behind
her, those Hills upon the occasion being called by her Name. Placidia ( Galla,)
Daughter to Theodosius, the Great Emperor; she was also Sister to Honorius and
Arcadius, who were likewise Emperors, and afterward Mother to Valentinian the
Third; she was taken Caprive by Alathulsus, King of the Huns, etc. who married
her for her Beauty, Wit and pleasing Humor: So that by her Ascendant over him
she diverted him from his Purpose, utterly to raze and destroy the City of
Rome. Placidia, Daughter to Valentinian, the Third Emperor, and Eudo^ia his
Empress. She was carried away by the Vandels, but restored soaa after, and
honorably married the Senator. Plectruda, Queen to Pippin, called, the Fat.
After her Husband's Death she took upon her the Govenment of the Kingdom, in
the behalf of, her Grandson, a Child, and put Charles Martel, whom Pippin had
by a former Wife, in prison,; but he escaping, raised a War against her, and
wrestled the Power out of her hands. She was a woman of great Courage and Wit.
Plantina, Wife of Trajan the Emperor. She did much good in the Empire, by
Prevailing with him to take off the heavy Taxes. She procured the Adoption of
Adrian, who coming to be Emperor, built a Palace, Temple and Amphitheater to
her memory, the Ruins of part of which magnificent Structures are yet seen at
Rome. Poictiers ( Diana) Duchess of Valentinois. She got her Fathers Pardon
when condemned to die, and was very Famous in the French Court, during the Reign
of Henry the second, disposing of all Offices and Places of Trust to her
Favorites. But after Henry's Death Q. Katharine de Medici stripped her of her
Jewels, and banished her the Court, for grief of which the soon after died.
Polla Argentaria, was Wife to Lucan the Poet, put to Death by the Tyrant Nero,
for writing better Verses. She was a very Learned Lady, and much skilled in
Poetry her self. After his Death she corrected his Pharsalia, and writ many
Poems. Palyhymnia, one of the Muses, ^^id to take care of History and
Historians. Others affirm she was extremely in love with Rhetoricians; she was
painted in white Robe, With a Crown of Pearls, and a Scrowl in her hand; in a
posture as if she required attention to what she was about to say. Polyxena,
Daughter to Priamus King of Troy; With her Achilles fell in Love, and being
trained to the marriage, was killed by Parris with an inpoysoned Arrow; in
revenge of which, to appease that Hero's Ghost, she, after the taking of Troy,
was sacrificed at his Tomb. Pomona, held by the Ancieats to be a Goddess that
looked after Orchards and Gardens. With her Vertumnus fell in love, and by
borrowed shipes got his Will of her. Pompea, third wife to Julius Caesar,
Daughter to Q. Pompeus; but was divorced upon suspicion that she dealt false
with him; yet he believed her innocent, though he was told Claudius often had a
(...) in meetings with her in Woman's Apparel. Poniarovia, Duughter to Julius
Ponictovius, a Nobleman of Poland; she had often, as she said, Visions and
Revelations. foretelling the happy state of the Chruch, and the destruction of
its Enemies. Pontia, a Noble Roman Lady. With her Octavius Sagista fell in
love; but after he had obtained her to be divorced from her Husband, changed
his mind. Whereupon she married an other; which so incensed him, that he killed
her; for which he has Tried and Executed. Popea Sabina, Second wife to Nero,
Emperor of Rome, a very beautiful and virtuous Lady, who being great with
child, was killed by a Kick he gave her on the belly, of which, among all his
wicked acts, he was only known to repent. Populonia, held to be a Goddess that
secured Countries from ravagement and spoil. Porcia, Cato's Daughter; she was
wife to Brutus, one of the Conspirators against Julius Caesar, who to regai^
the Roman Liberty, assassinated him in the Senate House; and being overthrown
by Octavius Augustus, in the Philipick Fields; she no sooner had notice of his
Death, but she resolved not to survive him; so that her Friends, to prevent it,
laying all mischievous things out of her way, she choked her self by
swallowing hot Coals. Poreta, a Woman of Hanault, for writing and maintaning
the Doctrine, that those who are wholly devoted to the Creator, may satisfy
all the Needs of Nature without offending God, was burnt, together with her
books. Possvorta and An^^^ta, Two Goddesses held by the Ancients to know what
would happen before and after; tha last having power to redress Evil past.
Potaniades, held to inspire men and women with Rage; and to appease her, the
ancients sacrificed Pigs upon her Altar. Poverty, another Goddess; she was
painted meagar, and almost famished; yet by others she was called the Goddess
of Industry, because Poverty induces men to study and labor, and is she proper
mother of all Arts and Inventions. Praxardicia, a Goddess sabled to set bounds
to men's actions and passions; and therefore she was represented by a Head, to
show that Reason ought to guide us in our affairs; and to her were offered only
the heads of the beasts ordained for sacrifice, the rest being the Fees of the
Priests that attented her Altar. Priscilla, a Noble Lady of great Virtue,
before she was corrupted by Montanus and his heresy. Priscilla, a Roman Lady,
very charitable; she purchased a burying place for the Martyrs the fell by the
Heathen Persecution. Proba, an other Roman Lady, and very learned; she wrote
the life of our blessed Savior, and composed several (...) taken from Virgil
by (...). Prosa, the Persian Goddess of Childbirth, who gave easy deliverances
to woman in labor. Proserpina, Daughter to Ceres, the Goddess of Corn; she was
stolen away by Pluto, God of Hell, and Enthrod'd in his sutty Kingdom, and
fabled to be fetched thence by Hercules, and delivered to her sorrowful mother.
Psyche, a beautiful Damsel, with whom Cupid fell in love; but often crossed by
his mother Venus, till he compelled her to give him a free Enjoyment of his
Mistress, by often wounding and inflaming her with his Arrows, which made her
dote on every servile Swain. Pudicita, a Goddess adored at Rome under the
similitude of a woman with a Veil over her Face, called the Goddess of modesty,
or shamedfacedness. Pulcheria, Daughter of the Emperor Arcadius; She was
called Augusta and did many notable things for the Good of the Commonweal; and
by her means the General Council of Chalcedon was held (...) 441. Pussa, held
among the Chinese for a Goddess, called by some the Chinesian Cyble; she was
represented in the shape of a woman sitting upon a Cocus Tree, with 16 Arms, 8
Extended on each side, with diverse symbolical Instruments in them. This Image
is exceeding rich, being set out with Diamonds and other precious stones.
Prudentia, a Goddess fabl'd among the ancients to give Wisdom and
Understanding to her Votaries, she was printed with a Glass in one hand and a
Serpent in the other; and she was prayed to in doubtful matters, that a right
understanding might be had in deciding the controversies that arose. Patrico's
are the S^olers Priests; Every Hedge is his Parish, and every wandering slogue
and Whore his Parishoner. The Service he says is the marrying of Couples
without the Gospel, or Book of Common Prayer, the solemnity whereof is thus,
the Parties to married find out a dead horse, or any other beast, and standing
one on the one side and the other on the other, the Patrico bids them live
together till Death them part; and so shaking hands, the Wedding is ended.
Pasts. There are man Qualities which although they are not so proper unto
Ladies, yet they are very commendable in them, in which number is this piece of
Cookery, to have a good hand in the pastry. For skill in this affair consult
for the present the accomplish Cook, Sect. II, and Rabisha's Cookery, Book 14.
Markham's Way to get Wealth, Book 2. And in my second part of this Dictionary I
shall entertain you with great Curiosities on this Subject, that I have
received in Manuscript from Ladies of the best Quality. Painting the face and
Black Patches. -- Though the Face of the Creation has its variations of
Prospects and Beauty, by the alternate intermixtures of Land and Waters, of
Woods and Fields, Meadows and Pastures, God here mounting an Hill, and there
sinking a Vale, and yonder levelling a pleasant Plain; Designedly to render the
whole more delectable, ravishing and acceptable to the eyes of men; (could they
see his Wonders in the Land of the Living) that he might reap the more free and
generous Tributes of Thansgiving, and Cheerful Celebration of his Goodness in
the Works of Wonder. Yet has he no where given us more admirable expressions
of his Infinite Power and Wisdom than in the little Fabric of man's Body,
wherein he has contrive to Sum up all the Perfections of the Grearer, that lie
here and there scattered about. Nor is it possible for the heart of man with
all its considerative Powers to adore enough the Transcendencies of his Divine
hand, in the Perfections that he bears about him. But amongst them all, omiting
the curious contexture of the whole Frame, raising it up into a stately
structure to survey only the Glories of the Face and the admirable Graces that
God has lodged in each Feature of it, and then to remember how many Millions of
them have passed through his hands already, flourished out with a perfect
diversity of Appearance, every one discernably varying from all the rest in
different Feature and Meene, and yet every one excellently agreeing with all in
the same Identity of Aspect. All this variegated Work miraculously performed
within the compass of a Span, to let us see what a God can do when (as the wife
Potter) he turns his Wheel, and molds Nature into Infinite Ideas and Forms.
And though now and then grimness and crabedness find residence in some Faces,
(Providence foreseeing the necessity of Martial Countenances as well as
Spirits; Which History tells us the Romans ever did usually wear, or put on;
That the flash of their eyes as Lightning, might accompany the Thunder of their
Arms, and both together strike despair and death into their Enemies hearts. And
one of their Emperors was of so very frightful a Visage, that Speed, a
Country man of our own, tells us, it was as bad as High-(...) to stand staring
on his face which was ever an (...) to the terror of his Face)yet are these
Rough and impelished pieces but rare, and perhaps necessary too, to set off the
Beauties of all the rest. Now if God has stuck this loveliness on the Male
Cheek, what has he done on Female? What Glories? What Transcendences of them?
What adorable Perfections of Art has he shown, in the drawing those Lineaments
which are the stupifaction of Angels and Men: Beauty, when attended on by
Virtue, Create Women very Angels on Earth; when corrupted by Vice, degenerates
them into Devils of Hell! Which has not triumphed in the Infinite S^^oils of
mean and vulgar Affections only (that is their every days Tyrrany and Sport)
unspirited almost the whole Creation; But such as have dragged after them very
Crowns and Scepters into absolute vassalage and Chains. The proudest Jewels of
the Diadem have humbly vaild to stick themselves in the more Imperial Bosom of
a Woman, the Sparkles of her eye have out dazzled all their shine. -- But for
all that, I think those that paint their Faces, ought to be severely reproved.
This wicked Trade and practice of painting, has been much censured by the
Fathers. (...) first Parentage and Rise, others besides St. Cyprian, have
derived from the very Devils in hell, Apostate-Angels. The very Devils (says
he) first taught the use of Coloring the Eyebrows, and clapping on a false
and lying Blush on the Cheeks, so also to charge the very natural Color of the
Hair. and to adulterate the true and Naked Complexion of the whole Head and
Face, with those cursed Impostures; (and again) God has said, Come let us make
man after our own Image. And does any one dare to alter or correct what he has
made? They do but lay violent hands upon God, while they strive to mend or
reform what he has so well finished already. Do they not know that the Natural
is Gods, but the Artificial is the Devils? Do not thou tremble; (says he in
another place) to Consider, That at the Resurrection thy Maker will not
acknowledge thee as his own Creature? Caust thou be so Impudent to look on God
with those Eyes which are so different from those himself made? St. Jerome
seconds him, Quod facit in Faciz Christianae Purpurissum Cerussa, etc. What
makes the White or Red Varnish, and Paint in the Face of a Christian? Whereof
one sets a false dye and lying Tincture on her Cheeks and Lyps, the other an
Hypocritical Fairness on her Neck and Breasts, and all this only to inflame
young and wanton Affections, to blow up the Sparks of Lust, and to show what an
whorish and impudent Heart dwells within those daubed Walls? How can such an
one weep for her Sins, when the very tears would wash away the Colors, and
discover the Cheat? The very falling down of them would make long Furrows on
her Face? The Painting the Face is the deforming of Gods Image and Workmanship,
and is most damnable, faith another. But let those that are ugly and deformed,
rather endeavor to fix a Grace on their Persons, by the lovely exercises of
virtue, then think to (...) themselves by the stinking Collusions of Paint:
(says another) If we are Commanded to endeavor not our own only, but
Neighbors Salvation, with what conscience can men use Painting and false Dye,
which are ask many Swords, Piosons, and Flames to burn up the Beholders, Saint
Peter Martyr. The French have a good Lituny, De trois chooses Dieu nous guard.
Imagine one of our Forefathers were alive again, and should see one of those
his Gay Daughters walk in Cheap Side before him, what do you think he would
think it were? Here is nothing to be seen but a Vardingale, a yellow Ruff, and
a Perriwigg, with perhaps some Feathers waving in the top; three things for
which he could not tell how to find a Name: Sure he could not but stand amazed
to think what new Creatures the times had yielded since he lived; and then if
he should run before her, to see if by the forelight, he might guess what it
were, when his eyes should meet with a (...) Frizzle, a printed Hide shadowed
with a Fan not more painted, Breasts displayed, and loose loose (...) wontoaly
over her shoulders betwixt a painted Cloth and Skin, how would he more bless
himself to think what mixture in Nature could be guilty of such a Monster. Is
this the Flesh and Blood (thinks he) is this the hair? Is this the shape of a
Woman? Or has Nature repented of her work since my days, and begun a new
Frame. -- How had these wantons repind at their Creation, and perhaps
blasphemed their Creator, had he made them as they have marred themselves? They
had no doubt get a room on the Chronicles amongst the prodigious, and Monitrous
births, had they been born, with Moons, Stars, Crosses, Lozenges upon their
Cheeks, especially had they brought into the world with them a Coach and
Horses. What does the open shop, and sign at the door signify, but that there is
something venial? Nor shall I tax the practice of ambition to show the sineness,
clearness and beauty of the Skin; tho if it were so I would ask; who are
concerned I pray to know what (...), what color it is of, but either your
Lawful Husbands, or unlawful paramours? In the mean time it is too plain: That
Arrogance, and Impudence have usurpt the place and produced the effect of
Primitive simplicity, and woman are now almost naked, but not at all are
ashamed. -- Fashion brought in Painting and Antic dresses. Fashion brought in
Silks and Velvets at one time, and Grayes at another, and the Tunick and Vest
at another. Fashion brought in deep Ruffs, and shallow Ruffs, Thick Ruffs, and
Thin Ruffs, Double Ruffs, and no Ruffs; Fashion brought in the Vardingale, and
carried out the Vardingale, and has again revived the Vardingale from the
Death, and placed it behind, like a Rudder or Stern to the body, In some so
big, that Vessel is scarce able to bear it. When God shall come to Judge the
quick and the dead, he will not know those who have so defaced that Fashion
which he has Erected. -- True grace, says learned Author, is the most
excellent Receipt for beautifying the face; Wisdom makes the face to shine.
There is something ( tho hard to say what it is) in an unaffected gravity, an
unforced modesty, in an ingenious affable deportment, free, and Natural,
without starch, and pedantry, that recommends, and endears more to the
Acception of the judicious then all the curious mixtures of artificial fading
colors. -- Perhaps the evil of thy supposed Defect, and shortness, is more in
fancy, then in reality: Thou art well enough, very well, if thou could think
to: When we consider our Moral blemishes. we deceiveour selves, that we are
good, because not so bad as the worst; but when we reflect on our natural
defects we are apt to repine because we are not as good as the best: And whilst
we pore only on what we want, we loose the contentment, and our God the glory
of what we have. -- And it should be considered, that as some, designing to
make it burn the clearer, snuff the candle too long, and so near, till they
quite extinguish it; And as others are always carining the vessel of, the body
with physic, washing and tallowing with external applications till they sink
it; so are many tampering continually to mend the feature, and complexion,
which God made very well, because it pleased him to make them no other, till
they utterly spoil them. Palasius, o. [Ladies] of honor. Pales, the Goddess of
Shepherds. Pattacus, so famous for his Valor and as much renowned for his
Wisdom and Justice, seasted upon time certain of his Friends, who were
Stangers. His wife coming in the midst of the Dinner, being angry of something
else, overthrew the Table, and tumbled down all the Provision inder foot. Now
when his Guests and Friends were wrongfully dismayed and abashed hereat,
Pattacus made no more ado^^ the matter, but turning to them; There is not one
of us all, says he, but he has his Cross, and one thing or other wherewith to
exercise his Patience: and for my own part, this is the only thing that
checketh my Felicity: for, were it not for this Shrewing Wife. I were not the
happiest man in the World; so that of me these Verses may be verified. This Man
who while he walks the Street,
Or public Place, is happy thought;
No sooner sets in House his feet,
But woe is him, and not for ought:
His Wife him rules, and that is a spite,
She scolds, she fights from mo^ to Night.
Perfect Beauty. To make a perfect Beauty is required a Smooth Complexion,
white and red, and each color be truly placed, and lose themselves
imperceptibly the one in the other; which some Ladies would express by the new
French Phrase, demeslee. Full Eyes, well made of a dark or black color,
graceful and casting of luster. A Nose well made neither too big, nor too
small. -- A little Mouth, the upper-Lip resembling a Heart in shape, and the
under some what larger, but both of a vermilion color, as well in Winter as
Snnamer: and on each side two small dimples easily to be discerned in their
moving upwards, which look like a kind of constant smile. -- White Teeth, very
clean, well ranged in order, of an equal bigness, neither short nor long, but
very close (...). -- A sorked Chin, not too long, and hanging double. A full,
round, or oval Visage. The Temples high raised. -- As for the color of the
Hair, opinions are various One the fair hair, another brown admires,
A third a color between both desires,
But herein all concentre and do rest,
The color of the loved object is the best.
Therefore it is indifferent to one which of the three they be, provided the
Hair be very long, and thick, loose, cleanly kept, and a very little frizz'd or
curled in rings; but above all that it be not red, nor come near in the
rincture. For it were disadvantageous to them (...) have all the other species
(...) Beauty, if they are of that color. I have a natural anti^athy against
it, insomuch, that I oftentimes betake my self to my heels, when I spy (...);
not but they are usually accompanied with a pure (...), for which I have a
great ^clination; but the aversion (...) have for the one, makes (...) abandon
the other. But to return to the Ladies, to whom beauty de jure belongs. I am
acquainted with some who by their damned Art destroy the most beautiful works
of Nature. -- I am sometimes so incensed against them, that I have a great mind
to put an affront upon them, and I have a kind of itching desire to go and rub
their cheeks with the li^^le end of my finger, to give them to understand the
arrifices wherewith they endeavor to abuse them. For I phaney no (...) but
what is natural, which I have fram^ed; and am an enemy to those kind of
disgif^es, that in vaitn strive to in^^^^ the naturals. But as the Lover cannot
take the same liberty, that my absolute Empire over all that is beautiful
furnishes me with, to reform all abuses that are committed; that which he may
do, is to take the Lady he waits upon, and suspects to be guilty of such
sacrifice, when she rises out of her bed. -- It Is then tha^ the paint box has
not as yet played its part, unless by near foresight she made use of it the last
night. In this case he must address himself to the waiting Gentlewoman, as to
an Oracle, that can only clear all his doubts. But if he will obliqe her to
relate the truth, he must open his purse, for that incloseth the most
mysterious secrets. He shall no sooner produce certain Guests, that dwell
there, which they call Guinnies, but they will unriddle him the most obscure
aenigmas, not only upon this, but any other subject whatsoever, that his
curiosity prompts him to understand. But since we have not examined all the
natural beauties, let us leave those that are artificial, and return to what
remains. -- After the Face, the Neck, Arms and Hands fall under consideration;
which some Buffoons have called lapetite Oye; Though their beauty is inferior
to what we have already destrib'd, yet they produce sometimes strange effects,
and there is no heart that can resist the charms of a fair Neck, when she
satiates your Eye with beholding. Those graceful Apples which they bear inflame
the hearts of those that are most insensible. These two Fruits are so lovely,
that a person is ready to die with a desire of approaching with the mouth to
taste them, and is sensible of a pleasent convulsion when he does but grasp
them in his hand. In fine, they are capable of creating my content, but never
satiate me.

Lovers that touch their Ladies lovely breast,
De feel the Matchless flame within their heart,
And are with amorous designs poossest,
To enjoy wonders in some other part,
For greater pleasures they require
To satisfy their fond desire.
The comely proportion has many charms to move an affection, especially when
accompanied with a free Air that attracts the inclinations of all persons.

Poetical Revenge for being slighted
Coy one be gone, my Love-days now are done.
Were thy Brow like the Ivory fret,
As it is more black than Jet.
Might thy hairy tress compare
With Daphne's sporting with the air;
As it is worse selter'd far
Than the knotty tufts of Mandrakes are.
Were there in chy Squint Eyes found
True native sparks of Diamond;
As they are duller, sure I am,
Than th'Eye-lamps of a dying man.
Were-thy breath a Civet scent,
Or some purer Element;
As there is none profess thee love,
Can touch thy Lip without a Clove.
Were thy Nose of such a shape
As Nature could no better make;
As it is so screwed in,
It claims acquaintance with thy Chin
Were thy Breasts two rising Mounts,
Those Ruby Nipples Milkey Founts;
As those two so faintly move,
They Would make a Lover freeze with Love.
Could thy pulse affection beat,
Thy palm a balmy in^isture sweat;
As their active vigour's gone,
Dry and cold as any stone.
Were thy arms, thighs, legs, foot and all
That we with modesty may call;
Nay, were thy Grove of such choice Grace.
A^t might be styled Loves-watring place.
As all these yeid such weak delight,
They Would fright a Bridegroom the first night.
And hold't a Curse for to be sped
Of such a Fury in his bed.
Could thine high improved slats
Vye with greatest potentate;
As in all thy store I find
Mole hills to a noble mind.
Went thou as rich in Beauties form
As thou art held in Nature's scorn;
I vow, these should be none of mine
Because they are entitled thine,
Passionate Lovers. Love is so contagious, that all the Estates of the world do
feel it, an Evil so pestilent and venomous, that it plungeth and intermeddieth,
among all Ages indifferently, as all the Devils do among all the Elements,
without excepting Persons or Equality of old or young, foolish or discreet,
seeble or strong. And the greatest pain in this malady is, that they become mad
and out of their Wits, if they be not well treated and medicined at the first.
And therefore it is that Paulus Aegineta, in his third book, ordained to all
those that are peasecuted of this suror of Evil, such Ways and Rules to live as
are fit for sools, and such as are out of their Wi^s. The which Empercleus(
following the counsel of Plato) ordained also, who made two kinds of Furies, of
the which he called one in Greek Exoticon, which signifies in Latin Amatorium,
and in English Love. I have seen Anotamies made of some of those that have died
of this malady, that had their Bowels shrunk, their poor heart all burnt, their
Liver and Lights all wasted and consumed, their Brains endamaged. Love
proceeds of the correspondent quality of Blood, and that the Complexion
engendereth the same mutual love. The Astrolgians, in like manner, say, that
Love proceeds, when that two meeting have one mind, or that they be changed
in some other Constellation, for then they be constrained to love together.
Other Philosphers have said, that when we cast our sight upon that which we
desire, suddenly certain Spirits that are engendered of the most perfectest
part of blood, proceeds from the heart of the Party which we do love, and
promptly ascends even up to the Eyes, and afterward coverteth into Vapors
invisible, and enters into our Eyes, which are bent to receive them, even so
as in looking in a Glass there remains therein some (...) by breathing, and
so from the Eyes it penetrateth to the Heart, even so by little and little it
spreads all about, and therefore the miserable lover being drawn to, by the
Spirits, the which desire always to join and draw near, with their principal
and natural habitation, is constrained to mouth and lament his lost liberty.
Suddenly you shall see them drowned in tears, making the air to sound with
their cries, sighs, plaints, murmurings and imprecations; another time you shall
see them cold, frozen ang in Trance, their faces pale and changed; other times,
if that they have had any good look. or other gentle Entertainment of the thing
that they love, you shall see them gay cheerful and pleasant, so that, you
would judge that they were changed into some other form. Sometimes they love to
be solitary, and seek secret places to speak and reason with themselves; and
sometimes ye shall see them pass five or six times a day through a (...), for
to spy whether than they may have any look of the Eye of (...) whom they love;
and in the mean (...) poor pages and (...) have their legs (...) with running,
their arms awaken with (...) brushing, trimming, (...) king clean the
Gentlemen, (...) the Lover be poor, there (...) no (...) of Humanity, (...)
that he shows is, even to sacrifice, and to put (...) if need shall require.
I he be rich, his Purse ( as the Greeks term it) is tied with a Leek-blade;
though he be covetous, he becomes then prodigal, there is no (...) he will
spare (...) is the power of the poyson^^, the which has an (...) to say, that
Love was the first inventor of (...). if the Lover be learned, (...) his
spirits be any time. weekned, you shall see him (...) Sea of (...), to double
his plains, (...) ^^^ the Heaven, make an Anatomy of his Heart, freeze the
Summer burn the Winter worship, play the (...) wonder, to feign Paradise, (...)
forge Hall, conterfeit (...) play Tantalus, seign (...) with a thousand other
(...) And if they be minded (...) Exalt that which they love, then what is her
Hair (...) Golden Locks, her Brows (...), her Eyes (...), (...) Looks shining;
her Mouth (...) her Teeth Pearls of Orient, her (...) Balm, Amber and Musk, her
throat of Snow, her Neck of Mole, the Apples see things that she has on her
Breast, Bails or Apples of Allablaster. And generally all the rest of the body
is to other (...) treasures of (...) and of a nature, (...) had reserved to
please, or agree in all perfection to the thing that they love. Here you may
see how this cruel Melody of Love tormenteth those that are attainted with this
mortal poison; and notwithstanding, there are so many People, Nations and
Provinces so charged with these furious Assaults, that is there were an Army
made of all he lovers that are in the World, there is no Emperor nor monarch
but would be afraid to see such a number of fools in a company. And
nevertheless, this pestilent Evil, by custom, has so prevailed on humane kind,
that there can no remedy he found, although that many medicines, Greeks and
Arabians have employed all their Wit and Policy for to (...) this passion.
Samerati^s, (...) and Ovid, have written many great Volumes of the remedy of
Love, by the which they show the remedies for others. but they can find no
remedy for themselves, for that all three died, pursued and destroyed, not for
the harms that they did at Rome, but for the Loves that they (...) at (...).
But this (...) (...) which I have read (...) destroys, that things are come to
such (...), (...) when this foolish (...) does take hold of us, it renders us
british and unsensible, as it has been manifestly and evidently showed and
seen in a young man being of the highest (...) in Athens, and well known of all
the Citizens of the City, the which having many times beheld a fair statue of
marble very excellently wrought, which was in a public place of Athens, he was
so stricken with the love of it, that he would never be out of the sight of it,
and always remained by it embracing and kissing it, as if it had been a living
soul. And when that he was out of her sight, he went and lamented so piritully,
that it would have moved the most (...) to pity, and in the end this passion
got so much power on him, and was brought to such extremity, that he desired
the Senators to sell it him at what pride they would, to the end that he might
have it to bear about with him, the which thing they would not grant, for that
it was a public work, and that their power and authority extended not so far:
Wherefore the young man caused to be made a rich Crown of Gold, with other
sumptuous ornaments, and went to the (...), let the Crown on her head could
(...) her with (...) hold it, and call upon it, and worship it, with such
obstination and percinacity, that the people were ashamed of his foolish and
and ridiculous love, so that they forbad him to approach, or resort to the
Image any more. Then the youngling seeing himself to be deprived and kept back
from that which was more deer to him than his life, being oppressed with grief,
for sorrow killed himself. For the virtue of this passion is so great, that
after it has entered and taken full root in the heart of men, it walks
uncurable by the most livelyest and sensible parts of the body, and being in
full possession of us, she causes an infinite number of tears and sighs to be
poured out so wholly, that oftentimes it takes away our life. The which the
great Philosopher Apolonas Thianeus confirmed to the King of Babylon, who most
earnestly prayed him to show him the most grievous and cruellest torment that
he might invent by all the secrets of Philosophy, for to punish or chastise a
young Gentleman whom he had found a bed with one of his Damsels which he
favored. The greatest torment, says the Philosopher, that I can show thee,
and iuvent for to punish him, is for to save his life; thou shall see by little
and little, the burning heat of love to get so much on him, as it has already
begun, that the torment that he shall endure will be so great, that he shall
not imagine nor find remedy therefore: and he shall find himself so stirred and
provoked with diverse cogitations and thoughts, that he shall burn and consume
in this flame, as the Butterfly does in a Candle, in such sort that his life
shalll be no more life, but a very death, more crueller than if he passed
through the hands of all the Tyrants and Tormenters of the world. Here is in
sum, the cause why I let my pen ruu at large on this passion of Love, which is
the whole decay of the most part of Youth in our Age; For have they never so
little set their Foot or Minds on the pleasures of this World, they prepare
themselves to Love: Then Youth, Liberty and Riches, are greatest provoken in
this World, and in those wicked Occupations they lead without fruit the best
part of their life. Parents (when Good) their Character. Good Parents begin
their care for their children not at their birth but conception, giving them to
God, to be, if not (as Hannah did) his Chaplains, at least his Servants; and
this care they continue not only for a time, till their children are grown up,
and provided for, but as well as they may, even to the day of their death. They
show them in their own practice, what to follow and imitate, and in others what
to shun and avoid; For though the Words of the Wise be as Nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, yet certainly good Examples are as the Hammar to drive
them in, and clench them to a lasting continuance in the mind. Those Parents
that correct their children for Faults themselves are guilty on in their sight
or hearing, can have hale hopes to reclaim them; and indeed deserve correction
more than their children -- Good Parents decline to welcome and embrace the
first Essays of sin in their children, as knowing it very dangerous and
destructive to them: For as Weeds and Trash, Eldar buds, Nettles, Clivors and
the like, are accounted Herbs in the Spring, and much pleasing, though
afterward rejected; so they see that many over fond Parents are pleased with
the Early Evils and Licentious Wantonness of their children in their Infant
tattle, and restrain it not, though God is displeased and oftended at it, till
they begin to see their Error, when it is grown up rank, even to a loathing and
detesting in themselves, with what before they were satisfied and contended;
they therefore instruct their children Early in the ways of Piety, and by
Example and Advice lead them in the way they should go, that although they are
Young they will not forget it when they are Old; and if they have many
children, they place their Affections Equally on them, making no distinction,
nor difference, however Nature has favored and befriended some with beauty
more than others. If there be any inclining, it is to those that are most
obedient to them, and strive to please God, that he may continue to shower down
blessings on the Family. They take it to be Partiality and Tyranny to afflict
and despise those children that Natures too rough hands has rumpled into
deformity, and look upon it as a breaking those whom God has bowed before.
They allow their children maintenance, according to their quality and ability,
to keep tkem from low and sordid company, and from such things unworthy of
them, as Necessitty might prompt them to. So that a necessary supply even to
children, is oonvenient, and redounds not only to their credit, but advantage;
for having but a little money, they learn early how to husband it, and make wary
bargains, tho but for trifles; which when grown up, improves them in
thriftiness and politic management of their affairs; For we rarely see a young
person coming to a plentiful Estate, that has been kept severely in penury, as
to his Purse, but he has either many Extravagant Debts to pay, which he under
hand contracted, to supply him as it were by stealth, and for which he engaged
five times the value received; or coming out of a Land of Famine for Pleasures,
when he once finds them plenty, and stowing in upon him, he pursuits them to
such Exces, that he ruins both Body and (...) -- Good Parents in choosing
Professions, ever take singular care to considering the dispositions and
aptness of their children, whose Capacities and Inclinations are the (...)
Indentures to bind them to any Calling, or fix them in any Employment. If,
notwithstanding all their prudent care and management, there (...) rest a
perverse Nature in some children, they, however, with the Mother of Moses, are
careful to have a watch over them, to see what will become of them, where their
Rovings will end; as considering many that have broken and run out in their
Youth, have after long Rambargs seen their Folins, with the prodigal Son, and
with him repeated in rears, and returned to their Father's house, and after
reconcilement become (...) and changed to (...). And when they move their
children to marriage, it is (...) Arguments (...) to (...) Good and Welfare,
than their own Authority. It is a style too Kingly in this case, for Parents to
will and command, but certainly they may will and desire Affection tending to a
matrimonial contract, which are like the consciences of men, rather to be
gently led by kind persuasions, than driven, or drawn by force, And if they do
at any time marry where they do not love, they (...), no doubt, love where they
do not marry. Yet those Parents will not give their substance out of their
hands, to come themselves to be beholding to their children, but keep it to
reward their Duty and Obedience, as they see fit and convenient occasions, and
will deny them nothing that is reasonable for their advancement. On their Death
bed they bequeath their blessing to their children, not rejoice so much to
leave them great Portions, but that it may prospet with them, because it is
honestly obtained. If they leave them Young, their care is first to recommend
them to God's care and protection, and next him to conscientious and prudent
Guardians, or Overseers. Pariwigs and other Antic Dresses. Since we have found
the women so kind to tell us the Hair from their Heads, we have encroached on
the freeness of their Natures, and think they may as well, make a prize of all
the rest. And God knows the Age has not found them overshy of trading. In the
time of Seprinus vere^us, there were three thousand Indicted of Adultery, but
were all impeached that are guilty here, the Clerk of the Sessions need not
care to change place with the Judge. -- You cannot imagine what fancies it
creates in our Nodles by its hear. At Grand Cairo they hatch all their Chickens
in Ovens; on purpose heat to the degree of production; but who sees not since
our Brains have been fired by these Furzes what Serpents the Cockatrices Eggs
have produced. The Grand Seignier with all his golden Pe^oni's gliding mutely
along by his side, can never ravish himself in the lofry conceits of his
Glory, to that degree, that an Empty-skuil'd squire does now in the dancing of
his Aubrey Tresses about, while he looks out here and there to feast his Eyes
on the fancied Subjects that admire him. No sooner had Israel trimmed
themselves up into Gallantry and long Locks, but they shook off their Obedience
to Heaven it self; We are Lords -- we will come no more unto thee, Jer. 2.31,
33. -- Our Ancestors were (...) than we, who kept this Fax in their Pockets,
which helped to maintain their Tables, and would hardly have catch a Crumb, had
they found but an Hair in their Dish, while we are curling and powdring up
(...) thousand, chastely into our mouths all dinner, and cannot make a meal in
peace for 'em. -- To better purpose would this Hair be employed, should we be
put to the shifts that once the poor Citizens or Bizantium were, when under the
Extremities of a Three Years Siege by the Romans, and almost ready to perish;
having occasion to patch up a Fleet, under the want of Cordage, were sain to
make (...) Women's Han^; Which they, poor Wretches, very cheerfully cut off, and
gave them to inch out their Tackle; and though the whole Navy miscarried by a
storm, yet was not their Zeal the less laudable, who did it for the saving of
the City, or themselves, when ours do it for no good at all. -- A good head of
hair is so vulgar a blessing, that we find it as common to the Beggar as the
Prince, and he that dares not, for his Ears, boast the glory of his Blood, may
yet compare with the best in the fineness of his Locks. Then, Reader, lay down
your Artificial Ne^,and try how Nature will wean one. The truth is, it the
house be well furnished within, in every Room, as it ought, the Brain will find
Wit enough to excuse the unhappy want of a Bush without. -- It Is strange what
Pl^by records of the Romans, that they never knew the use of Barber till Four
hundred fifty four years after the building of their City, when in the time of
Scipio Affricanus, they were first brought in out of Sicily. Before that, it
seems, they hackled off their Locks with their Knives. But however Rough and
Uncomb'd they were then, sure I am they grew Curious and Spruce enough
afterward; for Plutarch tells us of the two boundless Hero's that admitted no
Superior nor Equal. The Great Pompey was so nice and Esseninate, in the
Formality of his Hair and (...) Locks, that he was noted (...) scratching his
(...). and once suffered a public Scott from the impudent Claudius for it, in
the midst of the Rout of Plebeians, who joined with him, to second that
Reproach. And Suetonius witnesses of the other, that he was so over curious of
his Head and Beard, he would not only be shaven very precisely, but his
Extravagant Haits even plucked. -- But what shall we think of his Successor
Augustus, who when he felt the assaults of Death invading him, called for his
Looking-Glass, and commanded his Hair and Beard to be combed, his Rivelled
Cheeks to be smoothed up; then asking his Friends, if he had acted his Part
well upon the Stage of the World, who told him he had; Well, says he, Vos
omnes Plaudite. Sure he went off very trimly. -- But what the modesty of
England has been in former Ages (however vain enough is other Fooleries, yet)
sure the Galleries and Dining-Rooms of our Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom,
will abundantly testify, from the brave Images of their Ancestors, whose open
Ears never valued the Coldness of the Winds, but which would glow to have heard
the monstrousness of their Childrens Ell-Wigs. -- The Puritans in the Reign of
the Royal Martyr, to distinguish themselves from their Neighbors, took on them
an Extraordinary short cut, and their Neighbors, in opposition to them,
Espoused a long one, because they would not be reputed Roundheads; and in
nothing outwardly were the two Parties so much differenced as in their hair,
and happy had it been that the Quarrel had Ended in the Barber's Scissars,
which we all know brake out afterward into the long Sword, and instead of
plucking each other by the Ears a little, they fell to stabbing one another in
the Guts. So that the mischiefs which the Barber might have prevented at first,
had he kept an Even hand on both Parties, and sheered them both to an Equal
Cut, all the wit of man could not prevent from running into Commodus his bloody
shaving, and cutting off Ears and Noses together with their Hair. -- Now a days
not a young Fellow that takes pet against his Noddle for catching the least
cough or cold, but strait, in revenge, off goes his Locks. And, to speak
plainly, Forty, or Threescore pound a year for Periwigs, and Ten to a poor
Chaplin to say Grace to him that adores Hair, is sufficient Demonstration of
the Weakness of the Brains they keep warm. And let me taste the boldness to
manifest a few of the ill consequences of this Idolatry. First, With the Woman's
hair we have put on her are (not of Cookery, and the Kitchen only, and become
Hen-housewives, but of the Chamber and the Dressing Room. Tricking up our
selves into as delicate starch'd-up a posture as she. Some of us have gotten
the Boddice ^^, to make us look slender and pretty: And the Epicene Sleeves do
very well fit both the he and the She. The Sleevestrings are tied with the lame
Curiosity, and the Val de Chamber that cannot knit the Knot Allamode, is kicked
away as a Bungler in his Trade and Profession. The Ribbon at the Hilt of our
Sword, is security against his being drawn, while we fix it there (as Cupid's
Knights) with no other design but to help to wound the Hearts of the Ladies. --
2, And who sees not the happy Victory, that we have gotten their very hearts in
our bosoms is close as their hair on our heads. Not their Effeminacy only, but
Weakness too, and have perfectly shaved away all our Virility and Prowess. Our
Swords lie dangling on our Thighs with the same Luxury sour Wigs (of the same
length) sport themselves on our breasts. -- Neither were former Ages without
their antic Dresses, It were enough should I hang out to View one of the Suits
that was generally worn heresofore in England, where you had a Dublet all
jagg'd and pricked, the Wastband coming down but a little below the Armholes,
guarded with Eight long Skirs; to this Dublet was claps'd a pair of Breeches
close made to the body, and whose length must make up the Defect of the
shortness of the Dublet. The large and ample Codpiss supplied the want of
Pockets, which came up with two wings fastn'd to either side with two Points,
which unknit made way to the Linen Bags, tied to the inside between the Shirt
and Codpiss; these bags held every thing they carried about them, except the
Gloves, which ever hung very Reverently at the Girdle, Where hung a Pouch made
fast with a Ring or Lock of Iron, weighing at least two or three Pounds,
whether there was any money in it or no. The like I could give of the Women's
Gowns, and show the madness of the Fardingale, and other whimsies -- But the
Gallerys and Parlours of most Old Familys are set out with such disguising
postures, as better will evidence them to the View of the Reader, than I care
my Pen should do at this time. I shall only add, That as to Women's curling,
crisping, twiching, variegating into a thousand shapes, into Rings, Mars,
Shades, Folds, Towers, Locks, etc. Tertullian inveighs bitterly against it.
What ails you (says he) that you cannot let your poor hair be quiet? but
sometimes it must be bound up, by and by dislevelled and loose about your Ears;
one while staring up in Towers, and presently patted and notched close. Aliae
gestunt cum cinnis coercere, aliae ut volucris and vagi elabantur. Some of you
are all for curling it up into Rings: others for a loosemode. Nay (says he)
Assigitis nescio quas enormitates suttlium atque texiitium capillamentorium.
Not content with that you stick on, I cannot well tell what manstious
Extravagancies of false Locks, and artificial hair and Periwigs. Pamphila, an
Epidaurian, the Daughter of Sateridas. So great was her Repute, that her Statue
is said to have been Erected by Cephisod^rus. Perilla, a Roman Lady, who living
in the time of Augustus, was in general Esteem for her Learning and Virtue. The
7 th Elegy of the third book of Ovid's Tristia, intimates her to have been his
Scholar. Phemonoc, the first Priestless of Apollo (as she is delivered to be)
and utterer of the Delphick Oracles; and also the first Inventress of Heroic
Verse. Praxilla, a Sycionian Di^hy Amote Pocress, of whose Writing there is a
Work entitled Me^^um Praxilleum. Proba Valeria Falconia, the Wife of Adelphus,
the Roman Proconsul, in the Reign of Honorius and Theodosuis, Junior. She
composed a Virgilian Cento upon the History of the Old and New Testament. Her
Epitaph also upon her Husband's Tomb is particularly remembered. Purification of
the Virgin Mary Candlemas, February 2. Pi^tage, f. Fornication (on the Woman's
part.) Protetaneous, arian, (...), l. having many Children, and little to
maintain them, vulgar. Palm Tree. Of this Tree there is male and female; the
male bears only blossoms, and no Fruit, the Female bears both, but not unless
the Male grow by it. Prendet de Baron, an Exception disabling a Woman from
pursuing an Appeal of Murder against the Killer of her former husband.
Pridiven, King Arthurs Shield, with the Picture of the Virgin Mary. Primer, Or
Office of the blessed Virgin, divided into seven parts. 1. Malines and Lauds.
2. The Prime. 3d. 6th. None (or (...)) hour). 6. Vespers (or Eversong). 7. The
Complines. Prioress, the Governess of a Nunnery. Panado (Span. Punada, or
Empanada; Fr. Paude) a kind of Food made of crumbs of bread and Curran's boiled
in water; or (as some will have it) of grated Bread, Milk, Sugar and grated
Cheese. Pandora seigned (by Hesiodes) to be the first Woman, and made by
Vulcan, endued by all the Gods with several Excellent Gifts: but afterward by
Jupiter, in displeasure, sent to her Spouse Epimetheus, with a box full of all
manner of miseries. Hence Pandora's box is taken for misery, calamity, and the
like. Pregnant, big with Child; also full, copious, ripe. Possowa, an Indian
beast receiving her young ones (on occasion) into a bag under her belly.
Paphian, ( paphius) belonging to Paphos, a City of Cyprus, dedicated to Venus,
and built by Paphus. Hence Paphus Archer is taken for Cupid; (...) fire or
shot, for the fire or arrows of Love. Papian Law ( Lex (...), Poppea) a Law
made among the ancient Romans, against single life, that if any forbore from
the privileges of Parents, and had no children, the People (who was the common
Father of all) should inherit their Goods. Tacit. Popelet, lote, c. a Pappet or
young wench. Polygamy, g. a being married to many at the same time. Polyhimnia,
lymnia, one of the Muses. Pomander, (q. Pomamber, D.) a ball of Perfumes.
Param, ( peramator) a lover, he or she, a Sweetheart. Paranymph ( Paranymphus)
an Orator, who a little before the Commencement of Doctors, etc. makes a
public Speech in commendation of their sufficiency, also an Overseer of a
Wedding, a Bride-dresser, or he or she that bears all the sway at the Bridal.
Paraphonalia, is used in our Law, but in the Civil it is Paraphernalia,which
are those Goods a Wife brings her Husband, over and besides her Dowry and
Marriage money, as, Furniture for her own Chamber, her own Apparel, and Jewels,
if she be of Quality; all which she must have, and not the Executors of the
Husband, etc. Shep. Fa. Counc. 122. Plesades, g. seven Daughters of Atlas,
turned into the seven fears. Plow monary, next after Twelfth-day, when our
Northern Plowmen beg Plowmony to drink; and in some places, if the Plowman
(after that days work) come with his Whip to the Kitchin-harsh, and cry, Cock
in the Pos, before the maid says Cock on the Dunghill, he gains a Cock for
ShroveTuesday. Point, f. the plight one is in; also Rich Needle work. Paritude,
Pariture or Parture (from pario) a breeding or ingendring, the time of travail
or deliverance of child or young. Philomela, flying from Terous, who had
ravished her, and cut her Tongue out. Pimpleiades, the Muses. Pimpompet, f. an
antic dance of three kicking each others bum. Perwick, wig. Peruque, f. a cap
of false hair. Phoedra, Daughter of Mines, and wife of Theseus. Phemone, the
first Priests of Appolo at Delphos, and inventress of Heroic Verse.
Phaetontiades, Phaetons sister. Phao, a Lesbian Youth, made beautiful by an
Ointment given him of Venus. Pentagamist, (Gr.) one that has had five wives.
Penlography, ( peplographia) the description of the Vail, called Peplum, which
was an Embroidered Vesture or hood to cover the head, now used for a Kercher,
worn especially by women, going to be churched. Tho. Peregrina, a Woman's Name.
Pelias, Brother of Aeson, King of Thessaly, slain by his own daughters.
Pelopaea, the mother of Aeghisibus, by her own Father Thyestes. People, lum. l.
a hood (for women at their Churching.] Pugitar, a Rival in Love. Petty Treason
( Fr. Petit Trahison) Treason it a lesser or lower kind. It a Servant kill his
Master, a Wife her Husband, a Secular or Religious man his Prelate, these are
Petit Treasons. Pin, as, he is in a merry Pin; it was an ancient kind of Dutch
artificial Drunkenness, the cup, commonly of Wood, had a Pin about the middle
of it, and he was accounted the man, who could nick the Pio, by drinking even
to it, whereas to go above or beneath was a forfeiture. This Device was of old
the cause of so much Debauchery in England, that one of the Constitutions of a
Synod held at West^. in the Year 1102. was to this Effect, That Priests should
(...) go to public Drinkings, nec ad Pinnus bibunt, nor drink at Pins. And
King Edgar made a Law that none should drink below the Pin. Pip is a Disease in
Poultry, being a white thin Scale, growing on the top of the tongue, which
hinders them from eating; it proceeds generally from drinking puddle water, or
eating filthy meat. Pledge, (from the Fr. Pleige) a surety or gage. To pledge
one drinking, had its Original thus; When the (...) bore sway in this Land, if
a Native did drink, they would sometimes stab him with a Dagger or Knife.
Hereupon people would not drink in company unless some one present would be
their pledge or surety, that they should receive so hurt, whilst they were in
their draught. Hence that usual phrase, I Will pledge you, or be a pledge for
you. Pattus, The bringing forth of a Mature Faetus, or Young, in natural
Births. The Faetus having broken the Membrances, turns his head forward, and
inclining it toward the neck of the Womb, strives to get forth; the usual
manner is after nine Months: Yet I have known some at Amsterdam, born at seven
Months, who have lived to Fifty or Sixty. Dr. Blanked. Phillis, (Gr.) a Woman's
Name) and signifies Lovely, as Amie in French. Philomel ( philomela) a
Nightingale. Philosophy ( philosophia) the love or desire of Wisdom; a deep
knowledge in the nature of things; there are three different kinds of it. (...).
Rational Philosophy, including Grammar, Logic and ^hetorick; and this dives
into the subtility of disputations (...) discourse. 2. Natural Philosophy,
searching into the obscurity of Natures Secrets, concerning besides,
Arithmetic, (...), Geometry, and Astronomy. 3. Moral Philosophy which consists
in the knowledge and practice of civility and good behavior. Philtre, (
philtrum) ^morous potion; a love occuring drink or medicine. Platonic love, is
a love abstracted from all corporeal, gross impressions and sensual appetite,
and consists in contemplation, and Idaea's of the mind, not in any carnal
Fruition; or it is a love of Friendship, without any admixture of Sensuality.
So called from Plato the Divine Philosopher. Pickadil (a Belg. Pickedillekens,
i. e. Lacinia. Teut. Pickedel) the round hem, or the several divisions set
together about the skirt of a Garment, or other thing; also a kind of stiff
collar, made in fashion of a Band. That famous Ordinary near St. James's called
Picadilly, took denomination from this, that one Higgins a Tailor, who built
it, got most of his Estate by Pitadilles, which in the last age were much in
fashion. Pilch, ( pellicea) a woollen or sur garment, now used for a flanel
cloth to wrap about the lower part of young Children. Hence d. Surplice. q.
Surplich. Pommade (Fr.) Pomatum, or Pomata, an Ointment used by Ladies; also
the Pomada, a trick in vaulting. Priscilla (a ^diminutive of Prisca) one of
this name was a great follower of Montanus the arch Heretic, and one of his
divilish Prophetestes, circa An. Christi, 181. Progeny ( Progenies) Issue
Offspring. Prolifical ( prolificus) Fruitful, that breeds or brings forth
issue apace. Prostitute, ( prostituta) she that for money suffers her self to be
abused by all the come, a common Harlo^. Pychoness ( pythonissa) she that is
possessed with such a Spirit; a Prophetess. Pandoratrix, an Ale Wife who also
brews her self. Pantalone, I an old amorous covertous Do^ard. Pantalones,
loons, a sort of Breeches well known. Paradise, g. a Garden or place of
pleasure. Paragon, f. a comdeer, to campare; also a Peerless Dime, etc. P^lam,
he seduced Hellena from Greece, which occasioned the Trojan War. Parnassides,
the Muses. Parnel, a pretty woman lover. Parthenian, g. belonging to Virginity.
Parthenope, the old Name of Naples; also one of the Cyrens. Partlet, an old
kind of Band, both for men and women, a loose collar, a woman's Pauss, Che.
Patelena, a Goddess of Com, when the cups opened. Paten, a Wooden Shoe with an
Iron bottom. Patin, l a great platter, Charger or Basin; also the (...) place
used by Priests (with the Chalice) at Mass. Pavin, Pavan, f. a kind of dance.
Pausonias, a famous Laecedemonian Captain; also a outh who slew Philip of
Macedon, because he had no redress for being ravished. Peeper, c. a. Looking.
glass. Promises, and Vows in Love to be observed, etc. Promises in Love-matter
when avowed and sworn to gain credit with many, though afterward they repent
their Credulity, especially if upon such Considerations Virgins trust too soon.
There is a Fable, that Jupiter being much in love with Jano, one day singled
her out, and raised a great Tempest; to shelter her self from which she sled
into a Cave, and he flew after her, in the shipe of a Cuckoo, into which he had
transformed himself, and lighted in her lap. She much pleased with the Bird,
put it nearer to a warm place: which he no sooner touched, but he returned to
his proper shape, and would, forsooth, have been nigling of her; but she was so
prudent as to resist his Embraces, till he vowed and swore to marry her, and
then she gave her consent. And we find he kept this Vow. Yet for all that they
live'd but very scarvily together, though of a Celestial strain. However, I
would not have our Earthly Beauties lay too great a stress upuu such Vows and
Promises, left when their Virgin Roses are cropped, they stand like unregarded
bushes. It is the common Complement of some men in such cases, when they aim at
your Honor, not to regard what they swear, say, or do, so they can thereby
obtain their ends; for tho behind thy back they laugh in their sleeves to think
what advances they have made, and how easy and coming they find you to their
purpose; but before your face what protections will they (...) make of Hanging,
Drowning, (...) or Stabing themselves, (...) they may not Enjoy your Love, tho
they mean no such (...): they as well as your (...), can shead false,
determining Tears, and Act over a (...) Passion so to the Life, (...) you would
swear it was (...) and many are too apt to (...) it so, and thereby are (...)
to have bowels of compassion toward this supi^^d suffering and afflicted over,
when they hear them (...) and say, well my dearest, (...), and most pleasing
Mistress, you see to what Extermity your denial has forced (...), even to the
making my (...) irrevocable be any but our hair self; and then when (...) toe
late, I doubt not but you will shed a tear to hear you have murdered me by your
denial; and that I fall by a violent death for your sake. Which story being
seconded with a few tears, too often goes down with the credulous Virgin, and
she by her compassion, where there was but little need of it, is undone. yet it
is not good Jesting this way; those Vows, or ought they know, as high as they
set by them, may be registered in Heaven, as we before have hinred; and may had
down Vengeance upon the Violators of them when least expected, when they are
huging themselves in a pleasing security, and bostling of the spoil, they have
grin'd thereby -- Promises and Vows on the other side, in Women, are likewise
very frequently violated; and, what is worse, many of them at the very time
they make them, intend not to keep them, but prostitute them to their Ends and
(...). They have tears at (...) naturally look (...). But these things most
properly belong to cunning liking Women. Aretines (...), when her Sweetheart
came to Town. wept in his (...), that he might imagine those tears were shed
for Joy of his return, though she had twenty more at the same time; and to
these Crocadile tears they will add sighs, sobs, and seem sad and sorrowful,
look pale and merge, neglecting their Dress, and go carelessly, that you may
fancy your neglect makes them take no delight in themselves; but that they are
pining away, and will languish and die for your sake; and then the young
Amerest thinks, peradventure, by reason of her Vows. Tears, s^^iks, etc. She is
solely his, and he has her heart and affection when indeed he is forth for.
from it, for such kind of de^^ding Women will have one Sweetheart in bed,
another in the Gate, a third sighing at home, a fourth busied abroad, in
obeying her commands; and all this the manages so cunningly, that every one
thinks himself sure of her, and knows nothing of the Favors she bestows upon
his Rivals. They can also, upon occasion, so weep that one would conclude their
very hearts would dissolve within them, and slow from them in tears from their
Eyes, when we perceive them like Rocks dropping Water; and yet all this is but
in Jest; for they can wipe away their tears like Sweat; weep with one Eye, as
the saying is, and laugh with the other; or like some Children, who cry and
laugh both at a time; and Old Chauter, in his home-span Rhythme, says, For half
so boldly there can none
Swear and Lie as Woman can.
But this must not reflect upon all Women; for some are Religiously
Conscientious to a miracle. And another upon their tears has this: Regard not
Women's Tears, I counsel thee;
They reach their Eyes as wet to weep as see.
And so says another, there is no more pity to be taken of a Woman's weeping
than there is of a Goose going barefoot; and indeed a General of an Army
Besieging a City, has not so many stratagems to take it as some of the Fair Sex
have to take those they design to gull, and flatter into a belief of their
Faith and Conscience, being both Active and Passive, doing or suffering any
thing that may be instrumental (...) bringing about their Plots and Projects.
Posthume l. a child born after the Fathers death. Philyea, the Daughter of
Oceans Pandor, (from the Belg. Pander; that is, he (...) takes a (...) or
Pledge; the Souls of such as (...) of him, are pawned into (...) hand, as to
Asimleus his (...) berlain) a He-Baud. Philters, their power and force to cause
Love. -- Philters are held by many (...) be great Provocatives to Love or
rather Lust; and some have used Amulets, Spells, (...) Images, and such
unlawful practices to compass their desires. It was given out, that a Th^^^lian
Girl had bewitched (...). Philip of Macedon, enforced him by Philters to love
and dear upon her; though when O^^pia, his Queen, observed her Beauty, she
disbelieved it, and ascribed his Love to that alone. And some, none of the
least wife, will not credit that any such thing can be done to force love; but
others again affirm it, telling how strangely many have been infacinated by
those that have been deformed, alleging, that it is common for Witches to make
such Philters as shall cause Love or Hate at their discretion. Hieron tells as,
that a young man gave a (...) one of these Philters, that made her, though she
disdained distraction before, run mad for love of him, and was after a long
(...) cured by Hilarian. Plutarch says, that (...); his death was occasioned by
a Lucullus and that might be; for there are Poisons mixed in them to inflame
the Blood, which nor well corrected prove (...), Cleopatria is said to use much
means to chain Mark Ari^^ to her Embraces. Charles the Great, is said to do
upon Woman of mean beauty and extract for many Years, to the neglect of his
Affairs; and then this Woman died, he (...) her Coffin to be hung (...) Jewels,
and carried it (...) with him where e're he (...), till it was revealed to a
(...), three prayed he might over himself from so great folly, that the cause
of it was (...) the Woman's Tongue. (...) Bishop thereupon searched and found a
small Ring; upon (...) his passion toward her (...), and he fell extremely in
love with the Bishop, hardly enduring him out of his sight, who thereupon
considering the ^ing had some Necromantick Force in it, threw it into a Lake
and the Emperor neglected him, and built an house in the Island that stood in
the Lake, as also a Temple by it, to his great cost, and neglecting all his
other Palaces, was extremely delighted there, till he died. Some Writers have
suspected the Lady Catharine Cobham to have gained Humphrey Duke of Gloucester
to be her Husband, by such Arts; and that Roxolana bewirch'd Solomon the
Magnificent to love her even to madness, by the means of a Philter she received
from a Jew. And Salmatz affirms it is an ordinary practice in the Kingdom of
Fess, in Africa. Some ascribe it to the Devils Enchantments rather than the
Force of Drugs, though they are used as a visiblements. And others on the
contrary, will have it, that such Effects, supposed to be done by Charms and
Philters, proceed from Natural Causes, as men's blood Chymically prepared; which
as Ernestus Burgravius says, much avails. He says, it is an Excellent Philter,
but not fit to be used, or made public. Mandrake Roots and Apples are held by
some to have powerful Effects in this nature, also dead men's clothes, certain
hairs in a Wolfs Tail, the powder of Swallows or Doves hearts, sundry sorts of
precious stones, and that small Bladder which grows up the Colts Forehead, e're
the Dam bites it off which if she misses to do, or it prevented, she never
loves her Fool. They tells us, that there are certain Fountains, of which if
any drink, they shall grow mad for Love. There is, say they, an hot Bath in
Germany wherein, it is fabled, that Cupid once dipe his Arrows, in which
whosever baths, shall soon after fall passionately in love; against which
Project Ovid exclaims; viz. He gulis himself that seeks to Witches craft,
Or with a young Colts Forehead makes a Draught.
No powder in wife Medea's potions dwells,
Nor drowned persons mixed with magical spells.
The power of Love is not enforced by these;
For were it so, then had Ersonides
Even stayed by Phasius, and Ulysses kept.
Who ^ale from Cir^e whilst the Inch^tress slept.
These charmed Drugs move Madness, hurt the Brain,
To gain pure Love, pure Love return again.
And inded plain dealing is the best; for we find where Love, or rather Lust
and Madness is thus forced, it always proves unhappy in the End, and when the
Fumes are worked out, turns to Repentance, Hatred and Discontent, Crowding
miseries and misfortunes one upon another, till they overwhelm the expected Joy
and Felecity, or fearrer them in Chaos of Confusion. Prognostics of Love
Melancholy. -- Prognostics or Presage of things, have in ancient times been
held in greater Esteem than in these our days, though they have not lost all
the regard due to them; and indeed, were they more curiously scanned, matters
in many affairs might go better than they do. But waving all other matters, we
must only now handle such Prognostics as are suitable to our Subjects: and
amongst them those of love Melancholy are worthy our Observation; and the
sorerunners of such melanchol, are unaccountable Disorders in the mind,
Suspicions, Fears, Cares, Jealousies, and such like without any sufficient
ground, warrant or reason for such Anxieties. Now the Question remains, What
will be the Evces of these miseries? Some are of Opinions, that it will fix
(...) a Love-melancholy in the mind, that is cannot be removed neither by
Physic nor found Advice; and that the Physician himself, thus possessed may
despair of his Art, and complain with Apollo, when that no medicable herbs can
cure Love. Eurialus being thus taken, when his Friends came to persuade him cut
his passion, he figthing, (...) Go, bid the Mountains cool down into the
Plains, the rivers run back to their Fountains, and the Sun leave its wonted
course, and make its Diurnal Road from North to South. You may as well bid
this, with as much hoped success, as bid me not love. First, Seas shall want
their fish Mountains their shade,
Woods birds sucet Notes, and the Winds murmur fade;
Before my Love to Sylva is ullay'd.
Physic may Remedy each sad disease.
Excepting Love; but that it cant appease.
Pretenders to love are never afflicted with this distemper; and therefore
after they have broke off, or are slighted and frowned upon, you may conclude
their Love was like a painted fire, the resemblance without heat indifferent;
therefore we intend not in this place to give advice to such as have no need to
it, but rather to those that want our compassion, and are really to be pitied;
in those where find it too frequently break out into outrageous and prodigious
Events. Cupid and Bacchus, above all others, raise the greatest storms in men
and women, and run us many times even to madness, or at least to be besides our
selves. Therefore to prevent the danger, we ought at first to be moderate in
both, and not sip in more than we can reasonably bear, and work off again; for
in one sense a man may as well be drunk with love as Wine; and it is indeed the
worst of the two, because more lasting; when the other, perhaps, is but a
Nights debauch, this many times stupifies the senses all the days of Life,
locks up his Reason in the Dungeon of headstrong willfulness and
self-blindedness, placing an unruly passion, as Jailer, to keep it strictly in
Chains; so that a man or a woman thus divested, may justly be termed an
irrational Creature, acting in some degress worse than they. Mark Anthony had
such a love to Cleopatria, that none could wean him from it, first, by giving
himself up to sloth and wantoness, lost that great Name he had gained in War,
then the love of his Soldiers, and lastly, the Empire of the East, and for
despair and madness killed himself, and brought Egypt, and other Countries,
into an Extreme Calamity. The fair Inchantress likewise killed her self by
clapping Vipers to her breasts; and so ended their Love Fevers in a doleful
kind of Melancholy. How many might we name that have lost themselves, and their
flourishing Fortunes upon this account, throwing themselves, as it were, from
Precipices, or into Yawning Gulfs, when they might have stood firm, or moved on
smoothly and uninterrupted, -- Platina says from hence came Repentances, though
of a strange kind, Dotages, Ship wracking of Wits and Fortunes, and violent
Deaths. And some hold the Prognostic is that when this Passion is at the
height, and Extremely Raging, the Party will either run mad or die; at this
Reason is given, viz. because it makes the Blood black, thick and hot; and if
the Inflammation get into the brain, it will with continual waking meditations
and musing so dry up and the moisture, that the brain is inflamed for want of
it, or shrink together, and then madness, ensues, and sometimes they lay
violent hands upon themselves; some pine away, and die upon a sudden. And as
one says, For whilst I do conceal my grief,
Madness steals on me like a Thief.
Would I were dead, for naught --
But death can rid me of my woes.
When Eurialus left Lucretian, she never laughed, jested, or gave one pleasant
look, but fell into Love Melancholy, and pined her self to death. So desperate
had Love made a young hot brained Lover, that the Parents of the Virgin he
loved, utterly refusing to let her marry him, in a raging fit of passion,
resolving if he could not, that nobody should enjoy her, he first Killed her,
and then himself, having desired of the Magistrates they might be buried in one
Grave; which being granted, when he had mortally wounded himself, he took a
great consolation to his troubled mind, Many have been so inflamed with love,
that to obtain their desires they have destroyed their nearest Relations, and
best Friends, for giving them good Counsel. Some have betrayed Citys, nay,
whole Countries in their proses'd Enemies upon this occasion; as the Widow of
Nereus did Athens for the love of an handsome Venetian Gentleman. Pithidice, the
Governors Daughter of Methinia, betrayed her Father and the whole Island to
Achilles, has the love she bear him. Alexander, for the love of Tan who
demanded it as a trial of his Affection, set the famous City of Persopolis on
fire, tho Repentance came too late, and made him weep over its Ruins. Cataline
Killed his only Son in a Love raging fit. Therefore such violences are timely
to be avoided. All that in us ^^ere they grow too strong for us, and we cannot
(...) them, When gentle winds do blow, (...) Oars we try,
But in rough storms are fore^^ Lay them by.
Prognostics of Jelousie, Madness, Despair, (...) Examples, etc. --
Prognostics of Jelousie, are (...) and various, and we find they Tyranizing
distemper (...) first with a kind of (...) and dullness of the Spirits, the it
is formed into suspicion. ^^ from thence grows up to hatred, and from that to
Madness, Fre^^ey, Injury, despair and Murder, if it to be not removed or
prevented in time. There is nothing so bloody as the fury of a Jealous man in
his enterpriz'd Revenge, and if they are hindered in that, they many times turn
their Fury on themselves, and are destroyed by their own hands. And Cyprian
says it produces a fruitful mischief, is the Seminary of offenses, and Fountain
of Murder. A thousand Tragecal Examples we might mention, ancient and modern,
Hercules was Poisoned by Deianita, Amestris, the Wife of X^xes, finding his
Cloak in the House of Masista, presently grew Jealous of his Wife, got her into
her Power, and glutted her Eyes with Cruelty, by fleeing her alive, cut off he^
Ears, Nose, Lips, Paps, and likewise her Tongue out, and left her to dye in
that miserable condition, Deutera, the Wife of Thexiebar King of France, having
had a Fair Daughter by another Husband, grew Jealous that she sought to take
the Kings Love from her, and Transported with this Rage, like a Barbarous
Inhuman mother, caused the beauteous innocent maid to be murdered. Ferdinandus
Chal^eria cut off Getherinus a Nobleman's Leg, because, as he supposed, he
looked too familiar upon his Wife, which occasioned much blood shed by the
Quarrels that ensued upon it amongst their Relations; and another who suspected
a Friar that often Visited his House, being in the Chamber when his Wife was
Delivered, and seeing the Child in the Caul, he immediately swore the Friar had
Cuccol^ed him, and that must of necessity be a Child of his begetting, and the
Learned Reason he gave for it, was, that it came into the World wraped in a
Friars Caul or Hood. Fulgosus, a Woman of Narbone, though one would hardly
think that a Woman would be so unkind to herself, took her Husband Napping, and
in his sleep cut off his Genitors, because she supposed he performed Duty
somewhere else and neglected it at home, resolving, since they were in a manner
useless to her, no body else should be the better for them. -- Pain almost of
any kind is doubtless nothing to the Torments of Jealousy, it puts the party as
it were upon the Rack, and Afflicts him in every part. At Basil there was a
Painters Wife who had bore her Husband nine Children by that she was twenty
seven years of Age, and then upon a Caprice, of which she could give no
reasonable account her self, she must needs grow Jealous, which in a small time
increasing, utterly destroyed her Quiet and Repose, nor would she eat and drink
at home for fear, as she said, her Husband should Poison her, Felix Peter tells
us of a Physician that went mad through Jealousy. Of a Merchant that Killed his
Wife in the humor, and afterward himself. O a Doctor in Law that cut (...)
Man's Nose, because whilst the fellow was telling a blunt story, his Wife smiled
at it. -- Prognostics of this Kind may be taken from the Humors, for when
they are once stirred, and the Imagination disaffected, Jealousy soon enters,
varying it self into diverse forms, and many absurd Symptoms accompany it, and
when it gets too large a scope, and taints the blood, then it turns to Madness;
And a Baker being once in a Phrensey Fit Gelded himself for no other Reason, as
he afterward confessed, but to put his Wives honestly to the Touchstone.
Jealousy makes men fall out into extravagant Ravings against the Fair Sex, when
perhaps there is no ground for it, but their (...) is a corner of a room; you
may where such Jealous Pates resort, hear one cursing and banning his hard Face
to be liked by her on whose Constancy he thought he might have wagered his
Soul. Another in another concern is perhaps a whining and smiling because he
finds, he thinks, his Wife Loves another better than himself, and he cannot
discover the immagionary Gallant to be revenged on him, and so he vents his
Stomach in tears of anger. A third who fancies himself (...), falls against all
Woman Kind, and concludes there are none but what are Dishonest and Inconstant,
and so vends his Spleen against the whole sex, in a sharp Satyr to this
purpose, which in a strutting manner he belches out in C^non Roar, etc. viz.
Trust thou thy Ship to Sea and Wind.
But not thy self to Woman kind;
For the inconstant Wind and Sea
Are Faithfuller by far than they;
They all are Treacherous in their Love,
And if by chance one constant prove,
I know not how she e're could be
Made constant from Inconstancy.
Thus we see Jealousy is a severe ^^^menter, he Persecutes those that entertain
him perpetually without giving them the least Intermission, it is a plague next
to the everlasting worm, and throws the party into abundance of
inconveniences, and many times fatal mischiefs; it is like the Devil mentioned
in the Gospel, that possessed the youth, it sometimes throws them into the Fire
of burning anger and furious act; times into the Water of cold Melancholy and
Sullen morossness; and a man had better, if he would consult his Reason, be a
hundred times a Cuccold in earnest, than troubled with Jealousy, tho but upon
bare ^armise, or suppo^tion; it is a crime that brings its punishment along
with it, and a Virtuous Woman is at full revenged of her Jealous Husband by his
own jealousy. -- Pardon us, married Ladies and Gentlemen that having had often
occasion to Discourse of Jealousy and its effects, Particular and General
considerations, and what may be considered in Jealous Persons who have some
color for it.
Occasioned mostly by bare surmise, we come now to say something of those who
have a real occasion to be so, were they never so foolishly inclined. It is
many an honest man's fortune to be a Cuccold, who takes it patiently, and is to
be accounted so much the Wiser, if he cannot prevent it, without greater
mischief and inconveniency, it is perhaps the honest Gentleman's Fortune to be
so, and is as Hereditary to him as his Land; and why then would any be so
nicely unconscionable as to have his good natured Wife go about o debar him of
that which, if you will believe the Astrologers, the Stars have long before
pointed out for him; besides, the Natural Philosophers tell us, that Women are
more prone than Men to amorous desires, and love we have heard will break
through the Walls and Gates of Nunneries, much more enter the open Doors of
those that have tasted of its pleasures; for grant we that wives be never to
Chaste, the Husbands will be frequently showing bad Examples to incite or
provoke them to Desire, or revenge, by buzing about their Chambermaids, or
starting aside into a Neighbors bed in his absence; how then in Conscience can
they then be Jealous when themselves have drawn the Pattern to be imitated;
nay, some have been so, Generously inspired as to put tricks upon their own
Wives that way, by helping others to lie with them contrary to their Knowledge,
and this besel a noted person in our days, which story, for a Caution to those
that would avoid being dubbed Knights of the Forked Order, will not be amiss or
unpleasing in this place. -- Passionate Love for Kitchen-maid, a brisk, plump,
tho honest Lass, had so violently possessed a married Gentleman, with the
desire of Enjoying, Ladies, what we will not name for fear of forcing your
modesty to a blush, and was so importunate with her, that after many denials,
being tired out, and yet persecuted on, she revealed the secret to her
mustress, who was very much incensed at his Ingratitude; but knowing not how to
remedy it by open force, she resolved to use a stratagem, ordering the Wench
seemingly to comply with him, and she would in the dark take her place, and in
conclusion make him see his Folly and Error, which may be a means to refrain
him. In the mean time the Husband had made a young Spark of his acquaintance,
privy to his Solicitations, to draw him in (who was prone enough of himself at
that Game) for a snack in the Charges, if the wench should happen to prove with
Child; seemingly accorded; his Friend, glad of such an opportunity, was
contended to accept of his leavings, he had seen the Girl by day, and doubted
not but she would feel as well by night; the Room was dark, and it was to be a
silent meeting, least the good Wife, who was then in the bed, should hear and
disturb it; she received him not as a Married Woman, but with the striving; and
struglings of a coy Virgin, so that by that means, and a glass or two of Wine
he had in his head, he never dreamt of the Change that was put uphim; his
companion was placed behind the Hangings (ans as soon as our tired Gentleman
withdrew, seemingly for the Chamber Pot, purposely set on the further side of
the Room) he slept into his warm place, the other with his Clothes under his
Arm retired and left him, and he performed his task so well, that the
Gentlewoman all this while supposing it her Husband, but wondering at his
Vigorous improvement, imputed it to his Imagination that he had a fresh Lass in
his Arms, and therefore resolved so say nothing, as being desirous of repeated
Experiments of this kind; however, thinking to startle him when day light gave
him a prospect, she unwittingly slipped her Diamond Ring upon the young
Gentleman's Finger, which he taking for the Watch Token to be gone, arose and
followed his Companion to the Tavern, where they had appointed to Revel all
that night in Triumph over the Virgin Conquest they supposed they had gained,
but the Ring appeared unexpectedly, dashed all the meriment, the Husband
instantly knew, and presently concluded he had put a trick upon himself. Now
pray give us leave to demand with what Reason or Conscience this Gentleman
could be Jealous of his Wife; the Woman in this case was Innocent; and tho her
Husband was as much a Cuccold as a Cuccold cau be; yet she was guiltness,
because her mind and intention contributed not to the Fact; and so we acquit
her, and hold her notwithstanding to be an honest Woman, for the Body is not
capable of sinning, unless it be first formed in the mind, and in this case no
such thing appears, and the Gentleman's wisest way had been to have held his
Tongue for her Conscience sake, and his own Reputation; but Jealousy got so
much the upper hand of him that he could not refrain blowing those horns
himself had caused to be made and s^ted to his brows, by which means he became
a very noted Citizen, being every where pointed at for his solly. -- Put the
case a man be Jealous of his Wife without a cause; this very wronging her shall
in revenge prompt her to do that which she otherwise never designed, for
nothing exasperates a Woman more than distrust unjustly (...) upon her, as if
she had not a sufficient discretion to Govern her self without seting spies or
a guard over her. We shall show you in another example how this kind of usage
contributed to another Gentleman's misfortune; he had been, tho but a young
Spark, yet an old Sinner at this kind of Game, and above all things dreading to
be a Cuccold, he was very different in the choice of a Wife; this frightful
bugbear, even at a distance, making him some times conclude never to Marry, but
then being Heir to a pretty good Estate, the main he found would fail, and it
would pass after his Decease into another Family; but that which most moved him
to comply with Matrimony, was, that part of it being Mortaged, he wanted a
Wives Portion to redeem (...), and at last found out one suiting hi humor,
young, rich, fair and witty, and in a short time clapped up the March; having
brought her home, he put her under the Ward of an Old Aunt that was his
Housekeeper, with a strict chare, at the peril of her place, to watch the young
Ladies waters so narrowly, that she should let none slip without her
obsrevation, suffer her to go no where without her and no company with her but
in her hearing; this made her stomach it extremely, that instead of the freedom
she Expected in being a Wife, she found her self but a Prisoner at large,
having always her Keeper at her heels. This put her upon revenge, which
otherwise perhaps had not come into her thoughts, she took opportunities to
solicit a young Gentleman, that had the freedom of the House, not with words,
for that she durst not, but with her Eyes, and some Dumb Love signs, of which
Language he was not ignorant; but how to compass their desires they knew not,
but upon consideration the Lady was to make a Visit to a Cousen of hers, or she
pretended to do, and having her Governant at her heels, just as she was about
to enter the Door, a pail of water came sousing upon her out at a Window, as by
accident, which wet her all over; but Love and Expectation had too much warmed
her within, to catch cold, or fear an Ague, when shaking her Ears a little, as
in a passion for the Affront, turning to her Aunt, You see, said the, what a
condition I am in, wet from top to toe; I prithee step home quickly and fetch me
some dry Clothes for shifting. The Old Woman upon this, little dreaming Love
could play such Tricks to circumvent her Vigilance, pitying the condition of
her poor almost drowned Neice, ^rudged away instantly or other Garments, whilst
a warm bed in that house, and as warm a bedfellow awaited the wet Lady; there
was little time to trude away, and so they improved it to the best advantage
e're the old Woman returned. Thus the over cautious Husband was outwitted, and
fitted at once for his over strictness. It Is very unreasonable that a Woman
should be curbed and s^nb'd, watched, warded and tyraniz'd over by a Husband,
as if with the Loss, of her virginity she had torfeited her Liberty. In vain it
is to go about to make the Fair Sex believe that Marriage was ever intended to
Enslave them, give 'em their Freedom and good Usage, and you chain their
affections to you.

Their Souls are soft, which you may gently lay
In your loose Palms, but being pressed to stay,
Like Water, they delude your grasp, and slip away.
But now suppose the worst, that is, that a man is really wronged, if he be
contented with his lot, and it is kept from the babbling world, that his
Reputation does not suffer, we cannot, (if his wife be not lavishly Expensive
that way) find him in a worse condition than other men, nor half so miserable
as the Jealous pated man that creates trouble to himself when he might live at
ease and quiet. Persuasion prevails against Love Melancholy. -- Persuasion (tho
Threats and false Representations of the party loved to the party loving,
Persuasion a Remedy for Love.
may sometimes prevail) is a more gentle and easy way, and best to be approved.
But where Lenitives will not effect the Cure, Corrosives must be applied.
However, good Counsel and Advice, though some reject it, is of great use and
Efficacy, if it proceed from Wife, Fatherly, Reverend and Discreet Persons, who
have any Authority or Awe over the Party, or from those from whom he by the
ties of friendship has a Respect and Kindness; and this, Gord^niss, a learned
Physician, says, ought to be applied before any other Remedy; but not till the
fury of the Passion is a little spent, and some absence has weakened or allayed
it; for as Judicious Observer takes notice, it is at first as Intempestive to
give Counsel as to go about to dry up the Tears of Parents when those Children
they entirely love are at the point of Death. Seneca says of this Kind of Love,
it is learned of it self, but without a Tutor hardly left. It Is convenient
therefore to have some Judicious Overseer to Expostulate calmly, and show the
absurdities and incoveniencies of an unruly Passion, with its Imperfections,
and the Discontents that usually ensue, which they themselves cannot at that
time apprehend a right. I will, says one blinded by Passion, have such a fair
Damsel, tho I lose my Parents love, the love of all my Friends and Relations,
undergo want, poverty, or any misery; the Enjoying her lovely Person will over
recompense me for any misfortune that can befall Thus the sick brained Lover
raves, and is to be pitied; for if he obtains his desire, and the heat of his
Passion is abated by Enjoyment, he stands amazed at what he has done; and
thinks all that has passed to be the Effects of a Dream, he stares at his
Folly, and repines at his hard luck; and seeing his Friends renounce him, other
slight and laugh at him, and within a while, perceiving Poverty, with her
calamitous attendants, Hunger, Thrist and Rags, about to rush in at the fore
door, his Love, after a quivering fit or two, either expires or retreats, as
the Country People say, out at the back door. Now his Eyes are open, he sees
his Folly, and would at any rate be off from his bargain. This Repentance
begets Heart burnings, Strife, Jealousies, etc. that destroy the peace and
quiet of his life. Many such unadvised Matches have happened in our days by the
Passion, Weakness and Oversight of either Sex, which makes an Over kind
Sufferer that Exclaim against such Kind of Love, viz. Be gone, he gone, thou
wheedling Cheat;
Thou Enemy to all that is Great;
That only were at first designed
To be in pleasing Torments kind.
Thou lovely Paris dids^ destroy
In a worse flame than the Greeks Troy.
Well may^t thou still delight in strife
That to a Tempest owd'st thy life
Hence all the beauteeus Sex we (...)
Have learned Inconstancy from thee.
Be banished then to some cold Isle,
Where never yet the Sun did smile;
And only there Exert thy power
Where Ice glazed Se^s embrace the shore.
I Will burn my Songs, I Will break my Lyre,
Unless they nobler thoughts inspire;
And on the Thebian Swan will fly
To view mellodious worlds on high;
Where Love is pure, where Joys can never die
There are but two sorts on which Love can fix; that is, on those that are
Virtuous and those that are otherwise; On a dishonest woman love is but lust,
and is the greatest degree of Folly imaginable; for as Aeneas Sylvas says in
one of his Epistles to his Friend, a dishonest woman is a Poler of Youth, a
Ruin to mankind, a lost destruction, a devourer of Patrimonies, the downfall of
honor, fodder for the Devil, the Gates of Death, and the Supplement of Hell; a
sweet poison, bitter honey, a delicate misery and a voluntary mischief. And
Lucretia, one of that Profession, ingeniously confesses, that Theft, Envy,
Sacrilege, Pride, Gluttony, Anger, Murder, etc. were all born that day a
Whore began her profession and further says, Her Pride is as great as a rich
Churl, she is more Envious than the pox, as Malicious, as Melencholy, as
Malicious as hell, and if, from the beginning of the world, any has been
superlatively wicked, it must be a harlot. O Antonina, continued she, how many
have I ruined, caused to be wounded and slain? Thou see what I am without,
but G^d knows within I am such a soul Wretch, such a puddle and Cinque of sin.
that Hell affords not a worse. -- Pray tell us now, this being the true
Character of a Strumper, what delight any but Madmen can take in them; and yet
we see how many dote upon these painted Sepulchers, that tho they have a gaudy
outside, are filled with french and Rottenness, within so many Pandora's with
boxes full of deadly plagues. Yet these, by many a keeping madmen; for they
cannot sure be in their senses, and guilty of such a Transcendant Folly; nay,
even those that have Fair Virtuous Wives, are many times so poffest with this
Frenzy, s^ghting their chaste Embraces for the mercenary smiles of a painted
car-case full of Impudence and Diseases. They bravely do maintain these Jilts
in Tomn,
Whilst my great Ladies are in haste sent down;
And forced in Country Mansion house to fix,
That Miss may rattle in her Coach and six.
We think the true Character we have given her, may be an Antidote against
Lerchery, where there is but a glimpse of Reason to discern the miseries that
follow close at the heels of such lawless lusts, tho in all we have said, we do
not forbid a Virtuous Love, where it is Mutual, stable and Agreeable. Propose
to your self seriously if your Intentions are honorable, whether it be pure
Love, or Lust, that drives you on to this Liking and desire, if the Latter, you
may conclude, if you have so much reason Left undisordered, that it is very
unlikely to be a happy match, for burning lust once allayed, turns to Loathing,
be therefore serious; call reason home, and consider well what you go about,
before you go too far, before your Affections settle, pry as narrowly as may be
into the parties Estate, conditions, etc. And trust not too much to your own
Judgment, but take the advice of others, see with the Eyes of a friend, least
your own should dazzle with too much earnestly gazing on the Mountain that you
suppose is about to bring forth a world of felicity, though at Last it may be
delivered only of a Rediculous Mouse. -- Proportion of years must above all be
considered, for by their disproportion, they put love out of tune, and in a
very little time, quite spoil his harmony; for Age an youth are as contrary in
this affair, as fire and water, winter and summer, though money, which is the
witchcraft of the world, doing such Miracles by it is charrus, as is almost
incredible to believe, is the cause that fourscore Joins with twenty,
threescore and ten with fifteen, and even deformity it self if, gilded over,
his courted and pretended to be liked, and admired; tho pardon us reader, if we
have not so large a faith as to believe it, but having treated upon the subject
of Marriage very copiously else where, we may here spare a further enlargement;
our pretentious being in this Chapter, to prescribe such remedies as may cure
lovesick Malencholicks, rather than to spur them on in the pursuit of what
perhaps may make them worse, for some, though we ought to blame them for so
harsh a sentence, will have it, that Marrying and hanging are desten'd Perjury
to be Avoided in Love, etc. -- Perjury among some Rhedomontado pretenders to
love, even of either sex, it set lightly by, and in Excuse for the breach of
their oaths, vows, and solemn Protestations, they would flamn us with an old
tale of the Ancient Poets, that Jupiter, having in his may scapes and
transformations, been guilty himself. In Compassion to the frailties of Morral
lovers, puts all their vows in a bottomless bag, never to rise up in Judgment
against them; but however, they may flatter themselves it will not serve their
turns, an oath, tho not taken in manner and form before a Majestrate, is not a
matter of such light moment as not to be regarded or trifled with, it is a
solemn and sacred security, as one can give to an other, and God himself is the
witness to it, and in some degree is Engaged to see it performed, or in his
Justice to revenge the afront, and dishonor done to his Name, as indeed to the
terror of mankind, he has very often done in the most Astonishing ways, the
more lively to express his high displeasure. -- Pitious was the fate of (...)
and her Children, who was betrayed into her Brother (...) hands, who resolving
to seize to himself the Kingdom of Macedonia, after the Death of Alexander the
Great, to which Arsina's Children had the right, as Sons to Lysimachus, the
deceased King of Macedon; he labored to get Lysymacus and Philip, the two
young Princes, into his hands, but finding it could not be done by force, he
betook him to fraud, and wrote many kind and endearing Letters to his Sister,
proposing, by his Messengers, a Marriage with her (a thing then usual in those
Countries) and that her Children, after his decease, should enjoy not only
that, but his other Dominions, and to this he promised to Swear in the Temple.
By these fair Promises she was persuaded to yield to his proposals, and sent
some of her faithful Friends to take his Oath, which he gave them in the
ancient Temple, touching the Altar and the Images of the Gods (the custom of
those times) Cursing himself if he did not desire the Marriage, and to make her
Children his Heirs. In brief, he Married her, and set the (...) upon her Head,
to the great rejoicing of the People, called her Queen, and the Royal Partner
of his Dominions, at which being overjoyed, and (...) badly blinded by her Love
and his Flatteries, she went before to Cassand a, a well Fortified City, where
her Treasures and her Children were, and sent the young Princes, the one of
Sixteen, and the other Thirteen years, to meet their Uncle or New Father is
Law, whom he met and closely Embraced without the G^tes, bringing them along
with him; but having entered with this Army, he immediately caused the Royal
Youths to be Slam in their mothers arms, where they fled for shelter; and made
her the more miserable in this, because she might nor dye with them, having in
vain interposed her self between them, and the Swords of their Executioners;
she was likewise her self driven into Exile by her Perjured Brother and
Husband; yet this Triumph was short, and swift footed Vengeance overwhelmed him
(...) ruin; for being overthrown by an Inundation of Gauls than broke into
Macedonia, he was taken Prisoner, and after much Despite used toward him by
those Barbarous People, they cut off his Head, and carried it about at the end
of a Speat in decision. -- Perjury brought one Ann Averies, a Widow, to a sad
end; for she had no sooner Foreword her self about some mo^ies that was to have
been paid for fix pounds of Flax at a Shop in Woodstreet; but she fell down
Speechless, and casting up Excrements at her Mouth, dyed; so Visage after
death, being so gashly, that few could behold her without great afrightment and
trembling. Paticure, Admirable in either Sex. -- Patience is a necessary
exercise, for every one that lives in this World, for there is none so free
from one cross or other, but this Virtue will be wanting to render him the more
easy in the course of his life. The Female Sex especially ought to be endued
with it, because they have frequently occasion (...) it. Every one knows how to
Row in a Calm, and ^^ indifferent Pilot, in a quiet ^^^son, will ^eer a Ship;
but the Conduct of the Govern^^^^, is most praise worthy, who shows best to
conduct his (...) aright, when the Winds (...) en^aged, and the Seas run high,
and the Winds have put ^^ Waves into a vehement (...). In live manner, (...) ^^
no extraordinary commen^ation to appear mild, when (...) is no rubs in the way,
(...) this Virtue is, when the (...) rise high to bridle (...), and keep down
our re^ments in the midst of in^ious Provocations; so no^ a Victory deserves
those (...) that perhaps the (...) Conqueror never me^d. -- Patience, or a
power to overcome passion, Patience in Example.
was very strong in Dr. Comper, Bishop of Lincoln, for having been eight years
in gathering Notes to compile a Book, which now goes by the Name of his
Dictionary; his Wife more desirous of his Society than that Affair would allow;
and also fearing the impairment of his Health, by such a redious Study; in his
absence, getting open his Desk, the (...) them all, than which, nothing could
be more provoking to a learned man; yet he received it with that Patience and
Moderation, that he vexed not himself that any could outwardly perceive it, nor
showed any resentment, in reproaches or giving her an angry word, but patiently
set down and began it again, so that it took him up the other eight years
before it could be finished, as resolving whatever pains it cost him, not to
disappoint Posterity of his worthy (...). Phaucy, What it is. -- Fancy, is
that which strangely carries our minds about, and fixes our thoughts upon
various things, but rarely continuing long at a stay, It twirls us round, and
makes us dizzy; so that we are as it were in a mist, and are at a loss, till in
its eternal Roving, one fancy jostles out another; our follies or defects of
this nature cannot be better described than by Democritus to Hippocrates.
Pardon us, Reader, if it be somewhat tedious, because it is much to the
Purpose; and therein you will be made amends for you Patience. The People of
Athens thinking Democritus (...), sent for the aforementioned Learned Physician
to cure him, who found him in his Garden, at his study. At the approach of
Hippocrates, he (...) heartily, as Knowing his business before; and after some
words passing between them, he told him, that those who had sent him, were mad,
and not himself; For, says he, they give themselves up to the (...) and
Fopperies of the Times; and would is not make one laugh, to see them Empty of
all (...) actions, hunting after Gold, and having no end of Ambition, taking
infinite pains for a little Glory, and to be Favored of Men; Frequently (...),
when they only meet with (...), never pleased how it change of Recreation; The
martyred Couples, fancy each other for a while, and own their (...), and they
grow (...) in their affections. Great care is taken to get and bring up
Children; but then, like an Hen, as soon as they are from under their Wings,
little regard them, as to their manners and behaviors, nothing of the
Excellency of the mind being taken notice of; and so they flourish in
outwardthing, let every thing else, more as Fancy drives. How many strange
humors are in men? when they are poor they seek Riches; and when they have
obtained (...), they have not the hearts to enjoy it as they ought, but either
(...) it up, or (...) and Luxury, ^ (...) their health, or destroy themselves.
How do their Fancies lead them to Jar and contend, Relation with (...), etc for
(...), and crave after Riches almost in their Graves, when they know (...) can
carry nothing with them; and their Children, to whom they should leave it, are
many times dead before them, or (...) Riches left them serve (...) hasten their
miseries; (...) pussed up with pride, they (...) into diverse Evils; They miss
account of diverse senseless (...) on which their Fancies (...) Value, as
Pictures, Statutes, (...) the like, when they (...) regard to their having
Neighbors, and Relations, (...) effect difficult things, (...) are for roving
from place to place, not bring quiet i^ (...) They commend courage and strength
in War, and yield themselves to be overcome with their Vices, etc (...) now,
continued be, if these (...) were not Rise in the World should have no cause of
(...) It is not that I am so ^turally prone to it as they (...) (...), but
their Fancies (...) Follys Extort from me (...) Mirth. Hippocrates (...) heard
him with patience, lowed his Reason, and (...) answer to those that sent him,
That Democritus was a very wise and Learned Philosopher; which made many
Extravagant Panatasticks, be more moderate in Athens. Powders for the Hair,
Linen and Sweet Bags. -- Powders of this Kind are made several ways; and are of
Great Efficacy for Ladies. After you have made use of many things, if
nevertheless you meet with any that defies your Charms, and is obstinate, do
you not despair; for we will teach you how you shall tickle his Nose with a
Powder, and cartously fetch him about with is, which will give you so rich a
Scent, that the Roses and Violets in your Cheeks shall not make you has so
sweet. -- Powder of a curious Scent, is made of Florentine Iris (...), timely
powdered one pound, Benjamin four ounces, Cloves the like quantity, Starax two
ounces; powder them all very line, use them, and well mix them together. This
you may (...) to sent your Hair Powder we had, adding about 3 ounces of it, to
a pound of Starch or Rice Grounds, well find and (...). Again, take Iris Roots
fix ounces, Red Rose leaves powdered four ounces, Cyprus half a ^iachm,
Marjorum, Storax and Cloves of each an ounce; Yellow Saunders and Benjamine of
each half an ounce, Violets 3 drachms, Musk a dicham; powder these, isior Sweet
Bags, or to lay among Linen, very grossly; him if let the hair, very fine. --
Powder to give the Hands, or any part of the body an Excellent, odor, make in
this manner. Take the pressings of sweet and bitter Almonds after the oil is
drawn off, of either sort four Ounces, the flower of French Barley, and Luptu,
of each two Ounces, the Roots of Ins an Ounce, white Roses, dried Benjamine,
fix drachms, Salt of white Tartar, white Chalk, powdered sperma (...) of each
half an Ounce, Oil of (...), one Scrupie, of cloves, and I avender, each half
of Scrapie mix, and make them into a powder, well dried, and if you would have
your hands seemed, and of a curious white, or any other part of the body, rub
on this powder and it will effect your desire, you may with Rose water, make it
into a Past let your face, and it will beautify it. Perfumes, to (...), Sweet
Candles, etc. -- Perfumes, Ladies, of this kind are very greatful to the
finelling, and more advantageons where Lights are made of them, as Sweet
Candles, etc you are, indeed, very much beholden to ordinary Candles; for when
the gloomy Night would befriend your Chambermaids, and make them seem as
handsome as your selves, that which discovers the mistake, and makes you be
preferred before them, is the Friendly Light those Candles lend; They show the
difference between a (...), and the Foils that (...) attend her; but if those
common ones are so serviceable to you, these will certainly be more; for if you
can but once procure these Ignes fatui, to lead men about, you need never fear
but to have servants enough dancing after you -- Perfumes are made sundry ways;
but the best are these, Take Labdanum two drachms, styrax Calamint a dram and
an half, Benjamine, White Amber, Red Roses, Wood of Aloes, Cinnamon, Cyprius and
Cloves of each two Scruples. Amber and Musk each five Grains, made with Gum
Tragacanth into small Cakes, the Gum being first dissolved in Spirit of Roses,
one of which Cakes being cast on the coals, scents the Chamber with a very
pleasing odoriferous Vapor. Again, Take dried Charcoal, made of Willow, one
ounce, Mirrh Wood, Storax, Aloes, Calamint, of each one ounce and an half,
Labdanum an ounce, Amber and Musk, each seven Grains; dissolve half an ounce of
Gum Tragacanth in Rose water, with a little Spirit of Wine, and make them up
into Rolls like small Candles, which being set a burning, will give a pleasing
perfume. Again, Take Benzoin, Storax, and Calamint, each half an ounce, Wood of
Aloes two drams, Zibet, not adulterated, one dram, Galia Muscata, one
Scruple, Oil of Roses, and of Cloves, of each half a Scruple; mix them well
with Damusk Rose Water, and make them into little Bails, and they are an
Excellent Perfume. -- Perfumes of these sorts add, Perfumes for Gloves, Cloths,
etc.
Ladies, the Roses Sweetness to the Lillyes loveliness of your snowy hands.
Scent then your Gloves with these Perfumes, and those that take you by the
hand, shall find all pleasures grasped in an handful, wherein all Ravishing
Objects are, that can convey those charming Delights to the admiring Fancy,
that pleases the sight, and feasts the Feeling, with its downy softness, and
the Smelling, with perfume. -- Perfume, then of this Kind, to make it, Take an
ounce of the whitest Gum Tragacanth dissolve it in Water; then take Musk,
Amber, and dried Majoram of each one Scruple; boil them gently all together,
and in the boiling add half a Scruple of Zibet; put these into a covered Vessel
till they are cold; and when you have ordered your Gloves, sit for its being
laid on, chase it into them, being cold, and smoothing them as well as may be,
lay them in a convenient place to dry, or wash the Gloves, you first intend to
perfume in White wine, then dry them in the shade; after that wash them again,
in a pint of Rose Water scented with Oil of Jessimine, Cloves, Nutmegs and
Labdanum of each half a Scruple; then take Musk, Zibet, and Ambergreece, of
each five Grains, beat them together in a Mortar with a little oil of Spike and
mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, dissolved in Rose Water; and chase in this
composition (the Gloves being well safh'd) before a gentlefire. By these
measures, you may make any perfumes, most grateful to your scent; for the same
way they are all ordered, of what fort soever, that is usually subject to be
perfumed; and therefore to go on, any further in this matter, would be but a
Repetition of what has been already said; so Ladies we have you. Experience
shows what has been laid down, which we doubt not will answer your Expectations
in any persuming of this Kind. Pride. As for Pride, she has so many feathers
added to her wings, that she covers all the earth with her shadow. Our men
are grown to esseminate, and our women so man-like, that (if it might be) I
think they would exchange genders. What modest eye can with patience behold the
immodest gestures, and attires of our women? No sooner with them, is infancy
put on, but impudency is put on: they have turned Nature into Art; so that a
man can hardly discern a woman from her image. Their bodies they pinch in, as
if they were angry with Nature, for casting them in so gross a mould: but as
for their looser parts, them they let loose, to prey upon whatsoever, their
last darting eyes shall seize upon. Their breasts, they lay to the open view,
like two fair Apples, of which whosoever tastes, shall be sure of the
knowledge of evil, of good I dare not warrant him. -- Some Gentlewomen, have
more to do, to attend their Beautyes, than the Vestal Virgins to maintain their
sacred Fires. In the morning they study their Glass, in the Afternoon, they are
taken up and down with Visits, where you may see, they are not wronged by
those, who have branded that Sex, with too much Loquacity: for there their
Discourse, is so much and loud, that a few Women would suffice to make the
Noise of a Mill. And it could be wished, their Discourse were not Lascivious,
as well as Loud, for too often we find them Allurers of Men, and Corrupters of
their own Modestly, by their wanton and unbridled Discourse: For the Tongue
being the Orator of the Heart, declares the intent of the mind; with what care
therefore ought Women to speak, and with what Modesty to govern the Organ of
their Thoughts, since few will be persuaded to believe, that any thing but what
is Pure and irreproveable, will proceed from a Heart that is without Stain and
blemish. There is a Phrenzy in the Pride of many Gentlewomen: He who would
(...) the Sun is taken up at the (...); to death a little Body of meirs,
whereof the Worms will quickly make a Dunghill, would think they had undertaken,
to cover some Creature of a most prodigious Bulk. Should we reckon up all the
Furniture of many Gentlewomen, as we ice them lying on the Table, having never
beheld (...) Vanity before, we should think it Mercery enough, to furnish a
(...) City, rather than the body of a true Lady. They are like those Birds who
have almost no ^word but all Brothers; (...) business it is, to adorn one of
them man some do take who have a Common wealth to managed what shall we say,
when they begin the (...) of their bodies, with the (...) of their (...), which
insensibly is (...) with Painting and (...), as if they would (...) their
Beauty from (...). (...) to Soft naked Bodies, than (...) cover them. (...)
(says one) may be reserved for the eyes of (...) Headband, when almost through
all Markets where (...) the secret parts of his (...) Lady are exposed, as if
they were ready to be delivered to the best bidders. -- Pride is an Enemy even
to Beauty as well as Virtue, Pride to be (...) with more particular arguments
against it..
and a graceful compliance of the mind; it se^s marks of deformity upon the
Fairest Faces, and utterly obscures its Internal Loveliness; it is opposite to
Humility, one of the most Sparkling Jewels wherewith a Lady can adorn her self;
It is the greatest Ornament of the Christian Religion, the foundation on which
all other Graces build, and ra^^^ their Pyramids of Glory, to that Throne from
whence they proceed, yet against to Divine a Virtue, Pride proclaims an
Irreconcilable War; but it is Forces, tho very rash and headstrong, are
notwithstanding their dwelling and blustering, unable to prevail, for Humility
is stronger fortified with its Valives, then Pride on all its cloudy aspiring
Mountains. But to wave this, let us seriously charge it on our Minds, and
consider what any mortal Creature possesses, than can reasonably give it
occasion of being proud, and boasting of (...); truly we can see nothing that
is worth a sweling thought, or a pust up imagination; as for Mankind, the
masterpiece of the Visible Creation, if the Body considered, it is weak and
impure; our strength is inferior to that of many beasts, and our Infirmities
so many, that many times we are at a loss to number them. -- Pride in beauty is
ridiculous, because the Colors in the most beautiful Face, are inferior to
the snowy Whiteness, or Carnation Tinsture, of many Flowers that enamel the
fields, and are regardlessly (...) under foot by unthinking Asses; and all
(...) Creatures in their proper proporrion have as fair a ^ittle to be proved,
as the most gaudy Rationals. If gay Apparel, which is the foolishest of all,
can puff up any one, let the party consider, that she wears but the spoils of
Weeds, Beasts, Birds, and Insects, and if every one of these should call back
what is long, the greatest Court Lady would be left naked and un^^rrav'd, like
the Queen of the Earth, in her (...) and Innocence, before guilt made her fly
to the Creatures aid for Coverture. We are apt to laugh at the Peacocks or
Turkey cocks Pride, when we see them spread and flourish their trains, and walk
with stately steps, to show how nature has adorned them, tho their gandy
Feathers spring from the humors and moist air of their bodies, which give them
their various dies, when as we have showed it is contrary to mankind. Those, if
any, that are so Vain, to be Proud of Beauty, ought to consider how fadeing it
is, how subject to change and misfortunes; and tho it holds up for a time, yet
every moment gives it a step toward Age, Wrinkles and Deformity. Some we have
known proud of their Learning and Parts, but then it showed, they had but
little of either; for Learning is that which shows us the way to Humility, and
to be Proud of that, denotes the greatest ignorance in the World; and indeed
Learning is so long a getting, and so very Imperfect, that the greatest Clerk
knows not the thousand part, of what he is Ignorant, and knows so uncertainly,
what he seems to know, that it is little more, then what is told him, or what
he guesses at, except those things that concern, and which God has revealed to
him, which also every Woman knows so far as is necessary. The most Learned Man
has nothing to be proud of, unless this be a sufficient argument to exale him,
that he uncertainly guesses at some more unnecesary things, than others, who
yet know all that concerns them, and mind other things, more necesary for the
aged: of Life and Common (...) Those that are proud of Riches, are forbid, even
the Miser, that in a manner starves himself when his Coffers are crammed with
Gold, takes a secret pride, that he has his God in his Chest, and feeds upon
the airy thoughts of what he will not part with for the supply of the craving
necessities of Nature; let those then consider that will exalt themselves above
their Neighbors, and expect homage, and almost adoration, from those that are
inferior to them in Riches; how much they are inferior to a Gold or Silver
Mi^e, to the rough and craggy Rocks wherein the Rubies and Diamonds Grow, or to
the Oysters that breed the Oriental Pearl. Such as are proud, by reason of any
excellency of the mind, may be pleased to remember, that all Souls are equal,
and their differing operations, are because their Instruments are the better in
tune, their bodies more Healthful or better tempered, which is no more praise
to them. than that they were born in a distant Country; such as are proud of
Birch, are proud of the (...) of others, not of themselves, for if their
Perones were more Eminent in any circumstance than their Neighbors, they are
to thank God, and to rejoice in them, but sill such Parents may be Idicos, or
unfortunate, or deformed, when those that are so proud of them were born, and
at the time of birth it was indifferent to them whether that Fathers were
Princes or Peasants; for they knew nor any thing, nor chose any thing, and most
commonly it is true, that those who boast of their Ancestors, who were the
Founders and Raisers of a Noble Family, do confess that they have in themselves
a less Virtue and a less Honor; and consequently are degenerated. And what
differences soever there are between them and their Neighbors, there ought to
be no Upbraidings or Contempt; and if any thing is to be done, it must be with
an humble Courteousness. For the least betraying of Pride and Haughtiness of
Spirit, makes them reject even good advice. Let all remember what they are,
before they were begotten, and then they will conclude they were nothing; what
they were, in the first Region of their dwellings, before they breathed; and
then they will find they were but Uncleanness; what they were so many Years
after, and then they will find they were only Weakness and Imbecility; what
they are in the whole course of their lives, and then they will know they are
but sinners; what in all their Excellencies, and then they will find it but
lent, and that they stand indebted to God for all the Benefits they have
Received, and Enjoy in the first place, and in the next to their Parents, and
the Creatures, that cloth and feed them. But they may, if the please, use the
method of the Platonisis, who reduce all the Causes and Arguments for Humility
which they can take from themselves to these seven heads; First, The Spirit of
a man is light and troublesome. Secondly, His Body is brutish and sickly.
Thirdly, He is constant in his Folly and Error, and inconstant in his Manners
and good Purposes. Fourthly, his Labors are Vain. Intricate, and Endless.
Fifthly, His Fortune is changeable, but seldom pleading, never perfect.
Sixthly, His Wisdom comes not in any Full Proportion, till he has but a few
paces to the Grave, and it be in a manner past using. Seventhly, His Death is
certain, always ready at the door, but never far off. -- It is past all doubt
that a Fair Young Gentleman, Pride, the Vanity of it, considering no mortal
state, change of things and uncertainty of life.
who stands recorded in History, was very far from Pride, who being often in
his Life time requested to have his Picture drawn, and courted to it by the
greatest Masters of the Age, who covered it as a perfect Pattern of Masculine
Beauty; yet utterly refused their Solicitations, telling them, he intended it
not to be done till a few days after his Burial and so strictly enjoined it by
his last Will, dying in the strength and flower of his Age, to show those that
are proud of beauty, what a change Death makes, when opening his Sepalchar in
order to it, they found half his face consumed by Vermin, and his Midrist and
Backbone full of little Serpents, supposed to be bred of the Purrelaction, so
short a time had reduced him to, and so he stands Pictured amonst his Armed
Ancestors; So soon does Death change the fairest beauty into Loathing. Riches
have the same fare, for they cannot secure the Possession to the Grave, nor
follow him thither to do him any kindness; and how soon may we be hurried
thither we know not. Seneca tells us of one Senecius Cornelius; a proud rich
man, craftly in getting, and tenacious in holding a great Estate, and one who
was as diligent in the care of his Body, as in puffing up his mind in the
conceit of his accumulated Riches; having been one day to visit a sick Friend,
from whom he expected a large Legacy, returning home joyful, that the party was
so near his end, by which his Treasury would be augmented, but in the night was
taken with a Sq^^nzey, and breathed out his last, before the Sun gilded the
Earth with its beams, being snatched away from the torrent of his Fortune, and
the swelling tide of his Wealth. This accident was then much noted in Rome,
because it happened in so great a fortune, and in the midst of wealthy designs,
and presently it made Wise men consider how imprudent a person he is, who hears
himself up, and is (...) with Riches and Honor, promising himself many years
of happiness to come, when he is not Lord of to morrow. The Tuscan
Hierogliphycks, which we have from Gabriel Simeon, show us this, viz. That our
life is very short, Beauty ^^uzenage, Money false and fugitive, Empire odious,
and hated (...) that have is not; (...) to them that enjoy it; Victory is
always uncertain, and Peace but a ^^^dulent bargain, Old Age is miserable,
Death is the period, and is a happy one, if (...) be not sowred by the (...) of
our Life, and nothing is permanent but the effects of this Wisdom, which
imployes the present time in the Acts of holy Religion, and a peaceable
Conscience. For these make us live, even beyond our Funerals, embalmed in the
Spices and Odours of a a good Name, blessing us for a blessed Resurrection, to
the state of Angels and Beautified Spirits, where Eternity is the measure, the
Lamb the Light, and God the (...) and Inheritance. Alexander we find was so
puffed up with his Conquest over Persia, that entering India, he wept when the
Sea interpreted, that there was no more Worlds to Conquer; but he that had
threst his Sword through so many Nations, with vast slaughter, and had so many
flattering Titles bestowed upon him, that he (...) himself a God, and exalted
Divine Adoration, had his Ambition quenched at Bobylon, with a little draught
of Poison, to let the World see he was but a moral man, and Subject to (...)
and Misfortunes, as well as the (...) of those People he had triumphed over.
Seneca tells us of a rich, proud Man, that gave himself up so much to
sensuality, that he would often ask his attendants, when he was placed in his
Chair, whether he sat, or no, that by his Slaves answering him, the by
standers might know who were his attendants. So have we seen a sparkish Gallant
dancing along as light as if he thought the Ground unworthy to bear him, yet
often looking over his Shoulder at his man, in a fine new Livery, who lugg'd
his Laced Cloak after him, that the Night-Railsin the Balconies might take more
notice of his Equipage. The Pope to (...) the Pride he may conceive for being
Exalred to St. Peter's Chair, and to let him see, he is but a moral man, among
other Ceremonies at his Corronation. his one that carries a (...) of Flax
before him on a staff, and it the appointed place says Behold Holy Father so
passes away yhe Glory of this World or worldly things. We find Xerx^^ wept,
ehen he saw his Army of Ten Hundred Thousand men, upon the shoars of (...),
ready to invade the Greeks in Purpe, in consideration, that in less than an
Hundred years that multitude of People would be turned to dust, and (...)
bridged over the (...) Sea, with his mighty (...), he proudly scourged the
Wives, with Chains as he (...), because their Violence (...) broke a part of
it, but it is observed that in less than two years his own rashness brought
most of them to their Graves, that mighty (...) being consumed by the Greeks
small Forces in that (...), and himself compelled to thy ruins of his fortune
in a little Skiff; so uncertain are the product of the continuance of a
prosperous Fortune. Saladine, the great Egyptian Sultan, was mindful of this,
when he ordered his Shirt to be carried before him upon a Spear, and
Proclamation to be made, that that was (...) he should carry (notwithstanding
his acquired Riches, Power, and Glory) to the Grave with him. The Emperors of
Constantinople were (...) on their Coronation days to have a Mason bring them
several sorts of Stones, and demand, of which they would have their Tombs made,
that being minded, they were but mortal men, it might give an (...), and an
abatement to their (...) thoughts by access to Empire. The ancient Romans
allowed those they granted Triumphs to be justly reproached by whomsoever
would, on the day of their Triumph, that they should (...) conceit themselves
more (...) men, through the applauses that were generally given for their good
Services; accounting those that could beat the highest Prosperity, and
accumulated Honors, with a modesty, as if they regarded them not, and remain
fixed and unmoved in all Stations and conditions; such a one may be said to be
a living Person, that has a life which distinguishes him from irrational
Creatures, and gives him a Capacity next to Angels; he or she so qualified can
look upon Death, and see his Face, with the same Countenance, and endure all
the labors of Life with a Soul wordily supporting the Body, and equally
despise Riches when in Possession, or at a distance, and is not at all sadder,
if they lie in a neighbors Cosser, than if shining in his own House; he that
is neither moved, with good fortune coming to him, nor going from him, that can
look upon anothe man's Lands, evenly and pleasingly as if they were his own; and
yet look upon his own, and use them just, as if they were another man's, that
neither spends his Goods Prodigally like a Fool, nor yet keeps them a
naritiously like a wretch, that weighs not benefits by weight and number, but
by the mind and circumstances of the Benefactor; that never thinks Charity
expensive, if a worthy Person be the receiver; he that does not think for
Opinions sake, but every thing for Conscience, being as curious of his Thoughts
as of his Actings in Markets and Theaters, and is much in awe of himself as of
a whole Assembly; he that knows God looks on, and contrives his secret Affairs
as in the presence of God and his Holy Angels; that Ea^s and Drinks, because it
is needful, no^ that it may serve a Lust, or lo^d the Stomach; he that is not
Proud to any, but bountiful and cheerful to his Friends, and Charitable and apt
to forgive his enemies, that loves his Country, and o^^ his Prince, and desires
and endeavors nothing more than that he may do Honor to God, such a one may
reasonably and justly reckon his life, to be the life of a man, since he
banishes the monster Pride, and embraces Humility; he may compute his Months
not by the course of the Sun, but by the Zodiac of his Virtues, because these
are such things that none but the Wise and Virtuous are capable of bringing
themselves to do. These are therefore the Actions of Life, because they are the
seeds of Immortality. -- Hear on the contrary what Athenaeus says of Ninus the
great and Proud Assyrian Monarch, whose Life and Death he sums up in these
words. Ninus the Assyrian (says he) had an Ocean of Gold, and other Riches,
more than the Sand of the Caspian Sea; he never saw the Stars (and perhaps he
never desired it); he never stirred up the Holy Fire among the Magi, nor
touched his God with the sacred Rod, according to the Law; he never offered
Sacrifice, Worshipped the Deity, nor Administered Justice, nor spoke to his
People, nor numbered them; he was Proud, and not valia^ to Eat and Drink, and
having tasted Wine in his Golden Bowls, he threw the rest on the Floor. This
man is Dead, behold his sepulcher, and now hear what Ninus says, viz. Sometimes
I was Ninus, and drew the breath of a living man, but now I am dus^^ I, have
nothing but what I did Eat, and what I served to my self in Lust that was and
is a^ my Portion. The Wealth for which I was esteemed blessed, my Enemies
meeting together shall bear away: I am gooe to Hell, and when I wen^ thither, I
neither carried Gold nor Silver, nor Horses, nor Chariots; and I who wore a
Crown, and upon whose breath depended the Fa^e, of so many thousand Lives, am
but a little lump of Clav. That however it may be put upon, This, O Assyrian,
is most certainly the state of a proud sensual Person, and of those wretched
Worldlings that make their bellies, and their Gold their Gods. But to render
the Proud and Ambitious, a larger prospect, of the Ills and bad Effects, that
Pride, Ambition and want of Virtue produces in the World. In all the parts of
Earth, from farthest West,
And the Atlantic Isles, unto the East,
And famous Gauges, few there be that know
^hat's truly good, from what is good in show,
Without mistake: For what is it we desire
Or sear discreetly, to what do we aspire?
Thoroughly blessed but ever as we speed.
Repentance seals the very act and Deed.
Though thou small pieces of the golden Mine
Half lodged about thee, traveling in the shine
Of a pale Moon, if but a Reed does shake,
^^v'd by the Wind, the shadow makes thee quake.
Wealth bath its Cares, and Want bath this Relief,
^^ neither fears the Soldier, nor the Thief.
The Macedon one world could not contain;
^^ bear him of the scanty Globe complain,
An sweat for Room, as if Seryphus Isle,
Or Gyara, had held him in Exile. But Babylon this madness can allay,
And Egypt give him but his length in clay.
The highest thoughts and actions under heaven
Death only with the lowest dust, lays Even.
Yet that you may have something to commend
With thanks unto the heavens for what they send,
Pray for a wise and knowing soul; a sad
Discreet true Valor, that will scorn to add
A needless horror to thy death, that Knows
It Is but a debt, which man to Nature owes;
That starts not at misfortunes, but can sway,
And make all passions his strict Rules obey;
Who covets nothing, wrongs none, and prefers
An honest want, before rich injurers.
All this you have within your selves, and may
Be made your own, if you will take the way.
What ^^^ts the worlds wild loose applauses! what
Fraul fading honors, lost as soon as got!
What length of Years, Wealth or a fair Rich Wise!
Virtue alone can make an happy Life.
Yet ^span of a Virtuous Wise^ possessed,
May from that momet date his being blessed.
To a wise man all things go rigb^^ but we
Fortune adore, make her our Deity.
Painting, or coloring a Lady Face, to repair by Art the Defests of Nature,
defended; in opposition to what is faid against it in this book; by another
hand. -- Possibly there are but few Ladies that have not heard the Noise and
Clutter that has been made by a certain sort of people against refreshing and
reviving the fading Roses in the Cheeks of the fair S^x, as if it was an
unp^rdonable Crime, and a mortal sin, to a assist Nature, or help her
Imperfections by Art. Physicians, and even Midwives, if this were granted, must
give over their Professions. We think no reasonable people but will allow that
every thing, innocently and needfully applied, to its proper End, is to be
regarded. There are helps allowed to remove or remedy any pain, Sickness, Mann,
misfortune, or inconveniency, which happens to us, in our Health, Strength,
Motion, Estates or Spiritual Afflictions; and why not i^ our Looks, Beauties or
Complexions, wherein Women think themselves as much concerned as in their
Riches or Health. And the want of Beauty many times breeds discontent of mind.
Some had as lieve not be at all, as be much deformed, to be made a (...) and
Jest of by the unthinking V^^gar, or the more forbid precending Critics in
Beauty. Certainly, honest Endeavors, in Fair Ways, studied to relieve or
supply our Wants in any Kind; are not r^^e contestings with God's Providence,
nor are to be termed Crossings or Opposings of his Will; but rather they are
Servings and Obeyings of it in those Dictates of Reason, Prodence and
Discretion which God has given to Mankind (as he has the various motions and
instincts of other creatures) in order to preserve our selves from any Evils
either falling or resting upon us, which Voice of Go! whithin us sounding with
both Reason and Religion, is to be listened (...) and followed, as no less than
those silent Intimations, or blinder Characters we read in Providential Events;
which may admit or various Interpretations or Readings. (...) never such as
either cross or put a stop to these Divine Directions or Permissions, which are
given us both in prudence and in piety for our Ease and Help. Otherways, we may
nor, by a sacrilegious soberness, seek to cure those whom God has seen good to
(...) with the highest temporal miferies, not seek to do them good merely for
fear lest we should be found contesting against our Maker, contrary to his
providential Will. By which Paradox of supersticious submission, a sick man
must (...) and languish under his Dis^^^ sending a debiance to all Physicians,
etc. as so many da^ing Gianrs. who seek to fight against Heaven with the
Rebellious Weapons of their Drugs and Deses. So lame men may not use Crutches
to supply the Weakness of their Legs; Or the feeble to shore up the tottering
frame of their (...) etc. But by this soft and selfless Fallacy, of resting so
satisfied with the Events, and Signatures of Providence, as to use no lawful
means or industry that may seem to ^^^verse the sentence of the present Decree;
we may not quench those fires which casually seize on our houses; nor
extinguish those flames, which Incendiaries Kindle, of Faction or Sedition, in
Church or State; we may not Row against the Stream, or ascend upwards by any
Stairs or degrees, when our Native Tendency is downward; we must not repair our
decayed houses, nor mend our torn Garments, or honestly seek to recruit our
decayed Estates. After this method of holy ^usbandry we must (...) our Fields
and (...) oppressed under (...) and ^rambles, which are the Products of
Providence, as well as the best Herbs and Flowers; nay, we may not by the
invention of artificial Day, supply the Sun's absence with Candle or Lamp
Light, nor dispell the horror of the Darkness, which Providence makes to cover
the Earth; we may not when cast in Prison seek to obtain our liberty; which
cannot be without a Providence, since a Sparow falls not to the ground without,
Mat. 10.29. -- Pardon us if we shink so many Absurdities and ridiculous
Consequences do ^ollow the Fondness of their Opinions who argue against
repairing Defects, by applying innocent Redresses and Remedies. The Providence
of God, however it declares at present, his Will and Pleasure to us, by those
Events, which are naturally less welcome and pleasing to us; yet it does not
confine or determine, either itself or us, so as not to admit us to use lawful
means, of honest variations and happy changes, which we see, are not more often
applied by us, than prosper'd by God with desired success. So far is it, that
by any sad Events, we should be consigned only, to silent and passive
submission,(which is necessary and just indeed, when our afflictions exceed the
help of second Causes) that we are rather obliged, both in Reason and Religion,
to use those means which may obtain happy Recoveries, without Violation of Good
Consciences; which are not injured, but there where God is disobeyed. Nor is
the Divine Goodness less to be seen, ven^ared, and praised in those Emendarions
which follow, to our (...) and Comfort; the lawful ^^^^sions of Art and
Ingenuity, then has Power and Justice (or p^ss^^ly his special (...)) may
sometimes appear in those unpleasing Events, (which some would sain set up
beyond Gods intent) as Idols to such an unavoidable fiction as if it were
impious to endeavor to remove them, because Providence has once permitted them
to take place midst the changes and contingencies incident to this murable and
mortal States; Religion is no friend to laziness and stupidity, or to supine or
sottishness of mind, under the pretense of compliances with Providence, as
afraid to remove the crosses of bur^hens incumbent on us (wherein the sluggard
might have some plea for his sloth) for these befall us many times (as indeed
all necessities of Life do) not more to exercise our patience, than to excite
our invention and Industry; nor does the Infirm Life of Mortals, require less,
active than passive Graces, the one to remedy what we may, and the other to
bear with patience, what we cannot cure; who was ever blamed for wearing a
Glass Eye, which is but an honest mocking of the World (whilst it pretends to
the place and office of a Natural one, which God thought sit to take away) as
to our own sight and use; but he did not withal either take away our wits, or
our hands, or our freedom to make use, if we pleased, of artificial ones, both
to hide our own defects and Deformity; and from the sight of others, the less
pleasing prospect of also to remove our blemish; what reproach or scandal, is
fixed on those, who supply the defect of loosing their Hair, with that which is
borrowed? we rather pity than blame those, who help a shorter Leg, to stand
upon even terms with the other, by the help of an higher Shoe. Ladies are not
thought less Godly. even by carping Zealots, who being short, wear high
Head-Tire^, and enlarge the Philacteries of their Coats to conceal their
defects in Native beauty, enormous additions of Artificial heights. Who ever
was so impertinent a Bigor as to find fault, that the Hills and dales, of
crooked and haeven bodies are made to meet, without a Miracle, by some Iron
frame or bolstering? who fears to set straight or hide unhandsome warpings of
crooked Legs? what is there, as to any defect in Nature, whereof ingenious Art,
as a diligent handmaid waiting on its Mistress does not study some supply or
other? so far as to Graft a silver Plate, into Fractured Sculls, to furnish
cropped Faces with Artificial Noses, to fill up broken ranks, and routed Files of
Teeth, with Ivory Adjurants or Lieutenants. -- Pray tell us then if against all
or any of these, and the like reparative Inventions, by which Art, and
Ingenuity, study to help and repair the defects of deformity, which God in
Nature or Providence pleased to Inflict on Human bodies, any Pen, or what is
worse, malicious Tongue is sharpened unless in Spleen to the pasty, more than
the defect supplied by Art? no Pulpit batteries, no Writ of Rebellion against
Nature or Charge of Forgery and False Coinage is brought against any in the
High Court of Conscience. No poor Creatures (who modestly Embraces, modestly
uses, and with cheerfulness serves God, by means of some such help, which
either takes away its Reproach or eases its pain) is seated with the dreadful
scruples, or so tertify'd with the Threatenings of Sin, Hell and Damnation; as
to cast away that innocent succor which God in Nature and Art has given him;
Rather we are so civilly pious in many cases, to approve their Ingenuity, only
if the Face (which is the Metropolis of humane Majesty, and as it were the seat
of beauty and com^^^ness) if it has sustained any Injuries (as it is exposed
most to them) of Time or Accident, if it stands in need of any thing that our
Charity and Ingenuity in Art can afford it, though the thing be never so cheap,
easy and harmless, either to ^nliven the Pallid Deadness of it, and to redeem
it from M^t^rain, or to pair and match the unequal Cheeks to each other, or to
cover any Pimples and Heats, or to remove any Obstructions, or mi^tigate and
Quench Excessive Flushings, thereby to set often the Village to such a Decency
and Equality as may innocently please our selves and others, without any
thought of displeasing God, who looks not to the outward appearance, but to the
heart. What Censures and Whispers; nay, what Outcrys and Clamours, what
Lightnings and Thunders, what Anathema's, Excommunications and Condemnations
fill the Thoughts and Pens, the Tongues and Pulpits of many angry (yet it may
be well meaning) Christians, both Preachers and others, who are commonly quick
sighted, and offended with the least Ghost they fancy of adding to a Ladys
Complexion, than with many Camels of their own Customary Opinions and
Practices. Good men, tho in other things are guilty, not only of Fineness and
Neatness, but even of some Falsity and Pretension; They are so good natured as
to allow their Crooked Wives and Daughters whatever Ingenious Concealments and
Reparations of Art and their Purses can afford them; Yet as to the Point of
Face mending, they utterly condemn them, -- There are a fort of home (...)
persons, Partial censure^ Reproved and Confuted.
who never went far beyond their own Dwellings, who can with less Equal Eyes
behold any Woman, though of never so great quality, if they see or suspect her
to be adorned any whit beyond the vulgar mode, or decked with Feathers more Gay
and Gaudy than those birds use which are of their own Country breed. In which
cases of Feminine dressing and adorning, no casuits is sufficient to enumerate
or resolve the many intricate Niceties, and Endless Scruples of Conscience
which some men's and women's more Plebean Zelotry makes, as about Ladies Cheeks
and Faces, if they appear any thing more Rosy and Lively than they were want:
So about the length and fashion of their Clothes and Hair; one while they were
so perplexed about the curling of a Ladies Locks, that they can as hardly
disentangle themselves as a Be when too far engaged in (...); another while
they are most scrupulous Mathematicians, to measure her Arms, Wrists, Neck and
Train; how far they may sately venture to let their Garments draw after them,
to lick up the dust; or their naked Skins be seen. Here however some of them
can bare the sight of the Fairest Faces, without so much as winking; yet they
pretend that no strength of humane Virtue can Endure the least assaults, or
pe^ping naked necks below the Ears. Not that any modest mind pleads for
prostituting of naked Necks or Breasts, where modesty, or the civiller Customs
of the Country (...) it. But some peoples Rigous and Fierceness is such, that
if they spy any thing in the Dress, Clothes or Garb of Women, beyond what they
approve, or have been used to, presently the Tailors, the Tirewomen, the
Dressers, the Sempstress, the Chambermaids, and all the wretched Crew of
Obsequious attendants, are condemned as Antichristian, and only fit to attend
on the Whore of Babylon. Nor do the Ladies, though otherwise Young and
Innocent, and as virtuous as beautiful, escape these Rigid Censurers, though
what they wear is required by Decency, Civility and Custom. They would make
weak people believe, that every touch of Coloring added to the Cheeks, is
asemblance of Hell fire; and their curled hair, dangling never so little, an
Emblem of the Never dying Worm. Medusa's head is not pictured more terrible,
with all her Soaky Trestes than they would represent every Ladys, though never
so modest and virtuous, whose Hair, Complexion, or Tiring is not natively her
own. But these things ought not to discourage modest Ladys from using such Arts
and Adornments as may keep up, repair, or add lusture to their beauty. Those to
whom Nature has been liberally prodigal, stand not so much in need of them; but
where she has been sparing and scanty, there is all the Reason in the world but
they should advantage themselves of such helps as are necessary. The Earth is
most pleasant and delightful, when painted with flowers of various Colors,
many of them having in themselves a Tincture, or Paint, which they communicate
to us, as if they wooed us to use it. The Eastern Skies never look so gay as
when the Sun paints them with morning blushes, and Iris decks the Clouds with
her Bow of Various Colors, when she sprinkles the Ground with fertile showers.
The Fruit on the laden Boughs blush with Crimson and Vermillion fair pictures*
that are only paintings, are esteemed and admired. And since there can be no
harm, but good, in beautifying the Face. we see no reason but it may and ought
to be used to Good Ends and Purposes. Though Nature is the Elder, Art is the
Younger Sister, and may very well assist her where she is wanting or deficient.
Patches defended, in opposition to what is said against it in this book, by
another hand. -- Painting now not much use, being almost justled out by Washes,
is not the only thing that is censured and objected against; but if a Lady
happens to have a Wart or Pimple on her Face, they would not, by their Good
wills, have her put a black patch on it, and if she does, they point as it as a
mark of Pride, though we see nature her self, has adorned the visage with moles
and other marks that resemble them, and in imitation of which we suppose they
were first used. Venus, whom the Poet celebrate as the Goddess of Beauty, is
said to be born with a Motticella, or Natural beauty spot; as if Nature had set
forth a pattern for Art to imitate. And it was held to add a greater Luster to
her rare Features. We commonly see little spotty Clouds over the Face of the
Sun, yet he is not ashamed of his attraction; nay, some of late have affirmed,
through an Optic Glass to have discerned some nacul^, or spots mingled with
his brightness; yet they are not attributed to him as D eformities. The Moon,
shining in her full Orb, with her greatest luster, has in her pale Visage some
very remarkable spots, which rather appear as an Ornament than a disfigurement
or defect, and may be said to be her chiefeet Glory, seeing she is held in
every thing but that to be inconstant; yet those she never puts off, but
perpetually wears them. When a Lady puts on her Mask, which is rarely ^^vill'd
at, but held as the Skreen of modest blushes, as well as the shelter of beauty,
from the too warm Kisses of the Sun, or parching of the Northern wind, what can
that be termed but one great sao^ to cover the Face. Suppose she cuts her
Patches into Stars, they may improve her serious thoughts by minding her as
often as she looks on them, of the place to which she is desirous to go. I^
into Flys, they Emblem to her the Lightness, Vanity, and shore duration of
things in this World. Or suppose they be cut into the Form of little Worms,
then they may put her upon Meditations of Death and the Grave, where those
Insects are to be her Companions. Yet notwithstanding these advantages may be
gathered from it, it is the unhappiness of the most harmless and innocent
things to meet with misconstructions, when, however, from the same Subject
whence they draw their Suspicion of Curiosity, to accuse a Lady of Pride, she
derives the greatest Arguments of Discipline and Instruction to defend her
Innocence. There was hardly ever any Rare Invention, tho never so necessary to
the Public, but some one or other would be finding Fault with it. The Learned
Works of the most celebrated Authors have met with carping Z^iluses. We see
when Night has cast her Sable Mantle over the World, the Face of Heaven, in
spite of her, will be gay, by putting on her gaudy spots of Light, and Studs
of Stars. The Earth, and with her all Nature smiles, when she is spotted and
Enamelled with fragrant flowers. The Peacock is set off by Nature with the
spotty Glory of his Train; and it is accounted the Rarest Beauty of the
Creatures on whom men set the highest Value, to be sprinkled or dapled over by
Natures Pencil; yet (though in these Kinds it is so highly approved) when any
such artificial things are seen in a Ladies Face, what Batteries do the Envious
and Censorious raise against her Virtues, both in discourse and writing? But
however, this ought to be your comfort, Ladies, that their Railing Lectures
have rarely at any time been known to work a Reformation in your Sex; but you
have had the pleasure to make them spend their Spirits, and throw away their
breaths in vain and fruitless Ravings, and at the same time have had the
diversion to laugh at their Folly, and make it your Recreation to be unmoved at
their simplicity. Then fear them not whilst we defend your Cause,
When we invoke his shafts, Apollo draws,
To wound Invaders of the female Laws,
And turn their malice to your high applause.
Poetesses. Poetry is deservedly placed in the Catalogue of Sciences that
appertain to the Imagination, and may reasonably be set in the first Rank, and
that not by chance or for want of consideration, because it has been held by
many to be a kind of Inspiration, and Proceeds not immediately from the Effects
of Learning, nor a large understanding, but has its Power and Force from
Immagination. Plato would have it to be no Human Science, but a Divine
Revelation; for he says, If the Poets were not Ravis^ed, and full of God, they
(...) not make nor utter any thing worthy of Admiration; and he goes about to
prove it, viz. That those who are given to melancholy Musing, or deep Study,
are not capable of those exalted Expressions or Phrasees those similies and
lively images of things, that like Lillies^ Roses, and the rarest of flouers,
set out, beautify and adorn dorn the pleasant Garden (...) Poesy; it is thought
by some that in this strain the Inspired Prophets that spoke in the height of
Rapture, delivered their Divine Messages and Admonitions to the World: As for
the Royal Psalmist, and the wisest of Kings there is no doubt but they took
excellent Pleasure in it, or that Debora Suang praises in the like concordant
Harmony of Sacred Numbers. The blessed Virgin, Elizabeth, Anna, and Simeon,
divinely Inspired, Sung Praises for the wonderful mercies God vouchsafed to
mankind in the stupendous Mystery of the Incarnation of the Worlds Redeemer.
It cannot be denied but the Heathen Oracles gave all, or most of their Answers
in Verse. The Sybles, that were accounted Propheresses, were admirably seen in
it, as appears by their Verses yet extant in diverse worthy Authors, wherein
many wonderful things are foretold that have already come to pass, especially
the Incarnation of our blessed Savior, with the manner and Estate in which he
should be born, as it is elsewhere treated on at large in this book. The Reason
that Aristotle gives why profound Politicians, and those of great Learning, can
never arrive at the excellency of Poetry, is, viz. because the understanding
chiefly sways in them, and where there is a large understanding, the
Imagination is lessened, to which the Art of Versifying appertains, and so
cannot work strongly enough to produce rich and curious Fancies; and this may
be more demonstrable in Socrates, who after He had a long time ^cudgled his
brains in hopes to bea^ them into the Art of Poetry, could no^t,
notwithstanding all his Procepts and Rules, his great knowledge in Philosophy
and other Sciences, make any passable or tolerable Verse. Cicero, the best
Orator that ever Rome boasted of, was in the same Predicament; and yet in this
Art, that has soiled and puzzled a number of Wise and Learned men, the Fair Sex
has been very famous; their Beauties and Virtues have not only been the
glorious Subjects of Poetry, and Inspired it with higher raptures than any
other objects or representations to immagination, but themselves have been very
commendably the Authoresses of many curious Pieces, wherein their Ingenuity has
been livelily displayed, and raised them as lasting Monuments as men can
pretend to; In honor to whose worthy memories, we shall adorn this Work with
the Names of some modern Ladies that have been famous this way, mostly of our
own Nation. -- Pembro^k may boast to have had Mar, the Incomparable Sister of
the famous sir Philip Sidher, to it is Coan^^^, whose Name and Memory shall ever
have in his (...), which was (...) Virtuous Inclinations to Poetry and other
Ingenuities: There is extant of her Writings the Tr. of Antonius, and Albions
Triumph; some others are named, but supposed to be lost, or in private hands.
-- The Lady Mary Wroth, the Virtuous wife of Sir Robert Wroth, was an
Emulatress of Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, by her Urania, a Poetical History,
much of the same Nature, being a very curious piece, tho not meeting with the
like general reception. -- Ann Askew, the Daughter of Sir William Askew of
Lincolnshire, is remembered among the Ingenious Ladies for diverse things she
wrote in Verse and Prose; she is described to have been of a singular Beauty,
Virtue and Ingenuity; but above all to be Admired for her Constancy and
Courage, in (...) asserting the Protestant Religion against almost a whole
Nation of Popery, and D^i^g for that Faith, suffering, as a glorious Martyr, in
the flames, under the bloody Maryan Reign. The Lady Bacon, one of the four
Daughters of Sir Anthony Cook. The other Burleige, the Ladies three were the
Lady Russel and Killegrew, of whose Genius in Poetry, whatever has been
extant, there is the Testimony of the famo^s Sir John H^rrington, on their
Part, who, in his Alegacy upon the thirty seventh Book of his (...), Orlando
F^ri^^ (...) gives them all a very large Character for Learning, and
particularly for Poetry. -- The Lady Elizabeth Carrew wrought the Tragedy of
Mariam, a very curious Piece. -- Elizabeth^ Jioanna Westonia is by the Learned
Farnby, esteemed as a very Wife, Ingenious Lady, insomuch, that for her Poetry
and other Accomplishments, he blushes not to rank her with Sir Thomas Moor,
Drury Alabaster, and other English Writers of Latin Poetry. The Lady Jane Gray,
Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, whom we have already mentioned, took much
delight in Divine Poetry, almost as soon as she understood Letters. --
Margaret, Duchess of New Castle, a very Charitable and obliging Lady to the
World, very copiously imparted to public view, her Elaborate Works, in three
large Volumes, one of Orations, another of Philosophical Dramatick and other
kind of Notions and Discourses, and the third of Poetry, not forgeting to make
her own and her Lord's Fame live, when Monuments shall crumble into Dust. And
amongst those of lower rank, tho no less excellent in this Art; we find Mrs.
Katharine Philips, to whose worth in Poetry the Nation has deservedly given a
large applause; her Works are of a fresh date, and worthy the pe^^sal of young
Ladies; to which, for their more ample satisfaction, we refer them. Anae
Br^^dstreet, a New England Poetress, who writ so curiously, that she was called
the tenth Mu^e sprung up in America; she, amongst other things, excellently
described the four Elements, the four Humors, the four Ages, the four Seasons,
and the four Monarchies. Astera Behen, a Dramatick Poetress, whose well known
Plays have been every taking; she was a retained Poetress to one of the
Theatresses, and writ, besides, many curious Poems; but what exceeded the rest,
was that famous one upon the Death of King Charles II. which notwithstanding,
diverse were written by the best Poets of the age, carried the Bays from them
all in the Opinions of the Judicious; so that we may see, would Ladies bend
their Talents this way, they might be capable of equaling, if not exceeding the
men; and one main advantage they would gain by it, by being armed for the
Encountering their Satyr^, Pasquils, Lampoons, etc. and by matching them, not
only in Vindicating their Sex, but in exposing the ^olly and malice of their
adversaries, they would keep them in such awe, that the number of false
aspersions and c^lumnies would be lessened and dwindling away by degrees, they
would at length be disencumbered of all unjust reproaches; so that they would
see a wonderful change and reformation in their manners, by reducing the
stubborn Sex to their former Placableness, and settling them in a temper that
may make them highly esteem what they once durst seem to despise and trample
on; for what can it be imputed less, when out of a fantastic or malicious
Humor they libel Virtue, and to make themselves a little pastime among Fools
and Bussoons, or to satisfy a spleen for being refused in their aspiring to
what their Merits could no ways reasonably pretend; they dip their P^^s in Gall
and Wormwood, and sprinkle it in a bitter manner to blot and fully Modesty,
Chastity, Sobriety, Piety and all that can render a Woman lovely and admirable;
the which aspersion, tho never so false, is greedily suckle in with the common
air by the ignorant and unthinking Vulgar, and passes current because they hear
not what the party can say in vindication of her self to undeceive them by
detecting the bussoonery or malice of the Inditer, which if ingeniously done,
would not only nonplu^, but shame the scandaliser; so that the arrows he shot
to wound the Reputation of another, would be forceably driven back upon
himself, and make him ^^n, able what it is to feel his own Weapons Points,
which would have only tickled his Fancy with a sit of laughter, had they not
miss^^ their aim; some there are that have been met wi^hal, and overmatch'd by
such replies to their reflections, that they have not only desisted to make any
further attempts of that kind upon the Fair Sex, but been so far shamed of
their b^jaded Muse ever after, that they dust not trust so much as a di^ick to
p^ep abroad in the World, unless in such an Owl-light of obscurity, that only a
Privado or Confident who handed it about, could charge the Author with it.
Poetry at leisure hours, is a very curious Recreation, if it be on worthy
Subjects, nay, it Elevates and Illuminates the Mind to an high degree of
Befining it, and spreads a comfortable heat through every part, it is an enemy
to sadness and melancholy, and reaches at more than it can express, it
represents the Idea of things done many ages past so lively, that the Readers
immagine they see them present; it has a power over tears and laughter, and can
compel them as occasion requires, it exhilerates and brightens the Soul with
number and harmony, and is the very Soul of Eloquence, it has an insinuating
faculty to please the most sower and m^rose temper, tho for Color and show,
they may seem to be outwardly displeased at it; therefore Ladies, if it be used
as you ought, you cannot have a better Companion, except Divinity in your
Retirements. As Pictures represent the Images of things to the Mind, by the
Eye, Poetry must do it much livelier by the Ear; and if such things as are good
be conveyed to the Heart in Poetry, it makes the larger and more lasting
Impression; for there is nothing that the memory so quickly and kindly
embraces, as we see by our stage Actors, who, tho in other things have, many
of them, their memories so treacherous, that they do not remember a Score left
at a Tavern over night, unless they be minded of it; Yet in Poetry you may hear
them n^^ their Parts through a whole Play without blundering or hesitation. To
conclude, (...) then being turned to good purposes, it is much available.
Piossit^t^s. Some of our Young Novi^^, our guls Passive, are so chea^ed, as
that they spend the best remainder of their days, in courting mercenary whores,
and make along sure before they can obtain. It is (...) only flesh will make
one (...) these hawks stoop to th^lure, but she must have ^^ver too. Which,
my young practitioner not being acqai^^ed with, makes his request (...) vain.
When he speaks (...) love, she looks so strangely (...) if she heard a miracle;
sw^^ing she never as yet saw (...) man who could gain the (...) corner of her
heart. He believes all; and (like a (...) be not ^^cured man) presents (...)
with rich gifts, desiring no gist from her, but her self: which she (with a
pitiful look) condescends to, exclaiming against Fortune for subduing her to
man; when, God knows, she has been as common as the Highway. And how, my
plain down-^ight Squire (who never before was further than his fathers
windmill) in taking, is taken himself, with a hook that will not easily let
him go; and many a loud knave, and sea-gull shall upon the reveneues of his
purse, and he shall be called Patron till all his patrimony be spent. Their
soul dies in youth, says Job, and their life among the whore-mangers. But, if
it were good here to spur a question, and ask whether a whore hiring, or hired,
is the more detestable in the sight of God? The Scripture determines, and
judges, that a woman, taking money for prostituring her body to men, is
infamous; our, she that gives money to enjoy her lover, is most infamous of
all others. All are abominable before the Lord: and therefore Solomon in his
Proverbs says, that The mouth of a strange woman, or an harlot, is as a deep
pit: he that is a detestation to the Lord, shall fall therein. And, in another
place, he says; A whore is as a deep ditch, and a narrow pit. Noting thereby,
that if a man be once in with an harlot, he shall as hadly get out again, as a
man that is plunged into a very deep and narrow pit, where he can hardly stir
himself. The same Solomon, in the Book of Ecclesiastes, yields us the reason
hereof, namely, because she is as nets, snares, and bands; where if a man be
once in, he is fast enough for getting out. I find, says he, more better then
death, the woman, whose heart is as nets, and snares, and her hands as bands:
he that is good before God, shall be delivered from her; but the sinner shall
be taken by her. O, that flesh and blood would listen to the advice of the
spirit, and follow the counsel of the man! Desire not, says he, her beauty in
thine heart; neither let her eyelids catch thee: for by a whorish woman a man
is brought to a morsel of bread: and the adultress hunteth for life, which is
precious. Again he says: Albeit the lips of an harlot drop as an honey comb;
and the roof of her mouth be softer then oil; yet her latter end is bitter as
wormwood, and as sharp as a two-edged sword. Prostitute Doxies are neither
Wives, Maids, nor Widows; they will for good Victuals, or for a very small
piece of Money, prostitute their Bodies, and then protest they never did any
such thing before, that it was pure necessity that now compelled them to do
what they have done, and the like; whereas the Jades will prove common Hacknies
upon every slight occasion: they are dexterous in picking of pockets, which
they mind most when they find the man's thoughts most employed on somewhat else;
they are destructive Queans, and oftentimes secret Murderers of the Infants
which are illegitimately begotten of their bodies.
Q
QUendride, a Queen of the Lumbards, Famous for her Learning and Noble Exploits
in Arms. She caused many wholesome Laws among them, and civlliz'd that rough
Nation by planting Christianity among those who had not before received it,
building many Churches and Houses to pious uses. Quintillia, a Roman Lady,
highly favored by the Emperor Yitus Vespasian, for her Virtues, modest
Behavior, and Good Government of all her Actions especially when Rome Reigned
in the height of Luxury and Riot, and commanded the other Ladies to take a
pattern by her. She was courteous to all, and very charitable; a great favourer
of the Christians, tho she did not publicly profess it her self; but concluded
they must morally be a good people, because they were humble, meek, modest,
courteous, charitable and loving to all, and did by others as they desired to
be done unto hemselves, etc. Quisaca, a Princess of Tarnate, in the East
Indies, who though sought, by many great Princes in Marriage, refused them all,
and married Armusa, a private Gentleman of Portugal, whom she fancied for his
Courage in an attempt made upon the Isle of Tid^^e, She Endowed him with gre^^
Riches, and for his sake turned Christian. Querevolo ( Lovisade) created
Duchess of Portsmouth by King Charles the Second. She stood very high in the
Favor and Liking of that Prince; and is held to have had a great Ascendant and
Influence over him. Quercina, a Noble Lady of Venice, Daughter to a Senator,
who followed her Husband into banishment, who was banished by the procurement
of her Father, because he married her without his consent, she being designed
by him for a Richer Fortune, though less agreeable to her; and lived a poor
life with him in Corcyra, choosing to be with him she loved, before the plenty
and pleasure of a Palace. Quiddanet, a Confection between a Syrup and
Marmalade. Quodlibitaries, that follow their own Fancies. Quadrigamist (
qu^drigamus) a man four times married. Quarentine (from the Fr. Quarantine) is
a bene^^ allowed by the Law of England, to the Widow of a landed man deceased,
whereby ^^e may challenge to continue ^^ his chief Mansion House by the space
of Forty Days after his decease. Of this see Brast. ^ 1. cap. 40. And if the
Heir, or any other, attempt to eject her, she may have the Writ de Quarantina
habenda Inz. not. br. fol. 161. Quater Cousens, those that are in the last
Degree of Kindred, or Fourth Cousens. But we commonly ^y, such persons are not
Quater Cousens, when they are not good Friends. Queer mort, a Pocky baggage.
Quintain, a game or sport still in request at marriages, in some parts of this
Nation, specially in shropshire. The manner now corruptly (...), a Quintin,
Buttress, or thick Plank of Wood is set fast in the Ground of the High Way,
where the B^ide and Bridegroom are to pass; and Poles are provided, with which
the Young men run a Tilt on Horseback; and he that breaks most Poles, and shows
most a^^vity, wins the Garland. But (...), in his Survey of London, p. 76.
says, That in Ann. 1253. the Youthful Citizens, for an Exercise of their
activity, set ^orth a Game to run at the ^^sin, and whosoever did best should
have a Peacock for ^ prise, etc. Queries of Sundry Kinds, relating to the Fair
Sex. Questions are easily asked, but not so soon resolved, especially to
purpose and satisfaction. Many rather employ their inventions in raising and
starting of Questions, than their judgments in determining them. The one,
however, makes Learning fruitful of Disputes, the other of Works. Asking of
Questions proceeds commonly from some pre* notion of that which the party
demands; which occasioned that Opinion of Plato, to think, that all Knowledge
was but only Remembrance. It is a great part of Learning not to teach only what
to assert or affirm, but prudently to ask. Those that are very forward in
asking do often use the same liberty in telling, like Vessels that want
bottoms, they receive most because vent most. In cunning m^n they are
dangerous; for Questions in them are like beggars Gifts, a Gift with an Hook in
it, only to draw some thing back again, by way of answer, to find out your
abilities. Sudden Questions do often procure the truest Relation of matters,
which on consideration they do begin to color. They must, in weighty matters
especially, be very warily raised; for as delight in humane Learning is
inferior to that which is divine, so Faults committed in Divine Knowledge are
more dangerous than those in humane. But laying this aside, we now come to the
matter intended, which is to answer diverse Questions of sundry natures. --
Queries have been put, why the External parts of the bodies of those that are in
Love, are more subject to have their sudden changes of cold and heat, than
others? To which we answer, That the passions of the mind in such are more
stirring and agirated than in such as are not at all, or at least less
concerned; and when any Grief or Discontent is conceived, the natural heat
passes away, with the blood, into the Internal parts of the body; which gives
the cold a greater opportunity to possess the Vacancies it lest in i^s Retreat.
So that the outward parts become cold, and for the same Cause paleness takes
place, and a cloud of sadness hangs upon the countenance. But on the contrary,
when hopes of success, inspired by smiles, and a prospect of attaining our
desires, restore joy and alacrity, then a Spring Tide of blood flows again into
every part, brings along with it the retreated heat, and both of them produce
color and warmth; and for this cause Love is frequently painted sometimes pale
and wan, sad and dejected, and other times sprightly, Gay and blushing. And
Poets seign Love to be a Firebrand; and the Reason they give for it, is,
because that the minds of Lovers are sometimes in suspense, sometimes
incumbered with hopes and fears; the one making them soar toward the Object of
their desire, and being too ardently scorched with a violent passion, in
approaching too near the flame, the wax of their Icarian Wings melted by some
Repulse, send them fluttering down again, and startles them with ^read and
amazement, when they see from whence they are fallen. Loves Q^i^er signifies a
Loven heart filled with arrows, which are the Glances of the Fair Ones Eyes
whom he admire, which like wounding Weapons, or Instruments of death, stick
there till her condescending Goodness vouchsafes ^^ draw them thence; and the
assurance of Love stays the bleeding, and heals the wound. We might largely
comment on these matters, but the Question proposed being resolved we proceed
to others. -- Query, Wh^ women are s^^ and fairer than men? It is because they
are of a colder and moister Constitution which gives whiteness ^^ softness,
when a greater degree of heat in men render their bodies firmer, mo^^ brawny,
and of larger (...) implying strength; and tho^^ Excrements which cause h^ on
the Faces, Breasts, etc. men, are in women evacua^^ in their Menses, the whi^
ceasing by age, we may ^ serve many Old Women h^ hair upon their Chins, ^^ some
have Beards of a l^ Growth. Heat is likewise ^ occasion of it. But above ^
woman was designed to be the delight of the Eyes of man; and therefore was more
curiously furnished with all the ^^ allurements of beauty, set ^ot with a pomp
of winning Graces, and attracting charms. Query, Why are not women bald, i^ at
least so soon or often as men? It is because of the great quantity of moisture,
by reason of their coldness, the cold binding the pores; and moisture giving
nutriment to the hair. Q^ery, Why are women desirous to go neat, and exceed men
in the care of their attire? To this we answer, That woman being one of the
delicatest pieces of the Creation, and modesty compelling her to hide a great
part of her beauties, she nevertheless desiring that every thing should answer
what is visible, calls in Art to her assistance; and Knowing she was made to be
beloved, and highly prized by men, she will not omit any thing that may give
them cause to turn their affections from the Center whereto it ought to tend.
Besides, the esteems it as a comely Decency to have nothing about her but what
may demonstrate her careful in the management and conduct of all her
Undertakings, whilst man, who is taken up with the hurry of worldly affairs, is
less thinking, or less at leisure in matters to him of so little moment. Many
other Reasons might be urged, but these, as to our part, may s^ffice, whilst we
leave the rest to the imagination of the Reader, -- Query, Why is woman's wit
upon a sudden, a s^act, or turn, pregnant, and exceeding men's; but in weightier
matters, upon mature deliberation, not so solid or substantial? The Reason we
give, is, because being incumbered with less Cares, the Woman's Understanding is
free, less puzzled and disordered, and consequently more ratified at that time,
and capable of recollecting its powers to form sudden conceptions, which by
length of Time, delate, and losing succinctness, become less solid, if not
multiplied into confused notions that cannot again be recollected to solidity,
because the passions of the mind, by one contingency or other, throw in those
obstructions that foil the Reason, and render it incapable of making a second
Judgment so true or suitable as the former to the purpose if suddenly laid
hold on, nor is it allowed that Woman is endowed with such discerning Faculties
as man, when he enters into the deep retirement of serious Cogitations: There
are diverse Philosophical Reasons given for it, but by reason they vary, we omit
them. -- Quere, why do women Love men best who had their first affestions. We
answer, as to the first part of this Quere that all Innocent and render things,
where a propper Impression of this kind is to be made, are most apt to receive
it, and that which imprints the first Idea in the Heart of a Virgin, is most
lasting in her memory; we are apt, when Children of any moderate growth, to
retain transactions or such things in our mind^ as we have done or seen, when
things of greater moment, being grown up to rip^r years, ^^p our remembrance by
reason of the mul^^^icity of business, an I incu^brance of affairs, which
rolling, like the fluctation of Waves, one upon another, the forerunners are
covered and seem to be lost by the over flowings of those that crowd upon them.
The First Love, where the affections are settled upon ant be^utiful or taking
object, makes a deep impression, so that if Virgins would labor to obliterate
it, they cannot without doing violence to themselves. And perhaps it is too
deep roo^ed in the mind and fancy, to be plucked up by such ways. Some have
been prepossessed, that they have lain dreaming of a first Lover even in a
second's arm^; and their minds have been sed with his Idea, whilst an other has
been embracing them; and therefore Hesiod advises those that would have an
entire and undivided Love, to marry a Virgin rather than a Widow. Queen of
Sheba, etc. -- Queens have, we find, taken long Journeys to g^^ knowledge, and
spared no Pains or Labor to gratify their Curiosities; Sheba's Queen, we find,
came to Jerusalem with many rare presents, and was wonderfully satisfied in
enlarging her Heart with understanding; but as Camerarius tells us out of
Cedrenus, when she found tha^ Solomon without much difficulty had Expounded her
^iddles and Philosophical questions, she was resolve to try his Wisdom in
distinguishing yet further, and having prepared one day certain young Boys and
Girls, she appa^^lled them all alike, and set them before the King, their Faces
being so parallel that they discovered not the difference, but the King knowing
what her design was in it, caused Water to be brought, and ordered them to Wash
Their Hands and Faces distinctly whilst he looked on, by which device he easily
discerned the Males from the Females, for the boys rubed their Faces hard and
lustily, and the Girls more nice only stroaked them a little; at which subtle
discovery of the Kings, the Queen gave him great applause. Quality, etc.
Quality, if rightly taken, carries with it something extraordinary toward the
adornment of the Fair Sex: It is not ^^ Estate that renders a person one of
Quality, tho now adays theVulgar lok no further than to their Wealth, not
doubting that if she be rich she must be a Gentlewoman, and one Quality by
course but in the serious weighing, and considering the circumstances, it is
found otherways; ^^ilded Trapings make not a M^le an Horse. But to deal
^^^didly, and reflect on none, we shall delineate that which may truly bear the
Test in the Character of a Court Lady. -- Question not her ^irth, for that is
lively paint^^ in her Virtues, that it was ^igh and noble; she sets not ^er
Face so often by her glass, ^^^ she composeth her Soul by Gods word, which has
all the Excellent qualities of a true ^^^^. 1. It is clear in all (...)
necessary to Salvation, ^^^ those that will not be ignorantly or rather
wilfully (...). 2. It is not like those (...) Glasses by which some ^^dies
Dress themselves, ^^ich flatter them into a be^^ more Beauty and Com^^^ than
they are Mistresses ^^^ 3. It is very spacious, ^^d presents to view the l cast
external or internal Maculati^ 4. It is durable, tho in (...) sense it is
broken too (...), when God's Laws are ^^olated; yet it will (like the ^^one cut
from the Mountain ^^^hout hands) fall on its ^eakers at last, and grind (...)
into powder, and not (...) title of it shall fall to the ^^ound. 5. It has
power ^^^ smooth the wrinkles sin has ^^de in the Soul, to cleanse ^^e spots,
and mend the saults discovers; but to come ^^^er, she walks humbly be^^e God in
all Religious ^^ties, the better to claim ^^ assistance in time of temptation,
that her Faith fail not, she knows the best, without Gods assistance, would be
often soiled by the various delusions and temptations of the grand enemy of
mankind; she is always careful, and most tender of her Reputation. Travelers
tell us, that in Mexico, in the West Indies, there is a Tree which shrinks in
its Leaves at the approach of a man, as it by Nature it were shamefac"d and if
he touch, tho neverso lightly, they immediately wither and dye. A Ladies Credit
is of equal bashful niceness; Lacivous Eyes may injure it, and a small touch
may wound and destroy it, which makes her avoid all privacy with suspicious
company; she declines Pride and Stateliness, and is modest, courteous and
obliging to all that are Virtuous and of good Report, liberal to the poor, and
has her Ears always open to hear and redress the Grievances of the Distressed;
she is no respector of Persons where the Cause is unjust, nor is she more
careful of any thing than of God's Glory; she holds her self bound by the
Tenure (whereby she holds the Possession of Grace in this Life and Reversion of
Glory hereafter) to assert and vindicate the Honor of the King of Heaven,
whose Champion she professes her self to be, she is pitiful to all, Learned
and Wise above the usual Stature of her Sex, and improves those excellent
acquirements more to the public benefit, than to her own advantage; in
Discourse her words are rather very fit than fine, not any ways affected or
studdied, yet very Choice tho not chosen. -- Quality sits triumphing in her
looks, and compasses each Feature, tho mild and winning to command awe and
distance; she affects not the vanity of foolish Fashions, but keeps up the
ancient Grandeur and plain and modest Garments, and if they be Rich they are
not Gaudy and is highly contended with the beauty God and Nature has bestowed
on her. If very beautiful she is not in the least the more proud, but it
induces her to be the more thankful for her maker* for the favor he has
bestowed on her; If unhandsom, she labors to make here Soul shine more
Beautiful, and better her body in the virtues of her mind, instead of washes
and beautifying Waters and Pomanders, etc. her Closet is stored with Physics
and Cordials prepared by her own Skill and Industry, to send to her poor
Neighbors when they are sick and in pain; she detesteth all Adulterated
Complexions; in her Marriage she principally has a respect to Virtue and
Religion, and is careful in her Marching, not to bestow her self and unworthily
to an ignoble Person, or one unequal years; however, she is not covetous of
large Fortunes in Marriage, regarding the Virtue of the Person more than his
Estate. -- Quiet and Moderate she is in all her aff^^^^, she makes no noise nor
bust^^ in the World, tho she goes successful through her undertakings; tho far
from being ^^ a morose Temper; she ^ many times pleasantly affected she is not
transported wi^^ Court Delights, but when ^^ sees them, they appear ^ common
things to her; ^ if she makes any Comme^^ upon them, it is to turn (...)
Morally to her Advantage drawing, like the painful Be a Mass of Honey out of
Flo^ers of various Scents ^ Kinds, and sometimes out ^ Weeds; she Allegorizes ^
Earthly Vanities into Heaven Truths, when in her rea^^ Thoughts she remembers
^^soon the Scene in the Play (...) altered (almost before ^^ment it self could
take (...) of it) she seriously we^^ how mutable all things are the World, God
ringing Changes on all accidents, making them tunable to Glory. And by
contempla^^ the wonderful harmony of Creation, she Guesses Glorious a Place
Heaven is reads constant Lectures to self of her own Mortality that the sight
of death to will neither be so terrible strong, because she has ^o^^ beheld it
in her serious ^^^tations; and when she is ^^ upon to take up her Lo^^ the
Grave, she willingly herself down to take her sweet Repose (out of the reach of
the Noise and incumberances of the world) ^ill awakened in the morning of the
Resurrection, she shall arise and possess the Crowns and Kingdoms prepared for
the Ju^t. -- Quality, you see therefore, consists not so much in Riches or
Honor as in Virtue and a Good Name, which is the Foundation of True Greatness
and Worth, lastingly to build on, and raise T^ophies of Honor for themselves
to all Posterity. Qualifications and cautions ^word he had in regard by Ladies,
and^. -- Ques^^^^le^s there is a Reservedness that makes Beauty more
Triumphant; but w^^^ it once comes to a Parl^^, M^^le^ly is in danger to ^e
l^^t; and then shame and misfortunes slow in like the Waves that by their often
b^^^ng against i^, have forced a b^nk, whose m^ndatio^ might have been
prevented in time; but now it is too ^e. -- Mistaken she must consequently be,
that ^^ppo^es ^eauty to be the le^s prized because it is not always seen, or
^oo familiarly Exposed to the Eyes of men; when indeed it (...) incident to
men's Natures to Esteem those things most they ^ope to gain, yet are at present
^ome distance from them; when that they find crowded on them at a Cheap and
Easy ^^te, is little mi^^ed, if not ^^^temned. So long as a Lady ^^verns her
self by the Exact Rules of Prudence and modesty, her Luster appears like the
Mer^dian S^n in its ^^clouded brightness; which though less a^pr^ach^^le, and
more dazzling to the Eye, is accounted nevertheless more glorious; but when she
d^^lines from them, she is like the S^n, s^^een'd with a Morning ^lo^d, which
though gazed on with less hurt to the Opti^ks, is not half so clear to the
sight. And besides th^se collateral adv^nt^^es, it is evident that Mo^es^y and
Chastity, ((...) these are twin sisters not to be separated, and indeed are in
degree properly the same,) give an ^mmediate direct improvement to beauty.
Besure, above all things, to b^wa^e of those who finding you co^^ientious, and
st^ring at the thoughts of Vice, go about to corrupt your Judgment and would
either persuade ^ou that to part with your Chastity is no sin, or that after
this Life the Soul returns to a nothingness, or vanishes into ^o^tr air, th^^
so you may rush on secured against the dange^ of a future state. But let us by
the way assure such, that at la^t they will find their hot blood, and impure
flames, not capable to contest with unquenchable fire, when too sadly they see
themselves deceived; for though he that can persuade a woman out of ^^r Soul,
may soon command her Body, yet he cannot re^cue neither hers nor his own ^^om
an angry God. How ea^^ly by such Gradatious of Mischief may we judge the
deplorable Estate of those that have abandoned their Virtue. Whenever the
cutward Pomp and Gaudy Splendour of v^^i^ted women seems like that of Croesus,
to boast their happiness let them look through that Fallacy, and answer with
Solon, tha^ (...) know themselves happy till their end. We wish we could not
say, Ladies, it is too much the in^^^^ty of a great part of the Fair Sex to love
Gaity and a splendid appearance, which lays them more open to be tempted and
assaulted, Insomuch that we cannot pronounce those who are not arrived at a
sober Estimate of things, secure from the danger they threaten. It will
therefore be convenient for them to regulate their Opinions, and reduce all
such things to their Just Value, and then they will appear so trifling, that
they will never be able to stand in competition with the more weighty Interests
of Virtue and Honor, which in themselves have such a dazzling Luster, that they
out shine the rest, as the Sun does all the lesser fires, -- Modesty than is
the Guard that should secure Virgins from the dangers within and without; and
the better to strengthen it, all Temptations are to be avoided; even the
company of some Women is very dangerous A Woman that is conscious of her own
Scandal, thinks her self reproached by the Virtue another, which makes her many
times maliciously strive to level the inequality, not by reforming her self, so
that she concludes too hard a Task, but by corrupting the other. So that those
who to this purpose screw themselves into acquaintance, will be o^^r
officiousty kind, and by all arts of condescension, and obliging, Endeavor to
(...) a Woman of Reputation into her Company and Intimacy; and if she can once
entangle her into the Cobweb of Friendship, then she, Spider-like, infuses her
Venom, and poisons her Virtue. But of such take special heed.
R
RAchel, Genesis 29.9. a Sheep or Lamb, properly the Female. Rachel, Daughter to
Laban the Syrian. Win her Jacob the Patriarch fell in love, and served an hard
and tedious Apprentiship to gain her of her Father. She was mother to Joseph
and Benjamine, dying in Travel of the latter. She was very b^autiful, as
appears by the commendation the Scripture gives of her. Radegund, favorable
counsel or advice. Rebecca, Ribkah, Genesis 24.15. fat, full fed. Rhode, Acts
12.13. a Rose. Rosa^^^, the Ros^ of Peace, or as it (...), Rosamundi the Rose
or Flower of the World, L^^. (...) Rosa, a Rose, from (...) Recreatio, because
t^^ smell of it does strengthen and refresh the spirits of a man. Rose, Rosa,
commonly used. Ruth. (...), Ruth 1. v. 4. perhaps watered or filled. Rebecca,
Sister to Laban. She was married to Isaac, Abraham's Son by Sarah, and was
mother to Jacob, by whose advice and management: he got the blessing from (...)
Elder Brother E^^^. Rahab, the Harlot of Jerico, who Entertained the Sp^^, for
which she and her Family were saved in the destruction of that City. Radg^nda,
Queen of France. She was D^^gh^^r to Bertai^, K. Th^^i^^i^, a Lady of
Extraordianry Beauty, but more illustrious for her Vert^e. She laid aside her
R^yalty, and became a Nun, building the Abbey of Holy C^oss* and diverse other
places, which she dedicated to pious uses, and dyed anno 587. Ramsey ( Mary)
second Wife of Sir Thomas Ramsey, Alderman and Sheriff of London anno 1567. and
Lord Mayor in 1577. She was Daughter of Sir William Dale, Merchant of Bristol.
She lived a very Piousand Virtuous life; and dying N^^em^^r 1595. without
(...), le^t the ^r^a^est (...) U^es, (...) f^^ ever, that have been left (...)
private person before or (...). Reginatrud^, Duchess of Bavaria. She was
Daughter of Chidelbert, King of France, and married to The^d^n, the Third Duke
of Bavaria, whom she converted to the Christian Religion, and afterward, by
the assistance of Rupert, Bishop of Worms, she prevailed with the greater part
of his Subjects to follow his Example. Renea of France. She was Duchess of
Ferrara, Daughter to Lewis the 12th of France, and Ann of Britany She was
married to Hercules D' Este, Duke of Ferrara, by the contrivance of Francis the
First, who succeeded Lewis; though she might have had far greater Matches in
England and Germany. She was a Lady of great Courage, Wit and Learning. Renown,
otherways called Fame, a Goddess of Poetical Invention, held to be the
Messenger of Jupiter. She was painted in the shape of a Woman with Wings spread
abroad, and spangled with Eyes; her Garments light and succi^^^, with a Trumpet
in her mouth, as ^^un^ing. R^^^e, for refusing to forsake her Religion, and
marry Gaul^^, a Roman Prae^^ct, (...) him tortured, and (...) put to death; but
was (...) after her Death (...) as a Saint. ^oches ( Catherine) (...) of
p^ictiers, so well (...) in Poetry, that she was (...) The Muse of France. She
(...) books in Prose and (...) and Educa^ed her (...) to an Extraordinary (...)
Learning and Virtue. (...) the most accompli^^^^ (...) in the Country; (...)
great Matches were (...) red them, they could not (...) in^uced to marry, but
(...) them'elves with (...) and contemplative (...). ^^^ogunda, Daugh^^^ (...)
^^ng Pharaates of Par^^^^^ S^^ was Wife to Deine^^^^^ (...) of Syria. She was
(...) of great Courage, (...) and Vir^ue. ^^samunon, Queen (...). She was
Daugh^^^ (...), and Wife (...) who was called into (...), the Imperial (...)
revenge the astronts (...) Emperess Sophi^^ had put (...); but Al^ion having
(...) Father to death, and (...) Cup of his Skull, which (...) have forced her
to (...) out of, she (...) his Life, and caused (...) ^^^^hered, by (...) the
General of his (...). (...), Daughter (...) a Prince of Persia, (...) to
Alexander the Great, in his ^xpe^ti^n against Darius. She was held to be one of
the most beautiful Ladies of Asia. ^o^^llan, Su'taness, and Wife to Solomon the
Magnificent, Emperor of the (...), A Woman of great Beauty, but of greater
Spirits and Ambition. Ruth, Daughter in Law to Na^mi, married to B^a^. Rumia,
or Rumilla, a Goddess to whom the Romans recommended the care of their
Infan-Children. Rosamond, the Fair, Concubine of K. Henry the S^^^n^, of
England, poy^^r^^ by Q. Elenor, in Woodstock ^o^er, near Oxford. Back, the Duke
of Exeter's Daughter, an Engine to extort Confessions, brought into the Tower
by him (being C^n^i^^le, 16 H. 6.) intending to bring in the whole Civil Law.
Recreations suitable for Ladies, and what is to be observed therein. --
Recreations, when Innocent and Modera^^^^ may be called the Spring of (...)
that makes it move smooth and regular; it is an Antidote against the too rust
impressions of business, and over s^^^ious Thoughts upon the Spirits, and by
Wise and Prudent management may be turned to great advantages in rendering our
conditions easy and pleasant; but when immoderately used and carried to excess
and extravagancy, it is worse than Labor or Toil. All Pleasures that but
border on Scandal must be shunned and avoided, and even those that are the most
Innocent, must not exceed the Rules of Moderation. Which consists first in not
giving offense, scandal, damage or prejudice to your Associates or others.
Secondly, It must besuch as is not injurious or prejadicial to your Health,
Reputation or Business; you must by no means make your Pleasure your Bussiness,
but by the enjoyment thereof, be more than cheerful in your return to it, as
more enabled by your Diversions to perform it. The most innocent Recreations by
excess are many times abused, and the Body and Mind rather enfeebled and
disordered, than strengthened, and composed by them, their Vigor is weak and
sostened, the Compexson is besot ed, and the principal Virtues sometimes
banished. -- Recreation must be taken as it was first provided, and then it
will be taken without a S^ng. The Heathen Sages prohibited either Sex to
^^acken the Reins too much to it, least it should insensibly carry them away in
a career, they would not be able to stop, till they bulg'd upon the ruggedRock
of Misfortune. W^ that are Christians have more reason therefore to be
cautious, least too great a swing of Worldy Pleasure and Delights throws us
into Irre(...) and incumbers us (...) we never intended to be concerned withal;
those Recreations, above all others, (...) most commendable, that refresh the
Mind, and never leave any private (...) behind them on the C^^^^ence, to
upbraid ^he Sens^ (...) the immoderate or unlawful using them; she that
pla^^^^^ into a puddle, does but en^'^^ her self to the trouble of ^^
a^terwashing; few people are so indiseret and regardless of their Health, as
for the lusciousness of the Taste, to ^^^d on those things that will ^^pair it,
and render them (...) stempered; God would never have allowed such Recreations,
nor furnished us, either with the desire of them, or the faculties to enjoy
them, with any design we should abuse them, or that they should prove hurtful
to us; yet there are so many incoveniences adhearing to the use of ^^^sure, by
exceeding the measure, mistaking the m(...), misplacing the time, th^^^al
though Recreations be la^^^ul in themselves; yet if they be circumstanced
amiss, they are not expidient. -- Recreations and Pleasures are undon ^idly
lawful if we abuse (...) not by irregularity all the s'veral (...) in Food,
(...) other varieties of the (...) nature, were intended please the (...) to
satisfy the Appea^^^. of the beautiful and pleasant Fruits the Garden of God
contained, there was but one only, among so vast a number, excepted; from which
it may reasonably be concluded we may enjoy those delights we have a well
grounded inclination to, and that are no ways prohibited, if so we do it as not
to do it amiss. -- Recreations most proper and suitable to Ladies, may be
r^^^'d under four principal he ^; as Limning, Dancing, Music Reading, these
Employ both the Mind and Activity of the Body; Lim ^ing is a very curious Art,
wherein a Lady, especially in small Figures, either in Oil or Water-Painting,
may improve her Fancy to Admiration, and leave rare monuments of her Ingenuity
to Posterity. Dancing, Recreates the Body, and moderately used, much
c^ntribu^^^ to Health by t^^rring and dispersing the gathering and afflicting
Humors; besides, it gives a decent comeliness to a Ladies Carriage and
Behavior; but let not those that are not very skilful in it, put themselves
too forward at Bills, etc. least in hopes of gaining Credit, they will only
have the advantage to be de^ided; a Lady had better acknowledge her Ignorance in
it, and excuse her self from undertaking to Dance before competent judges, if
she understands not exactly the measures, and the way of her Dancing at the
place where she is; for all Ma^te^^ ^^ach not so exactly, but there may be some
variation either in the Motions or Music; If she has never so much skill, she
must not be over conceited of it, lest it lead her into the error of engaging
in some Dance she does not understand, or but i^per^ec^^, and small blunders in
such cases put all out of Order, and cause more ignorance to be imputed to her,
than really she is guilty of; apollogies may be made against the Entreaties and
perswations of those tha* come to take a Lady our, but she must not be too
obstinate, because it may be interpreted various ways, as to ignorance,
moroseness, or Pride; and therefore if she be understanding in it, she had
better run the hazard of a little disorder, if it should chance to fall out,
than undergo the Censures before mentioned. -- Recreation is found very
pleasing on Instruments of Music, well Tuned and Played on by a skilful Hand;
but it must not be used upon every slight occasion to gratify as many as desire
it, and so not only be made vulgar, as if a Lady made it her Profession, or too
much affected applause in unseasonably Exposing her Dext^rity; if to the Lute
she adds her Melodious Voice, the sound will be more Ravishing; but his she
must avoid as much as may be in chearing of any that pretend Courtship to her,
left they imprudently lay hold of it as a design to draw them on by a kind of
an Air of Courtship to be the greater admirers of her person for the
accomplishments it is endowed withal, but among Relations or indifferent
Friends, if the mode^ly press it, it will be some what under the Character of
good breeding, not to deny them that satisfaction they sue for; but it must not
be tedious, lest they seem tired with what they so earnestly desire; the
Harmony once Commenced, it will not at all be commendable to stop in the middle
to crave attention, though some seem not to listen, as good manners requires,
when they have engaged a Lady to pleasure them in this m^ter; The Songs must be
chosen, Witty, Modest, and Ingenious, loose lines avoided. -- Reading is a
Contemplative Recreation if applied to the right use and end; it carries us in
Fancy and Imagination into the remorest parts of the World, and gives us a
prospect of the rarities and Varieties of distant Nations, or more, it carries
us among the Stars, those glorious Luminaries that Spangle the Firmament with
Seeds of Light; it opens the Arcan of Arts and Siences, and by Contemplation,
leads us up into Heaven, and dazles our Souls with the unapproachable
brightness of the Divine Majesty; it likewise recreates dejected Spirits with
harmless merriment, and is, if not abused, the Vnum Necessarium of the the
mind; we need not tell Virtuous Ladies that they ought to shun wanton Books
that treat of Laciviousness, and corrupt matters, or such as are oppugnant to
Faith and Good manners; Virtue is an Enemy to such, and consequently Virtuous
Ladies will nor Injure their fair Eyes and fairer Reputation, to look upon, or
have any concernment with them. Stage Plays, or the Recreation of the Theaters,
have been by some condemned, as nor fitting for the Entertainment of modest
Ladies; but to such, most certain it is, they may prove of great advantage if
they wisely use, and rightly apply many things they hear and see contained in
Ingenious Plays, and Precepts for Instruction, and sundry great Examples for
Caution; and such notable passages, which being well applied, will confer no
small addition to the understanding of the Auditors, Edward the Sixth, that
English Pl^anix in Piety and Virtue, tho the weighty affairs of a Kingdom here
upon his Youthful Shoulders, yet he borrowed leisure from his Devotions and
State Affairs to see Plays, and Interludes, to refresh his tired spirits, with
such harmless Recreations; and for the better ordering them, that nothing might
appear indecent, he appointed an Officer to Supervise and Dispose to the best
advantage, what should be Acted and Represented before him, which place is now
supplied by the Master of the Rav^ls. Queen Elizabeth, the mirror and wonder of
Virgin Majesty, gave her Opinion, T^a Plays were harmless Spenders of Time; but
then a Lady must not make it, as it were, her business, to hurry and rattle in
her Coach to every Play she hears praised, for by that she becomes noted, and
lays her self open to censure, which takes all advantages to think and speak
the worst. -- Recreations there are of many other kinds, which may be suited as
the place and humor of company will admit, and a^e so various, that we pretend
not to prescribe all that may offer. Gaming among others, is allowable, if not
carried too high, nor too much frequented, whereby a Lady gets her the name ^
Gamester, which is but one degree from that of a Ra^ter, for in Gaming above
measure, some thing or other will happen that will cease the passions of the
mind to break out into extravagance unseemlyl, if not unpardonable. To
conclude, let all be done with Di^cretion and moderation, and nothing will be
done amiss. Religion, A Ladies chief Ornanent. -- Religion is the Crown of all
other Excellencies, nothing is so proper and necessary to be considered and
duly observed, seeing all our welfare and happiness depends upon our Piety and
sincere Devotion. -- Religion requires us not, but altogether forbids us at any
rim^ to put on an Angry Zeal against those that may be of a different
persuasion, though partiality to our selves makes us too frequently mistake it
for a duty, and we are sometimes so fond of our opinions, to think, in so doing
we are a Fighting the Lords Ea^le, and a contending for the vindication of his
Honor, when in reality of the matter we are only setting out our selve; our
Devotion too often breaks out into that shape which best agrees with our
peculiar tempers. Those that are Choleric^, grow into a hardened severity
against such a Dissent from them, and lay hold of all the Texts that suit with
their Complexions The Sullen and Melancholy are too apt to place a great part
of their Religion in dejected and il^um^ured. ^spects putting on sower and un
^omble faces, and declaiming against the Innocent Entertainments of Life, with
as much tartness as ought to be bestowed on the greatest Crimes, tho indeed it
is generally but a Vizard, there being nothing very often real in such a kind
of severity. -- Religion that is true, is so Kind, Inviting and Obliging, th^^
instead of imposing un^^ and unnecessary burden upon our Nature, it cases of
the greatest weight of our passions and mistakes; And redeemeth us from the
slavery we are prone to run into our selves, instead of subduing us with Rigor;
for whilst we are under the usurpation of our Appetites, Let Loose and
unrestrained, we are most severe masters to our selves. Religion in it self is
always a cheerful thing, and is so far from being an utter Enemy, to good
humor, that it is inseparably united to it; there is nothing that belongs to
them that is uneasy or unpleasant; a wise ^picure would be religious for the
sake of the pleasure he would find in it, by restraining himself by too much
surfeiting on worldly delights, and the quiet, peace and Content, it would
feast his mind withal. Religion is exalted, reason fi^^ed and refined from the
drossier part of it, having its abode in the upper region of the mind, where no
clouds or mist hinders its ^ereni^tes or Interpose to darken or ofend it; It is
the foundation and Crown of all virtues. As to says, relating to you in
particular, keep to that which is warranted by God, and avoid being given to
change; you having, Ladies* a stronger ground to be steadfast in your Religion,
than the other sex, by reason that the voluminous Enquiries, into the truth, by
reading multitudes of books, are not so much expected from you. -- Eeware above
all things, that a blind Zeal Leads you not into Error, Let the holy Scriptures
be the standard of your religion; and on the other hand beware of applying Gods
Judgments upon particular occasions, or pointing out those on whom they ^all,
as the subjects of his wrath, or the marks he Levells, else his vengeance at,
because a mortal being is too shallow of understanding to make true Judgment,
not competent to make a distribution of Gods Justice or his mercies, since
himself has thrown a ve^^ over them to hide them (...) our short sight, which
would, notwithstanding its imperfection, be too busily prying into them, though
beyond their Province; and to go about to determine, whether God Loves or hates
those he afflicts, is too nice a point for humane reason to discourse.In the
next place, Labor to keep vain doubts and scruples at a distance, that they
may not Interrupt and hinder your devotion, nor give you unseasonable
disquiets; and to do this, get understanding, and practice virtue; and if you
are so happy as to have these for your share, most certain it is that God by
his Grace, will reveal all necessary truths to you. -- Avoid as much as
reasonably you may Multiplicity of wordly busyness, and in that which is
unavoidable, Labor for an Evenness and tranquillity of mind, that you may be
smooth and un^rou^l^^ (...) tempe^i^^^ sor^^^^, (...) shall ^e^^^^ ^ebd (...)
glo^ when you ^re no^^^^^d, wit^ w^^^ c^res, (...) with Lo^ (...) and
i^^^^es^^. -- Order your ^riva^e ^^votio^s in ^uch a manner that ^hey become
not Argume^^^ (...) c^u^^s of tedio^s^^^s, by their Indiscr^et Length, but
reduce your words into a narrower compass, still keeping all the matter; what
is cut off in the Length, supply in Earnestness of spirit; so by that means
nothing is Lost, while the words are changed into matter, and Length of time
into Fervency of devotion. Reason considered in humane affairs. -- Reason is
the Guide of humane affairs, and distingu^^h^^ mankind from the subordinate
Rank of Creatures, and ought to be consulted in all our Actions, to testify
that we are removed by many degrees, from the Irrational part of the Creation,
who for tha^ cause are ren^^r^d subserviant to us. If woe consid^r ^^ur
str^n^^h. only we are (...) and L^able to be overc^^^ (...) destroyed by Lions,
^yg^ and other Savages, that ^^xe their Aboads in ^^^un^^^, and wildern^sses;
but God has provided a rational soul for man, which is ca^able by policy, to
Encoun^r those di^^^culties and dangers that his force could not otherways
struggle with or avoid. It has occasio^^^ (...) ^^putes ^^ong (...) ^^arne^
(...) what (...); some (...) is En^^^^ed in (...) and (...), it ^^ates it self
(...) p^^^ that are in^lu^^c^^ ^y it; others again co^c^^^ it has i^s pr^nc^pal
sea^^^^ brain. Invigo^a^ing ^^e (...) and facu^^ies, communica^^^^ i^s powers,
^y the Arteries, and Car^t^^es, the stopage or obstructi^^ of which, cau^es
desponde^cies of mind, and som^^imes madness; but these we count as w^imseys,
and mere conjectures; for the so^l being an Immortal E^^ence, cannot rationally
be concluded to be confined to any place particularly, but it i^ ^^e and at
Liberty to opera^^ in all, attending on the ^ody, as its Good Angel, till it
(...) called from it by him that ^ave it, and who can only comprehend and
Limit; i^ nor can we believe, though ^^xes differ, that souls have any
par^icipation of those dif^r^nces, but as in the man, so in the woman, and at
the great day when we shall be clothed with Immo^tality, there will ^e no
^^quality among the Ble^^ed, unle^^ in degrees of radience, as their ^reater o^
Lesser La^^^r in Ch^^^s ^ineyard, shall differ them (...) Glory as one Star
outshines ^^^ther, yet all shall be ^ull of Joy, and nothing wanting to
complete their happyness, or give occasion to complain or repine; we shall be
as Angels and ^lessed spirits, filled with Love, and delighted with the beati^^
vision. Some take upon them to conclude there will be no difference of sexes,
but that is too ^bstruse for us to determine; but thus far we are warranted,
that there will be ^o occasion for such differences there, since there is
neither Marriage, nor given in Ma^^^ge; but now we are soaring too high, and
must like a Lark at her height, descend again. Reason tells us, that women have
souls as well as men, and that they proceed from the same fountain of Eternal
Life, and therefore are to be Equally prized, as being of an Equal value, and
though virnous women Express a Generous obedience, in submiting to their
husbands, and giving them rule and government of temporal astair in this ^orld,
yet in the other it is not to be presumed but that there is an Equal liberty
and freedom, all being equaly Engrafied as Members into Christ their Head.
There no Folly or Imprudence will appear, but Wisdom will Reign and Triumph.
Not but in this lower Region, we must in a great measure, if not altogether,
allow the Fair Sex to be capable of an Equality, would they as industriously
apply and improve themselves in masculine Affairs. Scepters have often deigned
to kiss their beauteous hands, and the Gold been burnished to its highest
luster by their sost commanding Grasps, appearing as awful and Majestic in a
Woman's hand, as in that of the grea^^st Conqueror. Many wholesome Laws owe to
them their Original; and the Scales of Justice have in no other hands ^een held
with an Equaller ^allance. Mercy has sa^ triumphant on th^^r Brows, and
Oppression and Violence Thunder struck with their Frowns. They have been
Nursing mothers to Religion, and made it grow up and flourish under their
pro^^ction. Their prudent Councils, and Valorous Exploits, have made their Wars
prosperous, and obliged their proudest Enemies to humble themselves, and accept
the Conditions of peace. Learning, though men have labored to ^eep them in
Ignorance, h^s never been a stranger to their Sex. Great has been their
Sagacities, and Numberless their Worhty Labors. H^re Virtue has appeared in
i^^ Richest Array, and raised Wonder and Admiration in those that have
contemplat^d it, insomuch that it has shamed the E^vious, and made them blush
^or the Scandals and Reproaches they have uttered, and their pious Examples
have so regulated the world, that a Lycurgus or a Solon could have done no
more; then let us not so far forget our selves, as to dishonor those by our
calumnies or detraction, who are the honor of mankind, but rather value and
esteem them, as near as we can, according to (...) worth and ^^ri^, and ^e
^^^teful in prizing such a Trea^^^^, as a Modern Poe^ has (...) ^he pains to
do, viz. Woman, the loveliest creature Nature made,
Should (went not sin) have adoration paid;
Have Shrines and Altars raised, and Temples too:
But Praises are the least that are her due.
So soft, so loving, charming, and so kind,
That all the creatures to man's use assigned,
Comprised in one, all that in them is rare,
Cannot by in^inite degree with her compare.
Search for the Unicorn of Indian breed;
For the Camelion, that on Air does feed;
For the gay Phoenix in Ara^ia's field:
Or f^r the Gold and Gems o^t^ India's yield.
Nay. look where all the Snow white Lillys (...),
In native pure^^ss, or where Rivers slow.
View all the gaudy plumes which on the wind
Expand, and through the yiedling Air free passage find,
And all those animals Earth does contain,
The numerous Fry that brood the swelling main.
And still add more, let Flora's Glory come,
Nay, (...) golden Crop with swe^^^^^ ht home;
Let t^^^^ what of this kind th^^^ (...) ^rame
In one (...) in one their worth Pro^^
Compared with Woman, scarce they will find a Name.
Reason it is we should conclude that God, the Infinite and all wise Creator,
best knowing what would render man's happiness most perfect in an Innocent
st^te, would not have given him any thing that should have been unnecessary or
distastful to him; for we are not (because some urge it was only for the sake
of Generation) to shorten his hand; but must allow he might have Created men,
and made them like all other Creatures, by this powerful word, spring up from
the dust; we confess indeed Generation is a main end of the difference of
Sexes, as they now are distinguished; but there is more in it, a sweet harmony
in the society, a soft and gentle cont^xtu^e of Minds, uniting in Love, and all
the cordial Endearments that can make Life the more d^sirable, a closet o^
Truth (...) ^^pose the most secret though, and an Amulet for Cares and fears
that may arise. Adam* ^^d he been alone, proba^ly might have yielded to (...)
Devils Temptation and (...) into what a solitary Misery had he fallen to be
alone in Deserts or Wildernesses without hope of Comfort from any; and indeed
we find now, tho the world is populous, that man is in some degree termed but
half himself, without an happy c^junction with one of the Fair Sex; he is a
kind of Vagrant and Wanderer, a thing without a Center to six him; he is, as it
were, a Traveller in the Ear^h, having no certain home that can be pleasant to
him, his m'nd is roving, and he aims at something it covets, but he knows not
well what; innocent Convers^tion with Male Friends is pleasant to him; but that
does not satisfy, he wants a Cabinet to deposit secrets in, that he cares not
to reveal to Father or Mother, or the nearest Relation; and surely, let his
s^^rch never so curious, he can never find any so trusty as Virtuous Wise;
there is i^ such a Marriage so close an Union, that what he entrust ^^ her, he
intrusts himself (...) for she knows his misfortunes are her own, and she will
run any danger and hazard rather than be^ray her trust, no, (...) by
Inadvertancy, her caution being always great in such affairs; so that without
this material part of himself, we conclude a man is wanting in that which
should make him happy in the world. Lady Russel, one of the four Daughters of
Sir Anthony Cook. Rumia, a Goddess that ruled over sucking Children, and Woman's
Paps. Rape ( raptus) is a Felony committed by a man, in the violent deflowering
a Woman, be she old or young, Brit. c. 1. This offense is with us Felony in the
principal and his aiders. Anno 11. H. 4. c. 23. Anno 1. Edw. 4. cap. 1. West 2.
cap. 23. Rhetoric, g. the Art of speaking eloquently, or well and wisely.
Ravishment (Fr. ravishment. i. direptio, raptus, etc.) signifies in our Law, an
unlawful taking awa^, either a woman or an (...) Ward; sometime it is used also
in one signification wi^h rape, (viz.) the violent deflowring a Woman. Rebecca
( Hebr) fat and full; a woman's N^me. Regamancy, mation, l. a loving them that
love us. Relut, l. a Widow or any thing that is left. Rum Mort, a curious
Wench. Runcina, the Goddess of Runcation, l. weeding. Rosimunda, ( Sa* Rose of
peace) she was forced by Herminges to drink the Poison which she offered him,
by whom she had procured the Death of her Husband Alboinus (King of the
Lombards) because he drank a Health to her in a cup made of her Fathers skull.
Rose, The Flower of Venus, consecrated by Cupid to Harpocrates the God of
Silence. Under the Rose, among private lovers, not to be divulged. Repudiate, (
repudio) to forsake, as one does his wife, to refuse or put away. -- The
ancient Romans had three kinds of Separation in Marriage; The first they called
Repudiation, which was done by the man against the will of the woman; and the
first man that thus repudiated his Wife, was Spurius Carvilius, because she was
barren, (...) The second manner was called Divorce, and this was done with the
consent of both, and to (...) of them, it was permitted to require it; the
party suing for it, used these words. Res tuas tibe babeto, vel Res (...) tibi
agito -- The third was termed Direption, and this was done according to the
Princes will, 1 part Tr. of times. Rationibali part honorum, a writ for the
Widow (or children) claiming the thirds. Reasonable aid, was a duty claimed by
the Lord to marry his Daughter, or Knight his eldest Son. Remembrance, a
Preception whereby the Ideas of things before perceived, and impressed upon the
Mind by Sensation, or other Preception, are again offered and represented to
the Soul, by the Mediation of Animal Spirits in the common Sensory; either by
their former Footsteps and Images Impressed upon the Brain, or by some Words or
other Signs which awakened and stirred them up. Or Reminiscence, is an
Arbitrary drawing out of things, which were before impre^de upon the Brain, for
its own use. Dr. Blancart. Romance, ( Span.) a feigned Hulory or Narration
either in Verse or Prose in the Vulgar Language. Retromingents, (from retro and
mingo) is used by Dr. Brown, for such Animals as Urine or piss backward; such
are all female Quadrupedes. Revels (form the Fr. R^veiller, i. to awake from
sleep) are sports of Dancing, Making, Comedies and such like, still used in the
Inns of Cour^, and Houses of some great Pesonages; and are so called, because
they are performed by night; there is also an officer, called Toe Master of the
Revels, who has the ordering and command of these pastimes. Roundelay, a
Shepherds dance; sometimes used for a Son. Rhomb ( rhombus) a Spinning wheel,
Reel, or whirl. Rivals ( rivales) they that haunt, or dwell by, have inter^st
or fetch water from the same River or Brook; but it is most commonly use;
^^taphorically for those that love and woo the same woman; Corivals. Runci^a,
the Goddess of Weeding.
S.
Sabina, I. Religious or C^ast, from that (...) ^ings. Sarchia, I. Holy* Pure.
Sara^, my Lady or Dame. S^^^^, I. ^ Lady or Princess, because of the Promise.
Scho^^^ica, from (...) I. o^ium, Lei^ur^. Sebaste, I. Majestical or Honorable.
Shel^mith (...) L^v. 24.11. i. peacea^^^. Sybil, or Sibule, suase (...), i. the
Counsel of God. Sisley, see Cicely. Sophia, (...), i. Wisdom. Sophronia, (...)
i. modesty. Susan, (...) Sho^^^, Heb. a Rose or Lilly. Sabinia Tranquili^^, she
was Married to the Emperor Gordanus the third, a Lady of great Magnanimity and
Virtue Salmacis, a Nymph, who falling in Love with Hermophroditus, Son of
Mercury, begot him on Venus, grew so Impatient, that leaping into a Fountain
where he was bathing, she endeavored to oblige him to deslower her; but not
being able to gain him in that piece of Service, she prayed the Gods, while she
twined (...) him, that they might become one body, which was granted her, and
so (...) became the first that bore (...) of either Sex (...) (...), Sister of
(...) the (...) King of the (...) she (...) up Herod to put the (...) Ma^^^nne
to (...) by open be^ (...) or pretense she (...) him; and (...) the Death of
Alexander and Ari^, the Queens two Sons by (...) as also of two of her own
Husbands, Joseph and Costborus, and afterward dyed miserably her self. Salome,
Mother of S^. I^^^^ and S^. John the Apostle (...) Virtous and Pious woman, who
mainly propagated the Gospel by her exemplary Life. Salus, a Roman Goddess, she
had her Temple on the Mount Quirinal, which was much beaurified and adorned by
Augustus. Sappho, styled for her curious Verse, the tenth Muse, but her wanton
way of Writing hindered much of the Merit of them. Or her see more. Sarah, the
Wife of Abraham the Patriach, and Daughter of Haram, and obedient, Virtuous and
beautiful Woman; she was the Mother of Isaac. She dyed Anno Mundi 2175, aged
137 years, and was buried in a Cave near Hebron. Sachaca, a Babylonish Goddess.
held by the manner of her Worship to be the same with Ops or Terra of the
Romans; her Ceremonies were continued five Days in a year successively, in
which time the servants ruled, and the Masters obeyed. Scylla, Daughter of
Nisus the Magerensine King, she betrayed him and the City to Minos King of
Crect, with whom she fell in Love at the Siege, by cutting off, and delivering
him her Fathers Lock of Purple Hair. Segetia, by some called Segestia, a Roman,
Prayed to by them to take care of their Corn. Seia, another Goddess worshipped
by them, to whom they instrusted the care of the seed new sown; she had a
statue to her, and was Invoked Fertelize the Earth in time of scarcity. Semele,
Daughter to Cadmus the Thebian King, with whom Jupiter had secret Meetings; yet
Jum^ distrusting the matter, came to her in the shape of an old Beldam, and
incited her to persuade him to lie with her in the same Glory which he accosted
the Goddesses in the ski^s; Jupiter, tho loath, granted her at the next
meeting, but proved too hot for her, she being burnt to Ashes by his Lightning,
yet being with Child with Bacchus, he took the Embrio out of her womb, and
opening his Thigh, sewed it up there till the full time of his Birth was come.
Semizamis, Queen of Assyria. Of her see more. Serana, Empress to Di^clesian,
and Daughter of Theodosius the gr^a^, she moderated much of the Persecution
against the Christians, and ^^d the Church many singular favors in those
bloody times. Sforce ( Katharine) Married to Jeronimo (...) Prince of Flori,
when Franci^cus Vrsus headed the Rebels Killed her Husband, and (...) her and
her Children in Prison; she persuaded them to let her speak to the Governor of
the Castle, that still held out, for her to Surrender, leaving her Children as
a Pledge; but being got into the strong place, she sent to command the Rebels to
lay down their Arms, and return to ^ their Obedience; which so d^^red them,
that they for^^ok their Leader, and by Anxiliaty Aids recovered the whole
Country, over which she ruled many years prudently and justly. Sibylla, Wife
to Guy of Luzignan, and sister to Sald^^^, the Fourth King of Jern^^^^. She,
after the Death of her Brother, and her Son, whom his Uncle appointed to
succeed him, caused her Husband Guy, to be Crowned, set^^g the Crown upon his
head with her own hands, saying, (...) he being her true Husband, he could not
make choice of any ^^^r to be King. But this soon (...) caused great
disturbances, and much weakened the Kingdom. Sibylls. They were ^oelve, and
accounted Pro^^^sles, fore^ellin^ many ^^derful things. Of these ^ more in this
Work. Sigbritta, a mean ^oman, a Native of II land, ^s so passionately beloved
by ^^itierne, King of De^mu^. ^igh he was at the same time ^^^y'd, tha^ he gave
her an ^^mited power, and all (...) and Great Offices were ^posed of by her; so
that ^ding her Ascendan: over that ^y Prince, who had raised ^ from a Beggar,
so near a ^^^e, she grew so proud and ^ogant, that the Queen and ^bles could no
longer endure but deposing the King, and ^cing his Uncle in his stead, she fled
to Holland, and there in a little time became as poor and miserable as ever.
Sigea ( Lovise,) Daughter to Diego Sigea, a very learned Lady; ^he understood
Arabic Greek Latin, Hebrew and the Syrick: she was skilled in Philosophy, and
the liberal Sciences, tho she died very young, and was lamented of diverse
learned men. Sirens, or Sirenes, Sea Monster, that by their melodious No ^^,
draw men to leave their ship^, and by leaping into the Sea, b^ing drowned, they
devour them. Sisigambis, Wife to D^^^^, King of Persia, who being taken
pr^^oner by Alexander the Great, at the Battle of Arbella, was courteously
entertained by him; and although she was exceeding beautiful, he preserved her
Chastity; and she dying for the Grief of ^o great a loss, he gave her
honorable burial. S^^gambis, Mother ^o D^^i^s, a woman of great Cour^ge, who
bore all her afflictions with patience, and despised the Frowns of Fortune.
Sophia, Emperess to Jus^trnian the second; she held a great sway in the Empire;
and after her husband's death, advanced Tiberius to the Throne, in hopes of
marrying him; but finding her self defeated, she, in Favor of Justinian, the
Nephew of Justine, conspired against him. Sopho^isba, of Cremona, a Lady very
Famous for her skill in painting. Sophronia, a Roman Lady, who being ravished
by the Tyrant Maxentius, begged leave of her husband that she might kill her
self; which accordingly she did, and is called the Christian Lucretia. Spaco,
Wife to Mithridates, Herdsman to Astyages, King of the Medes; she was Nurse to
Cyrus, the Great King of Persia and Hedia. Statira, the beautiful Daughter of
Darius Codmanus; she was taken Prisoner at the battle of Issus, by Alexander
the Great, and at his return from the Conquest of a great part of India, he
married her, though when she was offered as a Pledge of Peace by her Father, he
refused it, and at the Wedding give away 9000 Golden Cups to so many persons
that attended the Feast. After his Death she was murdered by Roxana, his first
Wife, being then great with child by Alexander. Stesiclea, a Lady of Athens,
Exceeding beautiful, beloved by Themistocles and Aristides, which Rivalship
caused a great Division between them, upon which much mischief ensued in the
state. Stratonice, Concubine to Mithridates, King of Pontus, a Lady of great
Courage and Beauty, yet contributed to his misfortunes, by siding with the
Romans, upon a disgust she took for her husbands checking her Ambition; but
afterward she greatly lamented the Ruin of her house. Sulpicia, a Roman Lady,
living in the Reign of Domitian; she composed diverse books, one in Verse of her
own Amors, and boasted she was the first that incited the Noble Women of Rome
to aspire to the Wit and Learning of the Grecian Ladies. Sulpitia, daughter to
Paterculus, a chaste and virtuous Lady, which made her only, among all others,
be thought sit to dedicate the Statue of Venus at its setting up in Rome.
Sylvia, daughter of Numitor, an Albanian King, otherways called Rhea; she was
Mother to Romulus and Rhemus, Founders of Rome, and held to conceive them by
others. Sylvia ( Botrix) she founded the Order of the Conception, and retired
with Twelve Virgins to an house given her by Q. Isabella, of Castile and led a
chaste Life all her days. Syrinx, an Arcadian Nymph, beloved by Pan, the God of
Rusticks, but flying from him to the River Lad^^ she prayed to be turned into
Reed, that she might escap^ his Lust; which being (...) he made a Pipe of it to
mak^ the Shepherds merry. Susannah, a chaste Hebrew Lady who was wrongfully
accused of Incourine. ^y by the Elder, and proved In^^cent by Daniel, to the
shame and confusion of her Accuiers. Sable, ( Fr.) Black color in Blazon. It
is also a Rich Fur a beast, so called, ^^e, and near as big as a Pole^^, of
color between black ^d crown, and breeds in (...), but most in Tartana.
Strowling Morts. Strowling Morts are such as ^^tend to be Widows, traveling
about from Country to Country, making Laces upon lives, as Beggar Tape, or the
(...); They are subtle Queans, (...) hearted, light fingered impocritical and
dissembling, and very dangerous to meet, if any Ruffer or Rogue be in their
company. Shop Lift. She is most commonly well clad, and (...) that wants more
of Grace ^woed^ Wit; she has several large ^^^kets about her, but that which
stands her principally instead, is her Gown or Pet^^^, so tuckt up before, that
will contain any thing with^^ falling out. Thus prepa^^, she will boldly go
into a (...) shop, and there pre^^ to lay out a great deal of (...); whereas
her whole (...) is to convey into her lap (...) Piece of Silk or Satin, which
will lie in a little com^^ And that she may the better facilitate her purpose,
she will be very troublosome to (...) Shopkeeper, by causing him to show her
much variety of Commodity, to the intent that what she has stolen may not be
easily mist; And having sped in one Shop, she will attempt other Shops of a
different Profession; She has variety of Customers for these stolen
Commodities; As Tailors, Piece-Brokers, etc. Where she makes up her Merchadise.
She Orators, that have pleaded their own Causes, or others. -- Strange and
admirable is the Efficacy and Force of Eloquence. Amesia, a modest Roman Lady,
who being of a great Crime accused, and ready to incur the sentence of the
Praecor, she in a great confluence slept up among the people, and without any
Advocate, pleaded her own Cause so effectually and strongly, that by the
public Suffrage she was freed and acquitted from all Aspersions whatsoever,
which she did with such a manly, yet modest constancy, that from that time
forward she was called Androgine. Equal to her was Hortensia, the Daughter of
Q. Hortensius. She, when the Roman Matrons had a grievous Fine put upon them by
the Tribunes; and when all the Tribunes, Lawyers and Orators were afraid to
take upon them the Patronage of their Cause; this discreet Lady in Person,
pleaded before the Triumvirate, in the behalf o^ the Women; which she did
boldly and happily; For, as one hereditary to her Fathers Eloquence, she
prevailed so far, that the gre^^st part of the mulctimpoled (...) them was
instantly remined. Differing from their modesties, was tha^ (...) A^^^^, the
Wife of Lycinius Eru^^^, a Woman plompt and ap^ for all contention and discord*
and in all Troubles and Controversies still pleaded her own Cases before the
(...). Nor that she wanted the help of an Advocate, but rather to express her
own impudence; whose common railing and (...) before the (...), grew to that
scandal, that it almost stre^cht to the injury of the whole Sex; insomuch, that
if any women were (...) taxed with boldness or irregularity, she (in the way of
a Proverb) was branded with the Name of Affrania. My (...) leaves her with this
Character, That it is much better to (...) when such a (...) than (...) to be
(...) when, or of whom she was (...). Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 3. -- (...)
Orators I come to Sophists, and from Declamer, to Disputants. It is reported of
C^cilia, the chaste Roman Virgin (being married against her Will, to a Noble
Gentleman calted Valerianus) when they were left together in the Bride-chamber,
she with her strong Reasons and prompt Arguments, discoursed and disputed with
him in the Patronage and Defense of her Virginity; proving unto him from the
Scriptures, how justly vowed Chastity is more acceptable in the Eyes of the
Great maker, than marriage insomuch, that notwithstanding his (...) of (...)
mee^ing with a Tempting, Provoking Beauty, the Convenience of Opportunity, Time
and Place, (with the lawfulness of the Act Establish^ by the Ceremonies of the
Church) yet he (at her interc^ssion) not only (...) from that time to offer her
any Force or Violence, but ever after, betwixt themselves vowing lasting
Virginity. Sisters Love to a Brother. -- Ituphens being to suffer Death by
Order (...) Darius, his Wife cast her (...) grovelling before the (...) (...),
with such pitiful (...) (...) ions and Clamours that they came even to the Ears
of Darius and much penetrated him being uttered with such (...) (...) and
moving Accen^^, (...) ble to mollify the Flint, (...) (...) marble Impressed
there sore with her pitious lamentations, the Kings sent unto (...) That her
Tears and (...) had so far prevailed with (...) that from the condemned Society
they had ransomed (...) and one only, to continue (...) memory of their Name
Family; choose among (...) all, whose life she most (...) ed, and whole safety
(...) greatest affection desired; furhter than this to grant (...) his sentence
was (...) None that heard this small (yet unexpected) Favor from the King, but
presently imagined she would either redeem her husband, or at least one of her
sons, two of them, being all she had, then groaning under the burden of that
heavy sentence. But after some small meditation (beyond the Expectation of all
men) she demanded the life of her brother. The King somewhat amazed at her
choice, sent for her, and demanded the Reason, Why she had preferred ^he life
of a brother before the safety of such a Noble husband, or such hopeful
children? To whom hr answered Behold (O King) I am yet but ^words, and in my
(...) of years, and I may live to (...) another husband, and so (...)
frequently by him more children; but my father and mother are has aged, and
(...) in (...); and should I lose a brother, (...) for evermore be deprived of
that sacred Name. Sentiments of the (...) concerning women. -- I (...) the
(...) of the (...) Wives, who in con^^^ of Death, scorn to sur^^ their
Husband's Funeral (...), but with chaste Zeal, and (...) Courage, throw
^^^selves into the Flames, as they were then going to the (...) Bed. Certainly
they (...) aright, who reckon Day of our Death, the Day (...) Nativity, since
we are Born to Possession of mortal Life. For this (...) I honor the Memory of
Lud^vicus Cartesius, the Pad^^ Lawyer, who in his Last Will and Testament
ordered, that no sad Fun^eal Rites should be observed for him, but that His
Corbs should be attended with Music and Joy to the Grave, and as if it were
the Day o^ ^poufals, he commanded that Twelve Suits of Gay Apparel should be
provided instead of ^^^ning for an equal number of Virgins, who should usher
his Body to the Church. -- It will not, I hope be an unpardonable Transiation,
if I statrt back from the melancholy Horrors of Death, to the innocent
Comforts of Humane Life, and from the Immortal Nuptials of th^s Italian, pass
to the Mortal Emblem, the Rites of Matrimony, the Happiness of Female Society,
and our Obligations to Women. It Is an uncourtly Virtue, which admits of no
Proselytes but Men devoted to Coelibacy, and he is a Reproach to his Parents,
who thuns the Entertainments of Hymen, the blissful Amors of the Fair Sex,
without which he himself had not gained so much as the Post of a Cipher, in the
Numeration of Mankind, though he now makes a Figure too much in Natures
Arithmetic, since he would put a stop to the Rule of Multiplication. He is
worse than N^^ma Pompilius, who appointed but a set number of Virgins, and
those were free to Marry, after they had guarded the Sacred Fires, the Torm of
four years: Whereas if his morose Example were followed, all Women should turn
Vestals against their wills, and be consecrated to a peevish Virginity during
their Lives. I wonder at the unnatural Fancy of such as could wish we might
procreate like Trees, as if they were Ashm'd of the Act, without which they had
never been capable of such an extravagant Thought, Certainly he that Created
us, and has riveted the Love of Women in the very Center of our Natures, never
gave us those passionate Desires to be our incureable Torment, but only as
Spurs to our Wit and Virtue, that by the Dex^erity of the one and he Intergrity
of the other, we might merit and Gain the Darling Object which should
consummate our Earthly Happiness. -- I do not patronize the smoke of those
Dunghil-Passions, who only court the Possession: of an Heiress and fall in Love
with her money. This is to make a Market (...), and prostitute the Noblest
Affection of our Souls to the fordid Ends of Avarice. Neither do I commend the
softer Aims of those, who are wedded only to the Charming Lineaments of a
Beautiful Face, a clear Skin, or a well shaped Body. (...) only the Virtue,
Discretion, and good Humor of a Woman could ever captivate me -- I hate the
Cynical Flout of those who can afford Women no better Title than Necessary
Evils, and the lewd Poetical License of Him who made this Anagram, Vxor and
Orcus -- idem. That Ontour whispered the Doctrine of Devils, who said, Were it
not for the Company of Women. Angels would come down and dwell among us. I
rather think, were it not for such ill natured Fellows as he, Women themselves
would pro^^^^ Angels. -- It Is an ugratefull Return, thus to abuse (...) Gentle
Sex, who are the (...) in which all the Race of (...) are cast: As if they
deserved no better Treatment at (...) Hands, than we usually (...) to saffron
Bags and (...) Bottles, which are thro^ into a Corner, when te (...) and Spice
are taken (...) them. The Pagan Poet (...) little better than a Murdere^ who
allowed but two (...) Hours to a Woman. (...) (...) Vnam in Thalams, alteram
Tumulo.

For my Part, I should steem the World but a (...) were it not for the Society
the Fair Sex; and the (...) Polished Part of (...) would appear but Hermi^^
masquerade, or a kind of (...) lized Satyrs, so imperfect unaccomplish'd is our
(...) without the Reunion of (...) lost Rib, that Substantial Integral Part of
our selves. Those who are thus disjoynted from Women seem to inherit Adam's
Dreams, out of which nothing can awake them, but the embraces of their own
living Image, the Fair Traduct of the first Mepamorphosis in the World, the
Bone converted into Flesh. They are always in Slumbers and Trances, ever
separated from themselves in a wild pursuit of an intolerable Loss, nor can any
thing fix their Valuable D^^^res, but the powerful magnetism of some Charming
Daughter of Eve. These are the Centers of all our Desires and Wishes, the true
Pandoras that alone can satisfy our longing Appetites, and fill us with Gifts
and Blessings, in them we live before we breath, and when we have (...) the
Vital Air, it is but to die an amorous Death, that we may live more pleasantly in
them again. They are the Guardians of our Infancy, the Life and Soul of our
Youth, the companions of our Riper Years and the Cherishers of our Old Age.
From the Cradle to the ^omb, we are wrapped in a Circle of obligations to them
for their Love and good Offices. And he is a monster in Nature who returns them
not the Caresses of an Innocent Affection, the Spotless (...) of Virtue and
Gratitude Live is the Soul of the World, the Vital Prop of the Elements, to the
Cement of Humane Society, the strongest Fence of Nature. Earth would be a Hell
without it, neither can there be any Heaven where this is absent. -- Yet I am
no Advocate for those general Lovers, who not content to let this active
Passion run within the lawful Channel of chaste marriage, swell it up with
irregular Tides, and wanton Floods of Lust, till it wash away the Banks of
(...) and morality, find out new Passages and Rivulers, encroaching on other
men's Possessions, or at least dilating on the general waste of the weaker Sex,
who ought to be as Gardens enclosed, ortholy Ground, not to be profaned by the
Access of every bold Instruder. I approve not the Incestuous mixtures of the
Chinese, where the Brother marries the Sister, or next akin; Nor the sensual
Latitude of the Mahometans, who allow every man four Wives, and as many
Concubinesas he can maintain. But above all, I detest the wild and brutal
Liberty of that Philosopher, who in his Idea of Humane Happiness, conceived a
promiscuous Copulation ad Libitum to be a necessary Ingredient of our bliss. --
On the Other side, my Regards to that sex are not circumscribed within such
narrow Limits, as to exclude any from our Conversation and Friendship, that by
any warrantable Title can lav a Just Claim to it; I would have out Commerce
with Females as General as is their Number that deserve it, whose Knowledge and
Virtue will be a sufficient security from criminal Familiarities, and from the
scandals of the World. There are among that sex, as among men, Good and bad,
Virtuous and Vicious, and a Prudent man will so level his Choice, as not to
stain his Reputation, or hazard his Integrity. It Is no small Point of
Discretion, I own, to regulate our Friendship with Women, and to walk evenly on
the borders and very Ridge of a Passion, whose next step is a Precip^ce of
Flames not kindled from the Altar of Virtue. However, it is not impostible to
conserve Innocence, on the Frontiers of Vice. There is no Difference of sex
among Souls, and a (...) line Spirit may inhabit Woman's Body. It is
dising^naous to rob Virtue of the advantages it receives from Beauty, which
makes it appear like Diamonds enchac'd in Gold, and gives it a greater Luster.
Reason it self will appear more Eloquent in the mouth of a fair maid, than in
that of the most Florid Orator: And there are no Figures in all the (...) of
Rh^thorick so moving and forcible as the peculiar Graces of that sex. I am of
Opinion that Men can boast of no Endowments of the Mind, which Women possess
not in as great, if not a greater Eminency. There have been Muses as well as
Amazons, and no Age or Nation but has produced some Females Renowned for their
Wisdom or Virtue. Which makes me conclude, that the Conversation of Women is no
less useful than pleasant, and that the Dangers which attend their Friendships
and Commerce, are recompensed by vast Advantages. -- But whatever may be
adduced against the Friendships we contract with Women, there is not in all the
Magazine of Detraction any Weapon of Proof against the mutual Intimacies of our
own Sex, the generous Endearments of Souls truly Masculine and Virtuous,
united by Sympathies and Magnets whose Root is in Heaven.a No Panegy ricks can
reach the Worth of these Divine Engagements, since they admit not of any
Mediocrity, but derive their Value only from their Excess. I have been always
flow and cautoius in contracting Amities, lest (...) should run the Risque of
his mistake, who while he thought he had an Angel by the Hand, held the Devil
by the Foot: But where I have once pitched my Affection, I love without Reserve
or Rule. I never entertain without suspicio^^ the warm Professions of Love,
which some Men are apt (...) make at first sight. Such Mushroom-Friendships
have no deep Root, and therefore most commonly wither (...) soon as they are
formed. Yet I deny not, but that there are some secret marks and Signatures
which Souls ordained for Love and Friendship can read in each other at a Glance
by which that Noble Passion is excited, that afterward displays it self in
more apparent Characters. This is the suent Language of Platonic Love, wherein
the Eye supplies the Office of the Tongue; it is the Rhetoric of Amorous
Spirits wherein they make their Court without a Word. There are some lasting
Friendships which owe their Birth to such an Interview, but their Growth and
Fastness proceeds from other Circumstances, being cherished by frequent
Conversation, repeated good Offices, and an inviolate Fidelity, which are the
only proper and substantial Aliment of Love. It Is impossible to fix a durable
Friendship, wherever we place a Transient Inclination, because of the
insuperable Necessities which divide particular Men from each Others Commerce
or Knowledge, after they have began to Love. In the O^b of this Life Men are
like the Pl^nets, which now and then cast friendly Aspects on each other en
Passant: But following the Motions of the Greater Sphere of Providence, they
are again separated, their Influences dissolved and new Amors commenced. But I
would have my Friendship resemble the Fixed Stars and Constellations, who in
the Eternal Revolution never part Company or Interest -- I have ever looked on
those men to be but one step differnc'd from Beasts, whose Love is confined
only to their own Families or Kindred. Such a narrow affection deserves not to
be ranked in the Praedicament of Humanity. My Love is communicative, it makes a
large Progress, and extends it self to strangers, it takes in Men of different
Humors and Complexions, Customs and Languages, it refuses none that have the
Face of Men, but with wide opened Arms embraces all that bear the stamp of
Humane Nature. And I have this peculiar in my Temper, that I find not the least
Reluctance in loving and ^oing Good to my Enemies. That which costs others so
much Labor and Toil ^o persuade themselves to, is to me as familiar and easy,
as to laugh at a ridiculous Object, and I esteem it not so properly a Virtue in
my self, as a Gift of Nature, the Effect of my Constitution.

Sculiery-Maids in (...). -- There (...) Rooms that you must keep sweet and
clean, as the Kitchen, Pantry, Washhouse, etc. -- That you wash and scowre all
the Plates and Dishes which are used in the Kitchen, also Kettles, Pots, Pans,
Chamber-pots, with all other Iron, Brass, and Pew^er materials that belong to
the Chambers or Kitchen; And lastly, you must wash your own Linen. Thus
Ladies, I have endeavored to show your Servants their duties in their
respective places. Six Nights Rambles of a Young Gentleman through the City,
for the detection of lewd women, as I find them inserted in the Athenian Mer^^^
Vol. 3. Numb. 3. in the man (...) following, viz. -- The first ^^ght I
traversed the Pall mall, and read the Face of every unmasked Lady I met; and if
masked, I started some question that still gave me an ^^dication of their
Temper, endeavoring to light upon as refined yet modest piece of Wickedness,
at I could; At last, having made (as I thought) the best of the market, away we
walked to drink upon the Bargain. So after several Glasses, and some little
insignificant prittle prattle, I fixed my Eyes upon her, and said, -- Madam,
methinks I read some Lines and Characters of Goodness in your Face, which are
not yet absolutely defaced. Your Education, I Am confident, has not been
unhappy. Pray be Free, and tell me, are you yet Proof agaisnt the Lashes of
your Conference? Sir, (said she) your (...) I know not, but I dare not believe
it to be ill, you having made such an inqu^^itive Prologue. No indeed (replied
I) my request proceeds purely from a Generous Pity at your misfortunes, which
are (...) ciently slavish. Alas, Sir! (said she, and sighed) it is a slavish
Riddle, to choose what I hate. I have repeated these Actions, but never without
regret and self-abhorrency for such a Folly. -- This I had peculiar to my self,
that I never was mercenary, thinking it a greater baseness to sell my Heaven
than give it: I was first betrayed by keeping company with a Lady that was not
over modest; but not thinking to engage myself till one of her Ga^lants
weakened my Resolves, and at last -- I know not what; but I was ruined for all
my Resolves are now too weak to resist, never being able to hold out a quarter
of a year together; but secure my Honor for this once by secrecy, and not
watching me to my Lodgings; and I hope the Novelty of this enterprise may have
New Effects upon me, and keep me from doing such actions as must be repented
of, or I am undone. -- The next attack was a (...) Madam, with a melancholy air
in her Face, which put me upon acting as follows: (...) having drank a Glass or
two, she began to draw a little too near me; whereupon I rose up, and with as
severe a Look as I could affect, I said, Madam, keep off; You think I Am (...)
and blood; and I doubt not but that I imitate it near enough to deceive your
Eyes: assure yourself I am not what I appear: Reclaim your Whoredom, or you are
lost: You have but a little Time left, make good use of it: If you are
otherwise solved, view these Features, and expect me to be a Witness against
you at the Day of Judgment. Here she waxed pale, and swooned away; and as soon
as she came to her self again, I left her: and enquiring the next Day about
her, I heard she took me for a Spirit, and was resolved to follow the advice of
her strange monitor. -- The third was a Sa^^^ bird, well skilled in Confidence,
and the depth of Pockets; but so simple and foolish in all her answers, that I
think nothing can reclaim her but afflictions. -- The next Enterprise was an
Old Friend, a Companion of mine, whom I overtook, caressing a Lady near the
May- Pole in the Strand; but being not certain, I kept behind them till they
came to S -- lane, where seeing them turn down, I made an halt, and they came
up again presently into the Strand; so resolving to be satisfied, I made up to
them, and by asking What is it a Clock, discovered the Truth of the matter: The
Lady finding my acquaintance with my Friend, scowr'd off; and he seeing himself
discovered, begged my silence, and promised a Reformation, which I hope he has
kept to ever since, having given me such satisfaction as argues his (...) rity
in this affair. -- The fifth Engagement occasioned the Confession. That she had
an easy tender Education, but her brother grew Extravagant, and instead of
saying hers and her siders Portions, he spent all, and she having no way left
to get her bread, and not being able to work, took up this Course, which (said
she) at first was very afflicting and uneasy to my Conscience; but has worn
off by degrees; tho after all, I could wish I had begged, rather than lived
thus dissatisfied; for I have lost my Credit, am ashm'd of my Friends, afraid
of my Enemies; and which is yet worse, see no probability of living under
better circumstances all my Life, and must die without hopes of mending it in
the other World. -- The sixth and last Enterprise was so like the story of
Paphnutius's converting of an Harlot, that I shall tell that only perhaps not
yet known to every body: He put on the habit of Soldier, and went to an
infamous house; and choosing his Woman, he desired to go with her into a
private Room, where none might see him; she brought him into a Chamber, which
he objects against, as not private enough; she brings him into the most private
Room in the House: he looks about every way, asks if they were secure there?
And if none saw 'em? She answered, None but God (...) the Devil. And believe
thou, says he, that there is a God? She answered. (...) And believe thou
that he is every where present, and sees all things? She (...), she did
believe it. and shall we (says he) sin so shamefully under the Eye of the most
Just Judge that sees all things? Hereupon she had nothing to say for her self,
but fenched a deep Sigh, being ashamed of her ^icked L^^e, lived afterward on
Bread and Water, (...) to take the Name of God unto her mouth, but frequently
repeated these words. ^^ u who have made me, have m^^^ on me, and so she
continued three years and dyed. To this conviction our present Instance agrees,
and we are not without hopes of like effects in the rest. Ladies if the Time
and moneys spent in these six Nights Rambles, may reclaim or hinder the
Debauchery of one single Person, I shall think it all worth my labor of
inserting here. Sicilian Matron. That Sicilian matron closed her content with
an incomparable contempt of the world; who publicly protested, That she could
Eye nothing in this Theater of Earth, that might seem worthy to entertain so
divine a Guest as her soul. And as of a finite to an infinite, there was no
proportion, so it was impossible that the Circumference of Earth should confine
that infinite beauty of the soul to her dimensions. -- That modern mirror of
True Nobility express her self a brave Soveraigness over her affections, who
held it the greatest derogation to Feminine honor, to discover the least
distemper in subjects of anger. When I take serious survey, said she, of ^^ine
own infirmity; and re-colle^^ daily what cause I give my m^^^r to be angry with
me: I am half ashamed to express my passion of anger to any. ^^n be (...) me
who made me; and (...) I ^r^ear ^^em who (...) (...) in their creation with me?
Spicery, etc. It is a very commend^ quality in Gentlewomen, (...) her young or
ancient, to (...) the sick; which that they (...) perform with as much
Reputation as Charity, they should have some knowledge in Physic, and in the
several Operations of Herbs and Spices. -- And in the first place, because the
Knowledge of the subdry sorts of Spices is very requisite, we will begin with
them. -- Pepper is a very hot and dry Spice, even to the fourth degree. Black
Pepper is with us most in use; it heateth much, it cutteth tough and gross
Phlegm, it helps Concoction, and is good against Cruditys. Dry Ginger is very
hot, and though not so much in use to season either fish or flesh, as Pepper,
it is good to help Digestion, and to open Obstructions, to discuss wind, and to
expel it out of the body. Green Ginger preserved in (...) Indies, is not hot,
and (...) good to eat fasting for a waterish, or a windy stomach. Cloves is a
Spice brought from the East Indies; they comfort the head, h^r^ and stomach,
they help the Eyesight and Concoction, and strenghten Nature. -- Nutmeg is the
Fruit of a Tree growing in the East Indies, and it is covered with that Spice
which we call Mace. Nutmeg is accounted hot and dry in the second degree, and
is good for the same Causes for which the Cloves are commended. -- mace
covers the Nutmeg, as already is expressed; it does partake of the same
Nature with it, it does strenghten the animal parts, and it is good against
Fluxes, and spitting of blood. -- Cinnamon is the inward Rind, or Bark of a
Tree growing in the East Indies. This Spice, in regard of its fragrant smell,
may justly challenge the first place of Excellency; (...) helps Concoction,
and expels Urine. Saffron, though growing at home, is nothing inferior to
any of the former; it reviveth the vital spirits, it is very good against the
Jaundies; ^^ is also good to further the monthly Courses, and to facilitate
birth. We shall follow the trace of good Husbandry, and from Saffron we shall
descend to Honey. It is far better boiled than row, and is more nourishing and
easier of Digestion. -- The best Honey, is very sweet, pleasant of smell, of a
clear and yellowish color. Honey is good in diverse pectoral Infirmities, the
Cough, shortness of breath, the Plurisy, etc. -- In the next we shall give you
an account of Sugar, which being more pleasant to the palate, is become in
these latter Ages of a far higher Esteem, and every where in frequent use, as
well in sickness as in health. Sugar is neither so hot nor so dry as Honey. The
coursest being the brownest, is the most cleansing, and approaches nearest to
the nature of Honey. Sugar is good for Abstersions in Diseases of the Breasts
and Lungs. That which we call Sugar Candy being well refined by boiling, is for
this purpose in the greatest request. There is one thing besides, of which you
are to take an especial notice, which is, that a great store of our finest
sugar, and which is most called for, is Refined and whitened by the means of
the Lee of Lime, which how prejudicial it is to our health, I leave to every
one to judge. -- I should here give you an account of the skill in several
Diseases, and of what Medicines are most effectual for their recovery, in which
our accomplished Ladys ought to be well instructed; but if I should fall upon
all particulars, I should make this (...) to swell into a Folio. I shall only
acquaint you, that we have under our own Hedges, many excellent Aromatical
Plants, such as Rosemary, Lavender, Time, Savory, Sage, Mints, Pennyroyal,
Bazil, Sweet Certuil, Avens, Angelica, and many others, insomuch that some
persons do wonder, that being supplied at home with such excellent Simples, we
should seek so eagerly for our landish Spices. Single Life. There are many (no
doubt) of great Eminence, and those of Esteem among all Ranks of Men, who make
a virtuous Choice of a single Life: Neither will I intrude upon those of the
sacred Function, so as to restrain them within the compass of this Discourse:
For although I cannot but dissent from the Church of Rome, in her indispensable
injunctions of Coelibacy to her Clergy, which not seldom becomes a Snare to
such as would live continently in a matrimonial state: so on the other hand, I
must needs commend the pious Practice of some men in our Church, who espouse a
single Life, to avoid the Encumbrances of the World, the more immediately to
apply themselves to a better discharging the Duties of their Profession. -- Yet
I would have all that are for a single life to consider that marriage will
prevent Diseases, and improve Health: I need not spend time to prove this,
which our bills of mortality are too great an Instance of; They that please to
consider them, will see how like Pestilence that walks in darkness, that
Disease which we disguise under the name of Consumption, sweeps away Thousands,
and how our Votaries to Venus are macerated, that they walk the streets, must
needs observe. -- If we compare our English Bodies (which in former Ages were
inferior to few in Europe with the more Temperate Suede, and Germans, I mean,
not as to Bacchus) the difference will be too apparent, in relation to what
advantages a married in preference to a Single Life, produces. The First, like
the Sober Traveller, keeps a regular pace, and so spends the more time in his
Journey, and preserves his Health, the latter Rides Post, which brings him
sooner to his Journies end, and that with aching Bones. The Health and
Temperature of the Body, when under the Conduct of a straying Lover, is like to
an Estate in the hands of a Prodigal, open to the attempts of every Harpy, for
our extravagance is one day at the Court of Bacchus, and the next at that of
Venus, where he can be no Favorite, if he comes with any reserve; 2nd and as
his Converse meets with none to preserve him, so neither when he falls is there
any to pity him. But it is otherwise with the married man, whose house furnishes
him with safer Delights, and his Wife and Children are as well a Guard to him,
as he the instrument of their preservation. -- It Is easier to prevent than
retrieve a mischief; ans in transgressing with Women, if we believe the wisest
of men, he tells us, that none that go unto her return again: that is, few do,
if they have drank deep of those stolen Waters. The same author advises the
young man to rejoice in the Wise of his Youth. -- Such as do so, are armed
against the assaults of lewd Debauches: The worst of men revere Virtue in those
they love, though they run retrograde themselves. That which recommends a Miss
is odious in a Wife; and we surely find a man so bad as to distaste his Wife
for her Virtue. -- If that Old Fashion of Wives; were renewed, the modish man
of Love would be so singular, that he must, if but to suit the general Humor,
have a Wife, and then by consequence must at last, in outward comformity, be
demeanable to the Laws of God and man, and men our Coffee-Houses, and Pl^ys,
would not abound with Champions for all licentiousness; it is such as have no
property of their own, who cry up that which may destroy it in other men. --
There seems to be a spiritual as well as a natural blessing in marriage; for
though the Nature of man is to depraved, that in all is choice of Things in
this World, he makes Virtue the least Ingredient; so that in Honors, Riches,
Power, Friends, and all the rest of the World's Inventory, Virtue makes not
always a Figure; yet is the choice of a Wife, it is the prime motive. Is she
fair, rich, witty, and not virtuous? Neither the wife nor the rich man will
make her his Choice. And as marriage abates the irregular lives of men, so it
produces a sober, and well disposed Posterity: How often do we see mothers vie
with their Neighbors in the Infant Divinity of their children, in which they
have not only the Praise of men, but the Encouragement of a Sacred Promise,
viz. Teach thy Child when he is young, and he will not forget it when he is
old. The Testimony of that great King, which he gives of his mother's
Instruction, is very remarkable, which runs thus: The words of King Lemuel, the
Prophecy, that his mother taught him; What my Sin! and what, the son of my
Womb! and what, the son of my Vows! See a book called Marriage promoted.
Silence. The true Virtue of Silence cannot be too much commended. It is such a
Quality that I want words to express its worth. I cannot well tell which I
should most commend to Gentlewomen, either Speech or Silence, since the one of
them does too much, and the other too little; Speech enricheth, and corrupts,
but silence is poor, but honest. I am not so much against Discourse, as vain
Prattling, which consumes time, and profits no Body. Speech indeed is one of
the blessings of Nature, but to ride still on the top of it is too vehement. --
The first word in the school of Cleanthes, that great Philosopher, was silence;
and the first word of command amongst soldiers in the Field now adays, is
silence. A talkative man or Woman is like an unbraced Drum, which beats a wise
Man out of his wits. -- Many States have used to punish the laying open of
Secrets, with the loss of their Tounges, which was a very just Law, and a sure
one, for no example prevails with a born Ta^ler, but the forfeit of his Tatling
Organ. I wonder that the Turks do not generally deprive their slaves of their
Tounges, as of their stones; methinks they should be as jealous of their
secrets, as they are of their Lusts. Certainly all people that are subject to
this flux of words, are very dangerous. I never knew Tatling a safeguard, but
only by the Geese that preserved the Capitol. -- I shall conclude this head
with that of a famous Writer, There is a Time when nothing, there is a Time
when something, but there is no Time when all things are to be revealed. Secret
Lovers. Let us here inst^nce what R^^^ modesty has been shown by Women in the
secret Expression of their affection. How loath to be seen to love; and how
Faithful to those they did love: How shamed faced in their professing, and how
steadfast in their Expression. I prefer love before life, said that Noble Aure^^
to one of her maiden sisters; yet had I rather lose my life than discover my
love. The like said that sweet Sulpitia, I could find in my heart to dye for my
Love, so my Love knew not I dy'e for his Love. The like said that virtous
Valeria; I could with to dye. So my Clerentius knew not for whom I wished to
dye That brave Burgundian Lady expressed the like modesty: I will pass by him,
said she, and never Eye him: my Heart shall only speak to him; for my Tongue,
it shall rather lose it self than unloosen it self to him. -- A rare Expression
of Affection showed that young maid; who seeing her Lover deprived of all means
to enjoy her, by the averness of his Father; and understanding how he had
resolved, through discontent, to take his Fortune beyond the Seas, with a
Religious Vow, never to solicit any Woman's Love, for the space of five Years.
She, though till that time, she had ever born him respects with such discreet
Secrecy and Reservedness, as no Eve could ever discover her affection; intended
under a disguised habit, to accompany him in his journey. Cutting therefore her
hair, and taking upon her a Pages habit, she came aboard in the same Ship
wherein he was received; and so continued during all that Sea Voyage, by the
help of that disguise, and discoloring of her hair, to her Lover, altogether
unknown. And being now arrived at the Port at which they aimed, this disguised
Page beseech him, that he would be pleased to accept of his service;
pretending, that since his arrival, he had heard of the Death of his dearest
Friends and such as his livelihood relied on; so as he had no means to support
him, nor in his present distress to supply him, unless some charitable disposed
Gentleman, like himself, would be pleased to take compassion of him, and
entertain him. This exiled Lover commiserating his Case, took her into his
service; little imagining that his Page was his mistress. But no doubt, bore
his late entertained servant more respect for the resemblance he concieved
betwixt his Page and mistress. -- Thus lived they together for a long time:
during which space, she never discovered her self: holding it to be to no
purpose, seeing he had taken a solemn vow (as was formerly said) that he would
solicit no Woman's love for such a time: so as, rather than he should violate
his vow, (which by all likelihood he would have done, had he known who was his
Page) she chused to remain with him unknown, expressing all arguments of
diligence and careful observance that any master could possibly expect from his
servant. -- Hope, ^^ich light^eth every burden; and makes the most painful
service a delightful solace, sweetened the hours of her expectance: ever
thinking, how one day those five years would be expired, when she might more
freely discover her love, and he enjoy what he so much desired. But Fate, who
observes no order betwixt youth and age; nor reserves one compassionate tear
for divided Loves, prevented their hopes, and abridge their joys by her
premature death. For being taken with a Quartan Fever, she languished even unto
death: Yet before her end, she desired one thing of her master, in recompense
of all her faithful service: which was, that he would be pleased to close up
the eyes of his Page, and receive from him one dying kiss: and lastly to wear
for his sake one poor Ring, as a lasting memorial of his loyal love. All which
his sorrowful master truly performed: but perceiving by the Posy of the Ring
that his deceased Page was his mistress: and that he had bestowed that Ring on
her, at such time as he departed from her; it is not to be conceived, what
continued sorrow he expressed for her. -- A story of no less constant nor
passionate affection may be here related of that deeply inamoured Girl; who
though she preferred her Honor before the Embraces of any Lover: and made but
small semblance of any fondness, or too suspicious kindness to him, who had the
sole interest in her love. Yea, so far was her affection distanced from the
least suspicion, as her very nearest Friends could scarcely discover any such
m^^^er betwix^ them ye^ ^t such time as her unfortuna^^ Lover, being found a
notorious D^l^nquent in a Civil State, was to suffer; when, all the private
means by way of Friends that she could make^ prevailed n^thing for his
delivery: and she now made a sad ^^ectator of his Trage^y. After such time as
the Headsman had done his office, she leapt up upon the Scoffold, and in a
distracted manner, called all such people as were there present, to witness,
That he who had suffered could no way possi^ly be a De^inquent, and she
innocent, For this heart of mine (said she) was his; how could he then do any
thing whereof I was not guilty. -- Nor could this poor distempered Maid, by all
the advice, counsel, or persuasion that could be used to her, be drawn from the
Scaffold; ever and anon beckoning to the E^ecutioner to perform his office: for
otherwise he was an Enemy ^o the State, and the Emperors professed ^oe. Nor
could she be without much force haled from the Scaffold, till his corpse was
removed. -- But as Virtue receives her proper station in the Mean; so all
Extremes decline from that Mark. -- Those only deserve approvement, who can so
season their Affections with discretion, as neither too much coyness tax them
of coldness, nor too much easiness brand them of forwardness in the ordering of
their Affection. -- This closes fitly with those Posies of two cursory wits
writ in a window by way of answer one to another. She, she, for me; and none b^
she.
That Is neither for^ and nor t^^ free.
Which was answered in this manner, in a parallel way to the former.

That wench, I vow, shall be my joy,
That Is neither forward nor too coy.
But thus much may suffice for instances of this kind.

Seminaries. The first English one beyond the Sea^, was erected at Doway in
Flanders, a^no 1*6* by Dr. Allen, afterward Cardinal Allen, and R. Bri^^^^.
Anot^er was s^t up at Rhemes in Fra^^^, 1577. and another at Ro^^, 1573.
Sybils. Sybils were Twelve Prophetesses. The first was called sambreta or
Pers^^^, from the Name of Persia, where she was born. She prophesi'd Christ
coming, and being bo^^ of a Virgin, pronounced him the Savior of the Gentiles.
-- Sybil the second was of L^^^^^ and thence called Libica, ^^^ amongst other
Prophecies, ^^liver'd this, viz. That the ^^^ should come wherein men s^^^^^
see the King of all living thi^^^ upon the Earth, and Virgin Lady of the World,
should hold him in her Lap. -- Sybil the third of these. was of Themis,
surnamed Delphica, from Delphos, the place of her birth, where she prophesied,
That a Prophet should be born of a Virgin. -- Sybil the fourth was Cumean, born
at Cimeria, a City of Campania in Italy; amongst other things she prophesied,
That God should be born of a Virgin, and have Residence and Conversation among
sinners. -- Sybil the fifth was called Erythrea, being born at Babylon; she
prophesied much of the coming of Christ, and the Glory of the Christian
Religion, insomuch that diverse of the ancient Fathers of the Church have taken
great notice of her predictions, as St. Eusebius, St. Austin and others, and
that the first Letters of certain Prophetic Verses of hers (foretelling many
strange Events, as the world's being at last consumed with fire, the
Resurrection of the Just, etc.) make these words, viz. Jesus Christ, Son of
God, Savi^^r. And indeed, though she was long before the birth of Christ, yet
foretold a great deal of the Substance ofthe Christian Religion, and what
wonders would be wrought. -- Sybil the sixth was born in the Isle of Samos, and
from thence called Samia; she prophesying of our Savior, says, he being Rich
shall be born of a poor Virgin; the Creatures of the Earth shall adore him, and
praise him for ever. -- Sybil the seventh was called Cumana, because she lived
and prophesied in a Cave, which Cave is now to be seen near where ancient C^m^^
stood, once a Famous Town in Campania in Italy; and in it to this day are
strange Noises heard like the hissing of Serpents and Toads, etc. She
prophecv'd many things of the Roman Government, which flourished in her Time,
which Exactly came to pass in their Civil and Foreign Wars* as also of Christ,
saying, he should come from heaven, and remain here inpoverty; That he should
rule in silence, and be born of a Virgin. She is hell to write Nine books of
Prophecies, which were brought to Tarquinius Superbus; but he refusing to give
her her unreasonable demands for them, she burnt six before his Face, and yet
obliged him to give as much for the Three as she asked for all, and then
vanished: Which books were afterward held in wonderful Esteem, and highly
credited by the people. Amongst other things they contained a Prophecy of the
coming of Christ Kingdom, his Name, Birth and Death* but these three books were
afterward maliciously burnt by the Traitor Stilico, and most of the Phophecies
by that means lost. Those remaining being taken out of others works, who had
carefully quoted and inserted them before the books were so unhappily
destroyed. -- Sybil the Eight, called Hellespon^ica, born at Ma^mis^a, in the
Tro^an Territories; she Prophesied, that the Savior of the World should be of
the Tribe of Judah, born of one Mary, a Jew; and that she being a pute Virgin,
should bring forth the Son of God, and his Name should be called Jesus; and so
be both God and ^n* f^lfilling the Laws of the Jews, and should and his Law
thereinto and his Kingdom should remain for ever. -- Sybil the Ninth prophesied
at the Town of Ancire in Phrygia, and was named Phrygia. from the Country; she
foretold, That the highest should come from heaven, and should confirm the
Council in heaven; and a Virgin should be sh^^ed in the Valley of the D^s^rts.
-- Sybil the Tenth was called Albenea, and surnamed Tybertina, from her being
born on the banks of the River Tyber, about 19 miles from Rome; she prophesied,
That the Word Invisible should be born of a Virgin, to have Conversation among
sinners, and to be d^^^^ed of them: and, as St. Austin gives an accounts she
foretold all the manner of his Passion and Sufferings, and his rising again
from the Grave, at the End of three days; Giving a tolerable Relation likewise
of his Miracles, and many other things, that come Exactly to pass. -- Sybil the
Eleventh was called Epiro^ica. Many have held this to be the same with that of
Ph^ygia, because her Prophecies r^n to the very same purpose; Though Johannes
Tsetses c^^^s her Phaenni; she prophec^'d the birth of Christ, and that he
sold Reign in the souls of men, and his Kingdom and Government never to be at
an End; but that he should save us to another Life. -- Sybil the Twelfth was
born at Goloph^nia, a City of Jonia in Greece; she prophesied of many Judgments
to come, as Wars, ^^^nda^i^ns, Eartrhquakes, advising people to repent, and
turn from their Vices, lest God should destroy and overthrow them; she foretold
likewise, That the World should one day perish by fire, etc.. Their Prophecies
were written in Verse, and highly prized by the Ancients, who held them to be
inspired by a Divine Spirit; for by no other means they could have Knowledge of
such sacred Truths; being altogether unacquainted with the books of M^ses; and
the Devil, ha^^ he known them (as some doubt it) would not have revealed them,
because it was against the Interest of his Kingdom. Saluting, or kissing the
Lip, Cheek or Hand, has been a very ancient Custom in all Civilized Nations,
wherein is shown not only a profound respect, but degrees of Love and
Affection. We read of it as long as since Jacob and Rachel first met at the
Watering the Flocks. Some will have it that the Greeks brought it in Fashion,
only to discover their Wives by the Scent, whether they had been drinking Wine,
it being at that time prohibited them, because through great Excess many
Noblewomen and others, had died of Sur^cits an^ Fevers. The Romans were wont to
kiss their Kindred, when they we^com'd them to their Houses; and an Ordinance
was likewise made, that the Women should likewise Kiss their Kindred, without
being ceniur'd, but not with strangers; but now it is grown so universal, that
we shall leave it to the Ladys discretion to manage their Lips as they please.
Sulpitius Gallius unkindly divorced his Wife, because she went one day abroad
in her hair, without Head Clothes on, telling her, that the Law confined her to
have no other Judges of her beauty but his Eyes; For these, continued he, adorn
thy self; be thou only fair to these, and do thou believe ever the farther
sight of thee, where it was needless, must needs be suspicious and criminal.
S^mpranius Sophus Divorced his wife because she went to a play without his
leave; and now by the way, Ladies, what abundance of Divorces would our Age
require, should your husbands do so ill natured as these Austeer Romans, who
had the hard hearts to part with pretty Charming Creatures, for the small fault
of disobedience, yet have a care how you tempt them too far, some may be as
churlish and (...) bred as formerly. Sempeona and Sappho, both Learned and
ingenious Women, had such tickling Fancies, that turning Poetreiles, they stood
the Champions of Venus, in allowing the Fair Sex an extraordinary lavish
freedom; yet sm^ttied their own Memories with their wanton Verses and Writings
to the Worlds end. Semeramis, who who first assisted at the fo^nding of the
Walls of Babylon, was so thirsty of Soveraignity, that her Husband dying, she
Married her Son, and not being content, unless she might Rule alone, she one
day asked him to give her power for one day, to Command in the sole Power of
the Regency, and that whatever she did, might stand unalterably; the easy youth
not perceiving his ruin lurked in this request, granted the ambitions Queen
what she desired, which was no sooner ^aned with the signer, but she Mounting
the throne caused him to be brought before her, and passing sentence on him
caused his head Immediately to be stricken on, and proclaimed her self sole
Regen^, Leading mighty Armi^^ (...), and much Enlarging her t^rritories; so
that she is Accounted amongst the great warriors. Secrecy. Secrecy's a
wonderful gift, and in many cases may merit just (...) as when it is (...)
firmness of (...) the lawful Secrets of a Friend that might be prejudicial to
him if divulged, and indeed to keep our own, which many to their great
detriment, are not capable of Doing; the full charged mind too frequently
taking Fire, and forcing its way in spite of all precaution or resolves; it was
a rare commendations that Spintharus gave of Epaminond^^ the Theb^an, when he
said, he had rarely coversation with any that knew more, and spoke less; it is
an equal prudence to know when to speak, as how to do it with Judgment and
Discretion; and lest we should be over prodigal or unseasonable in our speech,
nature has taken care that the Tongue should be confined within a double
Enclosure of the Teeth and Lips. Many a man in our Age has dearly bought the
Intemperance or Unseasonable use of that (...) Member with the pri^e of his
Life, and this might be the reason why Numa recommended the Veneration of
Tacita to the Romans, as a tenth Muse, by which great enterprises are managed
and conducted with safety, which would otherwise be frustrated and hazardous.
-- Secrecy has been wonderfully regarded as a great mark of Prudence and
Fidelity in many young persons, which puts us in mind of a notable passage,
Papyrus a Senators Son of Rome, being one day, when important business was
managed, at the Senate House with his Father, his Mother, very Inquisitive of
News, would not upon his return, be satisfied with any of his Excuses, that
secrets were not to be revealed that were transacted in that place, till he
Invented a formal Story, that the Senate had Decreed every man should have two
Wives. The Lady thoroughly nettled at the News, immediately assembled all the
chief Matrons of the City, and informed them what a dreadful Plot was brewing
against their happiness and quiet repose. This startled them a while, but
assembling to consult how to prevent the supposed storm; they at last concluded
to show the Senate by way of Petition, the unreasonableness of it, and that
considering how impotent many of their Husbands were, they ought rather to
decree that the Women should have two Husbands a piece, as being better able to
manage them, than the men 2 Wives. The Senators started at this, as in a mase,
and knew not what to think, being besieged by so many Females, but the true
original of it being known, the youth was highly commended, and the Women
dismissed with full assurance, that there was no such design to Entrench upon
their prerogatives, by seting up more Commanders than oue in a Family. Sobriety
and Temperance. -- Though some may Imagine this Extends no farther than
Moderate Eating and drinking, they are mainly mistaken, for it takes in
Carriage, behavior, discourse and Recreations, etc. and Carries a great stroke
Especially in morral virtues; when Leotichv^^ was Asked the reason, why the
Spartans were so Pars^mon^us in their Eating and drinking, he replied, because
we had rather consult for others, than others should consult for us, Implying,
that Luxurious and intemperate men and women, are not fit for Councils, or
sound-Advice, and that Temperance and sobriety are wont to be the proper parent
of sound Judgments. And Indeed all other virtues are obscured by the want of
this, as both the body and the mind are wonderfully Improved by it, which is
the reason why so many great persons have made Choice of it for their Ach^tes
or best Friend. Semiramis Tomb. Semiramis the great Assyrian Queen, caused a
plate of Brass to be fixed on her Tomb, which was of a very stately
Architecture, and to be Inscribed on it; that whatsoever King should come into
that Land, and want treasure, should open her Tomb, and should there be
supplied with plenty, diverse refused it, as having a veneration for her. But
coming Darius to the possession of those Countries, he found himself
straightned by the vast Exhausting of his treasure in the wars, caused it to be
opened, and found only a stone in to with this Inscription: If thou had not
been a wicked man, and transported with an Insa^iable thirst after treasure,
thou would not thus have violated the sepulcher of the dead. This reproach
confounded him with shame, and thereupon going away, he ordered the Tomb to be
closed again. Sevil is an ancient town in Spai^e, rear to v^^^ch stood an old
chapple little ^requented, and in it a cloister that was walled up, and for
along time there was a proverb, that if any one should open that place, they
should see the figures of those that should soon after conquer the Country.
This Rumor had been spread about a long time e're, any body either minded or
durst attempt i^; but at last by order of authority, it was opened, and in it
they found the Images of Moors, carved in stone, rough and unpolished; and
Indeed this proved true, for the Moors a while after overrun almost all Spain
and held a great part till Ferdinand, and Isabel, King and Queen of Castile,
and Aragon, drove them out of Granada. Singing, etc. Singing is a very powerful
En^ic^ment in Love; The Tone of some Voices is so taking, and the Accent so
sweet, that they ravish the Senses. What can the poor souls do that hear the
charming Voices of these Sirens, but plunge over Head and Ears in the Ocean of
desire ever to be ravished with their Melody; and if the Tone, etc. be so
powerful as to be able to captivate a young man, it must have a greater
advantage when Art and Eloquence are joined to it. Jovius highly commends the
Italian Women for the sweetness of their singing, above other Nations, and
among them the Florentine Ladies, Some prefer the Roman and Venetian Court^zins
to these, alleging they have such sweet Voices, and Elegancy of speech, that
they ^are capable of insnaring a man, and make him forget himself, whilst their
harmony infacinates his sense^. O^id, in his recommending singing as a great
advantage to the Fair Sex, says, The Siren are Sea Monsters,
whose swe^t Notes
Draw to their Tunes the wandering
ships and boats;
And if their Ears with wax they
do not stop,
They Are charmed to leap off from
the hatches top.
Singing's a fair Endowment, a
sweet thing,
A praiseful gift; then women
learn to sing.
Hard favored Girls by songs have
won such graces,
That their sweet tongues have
mended much their faces.
Singing was always held to add ^^^^ure to she ^^r^y, and raise up Ad^.
Petronius affirms, that a Lady of his time sang so sweetly that she charmed the
Air, and outdid the Sirens, what can be more winningly graceful than a Lady
tuning her sweet voice to her Virginals, Lute, or Viol? and on the other side,
a man's voice well tuned is no ^ e^s pleasing, and taking with the Ladies upon
this very account, having raised themselves to great ^ortunes by Marriage.
Parthenis was so taken at the first interview with the singing of a young
Gentlewoman, that being Impatient of delay running to her sister, she thus
complains. -- Sister, Harpedona, O what shall I do, I ^^ undone, hark h^w
sweetly be s^^^^ I Will spea^ a bold word, he is t^^ p^operest man that ever I
^a^ ^ my Life. O how sweetly he sin^s, I dye for his s^^^; O that b^ would Love
me A^ai^. Luci^^ speaking of a wom^ns singi^^ (says he) thou wou^dest ^^^g^t
thy father, and mother, and forsake all thy relatio^s and friends to follow
her. ^^ is h^ld that Paris was E^^moured of Helen, as much for her sweet voice
as for her beauty; he likewise comme^^ Daphne, upon the like score* How sweet a
f^ce ^ath Daphne,
but her v^ice
Excells that s^eetness, (...)
has gained my Ch^ice.
Singing, though it is hig^^^ esteemed, and has a me^^^ praise due to it, yet,
Ladys, ^^ in^^eat you to consider tha^ is not that, that renders a man
Accomplished, nor can yield you all the happiness that is requisite, to give you
a Lasting tranquillity, seeing in this Ag^, it is Managed to Sinister ends;
every gay ^op makes it his business to be as good a proficient in it as he can,
not out o^ any regard to its peculiar ends, bu^ that he may have the greater
Advantage to ens^^re your sex, as knowing i^ not by Experience, yet by
Information, it is very t^king with them; we could name a ^idler, though no
proficient in Musical Airs, gained a for^une of two thous^nd pounds, by
procuring and humming over so^e Love ditties, that declared his passion, which
himself was not otherways cap^^le of delivering in common sense. Some that have
had nothing in them but a sew Pl^yers Ends and Complements, Songs and gay
Clothes tempting.
have gone a great way in this manner, though they were ^^pable of no more
harmony th^n Old B^ll^d Tunes af^ord^d them, only set out with a Fashiona^le
G^r^, or Esteminat^ Dress, gaining thereby the report of fi^e sweet Gentlemen.
Your Sex, Ladies, let us tel^ you, begg^ng pardon if we give Offense, is casy
to be won, upon your Favorable Constructions and Good Na^^re, and cannot
without much difficulty penitr^te the a^struse Int^ntions of th^^e that ^ak^ it
their bu^^ness to decoy you. Love songs smutty'd over are powerful Incitements
to what we will not name. Powerful, as we have h^nted, are the Temptations of
this Kind, and when ^nce they get the Ascendant over us, are not e^sily su^^ued
and brought under. We ^ee, or have heard, that the ^i^allest Grain of Poison,
taken inwardly, immediat^ly dilates the Venom into every part of the body, and
puts the whole Frame into disorder. It was Aristotle's Opinion, That young men
and women should not see Como^dies, le^t the Expression^ use^ in them might
corrupt their Vertue^, and over^hrowing the Fences of modesty, let in those
wild desires that would ruin their Chastity. But however, we do not allow of
h^s ^ev^^ty in such a prohibition; For as Bees suck Honey as well out of
uns^voury as sweet herbs and flowers, so a discreet and steadfast mind may
retain what is good, and reject what tends to a di^ection. Nothing more
prevails with some to shun Vice than to see it in its proper deformity,
unarray'd of those false appearances that to undiscerning Optics, guild over,
and make it seem lovely and charming. Lascivious Pictures, as well as Songs,
are to some an Incitement, to others detestable, and an Antidote against what
they represent; though according to the Old Proverb, Nemo mortalium omnilus
horis sapit; No man is wise at all times. The Temple of Venus in Rome, was
placed in the su^ur^s, that the Lacivious Proce^^ing might be as little pu^l^^^
^o the majority of the People ^s possi^le, to av^id all occasions and objects
that might furt^er a Temptation to Laciviousness. So in Singing, when it is for
cha^te Delight, and modest Recreation, may w^^^ Reason gain approba^ion and
applause. Orpheus turned his melodious Voice this way, and as it is fabled,
made inanimate and irrational Creatures admire him; his harmony charmed them
into wonder, and drew them after him; but the Rude Bacchanalian women, o'^^
fl^w'd with Wine and Lust, could not endure it, because it suited not their
Dr^nken and Lascivious Humor; and threfore in their mad Rag^ they tore him to
pieces, and threw hi^ scattered Lim^s into the River Hebrus, at the Foot of
Mount Hyblia of which a modern Poet brings in Caliop^, one of the Nine Mu^es,
^ius complaining: Was not my Orpheus death (tho long ago)
Enough for me to bear, for you to do!
Orpheus, so much by all the Graces loved,
Whose charming Voice and matchless music moved
The savage bea^^^, the stones and senseless trees,
Yet could not move the harder Destinies:
I saw his Limbs (alas) scattered abroad
On Hebrus streams, whilst down the silver flood
His learned head was rolled, and all along
Heard the sad murmurs of his dying Tongue.
Such misfortunes have often happened to the Chaste and Vertous, whilst ^he
immodest and Vicious have not only escaped, but gained applause. -- Juvenal, in
his S^^yr^, ^ives diverse Examples; and ^^^^elf, for telling the Truth, in
reproving the Wickedness of the age wherein he lived, was for^d to fly his
Country. But to a closure of this matter, singing, seasonably and moderately
used, is a great accompli^hment and advantage to either Sex; rendering the
parties acceptable i^ all civil company. Some hold it is the harmony in heaven,
thou more rare and refined; and we are not without Warrants for it in holy
Writ. especially in the Revelati^ns, etc. where Song^ of Praises are uttered.
Small Pox, its scars or marks how to repair ^ obliterate. -- Past en^merating
are the surprising Casual^ies that appe^r as s^ many enemies to deform ^ fa^r,
smooth and polished skin, each wound they give being a grave where Loves dumb
Oratory lie^ immure dor ^u^^e^, and Ch^rurgeo^s usually are the unskilsul
Plaisterers, that make an i^^ raised Cicat rice, the swelling monument to
depa^ted B^a^^y. The Fe^^r^ fretting Smallpox, if it chan^^ (...) Foot within
that (...) of Perfections, the (...) leaves many times more ^^^figuring
Impressions than a (...) clouted shoos on a (...) Floers; now to smooth (...)
Ladies, and Polish your (...) after such unwelcome (...), prize what we
recommend to you as rarity, (...) you will soon find the (...) and Dales of
uneven Faces meet without a miracle, dwelling to such a smoothness, (...) the
God, though fabled (...), may carelessly sport him^^^^ without stumbling. Small
(...) deformity is removed, by ^^ing Saffron half an ounce, (...) two ounces,
Turpen^^^^ three ounces, Gum Ara^^^ one ounce, O^^ Olive Oil ^^o ounces; make
the Mastick ^^d Arabic into gross powder, and put them into the Oil and
^^^pentine, then distill them in ^ Glass Alimbick, and there (...) come a
curious healing Water from them, or rather ^ precious Unguent, with which
^^oint the Face going to bed, (...) in the morning wash it off with warm water,
wherein fine ^ower has been infused; and (...) is likewise exceeding good when
after the consolidation of ^ Wound any disfiguring scar remains. Safe it is
likewise, (...) advantageous, for want of (...) former (or we give you ^^ave to
choose which you ^lease) to take Litharge of Gold ^^o ounces, Salt and Ceruse
half ^n ounce of either, Vinegar, ^^^tain, and Rose Water, of ^^ch three
ounces, half a dram of Camphire; mingle and philter it; and to let the Face. or
any part defective, be anointed with it; and after rub it out with Oil of
Roses, or the Essence of Jessemine; and in so frequently doing, the skin will
rise and fill up the hollow pits and places, and an Excellent color will be
restored, adding more beauty perhaps than before the disaster befell the party
using it. Spots in any part of the body, to remove them. -- Spots are as great
blemishes to beauty in either sex, as in precious stones, as much debasing the
worth or value of either; we have seen Faces from whose Features Beauty her
self might have drawn Patterns, had not Nature studied too much neatness,
played the Curtezan, and spoiled that which was Lovely and Charming before by
over Patching; yet many Ladies never conclude themselves Venus's in beauty,
unless they have some Artificial Mole, tho such clouded Stars more Eclipse than
Increase their Native Lusture, and especially where Nature is too Liberal, her
Spots they are always accounted Blemishes rather than Ornaments; those then
that have the Characters of Beauty defaced with such blots, may have, for a
repair of such defects, recourse to our following directions, and thereby will
find themselves quickly freed, and their features so ravishing and
transporting, that were it the fashion of this Age to dedicate shines to
beauty; there are few of them but would have their Altars where the most
generous heart should glory to sacrifice. -- Spots are of dive^s colors and
there is some preparation in general in order to facilitate their removal,
Spots of deformity of any kind on the body removed.
before we come to particulars, and this may be effected by bathing them 3
mornings successively with Alum dissolved in oil of Tartar, washed off with
Lie, and Lupin meal; or you may take one part of rose water, and two of plantan
water, two ounces of Sulpher Vive, Roch Alum in powder an ounce, heat them
over a gentle fire, till a fifth part is consumed, then taking off the vessel,
stir the Ingredients continually, till the whole become cold, strain it then
through a fine cloth, and with it anoint the place. And thus being prepared,
take Sugar Candia two ounces, with Frankincense the like quantity and these
being dissolve in a pint and a half of Juice of Limons simper thea^ gently over
a moderate fire, and anoint the spots first being washed with barley water, and
it will remove them. -- Sparkling Eyes, Spots, Inflammation, bloodshot and
yellowness in the eyes.
are the starry Jewels of a heavenly face, which with their Attractive
influence and amorous emotions, govern the restless fate of every Lover, whence
once these twinkling twins, brighter than those that Grace the skys, make break
of day through their Inclo^ing Lids, their piercing beams of glory Amuze
spectators, and make them pay tributary devotion to those Crystal Orbs from
whence they flow. The beauty of the eyes is much Impaired by spots, bloodshot,
Inflammation, etc. Which Eclypse and cloud their splendour, but may be remedied
by using means. -- Spots being observed to cover the sight or pupil of the
eyes, purge first the body, wash your Eyes with ^^dive water and oil of Roses,
then prepare tutty, ginger, and Sugar Candy, of each a dram, Alum burnt a
dram, ^^sk half a scruple; make these into a powder, and going to bed let a
little of it be blown into your Eye with a Duck or ^^vens quill, and then shut
it close as Long as you feel the effects of the powder, perhaps an hour, and it
will in two or three times using, fret off the film or skin, that like a dark
cloud, skreens the rays of sight you may wash the remainder of the powder, that
dissolves not, with Eye bright water. -- Spots many times are attended with
Inflammations, bloodshot, or discoloring the eyes caused by Rheums, or noxious
vapors to cure these refrain from drinking much, and keep ^ moderate diet, eat
such thing as are cooling; purging, ^^ ^^^odletting, to Evacuate the ^^^^ing
humor, is not Amiss, ^^ the Inflammation be extraordinary; some draw blisters
in the neck, but then the occa^^^ must be urgent; however apply such things as
may alter and digest the humors; if hot, ^^ is said, Endine, Nightshade,
^^^ain and Rose waters, drunk with a little sugar, are Ex^^^ cooling; as also
to (...) the Eyes with; but for the ^^^^uxion of a cold Rheum, (...) Laurel
Leaves in white ^ine, make a pultice of them, (...) apply it to the Eyes, or
^^^ may make one of Celen^^^ and whitwine it eases ^^^ pain, and takes away the
^^^^amation. Sweeten the breath. ^weet flavours in this case (...) extremely
requis^^, for when a Ladies breath is taint^^ though the admiring Lover ^^y
contemplate her beauty ^^^h wonder, and take her to ^^ an Angel, yet when he
^^^ws near to sip the Necture ^^ expects to find in little ^rs upon her rosy
Lips, and (...), instead of breathing ^^^er, meets a scent unsavory, ^e's
baffled out of this ex^^^ bliss, and forced to a ^^^^eat; then Ladies, you that
^^^e this defect thrown into ^^^e balance, to weigh against (...) excellent
features, make (...) Application to the fol^^wing directions, and you ^^^ll in
a very little space, ^^^lm the Air, with so rare scent, that all the Arabian
^^^tick flumes, or Flora's sweets shall not Enrich it with a more delicious
fragrancy. -- Sweet Saunders half an ounce, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each
an ounce, Wood of Aloes an ounce and a half, Musk half a dram, make these by
gently drying them into a powder, after that make it up into small balls, with
rose water, Gum Tragant, and a little Sugar, and hold one of these in your
mouth, and no offensive scent can I^lue thence. -- Sweetness of breath to be
recovered, by taking away the cause of the offense, is to be done by taking of
Cloves two drams, Cinnamon half an ounce, Mace, Nutmegs, and Citron Pill, of
each one dram, Florenti^e Iris, the lester Galingal, of either half a dram,
wood of Alloes, and yellow Saunders, each a scruple, Musk and Ambergris each
half a scruple, these must be carefully beaten into powder, and the powder
infused in a quart of the strongest Malmsey, ten or twelve days, then the
Liquid part strained out, and bottled up close, of which take each morning
fasting a spoonful or two, and it will cause the breath to become sweeter.
Cherish the Lungs, and strengthen the heart and stomach, and add a Lively blush
where the roses are faded on your cheeks. Servants Female, some Instructions to
them for the better management of their affairs, etc. -- Since we have directed
and recommended many things of great importance to the Ladies and Gentlewomen,
whose Fortunes, or rather a kind Providence, has raised them above any thing of
servitude, or dependence of that nature, it might seem unkind in us, if in such
a Work as this we should so far forget, as not to remember whose that are so
serviceable to them, and to whose prudent management, care and diligence they
must own themselves Extremely beholden in many Respects, for part of that Value
and Esteem that the World sets upon them. Some of high Fortunes have fallen
low, by accidents, Casualties, and misfortunes of sundry Natures; and from a
state of commanding, have been reduced to a station of being commanded. The
mutability and unconstancy of things below, give little assurance to any of a
lasting continuance. The Wheel of Fortune is perpetually in motion, and those
that are uppermost to day, may be deprest beneath to morrow. It was the answer
of that Good, Great* and Wise Emperor Augustus Caesar, to a Prince (who
demanded of him, Why he so much lowered the Imperial Dignity of his Family, in
suffering his Daughters to learn and employ themselves in curious manual Arts
and Occupations, as working in Looms or Frames, curious historical
Representations in Gold and Silken Works), That he knew not how Fortune might
change; and then if they were subjected to her Frowns, they might nevertheless
live honestly (...) their Industry, and not be bu^thensome to friends, which
(...) adversity are rarely real, or ^^ long continuance. Therefore to such as
fortune, by the p^^^fuseness of parents, or Ill ma^riages, have been necess^^^
to submit to what once (...) remotest from their though^^ we first Address our
selve^. Since then it is their L^^^ be under command, they mu^^ as much as in
them Lys, fo^^^ their former condition, (...) only fix their minds (...) what
they are reduced (...) former things being (...) away, they must Look forward
and not Imbitter their remembrance with what has been, (...) cannot be
recalled; they (...) take up with a contented (...) which the sacred Scrip^^^
calls a continual Feast; and indeed it is, if it were right understood. If at
last th^^ have the happiness to be i^^^^duced into Honorable F^^^lies, they
will there be res^^^cted and regarded, with th^^ own proclaiming what is (...)
to them. Modesty ever ^^ates Esteem, when Osten^^^ is despised. They must be
all seasonable times ready do more than they know (...) be required of them;
and that they will ingratiate the^ selves into an higher F^^^ and Respect. They
must meek and humble in their ^^^^riage and behavior, and (...) the
opportunity of adv^^^ment; They must stifle keep under aspiring Thoughts, and
never talk loudly of their Birth and Parentage, nor think they are in a servile
condition whilst they are at a plentiful Table, and have all things that are
necessary and convenient, and in a more secure, and perhaps happier Estate
(bating some reluctances of the mind) than that from whence they are fallen;
nor lie they now under so many Temptations, the eyes of the World are not so
much upon them, and their Virtues are more secured against assaults; tho such
may be under a Command, it will be gentle and easy, and at the (...) time they
are in a condition to Command others that are placed under them; for (...) we
are speaking of such (...) are waiting Women or ^^^se keepers, or Companions,
(...) what the Ladies they serve are pleased to term them, and therefore to
their Subordinates they must be courteous and gentle, mildly reproving their
^^iling and miscarriages, and ^^^cting them with softness (...) good Temper, to
amend what is amiss; by which means they will gain an entire Empire over their
good wills and affections, and readily oblige them to do all the good Offices
they (...) capable of performing, by (...) of gratitude and acknowledgment, and
render them (...) their servants than theirs ^^y are reputed to serve, and
(...) consider themselves in as ^^ppy an Estate as ever. But ^^^ing from these,
we come to those of a lower degree, who have not so much understanding of what
is required in their stations; For she that has been a Mistress of Servants, if
any thing discreet, must needs know how to order and govern her self when she
comes to be so; but she that never was, must be more to seek. -- Such as enter
upon this Undertaking, Service relating to a Chamber Maid, and what she is to
take notice of, etc.
must be very neat and handy, Especially in Families of Quality. She must,
above all others, be sure to have the art of dressing well, that she may be
assisting to the Waiting Woman, if Necessity requires her attendance; also the
fine Linen, especially, should pass through her hands; and she must be Curious
in Laundry Affairs, especially in ordering them, and seeing there be nothing
done amiss, or incommodious. The beds must be kept neat, and all things about
them done in time, and order, that nothing be found indecent, if any one should
surprisingly enter the Chambers, or Dormitory. Night Linen must be carefully
prepared and laid in order, and every thing necessary asigned to its proper
place, that there may be no disorder upon any sudden inquiry; she must be
modest in her deportment, and ready with her attendance on all occasions, not
replying again if any reproof be given, or if she does, it must be with
mildness and pacifick Language, to appease anger, and being justly reproved,
she must take care to prevent it another time, by amending the failing in her
greater diligence; she must not be Loquacitous, and above all, avoid
complainings of her fellow Servants, unless some extraordinary Cause require;
but rather admonish them to be more diligent in their several stations; she
must be no tale bearer, for that will stir up envy against her, and undermine
her foundation. Backbiters especially are despised and held in contempt by
those that seem to give ear to their reports, as well knowing those that are
given to such kind of slander, will not spare their best and nearest friends;
she must not be Ignorant of needdle work, and other curious matters, that at
Leisure times will give her a double advantage, viz. Gain her a repute of being
Industrious and Ingenious, and prove a pleasing recreation to her; nor must her
skill be less in raising paist, seasoning, making sauces, spoon meats,
Pickling. Garnishing, preserving, candying, distilling, for though they are not
all properly her business, yet her helping hand may be required many time^ in
assisting, and then her appearing Ignorant, will much lessen her value and
Esteem amongst those she would have reputed inferior to her. Market affairs
must be no stranger to her; and if at any time they are committed to her
charge, she must be skillful in choosing, and frugal, as much as in her lies, in
laying out the money she is entrusted withal; and so will her Reputation arise,
perhaps, to the gaining her as happy Fortune; for men conclude, that she who
has been industrious for others, will doubtless be the same for her self and
her Family. -- Servants that are entertained in this station, Service relating
to the Cook Maid, or her Office etc.
though by some it is accounted an inferior Office, have nevertheless a great
charge and care upon them, especially in houses of Note or Resort; for that
which is delicate and pleasing to the Palate, and nourishing to the body, p^^^
mostly through her hands. She must be well skilled not only in buying and
dressing all manner of Flesh, Fish and Fowl, with other matters for the
complete furnishing out a Table, but also in Knowing the Times when they are
choi^^ and rare, and best in season, for to bring any thing out of order, seems
to some curious persons to be an affront; or^^^ least it reflects upon the
Ignorance of the Family, for Knowing no better, or Giving their Caterer no
better D^^^ctions. All manner of ba^^ meats, and all kind of Sawces are under
her care, and (...) must be understanding, (...) Knowing what Sawces are m^^^
proper for things and seasons. Gu^ishing is her Province, ^^d all manner of
Pickles she ^^^t have in a readiness, prop^^ly of her own providing* ^^d she
must see the Dishes ^^e not served up the wrong E^d foremo^t* or irregularly
placed on the Table; and what (...) returned, if it be expected again at
supper, she must s^e carefully set up and ^r^^red (...) the best advantage, not
^^^ishing and sq^an^^r^ng away what may be ^r^g^ly s^ved, ^^^ping every thing
n^a^, ^^ean* and in order in her ^^fice, for cl^anl^n^ss is her ^^ief^st
comm^ndation; she ^^^s the hours of m^^l^ ^xactly (...), and ha^h ^^^ry ^hi^g
in a readyness, u^less ^r^^r (...) (...) to s^^ve up ^^^^^r, or ^or a longer
del^^; in her ap^^^l she may go n^^t and G^^^e^l, but not ^^^dy and ^^^^ving
for that is as (...) u^, as if she ha^g ^^r d^i^ing p^n upon her back, and were
^^r ^^^^le upon her h^^d f^r a ^^mmod^; and so b^ her ^^^l ^^dering ^^^^rs
^^^^^rs* s^e (...) come o^e d^^ to cook (...) ^er own Ki^c^^n, and en^oy her
recomp^nce of her Labou^s. -- Service in this kind is but little more than
washing well, Service re^^^ing to a (...) Maid.
(...) taking care the Linen, (...) well dr^ed, Ironed and (...) up carefully
from Mildews, ^^o^-molds, or the li^e; she (...) however be knowing in ^^^^ing,
and st^rching Lace, Sarsnets, Tiff^nies, and making Perfumes, and such sweets
as give Clothes a good scen^, mending things where they are amiss, and having
all things ready at hand to deliver up to those that are to take the next
charge of them. -- Since there are Ladies in the Country as well as Court,
Service relating to the Dary.
we must make a ^^^p to look ^ little into ^^r^, where we expect to (...) the
Churms, Pans, Tra^s, ^owls, and other matters, all in ^^od order, by the
Hu^is^^ care of the ne^t ^a^y^^a^d, Cl^anlin^ss being her chie^ Province; f^r
all the ^^^^ness ^e c^n find she h^s (...) i^ only to chur^, and w^ll ^rder her
Butt^r, ^u^ Runner into the Milk, and pr^s^ the Cur^s into Cheese; and when the
Young Ladies, and their Sp^r^s, come ^o visit her out Mansion, to have a Bowl
of Curds and Cream at their service, or things in order to the m^^ing a
Sulli^u^; for which they drop her half a Crown, and go their ways: and with
them we march off too, and take our Leave of her. -- As for the H^u^e maids
under C^^k maids and Scull^^y maids, H^^semaids, under Co^k maids and Scull^^y
maids.
we Know little Business they have to do but s^^^p Hou^es and scowr Dishes; and
therefore it is not fit to disturb them at their bus^n^^s, l^st ^^e^ t^le Pet
and grow angr^ wi^h u^ ^^r pr^ing into their concern^. Besi^e^, we have largely
discourst on the s^v^r^l R^^k^ ^f serv^nts else where in this Work* so that
'twill be ne^^l^ss to add any thing f^r^h^r here. Scoundrel, a sorry base
^^l^o^. (...) ( secunde; (...)) the thr^e ^^i^s, w^^r^in an Infant lies while
it is in the womb, or when it co^^^ into the worl^; the second or ^f^^rbirth in
Women; in ^^asts the H^^m. (...) (Fr.) ^vening mu^ic^ at the do^^ or under the
wi^^^^ ^f a lov^ly or b^l^v^^ ^^^^^ure. (...), we call a cur^^ (...). a Sh^^w.
(...) Sirenes, from the ^r, (...) Mermaides. Alluring and ^emp^ing women, ar^
called Sirens. Sodomy ( sodomi^) burg^ry; so calle^ from the C^ty S^d^m in
Ju^^^, which f^r that de^esta^le Sin was destroyed with fire from heaven, Genesis
19. S^^dures ( soldurii) were (as (...) ^^ith in G^uil^h language, such kind of
M^n as destined and vowed themselves ^o the amity of any, to take part in all
their good and ha^ ^^r^une^. ^ooter^in, a mons^^r l^ke an unshaped Rat, which
some women in Dutchland are said to have brough^ for^h, a: the product of some
preter^^^ural conception. Cl. Poems. S^^or^^^r Virgin ( Virgo So^ori^ns) a
young maid, whose Br^sts be^in to be round, or (...) out for show. ^p^^^^er, a
term or addition in our Law-Di^l^ct, given in evidences and Writ^^^^^, to a
some ^^le, as it were c^^^ing her (...); end this is the o^^ly ^^^^^ion f^r all
^nmarried ^omen, from the Vi^counts Daughter downward. Spin^^^an (from
s^^t^^^^) pert^ining to t^ose that ^eek out, or invent new and monstrous
actions of lust. Spo^^e ( sponsa) a woman spo^sed or (...), a ^ride or new
married woman; al^o from sp^nsus, a new married m^n. Spou^age ( sponsalia) the
contract or betroning bef^^^ ^u^l m^^ri^ge. Spurio^s ( spurius) b^rn of a
c^^m^^ woman, that knows not his Father, ab^^^ ^or^, coun^^rfeit. Stepmother,
so called because she steps in stead of a Mother, by marrying the sons or
daughters Fathers; a Mother in Law. Stews, are those places, where women of
pro^^^^^d incontinency, pro^^er their bodies to all comers; from the Fr.
Estuve, i.e. a Bath or Hot-house; because wa^^ons are wont to p^epa^e or rather
to purge themselves for those venerous acts by o^^^n b^thing and Hot-houses.
And that this is no^ new, Homer shows in the eight Book of his Od^sses, where
he reckons hot B^thes among the esteminat^ (...) of pleasures. Of these (...)
the Statue, An 11. (...). 1. As for the walking ^tensils attending these i^
(...), ^^ey are nea^ly kept on (...) to decoy poor ^^wary youth; and because
they are not used upon all occasions, they appear the more delectable to the
E^e; gene^ally as soon as you enter the door of these Vicions ^wellings, you will
hear ruffling of Silks in sundry places, for this i^ their Policy by seeming
mod^^^^, to set a sharp edg on men's corrupt inclinations; they will commonly
^ring you ^everal sor^s of Wine and salt Me^ts to relish the ^allate, tho you
give no order for the same, for this is the Custom of these Houses ( tho a
Chargable one^) that without a Piece spending, you shall know li^^le of their
Practices. They Will (...) their desires with a million of proti^ute Coun^enances
and Inticements; b^t young ^^n (I beseech you look upon them rather as
Companions ^or ^n Hospital, and that they really stand more in need of ^
Chirurgious a^quaintance, than yours. Fly from their Em^^aces, as you would
from the Devil, for they have many ^^ys to delude; sometimes to heighten your
thoughts they will declare to you their ^^^th and Education, and say, that as the
one was well Extracted, so the other had occasioned much cost and expense, that
for their part they associate with none but Persons of Quality whose long
Patience and Entreatments first procured a Familiarity, and in fine, freedom in
the exercise of Love A^^airs; and so will seemingly put you off upon that
score; the poor youth thinking that ^^is not usual for them to admit of any to
their Embraces but such whose long acquaintance has gained their Affections,
and are soon ruined. These are the baits they lay for unthinking men who
remember not (what Solomon says) that the Dead are there, and that ber guest
are tho depths of Hell. Stole ( stola) any Garment wherewith the Body is
covered, a Robe of honor. Among the ancient Romans, it wa^ had in great
reverence, and h^ld as a V^^t or Badg of chastity hence that of M^ntial, li^ 1.
Q^^s ^^^alia (...) Stolatum (...) p^dorem! Stork (Belg.) a Bird famous f^r
natural love to^ards his Parents, whom he (...), being old and i^poten^, a^
they ^^d him being young. The Egyptians so esteemed this Bird, that there was a
great penalty laid upon him that should kill him. Sueda, the go^d^s^ of
Eloquence, or de^e^table speech among the Romans. Succubus ( Lat.) a Devil that
sometimes, in the shape of a Women, lies with Men. See Incubus. Sumptuary Laws,
are Laws made to refrain excess in apparel or clothing. Sunamite (Heb)
dormines, one sleeptug. A worthy good woman of ^una that often entertained
Eliseus the Prophet, by whose Prayers she had a Son, when by course of Nature
she was pist hopes of any, and afterward had the same son raised from death to
life by the same Eliseus, 4 Kings. Superfetation ( superf^tatio) the conceiving
an other after the first young is conceived; a se^ n^ conceiving, or the
breeding of young upon young. Susan, Heb.) Lilly or Rose. Suzan, in the Pers^n
Tongue, signifies a Needle. Swain, ( Sax Swanz) a Country Clown, a Bumpkin, a
Freeholder, or as the Saxons call'^ him a Bocland man. Syllogism ( Syllogismus)
a most perfect kind of argument, which gathers a necessary conclusion out of
two pr^mi^^es; as thus. 1. Every vice is odious. 2. Uncleanness is a vice. 3.
Ergo, Uncleanness is odius,
The first part of a Syllogism is called the Proposition or Major; the second
the Assumption or Minor; and the third, the Conclusion. Sympathy ( sympathia)
natural consent or combination, mutual passion, affection or disposition.
Salacia, The goddess of Water. Salique Law ( Lex Salica) is a Law whereby the
Crown of France cannot be inherited by a woman, cannot fall from the Lance to
the Dista^, as their saying is: which Law, one undertaking to prove out of Holy
Writ, urged that place of Matthew; where it is said, Mark the Lillies (which are
the Arms of France) and see how they neither Labor nor s^^^ This Law they
pretend was made by Pharano^d their first King, and that the words Si^ aliqua,
so often mentioned, gave it the name of Salique Law. Others say, it was named
by Charles the Gre^, after his Conquests in German, where the incontinency of
the Women, living about the Rive^ Sala (in the Country now called Misnia) gave
both occas^ and name to this Law; the words are these, De terra ^ Salica nulla
portio haeredit^ malieri veniat, sed advir^ sexum reta terr^ h^red it as^
venia. Seldom. Mr. Blunt. Stall whimper A Bastard. Saraband (Ital. Z^rabanda) a
kind of lesson in music: and a dance so called. Sappho, a Lesbian, (the
Daughter of Scamandarus, and Wife of Cercilas, a Rich man of Andros, by whom
she had a Daughter named Clio) not inferior in same to the best of Lyric
Poets, and said to be the first Composer of that sort of Lyric Verse, which
from her is called Sapphic. -- Moreover, being a Poetess her self, she is
likewise the subject of Poetical Tradition, if at least it were the same Sappho
who falling in love with Phao the Ferry man, and finding her self slighted, was
possessed with a worse then Poetic madness to throw her self headlong from the
rock Leucas into the Sea. Sosipatra, a Lidian the wife of Aedesius, whom being
of a Prophetic spirit, and foreteling future events in Verse, some have not
doubted to place among the poets. Sulpitia, a most Learned Roman Lady the Wife
of Calenus: she is reported by Fulgosius l. 8. cap. 3. to have written many
things in Heroic Verse; and is elegantly celebrated by Martial, in the 35th
Epigram of his tenth Book. Satyriasis sive Priapismus, an immoderate desire of
Venery, which upon Coition vanishes Dr. Blancard. Secundinae, the Secundine, or
Afterbirth, are the three Membranes, Chorion, Alantois, and Amnion, which with
the Placenta, are excluded after the Birth. Semen, Seed, a white hot,
spirituous, thick, clammy, saltish Humor, which is made out of the thinest
parts of the Blood in the Testicles and Epididymides, and by proper Passages is
ejected into the Womb of the Female. There is also in the Female a Matter which
is called seed, which proceeds from the Prostates, and frequently in their
Lechery is emitted forth: The use of this is to raise Titillation, and render
the Coition more pleasant. Dr. Blancard. Somnus, sleep a streightning of the
Pores of the Brain; caused by the Rest of the Animal spirits, by which means
the outward senses rest from their Operations. Sparganosis a Distention of the
Breasts, occasioned by too much Milk. Superfaetatio, is when after one
Conception another succeeds, so that both are in the Womb together: Sennertus
makes mention of frequent Cases of this Nature. Dr. Blancard. Satyr ( Satyra) a
k^nd of Poetry, where of there seems to have been two kinds; the one more
ancient, which consisted only in variety of Verses; the other more modern,
containing an open reprehension of men's Vices, without respect of persons.
Satyr ( Satyrus) a Woodwose; a strange monster, having the body of a man all
hairy, with legs and feet like a Goar, full of motion, and given much to venery
which the Poets were wont to call Gods of the Woods; these were found in time;
past in the Eastern Mountains of India. And Saint Hierom^, in the life of Saint
Antony, reports, he saw one of them in his time. Saucige (from the Fr. sauciss)
a kind of pudding, well known. The Bolonia Saucige is made of Bief and lean
Bacon in equal quantity, flayed and chopped small with half as much Lard, and
some Pepper, Ginger, and Salt; then put into a clean Ox-gur, half a soot long,
and laid in falt for two days together, and after hung up in the smoke. Cor. Su
Pouch, Hostess. Scatinian Law ( Lex Scatinia) was a Law made by Scatinius,
wherein the use of preposterous Venery was chastised. Scene ( seena) the front
or forepart of a Theater or Stage, or the partition between the Players Vestry,
and the Stage; a Comedy or Tragedy, or the division of a Play into certain
parts, viz. first into Acts, those again into Scenes, which sometimes fall out
more, sometimes fewer in every Act; The definition of a Scene being mutatio
personarium. In old time it signified a place covered with Boughs, or the room
where the Players made them ready. Scholastica ( Gr. a Woman's Name; and
signifies leisure from business. Science ( Scientia) cunning, skill, learning,
knowledge. The seven Liberal Sciences are these, Grammar Logic, Rhetoric,
Astronomy, Geometry, Arithmetic, and Music. Shop-lift, one that filcheth
commodities out of a Shop, under the pretense of cheapening or buying.
Scrudland, sa. Land allotted for buying Apparel. Scandalize, g. ^o slander,
also to give one occasion (by example) to sin or be offended. Scatinian Law,
against preposterous venery. Salmacis, a Fountain in Caria, where the Nymph
Salmasis and Horm^phroditus became one, and is said to effeminate all that
drink or bath in it. Salver, a broad pla^e with a foot) used in giving Beer,
etc. to save the Carpet or Clothes. Samplar, (Exemplar) a pattern [of
Needlework] or rather (^or Sarp^^) the Canvas on which the Scholars work.
Sanchia, Sancta, a woman's Name. Sapho, Sappho, a Poetress of Mitylene.
Sarcenet, a kind of (...) Ta^^ara. Selvage, the mar^^ of linen Cloth. Semele,
The Mo^^^^ of Bacchus. Sectis non faciden^^s, for a woman, who (...) her Dower)
owes no (...) of Court. Severus, he con^^^^ed Marriage, Flesh, (...), etc.
Semiramis, Wife (...) whom she made a^^^, and succeeded in the ^^^^dom of
Assyria. S^^aglio, the Turks ^alace. Sibbe^idg, red, Sf. (...) of Matri^ony.
Smilar, a Virgin (...) (^or Crociss's love) pined (...) a Kidney bean. Smutty,
obscene. Spermatize, to cast (...) Sperm. Spinster, the title of ^^married
women, from (...) Viscounts Daughter down^^d. Sole tenant, hold^^^ in his own
right, without (...) wife (or any other) joyn^^. Sont^rels, o. sunny, (...) of
hair. Spharites, a very ^^^minate and luxurious peo^^^. Symmetry, g. a due
^otion of parts. Sympathetical, belonging to sympathy, g. natural agreement in
affection or passion. Sultana the Empress. Sumtuary, laws, against excess in
apparel. Super Praerogativa Regis, against the Kings widow for marrying without
his License. Suada, the Roman Goddess of Eloquence. Sentiments on Poetry.
According to the sentiments of all who have treated upon this subject, it was
the first sort of writeing used in the World, and was begun with the prais^s
of, and Hymns to the Deity, for the great and daily Benefits he perpetually
confers upon us, and this in the Wild notes of natural, Poetry, long before the
invention of seet, and Measures. In America, the first Spaniards met with many
strains of Poetry, and left several of them translated into their language,
which seemed to have flowed from true Nature, there being no Letters know
there, when they entered. Aristotle says, the Agathyrsi, had all their Laws in
Verse. and Tacitus that the Germans had no Annals, or Records, but what were
so. -- We will come to the several kinds of Poetry, and first E^logue, or
Pastoral. Which is the most ancient kind of Poetry as resulting from the most
ancient way of Living. For since the first Men were shepherds, as may be
gathered out of Thucy^ides and Varro, they have the first that, invited by
Leisure, or in imitation of birds, began a Tune. First Weary at his Plough, the
laboring Hind,
In certain feet, his rustic words did bind,
His dry Reed first he tuned at sacred Feasts,
To thank the bounteous Gods, and cheer his guests.
Eclogue, is the most considerable of the little Poems, Its business is to
describe the Sports, Piques, Jealousies, and Adventures of Shepherds, so that
its Character must be simple, its Wit easy, the manners innocent, the language
pure, the Expressions plain, and the Discourse natural. The Models to be
proposed to write well in this sort of Poesy, are Theocritus and Virgil. --
Secondly, Satyr, If (says Dryden) we take Satyr in the General signification of
the word as it is used in all modern Languages, for Invective, it is certain
that it is almost as old as Verse, and through Hymns which are the Praises of
God, may be allowed to have been before it, yet the Defamation of others was
not long after it. The principal end of Satyr, is to instruct the people by
discrediting Vice, It may therefore be of great Advantage in a state, when
taught to keep within bounds, and is not (as it often happens) like a Sword ^n
the hands of a Madman, that runs a Tilt, at all manner of Persons, without any
sort of distinction or reason. It is more difficult to praise then to find
fault, yet the same delicacy of wit, that is necessary to to keep the one from
being fulsome, is necessary to keep the other from being bitter. Of all the
ways that wisest men could find,
To mend the Age, and mortify mankind,
Satyr well writ has m^^^ successful proved,
And cures, because the remedy is Loved.
Thirdly, There is a sort of Satyr among us which we call Lampoons, which are
dangerous sort of Weapon, and for the most part unjust, because we have no
moral right, on the Reputation of other men. In these, no Venom is wanting, or
dec^oy consi^^r'd. The weaker Sex* is their most ordinary Theme, and the best
and ^^irest are sure to ^e most ^^^^^ely handled. Among men, ^^^se who are
Prospero^^ly U^^^^^, are entitled to a Paneg^^ick^ but afflicted Virtue is
insolently stabbed, with all manner of Reproaches. -- We should have insisted
longer here on the several sorts of Poetry, but for want of Room we shall
finish what is wanting on this subject, in the second part of this Dictionary.
T.
TAbitha, ( Acts 91.36) in the Syriac tabitha 1.a ^^- Buck. Tace 1. Hold,
peace, hush, be silent, from tac^o to be si^ent, and indeed it is a fit N^me to
admonish the fair Sex of silence. Tamar. (2 Sex 13.1.1.) ^ Palm Tree. Thamasin,
(or Thomasi^ 1.) ^ Twin, from Thomas in Men's Names. Temp^rance, ^1. Moderation,
^^berness, or refraining from ^^^^^^lity. T^^od^cia 1. given of God. Th^op^tia
1. a Friend of ^od. Tadica, a very Rich Ara^^^ Woman, with whom ^^^^omet the
Impostor lived ^^ a Slave or Menial Servant, ^^en Sirgeus a Monk perswa^^ her
in hopes of great ^^ward to Marry Mahomes, (...) then being 50 years of ^ge,
when by the countenance ^^ her Wealth, he spread a^^o^d his pernicious
Do^^^i^e. Thamer, Daughter in Law ^^ Judah the Patriarch, who ^^^^ingly
deceived him by (...) way side, as he went to (...) sheep-shearing, by
perso^^^ng a Harlot or Common^oman, because he had ^^^held from her his Son,
^^own up to years, who ^^ght to have been given to (...) for a Husband. Thamer,
the Daughter of D^vid the King, whose Chastity wa^ viola^ed by A^non, one of
the Kings Sons; he forcibly gaining his will of her by (...) himself sick, and
procuring her to attend him in his Chamber, which afterward cost him his Life,
at the command of Absalon^ at a Sheep-shearing Feast, to which ^e had invited
him and his ^^ethren. Tanaqui^, otherwise called cicily who was sometimes Wife
to the Elder Tarq^in; she was a very prudent Woman and an Excellent Inventress
of curious work, especially in Embroideries of Purple and Gold; and in memory
of her Art, a Royal Cloak of her working, was hung up in the T^^ple of Fortune;
she also (...) Coats and Vests entire, and distributed their among young
Soldiers, and young Married Men, as their Deserts appeared. Tabitha, otherwise
called Dorcas, whom our blessed Savior raised from the Dead, was no doubt a
Woman of singular dexterity in curious Wo^^s with the Needle, for there we find
those who lament her death, seem as much to grieve for the loss of her Art,
which must probably have dyed with her: As for the Artist, as appears by
showing (...) curious Wor^s, and no dou^^, commending them very highly as
things rare, and not to be paralleled by any of her Sex of that Country or in
those times. Tarb^la, the Bishop of Sel^cia's Sister, being much envyed by the
Jews for her Zeal and Piety in promoteing the Christian Religion, was by them
accused for intending to poison the Queen of Persia, in revenge of her Brothers
Death, and being condemned, the Magi, one of them, taken with her excellent
Beauty, promised to secure her Life if she would yield to his Lust, but to
preserve her Chastity, she chose rather to dye, and accordingly suffered with
great courage and constancy. Taygete, Daughter of Atlas, and Pleion one of the
Pleiades, on whom Jupiter begat Lacedemon, Founder of Lacedemonia, once a
famous City in Greece. Telesilla, A famous Argine Lady, by whose Counsel and
Courage, the Argiers beat the Lacedonians, and freed their Country: She was
likewise excellent in Poetry, so that she for these and other virtues, had a
Statue of her proportion set up in the City of Argos. Tellus the Earth, was by
the Ancients worshipped as a Goddess, and Homer calls her the Mother of the
Gods, for the advantages she gives and affords to Mankind, wherefore they
Painted her with great Swelling Breasts and Naked. Terphitchorie, Accounted one
of the Nine Muses, to whom they attribute the keeping true t^ne and measure in
dancing, as also the Invention of Set Dances, and was by the Ancients painted
holding a Harp in her hand, and other Musical Instruments lying at her Feet,
also a Garland or Caplet of flowers on her Head. Tethys, the Daughter of
Caelum, Sister to Vecta and S^turn, said to be married to Neptune. Thetis
another Fabled Goddess of the Sea, who bore Achilles the famous Greek, who did
such wonders at the Siege of Troy. Teudeguilde, Daughter to a Sheperd, but of
such Excellent shape and beauty, that Chariber for her sake, refused all the
great Ladies of the Court, and Married her. Theano, Wife to Pythagoras, a Woman
of great Ingenuity and Learning, but above all, exceeding Chas^^^ and Virtuous,
teaching Philosophy after the death (...) her Husband. Thermis, by Eusebius
called Carme^ta, held to be the Daughter of Heaven and Earth, a^ the first that
gave Oracles to the pagans, and taught the Image Worship: She is otherwise
styled the Goddess of Justice, and is fabled, that upon refusing to Marry
^upiter, he forced her to (...) Will, and begot on her, Justice, Peace and Law.
Themistoclea, a Famous Learned Virgin, was Daughter to Mensarchus a Goldsmiths
of Samos. Theodelinda, a Queen of the Lumbards, about 593. And after the Death
of Authaeris he^ Husband, she kept the Crown and transferred it upon a second
Husband, viz. Agulphis, she reduced the Lumbards into good order, and made them
renounce Aranisme, yet sell her self afterward into Error, till Gregory the
Great convinced of them, and her Husband dying, she reigned jointly with her
Son, till Anouldus deposed them. Theodora, Wife to the Emperor Justinian; she
curbed the growing pride of the Bishops of Rome, and raised up Competitors to
contend with them. Theodora, a Roman Lady, who gaining by the favor of the
Marquess of Tuscany, the Government of the Castle ^^olst. Angelo, became so
powerful in Rome about the year 908, that she governed all, making Popes at her
pleasure, of whom one was Pope John, who had been her Gallant. Theodora
Augusta, Daughter to Constantine the Younger she was when young, put into a
Monastery, but afterward advanced to a Throne, ^eigning six years and Eight
Months, with great Modesty, Justice and Integrity. Theophania, Wife to Romanus
Emperor of constantinople, who after her Husbands death, poisoned Stephen her
Eldest Son, and Married Phocas, and advanced him to the Empire, but he
undertaking to curb her unruliness, she caused him to be Murdered, and
advanced one John Zi^isces, who banished her, and restored her younger Sons to
their right. Theressa, a Lady born in Spain, who professed her self a
Carmelite, and Established diverse Monasteries for Nuns and Monks in Old-castle
and other places. Tutulian, a Goddess invoked by the Ancients for the safety
and preservation of the Harvest, from whom comes the word Tutular. Thermuth,
the Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt, who saved Moses when he was exposed in
an Ark of Bull-rushes by the River, and brought him up as her Son, in her
Fathers Court. Therys, held to be Married to the Ocean, Mother to Doris and
Nereus, and of this Marriage came the Nymphs of the Rivers, Woods and Sea; of
which Thetis the youngest was the most beautiful, insomuch that Jupiter
purposed to Marry her, but remembering the Oracle had pronounced that of her
should be begotten a Son that should be more renowned than his Father; he
married her to Pelus, who begat on her Achilles; at this Wedding, it was the
golden Apple was thrown among them, with the Inscription, be it gives ^^ the
fairest, and Paris the Son of Priam, King of Troy, being made Judge, gave it to
Ve^^^, for which Juno and (...) spite and (...) (...) his Ru^^. Victori^ (...)
was (...) Valor and (...) in governing ^^^rs. Thi^be, a Lady of Babylon in
Love with Pyramus, and he as much with her, but being crossed by their Parents,
they agreed to steal out one Night, and meet at Ninu^'s Tomb, there further to
consult their Loves, but the ^^^^ing thither first and espying a Lion coming
down from the Mountains to drink at (...) Fountain, fled and in (...) dropped her
Vail, which the Lion finding in his way, (...) with his bloody Jaws, (...) so
departed. Then Pyr^mus coming and finding it in that condition, as also the
print of the Lions Feet by the light of the Moon, concluded her devoured, and
after many Lamentations, fell on his Sword, which she no sooner coming and
perceiving, but with the yet reeking Sword she killed her self. Timarate, an
Old Woman, who amongst others, was made use of Jupiter to pronounce his Oracles
in the Dodonean Grove, where People ^ancyed the Trees spoke, and gave answer to
such questions as were demanded. Tullia Daughter of Servi^^s: Tullius the sixth
King of the Romans, she was Married to T^rqu^^, and p^^ him upon ^illing her
Father, that the Kingdom might rest in him, and being about to meet her
Husband, caused her Father to be tumbled from his Horse and drove her Chariot
over him. Tullia Daughter of Cicero the Roman Orator, a very Wise, Learned and
vituous Lady. Tolon Beau characterised. It is not a pleasant and very diverting
Spectacle to see ^ ^^llow, as soon as he is out of his Bed in a Morning, run to
the Looking Glass, and pay (...) Devotions to the wor^^^ ^^^ (...) of himself?
To (...) the (...) with his own ^^^low, and (...) his Court (...) (...) hundred
and twenty (...) to his pretty Pig^^^? Is it not a (...) Exercise to (...)
licking his Lips into (...), painting his Cheeks into Cherries, patching his
^^^-gin^s, Carbuncles and ^uboes? to see another striving to outdo Ap^lles in
counterfeiting the lovely Eyebrow* A third to be two long H^^^ in careening his
Hair or P^ruke? A fourth as tedio^s in adjusting his Crevat-string. It is not
very comical to (...) the ^op strutting up (...) down his Chamber, surveying
himself from Head to Fo^^ ^^st turning one Shoulder, then the other, now l^oking
fo^^right in the Glass, then turning his Posteriors, tiff^ing ^^^ the Curls in
his Wig,(...) and untving his C^evat, (...) ing himself into as (...) (...)
ares as he in the (...) (...) and yet after (...) his (...) s^culation, nor
being (...) till he has consulte^ (...) (...) Vale^? (...) no (...) (...) you
with all (...) (...) (...) Dialogue that (...) (...) (...), but after (...)
(...) Parrotted over (...) (...) (...), Chedreux, (...) (...) (...), Picards
(...) (...) (...), and a de^^ (...) (...) (...) Rabble, Pedie^^^ (...) and
after Monsier (...) (...) completely (...) his (...) o^ chevalis, (...) ^park
(...) forth of his Chamber (...) a Peacock, beseeching (...) Winds to favor
his de^^^te Friz, and not but a lack or a Curl out of Joint. Then'tis very
edifying, to ^ind how the Coxcomb an (...) for Admirers. The good^^mr'd Animal
fancies eve^^ Body's in Love with him, (...) casts an Eye on his Ac^^plish'd
Phis'nomy, and (...) as he walks along the (...) I should have said (...)
along, for he scorns to (...) the vulgar Mechanic Pace. (...) be no less taken
with (...) Scene, when our Spark, ^^be is moving along, like an (...) of Wax,
or Piece of (...) Clockwork, deeply occupied in the Contemplation of this
Wo^derf^l (...) is (...) for a (...), what ^uck^^ (...) and scraping (...) is
b^^ween can? You (...) they were (...) one ano^^^ ^span go their (...) as to
(...) (...) o^^^^ (...) over one Shoulder and then over to there, ^^abbering
each others Cheeks, like a (...) of (...) (...) that take turns to lies one
another where it (...) you' ^wear they were (...) and were (...). It needs
(...) be a sweet Exercise for a couple of Puppies to brush one another Chaps
with their bristled Beards! Especially when perfumed with the odoriserous scent
of Tobacco. Pursue him to to the Coffee: House, where he generally takes his
Mornings Draught, and you would find him either the Cipher, or the Single Ten of
the Company. Either he fits like Jack Adams, and brings forth nothing but a few
dull Stories, the Tackers together of other Men's Words; or if he ventures to
let his empty Noddle ta^^ wind, all his Discourse is of Dresses, Pimps and
Whores, or the like insignificant Stuff, embroidered now then with Oaths and
God-d -- mes, which renders him the Scorn of all Civil Company. Men of Sense
Lampoon him to his Face, and he takes it for a Pan^gyrick: And the very Coffee-
Bo^s having once found out the Gallants soft place, burlesque upon the Noble
Squire, while the Silly Creature takes all this for Respect. -- Trace him from
thence to the Ordinary, or Eating House; if he dines alone, he may pass for a
wise Man, according to the old Rule, That a Fool cannot be known to be such by
his silence. But if he engages with other Company, they make a double use of
him, one to help their Digestion, by affording them continual matter of
Laughter and Ridicule, and the other, to pay the odd Money of the RecKoning,
which the easy ^op never refuses, that he may appear a complaisant and
well-bred Gentleman. -- And now his Belly's full, the Lambkin begins to grow
wanton, and has a great mind to visit his Sempstress or Milliners -Shop, on
purpose to be admired by little Miss that fits behind the Counter, with whom he
enters into a profound Chat about the newest Fashion for Crevats, what colored
Ribband is most proper for that Season? How deep Men wear their Ruffles? When
he has run himself out of Breath with a Catalogue of the various Whim-^^ams,
such Coxcombs as he wear about 'em, he makes a Parenthesis (by peeping in the
Glass that hangs up in the Shop) finding fault with his Barber, Laundress,
Tailor, etc. on purpose to draw her Eyes toward his Idolized Self. Here begins
the rehearsal of his Morning's Chamber work: He picks a Quarrel with his
Crevat, that he may engage pretty Miss to tie it an w for him. and then he has
a fair Opportunity to make Love by a thousand little effeminate Tricks. Then
his Ruffles don't sit to please him, and Miss is emplo^ed again. Here Is another
advantage, to show his white Hand, whilst the fond Coxcomb falls in Love by the
same methods which he uses to captivate her; and she laughs in her Sleeve at
the ridiculous effeminacy and softness of him, who might otherwise pass for a
Man. If he goes from hence to the Playhouse on a Day when Sir Fopling Flutter,
Sir Martin Marr-all, Sir courtly (...), or any other Comedy is Acted, that may
serve as a Mirror for him to see his own Folly in: He has hardly patience to
sit the first Act out: but as soon as that is over, he flies out of the Pit in
Huff, calls for his Half-Crown, plays the Critic, damns the Play, away he
troops like^ Knight Errant to hunt fox new Adventures; for he knows not what
that Moc^anick-Thing, called Busi^ess, means. He strolls up and down the
Streets, and is never out of his Road, so long as he is within Scent of a Tavern
or Alehouse, where he may idly pass away his Hours, till the Evening Change
Time calls for him to beat the Hoof in Fleet Street, cheap side, or the Strand,
in pursuit of some Female Bargain. But here is the ^ee'l on it, though he means
well, yet his Luck's naught; for he is a Fumbler at Courtship, that the better
sort of Night-Walk^^ put him out of of Countenance, and he is forced either to
take up with some Ordinary Pug, who ten to one picks his Pockets before she
leaves him; or being balked in this important Design, he sneaks into some
Coffe-House, to end the Day as he began it, and go Home to Bed the same Fop be
rose. -- AFter all this, Gentlemen, will you persist to libel Women, because
they use some innocent Arts to reclaim you from these Follies? Believe me,
these Towers and Top-knots are no others than Satyr^, on your high crisp'd
^iggs, and Dangling Locks, your Spruce c^^ust-strings, Swords-knots, and the
rest of your Finical Dress. I dare be bold to challange you in the Name of all
the Female Sex; begin you, and show a good Example, leave all of all this
effeminate Clutter; abandon your Fopperies and Vices, and act like a Man of
Sense and I Will engage the Women will quickly follow your steps, and re-asluming
the ancient Spirit and Valor, of our renowned Ancestors the Picts, we'll
accompany you to the Wars, and make all the World to tremble at the Name of the
English Amazo^s. Tre^^^ between a Common Lady and her Husband. Give no place to
wrath, but give place to your Husbands in time of their wrath. Anger is
madness, and as strong
In force, but not in course so long.
The only way to allay passion, is to calm it with an expostulation. This that
bravely composed Roman Lady, made excellent use of; who when she found her
Husband quite off the hinges; affecting nothing more, then to catch at offense;
with a sweet countenance, and pleasing language, she entered into a fair treaty
after this manner. O my dear Quintianus, whence may these Distempers grow? you
had a Juliana, I must confess, a consort well diserving your choice; and
because your now espoused Chariclea supplies her place, does is repent you of
your change? And yet, me thinks, should you ^ecollect yourself, a^^ (...) an
equal scale weigh your Caric^^^'s Love, you would hold it a^ ungrateful
guerdon, ^o ^^quit^ her Loyal Love with a dista^leful look. Your first choice
was fair, incomparably fair, of a graceful presence, per^ language! It is
confessed. Y^^ knew this Abstrat of perse^^on, to break forth into passion. But
she knew her own worth, so as passion lodging in such a Subject, might admit an
easy dispensation; and make that Eagerness appear a Virtue in her; whereas
even Mil^ness* seated in so imperfect a Piece as my self, may present it self
like a Vice, being shrouded with s^ mean a Cover! believe i^ (...)* as Nature
has not bestowed an m^* to make me proud? relinquish me for ever, if my respect
to honor shall not supply those defects of a ^^^e exquisite Feature: Your
anger shall not beget in me the least Distemper; but, if at any time I be
moved, it shall be, because you are discontented. Have you occasion to rejoice?
I shall increase it. Have you cause to griev^? I shall allay it. Should you in
a^^ extrimity suffer, I should desire nothing more then to become your sharer.
Many, very many might you have had, (...)* more choice in proportion* but never
a^^ more true in her affection in one word* as there i^ n^ office in Chariclea,
which shall not bestow it self to Quintianus's ^^no^^, during life: So (...) it
be Quintianus's gooddess to accept the loya^^ sacrifice of her devoutest Love.
-- This Conjugal protest wrought so impressive an afecct in her too passionate
Husband* as, recollecting his dis-joynted affections, he became so truly
inamoured of his Choice, as the conceit of her inparallel'd virtues estranged
his resolves, not only from the least apprehension of a future Change, but
fairly attempered in him all Motives of choler; so as, it was rare to find in
him upon any occasion whatsoever, any appearance of Distemper* much less of any
inconsiderate anger. There is no doubt but grounds of distaste may be easily
suggested; especially* where either Jealousy, arising from an exuberance of
fancy; or an intended desire to displease, works upon the conceit of the party.
But admit, Gentlewomen, your Eyes and Ears were so strongly possessed of your
injured Bed, as you may visibly perceive a breach and violation of that faith,
which by a sacred vote, should in reason and religion have admitted no blemish
unto death: Yet if you shall find a re^e^^ting disposition in them, do not
aggravate your wrongs by too bitter an expression of them. The confession of a
wrong should beget in you an indulgent ^mile; if not a parson.

Tiara (Lat.) a round Ornament for the head, which Princes, Pr^^^^^* and women
of old time wore. Hence we still call it a tire for a woman's head, and a
tiring-woman. It is sometimes used for the Popes triple Crown. Terrestrial
Paradise, the place where God framed so ^^ble a Creature as Woman. with remarks
upon the V^i ^^ and Affection that is betwixt Man and (...). God was pleased to
make Woman of Man, to show the Union and Affection that ought to be in
Matrimony, or to admonish Women to acknowledge with Obedience the cause of
their Being: He made choice of the Rib, taken from the left side, to advertise
us that Woman, ought to be the Heart of Man, not the Head, or that it was taken
from A^am in the making of so fair ^ Creature, that if she committed any fault,
it might be ^^puted as well to him, because done by a part of himself, new
framed and molded into the beautifullest Object of the lower Creation. --
Terrestrial Paradise was the place where God formed so noble (...) Creature as
Woman, but (...) for the Man he was Created (...) in the Field of Damas^us,
(...) some hold it, but we all ^^ree, he was not Created in Paradise, but
brought thi^^her after he was made, and (...) that means she surpasied ^im in
the Nobility, of the Place of her Birth: God, (...) for the mor expeditious
population of the World, could have made me^ only in multitudes, b^^ divine
Wisdom considered more harmony, love and joy in this difference of Sex: Woman
was made, as we may not unaptly say, upon the second thought, and therefore the
more refined and excellent; and that Love and Peace and Concord, should the
better be observed; he so ordained it, that the whole Race, that in after days
was to spread over the face of the Earth, should descend from one Father and
one Mother, to be the nearer allied. Scarce was Adam released, from the soft
opression of sleep, when the beautiful Object met his Eyes; the observing,
admiring, and loving her, was in him but as one act, done in one and the same
time; she carrying in her Face, such singular Endowments, that not to
appropriate them to himself, would have been the Effects of stupidity rather
than prudence: Beauty has so strange a Virtue, and wit has a sweet and
pleasing Tyranny that it Introduces subjection into the noblest minds, and the
most courageous breast; so that Adam no doubt, contemplated this fair Object
with wonder and admiration; he observed in her a gravity so full of tenderness,
that compelled him to esteem, and highly value her Golden hair waveing by the
gentle breath of Winds on her Ivory Shoulders, and her sparkling Eyes that had
mounting Fires in them, with the sight of the Roses and Lillies striving in her
lovely Cheeks for Mastery, could not but captivate his hearts, and make him
stoop to Love, whilst on the other side her Eyes were no less ravished with the
delights that every where surrounded her, but most of all with the comely shape
and manly form of him from whom she was taken, and who is partner she was
created to be, and after eager gazing and shooting the beams of their Eyes into
each other Souls, the Tongue broke forth and flowed in streams of ardent
Expressions and love Passions: He knew by an instinct of Nature that she must
be certainly a part of himself, that had such an attracting power to draw him
so forcibly to her, he called her his joy, content, and delight, summing up all
his desires in her; and to be brief, Women have derived from Heaven so sweet a
Tyranny in their Faces, that the denying them the subjection of Hearts, is
thought by some unreasonable however; we must allow him either to be defective
as to his Manhood, or endued qualities, superior to the commanding standard of
the World, that can at all times resist the Charms of Female Beauty. -- Thus
becoming more intimately acquainted, clad in their native Innocence; nakedness
was to them no shame, because not guilty of shame, whilst they stood firm and
high in the savor of the Almighty, in whose peculiar care they were; hand in
hand they walked, the fairest couple that ever were produced on Earth, and no
doubt he showed her, the interdicted Tree of Knowledge, and warned her to
beware she tasted, and by her disobedience forfeited her happy state; told her
the penalty, perhaps better unknown to her; for if it was in her nature then,
as it certainly is in the nature of many of her Daughters, since the
prohibition, might raise in her an Appetite of coveting, for denial adds a spur
to their desires ardent enough in all things, but many times insatiable in that
which is most denied: Pardon us Ladies, for this bold truth, though we do not
allow it to extend to all, and we appeal to you, if in many particulars in this
case; you concur not with us. This Fair Creature the, we may suppose,
transported with the prohibition, grew more curious and inquisitive into the
reason and nature of it, which mainly assisted the Devil in fastening his
temptation; for it is the opinion of the best Divines, and with them we agree,
that Satan has no power to compel the mind to Evil, but in bringing about his
purposes, is ashifted by our weakness and Inclinations to gratify our
inordinate desires and affections, and that he might the better prevail upon
her, it appears he watched his opportunity, masqueraded in the disguise of a
Serpent to take her alone, destitute of the Council, and Advice of her Husband,
and so the Temptation easily working, when her own Inclinations met it half
sway, for she (it seems) like many Women of our times, covering to be more wise
than he^ circumstances required, merely fooled her self into the greatest of
Follies and madness that ever was acted in the World, losing for the sake of an
Apple, and the knowledge of Evil (for good she knew before, though not the
fatal difference between them) her self and all her Posterity) becoming of a
fair and lovely Innocent, a miserable wretched Criminal, which loss, nothing
but the rich redeeming blood of God, shed in compassion to our frailties, could
in any degrees restore all the Angels, Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphins,
combining their power in one, were incapable of paying this single forfeiture,
none but the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, was none but the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, which commenced in the Promise given, though he dyed
not actually then, was found worth to take the Book out of the hand of him that
sat on the Throne and able to open the Seals thereof, to work out the stupen
lions mastery of Man's Redemption: it is amazing that the often ^ed should suffer
to set the offender free from punishment. But now the men may be apt to crow
and upbraid the Women with this defect of ^ve; indeed they have little re^ on
for it, but rather to take shame to themselves, for we find, though she had a
mighty Archangel, wise and subtle, though somewhat faded in falling from his
glorious state, she resisted the Temptation ^or a time, and urged Reasons
against complying with it; but Adam was (...) the first proster of the
forbidden Fruit, as far as we see, overcome by a weak Woman, though he had a
sad Example other Fall before his E^^s, some will, to reverse this, allege,
that she being part of himself, and fallen, the whole was corrupted, and that
he was incapable of standing without her, but this we leave to the
determination of the Casuists, and proceed to say, that perhaps when by the sad
remorse of her Conscience, she found her self lost, we cannot conclude it out
of Envy, but rather out of the Love she bore to him, she resolved to have her
(...) band with her, into what state soever she was to pasafter her
disobedience* so one falling into the Water, suddenly, catches hold of (...)
Friend, to (...) no harm, and pulls him into the same Misfortune, (...) is
dropping into; for when she had eaten her self, we cannot find that she invited
him to the True, but brought him (...) of (...) as it were (...) him; ^or he
confessed (...) guiled him, and he (...) which appears to us, (...) though he
knew where (...) Then stood, and could distinguish the Fruit on the Boughs, he
might be deceived in taking that she gave him, to be the Fruit of some other
Tree, and so fell, being ignorant of what he did, but this is too weighty for
us to determine; however he was overcome by her, and she perfected that which
the Devil wanted courage to attempt. That they could see before, was certain,
but now the Eyes of their Consciences, were opened to guilt and horror, almost
bordering on Despair, for having so foolishly betrayed their happiness, and for
so trivial a matter offended so good and gracious a God, who had done all
things for them: Then their Nakedness appeared, and they with sorrow and Tears
wished it undone, but it was too late; the Almighty Word was passed and could
(...) recalled: Naked (...) before the Fall was (...) as in Chil^^^^ he their
(...) infancy, not (...) who sees their (...) parts; but when (...) to
knowledge of Good and Evil, then they (...) ashamed, if any such thing be but
accidentally (...), however we find (...), the (...) no (...) part (...) with
them, (...) Thorny and (...) Regions of the World. ^aber ^^habfour, is very
decent and seemly, and ought to be Critically and Nicely observed, by reason
offenses and (...), are soonner taken (...) than almost any where else, though
they are not (...) or given willingly but by (...) or oversight; and (...) in
Dier (...) in other things we need not tell you Ladys, that it is unseemly to
(...) with your Elbows on (...). To loll over or to keep your Body in a heaving
motion, none but Children, or those that are weaker of their Senses, can be
Ignorant of this; and that to fix your Eyes upon any thing too eagerly, or
being overhasty in Craving, it is not at all decent. If you are invited
abroad, there is care to be taken how you place your self; let your quality be
what it will, be not your own chuser, for the best place, but rather take one
lower till that is recommended to you, and as it were forced upon you; nor be
too forward in choosing, but make some Excuse if you are (...) to do it, yet
(...) than be (...) you carve for you tell or others, remember it is (...) to
put your Fingers (...) Mouth as some, either forgetful of themselves or
Ignorant of behavior; (...) Meat is hot, or any such (...) offers as may (...)
if you were in the (...) by all means it (...) at the Table, (...) giving
offense to (...) Always in (...) keep your (...) and upright (...) for Leaning
over, (...) modes many times your apparel, and is unsightlys (...) now by
reason, even some Ladies may be Ignorant, what is most acceptable to be
presented (...) Friends, when (...) cause it has not (...) much their (...)
Carvers, we think it (...) to give Directions in this matter. -- It Is generally
agreed that of all Wild Fowls, the wings are the best, next to the (...) piece;
and of Tame Fowls, the Legs, because they are most in use, the one by stying,
and the other by walking or scratching. In Bief Boiled or Roast, that which is
curiously Interlarded, is the best in esteem. In a Loin of Veal, the Nut or
Kidney, part in the middle. In a Leg or Mutton the little bone on the outside
the Joint, is fancied by many for a rarity for we remember a story (...); not
(...); of (...); before (...) as fancying Clowns had (...); of it, by (...)
they had less that (...); which he (...) (...); to their Ignorance, (...); the
best piece. A Shoulder of Mutton is to (...); cut semiricular between (...) and
the slap, which ^wprd^ is thy most approved. in a Roasted Pig, the uuder jaws,
Rats, and Neck part, are most in esteem, In Hares, (...) and Rabbits, (...)
which is called the (...); is preserved which (...); side of the Tail, (...);
to that the Loins (...); piece. In a Cod^^ the Head is the rarest Dainty. In
Salmon and Sturgeon, the Jowls, and of all lesser Fish, the middle part. As for
Paistry, there needs no further direction than to deal it out decently with an
equality of inwards and outward where variety is at the Table be patient till
your turn comes to be served, or to serve our self. Neither be too nice or
curious, as if you had a dislike or took distaste at any thing; nor be lou^, or
too often in asking for any thing you want; but if you can conveniently, and it
be out of course whisper those that attend to help you to it; (...) talking ^t
Dinner any more than is necessarily convenient, for that hinders your self and
others, and lets things cool and spoil by lengthening out the time. It must
never be asked at another Table what any thing cos^; that is a fi^ter question
to demand of the Cook maid in the Kitchen. If there be any thing that disgusts
you, however receive it civilly in course though you deliver it untouched at
the next change of plates. If you are left to your liberty which the rest to
carve for your self, let not your hand be first advanced, but give away to
others unless their Complements in a manner Constrain you to it, and then carve
on that s^e of the Dish that is toward you; unless it requires turning round,
but by all means avoid reaching your Arms over to the further side, and see
that you over charge not your Plate, cut as near as you can at once, what you
intend shall suffice you of one Dish; avoid eating too fast for fear an
indecency may fall out in it is sticking by the way, and offer not to speak when
your mouth is full; nor smack with your Lips, for those things will prove
ungrateful to the company; if any thing you are to eat with a spoon be so hot,
you cannot well endure it in your Mouth, do not stand sipping to make wry
faces; but set it a side, or wait with patience till it cools; blowing in a
Dish, or Spoon, is uncomly at a Table, where strangers are especially, or to be
so eagar of eating, that the heat causes tears to stand in your Eyes. It will
not be taken well if you criticize or find fault with any thing on the Table,
during the repa^t though at your own, more especially than at another Table;
be cautious at that time to give rough Language to the Servants for any thing
that appears amiss; but reprove them, if it must be, with Gentleness in
drinking; proceed not so far as to be out of Breath, that you must blow in the
Glass or other Vessel it is presented to you in. And now Ladies, since we have
been upon the subject of Good eating, etc. It puts us in mind of what we ought
not to pass over, and that is the term for carving for though a Lady carve not
her self, she may give directions and if she does it in the wrong phrase, it
will occasion a simpering in the more knowing. It was the opinion of Lucallus
the Noble Roman, that there was as much care to be taken in the well managing a
Feat, as in the Marshalling of an Army; that the one might be as pleasing to
Friends, as the other terrible to Enemies; in cutting up therefore all manner
of small Birds, we say thigh them as Wood-^ocks, Pigeons, Partridges, etc. The
term for a Plover, is, Mince it; for a Quail, wing it; for a Pheasant, allay
it; a Cur^ew, attach it; a Bittern unjoynt it; a Peacock, disfigure it; a
Crane, display it; a Hern, Dismember it; a Mallard, unbrace it; a Chicken,
trust it; a Hen, spoil her; a Capon, Sauce it; a Swan, chit it; a Goose, tear
her; a Coney, unlace her; a Dear, Creak it; Brawn, leach it; and for Fish, viz.
A Salmon, chi^e it; a Lampry, string it; a Pike, splat it; a Place or Tench,
sauce it; Bream, splay it; a Haddock, side it; a Barble, tusk it; a Trout,
culpon it; an ^el, transon it; a Crab, tame it; a Sturgeon, Tranch it; and a
Lobster, barb it. Thus having the terms, we shall direct such as need it how to
cut up some of these, by which means being brought dexteriously to handle their
Knife and Fork, they may the better manage the rest, To life a Swan, slit her
right down in the middle of the breast, also through the back bone, from the
Neck to the Rump, and so laying the divided parts in the Dish, the inward parts
downwards; let your Sauce be chaldron, apart in Sawcers, and then every one may
cut as best likes the party. To rear or break a Goose, is to take off the legs
very fair, then to cut off the belly piece round, close to the lower end of the
breast, and with your Knife lace her down, quite through the breast on each
side, a thumbs breadth from the breast bone, then take off the wings on each
side, with the Flesh you first laced, raising it from the bone, and then cut up
the Merry-thought, and having cut up an other piece of Flesh which you formerly
laced, then turn the Carcass and cut it asunder, the back bone above the Loins,
take the Rump end of the back and lay it at the sore end of the Merry thought
with the Skinny side upward, then lay your pinions on each side contrary, set
your legs on each side contrary behind them, that the bond and of the Leg may
stand up in the Middle of the Dish, and the wing pinions on the out sides of
them put under the wing pinions on each side, the long slices of Flesh which
you cut off the breast bone and let the ends meet under the leg bones. To deal
in like manner with a a Turkey or Bustard, raise the leg very fair, then open
the Joint with the sharp point of your Knife, but take not the legs off, then
lace down the breast on both sides, and open the breast pinion, but take it not
off; then raise up the Merry-thought between the breast bone and the top of the
Merry-thought; lace down the Flesh on both sides of the breast bone. And raise
up the Flesh called the Brawn, turn it outward on both sides, but break it
not, nor cut it off, then cut off the wing pinions, at the Joint next the Body,
and stick on each side the pinion in the place where you turned out the Brawn,
but cut off the sharp end of the pinion, take the middle piece, and you will
find it just fit the place: and in the like manner a Capon, Pheasnt, and most
Fowls of largeness may be cut up. A Capon cut up in this manner, only differs
in placing, slit the Gizard, in the place where the pinions, of the Turkey, as
aforesaid are laid. In dismembering a Hern, take off both the legs and lace it
down the breast, then raise up the Flesh, and take it quite off with the
pinion, then stick the head in the breast, and set the pinion, on the contrary
side of the Carcass, and the leg on the other side, by which means the bones
ends will meet cross over the Carcass, and the other wing crossing over, on the
top of the Carcass. To unbrace a Mallard, raise the pinions and legs, but take
them not off, raise the Merry thought from the breast, and with your Knife lace
it sloaping on each side the breast. To unlace a Coney, place the belly
upwards, and take off the flaps from the Kidneys, then put in the point of your
Knife between the Kidneys, and loosen the Flesh from the bone on each side,
then turn up the back, and cut it cross between the wings, and lace it down
close by the done on each side, then open the Flesh from the bone against the
Kidneys, and pull open the legs softly with your hands, but not quite off, then
thrust in your Knife, between the Ribs and Kidneys, and slit out, and lay the
Legs close together. In displaying a Crane, unfold his Legs, and cut off his
Wings by the Joints, then take up his Wings and Legs and sauce them with
Mustard, Vinegar, Salt, and Powder of Ginger well mixed together: The same
Sauce is for a Hern, and though a Biltern is to be dismembered, after the same
manner, yet seldom any thing is used with it, except Salt: And for a Partridge
minced, Wine, Ginger and Salt over a Chafin-dish of Coals, and the like for
Quails. In allaying a Pheasant, you must raise the Wings and Legs, and cut it
up as a Capon. -- This may give an Insight to the Art of Carving, which however
it may be disesteemed by some, and thought beneath their Notice, yet we (...)
them that to be ignorant is it, shows a great defect in Table-knowledge, for a
Car^^^ not being at hand at all times in all places. It will look very odd to
see Ladies with covered Table be^^^^ them, to which they have brought keen
Appetites, and yet sit gazing on each other, and none of them showing how to
begin according to the accepted way (...) dividing their Dainties; (...) to
tear them to pieces, (...) the rustic manner, is (...) undecent, and not only
^^^aids them with want of all, but in some manner (...), such delicates have
(...) strangers to their Bills (...) Fare, and may likewise (...) a squeamish
Stomach, (...) prove ungrateful where thought to give the highest satisfaction
to the Appetite; ^^^ever, if they do think it unworthy office for their (...)
hands, we crave leave (...) recommend it to their ^^^vants as a necessary
Instruction and addition to their ^er acquirements; and since (...) in season
are of most (...) and esteem, we pre^^^^ likewise a Bill of fare of (...)
things for the first and second Courses, as Custom (...) brought into Fashion,
through the circling of the Year in its respective Months, and recommend it to
those who love good Eating, and are curious in their Guests. January first
Course.
1 Brawn and Mustard. 2 Two boiled Capons with white Broth. 3 A Roasted Turkey.
4 A shoulder of Mu^ton hasht. 5 Two Geese Boiled. 6 Two Geese Roasted. 7 Ribbs
or Sir-Loyn of Beef. 8 Minced Pyes. 9 A Loyn of Veal. 10 A Venison Pasty. 11 A
Marrow Pie. 12 Roasted Capons. 13 Lamb. 14 Wood-Cocks, Partridges and Larks.
Second Course.
1 A Soust Pigg. 2 A Warden Pie. 3 Dried neats Tongues. 4 A Soust Capon. 5
Mushrooms and pickled Oysters. 6 Sturgeon. 7 A Goose or Turkey-Pye.
February first course.
1 A Chine of Roast Pork. 2 Veal or Beef Roasted. 3 A Lamb Pie, and minced
Pyes. 4 A couple of Wild Ducks* 5 A couple of Rabbits. 6 Fried Oysters. 7
Skirrots.
Second Course.
1 A Lamb roasted whole. 2 Pigeons. 3 Pippin Tarts. 4 A Joul of Sturgeon. 5 A
cold Turkey.
March the first Course.
1 Neats Tongue and Udder. 2 Boiled Chickens. 3 A Dish of stewed Oysters. 4 A
Dish of young Rabbits. 5 A grand Sallad.
Second Course.
1 A Dish of Soles and Smelts. 2 Marinated Flownders. 3 A Lamb-stone and
Sweetbread Pie. 4 A Dish of Asparagus. 5 A Warden Pie.
April first Course.
1 Green Geese or Veal and Bacon. 2 A Haunch of Venison roasted. 3 A Lumber
Pie. 4 Rabbets and Tarts.
Second Course.
1 Cold Lamb* 2 A Neats Tongue Pie. 3 Salmon, Lobster and Pruens 4 Asparagus.
May first Course.
1 Boiled Chickens. 2 Roast Veal. 3 Roasted Capons. 4 Rabbets.
Second Course.
1 A hot Artichoak Pie. 2 Westphalia-Hams and Tar^. 3 Sturgeon, Salmon, and
Lobsters. 4 Asparagus. 5 A Tansie.
June first Course.
1 A Leg of Mutton and Colly-flowers. 2 A Steak Pie. 3 A shoulder of Mutton. 4
A fore-Quarter of Lamb. 5 A Dish of Pease.
Second Course.
1 A Sweetbread Pie. 2 A Capon roasted. 3 Goosebery Tarts. 4 Straw-berries and
Crea^ or, Straw-berries, white wine, Rose water and Sugar.
July first Course.
1 A Westphalia-Ham and Pigeons. 2 A Loyn of Veal. 3 A Venison Pasty. 4 Roasted
Capons.
Second Course.
1 French Beans. 2 Codling Tarts. 3 An Artichoack Pie. 4 Roasted Chickens.
August first Course.
1 Calves-Head and Bacon. 2 An Oglio or Grand boiled meats. 3 A Haunch of
Venison Roasted 4 A Pig roasted.
Second Course
^ Marinate Smelts. ^ A Pidgeon Pie. ^ Roast Chickens. Tarts. ^ Cream and Fruit.
September first Course.
^ Capon and white broth. ^ Neats Tongues and Udder. ^ A powdered Goose. ^ A
Turkey Roasted.
Second Course.
^ A Potato Pie. ^ ^^^^ridges roasted. ^ A Dish of Larks. ^ Cream and Fruit.
October, first Course.
^ Loin of Veal. (...) brand Geese roasted. ^ grand Sallad. (...) Capons.
Second Course.
^^^^ants, Pouts and Pigeons ^ Dish of Quails or Spar^^^. ^ Warden-Pye Tarts,
or ^^ards.
November, first Course.
1 A shoulder of Mutton and Oysters. 2 A Loin of Veal. 3 Roasted Geese. 4 A
Venison Pasty.
Second Course.
1 Two herns, one Larded. 2 A soust Turbut. 3 Two Pheasants, one larded 4 A
Roll of Beef. 5 A Soust Mullet and Bass. 6 Jellies and Tarts.
December first Course.
1 Stewed Broth and Mutton* and Marrow-Bones. 2 Lambs Heads, and white-Broth. 3
A Chine of Beef. 4 Minced Pyes. 5 A Roast Turkey stuck with Cloves. 6 Two
Capons.
Second Couse.
^ A Lamb or Kidd whole. 2 Two brace of Partridges. 3 A Quince Pie. 4 Half a
dozen of WoodCocks.
For Fasting Days Bill of Fare, etc.
Oysters, if in Season, a Pole of Ling; green Fish and Eggs, Pruens, Butter,
Craw-Fish Boiled; Pikes stewed, Carps with Oysters; Soles fried, Spitchcock'd
Eels; roasted or fried Smelts, Salmon, Lobsters and Sturgeon; Buttered Eggs,
Barley broth, Rice Pottage, Haddocks, Whiting, Carp, Pyke soust, Turbut,
buttered Crabs, Salmons, Sturgeon, Skirts fried, Soust Conger: And indeed these
ar fit to be recommended to Ladies at any time, for there is no fear of
Imparing their Beauty and health by Fasting, if they gratify their Appetite to
the purpose with these kind of Viands.

As for the methods and manner of Cookery, we think them no ways convenient to
be inserted in this Book, as not so suitable to our purpose; but the concern of
another Classis somewhat inferior to this: Ladies very rarely meddling in that
affair, or if they do, we are very well assured, it is not very pleasing to
their Maids, whose proper Province it is. The Fire indeed makes them hot and
Fretful, but where a Lady intrudes on their concerns, it redoubles their Heat
by Anger, which they are too mannerly to express in words, yet their
forwardness and gesture makes it visible, and many a Lady out of curiosity,
going to give Kitchen directions, has done no good, but a great deal of harm,
by causing a good dinner to be spoiled; for the Cook-maid supposing her self
too. Old, or too experienced to be taught, while she in a discomposed manner
has been fretting like Gum'd Taffata, the Jack has stood still, the Sawces
washed to nothing, and the over-boiling Pot pist out the Fire, so that all
being in disorder and confusion, the lady has suffered in her Conduct, by being
over-nicely curious, in it.




Temperature, full Diet climate and Idleness, the causes of Love. These Causes
only incline to that we call Heroi^^ call Love, or those that se^^ with the
Eyes of their passion, rather than the Eyes of Reason, and differs in many
material Points, little from Lust, or hot burning def^^^ of Enjoyment, that
over powers the Faculties, and makes them subservient to its ends; the remotest
of these Causes some hold to be the Stars. -- Those that ha^^ Venus and Leo in
their Horoscope, say, they are more prone to this manner Love; when Venus and
the Moon be mutually in Aspe^^ or such as be of Venus Compexion; but of these,
((...) some hold) unaccountable astrological Aphorisms, (...) find that the
Stars at the most, can be only inclini^^ not compelling; for then must allow
them not to second causes, even more than can be reasonably distributed to
Creatures. -- Temperature, is that which Joins it with Complexion, from whence
Physicians gather their conjectures, and to conclude that Phlegmatic Persons
are not much inclined to Love, and those that are Melancholy less than they,
however, it is held, if this fire once ^izes them, it is very hard to be
Extinguished, though their Opinions are, that da^^ous ^^ous or Hypocondraical
Melancholy, when once taken, (...) surely chained till Age or some
extraordinary distem (...) sets it free; and further, that the violent Passion
proceeds from abundance of ^ind, as ^^ine asserts; but ^^^donus from Seed and
Spirits, Atoms in the Seed which (...) up a violent passion: San^^^ therefore
is soonest caught and the younger sort most ^one to Love. Theomestus ^^^ing of
that constitution, acknowledged that he was so ^morously given, that one might
sooner number the (...) Sands, and falling Snow, (...) his several Loves, being
deluded with various degrees, one Love succeeding another, and no sooner was
(...) ended, but a second croud^^^ upon him: The last that pitched on, being
always Fairest in his Eyes, though that was present pleased in the most; his
Eyes and affections, like too many in (...) Age, were like the Balance to
propend as the weight turned it; his Heart was a Weather cock, his Affections
Tinder, which a smile or an Amorous glance could turn or set on Fire, and this
is by some reffered to the Atoms in the Seed, and to other causes of the like
nature, and those that are subject to it, are gerally were strong and active,
and to this the Climate adds much. The Southern Countries are more prone to
Venery, by reason of the heat, than those more Northward. -- The Moscovities,
Mogors, Xeriss, and Persian Sophies, press and muster up Women as we do
Soldiers, to satisfy their Lust, even the rarest Beauties their Countries can
afford, and even those cannot keep them from Invading others properties, and
from unseemly Acts, as Adultery, Incest, etc. Diet, no doubt is a great
provocation to the desire of carnal Embraces; and indeed pardon us, Ladies, for
this Expression. It is something rare to see young Men and Women, that live
idly, and fare deliciously, of what condition soever, not to be in Love.
Alcibiades made it his Recreation to be dallying with young Women even to
immoderate Excess and Expenses; his very Apparel being Effminate, and one main
incitement to it, was his over delicacy in Diet. Nor are the Fair Sex wanting
to Indulge their Appetites upon the like occasion, with all the dainties Earth,
Air, and Sea can afford them. Temperance and its rare effects. Temperance is
certainly one of the Chiefest Pillars of Life and business; it is the support
of Health, Wealth, and Reputation; when it was demanded of Leotichydas, why the
Spartans were so sparing in their Diet, it is, said he, because we had rather
consult for others, than they should do it for us, meaning, that Intemperance
hurts the Mind, and rendered either Sex unfit for Council or advice, and that
only Temperance and Sobriety are the Parents of sound and wholesome Resolves to
the Benefit of human Felicity and Conversation. And indeed all other Virtues
are obscured for want of this; for where the contrary is, the Mind and Body are
out of frame, but by it they are wonderfully improved, which is the reason that
the wisest, noble, and ignoble of all Ages, have chose it as the only preserver
of a comfortable Being on this side the Grave. The Ancients took a pride in
living sparingly, and the Roman Virtue ceased, when Luxury put Temerance to
flight; and indeed where Intemperance reigns, it brings in all manner of Vices,
for the Head Being full of the Vapors of Wine, or the Stomach overcharged with
curious dainties, the Body and Mind conspire to perpetrate many Evils. Time to
be improved. Time is the most precious of things upon Earth, if the advantages
accruing by it be rightly considered; for indeed, it is not only by a wife and
Judicious improvement here gives us what we reasonably can wish, but like a
golden Chain let down from Heaven being improved to our Soul andvantage; it
leads or draw us to Heaven and eternal happiness: The Wise man counts it very
precious, and earnestly admonishly us to use it whilst it is in our power to do
well; the Ancients pictured time bald behind, (...) with a forelock very large
and long, signifying in (...) Emblematical way, that those that took the
advantage ^^laying hold of his Fore-lock might accomplish their desires but
when he had passed them there was no overtaking him or hold to be laid on, Post
(...) occasio Calva, was the old Motto, and indeed it hold (...) sadly true in
our Age, with many, that we might recommend you to, for a further confirmation,
which puts (...) in mind of a Story not improper to the Subject. A young
Gentlewoman had (...) aspiring hope of greater things strangely withstood her
Fortune, so that it being given out that she was proud, (...) and disdainful,
her first ^^reres having lest her, she ^^^nd but a thin Harvest of succeeders,
and those not comparable to the former Admirers; this vexed her, and made her
Gaul overflow at a strange rate, but fretting could not mend it in that
conjuncture though she yet appeared very stiff, and stood day upon her
pantoffles; one day she asked an Old Jilting ^^rse, the reason of it: Why
truly, replied she, fair Daugh^^^, the case was just so with and my punishment
has occasioned me to live a Maid, as Maids go now, till I am come to two snaggs
and a (...); therefore let me persuade you to one thing my dear Child, to
convince you, before Time's Forelock is got out of your Reach. And I pray, said
Miss, what may that be. Why, replied she, on (...) go to yonder Wood, and bring
me the straightest and ^^est Stick you can find in passing through it, but when
you have passed any, turn not back to cut one; our ^^y Lady simpered at this,
as not knowing well what to make on it, but taking, without asking any more
questions, a sharp Instrument in her hand, t^king up her Petticoats like Diana,
away she tripp'd to hunt for the stick (...) should please her best, and in her
choice, you must know, it not declining from her former humor, she was very
nice and made no liking till she came to the out skirts of the Wood, where were
only a few crooked and Knotty Beech Plants, when not to break her word with her
Governante, she cut the best she was forced to like, and with much shame and
perplexity, a hanging down Head, and sour countenance, Lips pouring, and Brows
bending, she came drawling it after her, to her that sent her about the
business you wo^ of. It Is thought, Fair Angels, there is no necessity that we
should put a Moral to this, but rather leave it to your own candid
constructions, who are best Judges and Interpreters of such matters. Top Knots.
It was a serene Sun shine Morning that Dame Nature came forth from her
Retirements, to take a Survey of her Works, and recreate her self with the
Prospect of her own beautiful Image scattered through the Universe: She beheld
the Sun, that glorious Fountain of Light casting abroad his Splendors with an
unva^led Countenance; but the more modest Moon shrouded above half her Face
under a Mask, unwilling to be exposed to the laseivious Eye of every Endymion,
she saw the rest of the Planets and Stars bashfully twinkling their innocent
Glances at each other, and on all the World; she traversed the Elements, and
observed every thing kept the Order which she had first appointed it. But she
fixed a more particular Eye on Man, the Masterpiece of all her Works, the
Masterless Epitome of the whole Creation; and calling to mind his primitive
Perfections, with the Tragical Story of his Fall she fetched a deep Sigh, which
made the Earth to tremble. Whilst she was pensively bosied in this
Contemplation, I perceived her Brows suddenly knit, and she gave a start, which
put all the Elements in a Disorder. Looking about me to see what was the
Occasion of this violent Passion, I beheld a LADY passing by her, dressed
Ca-pa-pe-astir the present mode: Upon which I heard the Venerable Matron break
forth into these Expressions; -- Bless me said she! what uncouth Object is this
invades my Eyes! a thing so foreign to all he known Species of Beings! Or am I
super^nuated and some new Power usurped my Place, to sorge the World again, and
hammer out such Forms as never before were ranked in the great List of all my
Works? Stay thou bold Phantasm! tell me what thou art? With that the Lady
turned about, and made her this Answer. -- Lady. You are merrily disposed
Madam, and discover the Brillant of Language in your Expressions: I am pleased
with your Raillery; but pray (...) News from Paris? In what Array did the
Dauphiness appear last Ball? I am told, my Commode is a Tire too low, as they
adjust it at the French Court. -- Nature. Am I (...), or has the Multitude of
Years impaired my Sight and judgment? The Voice is Woman's, but for the prating
Figure I want a Name: I see a moving Pyramid of Gavities, a walking Toy-shop, a
speaking Gallimuasry of Ribbons, Laces, Silk and Jewels, as if some upstart
mimick Nature had been at work, on purpose to upbraid my Skill, and tell me
that in framing Woman, I left out the Essentials. -- Whilst Dame Nature was
thus expostulating the Case with her felf, I heard a sudden Noise raised behind
me, at which looking that way, I saw Heraclitus Ridens standing in a Corner,
ready to break his Twarling string, he was so big with Laughter; it is a fine
time of day, said he, with Women, when Nature her self will not own 'em, as if
she were ashamed of her Productions: Do but mind yonder Lady, she has spent
five Hours this Morning in rigging and C^reening her self for public
^^pearance; and I dare be bold to say, you may as soon resko^ up the Numerous
Tackle of a Ship, as give the ^^^ Nomenclature of all the gaudy whim-whams she
wears about her: You would not wonder at me for changing my Note, had you seen,
as I did, what pains this little She-Lucifer took to day, to mend the supposed
Botchery of Nature in her Face; how she hunted after imaginary Faults in her
Cheeks, to find occasion for Black-Patches; how she placed and displaced 'em an
(...) times over, pursuing the least Spot and Freckle in her Skin to a thousand
Dilammaes, with wash, Paint and Patch, till tired with the tedious Discipline
of her Toilet, she fails forth of her Chamber like a new-launch'd Vessel with
Pendants and Streamers ^^ying, and all her Female Tackle in order, from the Top
and Top Gallant to the H^mble Keel: Do but regard her Rigging above Deck, and
you would swear she carries Row-Streple upon her Head, or the Famous Tower of
Severus in Rome, on which was built seven Ranks of Pillars one above another.
Such a lofty Gradition of Topknots, if it proceeds, will be friend the
Carpenters and Bricklayers, for our Gentry and Tradesmen in time will he forced
to pull down their low pitched Houses, and take the height of the Stories in
the next Scructure, from the elevated Pageant of Trinkets on their Wives and
Daughters Heads, lest these fine Trappings should be Kidnap'd from their empty
Noddles by an unmanerly Brush of the saucy Ceilings. 'Twould make a Dog split
his Halter, to hear the learned Cant between the Mistress and Maid, when about
the important affair of adjusting her Ladyships Array in a morning; you would swear
they were conjuring, they sputter out such a confused Jargon of hard words,
such a Hotch-potch of Mongrel Gibberish: Bring me my Palisade there, quoth
Madam: You Would think she were going to encamp. Will it not be convenient to
attack your Flandan first, says the Maid? More Anger yet? still Military Terms?
Let me see, says Madam, where is my C^rnet? Pray ^arine this, Favorite: So, so,
good words; now there is some hopes of Peace, till the blustering Frilal and
Burgoign are called for, and then the old Catterwawling begins again? -- There
is a Clack of Settees, Passes, Monte la haute, Crotches and other Trinkums,
would make a Man suspect they are raising the Devil: at last comes the Si^-les
front, and then Madam is completely harnass'd for the Play, or the ^^sterious
Ruelle. -- Here H^rocltius made a Digression, at the sight of a Troop of
Females that were walking by. These, said he, belong to the inferior Class of
Top-knots, they are but one Story high yet. Do but follow follow 'em, and you will
discover by the Working of their Heads and Tongues, that another is a brooding:
I took his Counsel, and keeping at some distance, observed their Motion. -- I
wonder, says one of them, why the Men should make such a noise about the
innocent Arts we use to win their Affections. They pretend to love us, and yet
would confine us to a Dress that would make 'em hate us. Whatsoever is not so
gay and polite in the World, is despised and trampled on: We have reason to
hold up our Heads, to deck our selves with all the Ornaments that may create
Respect in that wild Race. Why should not an English commode be as allowable as
the Persian Tiara, or the Roman Septizonium were of old? Away with this servile
Restraint! Let us appear like Amazons, defy the men, and all their grave
Preachments, or lighter Pasqulis, I am resolved to be in the mode, though it
should put me to the charge of maintaining a Negro to support the Monumental
Vmbretta on my Head. With that Dame Nature steps up to her, and thus addressed.
-- When I first mouldded Woman, and sublimated her from the grosser Ore, I drew
into that fair Compendium all the visible Perfections of the Creation; In her
native simplicity she glittered with Rays and Charms, that dazzled all Eyes:
Nothing so salvage or untamed, that did not pay an Homage to her conquering
Beauty. She needed no other Ornament than the luster which flowed from her
untainted Virtue. How comes it to pass that she has lost her Diadem? and secks
in vain, to regain the shattered remnants of her former Glory, by borrowing
from every Triffle, some counterfeit perfection to set her off? You are but the
Milleners Machin, joined together by Chambermaids officious hands. A mere Chaos
of needless Manufactures jumbled into the perfect Figure of a Woman. -- The
Lady that had first occasioned Madam Natures surprise, and all this Discourse,
had not patience to hear any more, but looking on her Watch that was attached
to her Crochet, made her Revoir to the Company, excusing her abrupt departure,
by telling them, 'twas time to go to the Playhouse. Upon which the young Fry of
Top-knots buttonning up their Mouths in a most charmant manner, begged of her
Ladyship to vindicate the common Cause against this Clownish old Beldame, that
had made such a Coil about their Habiliments (for they had got that modish word
by the end too.) The Lady fond of the Character of a good Natured Woman, took
up the Cudgels, and turning to Dame Nature, spoke to her after this manner. --
Prithee don't trouble thy head old Gentlewoman, said she about the present
Mode; the World is grown more refined and polite since your Youthful days:
Women are not mewed up in the Nursery, as in Queen Elizabeth's time, but have
Liberty of Conversation; we are more Eveille (as I may say) than formerly,
weaned from the Winter tales of the Chimney Corners, and learning the Modes
abroad, and Customs of more civilized Matrons. We had been absolutely
barbarous, had it not been for the Conquest of the Romans: And we should be
little amended now, were it not for the Neighborhood of the more accomplished
French. I am in love with that genteel Nation: may Foy. -- Truly said
Horaclitus laughing, you are much in the right on it. I ever said the fondness
of our English Women would make us Slaves to France; nothing but French will go
down with us. We Eat, Drink, and Sleep in plain English, but we manage the rest
of our Actions in French. We Love and Hate A. la-mode de Paris: We walk, talk,
dance, and Sing, A-la-mode de Paris. In fine, we do all things en Cavalier, or
A-la-mode de Paris. Tomboy (a girl or wench that leaps up and down like a boy)
comes from the Saxon tumbe, to dance and tumbod, danced; hence also the word
tumbling still in use. Trepon or Trapon (from the Ital. Trappare or trappolare,
i. e. to entrap, or in a gin) in the modern acceptance, signifies to cheat, or
entrap in this manner; a whore admitts a man to be naught with her, and in the
very instant, rings a Bell, or gives a watchword, and and in comes a Pander,
who pretends to be her husband, and with vapor and threats forces money or
bond from the d^lude third person. Some take this word to be derived from a
Pander. that does entrap, or a trapping Pander. -- The brand of one convict
(for any Felony save Murder) and having the benefit of Clergy. Tabouret, f. a
pin-case, also a child's low stool. -- Privilege of the Tabouret, f. for some
great Ladies to fit in the Queens Presence. -- Tail general, limited to a man
and his Issue by any Wife. -- Tail special, limited to a man and his wise, and
the Heirs of their particular Bodies. -- Tant me fait mal departir da ma dame,
f. So much it, grieves me to part with my mistress. Tarpeia, a maid that
betrayed the Capitol to the Sabines for their bracelets, who (adding their
shields too) pressed her to death. Tarqinnius Sextus, ravishing Lucretia caused
the extirpation of Kingly Government, Mr. Cole. Tullus, l. [the Goddess of] the
Earth. Tenebrion, l. a night-walker. Tethys, a Goddess of the Sea. Tetch, o. a
fashions also a stain. Thalassion, l. a Nuptial song among the old Romans.
Thalestris, an Amazon Queen, who went 30 days Journey to meet Alexander. Thalia
one of the Muses. Themis, a Goddess of Justice. Theodosin, the feminine of
Theodocis. Thetis, [a Nymph of] the Sea. Thomytis, Queen of Scy^hia, who threw
the head of cyrus into a tub of blood saying, -- Satia te san gain, Cyre!
Timon, a sour Athenian hating all company. -- Tithing, a Society of ten
families bound for one another good behavior. Tithonus, ravished by Aurora
into Aethopia, and turned at last into a Grasshopper. -- Tour frezetle, f.
curles for women's foreheads. -- Transection, ^xion, a turning from one sex to
another -- Transeminate, to pass from woman to man. -- Transport, a rapture of
mind. -- Petit-Treason, when a Servant, Wife, or Priest kill their Master,
Husband, or Ordinary. -- Tricliniarch, g. the usher of the Dining room.
Trigamist, e. having three wives. Trigeminous, l. threesold [twins] -- Trull,
I. a vile Harlot, also to trundle, Ss. -- Turttle-Dove, a small kind of
mournful Pidgeon living always single after the Mates death. Tutelina, a Goddess
protecting Corn. Tutaa, a Vestal Virgin, who (to clear her self) carried water
in a Sieve. -- Tabes Dorsalis, a Consumption in the spinal Marrow, most
incident to Lechers, and fresh Bride-grooms; they are without a Fever, eat
well, and melt or consume away: If you ask one in this Disease an account of
himself, he will tell you, that there seem so many Pismires to fall from his
Head down upon his spinal Marrow; when he eases Nature either by Urin or Stool,
there flows then liquid Seed plentifully; nor can he generate, but when he
sleeps, whether it be with his Wife or no; he has lascivious Dreams. When he
goes or runs any way, but especially up a steep place, he grows weak and short
breathed, his Head is heavy, and his Ears tingle: So in progress of time being
taken with violent Fevers, he dies of a Fever called Lyperia. Dr. Blankard.
Telesilla, a Noble Poetess of Argos, who upon consulting the Oracle about her
health, being advised to betake her self to the Study of the Muses, grew in a
short time so excellent, that animated by the charming power of her Verse, the
Argive Women under her conduct were able to repel Cleomenes, the Spartan King,
from the Seige of Argos. Theano, a triple female name of considerable repute in
Poetry: The first of this Name was Theano Locrensis, or Native of the City
Locri, and Surnamed Melita, from the exact Melody, to which all Her Lyric Airs
and Songs were composed: The second a Cretan Poetess, and by some delivered to
have been the Wise of Pythagoras: The third Theano Thuria, or Metapontina, said
to have been the Wise of Carystius, some say Brantinus of Crotona, and the
Daughter of the Poet Lycophron; they are all three mentioned by Suidas.
Thymele, a Musical Poetess remembered by Martial. Tongue, How to govern it.
Furnished is not the Eye with more Objects, than Invention supplies the Tongue
with Subjects: And as without Speech no Society can subsist, so by it we
express what we are, and how we are inclined. Let discretion frame your
Discourse, and speak not overhasty; for in thrusting out your words too fast,
you cannot frame them all aright; but some will be disjoynted and disordered;
it is more highly commendable to speak a little to the purpose, than a great
deal that will not seem so: Some have tired their Audience, in telling an hours
Story that might have been concisely cut off by way of Abridgment in two
moments: It is in no wise seemly to interrupt others, or break off the thread
of Discourse with interposing Questions: But if you have any thing to offer, it
is good manners to stay, till they have done, unless they be impertinently
tedious and tiresome; nor must you be over eager in craving attention to what
you would, or are about to say; for that earnestness will show you affected
with your own Discourse; for then, if you trip or blunder, instead of the
applause, they will imagine you expect, you may perhaps be silenced with
Laughter in the midst of your Oration. If you cannot discourse well, or want a
good utterance, either be silent, or know what company you speak in; pretend
not to things you are ignorant of, least being put upon trial, you must rudely
refuse it, or what is worst, shamefully acknowledge truth was a stranger to you
when you made that boast; and how mean, low, and ridiculous must that look in
the eyes of the sober and judicious. We have known some indeed that have been
so caught; endeavor to put it off, or salve their Reputations with
Equivocations, Inuendo's, Jests, Banters, and Pretensions of doubt and doubtful
meaning, and constructions of the matter; but we could never find, that these
stop the flaws, and cracks, their indiscretion made in their Credits; but they
rather found people incredulous to their real Truths, than they would run the
hazard of being put upon by an Aesop's Fable.
V.
VEnus, qu: ad omnes veniens, i. t. coming to all; a fit name for a Harlot.
Lat. Verosa, i. e. true, from verus. Ursula (Lat.) a little she Bear; a woman's
name, heretofore of great reputation, in honor of Vrsula the British Vergin
Saint, martyred under Attila, King of the Romans. Vestals ( Vestales Virgin^s)
certain Virgins among the ancient Romans, consecrated to the Goddess Vesta, and
therefore so named; they were always chosen between six and seven years of age,
and continued thirty years in their Office; whereof the first ten years they
bestowed in learning the Ceremonies of their Order; the second in execution
thereof, and the last ten in teaching others; after it was lawful for them to
marry, Their chief duty was to keep fire continually burning in a round Temple
at Rome, in honor of Vesta; and if it chanced to go out, they were to renew it
again with no usual fire, but such as they could get by art from the Sunbeams.
Nec tu aliud Vestam quam puram intellige flamma^. Ovid.

They are greatly honored in the City, and had diverse privileges; for they
were carried in Chariots, and the chief Magistrates would do reverence to them;
they had Officers going before them, as the Consuls had, and if they met any
one, who was led to be put to death, they had authority to deliver him, taking
an Oath that they came not that way of purpose; they might also make a Will,
and dispose of their Goods as they pleased; but if any of them were found to
live unchaste, she was openly carried with sad silence to the Gate called
Colli^a, where, being put into a deep pit, she was presently buried alive.
These Vestals were first instituted by Numa Pompilius, or (as some write) by
Romulus. Dr. Brown.

Vestment ( vestiminium) a Garment, Vesture, Apparel, Clothing Attire. Ualasca
a Bohemian Princess, who conspired with other Women to drive the Men out of the
Country, and form an Amazonian Government, which she affected; and the War
between them, and the Men lasted many Years, but she being at last taken
prisoner by a Statagem, the Men again assumed their former Power. Ua^drade,
Gontire the ArchBishop of Coloigns Slster, her Beauty gained her the Love of
Lothier King of Lorrain, who turned away Thiethbert, and married her, she was
Mother to Huges the Bastard who called the Normans into France. Venille, a
Nymph and Wife to Tranus, also the Sister to Amnata Queen to Latinus, some have
Fabled her to be Neptunes Wise, and to have been called Salac^. Venus, held by
the Ancients to be the Goddess of Love and Beauty, and to be Daughter of
Jupiter, and Di^^, others say the sprung from the froth of the Sea, occasioned
by Jove's throwing his Genitalls into it: She is held to be married to Vulcan
who molded Thunderbolts for Jupiter, and that Mars was her Paramour, whom
Vulcan with a curious net of wyre, laid cunningly about the bed, took naked in
her Embraces, and then called in the Gods and Goddess's to be the Spectators of
the entangled Lovers. She was likewise passionately in Love with Adonius, who
was afterward killed by a Wild Boar as he was hunting, and on her Anchises is
said to beget Aeneas; Cupid is also styled her Son, some reckon another Venns
or Queen of Love Urania or Celestis. Venus painted by Apelles. For the space of
ten years employed all his wit and policy, to paint an Image of Venus, the
which was endued with so excellent Beauty, that the young men that stood
beholding of it, became Amorous, as though it had been some live Image, and
therefore by public Edict he was charged to keep it secret, for fear to allure
the youth corruption. Who is it that does not marvel of that which Pausanias a
Greek Historiographer writes, to have been formed and made in Heraclia, a
Province of Peloponensia by a certain Artificer, the which composed a brazen
Horse, having the Tail cut and deformed, and all the other parts of the Body
perfect, to the which notwithstanding the other Horses sought to join and
couple, with such ardent desire and affection, that they broke oftentimes their
Hoofs with their often riding and horsing of him, and for all that they were
beaten and driven away, yet would they not from thence, but they would rage as
it they had found a proud Mare. But what secret thing, what charm, or what
hiden Virtue was there, which could constrain and force the brutish Beasts to
obey and love a trunk of Metal, void of Feeling or Understanding? Virtue was
styled by the Ancients a Goddess, and had her Temple at Rome joined to that
which was dedicated to Honor, and so contrive in building, that one could come
into the latter, but by the way of the first, to demonstrtrate, that Virtue is
the right way to Honor. She was v^riously pictured, sometimes in a beautiful
Female Gr^^, to show her mildness; sometimes in Armor, to show her courage and
constancy. Victory, had her Temple among the Romons as a Goddess, also among
the Grecians. She was accounted the Daughter of Heaven and Earth, Painted,
Young, Lively and Gay, to manifest her Vigor, and the Luster that attends on
victory; and with wings, by reason of her unconstancy, and doubtful success;
Crowned with Laurel as an Eternal renown, with a Palm branch in her hand,
signifying unconquerable courage; that Tree, the more it is oppressed the more
it Flourishes. Vaistai, the Beautiful Wife of King Abasuerus the great of
Persia. She was deposed from her Royal dignity, and Hester made Queen in her
stead, because she refused t^ come and show the Nobles her Beauty, when the
King sent for her at his Royal Feast. Virginiana, the Goddess of Virgins,
invoked by both Sex for Marriage, and held to take care of untying Virgins
Girdles on the Wedding Nights. Virginia, a Roman Lady, she built a Temple of
the Phebian Pudicity of Chastiry. But Lucian discribes her melancholy hanging
down her Head, ill clad and sore afflicted, and abused by Fortune, insomuch
that she was prohibited to appear before Jupiter, least being of his Offspring;
she should in so mean a Condition, disgrgace him. She had two Temples at Rome,
one built by Marcellus and the other by Caius Marius, and there she is
represented like a Grave Matron clad in White denoting Innocence sealed on a
Square Stone. Venturia, Mother of Coriolan. who when he Waged War against Rome,
and laid strait Seige to it, went with diverse other Roman Ladies to his Tent,
and with her Tears and Persuasions obliged him to raise the Siege when that
rich City was at the point of yielding: Whereupon the Senate in honor to her
Memory built a Temple to Fortune, wherein Women sacrificed on the day the Siege
was raised. Vorine, Wife of Victorine, who was Associated to the Empire by
Posthum^s, she was a Lady of extraordinary courage and wit, insomuch that (...)
thought himself not (...) in the Empire till she was dispatched. Voluptas,
styled the Goddess of Pleasure: To her the Ro^^s in the height of their
luxury, built a Temple, seating her as a Queen upon a Throne with Virtue at her
(...). Voluntina, was another of ^^^ir Goddesses, who took (...) of the straw
that sup^^ted the Ears of Corn, that should be strong to bear it, ^wors^ bring
it to ripening. ^rfine, married to Guy Tor^^^, Count of Gu^st^lle, an (...)
Town in the Dukedom (...); she is highly seemed for her Courage, (...) when her
Husband (...) absent, the Venetians being the place, she failled and beat them
from the (...) with great slanghter, (...) diverse of them with ^own hand. (...)
Ursula, or the Order (...) Vrsulines, a Monastry of young Women and Widows
following the Rules of St. Augustine: Now being spread into diverse
Congregations; the Institution of them was to teach young Girls, and train them
up in curious Works of diverse kinds. Under Cook-Maids. If you would so fit your
self for this Employment, as that it may be a means of raising you to higher
preferment, you must be careful to be diligent, and willing to do what you are
bid to do, and though your Employment be greasy and smooty, yet if you be
careful you may keep your self from being Nasty. Therefore let it be your Care
to keep your self Neat and Clean; observe every thing in Cookery that is done
by your Superior or Head-Cook; treasure it up in your Memory, and when you meet
with a convenient opportunity, put that in practice which you have observed;
this Course will advance you from a Drudge, to be a Cook another day. Every one
must have a beginning, and if you be ingenious and bend your mind, to it, and
be willing to learn, there is none will be so Churlish or unkind, as to be
unwilling to teach you, but if you be stubborn and careless, and not give your
mind to learn, who do you think will be willing to teach you? You must beware
of Gossips and Chair-Women for they will (...) you, take heed of the
Solicitations of the Flesh, for they will undo you, and though you may have
mean thoughts of your self, and think none will meddle with such as you, it is
a mistake, for sometimes brave Gallants will fall soul upon the Wench in the
Scullery. Dairy-Maids. Those who would endeavor to gain the Esteem and
Reputation of good Dairy-Maids, must be careful that their Vessals be scalded
well, and kept very clean, that they Milk their Cattle in due time, for the
Kine by Custom will expect it though you neglect, which will tend much to their
detriment. -- The hours and times most approved, and commonly used for Milking,
are in the Spring and summer time, between five and six in the Morning, and six
and seven in the Evening: And in the Winter between seven and eight in the
Morning and four and five in the Evening. -- In the next place you must be
careful that you do not waste your Cream by giving it away to liquorish
Persons. -- You must keep your certain days for your Churning, and be sure to
make up your butter neatly and cleanly, washing it well from the Butter-Milk,
and then Salt it well. -- You must be careful to make your Cheeses good and
tender by well ordering of them, and see that your Hoggs have the Whey, and
that it be not given away to Gossiping and Idle people, who lives merely upon
what they can get from Servants. -- That you provide your Winter Butter and
Cheese in Summer, as in May: And when your Rowings come in, be sparing of your
Fire, and do not Lavish away your Milk, Butter or Cheese, -- If you have any
Fowls so Fat, look to them that it may be for your Credit and not your Shame,
when they are brought to Table. -- When you Milk the cattle, stroke them well,
ans in the Summer time save those stroking by themselves, to put into your
Morning Milk Cheese -- I look upon it ^^ be altogether needless, so to give you
any Direction for the making of Butter or Cheese, since there ar^ very few,
(especially in t^^ Country) that can be ignorant thereof; I shall only say,
that the best time (...) put up Butter for Winter is in the Month of May for
the^ the Air is m^^^ temperate, and the Butter will take Salt best. However it
may be done at any time betwixt May and S^p^ber. Vil^^ing Friends, etc. He Is an
happy Man now that can drive his Pedigree from William the Conqueror; though some
Women whose Husbands are great Antiquaries, will go a great deal farther at a
Christ'ning; and in the heat of Contention when Priority comes to be disputed,
when derive themselves from the eldest Maid of Honor, to Nimrod's Wife. But
let that alone: Most certainly it may so happen, that a Man may marry a Wife,
that has had a great many Relations that live in the Country, and a Woman may
marry a Man that has as many. For it you ask a Citizen where he was born,
there is not one in Forty, but will cry in Gloucestershire, Devonshire, Kent,
Norfolk. etc. others in Wales; but very few make answer, within the found of
Bow Bell. And this is apparent from the several Country Feasts that meet every
Year, which were they all joined together, would beat the Cock^^ys into an
Augur-hole. Now the Wife out of Natural Affection is unwilling to see her
Friends, and the Man is no less ambitious to show his Wife: and thus when both
are agreed, the pleasure of Marriage is in concerting both in the same opinion.
Perhaps there has been an Exchange between (...) of Turkies, Geese, Cheeses an
Bacon, for Sugar, Plumbs and Spice; perhaps one of the Kindred has had an
occasion to come to Town, and has had the Convenience of a Lodging at his new
Kinsman's house, for which he can do no less than invite the Married Couple
into the Country to a Dish of Keel and Bacon, and homely Apple pie. Why, realy
Cousin, or Uncle, quo' the Young Man, we may chance to pop upon ye before you are
aware -- I should be at Exeter-Fair this Lammas Table -- Cuds fish, quoth his
Cousin, it is but a little out of your way, to ride to Dorchester, and then you
come within a Mile of our House. -- Now suppose the young Man should be as good
as his word, and resolve to give his Wife an Airing in the country. Why should
Marriage hinder, it will be a gentiler way to send her down before, with some
Friend of a Country A^^^ney, and a little before the Sizes, and for him to go
after and fetch her home again. And then, besides that she shall see the Sizes,
and my Lords the Judges, he shall have the happiness of a new pleasure that he
never enjoyed before; which is to write lovingly to her, and to receive
end^^ring Answers from her again, with Dear and Chuck at the Top, and Thine
till Death and, Thine Eternal at the Bottom. -- At lenght after three or four
days Journey she gets among her Friends, and then there is Kissing and hugging;
and dear Cousin ye are welcome -- and the four Bells ^'the steeple are set a
jangling for joy. And do you think it is an extreme pleasure to her Husband, to
see his dear Wife so carress'd and made much of among her Relations. After a
stay of three or four days, away gallops the Husband thirty or forty Miles
farhter about Business, and leav's his Wife and her Palsrey together, to be
carried from place to place, to see and be seen; and still she has a Convoy of
he Cousins and she Cousins to show her the Country, and treat her at this and
the other good Town; they are never out of their way; for still she finds new
Kindred and Acquaintance, and all make much of the Londoner, and indeed, how
can they choose? she is so pretty, so bonny, so blir^^ and pleasant, that every
Bo^^ is glad of her Company: Then they whisk her to Bath, to Bristol, to Wells,
to Taunton, and then they gallop her over to Sedge-Moor, and show her where the
Duke of Mon^^^th lost his Battle -- so that by that time her Husband comes back
again, she is able to ride with e're a Jockey in Smithfield. Virgin, her
character Virgin Innocence is the most Illustrious Adornment of the Sex* and
makes it shine in its native Brightness and Purity. To give such a one her due
Character then, is a Duty incumbent on us; she is one that has bargained with
her self, and pass her resolves to live a Chaste and Virtuous Life: nor does
she choose a single Life solely for it self, but in reference to her being more
at leasare, and her better serving God; for indeed Virginity is none of those
things that is to be desired for it self, because it many times lies under
Censure and Scorn, some concluding they live Virgins because either their
Conditions or Deformities are such, that none will make them otherwise, or that
they are proud and peevish on the other hand, and think none good enough for
them. It is therefore to be considered and esteemed, because it leads a more
convenient way to the Worship of God, especially in time of Persecution, when
Christians have been forced to run Races for their Lives; the Unmarried have
had the advantage in being much lighter by many encumbrances, but that is not
all. -- Virgins that so intend to continue, improve their single Lives,
therewith to serve God more constantly, when Married people went those golden
opportunities, by being too much taken up with the Cares of the World, which
disturb their Duties of Piety, and make them con^racted, and many times
omitted, or unseasonnably performed, but our Virgin is sreed from these, no
churlish Husband does Command her, or over Amorous one hinder her from her
Devotions; no crying of Children disturbs or drowns her Mellodious Voice, in
singing of Hymns, Psalms, and Spiritual Songs; nor put her Devotion out of
Tune; no unfaithful Servants shall force her to divide her Eyes between Lifting
them up to God in Prayers, and casting them down to watch and observe their
Works and ways, but she at all convenient times makes her Closet her Chapel,
and there quietly enjoys God and good Thoughts; yet in all her Discourse.
(though she has resolved not to enter into the Estate) she makes an honorable
mention of Marriage, (...) knowing it a holy Institution, and an honorable
Estate, without, she could not have been brought into the World, but with
Infamy, and a brand upon her Name, and the Reputation she aspires (...); she is
no friend nor coun^^^ncer of those that bend (...) Wit^ like Battering^^^^ to
overthrow, if possible, (...) Ordinance that God him^^^^ has instuted to make
(...) happy, as knowing such bitter Invectives are unreasonnably pointed
against so comfortable an Estate, either to color their lawless Crimes, or out
of revenge grounded upon disappointments in their Courtship, when they have
aspired above what in Modesty they could pretend to, or that having had
Conversation with bad Women, they rushly measure by them, all the Beauties and
Virtues of the Sex, which is very unreasonable, seeing there is dross in Gold
Ore, though the purest of Minerals, are least subject to Corruption or Decay,
and sometimes among Atheistical Persons, it is done out of Spite to God and
Nature, who careless of themselves, care not what becomes of the World or its
Existance. -- Virgins that truly pretend to Virtue, count themselves better
lost in modes^ silence than sound in a prolaborous Discourse; and as Divinity
forbids Women to speak in the Church, so Morality has had the same prohibition
on Virgins to be too talkative in the House, and where their betters are
present, it is decent and a comely part of behavior rather to be seen than
heard, unless some necessary Interrogation requires the motion of their Ruby
Portalls. Our modest Virgin is far from the humor of those (who more bridling
in their Chins than their Tongues) Love to be loud loud and Noisie, and think
by so doing, they make sweet Music, but it is only in their own Ears, for it
is harsh and grating like the turning of rusty hinges in the Ears of their
Auditors: Our modest Virgin con^^ives the bold maintaining of any Argument
concludes against her own Eyil Behavior, and not with she is not so reserved
or (...) ^c^upulous, but she is rea^y to give a good account of any Modest
thing, upon demand, or as occasion requires, which well considered, is
sufficient to demonstrate that her silence is her choice and not her refuge,
because she is not furnished with apt words for Discourse; in speaking, she
studiously avoids all suspicious Expressions, which wanton apprehensions may
colourably comment into obscenity, she being so far from it, that she blushes
for those that will not blush for themselves, when she accidentally hears any
wanton Discourse, and never comes into that Company twice, that she finds given
over to Indecency, and unbecoming Expressions; for she concludes if she should
sit silent when she hears it, she fears it will be taken for granted, that she
approves and consents to what she indeed abhorrs and detests, or if she should
go about to confute it, even Modesty in h^^ would suffer by such Expression as
u^nst be necessarily used on that occasion, therefore all she thinks fit to do
against what cannot at that time be avoided, is to enter a silent protest, by
mo^est blushes, uneasiness and visible to^ens of ^^slike, by rather frowning to
condemn, than smiling to applaud it; and takes the first opportunity to get a
Goal delivery out of that Compan^, into which she never intends to enter more.
And now since we are making mention of Blushes, which mingle the Lillies, who
before seem to have taken up the Beauty of the Cheeks with Roses and Vermilion,
it will not be amiss to say something on them in particular, sin^e when they
are Innocent, they spread such comely Graces in lovely Faces, as in such a case
the ^oet Paints in forth, viz. Virgin her Blushes, the Cause, and Comeliness.
Who looks upon her Blushing Cheeks may see
Such various, lively Colors Spr^^d
As Crimson Apples show up in the Tree
All painted gay, with ple^^^^^ Red (...)
But in her Breast, there Heavenly Beauties ^ye,
Too glorious to be seen with m^^tal Eye.
We must however allow that blushing sometimes proceeds from Guilt, but this
our Maiden Blush is exempted from that, and commonly dye the Color of
Innocence, and is here a Preserver and not an Accuser. It shows the beauty of
the Mind, that it is not ^^llyed or spotted with Vice, and only Arises, because
she is surpised with something she approves not of, or is unjustly accused of*
and though armed with Innocence, that she cannot be pierced, yet may she be
amazed with an unexpected Charge; and again she may blush from the sense of
disgrace or shame, though innocent, for no other cause than that she should be
so unhappy to be within the suspicion of such Faults, and that she has carried
her self so, that any Tongue durst be so Impudent as to lay it to her charge;
and sometimes it may fall out for want of a disability at the present, to quit
her self (her Integritiy wanting rather clearing than clearness, and although
she be only accused in jest, she is Jealous, the Accusation will be believed in
Earnest, and wound her Reputation, and sometimes she blushes for Anger, to hear
things not fitting to be spoken, or to be ^^^ely accused her self of things she
is altogether Ignorant, and ^^nocent of, and then as fear chills and causes the
Blood to ^^^^ire to the Heart, that Seat an^ Fountain of Life for succor; a
noble compulsion, to fally out into the Virgins Cheeks, and there as a Champion
of her Innocence seems to challenge her Injurious Accuser, and indeed Blushes
when small faults are committed by inadvertency, easily obtain a pardon for
them; as for an unavoidable mistake, she imprisons not her self, however she
keeps her Virgin state) with solemn Vows never to Marry, as taking it for too
much rashness, seeing she is Conscious; none know their own strength in such
matters, and that it raises but a stronger Temptation for her to struggle with,
as being indispensibly chained to a single life; when a Vow is pasted, she
thinks it sufficient to live an unsported and unblameable Life, that so long as
she lives with less care than those that are Married, she may dye with less,
she may ^^e with more carefulness, all her discourses being of Virtue and
Piety, and who conduce to the happiness of her Eternal Estate, so that those
who keep her Company, truly say, Within her Mouth, soft Accents gently glide,
And in swol'n Seas of Nectar swim,
Like generous Wine, in a changed ^o^l, full Tide,
Which sparkling bright, n^^ looks the b^im.
Her words are like fair Lillies, when made wet.
And all with liquid Gems of Dev^^ beset.
Virgins, their ^ate and behavior, particulary those in Years. Virgin is a
word that includes a rare felicity; the Virgin state is held the divinest, as
coming nearest to that of Angels and blessed Spirits, who live free and
unincumbred; Virginity is first in order of time, and accordingly in the
Primitive Days, Virginity was held in singular Estimation; and according to the
Assignment of Schoolmen, had a particular Corronet of glory belonging to it;
we may find that a Consecrated Virgin was held as sacred; the Roman Vestals had
privileges extraordinary allowed them, and were generally held in such
reverence, that the Testaments and other dispositions of the greatest trust
were usually committed to their care, as to the surest and most Inviclable
Sanctuary of Trust; and their presence were so to Convicted Malefactors, the
Magistrates Veiling their Faces, and giving up the Criminal to the commanding
intercession of Virgin Innocence. It has been held as a necessary Sanctity in
Religious matters, and those who have vowed their Virginity to their glorious
Spouse, as unspotted Oblations of Love, have been in high esteem in the
Christian Church, till it became depraved and corrupted, the real Intention
being turned to Design and Advantage; a Nuns External Veil, being
superstitiously taken for the Internal Veil of Piety and Innocence, which makes
us pass over the many Orders that have been in the latter Ages established,
merely out of humane Policy, but to come nearer home. -- Virgins in our clime,
where the Sex is so little transporte^ with the Zeal of sincere Intended
Virginity, find some discouragement, since so few have patience when it is
decent and necessary, as finding of Maids despised and looked upon as part of
the Creation, not valuable, because those that take but a speculative view,
conclude that it is not voluntary, but their hard Fortune that makes them
continue in that state; in measure we may attribute this to those that are
against their Wills, kept in such a state, but certainly it is the original of
that Misery or Misfortune, call it which you will, proceeds from the desire not
the restraint of Marriage; but we must not be so unkind to the fair Sex, as to
immagin, at most conclude; that it is always such desire that gives them
Aversion to celibacy, we doubt not but many are frighted with the Vulgar
contempt, under which that state^ lies, for which if there be supposed no Cure,
there is nevertheless the same Armor against it, as against all other
causeless Reproaches, and that it is to contemn it, yet we are a little apt to
believe, there may however, be a prevention in the case, if Virgins
superanuated, would behave themselves with reservedness and gravity, by
addicting themselves to the strictest Piety and Virtue, that the World would
credit their real intentions, to concur with their Asseverations, and that it
were not their necessity, but choice that they remained single upon the Account
of a pre-engagement to a better Amor, viz. Espoused to the spiritual
Bridegroom, where Crowns and Kingdoms awaited as the rewards of their
Chastity; and this among the sober sort, would you at least the reverence and
esteem of Matrons, or if after all their Endeavors and Cautions, they are so
hard set as to ^all under the Censure of Malicious Tongues, this they may
conclude is no more in some manner or other, than happens in all other
instances of Duty; and if contempt be to be avoided, Christianity as well as
Virgin Chastity must be quiet; but if on the other side, by all endeavors of
ga^ty, behavior, and youthful dress, they labor to disguise their Age,
herding themselves among the youngest and vainest company, betray a young Mind
in an Aged Body; this notwithstanding all we can urge on their behalf, must
expose them to scorn and Censure: we wish therefore that those who would be
thought to be Virgins by choice, would more universally try the former
expedient as the best Antidote against the reproach they dread, and may also
deliver them from the danger of a more costly remedy, as that of an unequal and
imprudent Match, as too many have rushed upon, when they have run frighted from
the other, and so by an unhappy contradiction, do stay too long, and yet marry
too hastily; gall their Necks to spare their Ears, running into the Yoke rather
than be offended with so slight and unreasonnable a reproach; you need not
however be upbraided with the Indiscreation of such an Election, since their
own Folly proves too frequently a sufficient Punishment: And thus far in good
manners having given the Elder Virgins the Ensign of Seniority, to stand in the
first rank, we turn now our discourse to the younger sort. Virgins of the
younger sort, their State, etc. Virgins of tender years in the Spring and Bloom
of their Beauties and sprightly Blood many will say, have various difficulties
to struggle with; Modesty and Ob^dience is necessarily required to guard the
Forts of their chastity, and to give a power to their Parents to hinder those
assaults, which tender years may not be so capable of avoiding, without good
counsel and wholesome Advice; and though we have largely spoken of many things
tending to this before; yet in this place it cannot be altogether reasonably
Omitted in the way of application to Virgins, in whom Modesty should appear in
its highest Elevation, coming up even to shame-facedness, her Looks, her
Speech, her whole Behavior should own an humble distrust of her self; she is
to look on her self but not as a Novice or probationer in the World, and must
take this time rather to observe and learn than to dictate: For we must Aver,
there is scarely any thing looks more Inocent, than to see a young maid too
confident, or forward in gestures and Discourse. But there is another breach of
Modesty, as it relates to her chastity which more nearly concerns them; the
very name of Virgins, Imports a Critical Niceness in that point, every Impure
Fancy or indecent Curiosity is a deflowring of the Mind; and every the least
corrupti^n of them, gives some degrees of desilement to the Bo^y likewise; for
between the State of a pure Immaculate Virgin, and a common Prostitute, there
are many intermedial steps, and she that makes any of them, has so far departed
from her first Integrity, that if she listens to any wanton discourse, her Ears
are violated; and if she talks any, her Tongue suffers no less a violation: Her
Eyes placed on wanton Objects run the same risque, and every the lighted
daliance of Action, leaves something of a sullying or stain behind it; there is
therefore a most rigorous Caution requisite herein. For as nothing is more
clear and candid than perfect Virginity, so the very least spot or so^l is the
most discernable -- -- Virgins, moreover for the most part in a youthful state,
are most flexible, cons^quently warping into Crookedness, if not kept straight
by Virtue and growing up so to Stubborn years, can really be recovered; we
speak as to the Beauty and Innocence of the mind; which is the guide of the
Body, and produces its glory or shame; tender Plants and early Blossoms are
screened from the Nipping Wind, where there is a careful regard had of their
preservation. And what can be more Nice and Delicate than a Maidens Virtue,
which ought to be secured from any of those Malignant Aires that might unkindly
blast or corrupt it, and they are of two kinds the one blowing from within, and
the other from without. -- Virgins, By the first of these, are most in danger,
and Curiosity is a dangerous temptation, and foiled Humain Nature even in
Paradise; shall a Feeble Virgin, then venture to grapple with that which foiled
her better fortified Parents? The truth of it is, and we must own it, that an
affected ignorance cannot be so blamable in the other as it is commended, for
indeed it is the sweetest, and most invincible guard, for she who is so curious
to know indecent things, it is odds, but she will too soon and too dearly buy
the learning; but when they have set this guard upon themselves, it is
necessary they then provide against foreign Assaults, the most dangerous
whereof is the keeping or allowing of bad company and Idleness. Against the
first, they must provide by a prudent choice of Conversation generally of their
own Sex; though we tie not up our Virgins so stricly: But that they may have
Conversation with ^ome of the ^ther Sex, that are of unspotted Re^utations, and
will entertain them Innocently, ^ not profitably against Idleness, that great
inletts vai^ thoughts; they must secure them by a constant series of Employment
in one Nature or other, which may be Innocent and harmless if not advantageous;
but we mean not such frivolous ones, as are more Idle in some since, than if
they were doing nothing; but such as ^re worthy and Ingenious; Religious,
Offices, mainly hinder wan^ering thoughts; Acts of Piety calls God mo^e
Immediately to your Assistance against Temptations and in the internals of
these, there are diverse Recreations where^y Virgins may not unusefully fill the
Vacancies of their time, such as the acquiring of any of those Ornamental
Improvements that become their quality as Music, Languages, Needle Work,
Writing, an^ such others; or those of a Lower Station, the Art O^conomy and
household managery, that being a very proper femi^ine bus^ness, from which (we
think it no affront to say) either wealth or greatness can totally absolve the
Sex? and a little management in the Houses of their Parents, though, Modesty in
the Theory would much eslist them toward the pr^ctice, when they come ^o (...)
^wn. We do not so severely, (...) many have done, condemn gameing when it is
kept within the bounds of Moderate Recreation, but when it passes and is set up
for a Calling; we know not whence it derives its License especially to Virgins,
and when that time may be better employed is squandered away in it, even to a
toil for extraordinary desire of it. Avarice or other ends we must reject it;
Romances and Love Stories are by many counted harmless Recreations, and so when
there is nothing obscure in them, they have passed amongst many god Companions,
but we wish we could believe them so in all respects, since those Amorous
passions, which are there Painted to the Life We are apt to conceive, may
insinuate themselves into the breasts and good likeings, of the unwary Readers,
and by an unhappy inversion, a Copy may produce an original, when a Young
Virgin shall read the Passages of some Triumphant Beauty, that captivate
imaginary Knights, and makes them fall prostrate at her Feet, and have an exact
obedience to all her commands: How difficult or severe soever, observing
diligently and obeying her winks, her Nods, her Smiles, why may not she begin
to consult her Glass, and by degrees posses her self with an opinion that for
ought she knows, having never seen this Queen of Fairy-land, her Beauty may be
as Charming and that she has lost time, because she has not produced so many
Hearts, or at least made no progreess toward such a Conquest. C^sar, when he
saw the State of Alexander the great, being then at the Age that Greecian
Prince was when he dyed, could not forbear envying him that he had Conquered so
many Nations. And himself had then done so little, which spurred him on to Push
his Sword at last into the Bleeding Body of his own Country. This may make her
Emulous, and then her business will be to spread her Ne^s and expand her
Alurements, that she may have the like advantages to Triumph; when perhaps her
self may be more fatally ens^a^e^; for when she has in sensibly wounded her
self into an Amor: Those subtle Authors as strange sort of Casuists, for all
difficult cases; will be putting her upon the necessary Artifice of deluding
her Parents and Friends; escapeing out of the enchanted Castle, she supposes
her self to be bound up with the Chains of her obedience to the Command of her
Parents, and so throw her self into the Arms of her KnightErrant who waits to
receive her, or by desperately falling Sick for Love compells them out of a
Natural tenderness to give her up to her ruin, for that saving that Life whch
she pretends can be prolonged by no other means than granting her Marriage,
with her admirable Don Quixot, or some famous Hero of his order: Pardon us
Ladies, if you think we are now writing to Nuns, ^o, we design not to con^ine
you to a Cloisler, but leave you all manner of Civil freedom, yet would have it
turn to your injury or disadvantage; for those that are desirous of Marriage,
may by Modest and reserved ways sooner procure it to their happiness, than by
any other means whatsoever; and indeed a great deal sooner ^o their content and
satisfaction; for Virtue is a Lodestone to draw on Love that is pure; the
Beauty of the mind takes with the best of Men more than that of the Body, be it
never so damask'd and Gay in its primest Bloom. -- Virgins, ought, we must
con^ess, wean themselves from immoderate desires, to be wandering abroad and not
wreck and torment themselves if any thing Extraordinary is to be seen, and they
cannot be at it, for such wandering was fatal to Dianab, and such meetings
often very hurtful to young Ladies, if they dote upon them, by reason of the
many occasions they give of being seen in such places which embolden attempts
(when opportunity gives leave) to be made as trials of their Virtue; the
Assailants imagining, perhaps as too often they do, that they come thither to
expose their Beauties as Alurements to draw them on to storm the Fort, which
will make but a slender defense; and this will be very troublesome to a Young
Lady that would not be troubled with Buffoons, and foolish flies, buzing in her
Ears, or about her habitations; who if she but casts her Ey^s upon them will
take it for a sufficient warrant for an address, though she might as well have
^one it upon any thing else, and gave it as just a claim, and perhaps their
Airy whimseys of a conceited expectations, may in their Drunken Cabals*
occasion their Tongues to run on to her prejudice and lavish too largely on her
Fame. -- Vain dressing and setting out is one other things to be considered by
a Virgin and to be avoided, for though rich in a person whose quality may
justly claim is very much to be allowed, but then that may be so decent, that
may give no occasion to any to think it is affected; many indeed will be seen
in the most exact form, when ^ver they go abroad especially, and aledge that
the employment of so setting themselves out, does not steal, but challenge
their time, it being by the vogue of this Age, the proper business; the one
Science wherein a yo^^g Lad^ is to be per^ectl^ Ver^^, so that in some Sense
all virtuous emulation is conver^ed into this single ambition; who shall exce^d
in this faculty, yet this is more excusable in the younger, if any ^xcuses may
be allowed for it than in thos^ of Elder Years, by reason they designing to
marry, urge that they ought to give themselves the advantage of decent
Ornaments, and not by the negligent rudeness of their Dress, Bel^e Nature and
render themselves, less aimable than she has made them; but not to touch you
Ladies but with Gentleness in this ten^er part, least we should offend you,
whom we have taken such pains to oblige, and then all our Fat will be in the
fire, we hope to come off with affirming, that excesses in apparel by which ^he
thought to gain her wish has frequently hindered a Virgins Fortune; it has made
some who might be well worthy of her, stand at an awful distance as not daring
to approach her, with their addresses; others more sober and saving, finding
her thus gallant and gaudily set out, thinks she will always affect it, and
either it does not please them to have such a tempting Creature, able to
attract the Eyes of all Spectators by the glittering of her dress, or fearing
in all things she will require the like costliness, dares not never at such a
chargeable rate, fanc^ing that wh^^t they seek a help, they should Espouse a
r^ine; and even is enough to fright a Country Gentleman out of his Senses to
think his Wife should wear the value of a whole Manor at once about her in
Ornaments, and indeed we fear this keeps many Young Ladies about the Town
unmarried, till they may be Numbered with those we first mentioned, and then if
it be a means to put them in a nearer way to Heaven, indeed we ought to have
nothing to say against it, nor any Body else; however, we must conclude to mind
them that the spring of their Age, is the Crittical time that must either
confirm or blast the hopes of all succeeding Seasons: young Peoples min^s are
compared often to White Sheets of Paper, or Wax without an impression, equally
capable of the best or worst impressions, and therefore wondrous pity it is
they should be filled with Childish Scrupels, and little insigni^^cant figures;
but far worse, that they should be stained with any Vicious Charracters, any
blots of impurity or dishonor, infixed on them: For the prevention of which,
it is highly reasonable that the straightest Notions of honor and Modesty, be
early and deeply imprinted upon their Souls, graven as with the point of a
Diamond, that they may be as indellible as they are indispensibly necessary to
the Virgin state, that so it may flourish in its Native Beauty and Luster, and
make the World as happy as if Angels were come down to li^^ in friendly
Conversation with Men. Virginity, its wonderful effects, Says one of the
Ephori. Its not the powder, dust or ashes of any material shrine that can be
possibly any way propitious to the Gods: As the enormity of our losses has
incensed them, so must the Ashes of some living Sacrifice appease them. My
opinon then is positively this: The Ashes of some Undefiled Virgin must be
sprinkled on their Alter, if we mean to preserve our state and honor. -- This
experience has confirmed long since so highly useful, as we may read what
eminent states had perished; how their glory had been to dust reduced; nay,
their very names in oblivion closed, and with dishonor clothed, had not the
fury of the incensed Gods been pacified, and by offertories of this nature
attoned. This might be instanced in those Sacrifices of Iphigenia, Hesyo^e,
Mariana, with many others: whose living memory raised it self from Dust, in so
free and voluntary offering themselves to the st^ke, to deliver their
endangered state; confirming their Country-Love with the loss of their Dearest
Life. Search then no further, ye Conscript Fathers, how to appease their wrath;
Virgin Ashes cannot but be the purest dust of Earth. Whose sacred Vows, as they
are dedicated to Vesta, who cannot admit her Temple to be profaned by any
impure touch: so has she conferred such an excellent privilege on a Virgin
State, as the fierce untamed Unicorn, when nothing can bring him to subjection,
nor attemper the madding fury of his di^position: As if he had quite put off
his Nature, and assumed another temper, he will be content mildly to sleep in
the lap of a Virgin; and in eying her, allay his passion. -- With joint voice
and vote all the Ephori inclined to his opinion: Which so well appeased those
divine Furies, as their state before, by the cracle so highly menaced, became
secured; their Altars, which were, before profaned, purged* And those
pollutions, whereof their City labored, clearly expiated. -- These Poetical
Fictions, though they easily pass by the Ear, yet they convey by a moral
application, an emphatical impression to the Heart. For hence might be divinely
concluded: There is nothing comparably precious to a continent Soul: Nothing of
so pure nor precious esseem, as a Virgin ^tate, And that a Woman, being the
weaker Vessel; when she either in her Virgin condition remains constant, or in
her conjugal state loyal, she so much more inlargeth her glory, as her Sex or
condition partakes more of frailty. Vows. A caution to Ladies, etc. in making
them. Vows are not to be made on every light occasion, as being too weighty to
be trifled with* there is extreme danger and disgrace in breaking or pretending
a dispensation for them, after they are solemnly made, Especially if they be to
good purposes; some think in matters of love, they may frequently be dispensed
withal, but indeed even there they are binding, and they are impending
Judgments over their Heads, who wilfully violate them, and do not labor to
keep them to the utmost strictness. Too many cre^ulous Females have been
induced by solemn Vows and Protestations of Marriage, to yield up their Honor
on trust, thinking them sufficient pledges for the performance of what was
promised, but afterward, they found, to their sorrow and shame, they have
proved only Spiders Webbs, and been easier broken than made; yet frequently
have we observed, that those unkind Violators have in the end been overtaken by
many Misfortunes and Calamities. But as to Vows which ought altogether to be
serious, for they will reasonably admit of no Jesting, we are to consider them
under these Circumstances: -- Vows must, in the first place, be seriously
weighed, and the performance resolved on to the utmost of our powers, before
they are undertaken, and be sure the matter of every Vow be lawful: Secondly
that it be useful in order to Religion, Charity, or any other ^^od end or
purpose. Thirdly that it be grave and serious, not ^rifling or impertinent.
Fourthly, that it be in an uncommanded Instance; that it be of something, or in
some manner, or in some degree, to which formerly we were not obliged, or which
we might have omitted without. Fithly, that it be done with Prudence, that is,
that it be safe in all the Circumstances of Person, least we beg a Blessing,
and fall into a Snare. Sixthly, that every Vow of a New Action be also
accompanied with a new Degree, (especially made in matter of Religion) and
enforcement of our Essential and Unalterable Duty, such as was Jacobs Vow (that
besides the payment of a Tithe) God should be his God, that so he might
strengthen his Duty to him, first in Essentials, and Precepts, and then in
Addition and Accidentals; for it is but ^n ^ll Tree that spends more in Leaves
and Suckers and Gumms than in Fruit, and that thankfulness is best that first
secures Duty, and then enlarges in Counsels, therefore let every great Prayer
in Need or Danger, draw us nearer to God by the approach of a pious purpose to
live more strictly, and let every mercy of God answering that Prayer, produce a
real performance of it; and then again, let not young Beginners, especially in
Religion, enlarge their hearts and streighten their Liberty, by Vows of long
continuance, nor indeed any one else, with out a great experience of their own
firmness and constancy of Mind, and of all accidental dangers, Vows of single
Actions are the most safe and proportionable to those single Blessings ever
begged in such Cases of sudden and Transient Importunities; let no Action then
which is matter of Question and Dispute in Religion ever become the matter of a
Vow. He Vows very indiscreetly, that makes a promise to God to live and dye in
such an opinion, in an Article not necessary nor certain, or that upon
confidence of his present Guide, binds himself for ever to the Prosession of
it; but when his Reason or Understanding is more opened, and ^^lightned, he may
contradict, (...) may find not to be useful or profitable, but of some ^anger
or necessity; and in other cases, especially in Marriage, many, in a humor
occasioned by some disappointment or other, have vowed never to alter their
conditions, yet we have seen in a short time, they have been quite of another
mind^, the Temptation has been too strong for them, and destroyed their Vows,
which in such case had infinitely better have never been made: And we are apt
to believe, that most of those Young Ladies, who in an ill Humor by being
crossed in Love, or in some other Worldly Affairs, or in a sudden fit of Zeal,
thrust themselves into Monasteries, and vow a single Life; are not many Months
there before they repent their rashness, and would unvow their Vows a thousand
times, to be at large in the World again. There are some Vows that ought indeed
never to be made, it being a sin to vow them as Vows of perpetual hatred,
revenge, bloodshed and the like, which if kept, is yet a greater sin; and
therefore since there is none of us have an absolute power over our selves and
Passions, it is good to be cautious how we vow at all. Uncleanness, Remedies
against. Uncleanness by some may be thought an unfit subject, considering our
proposals in this undertaking; but since we intend to be so candid did in it,
that it cannot as we conceive, be offensive to the Chaste and Modest, as far as
we shall think convenient to touch upon it, so we hope we may give caution
sufficient to the Unwary to detect and avoid it; when therefore a Temptation of
Lust assault such, they must not resist it, by heaping up Arguments against it,
and disputing with it, considering its offer and its danger, but rather fly
from it, that is, think not at all of it, but lay aside all consideration
concerning it, and turn away from it by any sevear and laudable thought, or
business. St. Hierome very prudently reproves the Gentile Superstition, who
pictured the Virgin Deity armed with a Shield and Lance, as if Charity could
not be defended without War and Contention; no, no on ^h^ contrary, this Enemy
is to be treated otherwise, if you hear it break into Language to dispute with
you, it proves dangerous, and is in the way to ruin you, and the ver^
Arguments you go about to Answer, leave a relish upon the Tongue; one man,
happen ^o be burned by going too near the Fire, though but to squench a Flaming
House, and by taking pitch from your Clothes you may defile your Fingers. In
the next place, avoid i^leness, and fill up all the spaces of your time with
Devotion, hon^st Employment, or laudable Recreations, for Lust usually intrudes
at vacant Hours, and fills up the space where it finds emptiness; where the
Body is at ease, and the Soul unimploy'd in things becoming its excellent
Nature, for there are but few easy, Healthful and idle Persons but this
Temptation wor^s upon, either in Thought or Action; give therefore no
E^tertainment to the beginning and first motions of it, but labor to silence
the secret whispers of the Spirit of Impurity, and if so you can totally
suppress it, it dies. This Coc^atrice is easily crushed in the Shell, but if
that be neglected, and grows, i^ soon becomes a destroying Serpent. St. Hurome
tells us, that the Son of King Nicome^es, who was a Mirror of Chastity, falling
into the hands of his Enemies, they thought they could no way so severely
punish him, as to male him renonce that Virtue he so highly prized and valued
himself upon; and therefore finding solicitations an^ the Baits of Beauty, they
laid before* his Eyes, ha^ no effect, they put him into a soft Bed, perfumed
and strowed with Flowers, and keeping him in it by a constr^ine^ violence, set
a fair Court^zan to do the office of an Infernal Spirit, viz. to tempt and
allure him to her Lacivious Embraces, using to that end, all the wanton
Artifices of her impu^e Calling, to inflame him with lustful Desires; but the
chaste young Prince disdaining her Impudence, and to show at once his Manly
fortitud^, Constancy and detestation, bit off his Tongue, and spit (together
with the Blood that flowed from the Wound) in her Face, which so dashed the
impudent Creature out of Countenance, that she retired and left him as one
invincible. -- Use f^^quently an earnest Prayer, if the Spirit of uncleanness
as^ault you waking or lascivious dreams, trust not your self too much to muse
alone, but converse with chaste and sober persons; fly the Conversation of the
Loose and Labidinous; implore the King of Purities, the first of Virgins, the
Eternal God, who is of an essential Purity, that he would be pleased to rebuke
and cast out the Unclean Spirit, sor besides the Blessing of Prayer by way of
Reward, it has a Natural Virtue to restrain this Vice, because ^ Prayer
against it shows an ^^willingness to Act it, and so long as we heartily pray
against it, our desires are secured, and then the Temptation looses its force,
and there is much reason and great advantage in the use of this Instrument,
because that the main thing in this Affair, to be secured, is the ^linde, for
upon that it works, as knowing the Body is not capable of acting a sin without
i^s concurrence; for if the Body be rebellious so the Min^ be chaste, let it do
its worst, it cannot injure you^ therefore the proper Cure or avoidance is by
application to the Spirit, and securities of the mind, which can be no ways so
well be secured, as by frequent and fervent Prayers, sobe Resolutions, and
sevear Discourses, and setting before your Eyes the Examples of those that have
lead, and do lead chaste and sober Lives. Vanity and ^^^ccration in Ladies,
considered. Vanity we must confess, though too much affected by some young
Ladies, thinking it something becoming upon many occasions, when indeed it is
in the Eyes of the Judicious quite the contrary, and to it may properly be
joined A^^^ctatio^; the one may properly be termed the Mother* and the other
the Daughter* the first is the sin, and the latter the punishment: Vanity may
be termed the Root of Self-love, and Affectation the Branches that sprout from
it; consider then that the World often changes the right of distributing
Applause and Esteem, so where it is assumed by a single Authority, the World
grows angry, and leaves not persecuting, till it has had its Revenge; and if by
the greatness of the penalty, we may be allowed to measure a fault, there are
few of a larger Magnitude than Vanity; it brings us into dirision scorn and
contempt, especially when it rises so high in a Woman, that like a Spring Ti^e
of Folly, passing the bounds of Modesty and moderation, it inundates on the
Company, for when in self-Contemplation, her thoughts are entirely employed;
she is not at leisure to think how much it is displeasing to others, but rather
by a fond mistake, labors to confine them to the same narrow circumfernce, not
minding that her self is not half that i^portance to the World, that she would
have them believe she is, or that she fancies she is to her self; for by being
her own Appraiser, she in a manner wilfully mistakes her value, and would
willingly have others do so too, and such a compass she will fetch in her
Discourse, to bring in something as she supposes, to render her self esteemed,
that she Angles for commendation from something in her extraordinary, and seems
uneasy, if the Bait she lays, be not taken, and swallowed by those she threw
it out for, being so over earnest however, to attract respect, that she
generally misses it by her impatiency to gain it, and ^pettish at at the loss,
because (...) the same time she concludes in her due, never considering that
the command of others wills, are not in her power to fix them to her humor, or
to make them concur with what she Fancies is but reasonable; and then so
unfortunate is she, that she has no appeal from their dislike, but to her
self, which is of no validity to others, though the sentence be never so
favorable, and she pronounce it never so loudly, but rather serves as a
further occasion of slighting, and a Subject only fit for Ridicule; and
sometimes she is so weak to take Laughter for a gratulation of her good parts,
and an allowing her to be above the common level of Mortals; and if she does
but float upon the Bladders of flattery a while, she thinks her self the most
accomplished of Woman kind, when those that flatter her, only laugh in their
sleeves, to find she is so easily taken with the Decoys they sen^ out, to bring
her into the Net of Self-conceit, and whil^^ she is ignorant of the danger,
more and more intang^^ her, and if she happens accidentally to throw out witty
Expression, she co^ceives there are such Excess^^ Commendations d^e ti h^^ that
the ^ayment can har^ly (...) made. -- Vanity, ^ those affecte^ with it, thi^^
^ules were made only ^^ the Vulgar, and this opini^^ many times provokes the
vain affected Lady, to extend her imaginary prerogative, beyond all that is
reasonably laid down to set bounds to her Extravagancy. If her Fortune be
weighty, then she swells above measure, though like a Bubble, only full of Air,
and that which must needs be taken for her good humor, is her only laughing at
good Sense, and all things that come not up to the height of her
Impertinencies, and what is fit and commendable to be done by her; she holds
too mechanic and mean, for those of her quality to meddle withal, and lays out
of largest part of her Fancy in pursuing those fashions that are most suitable
to her humor, to which not alone her fancy, but her Senses are mostly
resigned; and so exact an Observer she is of them, that should her Tailor and
Dancing. Master give her their words that Virtue was their Mode, she would go
near to be reconciled to it. To ^ Woman so composed when affectation is brought
in to ^^prove her Character, it is then exalted to the highest ^^tch, setting
up her self first (...) a fine thing, and for that ^^^son takes care to
distin^^ish her self from others in (...) she does, right or wrong, that it may
be thought she (...) made so much more of the ^^^^ified Mould, and that no
common Clay hangs about her; and neither by speaking nor moving to gain if
possible, the more belief, like others of her Sex, because it appears too
vulgar in her Eyes, or at least she conceits it so, in the Eyes of those she
would have to be the observers of her Actions; and therefore since ordinary
English is too course for her, she must have a language that will better suit
her, and in the Morning her Looking-glass dictates to her all the motions of
the day; her motion then, is as if she moved by Clock-work, and was newly wound
up to a precise time; she in setting her self out, frequently cavills with
Nature, and fancies defects in Gods framing her, for no other reason than that
she will find something of her own Invention, as she conceits to mend it,
though indeed she more frequently mars her Beauty by it; yet there is something
so natural in her affected easiness, that there is little difference to be
discerned between her soft languishings, and her Frowns, for there appears a
kind of a Pride in either. If she seems to disown any Commendation that is
thrown away upon her in jest, she does it with such faintness, that under such
a disguise, she seems to be the more thankful for it, than if she expressed her
self in significant Words; if any of the Sex more beautiful than her self,
takes the liberty of dressing and sprucing up her self beyond the ordinary
Rule, our mistaken Lady will imitate her witout considering the Inequality of
the pattern, though she makes her self appear homelye^ than before, by either
forgetting the privilege of good Looks in another, or without sufficient
reason, presuming upon her own; her discourse is as little pleasing as her
gestures, being for the most part composed of noise and emptiness; her
Complements are so unequally shuffled together, and applied to different
persons, that they are so mismatch'd, as neither to be considered or valued;
always you may observe her Eyes to keep motion with her Tongue, generally
inclining to the compassionate, and whatever she otherways pretends; she is
gentle and obliging to distressed Lovers, and especially to Ladies that are
kind-Natur'd and merciful to their Admirers, she has all the tender parts of
Plays by heart, and will repeat them so feelingly, that it may be believed when
she saw them, she was not altogether a dis-interested Spectatrix, and will many
times, to let you see, or at least would have you think, her Empire is absolute
over the Male Sex, give you broad hints, though by ^ kind of Innuendo's, that
diverse languish for her, and that some are so deeply wouded with the darted
glances of her bright Eyes; that there is nothing but her smiles and favors
can reprieve from Death; nothing but her kind hand can stay them from stumbling
into their Graves, when indeed there is little or nothing in the whole matter,
only she would be conceited to be admired when she is not; we must confess that
sometimes extraordinary beauties may dazzle the weak Eyes of the beholders,
that for a time they too seriously contemplating the outside va^nish, composed
by Nature and Art, cannot discern he Imperfections of the mind, but when the
brightness lessens, and their Eyesight grows more clear, and they can behold
things as they are, then the deformity is perspicuous, and that they are by
that means set at liberty, and so returning to their last Senses, detest what
they held in admiration, finding his immagined Goddess, only an Artificial
Shrine moved by Springs and Wheels, to delude him in a way of blind Devotion;
such a one is only pleasing, like the opening of a course Scene, which is
recommended by nothing, except its being new, and not having been exposed
before. -- Vanity, when affected is indeed a great weakness in ^ither Sex, and
though we have taken liberty to dress it in a Female Character, yet the other
Sex are not free from it; would it not make the weeping Philosopher forget his
Melancholy sadness, and dry up his Tears in laughter, to see how some of our
Airy Sparks, who pretend to be Men of Wit, and sense in a kind of a gaety of
humors they te^m it, affect to be vainglorious, and take it as a part of good
Breeding, when indeed it is quite the contrary; however let this Picture at
present supply the place of any other rules that might be given to prevent any
ones covetring to be drawn by it; for if well considered, the deformity of it
is instruction enough to deter us from a desire of Likeness; as a drunken Man
with all his Antic T^^^ks, and Beastiality about him* is the best preachment
to deter us from that Vice which appears so ridiculous in all Eyes but theirs
who are Intoxicated with the Fumes and Vapors of the liquor, which has for the
time divorced them from their Reason, and the use of their ordinary faculties,
so that they seem to be divested of Humanity, and by a kind of Circean Charms,
transformed into Swine. Ustulate, to Frizle or Curl. Utensil ( utensi^e)
anything necessary for our use and occupation; Housholdstuff. Uterine (
uterinus) of or pertaining to the Womb. Uterini, Fratres Brothers of the same
Mother, that came both of one Belly. Valasea, an Amazonian Queen of Bohemia.
Valor of Marriage, was a writ for the Lord to recover the value of a Marriage
preferred to the Infant and refused. Variegation, an adorning with diverse
colors. Vecke, ^. an Old Woman. Ventre inspiciendo, for the search of one that
says she is with Child, and withholds land from the next Heir at Law.
Ventripotent, l. Big Bellied. Voiders, great broad dishes, to carry away the
remains from a Meat-Table* also a Term in Heraldry. Vol^^^a, a certain Goddess,
who is said to be the Overseer of the husks of Corn, wherein the grain is
enclosed. Votary, (from voto) he that makes a vow, or binds himself to the
preformance of a vow; a vowel Servant. Urania, one of the Muses, to whom the
invention of Astrology is attributed; called also the Heavenly Muse. Vesania,
Madness from Love. Virgo, l. the Zodiac-maid. Viripotent, [a Maid] Marriagable.
Vitta, that part of the Coat called Amnion, which sticks to the Infants Head
when it is just Born. Umbilicus, the Navel, a Boss in the middle of the Abdomen,
to which the Navel-string in a Faetus is joined, which is cut off after
Delivery. Dr. Blanckard. Viduity ( viduitas) widow-hood, or the State of a
Widow: also lack of things. Voluptas, the Goddess Oversers of the cups wherein
the Corn is enclosed. Voyles, f. vails [for Nuns.] Up-fitting-time, Y. when the
Childbed Woman gets up. Uxorious, l. of (or doting upon) a Wife. Viragin or
Virago (Lat.) a Woman of flour and manly courage, a manly or mankind Woman.
Virginal ( Virgina'is) Maidenly, Virgin-like; hence the name of that Musical
Instrument, called Virginals, because Maids and Virgins do most commonly Play
thereon. Virgo (Lat.) one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac; so called,
because as a Virgin is barren and unfruitful, whilst she lives without man; so
whilst the Sun continues in this sign, it brings forth nothing, but only ripens
such Fruit as the proceeding part of the year has brougt forth. ^r. B^own.
Uterus, the Womb, an organical part placed in a Woman's Abdomen, which is
divided into the Bottom, the neck, and the Sheath: It has two broad Ligaments,
and two round: It is of a nervous and fibrous Substance; and is of different
Thickness, according to the difference of Age, and Time of going with Child. At
the Bottom within, there is a Cavity whence the Courses slow, wherein likewise
Generation and Conception are made. Dr. Blanckard. Umbreilo, (Ital. Vmbrella) a
fashion of round and broad Fans, wherewith the Indians (and from them our great
ones) preserve themselves from the heat of the Sun or fire; and hence any
little shadow, Fan, or other thing, wherewith Women guard their Faces from the
Sun. Vacuna, the Goddess of rest. Valentines, are either Saints chosen for
special Patrons for a year, acording to the use of the Romanists; or Men or
Women chosen for special Loving Friends by an Ancient custom upon Saint
Valentines Day, the Fourteenth of February; about which day birds choose their
meats. Venerous, lustful, fleshly, lascivious. Veneral Disease See Morbus
Gallicus. Venus, the Goddess of lust; also lust it self, venery, unchastness,
lechery; also (among Alcbymists) the metal copper; also one of the seven
Planets. See Saturn, the day of Morning Star. Venus Escuage, is used for
Knights (or nights) service to Ladies. Uml lical vein ( vena umbilicalis) is
that whereby an infant in the Womb receives nourishment, and which (it being
born) closes it self, and serves as a Ligament to settle the Liver to the
Navel. Dr. Brown. Valeria Miaina, an Italian Dramatick Poetess whose Amorosa
Speranza, I find peculiarly mentioned and commended. Victoria, see page 404.
Uncleanness. Reproved. There is One peculiar sort of wickedness, which the Term
of Uncleanness is more strictly put upon, it is the violation of that Chastity,
which is Enjoined upon us, by the Seventh Commandment, in the Holy, and Just,
and Good Laws of our God. And why is this Luxury called Uncleanness, but
because of a Special Filthin^ss, and Vgli^^ss, which this Vice is attended
with? Indeed, such is the Wretchedness of the Corruption, in Man, that it is
hardly safe so much as to mention in his Hearing, the several kinds of this
Damnable Wickedness. It was the Apostolical Counsel, in Ephesians. 5.3. (...)
Vnclean^ess, let it not be once Named among you. However, we may with some
Scripture Phrases, indigitate the Chief of those Diabolical Pranks, that are
Committed by those, whose Life is among the Unclean. Briefly, -- There is then
a Cursed Self Pollution, which is usually the first Pit of Uncleanness,
whereinto they fall, that are, The Abhorred of the Lord. Wretches there are,
that like Wicked Onan, do so Sacrifice their seed unto the Devil: and these are
meant by those Effeminate, concerning whom it is said, in 1 Cor. 6.9 10. Be not
Deceived, They shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God. -- There is next, an
O^ious Fornication, which is a further Step, of that Uncleanness, whereunto the
Raging Lusts of Men do carry them. It Is that, whereto Unwedded Persons, of both
Sexes, do prostitute themselves; and and it is reckoned among those Works of
the Flesh; whereof we are assured in Gal. 5.20, 21. They which do such Things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom. -- If they that have been thus Unclean, do come
to Marry, it is well if the Unclean Spirit still haunt them not. There are
Inexpressible Uncleanness. in the Married State, which the word of God has
Branded, in Col. 3.5. Under the Title, of In ordinate Affection; for which
Thing sake the wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience. -- And
sometimes, the Uncleanness grows into Adultery; Yea, perhaps a doubled
Adultery; wherein the Marriage-Covenant is fearfully broken by Sinful
Creatures, that Shake off the Yoke of God, imposed from the Beginning. The
Iniquity so often Damned in the Word of God; but especially in Prove. 6.29, 32.
Whosoever touches his Neighbors wife, shall not be Innocent; whose Commits
Adultery with a Woman, wants understanding; be that does it destroys his
own Soul. -- Sometimes also, There is an Incest perpetrated in that
Uncleanness, whereto the Hellish Fires in the Hearts of Men do carry them. They
will needs Invade that comfortable, and Profitable, Order; which God has
Established in Humane Society, as now increased, for the Propagation of
mankind. It was the Edict of Heaven, in Lev. 18.6. None of you shall approach
to any, that is near of kin to him. And to show, that such and such Degrees
were not forbidden unto Israel alone, the Lord adds, For in all these the
Nations are Defiled, which I cast out before you. -- Yea, which is horrible to
be Spoken! such a Vile Uncleanness, do some among the debased children of Men,
sink down into, that Sodomy and Buggery it self, has been among their Crimes.
The great God has had Occasion to issue out such precepts, as those, in Lev.
18.22, 23 -- against such unutterable Abominations and Confusions. Alas, There
is in Europe, a Land Professing the Christian Religion, where such Devilish
practices are they say, very frequent; but flaming Fire from Heaven will
shortly destroy that Accursed Land. Nay, And in this Land of Vbrightness too
there have been some that have thus Dealt wickedly And I have one very
wonderful Example to tell you of it. In the Southern Parts of New England,
about the Year 1641. A Beast brought forth a Creature that had something of an
Humane Shape. This Monster had a Blemish in one Eye, just like what a loose
Lewd Fellow in the Town, was known to have. This greater Monster, being upon
this Account Suspected, was Examined upon that suspicion, and his Examination
Confessed his Guilt of most infamous ^^stialities, for which he underwent a
deserved Execution. You hear what the Acts of Uncleanness are; but I am to tell
you, That there are Unclean Thoughts, which are Prohibited by the Lord our God;
even as in Mat. 5.28. A Looking upon a Woman and to Lust after her. And there
are Unclean Words, which are also Prohibited; Even, as ^in Ephesians. 5.4. Fi^^^iness
and foolish Talking. In all of these things, here is Uncleanness, But what
shall be said of this Uncleanness. In one Word, It is a Wickedness. It Is Rebuked
every where the whole Bi^le over. But indeed, I need not Appeal unto the Bible,
to prove the Wickedness of Uncleanness. The Natural Reason and Conscience in a
Man, will (...) unto it. Even an A^^^el^k, a ^hilistine, will pronounce it, A
Great Sin. Until the Souls of Men, come to be debauched, into the Vilest of
Degeneracies. They cannot but see a World of Wickedness in this Uncleanness
Why, the plain (...) which all the Unclean do both to themselves, and others,
are enough to make every sensible Person, say, (...), I should ever (...)
However Honorable, a (...) may be otherwise, Vncleaness will soon lay his
Honor in the Dust; there is a Blot in the S^ut^^^on, when Uncleanness has
de^^^ed it: Paul said of it. It is a Vile Affection. -- Again, The Unclean most
Probably leave the World, with the Humiliation or seeing None, or however, but
a Poor Posterity rising after them. It Is a frequent Thing, for that Great
Blessing of Children, to ^e Denied where the Guilt of much Uncleanness is Lying
on the Soul It was Threatened in Hos. 4.10. They shall commit ^^^^edom, and
shall not increase. There was no Conception in the House of Abim^^^k, while
Uncleanness was designed ther^ We read of one Committing Adultery* and
presently said our Lord Jesus upon it, I will kill her Children with Death.
It Is no Uncommon Cha^^^^ement for Uncleanness, Write this Person (...) the
Lord. Or, if Children are not always Denied, yet there are o^^^^ C^rs'd where
much Uncleaness is cleaving to the Family. It was T^^^^^ned, in Hos. 2.4. I
will not have mercy upon her Children for they are the Children of (...). --
This (...) Exh^^sts (...) Poisons the Spirits in (...) bodies, until an
Inc^rable Consumption at Last, shall (...) us down, One of (...). I^ procure
many Grievous Diseases: (...), Cramps, (...) and ^^^rbu^ck Taints, upon the
whole Mass within us: Yea there is a Grievous Disease that sometimes Invades
Horses, and because that Men do now so much Play the ^r^it, that very Grievous
Diseases, is in a disguise come upon Man also, to Chastise their Bruitishn^^^.
The Seventh Commandment well follows the Sixth; Uncleanness has a Self Murder
in it. But that which further hastens this misery of Uncleanness, is the Just
Revenge of Almighty God upon it. It was the Adomonation, in Eccl^ 7.17. But not
over much Wicked, Why should thou Dye before thy Time? Well might the Lord
then say, concerning this very Sin, Shall not my Soul Visit for such an Evil as
this? Why, It Is an High Treason against the Majesty of Heaven; it is a Clipping
of the Coin, that has the Image of the Great God upon it; and it is treated as
a Capital Offense, accordingly. What is Man himself, but the Picture of God.
The Roman Emperous made it a Criminal Thing for any Man to Carry his Picture
into any Sordid places: But how then shall the Glorious God bear it, for a Man
to Smutty His Picture with all the Superfluities of Naughtiness? -- But suppose
a Disposition to Uncleanness, may be such a Grain in a Man's Temper, that it may
be called. His own Iniquity; what shall we then? Why then, there is a famous
Prescription, Ores, casta Legas, Jeju^nes, otia vites
Si Servare Voles Cor, ora CastaDio
First Pray much, and pray with him, Lord, Create in me a Clean Heart. Then
Fast as well as Pray; if you Fast, the Unclean Kind may go out: Nextly, Read
much the Sanctifying Truths of God: It is by Taking heed thereto, that, The
Young Man may cleanse his Way: But shun all obscene Books, as you wo^ld the
Rags that had the Plague about them. Once more; Be not Idle, be not Sloathful,
have something at your Calling still to do. So you may come to say, as one
usually too hard for the Devil did, The Devil never finds me at leisure for
him. You know, when and how David fell! But permit me to add one Advice more;
and that is: Call for a chasing-Dish of Burning Coals. A Chaste Person solicited
unto Folly requested the Young Man, to do one thing for her, first; That was,
To hold his Hand a quarter of an Hour in a Chasing* Dish of Burning Coals for
her sake. He refused this, as a very unreasonable Thing; but she then Replied,
And how then can you ask me, for your sake to throw my self Body and Soul, in
the Fire of Hell; to Lay and Burn and Broil in that Fire throughout Eternal
Ages! Is not that more unreasonable? Argue at such a rate as that perhaps one
Fire will fetch out another? Even an Heathen of Old, Chaffering about an
Unclean Bargain, could say, No, I wont Buy Sorrow at so dear a Rate. O Think,
what a Phrensy it is, to cast a Soul into Eternal Fire, or to Dream of, The
Pleasures of Sin, which also are, But for a Season. And Last of all; Be at last
prevailed withal, to take the Warnings of such as have Dyed in Youth, because
their Life has been among the Unclean. He that b^ing often Reproved, hardens
his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy. The Primitive
Christians, I find sometimes using these words, we count it a sort of Murder
to disturb Conception; and what shall we count it then to Kill Infants already
Born into the World? The young Persons that have sometimes Died in and for
their Uncleanness among us; have you not heard their solemn Admonitions when
their Trouble, their Darkness, and the, Dimness of their Anguish, has been upon
them. When those forlorn Outcasts have just stood upon the Edges of an awful
Eternity, how vehemently have they called upon all Survivers, to Beware of
coming to the place of Torment after them! Oh! how they have Roared unto our
young ones, Whatever you do, Sir^, do not Lead such Unclean, Pro^an^,
Prayerless Lives as we have done. Well, take these Affectionate Warnings, And
among the rest, Give Ear unto the Dying Speeches of the young Woman, lately
Executed in New England for Uncleanness as they were delivered to Mr. Cotton
Mather signed by Her own Hand; Her Speech is as follows which I shall insert
Verbatim, having never been Printed before in London.

Her Speech.

I Am a Miserable Sinner; and I have Justly provoked the Holy God to leave me
unto that Folly of my own Heart, for which I am now condemned to Dye. I cannot
but see much of the Anger of God against me, in the circumstances of my Woeful
Death; he has fulfilled upon me, that Word of His, Evil pursues Sinners. I
therefore desire, Humbly to Confess my many Sins before God, and the World: But
most particularly my BloodGuiltiness. Before the Birth of my Twin-Infants, I
too much Parlyed with the Temptations of the Devil, to Smother my Wickedness by
Murdering of them: At length, when they were Born, I was not unsensible that
at least, one of them was alive; but such a Wretch was I, as to use a Murderous
Carriage toward them, in the place where I lay, on purpose to Dispatch them
out of the World, I acknowledge that I have been more Hard Hearted than the
Sea Monsters. And yet for the Pardon of these my Sins, I would Fly to the Blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the only Fountain set open for Sin and
uncleanness I know not now better to Glorify God, for giving me such an
opportunity as I have (...) to make sure of his Mercy, then by advising and
entr^^ting the Rising ^eneration here, to take Warn^ng by my Example; and I
will therefore tell the Sins, that have brought me to my shameful End. I do
warn all People, and especially, Young People, against the Sin of Uncleanness
in particular; it is that Sin, that has been my R^^ne; well it had been for me,
if I had answered all temptations to that Sin, as Joseph did, How shall I do
this Wickedness and Sin against God? But I see, Bad Company is that, which
leads to that, and all ^^ there Sins; and I therefore (...) all that Love their
Souls to be familiar with none but such as fear God. I believe, the chief thing
that has brought me into my present Condition, is my Disobedience to my
Parents: I despised all their Godly Counsels and Reproofs; and I was always of
an Haughty and Stubborn Spirit. So that now I am become a dreadful Instan^^ of
the Curse of God belonging to Disobedient Children. I must B^^ayl this also,
and although I was Baptized, yet when I grew up, I forgot the Bonds that were
laid upon me to be the Lords. Had I given my self to God, as soon as I was
capable to consider that I had been in Baptism, set apart for him, How happy
had I been! It was my Delay to Repent of my former Sins, that Provoked God to
leave me unto the crimes, for which I am now to Dye. Had I Seriously Repented
of my Uncleanness the First Time I (...) into it, I do Suppose, I had not been
left unto what followed. Let all take it from me; they little think, what they
do, when they put off turning from f^^ to God, and Resist the Strivings of the
Holy Spirit. I fear, it is for this, that I have been given up to such hardness
of Heart, not only (...) long Imprisonment, but also since my Just
Condemnation. I now know not what will become of my distressed Perishing Soul
but I would (...) commit it unto the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ, Amen.


Every Clause of this Writing, says the Reverend Author, from whence I
Collected these hin^s about Uncleanness, has more than once or twice been
Distincly Owned by this Dying Soul, before various Witnesses. Indeed, I Fear, I
Fear, says he, this is not all she should have acknowledged. However as far as
they go, may the Lord now sanctify these Warnings, to all the young ones, for
whom they are intended.

Unmarried, Passionate Wishes for it by an unhappy Pair. Take this Ring the
Married Yoke,
Take your plig^ted Faith again,
I take mine, and bagg the stroke
That divides me from my Pain.
Hail that uncontrolling Hour,
That dear Minute, when I found
No Confines to my Native Power,
But what a Virgins Honourbound.
Chorus both together.
Let Us both be pleased, I readily agree,
To recommence the Joys of Liberty.
Walburg or Worburg 1. gracious. Winifred, 1. Win, or get Peace. Wisard or
Wizard, perhaps from the Sax. Wi^ega, i.e. a Prophet or Foreteller of things to
come) a Cunning Man; the Hebrews describe him thus; He put in his Mouth the
Bone of a Beast named by them Jadua, and burned Incense, and did other things,
till he fell down with shame, and spoke with his Mouth, things that are to
come. We commonly take him for a kind of Wizzard, or one that can tell where
things are, that were lost, etc. Witch is derived from the Dutch Witchelen or
Wiithelen, which properly signifies whin^^ing and neighing like a Horse: Also
to foretell or Prophecy; and Wiicheler, signifies a Sooth^ayer; for that the
Germans (from whom our Ancestors the Saxons usually descended) did principally
(as Tacitus tells us) divine and foretell things to come by the Whinnying and
Neighing of their Horses: Hinitu and Fremitu are his words. For the Definition,
Perkins (cap. 1.) says, witchraft is an Art serving for the work of Wonders by
the Assistance of the Devil, so far as God will permit. Delrio defines it to
be, an Art which by the Power of a Contrast, entered into with the Devil, some
wonders are wrought, which pass the common Understanding of Men, Lib. 1. ^. 2.
de Mag. Dis. Wittal, is a Cuckold that wits all or knows all; that is, knows
himself to be so, and is contented with i^. Witches, the Scriptures says, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live, Bodinus (contrary to ^yerius, who will scarce
believe there be any such, accounting all those Judges as condemn them to the
Stake or Gallows, no better than Executioners and Hangmen) he shows diverse
probable Reasons why they ought not to live. -- The first is, Because all
Witches renounce God and their Religion; now the Law of God ^aith, Whosoever
shall forsake the God of Heaven, and adhere to any other, shall be stoned to
Death; which punishment the Hebrews held to the greatest could be inflicted. --
The second thing is, That they plight faith, and make covenant with the Devil,
adore him, and sacrifice unto him as Ap^l^ius re^tifies of Pampbila Larissana,
a Witch of Thessaly* as likewise a Witch of the Loadunensian Suburbs, in the
Month of May, 1578. Who blushed not to do the like before many witnesses: Now
the Law says, Who that shall but incline or bow down to Images (which the
Greeks call (...)) shall be punished with Death. The Hebrew word Tistave^, and
the Chaldaean Fisgud, (which all our Latin Interpreters translate Adorare)
imports as much as to incline, or Worship: Now these witches do not only
incline unto him, but invoke and call upon him. -- A Third thing is (which many
have confessed) that they have vowed their Children to the Devil; now the Law
says, God is inflamed with revenge against all such as shall offer their
Children unto Moloch; which Josephus interprets Priapus, and Philo, Satannus:
But all agree, that by Moloch is signified, the Devil and malignant spirits. --
A Fourth thing is (gathered out of their own confession) That they have
sacrificed Infants not yet baptized, to the Devil, and have killed them by
thrusting great pins into their Heads. Sprangerus testifies, that he condemned
one to the fire, who confessed, that she by such means had been the death of
one and forty Children. -- A Fifth is, That adulterate incests, are frequent
amongst them, for which in all ages they have been infamous, and of such
detestable cri^es convicted; so that it has almost grown to Proverb, No
Magician or Witch, but was either begot and born of the Father and Daughter, or
the Mother or Son: -- A Sixth, That they are Homicides, and the murderers of
those Infants; Sprangerus observes from their own confessions, and Baptista
Porta the Neapolitan, in his Book de Magia: Next, That they kill Children
before their Baptism, by which circumstances their offense is made more capital
and heinous, -- A Seventh, That Witches eat the flesh of Infants, and commonly
drink their Bloods, in which they take much delight. If Children be wanting,
they dig humane bodies from their sepulchers, or feed upon them that have been
executed, To which purpose Lucan writes: The Felons strangling cord she nothing
fears,
But with her teeth the fatal Knot she tears:
The hanging bodies from the Cross she takes,
And shave the Gallows, of which dust she makes, etc.
Apuleius reports, that coming to Larissa in Thessaly, he was hired for eight
pieces of Gold to watch a Dead Body but one night, for fear the Witches (for
which in ^^at place there is abundance) should gnaw and devour the Flesh of the
party deceased, even to the very Bones; which is often found amongst them. -- A
Eighth is, That they are the death of Cattle for which, Augustanus the Magician
suffered Death. 1569. -- A Ninth, That they have Carnal consociety with the
Devil, as it has been proved by a thousand several confessions. -- Now all
that have made any Compact or Covenant with the Devil, if not all these, yet
undoubtedly ^re guilty of many, or at least some, and therefore consequently
not worthy to live.

Women in Men's Apparel. There may be a Case put, therein in some exigency it
may be Lawful for the Women to wear the Agparel of the Man: And A^icrius gives
^one. (...). I know Woman (says he) that Pulled (...) Hair, and put on Man's
(...), and that a flowered Garment too, that she might not be ^rated form her
dear Husband (...) was forced to fly, and (...) his Head. Winefred, if Saxon,
signifies win or get Peace; but ^^me conceive it to be a British word;
corrupted from (...) srewi. Pr^wi was the Saints ^^me at first, but had the
(...) Ewen which signifies white in the Feminine Gender) from the white Circle
that remained in her Neck, after she was revived by Benno the Priest, and
Pastor of the Church (as the Story goes) by joining her cut off Head to her
dead Body. For it is a Tradition among the Britains, that in the very place
where her Head was cut off by wicked Cradacus, there sprung the Well that has
to this day continued under the name of St. WinefredsWell in Flintshire;
esteemed to be the most plentiful, and miraculous Spring in the World. Wheedle,
in the British tongue signifies a story, whence probably our late word of
fancy, and signifies to draw one in, by far words or subtle insinuation, to
act any thing of disadvantage or reproofs; to tell a pleasant story, and there
by work ones own ends. Waived belongs to a Woman, that being sued in Law,
contemptuously refuses to appear as the word Outlawed does to a Man: For Women
cannot be outlawed, because they are not sworn in Lees to the King, not to the
Law, as men are; so that a Man is said Outlawed, or without the Law, to which
he was sworn, and a Woman waived. Wife, Advice about choosing a good one. --
Having already inserted the Form of Prayer for the Ladies choice of Husbands,
drawn up by the Athenians. I shall here incert the like Assistance which they
gave to young Batchelors, for choosing Wives, which is as follows. When you
find your Devotion warm with thoughts of this nature, you may change the
following Character into a Prayer for -- One whose Piety and Virtue has
measured the Chains of Providence, and accordingly, makes a due Estimate of all
Occurences -- Whose Soul is too great to be crush under the weight of Adverse
Storms, and yet at the same time of a lost, easy, affable Temper, -- who is a
Stranger to disguise, yet not so free and open as to give grounds for contempt,
One to whom Nature has been liberal in good Features and Proportions of Body,
but yet with a fairer Mind: Witty without Abuses, Modest without Weakness,
Jealous of nothing but the decrease of her Kindness to you: Generous, yet not
profuse. One whose Prudence can secure you from an Inspection into her Family
Accounts, and divert the Curse of trifting into Poverty. A good Housewife that
can appear as great in the World with one hundred Pounds a Year as her
Neighbors with two. One who believes her Person should be a figure, and her
Portion a Cipher, which added to her, advances the Sum, but alone signifies
nothing; rather the Heir of her own Deserts, than barely the Offspring of
Virtuous Parents. One that without the Trial of her Virtue, can out of a
Principle of Generosity be just to your Bed Whose Virtue, Wit and Modesty can
rather be imitated than equalled by her Neighbors. -- In short, One whose
Carriage exceeds this Character, and attains to that of the Apostle, 1 Pet.
chap. 3. to that of the Wisest of Men, Prove. 31. from Ver. 10. to the end.
Athens. Wantons. Of Wantons there be two sorts, Meretrices and Scorta, that is,
Whores and common Women, such as either for Lust or Gain, prostitute themselves
to many, or all. The second are Concubina or Pellices, Concubines to Kings and
Princes, or such as we call the private Mistresses to great Men. The last are
as our Accidence teaches, like Edwardus and Guli^lmus, proper Names to this
Man or that. The first like Homo, common to all Men: both degrees sinners, but
not in the like kind. I have read a third sort, but know not what Consonant or
agreeing Name to confer upon them. Waiting Gentlewomen. If you desire to be a
Waiting-Gentlewoman to a person of Honor or Quality, you must 1. Learn to
dress well. 2. Preserve well. 3. Write well a legible hand, good Language, and
good English. 4. Have some skill in Arithmetic. 5. Carve well.
Having learned these, you must remember to be courteous and modest in your
behavior to all persons according to their Degree, humble and submissive to
your Lord and Lady, and Master or Mistress, neat in your Habit, loving to
Servants, sober in your countenance, and discourse, not using any wanton
gestures, which may give Gentlemen any occasion to suspect you of levity; and
so court you to debauchery, and by that means lose a Reputation irrecoverable.
-- In the first place, I would not have you look upon your condition as to what
it has been, but what it is; learn whatever you can, and slight no opportunity
which may advance your knowledge to the height of your birth. -- Wherefore I
advise all Parents (be their Estates never so good, and their Revenues large)
to endeavor the gentiel Education of their Daughters, encouraging them to
learn whatever opportunity offers, worthy a good estimation. For Riches has
Wings, and will quickly fly away or Death comes and removes the Parents.

Wassaile (Sax. Vas-hale, i.e. Salve, sis salvus, ave) the Wassaile-bowl on
Newyears Eve, had (according to Ver^^gan its origin thus, Lady Rowena or Ronix,
Daughter to Hengistus, having invited King Vortager to a Supper at his new
built Castle, called Thong-Castle, caused her after Supper to come forth of her
Chamber, into the Kings presence, with a Cup of Gold filled with Wine in her
hand, and making, in very seemly manner, a low reverence to the King, said with
a pleasing grace, in our ancient Saxon Languaged, Waes heal blaLord Cyning,
which is, according to our present Speech, Be of health Lord King; for as (was)
is our Verb of the pre^^^rimperfect tense, signifying have been, so (Waes)
being the same Verb in Imperative Mood, and now pronounced (was) is as much to
say, as, grow, be, or become, and Washeal, by coruption of pronounciation
afterward became Wassaile. The King not understanding what she said, demanded
it of his Chamberlain, who was his Interpreter, and when he knew what it was,
he asked him, how he might answer her in her own Language; where being
informed, he said unto her, Drine heal, i.e. Drink health, etc. Versi. p. 101.
Some say it is Wassaile, qua^, Wash your throat with ^le. Others more probably
wax bail, i.e. creseat salus. Wed (Sax) a gage or pawn, a word still retained
in the Country sport, called Pray my Lord a course in you Park. Wedding (
nuptiae) comes from the Germ. ( Wed)i.e. pignus, a pledge; and wedde in in
Scotland and in some parts of England signifies so much at this day. --
whittle, we, a doubled Blanket worn over Women's shoulders. Widdows-benob, Ss. a
share of their Husbands Estate, which they enjoy beside their jointure.
Wildfred, Sa. much peace. -- St. Wilfrads-Needle, a hole (in a Vault under
Rippan Church) through which chaste Women might pass, others not. Wimple, a
plaited Lin^en about the Necks of Nuns; also a flag or streamer. Winifr^d nes,
a British Virgin Saint, revived by Bruno the Priest, after (...) had cut off
her Head, in a place where sprang up Winifrids well, in Flint-shire. Wittal-ol,
Sa. one that knows himself a Cuckold. Willb^rga, another English Saint, who had
power of Birds, and could command them as she pleased; she is said to restore a
dead Goose to Life, that had been stolen and killed, an^ I do many other
Wonders in her Life time, and after her death. Wibes, their Marriage state
Instructions. Wives may immagine it strange that we should presume to give them
Instructions, who think themselves wise enough to instruct whole Families, but
having already brought the Virgin to the doors of Matrimony, it is fit we should
not only conduct her into that state, but see how she behaves her self, and put
her in a little, if she should be out in acting her part in so curious a Scene,
for here, as we may say, she is launched into a wide Sea, where she floats like
a Merchants Ship, fraught with all manner of rare advantages, to render her
happy, if she affect prudence and Modesty; for the Virgin Modesty must not in
some sort be laid aside in the Marriage state, but rather strengthened and
improved by a more solid Conduct and Management, to render it more Awful and
graceful. A Wife has a duty incumbent on her that has several Aspects. First,
as it relates to the Person of the Husband. Secondly, to his Reputation. And
Thirdly, to his Fortune Love is a Debt due to his person, which we find to be
the prime Article in a Marriage Vow, and is indeed the most essentially
requisite, without which all happiness is banished from a Matrimonial State.
It Is Love only that cements Hearts, and where that Union is wanting, it is but
a shadow, a mere appearance, but no real or substantial Joy; a Carcass of
Marriage without a Soul, therefore as it is very necessary to bring some
degrees of this to this state; so it is no less available to maintain and
improve it in it; this is it which facilitates all other Duties of Marriage;
Makes it an easy and pleasing Yoke to be born: The Wives therefore should
study to preserve this Flame, that like the Vestal Fire, it may never be
Extinguished; and to that purpose, take care to guard it from all such things
as naturally tend to put it out; and these Extinguishers are perverseness of
Humor, frowardness sullen and Morose behavior, etc. which by taking off from
the delight and complacency of Conversation, will by degrees wear off the
kindness: Jealousy above all others, is most destructive to Conjugal Love, of
which we have largely treated, under the proper Letter of Alphabet, and
therefore shall say the less of it here, though sometimes we find it to be an
unhappy and an unruly Passion; and although some term it the Child of Love, yet
we must ^erm it a Viper, because its birth is the certain destruction of its
Parent: Wives therefore must be nicely careful in giving their Husban^s no
occasion of Jealousy, nor ^e Jealous your selves, if they love their Peace and
happiness; for the entertaining of Jealous Fancy, is admitting the most
Treache^ous and most disturbing Inmate in the World; and she who lets it in,
opens her Breast to a Fury; and certainly it is one of the most Enchanting
Frensies immagi^able; it keeps the Party always in a restless and Importunate
search of that which ^s dreaded, abhorring at the same time, to find what is so
earnestly sought, and there is no difference in the Misery, when there is a
real cause, and only an immagined one; and a Wise, if she can so bridle her
self, if she knows her Husbands out-wandring shall sooner reclaim him by
dissimulation of the matter, or very calm notices, rather than by Fury and
Contention; though we must too sadly confess, more Women drive their Husbands
from home, by their Clamours and Outcries against them of this kind, that are
staid at home by mildness an^ persuasion, and are reclaimed by their Wives
Patience and Meekness; yet where Men have not wholly put off their humanity,
there is compassion to a meek Sufferer, so that Patience in this case, is as
much the Interest as Duty of a Wise. There in another instance of a several
Trial, and that we find to be when a Virtuous Wife lies under the causeless
Jealousy of her Husban^. This must be a great Calamity to a Virtuous Woman,
who as she accounts nothing so dear as her honor and Loyalty, so she immagins
no Infelicity can equal the Aspersing of them, especially when it comes from
him who should be more solicitous to protect her s^otlels Innocence, and clear
her Reputation from the Calumnies cast upon it by others; however, her caution
and circumspection, Prayers to God to turn his Heart from Evil Thoughts and
Wonderful Virtues, will in the end reclaim and make him, when he sees with the
Eyes of his Reason, the Scales of his blinded Passion being fallen off, he will
with shame and confusion, confess his Error and Folly, and by the returning
Springtide, let you see, even in his Jealousy, how much he valued, as fearing
any one should deprive him off, or at least fully over so fair a Jewel, and by
the high flowing of a constant Passion, not only make you amen^s in Love, but
by taking shame to himself, and blushing at his past indiscretion, cheer up
your Reputation, and make it shine brighter than before; for an Innocent being
falsely appeached, put to a sharp Trial, and coming off with his Innocence, is
pittyed and Esteemed, when one of the like candor standing by is not taken
notice of. -- Wives owe to their Husbands, in the next place, Fidelity, for
having espoused his Interests, she is obliged to be true to them; to keep all
his Secrets; to inform him of all Dangers that threaten him, and for his good,
in a mild and gentle manner, admonish him of his faults, that is the most
genuine Act of Friendship, therefore more abundantly the Wife, who is placed in
the most nearest and Intimate degree of that relation, must not be wanting in
it: She is his bosom Friend, his second self; and as she tenders her own
happiness, so she must his, putting gently in mind both of his duty and his
Aberations, and as long as she can be patiently heard, it is a fault in her to
omit it, and indeed in doing it she is kind to her self; for there is nothing
that does so much secure the happiness of a Wife, as the Virtue and Piety of
the Husband; yet though this ought to be her chiefest care, as being her
Principal Interest, she is not however to neglect any of those inferior to it,
but contribute to his utmost advantage in all his concerns. -- When these are
well considered, there remains more behind for a Virtuous Wife to observe
toward her Husband. As to what relates (then) to his Bed, she must be severely
scrupulous, keeping even her Thoughts and Immaginations from wandering, much
less she must not hold a parley or Treaty contrary to her plighted Faith and
Loyalty to her Husband; for wantonness-is one of the foulest Blotts that
constrain any of the fair Sex but it is more odious infinitely in the Marriage
state, there being then an Accumulation of crimes, Perjury added to
uncleanness, the Infamy of their Family builded upon their own ^^d throws all
into Confusion, and disorder, like a Mine sprung under a stately Fabric,
laying it in an instant, all in Rubbish and Ruins of dishonor and disgrace;
the Children are branded to Po^^erity, and many Generations to come, can hardly
justle it into oblivion. -- We come in the next place to speak something of
Obedience. This, Ladies, in so free and generous a Country as ours, may sound a
little harsh in your E^r^, yet it is no more than you promised in your Marriage
Obligation, and we hope you are too brave and just as to break your Words when
solemnly passed in so sacred a Place, and indeed there goes more than your word
to bind it, for God himself has commanded it; you lost the Charter of Equality
in Paradise, so that a contending for it, or at least, superiority is an
attempt to reverse the fundamental Law, which is very near as ancient as the
World; consider then that to affect Dominion, that has been so long given away,
and the gift often since confirmed to Man, is to little purpose, unless to
shipwreck the peace and Pleasures of your Lives: how happy might many Women
have lived, who have brought Misery and affliction upon themselves, had not
their restless Spirits pushed them on for Mastery? It Is better then to let it
rest where it ought, which is agreeable to Gods Word, to Nature and Reason, and
so to live in a calm, than by struggling for that which if possible to attain,
may be hurtful to you; for you must always be upon your watch and guard to
secure it, lest In Roads are made, or surprises happen, divesting you of your
power, and rendering you more miserable than before, by a more se^vile
Subjection: so that certainly it is not only the Virtue, but also the Wisdom of
Wives to do that upon respect and Duty to their Husbands, and so continue their
Love and Tenderness toward them, than being obstinate in what they know; they
may be compelled to Wives that would be accounted Virtuous, must have their
Husbands Reputations highly in regard to be extreme tender of it, and advance
it by making all that is good in them as conspicuous and public as may be done
modestly without ostentation or Pride, setting his worth in the clearest
Sunshine, but ^eiling his Infirmities, or setting them in the shade, that they
may be skreened from the Eyes of others, and even as far as possible from your
own, that he may look the more amiable in them; for in contemplating his
Weakness, it will make you apt to despise them, which by no means you ought to
do. In the management of such affairs as a Husband intrusts to your hand^; you
must be prudent and diligent, not seeing it squandered away, nor yet too
nigardly; that your penuriousness may redound to his Disgrace, giving no
opportunity of his being defrauded by any negl^ct or oversight and ^ly
Idleness, for that brings on many Ill-conveniencies: Be not over fond or
desirous of 'going abroad, unless about necessary occasions; and sometimes we
ought to allow for Pleasure, and moderate Recreation, for Woman being so rare a
Creature ought not so to be kept under, as if she was in Servility. Some Severe
Writers have been so morose, that they have allowed a Woman to be seen abroad
but three times in her Life, viz. At her Christening, Marriage and Funeral, but
these are to be rejected. -- We find however, that the Boetians had a Custom,
that when the Bride was carrie^ home ^o her b^troathed Husband, they used to
burn before the Door of his House, the Axeltree of the Coach that brought her
thither, giving her by that Ceremony, to understand that she must restrain her
self from much going abroad, and that she now being joined to a Husband, must
frame her self to live and tarry with him without any hope of departure, to
take up again with her friends Wives that were keepers of their Houses, and
diligent in their domestic Affairs: The Ancients Emb^em'd them by Snails,
which carry their Shells or Houses on their Backs. Thus have ^e briefly run
through the Duties incumbent on a Wife toward her Husband; and though we have
not, with the E^ac^^ess of a Casuit curiously Anatoma^^z'd every part, and
showed all the most Minute Particles, reducible to every Pea^; we have drawn
out the largest Li^^s, by which we have guided them to draw all the rest as
they occur, and in other places filled up the vacancies that some may object we
have left here; and ^o wishing the Husbands may behave themselves in such kind
as the Wives may have no reasonable occasion to complain, their Duty and
observance are bestowed in Vain. We bri^^l^ proceed to the Character of a good
Wife, that, as i^ a glass, others may see their Face by her, and mend what
deformities are amiss. Wif^ Good, her character. We come now to the Chracter of
a good Wife, some will we well foresee, object that there is no such thing, and
we might have spa^ed our Labor, but being satis^yed to the contrary, it shall
ta^e up a page in our Book, let them say at their own discretion, what they
please. But to the purpose. -- We find her then to command her Husband in any
equal matter, by constant obedience to him: For if in his Passion he should by
his power chance to prejudice his right, she wisely knows by complying or
compounding, how to rectify it again, to her Praise and advantage. She never
crosses her Husband in the Spring Tide of his Anger, but s^a^s till it is
Ebbing-water, and then she Mildly Argues the matter, not so much to condemn
him, as by that means to acquit her self, and let him by degrees see his Error;
she keeps at home, if she may not have her Husbands Company, or his leave, as
an uncontrolable Warrant for her going abroa^; she will not contend, and show
an impatient long^^g when she desires it, but gives him Reasons for the
necessity of it; and if we overruled them, she is silent, for the House is
truly the Woman's Center, and though the Royal Psalm^st says, Psalm. 104.2. The
Sin ari^eth -- Man goes for^h unto his work, and unto his Labor until the
Evening, yet it is said of the good wife, Prove. 31.15 She rises whilst it is
yet N^ght, and gives Meat to her Household, and a Portion to her Maidens: For
in the Race of his work Man starts from the rising of the Sun, because usually
his Business is without doors, and wants the Light of Heaven to perform it by;
a Woman's business being properly within doors, and therefore can Fancy the
Light of the Candle to be the Sunshine; her Clothes are rather comely than
costly, and in her neat wearing them, they set her off with as much decency as
Embroideries of Gold; she admires not variety and change of Suits, but sets up
a Sale according to the Reel of her Husbands Estate; and though of high
Parentage, her mind is not puffed up to Pride and Boasting, no, they are far wide
of her, not so much remembering what she was by Birth, as what she is by Match,
esteeming her Husband, though not rich, equal in her Mind ^o the most rich and
Power^ull, because she is satisfied with his Fortune, be what it will; an^
without repining, is con^^n^ to bear a ^ha^e in all his sufferings, and bear up
bravely with him, against the storm of an Adverse Fate. -- We find her an
A^c^na Imperii, wherein her Husbands secrets are fately lodged, and the which
she will never div^lge without his consent of her own Inclination, nor by
Threats or Promises can they be extorted or flattered from her, and locks up
all his infirmities and failings close from prying Eyes; in his absence, she is
Wife and Deputy Husband, which induces her to double the Files of her
Diligence; and at his return, he is sure to find all things in so good a state,
that he is highly pleased, insomuch that upon view of his Affairs, he wonders
to see himself in effect at home when he was abroad. -- We find her carriage
exceeding Modest and comely, even to that degree that she dashes all Amorous
pretenders out of Countenance, so that they despair to gain upon her Chastity,
and if any be so desperately bold as to hope for Impossibilities, he finds
himself punished with severe Rebukes, mingled with modest admonitions to leave
off his Wanton Courses, and lead a Virtous Life. In her Husbands sickness she
feels more grief than she shows, partly that by her Sorrow, he may not be
hisheartned; and again, that she is not at leisure so much as to seem
sorrowful, that she may be the more serviceable. Her Children (if many in
Number) are none in noise, governing and ordering them with a Nod, or the
motion^ of her Eyes, as she pleases, and when they come to u^derstanding, she
teaches them not Pride, but good breeding, Industry and Frugality; she teaches
not her Daughters to be Gentlewomen before ^hey be women, but rather instructs
them what they should pay to others than receive from them. The work of her
Servants (that to others might be heavy and Tedious) she makes light and e^sy,
by the seasonable enjoining of it, so that her Service is esteemed Preserment,
and her teaching better than her Wages, the Maids following the president of
the Mistress, live modest at home, and by that means, beget them such
Reputations as gain them good Husbands. Thus Reader, we have sh^w'd you to the
Life,
The Character of a kind, Virtuous Wife.
If you are Male, get such a one and see
How happy in Enjoying her you will be,
If Female, Learn to be as good as she.
Women with Child, how to order themselves, that they may bring forth Beautiful
Children. We resolving to furnish you (Lovely Ladies) with such Prescriptions
as most nearly concern the Beautifying of the Body, it will be requisite to
consider of some special and singular means, how to help amongst other things
of this kind. The tender Embrio, whilst it is in Natures Laboratory the Womb,
that so it may be reduced from the confused Chaos of the lesser World, not a
misshapen nor Monstrous Lump, but a sparkling Lumin^ry, and a piece that
Nature may take for a pattern, when she attempts the composure of a person she
intends to be proud of. -- Wherefore among those several things that tend to
this exact completing of the F^^tus, there is nothing more signally concurs
than the Immagination of the Breeding Mother; this is that busy Archytecture
of the Brain, which contrives such Machinations, and Acts such Miracles, that
it is almost a Miracle to find any that believe them; for let the prenated
Women use ordinary wholesome Diet, and temperate Recreation and Exercise, and
they will bring forth Fair Children. There is likewise to be consi^ered, the
regular ordering of the Fancy, which is held superintendant to the growing
Infant, and the Mothers Active Emissary, that with all obsequiousness executes
her Wishes an the tender Babe, whilst emprisoned in the Womb, for finding the
soft and Plyant Foetus pinioned in the Membranious Mantle, and lying helpless,
and drowsy in Natures Cradle, it freely without opposition, makes impression
as the Mother directs it, so that she by the assistance of an invisible Agent,
works and adorns the Infant with those Features her Mind most runs upon, and
she her self effects. -- Authors are not wanting to give us strange relations
of the Fantasies, Imperious Tyranny over the growing Embrio, Hel^o^t tells us,
that a Woman big with Child standing at the Door, two Soldiers fell out, ^ew,
and in the Combat, the one cut the others hand off, a^ which being much
affrighted, she fell presently into Labor, and was delivered of a Daughter
with one hand, having the Hand cut off at the same place, as it happened to the
Soldier, and the Arm fresh bleeding: He furnishes u^ with another Relation of
a Merchants Wife at A^twerp. who some Weeks before her Delivery, hearing there
were thirteen Condemned persons to be beheaded, was desirous to see them
Executed, and for that purpose, gets to a Friends House in the Market Place,
but scarce had she seen the first suffer, e're she fell in Labor, and was
delivered of a Lusty Boy, with his Head divided from his Shoulders; now whether
these things thus fell out by the force of Immagination, or the two strong and
boistrous Midwife, dismembered them by a forcible Delivery, we determine not,
but leave you to the Credit of so Judicious an Author. Gasse^dus tells, that a
great Bellyed Woman being set upon, and stabbed in diverse places by sundry
Villains, she immediately dying, the Child was reaped from out of her Belly,
and just as many blew Spotts found about it, as the Mother had received Wounds,
and in the very same places: Many have bin the Monsterous Births, held to be so
misshapen and altered in the Womb, by the force of Immagination, but as to
those in this place, we shall be silent. -- Women's Fancies we must allow to be
very strange, if it can transpose the parts of the Faetus, and make it a
Monster, or turn E^ecutioner in the Womb; why, if we grant this, may it not as
well act the Painter, and have the disposing of Natures Colors, to draw as it
pleases, ravishing, or less enticeing Features. Galen tells us, That a Woman
brought forth a Son not like the Father, who was deformed, but resembling the
Picture of a lovely Person that hung in her Chamber, whereon himself had wished
her to think earnestly, when her Husband Embraced her: Some will have it, that
by often seeing a Black moor, or beholding the Picture of one. Women having
been delivered of Children clouded with Natures sooty Mask, and wrapped in the
Sable Mantle of a Swarthy Skin, we cannot but be in some measure convinced,
that the Infant comes into the World apparelled in those Features, that Fancy,
that commanding Empress of the Mothers Brain, dispenses from her own Wardrobe,
so that if you desire, Ladies (as we doubt not but you earnestly do) to have
Children, whose Beauty shall eclipse all other Objects, and be an attracting
Maggot to the Neighboring Eyes, propose to your Phancies such patterns as may
excite your own and others admiration, whether it be some Person who
Monopolizes perfections, and is the Royal Exchequer of unparalled Beauty or
some lively Picture of a most Absolute Proportion of parts, temper of Colors,
and vivacity of Aspect, for some such exquisite patterns being made choice of,
and in the time of Conception, or else being with Child, intently thought upon,
or beheld, will by little and little Imprint in the Mind a noble Idea of the
same perfections, which the active Fancy soon apprehends, as a proposed Pattern
to work thereby a paralleled Piece; and therefore with an obsequious celerity,
informs the Appetite, which immediately Summons the subtle Humors, and the
most Spirituous parts of the Blood, is inferior Officers, and they receive an
Impression of this Idea, which they carry in Triumph through all the Coast^ of
the Microcosme, till they arrive at those Parts whereto they were Designed by
the di^ection of Fancy, who thinks no repository too secure for so fair a
Species, commands those Agil Emissaries to treasure it up in the Seed, which is
the most new and durable Edifice in all its Dominions, and likely to l^st
beyond the rest; or if she be instructed with this Idea: In the time of the
Mothers being great, she immediately sends those active Agents with it to the
Womb, that Mint of the Microcosme, there to have it stamped by the Plastic
Faculty on the growing F^etus, that so it may be in a capacity to act i^s
Princely part on the Theater of the World, where it may attract the Eyes of
future Admirers, and with a radiant Luster vye with its Prototype. -- Women or
some of them, notwithstanding what has been said, may perhaps be so scrupulous
as to enquire, that seeing the Fancy is merely a cognocivity of Faculties, and
the Women usually fix their thoughts on several and various Objects, during the
time of Conception and Gravidation; how it comes to pass that we find not the
Infant subject to more numerous Mutations according to the variety of the
Impressions made by sundry Species in the Immagination, to which the answer.
The reply to this will be easy, if we well consider, that if the matter were
more seriously pondered, we should not find the Immagination so seldom Active,
as is generally supposed, for it is very probable that the resemblance of every
Child, whether with the Father, Mother, or any other person, has some near
dependence upon some operation or other of the Mothers Fancy, according as her
Mind was, with more or less intenseness fixed upon such or such an Object: Yet
again it is not every Act of the Fancy that is able to affect the formative
power reciding in the Womb, but only that which is strong, and attended with
the powerful Commotions of the Spirits and Humors in the Body, so that there
being not many Acts of the Fancy, concomitated with the Enegrie of such
commotions. It Is no wonder that Infants signally affected with the Mothers
Fantasy are so few. Women's Phancies, in childbearing, further considered.
Women Indulging these kind of Fantasies, only induce such Agitations of the
Humors and Spirits, as are requisite to affect the Foetus, which are followed
by violent Passions of a surprising Fear, or an earnest and longing desire, for
these are the most turbulent and impetuous Passions that the Mind is subject
to, which exciteing the tenuous Humors and Spirits in all parts of the Body,
cause both in the Infant and Mother remarkable Alterations of which we have
sundry Instances. Baptista Porta, in his Natural Magic, gives us an Account of
a Woman, who Amarously affecting a Marble Statue by frequent looking on it, and
frequently keeping it in her Mind, brought forth a Son, Plump, Pale, and of a
glittering hue, in every thing representing the Features of the Statue. Fi^chus
tells us, and avers it for a Truth, that a Woman brought forth a Daughter, that
had a well proportioned Body, but for a Head, only two Scallop-^hells joined to
the Shoulders, which the opened at pleasure to receive her Sustenance; (...)
lived in that condition Eleven I ^s. and that which he says produced this
Monster, was the Mothers longing for Scallops, during her being with Child, not
being able to procure any to satisfy her impatient Desires. -- Women subject to
these unaccountable longings, as some call them, though we have given you some
reason for it, afford as many strange Examples. Delzio in his magical
Disquisitions, informs us of a Noble Lady, was Nurse to a very Beautiful
Prince, then Dolphin of France, whom she loved so above measure, that she
caused his Effigies to be drawn, and carried it about with her, scarce enduring
it to be out of her sight, whereupon it happened that she became Mother to a
Child so like the Young Prince, that the generality of the People could not
distinguish them but by the difference of their Clothes. And as for the
Passions of Fear, L^mnius tells us, That a man surprising a great Bellied
Woman, by suddenly placing before her a Picture of a Boy with a great Head, she
brought forth thereupon, a Child of the same misshapen magnitude. Many more of
the like Nature we might mention, but we suppose these Instances are sufficient
to demonstrate, that the Fancy (when attended with an Attractive joy or sudden
Fear, has power to alter the Confirmation and Complexion of the yielding
Foetus; and that there is little else required to have Handsome and Beautiful
Children, than being cautious in avoiding monstrous Objects, and Stories which
may distract the Fancy, and in their stead, the proposing of some Amiable
Objects, from which the Fantasy affecting it with a passionate tenderness,
may copy out an Idea, of perfect Beauty, to communicate to the plastic
Faculty, whose chiefe^t care is to erect a stately Structure, out of the rude
Mass that lies confused within the Womb. And these are the Learned Opinions of
several Ancient and excellent Physicians, as Hypocrates, Gal^^, Laurentius,
Wierus, Codronc^us, and others, whose Credit has been held unquestionable in
most Ages. Women Virtuous, a great Happiness and Blessing to Men. Women that
are truly Virtuous, there cannot be too much said in their praise, therefore
whatsoever may have been already nearly touched on this, is not improper: A
Virtuous Woman then is rightly termed the true Solace of a Man's Li^e, this Sex
even from their Infancy are aimiable, and to be delighted in; they Cheer the
Hearts of their Parents with their Innocent Smiles, and as they grow up in
Virtue are more Charming and Sweet in their Complacency, Modesty, Sobriety, and
a wining Behavior add to their Beauties: Her Carriage toward all is decent,
and Comely is her Behavior. In Marriage her Love is beyond Expression, and her
tenderness such, that she values him on whom her Heart is fixed, above all the
valuable things on Earth, unless it be her own Soul. The loss of her Life she
values not, in Comparison of her Honor and Good Name, and that her Husband may
be kept in good Humor, she makes it her business and study to please him,
using her utmost diligence, and Enforcing all her Charms to render her self
more pleasing in his Eyes, Equally sharing in his Joys, and in his Afflictions
bears the most Sensible part. Her Smiles are not to be bought with Silver, nor
her Love to be Purchased with Gold, but are freely and entirely placed upon
him; she makes Choice for a Companion of her Happiness in a Marriage State, and
then they are a^ fixed as the Center, or like the Needle touched with the
Lodestone, will turn or stand still to no point but their beloved North: She
Sympatizes with him in all things, and is even tender of his Honor; nothing
she thinks too good for him, nor nothing that she reasonable can do, too much
in health, she is very careful to provide him necessaries that are convenient
and commendable; and if he falls upon his Bed of Languishing (pressed down by
some weigh^y Sickness) what greater comfort can he have in such a Condition,
than to find his Virtuous Wife double diligent and tractable in forwarding his
Affairs; she is more studious for his Health than her own Interest, and puts up
her Prayers and Vows to Heaven for his recovery. In all her Actions, Expressing
a careful tenderness and Love, and a venerable esteem in all her Words and
Expressions. -- Woman has found Nature Prodigal and Lavish in forming her so
delicate a Creature; that she confessed her Masterpiece, and N^ plus ultra, A
Creature so soft and tempting, to allay and Moderate with Mildness the rough
and Rocky temper of Man; that she make him happy therein, whether he will or
no; great cunning did she use in proportioning every part, forgetting nothing
that was admirable, or might Create Wonder and Admiration in the beholders.
This last best blessing was far above the worth of all the Creatures that were
made before it: How can Man then who pretends to have but a Glimmering of
understanding, but haste to Embrace so great a Blessing, in which his Earthly
felicity consists, if he rightly knows what it is to be happy, it gives those
that can discern and be truly sensible of it in a lower degree; a taste and
earnest of that Love and Harmony. That must consuma^e our Endless Felicity, of
which God himself is the Author and Center. O How happy it is to leave
Mercenary Smiles and Embraces, which carrys distinction in them! for those that
are chaste and Cordial, the one is Boisterous, and Bandies us about, like a
troubled Sea, with Fears and doubts, and jealousies, whilst the other is Smooth
and Calm as the Waves where the Halcion Broods; the one is Proud, and
Imperious, the other Humble and submissive, seeks by Mildness to allay the
Storms. Approach her Angry Husband with Modesty and a winning Grace, that she
may temper his Heat, and disarm him of his Rage, which being opposed, might
break out into Violence and Mischief. So Venus moves when to the Thunderer,
In Smiles and Tears she would some Suit Prefer;
When with her Cesto's Girt. --
And drawn by Doves, she cuts the yiedling Skies
And Kindles Gentle Fires where e're She Flies.
These things considered, we cannot but be of the opinion, but that a Virtuous
Wife is the greatest happiness a Man can possess; Riches and Honor bring Cares
and Incumberances, but she brings Love, Peace and Joy, soft delights and
Ravishing Pleasure, and where such a p^ir meet whose Loves are pure and Chaste,
we may Contemplate t^eir happiness and say.

1.
Thus like the two first Lovers they
Yet free from Guilt and all off^nce;
On Odorous Beds of Flowers Lay,
In their First State of Innocence.
(2)
Their Lips still joined like billing Doves,
With ardent Breathi^gs of desire,
They secretly in^lame their Loves,
And set each others Heart on Fire.
And this may suffice in this place, to show Man the way to his happiness, if
he will be well advised, and conceive it aright.

Widow good, her character. Give us leave to point out a good Widow, that he
who cannot obtain his likeing and desire in a Virgin, may not be discourage
from ventering on one who has been tried, and is experienced in the grand
Mysteries of Love, by which she is the more capable of Love; she is therefore a
Woman whose Head has been cut off, and yet she is alive, and has a second part
of Virginity to act over. Her grief, though moderate for the death of her
Husband, is yet not withstanding real; it is not a violent storm that is soon
over, but a still Rain that continu^s long, and soaks their Hearts with grief
that is not easily removed; she continues her usual time in her Widows Estate,
with a serious and modest reservedness, not by any Action or Gesture, showing
as if she was willing to change, though for a great advantage, not only living
sober and single, but Chaste and honest, making Virtu^ her study, and works of
Piety and Charity her Recreation; keeping her self in all things blameless, and
her Reputation unspo^ted; and though she goes abroad, sometimes about her
business, yet she makes it not her business to go abro^d, though it is no Crime
so to do: In civil Affairs she is often forced to Act a double part, both of
the Man and Woman: The remembrance of her Husband is imprinted in the lively
Pictures he has lest behind him; for when she looks on her Children, she sees
his Idea there, and places her fondness in giving them good Education, and
bringing them up in the ways of Virtue. Her Husbands Friends are ever her
Welcomest Guests, whom she entertains with the honorable mention of their
Friends, and her Husbands memory. If she c^n speak but little good in his
Praise, she speaks but little of him, yet that to the best advantage, handsomely
holding ^p her Discourse, so that his Virtues are shown outward, and his Vices
wrapped up In silence: She is a Champion for his Credit, if any speak against
him, and always puts her special Confidence in God's Providence, as the best
and surest ^usban^ to the Widow, and Father to the Fatherless, and therefore
she seeks to keep his Love firm to her, by Prayer and a Religious Life: if she
Marry again, she will not do it so hastily, or rashly, but she will take care
to provide for the Children she has already, before she signs the Contract,
that they may not be wronged when it may not be in her power to right them. --
Get but such a Widow, and you need not fear to live comfortably and happily
with her, always having regard to the Equality of Years; for where Age and
Youth meet in the Marriage sheets, it must be an admirable Virtue that will at
all times exclude Discontents, and though they break not out, yet they will
smoother and gloe within, to the great hindrance of your peace and quiet.
Widdowhood, though it supersedes those Duties which were terminated merely in
the person of the Husband, however it endears those that may, and ought to be
paid to his Funeral Dust: Love is as strong as Death, and reaches beyond the
fatal stroke he gives, to make a separation where Lives were so nearly linked
in one for she will have Love, and cherish his Memory, though his person be
snatched from her, and laid up in a gloomy Grave, till the Morning of the
Resurrection; yet his Idea remains with her; a Modest Funeral any one bestows,
for decency toward the Dead is comely and Charitable, but she after having
bathed him with her Tears, embalms him in her Mind, and gives him there a
Monument, lasting as her Life. If she have Children by him, she keeps them as
the dear Pledges of their Conjugal Love, tenderly and careful, bringing them up
in the ways of Virtue and Piety, and they serve as so many Lively Pictures of
her deceased Husband before her Eyes, and are the dawning Comforts of her Life,
in the solitude and darkness of her sorrow; her care is so to Educate them,
that they may worthily be esteemed the Offspring of such a Father. -- We now
suppose the Funeral Solemnity over, and the extraordinary torrent of Tears
begin to be decreased into a calmer stream, wherefore we think it will not be
an extraordinary boldness, but such a one as may be pardoned by a Virtous
Widow, if we intrude a little into her Retirement, and consider somewhat that
may be advantageous to the state of Widdowhood. A Widow then may more than
conjecture, when God takes away the dear companion of her happiness, and
reduces her to a Solitude, he does it to sound a Retreat from the lighter
gaities and Jollitries of the World. The Jews were very early wont to put their
Women in mind of the brittle and unstableness of earthly Joys and pleasures,
and that we must be moderate therein, by breaking a Glass that the Bride and
Bridegroom drank in on the Wedding Day, at the Table before their Eyes: the
Wi^dows complying with Civil custom, to inure her self in darkness for a while,
inculcates to her, that she should put on a more reti^ed temper of Mind, a
stricter and sevearer Behavior than before; not to cast it off with her Vail,
but to let it be the constant Dress of her VViddowhood; for as that state
requires great sobreity and Piety, so it affords diverse advantage^ toward it,
more than the Married are allowed. For that she, as St. Paul says, who is
Married, care^h for the things of the World, how she ^^y please her Husband:
But God now has called away that care from her in a VViddow-state, and given
her a large opportunity to dress and adorn her Soul in Robes of Righteousness,
as fit to meet and be embraced by the glorious Spouse, who will sollace her
with Anti-pasts of Eternal Love; those Hours that before were her Husbands
right, seem now to devolve on God, the grand Proprietor of our time: That
Discourse and free Conversation wherewith she entertained him, she now converts
into Coloquies, and Spiritual Intercourses with her Maker; and that Love,
except the retaining of his Memory, which before was only humain, may now be
the changing of its Object, acquire a sublimmity, and exalted to Divine; so
that from a Loyal Duty and Conjugal Affection, it becomes the Eternal work and
happiness of Angels, the Ardor of a Cherubin; thus may she in higher Sense than
Sampson's Riddle aimed at, fetch Honey out of a Carcass, his Corruption may
help to put her on Incorruption, and her Loss of a Temporary Comfort, may state
her in one that is Eternal, which will be a blessed Exchange, and this will
bring a Blessing upon her Children and her Substance. -- Widows ought*
according to the proportions of their Abilities, to Exercise themselves in
Works of Charity. There was in the Primitive times an Order of Religious
Widows, mentioned by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5, Whose whole Ministry was devoted to
Charity. God highly approves of Almsgiving, if done sincerely, without
grudging, or expectation of Wordly applause, and takes it as done to himself;
and therefore none need doubt but he will repay it with a large over-pluss, at
a day when a Catalogue of their Alms shall be laid before him, as a Testimony
of their well doing, and procure them the Eulogy, of well done thou good and
faithful Servant. Timothy tells us, that a Widow who lives in this pleasure,
is not dead whilst she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6. But on the contrary, shall live when
she dies; when she resigns her breath, she shall improve her Being unto one
more glorious: The Prayers of the Poor, like benign Gales, shall gently bear
up her Soul to the Regious of Bliss, and she who has cherished the Afflicted
Members, shall there be indissolubly united to their glorious head. -- Widows
indeed are allowed Marriage, and many of them after they have wept a while, and
shed a few Tears to the Memory of the deceased* throw off their Veils, dry
their Eyes, and look out for new Embraces, which is very indecent and
unbecoming the Gravity of a Widow, since Marriage is so great an Adventure,
that once for many Reasons, seems enough for the whole Life, for whether she
has been either adverse or Prosperous in the first, it does almost discourage
the second attempt. It was the saying of a Young Widow Lady, when her Friends
advised her to a second Marriage, that she had two reasons to object against
it, viz. That having had a Husband, ravished from her by the hand of Death,
whom she loved above all Earthly things, and he as entirely cherished her. If
it should fall out, she should be matched to one of a cross and a stubborn
nature, it would break hier tender Heart, and if one as kind and obliging as
the former, she should always be in fear of losing him, which would create her
a doubt grief; but we do not find many Rich, and Beautiful young Widows in our
Age of her Mind. All Civilized Nations however, have by custom set a time
between the Death of one Husband and the Marriage of another. Numa made a Law
that no Widow should Marry under ten Months, and if she transgressed, she was
to sacrifice as for a Crime done; so that Octavia could not be Married to Mark
Anthony, till three degrees of State had passed to supercede that Law. --
Widows in their Choice, ought to consider how they make it, left by
unadvisedness it reflect upon their Reputations, and their former Prudence, and
Conduct of Affairs be brought in Question: When the Year therefore, that
modesty Allows with us (though some have made but a Spider Web of that custom)
is expired, then she may cheer up her Melancholy, and put on her former
brightness of Beauty that has so long been hid under a cloudy Veil; but avoid
all wanton Amorous Glances, and Toying, and if Age has stolen upon her to any
Degree, it will not be in the least commendable to go in gaudy flanting
Apparel, but rather grave and modest Attire. Marriage in all degrees is so
close a Link, that to have it easy, the proportion of Parties must be
considered, and first in respect of Fortune and Quality. It is always to be
wished that there should be no considerable disproportion; those that come
together upon the Level, are of all the least subject to such Upbraidings as
frequently attend a great descent of either party; it is therefore no prudent
motive, by which many VViddows are swayed, who having good Estates of their
own* Marry barely for a large Title of Honor, without considering their
happiness in it* which brings them in a short time into the contempt of their
Husbands, of which we have had many Examples: And on the other hand, for a
Woman to marry very meanly, and far below her self, is the worst of the two,
for such kind of Matches are generally made in a transport of Passion, but when
that abates, and is no longer, leaving her to sober Reflections: How many
disorders does it create in her Mind? What anger does it create in her against
her self, and Accusations of her rashness and Folly, when too late to be
remedyed? and this creates contention and strise. -- We find that a state of
Subjection is a little sweetened by the dignity and worth of the Ruler, for as
it is more honorable, so it is likewise more easy to be born: The basest
Spirits, of all others in command, being most Imperious, and it will not
certainly a little grate a Woman of honor, when she reflects how she has made
one of a Servile mind Master, who perhaps before would have thought it a favor
to have been entertained as her Menial Servant, and what adds more to
discontent! Such Matches frequently reflect on the modesty of the Woman;
censorious People making such constructions on it, as first jump into their
empty Sculls. It being presumed, that when the distance was so great, the
Advance must be on her side, or the other would not have had presumption enough
to attempt it; so that she is rather blamed than pittyed; too frequently, we
must confess, such matches have been clapped up, and proved very unfor^^^^te. --
VViddows, the premises seriously weighed and considered, ought, if they intend
for marriage, to be very deliberate and cautious in their choice, for when
Virgins, who are not presumed so capable of Understanding, and therefore sooner
deceived, are acquitted, they will be censured if they miscarry; therefore it
is their main concern, well to Balance their minds, and to see that their
Passion gain not the Ascendant over their reason. Let them likewise consider
their Opinions in point of Religion, for that many times, though it should be
the very cement of Peace and Union, man^ times makes a difference, and opens
wide breaches to disputes; and those to jarring, and those jarrings let in
discontent. It is certainly very uncomfortable, that those who have so closely
combined all their other Interests should in the greatest be disunited, when
one House and one Bed holds those which one Church cannot. And then again,
another Mischief is the Servants, according to their different persuasions
bandy into Leagues and Parties, so that it terribly shakes, if not uttterly
destroys the Concord, that should create a happiness in the Family. -- We find
another particular in which any great disproportion is to be avoided, and that
is inequality of Years; for the Humors of Age and Youth so widely differ, that
extraord^nary skill is required to compose the discord into a harmony; when an
Old Man Marries a young Woman, here is usually Jealousies on the one part, and
loathings on the other; and if there be not a large degree in both, or at least
in one party of discretion; there must unavoidably follow perpetual
disagreements, which by a suitable choice might be avoided; But in this case,
that does not often happen among those we are now speaking of; we confess the
Avarice of Parents many times force Virgins upon such Matches; but Widows who
for the most part are at their own discretion to choose, rarely make such
Elections, commonly the inequality falling on the other side; they to satisfy
their Desires, Allure young Men to them with their Riches, yet soon see their
Folly in doing it, and are punished for their dorage. It is indeed strange that
those who should be preparing to make their Beds in the Dust, should think of a
Nuptial Couch. A Philosopher being demanded what was the fittest time for
Marrying, gravely replied, The young should not Marry yet and the Old not at
all. The Wise Man considering the Follies, and deplorable condition of such
Doaters. asks the question, viz. Who will pity a Ch^rmer, when bitten by a
Serpent, Eccl. 12.13. How can any one of years if Reason be consulted, flatter
her self with her feeble Charms, to fix the giddy Appetite of Youth; but when
these things are transacted, Reason is not called to the Council, Lust and an
Infatiable desire, joined with Folly and precipitated rashness, and give their
Votes to humor a present Appetite; no fatal Warnings the Carier to misery, yet
one would think, but thinking here in this case, has no time allowed to appl^
it self seriously to deliberat^, that a multiplicity of unhappy presidents,
might caution her; she that accidentally falls down an undiscovered Precipice,
gains compassion in her Disaster, but she that sees the danger before her,
looks down and sees the dreadful bottom strewed with mangled Carcasses of many
that have fallen thence, and yet wilfully casts her self down; the blame
extinguishes the pity, and she that casts her self away in such a Match,
betrays not less, but more wilfulness: How many misfortunes of miserable Women,
present themselves to her View, like the wre^ks of tattered Vessels spit upon
the ^ock; and if notwithstanding all that has been said, she will needs stear
her Course, on purpose to run the same Fate, none to envy her the ship wrack
she Courts. Age we allow ought to be honored and esteemed, when it acts with
prudence suitable to the veneration properly due to it for as Solomon says, the
Hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.
Widows in years, when they act thus, we must confess, are in so high a Frenzy,
that we can hardly believe, but it must have some rooting in the Habit and
Constitution of the Mind; some lightness of Humor other must generate it,
before it can so giddly turn in their Brains; those therefore that will secure
themselves from the Effect, must substract the cause: How preposterous is it,
think you, to see an Old Woman delight in, and doting on gaudy Trisles, more
seemly for her Grandchildren; to see her with Spectacles reading Romances, or
Love-stories; to be at Masquerades and Dances, when she is only fit to Act
Antiquaries; these are contradictions of Nature; to hear others again wishing
themselves young; that it is odds, but within a while they will persuade
themselves they are so, and tearing off the Marks where Fifty or Sixty are
written, and write Fifteen, those who thus manage their Widdowhood; have more
reason to bewale it at last, then at first, as having experimentally found the
mischief of being left to their own Guidance. But pardon us, Ladies, if we have
touched too sharply on this matter, we are Conscious there are a great many
Virtuous Widows that take sober measures, Marrying discreetly, or spending
their days in Devotion and good works, ^elighting to bring up their Children in
the Fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom. Women Admirable, for
Sundays Virtue. After Dinners Solicitations of the Emperors and other great
Potentates, Ambassadors to the Pious Heroic, and ever Renowned Queen
Elizabeth, for the Tolleration or the Popish Religion in her Kingdom; she
silenced their Importunities with this weightly and reasonable Answer, viz. --
That to let them have Churches by the others, she could not with the safety of
the Common Wealth, and without the wounding of her Honor and Conscience. etc.
for what ever Doctrine is contrary to Godliness is dangerous in a State, and
opens a door to all Mischief and Wickedness, and therefore Popery be^^ing that
stamp, she resolved not to allow the public Exercise of it in her Dominious
Ann, The Beautiful and Virtuous Wife of King Henry the Eight, and Mother to
Queen Elizabeth was condemned upon the false accusation of some Popish
Favorites, who secretly Envyed to s^e a Lutheran Queen ascend the Throne, and
therefore resolved to change it into a Scaffold, the which when she ascended
with Courage and Modesty, where there were but few dry Eyes besides her; she
said, that the King was constant in advancing her, for a private Gentlewoman,
had raised her to the Honor of a countess, then a Marchioness, and lastly to
the highest of Earthly Honor, even to be his Queen, to whom she had been just
and faithful, and that she must now, at her going out of the World, give him
her Hearty thanks, that since he had no more Wordly Honor to Agrandize her, he
had taken Care to promote her to what was more glorious in Heaven by making her
a Martyr; to become a Saint in Blessed Realms of Eternal Life. -- After Her
Death these Verses were Written of her. Phoenix Anna Ja^et nato Phaenice
dolendum,
S^^^la Phoenices null TullisseDuo.
Here Ann a Phaenix Lies, who bore her like it is said.
Never one age two Phaenixes has had.
After this another Fair Court Star set in Blood, though deserving a better
Fate. The Lady Jans Gray, who had Married Gulford Dudly Son to the Duke of
Northumberland; and was after King Edward the Sixth's Death Pursuant to his
will, Proclaimed Queen to avoid the return of Popery, by the coming of Mary,
afterward Queen Mary to the Crown; but Fate consented not, for upon Mary's
Proclaimation, Northumberlands Army, with which he went to oppose her,
disserting him, he was taken Prisoner and soon after beheaded; the Young Queen
thus disserted, trusting to her Innocence and Virtue, as her guard and defense,
found them too weak where a Crown was in competition; for she with her Husband
was sent to the Tower, where She continued a Mirror of Piety, constancy and
Patience; being of the Royal Blood, as Grandaughter to Mary, second Sister to
Henry the eight. Tho she was very Young when this affliction fell upon her; she
was an extraordinary Scholar, well skilled in most Languages; during her
Imprisonment, she writ upon the Walls these Verse^.

Non Aliena Putes Homini ^^^ nbtingere possun^
Sors Hodierna mihi (...) erit ika tibi.
Think nothing strange, chance happens unto all
My Lot's to day, to Morrow thine may fall.
And again
Dio Javante nill no^^^ Livor malus,
Et non Juvants nil Juvat Labor grats
Post Tinibras -- spero Lucem
If God protect, no Malice can offend me,
Without his help, there is nothing can defend me
After Night -- I hope for Light.
She was so unconcerned at her Death, though not above 16 Years of Age, that
she not only bore it with singular patience and constancy, but sent to comfort
the Duke of Suffo^k her Father who was in Prison, and soon after suffered in
those Bloody Mazean times, when Popery had got again the upper hand; to comfort
him by her Letter, to Persevere in the Protestant Religion; and if be had the
hard Fortune to be cut off to Dye worthy of his Honor, and like himself, but
not at call to g^^^ve for her, for she was going to a happy Kingdom, to the
chaste Embraces of her Lord, where she should be out of the reach of Trouble
and Malice, and sit down with Joy and Peace; so that when this Incomparable
Lady Dyed, no Body could refrain from Tears, no not her very Enemies, whose
Spleen had brought her to so early and untimely an end. -- At the time when the
Protestant Religion, under the Pious Care of King Edward the Sixth flowerished,
the Duke her Father had one Mr. Harding for his Chaplain, who seemed very
Zealous for the reformed Churches, but when Queen Mary came in, and had set up
Popery, he Windmill'd about for promotion, as some did in the last Reign, and
became a very bitter Enemy with his Pen and Tongue against the protestants,
which so Grieved this Pious Young Lady, that she writ to him when she was in
Prison, to remember from whence he was fallen, and to do his first Works; which
Letter for the satisfaction of all Pious Young Ladies and others, penned by one
of such tender Years, we have thought fit to insert, that her great Wisdom and
Learning may be evident to the World. Often, says she, as I call to mind the
Fearful and Dreadful sayi^gs of our Savior Christ; that he who puts his
hand to the Plough, and looks back, is not meet for the Kingdom of Heaven;
and on the contrary, those comfortable words that he spoke to those who forsake
all and follow him. I cannot but marvel at thee, and lament thy case, who
seem sometime to be a Lively Member of Christ; but now the deformed I^pe of
Satan! Sometime the Beautiful Temple of God, but now the Synagogue of the
Prince of the Air; sometime the unspotted Spouse of Christ, but now the
shameless Paramour of Antichrist; sometime my faithful Brother, but now a
stranger and an apostate; sometime a slout Christian Soldier, but now a
cowardly Runaway? yea, whon I consider these things, I cannot but cry out unto
thee, thou Seed of Satan, whom he has deceived, and the World has beguiled,
and the desire of Life and promotion subverted; wherefore have thou taken the
Law of the Lord in thy Mouth? wherefore have thou preached the Will of God unto
others; wherefore have thou Instructed and exhorted others to be strong in
Christ when thou thy self do now shamefully shrink away, and thereby so much
dishonor God; thou preached'st that Men should not steal, and yet thou
ste^lest abominably, not from Men but from God committing h^inous Sacrilege,
robbing Christ of his Honor: choosing rather to live with shame, than to Dye
Honorably, and to Reign Gloriously with Christ who is Life in Death unto his.
Why do thou show thy self most weak, when thou stand by most strong? The
strength of the Fort is unknown before the assaults, but thou yeildest up thine
before any battery was made against it, etc. And after many other Excellent
Passages she thus concludes: Let I pray you the lively r^membrance of the last
day, be always before your Eyes; remember that Runagates and Fugitives from
Christ shall be cast out in that day, who setting more by the World than by
Heaven, more by Life than him that gave it. Did shrink and fall from him who
forsook not them; and also the inestimable Joys prepared for them, who fearing
no perril, nor dreading Death, have manfully fought, and Victoriously Triumphed
over the Powers of darkness, through their Invincible Captain, Christ Jesus,
who now stretches out his Arms to receive you; is ready to fall upon you and
Kiss You; and last of all, to wash you in his most precious Blood, and feed you
with the Dainties it has purchased for you, which undoubtedly, could it stand
with his own determinate purpose, he would be ready to shed again for you
rather than you should be lost.

Be constant then, and fear no Earthy pain
Christ has redeemed thee, Heaven is thy gain
Women Destroyers, of the Danes, and the Privileges they Enjoy by it. When
they were destroyed, is already recited, and riding the Land from such Mortal
Enemies, by the consent of the King and his Nobles, which all the Men ascented
to the Women, were allowed the right hand of their Husbands, which custom
continues to this day (though some will have it that it is only a fulfilling
the old Proverb, that the weak est goes to the Walls) That they should have a
third of all their goods and Chattels upon the Husbands decease, and take the
upper end at the Table, upon all Public Feasts, and some others, which the
Women being very politicy in matters of their Prerogative, have strictly
maintained to this day and in many things go beyond their character, so that no
Women in the World have the like Privileges and tender Indulgences, which made
a Spaniard say, if there were a Bridge made over the Narrow Seas, all the Women
would run into England, and the Horses for the hard useage they meet with,
gladly run out of it. Women Buried alive. When the Plague raged at Collen,
1357. One Richme^ Adolick a Noble Lady Died in appearance, and as the Fashion
was then, had her Rings and Jewels buried with her, of which the covetous
Sexton having notice, came with a Companion of his to dig her up, and that
being done, they opened the Coffin and going about to pull off her Rings, she
rose up in her shroud, at which the Sacrilegious Villains being concious of
guilt and oppressed with fear, fled and for haste left the Lanthorn, and the
Church door open, so that the Lady loosing her self, took up the Lauthorn and
went home; her Husband hearing her Voice, was as much terrified as the others
had been, but by degrees lessening his fears, he received her with Joy, when he
perceived she was a living coarse, and not a Ghost or Spectre, and she
confested to him that she had all that while been as one in a sleep, till two
men came rudely, and waked her, but when she was made sensible, that she had
been buried, she started, and then praised God that those Men's Evil purpose
has been the means of her safety; and being there upon taken great care off,
she recoverd her health, and lived to have three Sons afterward as appears by
her Monument Erected in memory of so strange a deliverance, and stands now in
the Entrance of the Apostles Church in Cologne. In the same City one John Duns
called Scotius, falling into an Appoplexy, was buried alive, but had not the
good Fortune as the other, to be timely relieved, for before he could be taken
up, he had beat his Brains out against the Grave Stone. -- Wanting of the like
sad misfortunes is not in our Age, for to the knowledge of many hundreds about
London, in the Year, 1661. One Lawrence Cawthorn a Butcher in St. Nicholas
Shambles who having provided all things for his Marriage, it is doubtful
whether too much strong Waters, or Opium given him by his Landlady, who aimed
at what monys he had got, and knew she should not be the better for it, if he
Married; cast him into a profound Sleep, so sleeping all that night, and all
the next day, she got some of her confederates to give out he was dead, so
buried him, but the next day being Sunday, as the People passed to Church they
heard a strange groaning in the ground, but for a time could not tell what to
make of it, growing louder, though a kind of a hollow found, they informed the
Churchwardens of it, who only Houtted at it as a delusion of the Senses, but
the next day being better informed and all circumstances considered; this new
Grave was opened, and the Body found warm, though dead with the stifling
vapors and violent beatings against the sides of the Coffin, upon news of
which the Barbarous Old Woman fled, and we do not hear she ever was found
again. Woo^ing, is like the Porch, through which you must enter to the more
softy structure of Matrimony; the fair one to whom the Young Lover intends his
address of Co^rtship, being pitched upon; he spruces himself up as fine as may
be, makes an enquiry at some distance of her birth, education, and good parts,
but more particularly what her portion is, or is likely to be, being somewhat
satisfied in these particulars, his next care is to gain admittance, which he
does by being introduced by some Friend in credit with the Parents: If she be a
Virgin and under their Jurisdiction, or by the Irresistible Charm of Presents
to her waiting Maid or Confident at first, ^unfess he be a pert noisie Fop, and
then he commonly mars the whole Project at the first dash, unless she be as
senseless as he) he says little but pays it off with thinking, and is hugely
pleased in contemplating her Beauty and Gentiel Carriage, nor stays too long,
least he should be counted troublesome, but with a profound respect, conjuing
almost to her Knees; he takes the liberty to impress her fair Hand with his
warm Lips, which is as much as he dare presume, or pretend to, at this time.
and so takes his leave. Then his business is immediately to run from Tavern to
Tavern, to find out a Friend to whom he may impart the weighty Joy that
struggles and labors to get vent; one being found, down goes his Hat and
Gloves upon the Table, and presently he lets him know, what he has been about,
by drinking of the Ladies health, which being past he tells him what pregnant
hopes he has of being the happiest Man alive, in a Wife, and then giving the
Table a hard Thump with the Palm of his Hand, he cries, I prote^t she is the
prettyest smirking Black-Eyed Rogut; the most Witty and Beautiful that ever I
saw in all my Life. O that I had her but in her Night Clothes. P^^, says the
other, willing to humor him, and drive on the Amor) never fear it Boy, were I
in your condition, I Would make no more of it to have her, than to drink off this
Glass, and so here is to her again. Come, says the Spark. fill it up to the brim,
I Will pledge it with all my Heart, and Soul, and return you a hundred thousand
thanks for the good encouragement you have given me, and so taking off one
Glass after another; drinks on till in a pleasing Ecstasy, he fancies he has
her in his Arms. He is altogether uneasy, till he makes a second Visit, and
thinks Time runs too flow, till he can find a convenient opportunity to do it,
and puts himself for that purpose, into the finest Garb that a Consult of the
nearest Tailors about Town can contrive, concluding that or nothing will win
her; and upon his first entrance, he will be sure to renew his Civility to her
Maid that Combs her Hair, and dresses her, as being sure she has her Ear most,
and the fit^est opportunities to oblige him, in telling her Mistress fine Love
Stories to incline her to favor him. And although she may be no Adorer of
Images drawn in full proportion, yet he presents her with part, Imprinted on
Gold, which begets such a Character of him in her Mind, that she will not fail
to discribe him as the most accomplished of Men, by running over every part of
him, to his commendation, as having in him something beyond the neatness of
other Men; recommending him to the young Lady, as the only person deserving her
Affection. If the Lady seem something Coy for decency sake, it is no more than
what he was reasonably to expect, left he should come too soon, or too bluntly
to the main Question, and put her to a Nonplus before she is prepared for an
Answer, however he has the happiness to find her Complaisant and modestly
Civil; no Clouds of Scorn or Disdain over-cast her Beauteous Face, and threaten
him in the Love Voyage he has undertaken, and this Encourages him to proceed
with Alacrity; he now has an encouragement to stay longer than before, without
being thought tedious or troublesome, and when he goes away, he takes his leave
with a greater satisfaction, and not altogether without some assurance of being
happy in the progress of his Affairs, for in his absence he has a Solicitrix to
manage his cause, who fails not to be her Ladies Remembrancer, and rather than
fail, will present her with a Bill she has taken up in the Street, given out,
as he terms himself, by some famous Astrologer, and press her to consult the
Stars in this weighty Affair, where to be sure this Pretender to Art, and
Familiar of the Destinies, will be always on the Lovers side, because he knows
it best pleases the Querant to be confirmed in what she most wishes and
desires. To do this with the lesser observance of any of the Family, she
sacrifices her Prayer time to wait upon the Devils Secretary, and returns with
satisfaction full of the Idea of her Amorist: and at this next interview she
begins to settle her Affections. Then Letters pass between them, blessed with
the secret impression of Amors, recommendatory Kisses, which are read over and
over, the better to be understood, and laid at night under the Pillow, to
produce pleasing Dreams of the Joys that are to be found in marriage: he
especially then flatters himself with his being encircled with a thousand
inexpressible pleasures. -- We must now consider, that it is not long e're News
is brought him by his industrious Pentioner, that his Mistress is to be at a
Ball, with an Account of the exact time and place: This makes his heart to cut
Capers for Joy, that he has a convenient oppotunity put into his hands. To show
her he is a man of breeding, and that his Friends brought him up at a
Boarding-School; he fails not to give his attendance, set out in the best
fashion and form, and is sure to get there before her, because she shall see
how dutiful he is in his Attendance; and she no sooner enters, but he rises
from his Seat, and makes his low Obeisance to her, that it may be observed, she
has a servant there obsequious to her commands: and though he sits again, his
feet and hands keep time with her in the Dance she undertakes; and when she
comes to place her self by him, which he entreats as the greatest of favors,
pretending to whisper her under her Hoods, he steals a kiss: At which she
blushes, but it is not observed by the company: And seeing her offer to take
out her Handcarchief, he officiously prevents her, by wiping off the pearls of
Sweat that hang on her Ivory Forehead with his own, dipped in Essence of Oranges
or Jessamine, squeezing her small soft hand, and telling her a thousand pretty
Love Stories, which makes her simper and smile, as well pleased with his
discourse; and then taking his turn to show his fine shape and activity, the
neatness of his Limbs, and roundness of his Calves, etc. He starts up, and
falls a Dancing like any thing, and if she applauds it, he is so overjoyed,
that the ground can scarce hold him; he capers as if he were treading on
Clouds. Then suppose when he is tired, a Gentleman in an obliging way takes his
Mistress out; he takes her motion to be the most charming sight in the World,
admirers her swiming Carriage, and the decent holding of her Petricoat ravishes
him; and when almost wearyed, she retires and comes again to take her place by
him, ex^asies of Joy seize on him, and he softly whispers in her ear: I protest
and vow, Madam, you dance like any Angel. At which she smiles, and wipes her
face, but puttiug up her Handkerchief carelessly, he watches his time to steal
it from her, and then concludes himself as rich as Cr^ssius; besides, it works
miracles, and makes him a Poet in spite of nature or Art; for he will besure
to send her a Copy of Verses; upon the manner of doing it, though he never writ
any before in his life, so that she thinks her self doubly recompensed for the
loss of it. -- We now are come to the breaking up of the company, and the
taking o^ leave: When in going down stairs, he humbly petitions her, that he
may yet have another favor added to the many she has already blessed him
withal, and that is, to wait upon her to a Collation he has beforehand
ordered for her at a Tavern: She seems unwilling to grant it, pretending it is
unnecessary; and besides, she is never to go to such places, but moreover to be
^ate abroad; but her Waiting-maid seconding him, his civil prof^er between
willing and unwilling, is accepted, with I vow and protest Betty, you are a
strange Wench to urge me to this; you very well know, how angry my mother will
be, it I keep not my time with her. There may be something in that, Madam,
replied she, but for once and not use it, cannot be much taken amiss; and this
wheedle Infallibly conjutes a Crown Piece into hand out of our Young Masters
Pocket, and away they rattle in a Coach, though it be but a bow shot off; for
you must know she must not be permitted to dirty her shoes, in crossing the
way, or venture the hazard of stumbling and stepping over a Kenuel; and whilst
the Wheels are Rolling them thither, he poures his Amrous discourse into her
Ears, and reading a Lecture in commendation of her Beauty, talks of nothing but
Roses, Lillies, Sunbeams, Rain-bows, Corral, Snow, Arabian Spices, and
perfumes, Amber and the like; from whence he draws smiles and inferences which
makes her blush, but the darkness hides it, and then he concludes with a Kiss;
and being by this time arrived at the Bacc^inolian Palace of entertainment.
the Rhennish and Sugar inspires the renewal of his discourse; and the Table, to
show Love, Love is no nigard, is spread with ten times more than there is need
off, so that when the repast is over, Betty passing a complement in favor of
Frugality, fills her Handkerchief with what best pleases her Tooth as a
reserve, and the rest being only looked upon as fragments, is left to the
drawers disposal, and so he goes down to the Bar and discharges the Reckoning,
to keep them ignorant, least they should repine at the Expenses, ^and then my
Landlady comes up with her Bottle and makes a present of it to the Young Lady,
with a welcome to her house, which is taken as so great a favor that it brings
half a Crown into the Drawers Pocket, and now they begin to talk of going home,
where one is appointed centinal beforehand to let them in without knocking to
disturb the family at such a time of Night, and is sure to be gratified the
next visit; for Betty will not forget to bring it in one way or other, who did
them that service; however the Mother is up, for she cannot sleep till her
Daughter is in Bed, yet to deceive her, and put a better color upon the
matter, they slip by the Parlor door up stairs, and immediately change their
dress to their Night clothes, and then begin to stamp about the room, that they
may be heard; the Mother then calls, and they presently make their appearance:
and the First Salutation they meet with is, alas Daughter! where have you been?
(though she knows as well as her self perhaps) I wonder you will stay out thus
late, it is not well done. Now whilst our Young Mistress is framing an excuse,
and it sticks between her teeth, Betty, briskly prevents her with replying, Why
truly, Madam, we have been above stairs this two hours; did you not hear us
come in? and if she replies no, other confident is called to vouch it, and so
all is well again. -- We leave them now to take their rest, as well as they
can, for thinking what has passed, and follow our young Inamoreto, who by this
time is ratled to his Lodging, highly pleased and full of satisfaction; and
having thrown himself into Bed, falls asleep: After some wanton Conceits and
Dreams all Night, of Kisses, Dancing, Drinking, Treats, and Discoursing with
his Fair Mistress, talking of her, and to her in his sleep, as if she was
present; sometimes ^alling so loud into Rapturous Expressions, that he disturbs
the Family, who not readily understanding the Cause, take him to be
Crack-braind, when they hear him at such an unseasonable time of Night* talk of
Angels and Goddesses: The Morning he ^in is her Handkerchief, after having
kissed it many times, sets about his Poetry, which for the most part he studies
in Bed, whipping out to his Desk to write now a line, then in again, to
consider of another that will twist with it^ but above all, is much puzzled to
find a Rhyme to match with Handkerchief, and not hitting on it, he puts ^it
into the middle, and make^ one more easy serve at the end: As, Fairest of
Creatures, wonder well you may,
How your fine Handkerchief is gone astray!
But I could tell you, would my Muse be kind,
It is not lost, although it laid behind.
It was content, though you would go, to stay
With him, who does the Owner Homage pay.
By this she knows he has taken it as a love Token* and expects either a
Goldwatch or a Diamond Ring in exchange at the next Meeting. -- We pass over
the Pleasant Diversions and Treats he accomodates the Lady with at Bartholomew
Fair, if the Wooing happen about that time, or continue till then. Nothing that
is rare must escape her senses of Seeing, Tasting, Hearing, Smelling, and
Feeling; nor must she go thence before she has taken a turn or two with him in
the Hospital, and made a Visit to the Lotteries and Raff^ing Shops, where he
humbly beseeches her to throw his Money away in trying her Luck, or to place his
Money for him on the Figures, not doubting, but she has a great command over the
blind Goddess, and can make her turn to his side^ i^^spight of her Teeth^^o and
so making her a large ^^esent of Plate and China over and above what she has
coyly received. He takes courage, and setting a good face upon it, waits on her
home in a Coach, not sneaking away as before, but with his Hat in one hand, and
her fair ^and on the other, in he leads her. The Mother is ready to receive
them; and the Daughter immediately falls to showing her, and relating the
History of the Proceedings. The Mother then gently chides our Spark for being
so extravagant, and blames her Daughter for ^uffering it; which he excuses with
a P^gh Dear Madam, these are only small Triff^es; I am only sorry this Lousy
Fair afforded nothing rarer, or of greater value: And then a Bottle or two
being sent for, if there be none in the house; and having drunk briskly about,
his Tongue String is loosed to the purpo^e; He is able to ask his Mistress the
Question, and demand the Mothers consent, if there be no Father in the case:
However, the Mother in such Matters is always consulted, and left at her
discretion, to mould the Father into a complying temper, as best able to deal
with him: He at first meets with some excuses of unpreparedness for Answer, but
so faint that the concernment as to Jointure Portion and the like, being well
weighed and rightly, stated, he from the little difficulty he finds to hinder
the progress; he from that very moment, dates himself Cock sure of being made
Master of his Wishes, and things being in a fair forwardness, he now has free
Access, and he is highly pleased to find himself the only Welcome Guest of the
House, and he is not only profoundly Respected by the Servants, who had so
often tasted of his Bounty, but by the graver sort, and of those that were
frequently summoned thither to consult the Affair in hand, so that he is in a
manner become one of the Family; and he is mightily pleased to hear large
commendations and Encouragements upon his Mistress, on every hand; what a
virtuous, diligent, careful, kind, good-natured and dispositioned Wife she is
like to prove, and this makes him hug him self in his Approaching happiness. In
the mean time, if he were but in Lodgings before he take a New House, and the
Workmen are hastened in the sitting it up, fit for the Accommodation of the
Bride: No colt is spared to render it pleasant and taking; and least any thing
should be amiss, he carries her to see the forwardness, and to give such
directions; as she thinks more convenient; and a large Entertainment is
provided for her, and such as she is pleased to bring along with her, and the
Place he had left him by his Indulgent Mother, and upon the account of several
Legacies over and above what the Gossips presented ^t ^his Christening, are
exposed in the most ample manner; and though all be very splendid, and more
than is requisite, he gentielly excuses it as a Bachelor Fair, and doubts not
but there will be ^ large amendment to entertain his Friends, and Visitants, by
her more prudent management: When she comes to take Government of household
Affairs upon this commendation, obliges her to spread her Fan over her Face, to
hide her Smiles and Blushes, which is infinitely taking with our Spark. -- We
now come to consider, this Entertainment drawing to an end, and that he cannot
acquire himself like a Gentleman, unless the workmen to their own management
waits upon them home, he then leaves them a Guinea to drink her Health, but not
so privately but that she must take notice of it, and they with their Hats in
their hands address their Thanks to her, as the cause of their wellfaring. Now
no sooner brings her back, but he finds diverse congregate to see and
congratulate Madam Bride, that is to be but more longing to see Mr. Bridegroom,
in posse, that they may pass their Virdicts upon him: Well, says one, they are
a very fine couple, and Providence is very kind in bringing them so near
together, to make one another happy. But when, says another, is the day over! O
very shortly, cries a third. Truly, says a fourth (for you must know they are
of the Female Sex) I should think every minute ten, till the time came, and
blame the Lazy Hours for rolling no faster on. I should never be at rest till
the business was completed, and then to stop their Eternal running on in this
pleasing Dialect, The Mother is forced to interpose, and tell, it shall not be
done very hastily, but with deliberation; for she being her only Daughter, she
intends to Marry her like her Child, and that the show may be the more
magnificent, she is content to throw away the Duties upon her own Parish, and
Marry her at one more remote; this is approved by all, and her prudence in it
highly commended, that it may not look like a stolen Wedding, but a splendid
procession to dazzle the Eyes of the gauping Crowd; out young Gallant having
patiently thought with no small Ecstasy of mind, and heard all this, takes the
boldness (for now he thinks he may do it with some authority) to call the Maid,
who knowing his meaning, brings a clean Glass, a Bottle of Wine, and a Diaper
napkin; she then, with out any expecting orders fills out a glass and Presents
it to her old Mistress, who drinks to the Lady that stands or sits on her thumb
hand, who presents her service to the young Gentlewoman and wishes all manner
of happiness; at which he bows very low and receives a bumper, with an Orange
or two, and presents his service, with many thanks for the favor that is done
him by his opposite, or her that is nearest him, who rises and courtizes to our
young Mistress, highly commending her choice, telling her how happy she should
think her self, if she would choose for her; likewise the Modest Virgin, then
only sips and sets down the Glass, being too bashful as yet to drink to her
Lover, though she has a longing mind to present him her service, and will drink
to no body else, least he should take pet at it; however he takes up the Glass,
and marking with curious Eye, where her Ruby Lips have touched it; he commends
his service to a third, and is sure to drink just there; and then some
Sweetmeats being brought, he observes what she likes best, and that pleases
him mainly, all the rest in his esteem not being valued a straw. This being
over, and the company dismissed, he takes a turn or two with her in the Garden,
and breaths out his Amorous expressions in a freer air than the company would
allow; at which she simpers, and sometimes blushes, not forgetting to tell him,
she fears his Love is too hot to hold long after he has enjoyed what he
desires, and then brings in a story or two for example, to confirm her doubts
telling, if he should prove unconstant or crosgrained to her, it would soon
break her poor heart; and perhaps at this last sentence, they may force a tear,
which sets him a crying in earnest, and a renewal (with uplifted hand and
sometime bended knees if the privacy of the place will allow it with decency of
Vows and Protestation of Eternal Love, and constancy with all the dreadful
Imprecations Imaginable, if he ever alter or changes; inso much that hearing
him often name Hell and Damnation, she is constrained to clap her Hand before
his Mouth, least going on he should call up the Devil to fright her, and the
better to allay the disturbance of his mind, occationed by the mistrust of his
fidelity, she is compelled to assure him, he has removed her fears and doubts,
and she cordially believes whatever he says. This revives his Spirits, and
throws him into such a transport of joy, that he imprints a thousand kisses on
her fair hand, which She permits without reluctance, or so much as attempting
to draw it back; and then the Mutual Vow passes Irre^ocably between them, which
is confirmed by a soft impression on her warm Lips, a favor he before aspired
not. To leave, being again taken, he cannot sleep all the following night, but
comes to pay an early Visit the next morning, and the Mother understanding by
her Daughter they are now sure together, and as the vulgar style it Man and
Wife. He is winked at, if his impatience to see her* carrys him into her
Chamber before she is up, and then what a Heaven of Happiness it is to him to
see her with part of her ^^ked Beauties carelessly displayed, like a little
sleeping Angel, recumbent on her Alcove, and perhaps in a stolen kiss, sip
Necture from her Ruby Lips, whilst she is transported in a pleasing Dream, and
fancies the God of Love is making his Amorous Addresses to her. If she chance
to awake, and start at the sight of him, blaming his unseasonable Intrusion,
His excess of Passion is his excuse, and his awful retiring at a distance,
justifies his having no dishonorable intent: This pacifies her; and thereupon
She orders him to withdraw, and She will rise and come to him: Which he does
with all the hasty obedience immaginable; and it is well if he Humbles not down
stairs on such a precipitate retreat. And now perhaps as he passes through the
Hall he sees a Porter with a burden of Money called in, as part of the Portion
he is to receive with his Fair Mistress, which heaps Joys on Joys, and makes
his heart so li^ht, the he scarce knows what to do with himself. Yet
considering his Dearest will not be long absent, He goes to prepare her Morning
Draught, of such as he knows is best agreeable to her Palate and Constitution;
and then out comes his Spirit of Amber or Golden Drops, to render it more
Cordial, and conducing to the preservation of Health; and as if he was about to
sacrifice to a Deity, a Chaffin-Dish of Coals is set in a readiness, and as
soon as She enters, he sprinkles it over with Mirth and Frankincense, to
congratulate her Nostrills with a pleasing Perfume. This kind Officiousness the
more endears him to her. -- We are come now within three days of the Wedding,
and the Tailor is the next person to be consulted; for although Nature
furnishes all other Creatures with their Gaities and Adornments, it is left to
his Mystery and Discretion, to set out the Lords of those Creatures, (whom She
only brings naked into the World) to the best Advantage: So that being sent for
with all speed, he informed them what was most suitable and agreeable to the
exactest Modes and Fashions in wearing: But knowing those of that Profession to
be bran^ed with an ill Name, and as some will have them, (though we know not
how it can well be) Thieves from their Cradles, they took a Catalogue of the
Materials, and concluded to choose and buy them themselves, and especially for
two other reasons, viz. the Young Lady to show her Skill in choice and
lavingness in bargaining, and her Amorist, not so much that he might be an
Eyewitness to it, but that he might have the more freedom of discoursing with
her abroad, than he could reasonably expect in a crowded Family, where She was
frequently called away upon diverse trivial occasions, whereby he was often
obliged to break off abruptly, in the midst of his most Refined Rhetoric, or
with a Complement half thrust out, and the rest sticking betwixt his Teeth. And
in their first undertaking of this kind, there appeared such a harmony of
consent and Equality in liking, that it presaged a Lasting Concord: for
whatever She made c^oice of in her concerns, he approved and applauded her
judgment: For indeed to be the more complaisant, She asked his Advice in every
thing, which Stuffs, Silks, Silver Fringe, Gold Lace, etc. he thought most
suitable, and what She pitched upon mightly pleased him, and She on the other
hand acquissed in his choice of Buttons, Cloth, Trimming, etc. And then for
the Linen, he resigns that to her management, as more properly her Province.
This being over, the time of their returning was taken up in considering of,
and naming the Bride Maids and Bride-Men, and who should be at the Wedding of
their Friends on either side; and in that there was not the least scruple, or
disagreeing between them: She takes notice to those of her Sex, and leaves it
to him to give the other an Invitation; and whilst this was doing, the Clothes
are made, and brought home, and were soon followed by a File of Sempstresses
with Band boxes: His own happened to jump right, but the Lady having a delicate
straight neat and slender Body; the Judges sent for to give their Opinions,
found several faults when they were put on, as that it is sitting too full in
the Shoulders, made her seem as if She were Hump backed, that some Pleats were
amiss, and the Body too big in the Waste; but above all, the Ba^^^ehead of a
Tailor, making no distinction between so curious a piece of Natures best handy
work and other Ladies, had put in unnecessary Boisters somewhat above her left
Hip, to hide a supposed Detormity* where never no such thing was. This made her
look upon it as an Affront, and made her a little peevish and fretful; which
our Gentleman, who had never seen her frown before, highly resenting as to the
occasion of bringing a lowering Cloud over so bright a Face, had like to have
fallen upon poor Pricklouse, with Bastinado's: but ^earing such an Outrage
might prove more distasteful to her, though in her own concern; he came to
milder Terms, and cried out, You confounded Toad you, where were your eyes, in
your heels, that you should be such a Bungling Cods-head to see no better.
Truly Sr. replied the Swipster, it is no more than what is usual; for most
Ladies give in little or more in that part: Besides th^se B^^^sters are no
bigger than Crows Eggs; the ^^^st we usually make. A Plague of your Juing*
continued yet our Cholerlck Spark; does this Lady look as if she went in on any
side, or wanted Crows Eggs; take 'em away, and that speedilly, or I shall be in
with your Crows ^a^e Q^^^^^! I Will crow y^^, and make you crow for your Money
before you g^t any till Crows lays, again, if you haste not to al^^^ and make
all fit as it should be (which was done to satisfaction. And herein our Gallant
showed his courage and discretion, viz. That he durst have broke the Tailors
Pate; but at a time when nothing but Joy was to take place, he would not let
his anger break out so far as to interrupt it. Some fiery Spark, upon a lighter
provocation, would have been apt to have unbridled his rage, and let it loose
to the ruin of his Ears, who had put such a trick upon a Lady, and not so
satisfied, have flung the Clothes into the fire: But this would have proved
Rashness and indiscretion at such a time, even to the hazarding the loss of the
Fair one; for what could she imagine less, than that if he was so hot to burn
her clothes before her face, before he had a full title to her, he might when
he had her person entirely in his power, make a Christmas log of her; And so it
was but reasonable to prevent the danger in retreating before she was advanced
too far. -- We find another Pleasure yet during the interim, which is to see
the Bed the Bride maids have decked with Ribbons, and scented with Essence of
Violets and Gessamine, so that we cannot but conclude.

His Quick imagination must present
The Scenes, and Images of his discontent;
Which soon the fair one will to him dispense
Joys, too unruly, and too fierce for Sense.
We find by this time all things in a forwardness toward the Nuptials; the
Milliner who of all Trades, in Furnishing out in such a Pomp is the readiest,
was consulted last; nor was he slow in furnishing the Bride-knots and Favors,
which the Nimble Fingur'd Bride-maids mingled in their Colors as best suited
their Fancy, alluding them to many pretty conceits, and in that, and washing
their White soft Necks, they spend most part of the Night to have the less to
do in the Morning, that they might be up as early as the Sunbeams shot into the
Eastern Clouds, Fringing their Edges with Purple and Gold, and then away they
haste to the Bride-chamber, where they find the Bride (whose thoughts and
fancies of what was approaching had given her little Repose,) just Jumpt out of
her B^d, and putting on her fine Laced Smock, Scenting all around her with
Benjamine and Essenses, wherein she bathed the Night before. Then they haste to
deck her up in all her gaudy trim, till she Glitters as if she would appear
something more than Mortal; and cannot choose but view her self with stricter
Eyes than ever, so see how gay and splendid she appears; her Glass scarce knows
her face again: but whilst she is thus contemplating, a Coach is heard come
rattling to the door, and then her Heart beats quicker between Joy and Virgin
fear; for she knows who it is that comes to bind her fast for Life, nor long
is it e're he trips up stairs as light as if his Joy had turned him into Air;
then with a profound reverence he accost her with repeated vows of Love and
constancy; and in an humble manner, having Kissed her hand, and then her Lips;
with Madam, in this you see my humility, and my aspiring, both expressed, etc.
To which she answers only with a blush, and so he loads her down into the Room
of State from whence the Cavel Cade is to set forth; and here we close the
Scene of Wooing, in which all those that are not stupefied, may perceive their
is a World of pleasure and contentment.

Wedding, The Happiness of the Day considered, and Exhortations to Wedlock; as
being an Honorable Estate, etc. -- Wedding puts an end to Wooing in one sense,
but ought to be the beginning of solid and substantial Love; the inlet of the
Entirest and Immovable Affections; the last best temporal Blessing that can be
bestowed on Man; It is ushered in with joy and harmony of Minds, and should
continue so till death disolves the sacred union, and then live in the
remembrance of the surviver: We see how the Congratulating coud throng to see
the Lovely pair pass to that state of happiness, insomuch that pressing to be
Spectators, they will hardly allow them room enough to enter the Church; every
one having good wishes and commendations in their mouths, some praising them
for their virtues, and others for the comeliness of their Persons; and those
that are ignorant who they are, make a strict enquiry to be informed, that they
may carry the joyful news along with them, and spread it in their
Neighbour-hoods, to set all the young Maids and Batchelours a madding, or at
least a wishing and longing, etc. They having with much a do thrust through the
crouding Rabble, and entered the Church, the Person attending, the Ceremony is
performed with all imaginable decency and order; the no longer Courtier, but
Husband, salutes his Wife, which she accepts without a blush, because now such
things may be done within the strictess Rules of Modesty: and so after some
sober admonitions (for you must know, the Bridegroom is not niggardly to him
that has linked him to so great an happiness) to live in Love and Unity; out
they pass through the waiting Multitude, and the Beggars who make not the least
figure in that number, fail not of their Expectations, but taste of their
Liberality, for which they send their prayers, and good wishes after them: And
perhaps are so generous as to lose some of their Blood on the occasion, by
going together by the Ears about parting the Money: Not is it to be accounted
less than a Mark of Greatness thus to be attended by the Rabble: For many Great
men have esteemed it a happiness to be popular, and admired by the multitude.
For after this large Expense to make a Splendid show, should the Rabble in a
moross and sullen humor, have declined their public appearing to be
Spectators, much of the honor and credit of the day would have been lost as
well as money thrown away to no purpose, which in private Wedding might have
been saved; however, they did not order the Coaches to drive so softly, as to
gratify them in a longer prospect, than the getting home withal the convenient
speed imaginable would allow. Being entered the spacious Room appointed for the
Entertainment, it was pretty to see how the Male Guest saluted and joyed the
Bride, and how the blushes arising by that means, adding a greater Luster to
her Beauty, and how in return, the Bridegroom did the like kind office to all
the young Ladies. -- Well then, the business being over, and Dinner not upon
the Table, our Gallant Bridegroom, after strutting about a little to take a
fuller view of the Company, cries, Come Gentlemen, what think of you of a whet
before Dinner? you know, from the Church to the Tavern, or elsewhere, to
participate the juice of the Grape, is all the mode now adays The motion was
liked well, for there were diverse thirsty Sparks of his Club Companions who had
rather be at a drinking bout than participate of a well furnished Lord Mayors
Table; and so about it went in Bumpers; he taking special care to see it go
round, because it was his Ladies health; however the Women were not pressed to
drink more than they pleased, but in that left to their discretion; however he
must take off a Glass to either of the Brides Maids, and it is their business
to put it about among their own Sex. This scarce* concluded when the wind
Music gave them notice, that Dinner was coming up, whereupon every one repairs
to a place in order, the Bride like an Angel, was placed at the upper end, she
being this day Mistress of Rule, and the Bridegroom who knew his duty well
enough, attended at the lower end: So that they looked like the two bright
Luminaries in opposition, his less brighter Visage being more enlightened by
the beams of her Eyes, that with often as it were, stolen Glances, Reflected on
it. They were no sooner seated, but all things were Marshalled in such good
order, that no General could have drawn up his Army more Regular and Uniform in
Batallia; there wanted nothing that could be wished or expected and what was
more pleasing admirable, the Brides handywork appeared in the more curious part
of the Pastery, in various Images, Figures, Similitudes of Fruit^ and Flowers,
which her Industery and Ingenuity had framed a Graceful Garniture to accomodate
the worthy Guests, insomuch that they were scrambled for, and coveted as
earnestly as Pilgrims do Relics, to be kept in Memorial of her, and the
proceedings of that happy day: Then was it pleasing to the Bridegroom, to
behold every one pay their respects to him and his Bride, in addressing the
Glasses first to her, and then to him, if he can but keep himself sober till
b^d time, or else a great deal of his happiness will be wanting. -- We now come
to consider that Dinner draws to a conclusion, the Glasses have gone round, and
some begin now their bellies are full, to be uneasy till they are released*
and get to dancing; but stay a while young Gallants, and Ladies, you must
consider the Mother of the Bride, and therefore, she has ordered the Person who
tied the Holy knot, and is now one of the Invited Guests, to read you such a
Lecture, relating to the state of Wedlock, that will do you more kindness and
credit, if well minded and put in practice, than all the Dancing at a hundred
Balls and Dancing Schools; which he standing up, and very gravely addressing
himself to the Company, delivered in these words: That Marriage (says he) is
honnourable and a holy state, Wedlock its ^onourable Estate, etc.
appointed by God himself; I suppose none here are so profane as to deny it is
honorable for four respects: First in the parts of it: Secondly, in the nature
of it: Thirdly, in the use of it: And Fourthly, in the Quality and Sacredness
of it. Marriage is the Prop of Mutual con^ent, the Aid of Nature, the
Perfection of Health, Wealth, Beauty, Learning, Honor, and Experience, Youth,
Manhood, Old Age, whereof none is sweet, where Marriage (...) not the want: It
serves not only for the necessity of Generation, but for the relief of such as
a^e past it: Looking at the Safeguard of the Stock, and Comfort of Life.
Marriage is the preservation of Chastity, the Seminary of the Common Wealth,
Se^d-Plat of the Church, Pillar under God of the World, Supporter of Laws,
States, Orders, Offices, Gis^s, and Services, the Glory of Peace, and the
Sinnews of War, the maintenance of Policy, the life of the Dead, the solace of
the Living, the Ambition of V^g^rity, the Foundation of Countries, Cities,
Vnversities, S^^^ss^on of Families, Crowns and Kingdoms: Yea, besides the b^ing
of these, it is the well being of these being made, and whatsoever is Excellent
in them, or any other thing, the very furniture of Heaven in a kind depending
thereon. -- He was going on to make some inferences from what he had said, with
proper applications, but the Mother of the Bride perceiving some of the Ladies
who had Laced themselves too staight to look slender, and through forgetfulness
filled their belly too full, grow very uneasy, and often change color,
whispered him in the Ear to have done, when better twenty Laces have been cut,
than such an Oration left unfinished; however, we have in other places as we
hope pretty well supplied his abrupt breaking off. -- We now have discharge
them of the Table: And the next thing to be considered, is, that the Music
strikes up, and they fall to Dancing till they had tired their heels; above
all, the Bridegroom drew most Eyes upon him; for the Bride was not permitted to
dance on her Wedding Day. -- The Bridegroom could not but have a great deal of
pleasure, to see how the Graver sort who sat to Judge, who carried away the
Garland, whispered and pointed at him, all which he could do no less than
Interpret, tended to his Commendation; so that he still kept on, till the
Bride, fearing least he should overheat himself, sent for him in to the
Withdrawing Room, whose Commands he obeyed with much readiness there, being in
private with him; She wiped the sweat from his face, with her Laced
handkerchief, and gave him the first Kiss, as a more earnest pleadge of her
Love; for now she might do what she could not pretend to before, without
blushing, and many languishing Glances passed between them with their Eyes,
they seemed to devour each other, and repeated Kisses frequently broke off the
soft Assent of Discourse. So two kind Turtles in a Myrtle Grove,
Leave in soft Murmurs their unfeigned Love.
Cooing they sit, pearch'd on some branch alone,
Whilst gentle fires by strong desires are blown,
Till they too fierce, are for resistance grown.
By this time the Dancers are weary, and Supper time is come, which is lightly
passed over without many Ceremonies, bacause the Bridegroom and his Fair Bride,
should be the sooner in Bed, and those that have far to go, make the best of
their way: However it is too late; for indeed though the House is very spacious
and well furnished, there are not Beds enough to Accommodate so numerous a
Train. After Supper the Music having played a while, the Bride steps away, and
the Bride-Maids taking the wink, follow, and up they go to the Bride-chamber;
kind Betty the Chambermaid, who had not a little finger in the Pie, as you
have heard, waiting at the Stair foot to Light and Usher them up. -- Pretty
Discourse they spun out the time, till they had got her to Bed: And by that
time this Ceremony was over, up comes the Sack Posset, brought between two for
fear of spilling, in a large Silver Bowl with two handles, and after it in
comes the Bridegroom entering with an overflowing joy, which appeared visible
in the brightning of his Eyes, who when he was in Bed, the Stockin being
motioned, the Bride must sit up to have it thrown at her Nose, that the
Batchellours may know by him that first hits it, who is to be married next, and
now leave being taken by Kissing the Bride, we leave them both to their sweet
Repose.

Wedding-bell, A Poem thereon, by a Modern Wit. Now the hurly burly is done,
Now the Battle's lost and won:
Fie upon it, why s^eak you thus?
Fie upon it, what makes you blush.
No intruding maid was nigh,
None was under Bed but I.
Fee me well and never fear,
None alive a word shall bear.
True, it is the babbling bell,
Did a little motion tell.
What of that, I can swear
'Twas the intemperance of the Air.
Or the Fleas'twas, who does know,
That did make you tumble so.
Or the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Quarrel for the better side:
And dispute when none was by,
Which should in the middle lie.
Or a reason may be shown,
That he is used to lie alone,
And now with powerful Brandy sped,
Kicks the Lady out of bed.
But what ever may be guest,
You can tell the cream of the Jest.
Mum for that, no more I Will say,
Least we all the sport betray.
See what it is to trust a Friend,
Give you joy, and there is an end.
Whoring, Causes a Man to spend Flesh for Silver, till he becomes so lank and
lean, that his Legs are scarce able to support their late portly young Master;
going still, as if he were sitting (occasioned through the imbecility of his
hammer strings) and so dry, that a marrow^ bon'd Man, if he should boil his
bones, could scarce get out two drops of moisture: his eyes so hollow, that
they run back to salute his memory least he should forget them; and his cheeks
denting in, as if he were still sucking at a bottle. And now my brave Slave,
being a neighbor to death, begins to find that all this while he has
mistaken and worshipped a false Deity, for a true: And that therefore (though
ceasing, through weakness, to burn here in Lust) he shall ever b^rn in never
consuming fire. Where i^ his Mistress now? Whose praises should be written with
Pens of Angels wings; who should be Nectar and Ambrosia. He now must leave her
behin^ him, common to Men that shall one day be common to Devils. It breeds
astonishment in me to hear a Man style a Woman, Divine Creature, of a Heavenly
Feature, Goddess of my Thoughts, Nature utmost endeavor, etc. whose body he
knows to be composed of putrefaction, and shall one day come to that degree
of rottenness, that (as she now in the no^^^^ls of God) it shall stink in the
nostrils both of Men^ and ^earts. Reason and Religion teach a Man (as her
remembrancer) thus to Court his Mistress: Fair Queen of dust and dirt, wil^^t
please your (...) decaying Majesty, after some few years, or months, or days,
to have those star shining Eyes of yours eaten out with (...), and (...) beco^^
cages for c^^kers? When your delicate smooth body shall be infolded in Earths
rugged Arms; and your soft, swelling moist, ruby Lips be kissed by her moldy
Mouth; when your pure red and white, shall be turned into pure brown and black;
and that face which has d^^^^^ so many into Consumptions, shall it self be
cons^^^ed to nothing. Yet for all this, our young Gentlemen will not forbear
their Amorous Prosane Love Discourses; but yields as much honor to Women, as
to their Maker.
X.
Xerin, Princess of Morocco her rare Example of Love and constancy. -- Xerin
Daughter of Muley Moluck King of Moroco in Barbary fell upon the first sight,
desperately in Love with Don Sebastian King of Portugal, though at that time he
was her Fathers Enemy, come with a great Army to Invade Africa, and take his
Kingdom from him, but before she could have time to make her Love know to him,
a great Battle was fought between the Moors and Portugals, on ^atal plains of
Tamis^^, where the latter were destroyed in a fearful overthrow; the King of
Portugal was held to be^lain among the heaps of his Subjects, and great spoil
was taken by the Barbarian people. -- Xerin hearing of the sad disaster of her
Lover, was greatly afflicted, yet was however resolved to find out his Body,
and give him a decent burial as became a King, and a Person she had set her
Affections on. The Field being clear of the Assailants, she left the Royal
Tent, and went with two slaves among the Slain, to find out his Body by the
Light of the Moon, if possible; having notice before, in what part of the
Battle he fought, and fell, though she was not assured but he might in the
Plunder of the Field be stripped, and his Body carried away; hour with a Lovers
boldness, on she went, and having lookd on diverse dead and dying Men, She at
last fixed her Eyes wishfully upon one Gallantly attired, and fancyed she had
found him, and with a shower of Tears, flowing from her Fair Eyes, fell upon
his Neck, and bewailed the Fate of a Monarch, and one that was so much belov^d
by her, blaming the Destinies for their Cruelty in cutting so pre^ious a Thread
of Life, which ought to have been spun out longer, to have made her happy; and
was about to offer violence to her self, when by striving and moveing the Body,
she perceived there was yet Life remaining in it; she thereupon, with a great
Cry, tore off her Linen, and with the help of her Slaves, bound up his wounds,
and drawing him from among the slain they got him to side of the River Mueazan,
where she washed off the Blood and Dust, whilst one of her Slaves went down the
River to seek a Boat, which he Luckily found, and in it they transported him to
a little Island in the River, where the Princess had a private House for her
retirement in the heat of the Summer, here they got what necessary things they
could, and dressed his wounds giving likewise such cordials and refreshments as
brought him again to himself; using him with all the tender care and regard of
a vallued Lover, so that in a while Recovering his Color, which the loss of
Blood had faded, and knowing whose hands he was under, sighing said, Madam, I
se^ Heaven will not deprive Portugale, of it is King, since it has sent him so
fair a deliverer; and she answered him with all the tender expressions that a
passionate Love could utter, and for his better acoomo^ation, thinking no
service too much or any thing too dear for him. She made interest to have him
maintained by Malei Eo^bd^^in a Moorish Prince, her Cousen in his Palace at
Hoscor^, till she found an opportunity to dismiss him to his own Country with
an Equipage, becoming the grandeur of so great a Monarch as she took him to be;
however, to make sure of him, least he should forget his vows, when he
repossessed a Throne, which without her assistance he must have inevitably lost
his Life; she made him so far understand her Love to him, that at the
perswation of the Old Moorish Prince he married her, she promising to be
Baptized, and become a Christian, when She should arive in Portugale, and so in
process of time, she by the secret assistance of her Friends got him such an
Equipage as might make him appear like himself, when he came home; her self
promising as soon as he was settled there to follow him with all her Treasure.
By the way we must tell you, that it was given out in Portugale that Don
Sebastian was slain in the Battle we have mentioned, with almost all his
Nobility, so that few Noble Families there were, that were not in tears and
mourning for their Friends and Relations, in the midst of which confusion the
King having no Issue lawful to quiet the people. Cardinal Henry his Uncle,
ascended the Throne; but he being very old, soon after dyed: When as Phillip
the second King of Spain, laid claim to it, as did Anthony Prior of Crato,
Duke of Burgance, and others; at what time he arrived in Italy, and was
joyfully received by his Cousin the Duchess of Parma, who verily believing him
to be the true King; and over joy'd that after she had so grievously lamented
his Death, She should yet se him alive again; as having also a secret Love for
him, above that of Friendship or Kindred, She writ to the Estates of Portugal
concerning him, who deputed some to wait on him, who gave them an Assurance,
That it was their true King Don Sebastian. The Spaniard upon this unexpected
News, mightily opposed it, laboring to prove him a Counterfeit Impostor; and
having gotten strong footing in the Kingdom, resolved to keep it by force:
Whereupon the other raised an Army in Italy, and on the Frontiers of Portugal;
but the success of the Battle turned against him: for the Spaniards oppressing
his small Number with a powerful Army, he was overthrown and taken Prisoner,
being closely confined to the Rock of St. Julian, a strong Fort in the River
Tagus. Xerin, whilst these things passed, not knowing what had befallen him,
came into Portugal, with great Treasure and splendid Train; but all her joy was
dashed when she heard he was in Prison. However, she went like a virtuous Wife
to comfort him, which She did in the kindest manner, laboring for his release,
but it would not be granted; so that through Grief and Confinement, he fell
sick; and finding Death's Approach, the Histories of those times, tell us, That
he freely declared to her, That he was not the King of Portugal, for he was
really slain in the Battle; but that he was one of his Subjects whom Nature had
given, Lineaments, Proportion, and Features, so like the true King, that even
the intimate Friends of Sebastian, had mistaken the one for the other: However,
the love of this virtuous Princess being unalterably fixed on a Husband, She
comforted him in the most tender and submissive manner, and with a sigh, said,
My dear Lord, Afflict not your self, with too late and fruitless a repentance.
I loved (continued she) the person of Don Sebastian more than the splendor of
his condition; I thought I had met that Prince in you, however those Charms and
Graces that first touched my heart, have lost none of their privilege, because
they were not placed in a Monarch, though I must freely own, I should never
have observed them in an ordinary person; neither my Birth nor my Spirit would
have permitted me to consider, whom I had not thought a Prince: but my own
Error become dear to me, and is still so, however fatal it proves to my peace;
the very Name of Husband is so sacred to a Woman truly virtuous, that it
obliterates any shame or disgrace that accompanys it. Therefore try to overcome
your Illness, my dear Prince (Pardon the name) Fortune said She, lifting up her
Hands and Eyes toward Heaven, might have given it where she gave you me:
Rescue your self then, if possible, from the Arms of Death; it may be I may
find you a happiness more calm and glorious than what is afforded, you in
Portugal. Xerin having said thus much, kissed and embraced him very tenderly:
But his Spirits being wasted with Grief and hard Usage, he was with the excess
of this Female Generosity so moved, that his Voice could not find an utterance
to proclaim the praises due to good a Wife. And being no longer able to suffer
the Transports of so Transcendent a love as She expressed toward him; He
fainted away in those beauteous Arms that embraced him, and sighed out his
Soul, whilst hers had much ado to stay behind: Had She not left a hopeful Young
Pledge of their Loves behind her in Africa, as being delivered of a son before
She came to Portugal; and now whether this was an Impostor, or the true
Sebastian, since many have doubted, we will not determine, but only present
this as a rare Example of Love and Constancy. Xantippe, Wife to Socrates the
Philosopher, a Woman of a violent turbulent disposition. To live with whom, he
had need of the great patience wherewith he was endued. And being asked by
Alcibiades, if he could bear her perpetual Clamor: He said, It was a kindness
to him, because it inured him to bear all the other Evils attending o^ humane
Life. One Morning after She had given him a jumper Lecture; getting from her,
he seating himself on a Sunny Bank under the Window, and as he was reading
Philosophy, She not thinking She had her fill of scolding at him, resolved to
urge him yet further, by swilling him from a Lost with a Piss-pot; at which
Indignity the good Man only said, That he always after Thunder expected a
Shower. A rare Example of Patience for Husbands that have scolding Wives.
Xerin, A Moorish Princess, said to draw Don Sebastian King of Portugal, from
among the heaps of the slain, when he and his Army fell at the Battle of
Alcazer in Africa; and after having refreshed him, and healed his Wounds,
married him, of which Passages see more. Xanthe, of a Yellow Complexion.
Xenophila, She that loves Strangers. Xantippe, Hieronymo writ a Book against
Jovinian, in which he copiously discourses of the praise of Virginity,
reckoning a Catalogue of diverse famous and and renowned in that kind amongst
sundry Nations. He speaks of Socrates, who having two cursed Queans, and both at
once (for the Law of Athens, did allow duplicity of Wives) could endure their
Scoldings and Contumacy with such constancy and patience; for having Zantippe
and Mirho the daughters of Aristides, the house was never without brawling. One
Euthidemus coming from the wrestling place, and Socrates meeting him by chance,
compelled him to supper; and being sat at board, and in sad and serious
discourse, Zantippe spoke many bitter and railing Words of disgrace and
contumely against her Husband; but he nothing moved therewith, nor making her
the least Answer, She tipped up the Table, and flung down all that was upon it.
But when Euthidemus being therewith much moved, arose to be gone, and instantly
depart: Why, what harm is there (quoth Socrates?) Did not the same thing chance
at your House, when I dined with you the last day, when a cackling Hen cast
down such things as were upon the Board? yet we your guests notwithstanding,
left not your House unmannerly. Another time in the Market, She snatching his
Cloak from his back, the standers by persuaded him to beat her; but he replied,
So whilst she and I be tugging together, you may stand by laughing, and cry, O
well done Zantippe, O well done Socrates. Another time She with her much
loquacity, had made him weary of the house; therefore he sat him down upon the
bench before the street-door: but She at his patience being the more impatient,
and much more angry, because She was not able to move in him the least Anger;
She mounts up in a Garret Window, and from thence pours a full Piss-pot upon
his head: Such as came by, extremely moved, as much in derision of his person,
as at the suddenness of the Action; he took up a laughter as high and as loud
as the best, expresssing no more Anger than in these words: Nay, I thought
verily in my mind, and could ^ably judge by the weather, that after so great a
Thunder, we must necessarily have Rain.
Y
Youth, Pro^e to Desire and Passions: How they ought to proceed therein, and
distinguish them aright. Young people in the Spring tide of Blood, Strength and
Vigor, have not always an absolute command over their Desires, but are many
times carried away too violently with the stream of Love-Passion. There is no
Precept commands that Application over the mind, as the power of Love; it draws
the Affections by a kind of sweetness, whereas Rules do it by distortion;
sometimes it is like Circes Wand, sometimes like Mercuries Cad^eens; sometimes
it corrupts, and at other times makes chaste; Beauty commonly as it is either
^ounded or apprehended, is the Object of that fancy, which proves like a
Gorgon, which whilst men admire, it dazles and blinds their Eyes of
Understanding, which causes the Lover to extol the Virtues of the party loved,
many times so far above truth; Virtue it self indeed is fair, which made one
say, That is, if it could be seen in a proper shape, it would appear so
Angelical and divinely Beautiful, that all would love and admire it. Love
indeed is the strongest of the Passions; but often found in the weakest minds,
whose Breasts not sortified by the strength of Counsels. Such amorous Conceits
have the easier Access to. Every Soul is imprinted with the Character of this
Desire, which being turned from the love of the Creatures to Piety, it becomes
Divinity: It makes all things seem pleasant; and therefore some have advised,
That we should not be without a strong Affection; Glances and Gestures do often
procure Affection, whether it be by strengthening the immagination or not, we
do not undertake to determine: It is most fervent when most opposed; nor is it
without a Mystery in nature. The secret attracting of Affections between
particulars, without any knowledge or apprehension of their conditions; for
there are certain Virtues that want a Name, which is the cause some can hardly
give a reason of their Love. It is prevalent sometimes in the wisest of either
Sex, which shows, it has a proximity with good: Youth is most subject to those
Inclinations, which shows, That it is for the most part the child of Vanity:
whilst he is steeped in his Affections, it becomes like a Dew that falls in
the Morning of Youth, when he is scarce got out of the Night of his Ignorance,
and is expelled by the rising Sun of his knowledge: and it is found, That Young
are Amorous, the Middle Aged Affectionate; and those of Elder Years run into
the Follies of Dotage, when Natures Fires are quenched in them, and only Ice
and Snow, of chillness and impotency being about them. -- Such as those are
like Gamesters, That have lost all at play, yet keep a sumbling with the Box,
and hinder others that have Lustly Betts to lay. Love indeed carrys a kind of
an impotency in it is effects, sealing up our Lips that we cannot speak our
mind, though fain we would; our words heave upward for vent, but cannot get a
passage: We might have the Object of our desires perhaps for speaking for, yet
are ashamed or fearful to ask for what we so much covet, which caused one to
admonish his Friend in such a condition, to take more courage, and boldly let
the Fair One know, for what he languished, in these lines. Ask Lover e're thou
dyest: let one poor Breath
Steal from thy Lips, to tell her of thy Death:
Doting Idolater, can silence bring
Thy Saint Propitious? or will Cupid fling
One Arrow? For thy paleness leave to try
This silent courtship of a Languid Eye.
(Witty to Tyranny) she too well knows
This; but the incense of thy private Vows
That breaks forth at thine eyes, and does betray
The Sacrifice thy wounded heart would pay.
Ask her Fool, ask her, if words cannot move,
The Language of thy Tears may make her Love:
Let them flow nimbly then, and when they fall
Upon her Breast, warm Snow, O may they all,
By some strange Fate fix^ there, distinctly lie,
Love Characters before her reading Eye.
When if you win her not, it may appear,
You tried your Lot, and lost her not through fear.
But now we come to give some cautions as to trust and distrust in these
Affairs; both of them being very necessary, as the occasion may require. It
cannot be denied, but the latest Rule to trust to, not to be deceived, is to
prefer distaste before too much credulity: As for instance, a Religious
Suspicion is a good Antidote against the Poison of Vice, which still the Devil
instills into the hearts of Men, with a deceitful pleasure, putting an
Imposture upon their Understanding: So a dissembling Lover dresses up his words
in the most beautiful Forms, covering his Hippocracy and Dissimulation with
gilded Promises, to gain Credit and Belief, that he may the better deceive:
And therefore such Ladies as would avoid being taken in a Snare, must have a
generous distrust, till they are very well assured how they may trust They must
join to the Innocence of the Dove, and the Wisdom of the Serpent, and not think
every shining thing to be real, and no counterfeit. It Is the style of Policy
to distrust, whereby probability of Appearance, it may give security. But to
let everything receive our own Additions, which are formed in the weak moddel
of a doubtful Fancy, distracts Judgment; and though these that are most
sensible of their own Imperfections, will soonest expect deficiencies from
others: yet, it is safe to think, there is somewhat lies hid which he does not
apprehend; for it collects the Understanding, and admits not of any thing
without due Examination; for many through want of venting the Ecstasies of their
minds, have become pale, disturbed and envious, even with themselves, which
have put the whole Frame of their composition out of joint: And for this
reason, we may well decline from too much trust in others; when it is not
always safe to trust your own heart: The heart of man is deceitful, which like
a Magic Glass, represents the Form of things which are not. Therefore, first
proceed from a knowledge and caution to your self, to that of others; so it may
prove a wholesome Exors^ne, least you might swell too great in Self Esteem. The
Flatterer composeth the Moddel of your own Desires, your self being the
Archirype thereof first. Therefore let them be viewed in Reasons Light, and the
other as things imperfectly mixed and obscured. Machiavell has done well to
acquaint the World with the common practice of men; for it induces Vigilance to
fair seeming Actions and Gestures, pretending to Love and Amity, when they are
perhaps but painted Dissimulations; for some Men will give you the smoothness
of their countenance to be taken hold of, whilst they are studying Evasion by
the slipperiness of their Fancy. A fairer look than ordinary toward a Spaniard
puts him in a present suspicion of his own safe in^i^uations of Love and Amity,
are many times very dangerous Symptoms of a persidious disposition; and in
other matters we see it an ordinary thing for one man to build his fortune out
of the ^uin^s of another. We see the manner of Natures production of things,
how commonly the corruption of one thing is the generation of another, and how
many have generated their own Fortunes. Note, That where there is too great a
facility of believing, there is also a willingness of deceiving; and although
Belief carrys with it a color of innocence, yet distrus^ s^^^l carrys strength
of safety. You can never be too sure; for if there be no danger, it is good to
be armed against it, least it may so fall at another, being rendered thereby
^upine and secure, or careless, you may be surprised. What commendation can
that General expect, who having notice from his own Scouts that the Enemy is at
hand, will not believe it, or put his Army in a posture to receive them, though
at present he sees them not; and if it should be a false Alarm, yet he shows
good Conduct, that is always ready provided, if the worst should fall out. Love
indeed makes many Alarums, and false Attacks to Amuze Lovers, but it is with a
design to carry the Fort by storm, if it cannot be gained by Parley: But a
Description of Counterfeit and true Love, take in these following Lines:

Mark when the Evenings c^^^er Wings
Fann the Afflicted Air: How the faint Sun
Leaving undone,
What be begun.
The Spu^ious Flames suc^^t up from Sli^e and Earth,
To their first low birth
Resigns and brings:
They shoot their Tinsil Beams and Vanities,
Threading with those false Fires, th^^ may;
But ^^^ you stay,
And see them stray*
You loose the Flaming Track; and subtle, they
Languish away,
And cheat your Eyes.
Just so ba^e a subl^niar Lovers Heart,
Feeds on loose profane Desire,
May for an Eye
Or Face comply:
But those removed, they will as soon depart,
And show their Art,
And painted fires:
Whilst those by powerful Love refined,
The same continuance have of ^^iss,
Careless to Miss
A Glance or Kiss,
Can with these Elements of Lust and Sense
Freely dispense,
And court the mind?
Thus to the North the Load^iones move,
And thus to them the Enamored Steel Aspires:
Thus they re^pect,
And do affect:
And thus by wi^ged Beams and mutual Fire,
Spirits and Stars conspire
And this is LOVE.
By this you may see the well known Proverb is verified, That all is not Gold
that glisters: A Lady, if she be not vey cautious, may be deceived and cheated,
with the fairest Pretenses, Vows, and all the Languishing Expression with some,
are only as so many Traps and Snares laid to entangle them; and when she is
fastened and more secured, by struggling to get free; then by a too late
Repentance, she sees that all she took for real Affection, was only false and
feigned: But too late Repentance seldom avails: Therefore it is convenient to
be very wary and cautious, whilst she is free. Young Man's Choice made, how to
gain their Mistresses -- Youth it adorned with comeliness and good parts,
naturally taking with the Fair Sex; but they stand so nicely upon their
prerogative, of being courted and sought to with obliging carriage, and humble
Submission; that though they could willingly condescend to meet you half way,
yet will not bate an Ace of their starchedness, and therefore you must take all
opportunities that are convenient to discover your Affection to her, for as
there is no person so unlovely, but thinks her self worthy to be beloved: So is
there a natural inclination in Love to beget Love; and unless in some
particular Exceptions seldom altogether fails. If not so much kindness be
procured, yet at least, so much commiseration as gives an appitite to
condescension, especially where Love is recommended with such becoming
importunity, as will admit of no denial, when Rhetoric is not strained by
unfit or Extravagant Expressions; but such words flow from your Lip^ as seem
only to be dictated by Affection, wherein the heart has the greatest, and the
wit no other share than to give them a moving pronunciation, wherein such
constancy must be observed as may give the sublimest Evidence of your
passionate and languishing desires; for Women being very (...) that this is
that, wherein their strength lies, and that they have no likelihood of ever
having such advantage, as when the Life and Death of you, depend upon their
smiles or frowns; or take pleasure in letting you see they are not so easy to
be won, and will try many ways to fret and disturb you, that they may prove
what humor you are of, and how you can bear such usage: Therefore, finding
your Mistress thus bent, it behooves you to summon all your Patience, that
nothing unruly, uneasy, or extravagant, may appear to give her disgust, and
lessen her opinion of you; though she keep you long in doubts and fears, and
makes as many windings and doublings as a Hair, to try whether you will loose
the Scent, and give over the Pursuit; but in this you have new hopes, for when
she comes to such often shifting, be assured that Love has almost run her down,
and she cannot hold out much longer Some indeed have a Pride to be Wooed, and
after long Service and attendance, the poor Lover almost heartbroke, and out of
hope, sneaks, which gives her cause to Triumph, as thinking she can never
better revenge the injuries done to her Sex by Men, than in such disgraces; for
she will not have this treasured up in the dark, but glories that the World is
a Witness of the defea^^ she gives, when in the midst of all your gallantry and
cost bestowed; you are routed Horse and Foot, by a Fair Enemy that gives you no
other reason, why she is so cruelly severe, but becuse she will be so, though
in the end perhaps she is foiled herself by some unexpected Arrows sent from
cupids Quiver, to let her know she is subject to his Empire. -- You must
therefore in such cases, deal with those sort, as Stalkers do with bold
Partridges, give them time, till they may be brought about again. For those
that are of this humor have a certain inconstancy attending them, that will
weathercock them about; though they stand to the col^ North to day, the point
may alter to the warm South tomorrow; you must not in your Love be too close
handed, nor too extravagant, but present, as you see opportunity, what you
think most taking and agreeable with her humor, perhaps she will re^use it,
if it be of any considerable value, because she will not have as yet, such a
ponderous Obligation laid on her, yet it will make an impression in her mind,
and induce her to believe your Love is Cordial, when she sees you not only
sacrifice words that cost you nothing, but those things that are dear and
precious to you. If she takes, then the Obligation is Incumbent on her part to
make you some suitable return; and if she puts you to your choice, we may
easily tell without consulting the Stars that you will ask her Love, and that
being gained, her self follows, and then you have your Presents into the
bargin, how rich and valuable soever they were; and pray where then is the loss
in all this? These Presents during your Courtship will be frequently obvious to
her, and become the opportunest Orators in your behalf; and for this cause your
costly treats must be of little use, that are almost forgotten as soon as the
taste is off the palate, though some of them spend more than would purchase
considerable Presents, that are lasting Obligations. Privacy in Courtship if it
may be obtained always wins the happiest moments of your advantage? for the
Fair one, though she may seem impatient of such a retirement and urge her same,
may suffer by it: Yet she will even when she pretends to be disturbed, listen
with a kind of a pleased attention; there can be but a few found who are not
proud of Adulation, -- You must however consider after all this, not to behave
your selves unmanly, or unseemly. If Cupid comes not timely to your aid, and
compells by his uncontrol'd prerogative the stubborn fair one to yield to the
accomplishment of your desires, but make as fair a retreat as stands best with
your Reputation; avoiding in any degree to cast Reflections on her whom you
have loved; for that will not only betray your weakness, but an imputation of
Malice will be assigned by the Censorious, who will apply the Fable of the Fox
and the Grapes, properly to your circumstance. It is more noble to let the
World see, that you had integrity in your intentions, and were rather
unfortunate than base, that your Love was pure, though at last killed by
disdain, and that you patiently bare her scorns and frowns with a fortitude
becoming a generous Lover, though you diserved them not; which will redound to
your p^^^ and perhaps another as amiable as she, taking pity upon your wrongs
and sufferings, may be induced thereby to be more kind. -- Yet laying aside the
supposal of your being rejected, and your obtaining what you desire; yet seem
not extravagantly overjoyed, for that betrays a weakness and unsteadfastness of
the mind, but rather be considerately joyful, observing the Golden mean of
moderate Freeness, not to Launch out into such an excess of Exhileration as may
render you suspected to the sober part of mankind, nor guilty of any such
proneness as may justly censure* you to the censures of the Wiser: For as the
day of Marriage should be the day of rejoicing, so it is an abundant of folly
to suffer the Tides of happiness to Swell so high as to overflow the banks at
such a rate, that when it Ebbs again, it can scarcely return with any force.
Moderation is the medium between Extremes, and renders the Joys most lasting
and comfortable; We will not in this place mention any thing relating the
expenses of a Wedding. Yet we would not have any so much Inebriated with the
transport of his happiness, as to run into such extravagancies as may prove
injurious and prejudicial to him; when he cools, and considers that a lesser
charge would have given as large a satisfaction, whilst others therefore wish
you joy; cast it in your minds, that the foundation must be in your selves, and
that likely to be most, which so begins that it may hold out: Let the fear of
God be always before your Eyes, and give not any countenance to idle
Talebearers, who as the Agents of the Enemies of Mankind do too frequently
labor to sow dissension and discontents between those whom God has joined
together in the holy Nuptial bands. Young men, Admonitions to them in sundry
matters highly concerning them. -- Youth is rightly compared to the gaudy
Spring, shooting forth with Herbs and fragrant Flowers, whilst the Earth grows
proud of her verdent Livery Embroidered, and Enaml'd over with more various
Colors than Iris bow which paints the Sky after an Evening shower. Young Men
are the hopeful Plants that sprout up in the World; supplying the Vacancy of
those that Times Impartial Hand cuts down, least fruitful Lands should become
Deserts; but those Olive branches cannot be multiplied till the fruitful Vine
is spread upon the Wall of the House, it is the Allusion the Royal Psalmist
makes to a virtuous Wife and Children: And since the choice of such a Wife,
that should produce him the other as the substantial Comforts and Sollace of
his Life, we shall endeavor to assist our Batchellour in his choice by such
directions, as if he follow them, will not sail him. -- Young Men are many
times so blinded with passion, Young Man's choice of a good Wife as to Birth,
and a good Name.
and set on fire with the blazes of beauty, that they have not Patience to
deliberate, or see with the eyes of their Reason, that not minding the path
they tread, they rush upon snare of misfortune, and fall into dark pits of
discontent, more admiring in the heat of their Love, or rather Lustful desires,
a fair outside, than the inward beauty of the mind, which oversight gives him a
too soon, and likewise a too late Repentance at one and the same time; the
first before he expected it, and the latter when it cannot be remedied; to
avoid which, let our young Batchellour be wary and cautious in his choosing,
seeing it is the greatest business of his Life, next to the concernment of his
Immortal stale: First then, let him be well satisfied of her Birth, Sober and
Religious Education, Frugality and Industry, which must needs beget her a good
name, and that is highly esteemed and commended by the Wisest of Men: See that
no Material spot or stain, shroud the brightness of it in the least^^, for fear
it should spread wider, and totally Eclipse it. The Cloud we find that rise out
of the Sea, to the appearance of a Man's hand, at last dilated on the expanded
Wings of the Wind; consider in the next place her Relations, and the Esteem
they have amongst Men, not so much for Riches nor Honor, are not able to
secure us a good Name, as they are merely in themselves, but rather blast it
with their Attendants, Covetousness, Ambition, etc. And since in a good Name,
there is a kind of an Immortality, which does over-live us, and intailed by the
surest conveyance upon our Posterity, so as that there is no fine and recovery
allowed in such a case; on the contrary, no time when it is blemished, is
capable of wearing it off, no merit sufficient to obliterate it; therefore it
is the care of a prudent Man, that the Streams flowing down to future
Generations, should proceed from a clear Fountain, he receiving it himself as
uncontaminated, as it ought to be his care to others. In the next place it must
be considered, whether any heriditary Disease have run in the Blood of her
Parents, as the Kings Evil or the like, and so communicate to her and by her
will, be so to her Posterity; for the ^other being tainted, the Children will
be Sickly, P^evish, Wea^l^, and not as we sometimes say, worth the rearing. --
You having taken care of her decent and unspoted Reputation, Young Man's choice
as to her Religion and Beauty.
consider if she be Religiously and Virtuously Inclined, not through Awe, or to
Please her Parents, or Gain Worldly Applause, but so inclined from the inbred
motions of the Soul, really and without color or dissimulation, and then she
will not do any thing that is unbeseeming a good Wife, for Religion when
sincere, will not suffer us to do any thing that is amiss without checking us;
our Conscience when we are in too forward a Carreer, will start and make us
retire, that by such means, perceiving into what a dangerous way we were
hasting; being brought to our own default, we may recover the scent of that we
were running from, and likely to lose those that Love and Fear God; will always
Love and Cherish and yield suitable Obedience to their Husbands, because it is
his Commandment they should do so: And in such a choice consists the happiness
of a Marriage Life; but we fancy we hear it urged that these Endowments and
Advantages are not sufficient unless there be Beauty and Riches into the
bargain: Well, these we must allow, are things not Improper to consolidate the
Comforts of Life, but take our words for it, Young Gamsters, to have all these
together, you must play very high and warily, for such a chance is not always
lighted upon one Fabric of Mortality; for being accomplished as we have said,
having no deformity, and but different Beauty, she may pass for a good Wife;
but if the smiles of Fortune so Favor, if you are so blessed over and ^^ove; to
get one of a fair Complexion, her Skin as soft as the Down of Swans, Enriched
with Charming Whiteness, her face enclining to a perfect Oval, her* Eyes black
and not the largest Size, possessing all that can be desired in Lovliness,
quick and brightening, full of Love, that with a single glance can dart the
Flame that Sparkles in themselves into the coldest breast; her Mouth small
enclosed with Ruby Portals, and that when it opens either in Speech or seemly
Laughter, it may not only expose Rows of Ivory, out-Vying Orient Pearls, but
affords thousands of new Charms; her Hair like courling Amber, dangling on her
Snowy Shoulders; her Hands and Arms long and small, White as polished
Alablaster; yet more taking by the Azure streams that wantonly Mau^der through
their tempting softness, whilst in her fair Cheeks, the Snowy Lillies and the
blushing Roses strive for Mastery, whilst a thousand soft temptations dance
about her Brows. If such a one, with the other Advantages, can be gained, we
pronounce the Possessor happy. But now Riches lag behind, all these will not do
with some Men, unless they have a great portion into the Bargain; Money is the
glittering white they aim at, the Women they desire, but the Money more. Yet
such Adores of Mammon we cannot Reckon among the number of those that are
lifted under Cupids Banner; their Souls are too sordid to be tinctured with his
generous Flame, which melts such dross, and nobly refines the Minds of Men, and
fits them for sublimer Treasures. Young Man's Choice, as to Portion and Friends.
-- Young Men, we must however, confess, sometimes require Money to fix them in
the World, and can make no figure without it; and having heard that others in
as mean a condition, have raised themselves by good Fortune, are resolved to do
so too, if they can. Where, though we cannot in Conscience Rank these among
Passionate Lovers; yet seeing we only undertake to give good Advice, it is but
reasonable we should help them out at a dead Lift. -- You then that purpose to
raise your Fortunes by a Wi^e, must be daring in your Enterprises, but not too
Audacious; look high, but not to impossibilities; for where it is possible,
such an Application may prove successful beyond your Expectation, and if it
should do otherwise, the discredit is the less to be disappointed in an Arduous
attempt. If you can handsomely fix upon a growing Fortune, some Person whose
Relations by prospering in their way, may make a fair Addition to the present
Portion, though not over large; it may do all together as well, if not more
successful, because it comes to assist you in your urgent occasions, many times
when you expect it not; how often have we seen those that have been akin to
Estates, though a great way off, have nevertheless enjoyed them, when they
least expected Deaths Kindness; and therefore, though most covet their present
Portions, where there is nothing to be expected beond, are not always to be
preferred; for Money is a disposable commodity, and in the passage does easily
stick to the Hands of those that have the power to transmit it: But Land is an
Apparent, Visible Estate, which the Law has so well and prudently provided,
for, that it cannot be diverted or concealed. -- Young Men Marrying Wives,
though with a small Fortune, whose Friends have been much Interested in
business, and able to advance, have found it better than a Portion, especially
the Wife being Frugal and Industrious, the good word and Countenance of a
Relation, has furthered many, though they have kept at a Distance. There is
moreover a kind of a Smock-Symony, that has proved very gainful, which in this
case may be allowed, though not in others; when a Man may be Son in Law, or
Kinsman to the next good Benifice, or Place that falls, or by the reflection of
the Sun shining on such a Friend, he may be made more lightsome and perspicuous
to the view of those whom he is desirous should see him. Y^oland, a young Lady
Heiress to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, as descended from Godfrey of Bulloign; She
was married to the King of Cicily, who thereupon joined the Arms of Jerusalem
to his, and bore the Title, till in process of time, it came to the House of
Austria, the Kings of Spain; to this present time stiling themselves Kings of
Jerusalem. Yeolante, a Norman Lady, exceeding well skilled in Music and
Painting, as likewise other Arts and Sciences. Ymena, a Scicilian Lady, who
when the Streams of flaming Sulpher issued from Mount Aetna, almost as far as
Catana, over-throwing diverse Villages, took her sick Husband upon her back, and
made her way through the Ruins and Danger, to carry him to a place of Safety,
not forsaking him, though she was burnt and scorched very miserably in diverse
places, till he was out of danger.
Z.
Zenobia, Queen of the Pal^^rians; she was married to Odenatus, being a very
Warlike Woman, taking usually the care and charge of the Army upon her self,
marching on foot at the head of it in heat and cold, going completely Armed
with a flowing Plume of Feathers on a Silver Helmet; so that She gained many
great Victories, whilst her Husband rested supinely in his Palace, and
carelessly took his ease. -- Zenobia succeeded O^edatius, in the Kingdom of
Syria, and waged mighty Wars; insomuch that the Romans in her time having got a
great part of Asia, and covetous of Syria, in which they had obtained some
footing, surpised, and took her Prisoner, though not without much difficulty:
But this Captivity was so far from depressing her Noble Spirit, that it rather
raised it to true greatness, in contempt and scorn of those that had the power
over the Liberty of her Body but not of her mind; nor would she be brought to
condescend to any thing below the Majesty and Grandeur of a Queen: She was
extremely well skilled in Philosophy, which gained her, together with her other
Noble Parts, so great an esteem and veneration, That the Senate by allowing her
a Palace, and suitable attendance on the Banks of the River Tyber; when she
was invited to hear public Orations, not forgetting her state, She appeared
with a Golden Helmet circled with Rays on her Head, a Purple Mantle flowing on
her Shoulders, buttoned with precious Stones; She was likewise happy by being
exquisitely skilled in the Greek and Arabian tongues, and those of many other
Nations that bordered her at the time of her Captivity; She had two Sons,
Timolaus and Hermolaus, whom She instructed and brought up so well, that they
became an Ornament even to Rome, at that time, the very Center of Learning; and
are very respectfully mentioned by Volateran, a good Author. In Oratory She
surpassed all Women of her Age, and came to be so much esteemed, that the Roman
Matrons seeing themselves so much outdone by an Asian Lady, they esteeming at
that time all but themselves in a manner Barbarians, could not cover their Envy
toward her; but She little regarding it, lived and dyed in honor. Zeal Rules
and cautions to Ladies concerning it, especial^y what is to be considered in
diverse particulars as to a go^ly Zeal.

Zeal, though it be good in it self, is frequently abused by mistakes and
absurdities; but when it is pure, Streaming from an uncorrupted Fountain, it is
highly to be prized. That Zeal is only good which in servent Love has temperate
Expressions: For let the Affection swell up as high as it can, yet if it run
over i^to irregular and unaccountable Actions, it will need many, yet have but
few excuses. -- Zeal must spend its greatest heat principally in those things
that more immediately concern our selves; but with great care and restraint in
those that concern others. Remember always that Zeal is something proceeding
from Divine Love, when true: And that it therefore must contradict no Action of
Love: Love to God includes love to our Neighbor; and therefore no pretense of
Zeal for God's Glory, must make us uncharitable to one another. -- zeal in the
ins^ances of our own Duty and personal Depor^ment, is more safe than in matters
of Counsel and Actions; besides, our just Duty ^^nding toward the perfection
it mains, is beholding to Zeal, for helping it to move more swiftly; but where
Zeal is unwary, it creates trouble, and sometimes danger, as in case it be
spent in too forward Vows of Chastity, and restraints of natural Innocent
Liberties. -- but let Zeal be as devout as it will, as seraphical as it will in
the direct Address and intercourse with God, there is no danger in it; do all
the parts of your Duty as earnestly as if all the Salvation of Mankind, the
Confusion of the Devils, and all you hope or desire did depend upon every one
Action. Let Zeal be seated in the will and Choice, and regulated with prudence
and a sober Understanding, not in the Phancies and Affections, for they will
render it only full of Noise and Empty of profit, when the other will take it
deep and smooth, material and devout; that Zeal to be sure, is safe and
acceptable, which directly increases Charity. Let your Zeal, if it must be
Expressed in Anger, be always more severe against your self, than against
others, which will distinguish it from Malice and Prejudice.

Zenobia, Wife to (...) mi^tus the Iberian King, her Husband being forced by
T^idates King of Armenia, to fly his Country; she accompanied him, though great
with Child, thorough Woods and Deserts* but finding her self unable to endure
the Fattigue longer, she entreated him to kill her, that she might not fall
into the Hands of the Enemy, and be made a Captive, which along while he
deferred, but seeing her Faint and Languish, he run his Sword into her Body,
and thinking she had been Dead, left her; but being found by some Shepherds,
she was carried to the City of Artaxates and there cured of her Wound, and her
Quality afterward being known, Tiridatesse ^^^t for her, and treated her very
kindly, praising her for the Love and Constancy she bo^e toward her Husband,
and for her sake, caused him to be fought out, and restore^ to his Kingdom. Zoe
Daughter to Constantine the Younger, she was given in the Marriage to Romanus
the third Emperor, but not capable of satisfying her Desires, she got him
privately strangled, and Married Michael Paplilagon, to whom for his
H^ndsomness and Proportion of body, she took a Main Fancy to, as working She
see him in his Shop, working at the Gol^-Smiths Trade, of which Prosession he
was: But he being weak in Mind, though strong of Body, committed the Affairs of
the Empire to his Brother, John, who was more stirring and Active, and he
working upon his weak Temper, at last persuaded him to turn Monk, which he had
no sooner done, but the Lustful Empress, to cool her Heat, was Cloystered in a
Monastery, and John Proclaimed Emperor in the East.
FINIS.

