THE DYING MAN'S Last Sermon. OR, The Fathers last Blessing. Left, and
bequeathed as a Legacy unto his Children, immediately before his Death. Being
comfortable Meditations and Preparations for the day of death; which for the
worth of them are more worthy to be written in letters of Gold, then with Ink
and Paper.

The twelfth Edition with Additions, By ANDREW JONES, a servant of Jesus Christ.

Job 14.1, 2. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days and full of trouble.
He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not.

London, Printed for Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner. 1665.

THE FATHERS last Blessing, Left and bequeathed as a Legacy unto his Children a
little before his Death.
THe life of Christian is, or rather should be, a continued daily meditation
on, or a preparation for the day of his death. The first man living was called
Adam Genesis 2. which in the original signifies a clod of red earth: and he was
arrayed and clothed by God with the skins of dead beasts, and adjudged to the
Earth to dig and delve in it, God would have his very Name, his Apparel, his
Employments, to be continual remembrancers of his original, and premonitours of
his mortality. O that men were wise, that they understood this, that they would
remember their latter end! For whatsoever a man's Wisdom, Birth, Beauty,
Strength, or State be, his foundation is in the Dust: Dust thou art, and unto
Dust thou shall return. Genesis 3.19. There seems to be a vaste difference between
a Cedar and a Shrub, a Vine and a Bramble, so long as they both grow together,
but cut them down and burn them, and their ashes will be one and the same. In
this mortal life, some men sit upon the Throne, others are grinding at the
Mill; some go clothed in purple, and fare deliciously every day as Dives did;
and others like Lazarus, lie at rich men's gates, and have not so much as the
crumbs of their table: but in the Grave there is no difference, there the poor
and the rich are all one; the Worms feed as well on rich Dives, as on poor
Lazarus: Kings and Emperors must submit to Death, and lay down their Crowns
and Scepters at the Grave.

The Daughters of Jerusalem, as the Prophet Isaiah says in the third Chapter
and sixteenth Verse, which walk with stretched forth necks; and wanton enticing
eyes, mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet, must at last
drop into the grave. And they that glory in the nobleness of their Birth and
Blood, must make their Beds in the Dust, and aknowledge Corruption for their
Father, and the Worms for their Mother. Why then should sinful Dust and Ashes
be proud. For we brought nothing with us into this world, and it is most
certain we shall carry nothing with us out of this world, as the Apostle says,
1 Timothy 6.7. And holy Job says, Job 1.21. Naked came we out of our mothers womb
and naked shall we return, etc. And the Apostle says, Hebrews 9.27. It is
appointed for all men once to dye. There is nothing more certain then Death,
and yet nothing more uncertain: most certain it is we must all dye, but when,
where, or how we must dye, that is altogether uncertain.

We read in the Scripture that all the Fathers dyed, Genesis 5. Adam the first man
dyed; and Mechuselah the eldest man he dyed also. Abraham the friend of God,
and father of all the faithful, he dyed, as you may read, Gen 25.8 And Abraham
gave up the ghost, and dyed in a good old age, an old man and full of years.
David a man after Gods own heart, who triumphed over all the host of the
Philistims, and slew Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.49 yet was overcome by death, as you may
read, 1 Kings 2.10. And Solomon the wisest of men was constrained to submit
unto death as you may see, 1 Kings. 11.43. And Moses the servant of the Lord,
he dyed, Deuteronomy. 34.5. And what man is he that lives and shall not see death?
For as wise men dye, (says the Psalmist, Psalm 49.10.) so likewise the fool,
and the brutish person. We all, like the Disciples, run fast, who shall come
first to the Sepulcher. We are no sooner born but we begin to dye. Man that is
born of a Woman is of few days, He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down,
Job 14. 1, 2. In the morning they grow up and flourish, in the evening they are
cut down and withered, says Moses, Psalm 90. ver. 9. And holy Job says, There
is an appointed time for man upon earth, and God has set bounds, beyond which
he cannot pass, Job 7.1. At the end of his appointed time he must dye; yet the
time when is very uncertain, as also the manner how: For one dies in his full
strength, and another in the bitterness of his soul. God will have us ignorant
of the day of our death, that we might be ready every day. We are but Tenants
at will, and know not how soon our great Lord and Landlord may eject us. Death
surprised Abel in the field, Genesis 4.8. Ely siting at the door. 1 Samuel 4.18. and
Jobs Children a feasting, Job 1.18. Herod sitting on his throne, Acts 12.33.
And as death it self is uncertain, so is the manner also uncertain; there is a
natural death, and there is a violent death; a natural death is when a man, as
a lamp goes out, because there is no more oil left to feed it; and a violent
death is when the soul is as it were thrust out of the body by some untimely
accident. There is a timely death, when a man comes to his growth, in a full
age, as a shock of corn comes in his season, which every godly man does,
though he dye never so soon, or never so young. And there is also an untimely
death, (that is) when a man is cropped or cut off as an ear of Corn before it be
harvest. And there is a lingering death, when the soul is besieged with
sickness, and so starved out of his habitation. And there is a sudden death,
which strikes without giving warning, from which the Lord deliver us, And there
is also a quiet death, a departing in peace, when the soul does as it were
steal out of the body.

Josiah he ours by the wound of an arrow, 2 Chronicles. 35.23. Abimelech by the tall
of a stone, Judge. 9 53. Wicked proud Jezabel is eaten up of dogs, 2 Kings 9 36.
There are thousands of casualties and discases, and no man living knows what
shall be his end: For unto God the Lord belong the issues of death, Psalm.
68.20. There is but one way into the world, but there are a thousand ways out
of the world. And we may all say of death as David of Ahimaaz, he is a good man
and brings good tidings.

For first, the death of the body frees us from the body of death, the
Remainders of corruption.

Secondly, the death of the body frees us from the misery and encumbrances of
this life. So many are the miseries and afflictions of this life, that were it
not for the hope of heaven, it would be worse then hell it self; cross
afflictions come as fact upon its as Jobs Messengers. The life of man is tike a
Winters day, short and very cloudy: Few and evil are the days of this life,
Genesis 45 9 Man that is born of a Woman is but of few days, but full of
troubles, Job 14.1, 2. Lastly, death translates us from a prison to a palace,
from a Scaffold to a Paradise, from a vale of miseries to a away all tears from
our eyes, Rev. 21.4. Where there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain; where we shall be perfectly free
from all sin: therefore may we say with Solomon, Better is the dead then the
living. And with St. Paul, To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil.
1.27.

Every man with Balaam desires to dye the drath of the righteous, Numb. 23.10.
and in this they desire well: For to dye well is a point of the highest
concernment in the world; because either eternal life or eternal death depends
upon it; for as the tree falls, so shall if lie. But to dye well is not
attainable, unless we have first learnt the art of living well. A fair ^ay Bay
have a foul evening, but a good life cannot have a bad death; for as David
says, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace; therefore it is good always to be in readiness for death;
and whenever the will of the Lord is, willingly and cheerfully to submit unto
it: for it is written, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord,
for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. And. if we be
dead in Christ, we shall also rise with Christ, Romans 6.8. For when Christ who
is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4.

And now my Son, as I have leisure and opportunity enough, so have I cause more
then enough to meditate and prepare for death. I bless God, neither my
prosperity nor my adversity has made me a stranger to the thoughts of
Mortality: for meditating on, and preparing for death, is never unseasonable,
although the time and manner of death be always very uncertain. I bless God I
am not so, old as to be weary of life, nor so bad as to be either afraid to
dye, or ashamed to live: my afflictions make me even sometimes desire to dye;
but when I consider that it is the glory of a Christian to dye daily, I desire
to conquer death by faith, and hopes of a better life. Blessed be God, I can
look upon the sting of death as unpoisonous, although it may be sharp, because
I know my Redemer Jesus Christ has taken it away by his death. I can say. and
that truly; I never found so much life of Religion, the feast of a good
conscience, as I have done since I came to converse so nearly with the thoughts
of death. I do wholly desire to depend upon God, and submit to his will, both
in life and death. I shall not think my life too long or too tedious, if God by
prolonging it shall be pleased to give me fresh opportunities to do good
thereby; neither shall I think my death too soon, whenever the will of the
Lord is to call for me: it is my honor and my erceeding great comfort that I
can go as willingly to my grave, as to a bed of down, or roses; the will of God
has confined and concluded my will, I shall have pleasure in dying; for death
cannot deprive me of more then I am willing to lose when God sees it fit, whose
mercy I am confident will abundantly reward my loss, with the joys of heaven.

My Son, the God of heaven and earth be thy portion; these are my last words,
for now the time is come, that I must leave this world and go to a better:
hitherto as a Father have I protected and directed you; but now my time being
come, my days being but a span long, I must go hence, and shall be no more
seen, Psalm 39.13. See therefore that you serve the Lord with all singleness
and uprightness of heart in godly sincerity, and he will be a Father unto you
in my stead. Keep a good Conscience all the days of your life, no to others,
as you would have others to do to you; For that is the Law and the Prophets,
says our blessed Savior, Mat 7. 12. And then when the time shall come, (which
although you be young now, you know not how near it may lodge at this present;
for many are living now that must dye to morrow, who would weep if they knew
they had so short a time to live) that when you shall lie upon your deathbed,
death may not a frighten you, but may appear unto you (as blessed be God it
does now unto me) not in his ugly shapes and deformities, but stingless as a
friend; thus shall you have comfort within you, that shall rejoice you when all
out wards comforts sail you (...) then every pain you feel shall be but as a
pleasure unto your, because it shall prevent the pains of hell: then the grave
shall not appear loathsome unto you, but sweet, because it was the Lords bed, I
bless God, I find the truth of this upon my own soul; and O that the mercies
of God to me might move you and all others to love him, and to serve him to
your lives end. And I charge thee before God, before whom I am presently to
appear, that you honor God above all things daily and principally: let him be
thy fear, and let him be thy dread, let him be thy counselor, the joy and
delight of thy soul; and be sure thou set God always before thy face, so will
he be a lanthorn to thy feet, and a guide to thy paths. Labor strongly to
suppress vice, and cralt virtue, strive to be in love with goodness; remember
that thou must give an account of each idle hour, and very idle word, as our
Savior says, Matthew, 12.36. Let all thy actions then proceed from a good
conscience, for thou shall never thrive by such ways and means as God has
accursed; for that is a miserable gain that is gotten by the less of thy soul.
For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul.
Matthew 16.26. Be always the same in the sight of God, for he sees all men's
actions be they never so secret: as thou appearest to be in the sight of men,
take heed thou give no aid nor assistance to any wicked words or works, neither
countenance wicked men in the least with thy company; for the faults of those
whom thou favourest will be imputed to thee. Be not a follower of those that
enrich themselves by unjust gain, for it is better to be poor with honesty,
then rich by wickedness. Account that day lost in which thou have not done or
learnt some good. Be more careful to keep thy word then thy money: acquaint thy
self with such as are good and virtuous: look upon every thing here below as
very uncertain, so shall thou not rejoice overmuch in thy prosperity, nor be
oversad or dismayed in adversity. And what counsel I give thee here for the
present, be sure thou treasure it up in store for the time to come.

My Son. says Solomon, Prove. 1. etc. Hear the instruction of thy Father. Hear
ye children the instructions of a Father, and attend to know understanding,
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. Then shall thou understand righteousness, judgment, and equity, yea,
every good path. Walk in the ways of good men, and keep the paths of the
rightenous; for the upright shall dwell in the Land, and the perfect shall
remain in it. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and transgressors
shall be rooted out. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee, bind them about thy
neck, write them upon the tables of thy heart, so shall thou find favor and
good understanding in the sight of God and man. Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Happy is the man that finds
wisdom, that gets understanding, for the merchandise of it is better then
silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold. She is more precious then rubies,
her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree
of life to them that lay hold on her, and happy is every one that retains her.
My Son keep sound wisdom and discretion, and let it not depart from thine eyes,
so shall it be life to thy soul, and grace to thy neck. Then shall thou walk in
thy way safely and thy foot shall not stumble. When thou lie down thou shall
not be afraid, for the Lord shall be thy confidence. Withhold not good from
them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it. Enter not
into the path of the wicked, go not in the way of wicked men; avoid it, pass
not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Turn not to the right hand nor to the
left, remove thy foot from evil. Be not over hasty to get riches, but consider
it is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich, and he adds no sorrow to it.
Let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the
day. Be not among wine-bibbers, nor among riotous eaters of flesh for the
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall cloathe a
man with rags. Look not upon the wine when it is red, when it gives its color
in the cup; for at the last it stingeth like a serpent. Devise not evil against
thy neighbor, for he that devises to do evil, shall be called a mischievous
person. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad
when be stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him. Give not thy
strength unto women, nor thy words to that which destroys Kings. It is not
for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes strong drink; lest they drink and forget
the Law. Open thy mouth for the dumb, open thy mouth: judge righteously, and
plead the cause of the poor and needy. Say not thou what is the cause that the
former days were better then these, for thou do not wisely imagine
concerning that, but consider the work of the Lord; for who can make that
straight which he has made crooked, Eccles. 7.10, 13.

And further, my Son I would have thee to consider seriously of what I have
said, and remember this as the last words of thy dying Father: Fear God and
keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. For God will bring
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil, Eccles. 12.13, 14.

Thus having briefly admonished thee in the words of the Wiseman, I shall
spend out my last breath in a word or two more, and I have done: it is some
refreshment to my fainting spirits to consider how you have begun and spent
some years in the experience of troubles, and exercise of patience; and indeed
I had rather you should be good and afflicted, then great and socond in the
world, I hope God has designed you to both, having so early put you on the
exercise of his Grances, Faith, Love, and Patience, which only will dipose
you, so these princley endowments and improvements that may gain you the love
and favor of all those that fear the Lord. With God I would have you begin,
and with God I would have you end: you have begun well, the Lord bless you, go
on end prosper; piety will make you prosperous, at least it will keep you from
being miserable, Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of the life to come, 1 timothy 4.8. Nor is he much a
loser that loses all yet saves his own soul. I trust you have already tasted
of that bitter cup whereof I have so deeply drunk. Above all, I would have you,
as I hope you are already, well grounded and settled in Religion, and the ways
of God, in which I charge you to persevere; for unless you be well grounded and
settled in Religion, you shall never want temptations to destroy you. Therefore
take here of averting any Faction whatsoever, for I have observed, that the
Devil of Rebellion does turn himself commonly into an Angel of Light and
Reformation: when some men's consciences accuse them with Sedition and Heresy,
they like the old Serpent pretend new light, and stop its mouth with the name
and noise of Religion; and when Piety pleads for Peace and Patience, then they
cry out Zeal, Zeal. Be sure always to keep up wellgrounded Piety, and such
Fundamental Truths as mend both hearts and lives of most men: and with an equal
eye and impartial hand, distribute competent rewards to such as by well-doing
shall deserve them, which will undoubtedly gain you both the hearts and savours
of the best, yea, and the most too, who thought they be not good themselves
will be glad to see the works of virtue sweetened by temporal rewards.

And once more I do require you, and entreat you, as a Father, as a dying
Father; that you never suffer your heart to receive the least dissatisfaction
to the truth of Religion now established, which I have by experience found to
be the best in the world, and nearest agreeing to the word of God. Happy times
I have will attend you. The Lord bless you, and establish your soul in right
ousness, that as you grow in years, so you may grow also in wisdom and goodness
in grace and favor both with God and man. The Lord bless you, and make his
face to shine upon you. And now behold I am ready to be offered up, and the
time of my departure is at hand, I bless God I can say as St. Paul did, 2 Timothy
3.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith; henceforth therefore there is said up for me a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteorus Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me
only, but to all them also that love his appearing. And now I leave you, and
go before you to a better Kingdom; and inheritance that is incorruptible and
undefiled, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. which the Lord has prepared for
me, and me for it, through the only and alone merits of my only and all
sufficient Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whose blessed protection and
mercy, I commend and leave you: and so farewell till we meet, if not on Earth,
yet in Heaven.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, The
Christians Blessed Choice. Likewise Christ's first Sermon. also, Christ's last
Sermon. And the Christians best Garment. Also Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror.
And the School of Grace. Also, A warning piece to the Sloathful, Idle,
Careless, Drunken, and Secure Ones of these last and worst of times. Very godly
Books, and are but three pence price.

Likewise 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. The dreadful character of
drunkard. 3. Doomsday at hand. 4. The Fathers last Blessing to his children.
5. The sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. 6. The Black Book of Conscience.
7. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. 8. The Plain Man's Plain Pathway to Heaven. 9.
Death Triumphant. 10. The Charitable Christian.


All very necessary for these licentious times, and each of them being but of
two pence price They are to be sold by Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion
near Pye-Corner.


