The Dreadful Character of a DRUNKARD. Or, the most odious and beastly Sin of
DRUNKENNESS described and condemned. Showing the fearful Judgments that have
befallen notorious Drunkards: with brief Exhortations to persuade men from that
Swinish and abominable Sin.

The tenth Edition, by Andrew Jones, a lover of Sobriety

1 Cor. 6.10. Drunkards shall not inherit the Kindome of Heaven.



London, Printed for Eliz. Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner. 1663.

Courteous Reader.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, The
Christians blessed Choice. Likewise Christ's first Sermon. Also Christ's last
Sermon: And the Christians best Garment. Also Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror.
And the School of Grace. Also, A warning-piece to the Sloathful, Idle,
Careless, Drunken, and Secure Ones of these last and worst of times. Very godly
Books, and are but three pence price.

Likewise, 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. Doomsday at hand. 3. The
dreadful character of a drunkard. 4. The Fathers last Blessing to his children.
5. The sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. 6. The Plain Man's Plain Pathway
to Heaven. 7. The Black Book of Conscience. 8. Peter's Sermon of Repentance. 9.
The Charitable Christian. 10. Death Triumphant.


All very necessary for these licentious times, and each of them being but of
two pence price. They are to be sold by Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion
near Pye-Corner.

The Dreadful Character and Condition of a DRUNKARD.
Habakkuk 2.15, 16. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy
bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look on his
nakedness.

Thou art filled with shame for glory, drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be
uncovered; the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and
shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.


THe Prophet Habakkuk in the foregoing verses of this chapter, having denounced
several woes against several evils and reigning sins, as cruelty and
covetousness, he coms here in this verse to denounce a sad woe against that
most odious and abominable sin of Drunkenness; a sin too too much abounding in
these our days. Woe (says the Prophet) to him that gives his neighbor
drink. The word in the original is, Woe to him that drinks to his neighbor;
that is, with an intent to make him drunk, as the following words do declare,
That put thy bottle to him, and make him drunk also: The word in the
original is, that put thy poison to him; discovering to us the great evil
that is in overmuch drinking, it poisons the soul, and makes the whole man
unserviceable both to God and man.

Now that I may discover unto you the odiousness of this beastly, swinish, and
abominable sin of Drunkenness, I shall first set forth unto you the nature and
condition of this filthy evil, and thereby show you what it is: in the next
place (God willing) I shall endeavor to set forth unto you the odiousness of
this beast-like sin; and then give you some further discoveries thereof, in
showing you, First, how this sin of Drunkenness is hurtful both to our own and
other men's souls. 2. How it is offensive and displeasing to God, and odious to
good men. And then 3. I shall show you how it wounds and destroys both our
good names, our credit, our estates, yea, our all in this life, yea, and
(without the great mercy of God) how it will bring everlasting horror and
confusion upon us both in soul and body to all eternity in the life to come.
And then fourthly and lastly, I shall give you some few (but fearful Examples)
of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance executed upon notorious Drunkards even in
this life, and so conclude in a word or two of Exhortation.

Drunkenness is a flattering devil, a sweet poison (as one says) and a
delightsom sin, which who so delights himself in, is not himself, but a
common shame even to nature it self, and perpetual disgrace to mankind.

And men may be said to be guilty of drunkenness, when they take in either wine
or strong drink beyond measure, so as there follows an intoxication of the
powers of the soul; and this Drunkenness is a sin that procures miserable
plagues and sorrows both to the soul and to the body, inflaming the blood with
unnatural heat, from whence comes Dropsies, Consumptions, and cold diseases,
with untimely deaths: so that many by drinking Healths to others, have drank
away health from themselves; a most abominable practice.

Secondly, drunkenness confounds the memory, dulls the understanding,
distempers the body, defaceth beauty, and hurts the mind: for the heat and
brain being the mediate instruments of the soul, and by drinking distempered
and inflamed, and thereupon arises wicked imaginations, disordered and unruly
affections; from whence also comes stinking breaths, redness of eyes,
weakness, woes, sorrows, wounds, and contentions, and such like, being the
fruits thereof, as Solomon says, Pro. 23, 29 30. In the 29. ver says he, Who
has woes? who has sorrow? who has contention? who has bablings? who has
wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They (says he, v. 30.) that
tarry long at the wine, they that go to the mixed wine.

3. Drunkenness corrupts the blood, drowneth the spirits, and beggars the
purse. The Drunkard (says Solomon, Prove. 23.21.) shall come to poverty. And
further, it inricheth the carcass with Surfets and Dropsies, and turns the very
Blood into water, and the very Soul into froth, swinishly disanimating the
understanding power of the same.

4. Drunkenness causes vomiting and filthiness, of which the Lord himself
complains by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 21.7, 8. speaking of the Priests, he
says, They also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are they out
of the way; the Priests and the Prophets have erred through strong drink, they
are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink, they
err in vision, they stumble in judgment. For all tables are full of vomit and
filthiness, so that there is no place clean.

Now the evil of this abominable sin of drunkenness I shall here set forth unto
you in these three things, First, as it respects God. 2. As it respects other
men. 3. As it respects the drunkards themselves. And first, as it respects God,
and so the sin of drunkenness makes men forget God and his laws, Hos. 13.5,
Prove. 31.4, 5. says Solomon, drinking of wine and strong drink makes men
forget both the laws of God and man. 2. Drunkenness is Idolatry, it sets up
another God, which is a most notorious sin, Phil. 3.19. Whose God is their
belly, says the Apostle, The Babylonians had Bell for their God, a God of
Brass, but drunkards and gluttons make their Bellies their gods, gods of flesh;
their whole thoughts, cares, and endeavors, are only to please their bellies,
their whole course of their life is nothing else but a filthy delight in
drinking and swilling to please their base lusts: they are Belly-gods which
love good liquors, who serve their Bellies; as St. Paul says, Romans 16.11. The
Rabbis were used to say, that he was a Belly-god that drank a quart of Wine.
We have many such amongst us, and do not they that drink healths upon their
knees sacrifice it to those they drink to, and thereby make gods of them. 3.
Drunkards abuse the good creatures of God, which they should use to the honor
and glory of God; these they abuse in the maintenance, pleasing, and pampering
of their own base sensual Lusts and pleasures, which are bitter enemies to God
and his truth, and ought to be mortified, 1 Cor. 10.31. says S. Paul, Whether
ye eat or drink, and whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. What glory
has the Lord when men make swill-tubs of their bellies, and so over-satisfie
themselves with drinking, that they are unfit for motion, either for God or
men, and fit for nothing but to sleep? 4. Drunkenness is a sacrilegious robbing
of God of his Worship. You know we are commanded to honor the Lord our God,
and to serve him with all out hearts, and with all our might, and with all our
strength; but when men have over-cram'd themselves with meat, and over-liquored
their filthy Carcasses with inordinate drinking; how unfit then are these men
thus distempered with drink for the worship and service of God? their heads are
either too heavy or too light, and their hearts are dull and drowsy, and God
may have the drunken carcasses, but as for their hearts and spirits, they have
none then for God; they are then fit for nothing but the devils drudgery, Hos.
4.11. There the Prophet says, Wine and new wine take away the heart; excess or
overmuch either in eating or drinking, causes defects in the service of God:
and as for such persons, God may have a little bodily worship and lip-labor
from them, a few drowsy sleepy performances; but as for spiritual heavenly
service and worship, that is not to be had of them, though the Lord be a
Spirit, most Wise, most Holy, most Great, and most Glorious, who will be
worshipped, if acceptably, in Spirit and in Truth.

Secondly, for the evil of drunkenness, as it respects others. First of all,
drunkenness makes men forget the condition of others; those that give
themselves to this evil of Drunkenness mind not at all the estate or condition
either of Church or State, let come what will come so they may have drink
enough, their pipes and their pots, it matters not what becomes of other. The
Prophet says, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. They eat the lambs out of the flock, and calves
out of the midst of the stalls, they drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves
with chief ointments; but they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph.

2. Drunkenness does exceedingly wrong and impoverish the poorer sort:
drunkards and gluttons are like caterpillars and locusts, which devour that
which should maintain and relieve other: did not men exceed so much in eating
and drinking as they do, there would be more plenty, and more cheapness, and
more relief for the poor then there is; for one drunken beast devours more then
would very well refresh and satisfy a hundred poor people that lie in want and
misery. I dare confidently aver it for truth and I do verily believe it, that
if the poor might have but one quarter of what is spent sinfully, and
superfluously in rioting and drunkenness, I believe, nay, I am confident, I
say, that we should see no Beggars in our streets, nor hear any to complain for
want of bread at our doors. There is a generation, (says Solomon, Pro. 30.14.)
whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth like Knives, to devour the poor
from often the earth, and the needy from among men. And such are the teeth and
jaw-teeth of drunkards and gluttons; they make both bread and drink dear. 3.
Drunkards wrong the chastity of others: who make more lustful attempts, or
commit more fouler acts of uncleanness, then those that delight themselves in
drunkenness? Fullness of drink breeds fullness of sin and fullness of lust;
intemperancy begets incontinency, and after rioting and drunkenness, follows
chambring and wantonness, Romans 13.13. When Lot was filled with wine, then was
he fit for incest, Genesis 19.31, 32, 33. And the drunken Sodomites, of whom the
Text speaks, were guilty of most horrible uncleanness. 4. Drunkenness gives
evil examples to others, they draw in others to follow their own most evil and
abominable filthy practice to intemperancy, in eating and drinking, which is a
very great evil, 1 Pet. 4.14. They think it strange (says the Apostle) that
you run not with them to the same excess of riot. There is a very great
inclination in the hearts of men naturally to follow others in eating and
drinking excessively; they will not only go, but run to it; a little
invitation will serve the turn, they need not to be asked twice: therefore
Solomon counsels his son, Prove. 22.20. not to keep company with
wine-bibbers. One drunkard poisons another with his sin, and men are as it were
poisoned by the evil examples of others. 5. This abominable sin of Drunkenness
brings down heavy Judgments from God, Isa. 5.12, 13. there the intemperancy of
the people is first set down, and then the Judgments that followed thereupon:
They rose up early, and sat up late to follow after strong drink, as too too
many now adays do; from the bed to the Alehouse, and from the Alehouse to bed
again: but verse 13. behold the Judgments of the Lord upon them; Therefore
says the Lord (because of their excessive drinking) my people are gone into
captivity, because they have no knowledge. Their Gluttony and drunkenness made
them both senseless and sensual, and their honorable men are famisht, and
their multitude is dried up with thirst: a most sad (but suitable) judgment.
So likewise Belshazzar, he feasts and revels with a thousand of his Lords; and
that very night when he was in the midst of his jollity, he was deprived of his
Kingdom, and himself also slain; as you may see Daniel 5. He drank Wine and
praised the Gods of Silver, and Gold, of Wood, and of Brass, and that very
night did the Lord cut him off, So 2 Samuel 13. Amnon being drunk was slain by
Absaloms servants. Through drunkenness Benhadad with 32. other Kings were by
the Israelites overcome, 1 Kings 20.11. So likewise David, a man after Gods own
heart, 2 Samuel 11.13. made U^iah drunk, thinking thereby to have covered his
horrid sin of Adultery, for the which he sorely smarted afterward. So Herod,
Mat. 14. in his drunken banquet caused John the Baptist to be beheaded; and
what became of him, he was deposed, and dyed miserably in his exile. So the
Jews, Isa. 5. drunk till they were thirsty, and then Hell was prepared for
them. Through drunkenness even righteous Lots daughters lay with their father,
and so two cursed Nations sprang from their loins, Genesis 19.31. Through
drunkenness Nabals heart dyed within him, 1 Samuel 25.36. Through drunkenness the
Philistines ( Judges 16.25. making sport to themselves with poor Sampson) had
the house pulled down about their ears.

Thirdly, the evil of this most odious sin of drunkenness, as it respects the
drunkards themselves, consists in these five things. 1. It hurts their souls.
2. Their bodies. 3. The whole man. 4. It impoverisheth their estates. And 5. it
disgraces their names, and staineth their credit even in the world.


And first, for the soul, drunkenness clouds and infatuates the understanding,
blindes the mind, and besots the spirits, Isa. 21.7. The Priests and the
Prophets erred through wine, and through strong drink were they out of the way;
the err in vision, and stumble in judgment. Drunkards drown both their wits
and their senses in the Ale-tubs. 2. Drunkenness disorders the Affections; by
overmuch drinking the government of Reason is laid asleep: and so the
affections grow disorderly, and then wanton lusts, lascivious thoughts and
desires travel up and down the Region of the Soul, and overpower and disorders
the affections, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. 3. Drunkenness hinders the activity of gifts
and graces in the soul: when a man is over-laden with any burden he cannot move
nimbly; so when men have over-laden themselves with too much drink, more then
they can well bear, they are altogether unfit for service either for God or
man; they are then fit for nothing but to sleep.

2. Drunkenness is hurtful for the bodies of men: overmuch and excessive
drinking brings sickness, and is destructive to health* almost all the
diseases which men have, come from the abundance of ill humors in the body,
and from whence comes these ill humors, but from intemperancy either in eating
or drinking: take men that are moderate and sparing in the use of the
Creatures, and they are seldom troubled with any disease. Sobriety is the best
friend (...) health, and a greater enemy it has not the^ drunkenness, 1 Cor.
11, 29, 30. The Corinthians were excessive in their eating and drinking and
what says S. Paul of them? For this cause (says he) ver. 30) many among them
were sick and weak. So Hos. 7.5. With bottles of wine the Princes had made the
King sick.

3. Drunkenness is hurtful to the whole man, as 1 by drunkenness a man is
brought into bondage under the Creatures which God has given him, if he had
grace to use them aright, dominion over them. Drunkards are under the tyrany
and bondage of their pots and cups, they are slaves to their drink. 2. By
drunkenness men become worse then the very beasts; the bruit creatures all,
unless dogs or swine, will neither eat nor drink more then what serves to
satisfy nature, neither can you persuade or force them to take more; But
drunkards they drink not to satisfy, but to surfeit nature, Prove. 23.35. When
the Drunkard was beaten he felt it not. Drunkenness bereaves men even of common
sense: The horse and the Ass may teach the drunkards wit, if they had but grace
to consider when they are sober. 3. Drunkenness hastens death. Many I am
persuaded might have lived longer, if they had lived more soberly: drunkenness
shortens men's days. Drunkards drink healths to others, but drink away health
from themselves. Many dye by the Sord, but many more by surfeiting and
drunkenness: the Corinthians excess in drinking sent many of them to their long
homes, 2 Cor. 11.30. Drunkenness either abreviates or takes away the lives of
men: How many have come to untimely ends in their drink? how many are there too
too often killed by men in their drink, and destroyed; one Drunkard kills
another when he is drunk, and so brings himself to the Gallows when he is
sober. How many Casualties do there daily happen to men in their drink? Many a
Drunkard has killed himself in his drink: some I know that have drowned
themselves in their drink: and others by falling have broke their necks in
their drink as they were going home. Drink makes men desperate and valiant for
the Devil, but if they repent not, they shall wish they had been more sober
when they are in hell. 4. Drunkenness makes men very secure and fearless. Come
(said those Drunkards in the Prophet) we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Drunkards do
not consider that when they are at their Cups, they are at the Devils work, and
dancing about the very brink of hell. Ships that are heavy laden sink deep into
the Water, but it over-laden they drown themselves; so men that are over-laden
with drink* sink deep into the sea of carnal security, and for ever hazard the
drowning of their souls in hell. Luke 21.34, 35. says our Savior, speaking of
the end of the world; If your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, that day will come upon you unawares, even suddenly as a snare. 5.
Drunkenness is such a sin as indangers men's eternal estates hereafter: yea, and
certainly without repentance, excludes men from coming to heaven. Be not
deceived (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.) neither fornicators, nor
adulterers, nor thieves, nor covetous nor drunkards shall inherit the kingdom
of God. The rich Glutton you know, Luke 16. was cast into hell, that was his
portion. The Apostle says, Gal. 5.21. They that do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven. What things? Why drunkenness and revillings;
which says the Apostle, are fruits of the flesh, and without repentance, will
for ever cast men's souls into hell: for no drunkard that lives and dies in his
sins, shall ever inherit the kingdom of heaven.

4. This cursed filthy sin of drunkenness destroys the estates of men; it
consumes them to nothing, as Solomon says, Pro. 23.31. The drunkard and the
glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags Many
by drunkenness and gluttony, rioting and revilling in their youth have brought
themselves to extreme poverty in their age; many in their youthful days have
so consumed their Estates in pleasing and pampering their lustful appetites
with Drink, that in their old age they wanted a piece of bread to eat; and then
instead of feasting and rioting, they have been forced for want to fast and
lament for their first abuse of the good creatures of God. The Prodigals excess
among the Harlots brought him to want among the Swine. He, said Solomon, Pro.
21.17. that loves wine and oil shall not be rich; that is, he that loves and
delights in them excessively shall never be rich, but shall come to poverty.

5. Drunkenness wrongs both the names and professions of men; intemperance
brings an ill report upon men. Noah's Drunkenness was a great disgrace unto him.
Prove. 28.7. says Solomon, He that is a companion of riotous men, shameth his
father; and if it be ill then to be companions of such persons, how ill is it
then to be a drunken person? Drunkards shame both themselves and their fathers,
of whom men may say, and that truly, That he is a Belly-god, a mere toss-pot.
The Prophet says, Isa. 28.28. All tables are full of vomit and filthiness; so
that there is no place clean: what a disgrace was this to those Prophets and
Priests? Drunkenness is a night work: They that are drunken (says the Apostle,
1 These. 5.7.) are drunken in the night; it is a work of darkness, and it needs
must disgrace a man. Who will believe or give credit to what a drunken man
says. I beseech you then in the name of Christ, and as you love your own souls,
your goods, and good name, take heed of this beastly sin, and avoid it: as our
Savior says, Luke 21.34. Take heed (says he) to your selves, lest at any
time your hearts are overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. Let us (as
the Apostle says, Romans 13.13.) walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness; let us not be intemperate: why should we pamper up and please our
vile bodies, which must shortly dye and become meat for the worms. The Apostles
rule is, Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

I shall now briefly show you some few, but fearful Examples of Gods judgments
executed upon notorious Drunkards, and so I shall conclude.

On the eighth of February, in the Year 1578. a company of Drunkards, whose
name are recorded as follows: Adam Gibbens, George Keepel, John Keysel, Peter
Hordroff, John Warner, Simon Heamkers, Jacob Hermons, Hermon Frow. These eight
Drunkards, in contempt of the blessed Sabbath, agreed to go to the Tavern on
the Lords Day to be merry; and coming to the house of one Anthony Hodge, and
honest godly man, they called for burnt wine, sack, claret, and what not; the
good man refusing to give them any, advised them to go to Church to hear the
word of God: but they all save Adam Gibbens refused: saying, They loathed that
exercise. Whereupon the Host departed, who being gone to Church, they began to
curse and ban, wishing he might break his neck ere he returned: and wishing the
Devil might break their necks if they went from thence till they had some wine:
whereupon the Devil in the likeness of a young man appeared unto them, bringing
in his hand a flaggon of wine, and so drank unto them; saying, Good Fellows be
merry, you shall have wine enough, you seem lusty lads, and I hope you will pay
me well: who answering, said, They would either pay him, or engage their necks
for it; yea, rather then fail, their bodies and souls: thus those men continued
drinking and swilling so long till they could hardly see one another: at last
the Devil their Host told them, that now they must pay for all, at which their
hearts wared cold; but the Devil bid them be of good cheer, for now they must
drink fire and brimstone with him, in the pit of hell for ever. At which they
Devil brake their necks asunder and destroyed them. And thus ended these
Drunkards their miserable days: which may serve for a Caveat for all drunkards
for ever.

Another example of Gods Judgments was showed upon two Drunkards at a place
called Almain on the fourth of July, 1508, the truth whereof is as follows.
Two drunkards coming into a Tevern, called for wine, which they presently had
of the best; but they disliking it for the newness of it, demanded better: so
they had store of old and new, where they sat swilling and drinking until they
were both as drunk as dogs: then one of them began a carowsing cup to his
fellow, who pledging him, asked who he should drink to: (Quoth this wretched
Drunkard) why, drink to God: upon which he drank a whole Carouse, and pouring
out, he asked his drunken companion, which wine God should drink; who said of
either, of which he would; then having filled up his cup with new Wine, he held
up his hand over his head, as though God should have pledged him indeed;
wretchedly speaking these blasphemous words: God (says he) I would know what
Wine thou love: this new wine is good enough, and too good for thee; if thou
had sent better, better thou should have had: but such as it is, take it,
and carouse it off. But behold the dreadful Judgment of God presently executed
upon this filthy wretch: for having thus stretched forth his hand, the Lord by
his mighty power caused it to stand so steadfast, that the wretched man could
not pull it in again, nor stir his body from the place where he stood; where
for a while he stood in a most fearful manner, his countenance looking most
ghastly and fearful to behold; for he seemed to be alive but stirred not: after
which the people sought to remove him, but could not; then they tied horses to
him to remove him, but could not; then they assayed to burn him, house and all,
but no fire would take hold of it: At which they concluded, that God had made
him a fearful example, and a perpetual spectacle to all notorious drunkards for
ever. And in this very place and manner as you have heard, stands this
blasphemous drunkard to this very day; the other drunkard his companion upon
this, they hanged upon a Gibbet before the the door of the said house. Thus
has the Lord in all ages manifested his sore displeasure against this
notorious beastly sin of drunkenness.

Now then seeing drunkenness is so offensive to God, and brings such great
evils as you have heard upon men in this life, and eternal condemnation in the
life to come; let us then in the fear of God avoid it, as most abominable, evil
and pernicious? for every drunkard is the devils Imp, a very limb of Satan.
Drunkards rather resemble bruit beasts then men: for first, how do their eyes
stare out of their heads? how do they foam and froth at their mouths like
Boars: do not their tongues falter in their mouths? are not their heads as
heavy as milstones? and their wits as it were drowned in their cups: Therefore
howl ye drunkards, and weep for the destruction that shall fall upon you. A
Heathen could say, he was better born then to be a slave to his body. We are
Christians, let us say, we are better born then to dishonor and disorder our
bodies by filthy drunkenness; we should be better born and better bred then to
be slaves to our sensual lusts and affections. It is a saying of our
Tobacconists, when any refuse their smoaky practice, (O say they) he was never
so well bred. O that Christians would say, when any entice them to be drunk,
that they are not so ill bred; that they cannot so disgrace their honorable
calling and profession so much. You have heard now the evil of this most
heinous sin of drunkenness, together with the most manifold miseries and
calamities that attend it: namely, loss of credit, good name, and estate. and
without repentance, eternal loss both of soul and body in hell fire for ever. O
then for the Lords sake, Christians, I beseech you as you love your own
precious souls, fly from this sin as from the devil that will damn you for
ever. I beseech you hate and abhor it; thou art worse then a brast if thou
do not: what (...) will thou endanger the loss of thy estate, and hazard the
health of thy body, and the eternal welfare of thy soul for a little drink, a
little swill? O do not venture the loss of thy soul, thy precious and immortal
soul, for the enjoyment of a little swill, to please thy own base sensual lusts
and affections. O do not drink and quaff away thy soul to hell, thou will
repent thee if thou do, for out of hell there is no redemption. Consider
then betimes in the fear of the Lord, every time thou go to the stinking
Alehouse to be drunk thou go on the Devils score, and he will have his
penniworths out of thee in hell, thou shall then pay the reckoning to him, both
thy soul and body too will then be little enough for the devil; he will not do
as the Alewives use to do, turn you out of doors when you have no money; no, but
he will torment both thy soul and body in hell fire for ever.

I beseech you consider, Alehouses are the devils Academies, the Nurseries of
all vice and Wickedness; the Devil sends men to the Alehouse to be drunk, and
the Alehouse sends men to Hell to be damned: both the Devil and the Alehouse
are beholding to one another for customers; the Devil is the best friend the
Alehouse has, he sends them many a drunken customer; and were it not for the
Alehouse, the devil might want guests in hell. Consider what St. Paul says to
the Corinthians, No drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, unless he
repent. The good Lord awaken every sinful drunkard out of security, and bring
them to repentance and amendment of life. To conclude in a word, Walk honestly
as in the day, as St. Paul says, not in rioting and drunkeness, nor in
chambering and wantonness; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.13. For the grace
of God which brings salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching them to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance
of the great God and our Savior Jusus Christ; Titus 2.13, 14. Whether then ye
eat or drink, or whatever else ye do, do all to the glory of God: to whom be
glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS

