A DECREE MADE AT ROME, The Second of March, 1679. Condemning Some Opinions OF
THE JESUITS And other CASUISTS.

LONDON,

Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown it St. Paul's Churchyard,
1679.

THE PREFACE.
THis Decree which is now so much talked of it France, being sent over to me, I
thought it would not be ungrateful to this Nation to have it reprinted here
with an English Translation; but lest some unwary Readers might make an ill use
of it, I judged it needful to prepare them to it by two Reflections, which from
the reading of the Decree they ought to make.

The first is, That those monstrous Tenets for which we have so often heard the
Casuists of the Roman Church, particularly the Jesuits, accused, are no false
Imputations unjustly laid to their Charge, but are truly delivered by them.
This none can have a face to deny any more, since the Pope and a Congregation
of Cardinals have gathered these Opinions out of the Books of Casuists, and
have thus condemned them. So that our Divines who have charged that Church for
tollerating these impious and immoral Doctrines, are no more to be suspected as
false Accusers, since here we have Witnesses beyond exception, that these
Opinions have been publicly taught by the Masters of the Casuistical Divinity
among them.

Of the following Propositions I desire the Reader may consider the 26. and 27.
by which he will see that those Directors of Consciences, teach, That if a man
is questioned whether he has done a thing that he really did, he may forswear
it, meaning within himself some other thing, or any other way of doing it, or
any addition to what he says, in which cases he does not lie, nor is he
perjured: And a just cause of such Reservation, is, when they are necessary to
save our Life, Honor, or Goods, or for any other act of virtue; so that the
concealment of truth be judged expedient or desirable.

By this Doctrine, suppose a man is examined concerning the Murder of Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey, that was privy to it, he may swear he knows nothing of it,
meaning either that he was not unjustly murdered, or that he was not murdered
with an ill intention, or that he knows nothing of it so as to tell those who
examine him: and there is a very just cause for using these Reservations, since
such denials are intended to preserve the Lives, Honor, and Goods of
Catholics. These being the Opinions of their Doctors, none can wonder if the
People, a great part of whose Devotion it is to obey their Confessors, are
persuaded into such practices.

But to this it may be now opposed, that these Opinions being condemned by the
Pope, we need fear the ill effects of them no more. Upon this I shall make a
second Reflection, which is no less clear than the former; that this
Condemnation is so lame and defective, that notwithstanding it, even those who
submit to the Infallibility of the Sea of Rome, may still hold the following
Positions. I need not desire the Reader to observe that it is above twenty
years since Complaints were first made to the Popes by some of their own
Clergy in France, of the Immoral and Impious Doctrines of the Casuists: but so
prevalent were the Arts, that the Jusuits have used to obstruct any Censure,
that the world has been all this while corrupted with these ill Opinions, which
many Confessors have infused into peoples consciences; whereby it cannot be
doubted but many thousand souls have been lost: and this Sentence which has
been but a week in England, comes too late for them, who are already in another
world, and are answering for the prevarications to which they may have been
persuaded by their Confessors.

But after all this Condemnation, we are not at all secured from the ill
effects of these Opinions. For the Pope does not condemn them as Impious,
Immoral, or contrary to the Laws of God and Nature: Now does he require all
persons under the pain of mortal sin, or as they would not incur the
indignation of Almighty God, to teach these Propositions no more; though that
is the common style of Bulls, in matters of much less concernment. If he had
done it thus, the Condemnation had been of greater Authority; and so all that
believe the Pope infallible had been indeed obiligatory, and indispensable. But
it is of a far milder strain: these Opinions are declared to be at least See
the like remark made on the Censure that Pope Alexander the 7th passed on some
other Propositions, by D. Lloyd in his Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Edmund Bury
Godfrey, p. 32.33.
scandalous and pernicious in practice. How softly and mercifully does his
Holiness treat them. To be Scandalous and Pernicious amounts to no more, but
that such Propositions have ill effects, but does not conclude them to be ill
in themselves. If then the case comes, that these Opinions may have good
effects, the Pope by a faculty may dispense with them, since they are not
declared to be in themselves evil or impious.

All persons are also required neither to defend nor publish them, nor reduce
them to practice: This is only a Prohibition, but no Condemnation. The Pains
are, Excommunication ipso facto, and they are required in the virtue of Holy
Obedience to do so no more. Nothing here of the Law of God and Nature, but only
Holy Obedience: Therefore since the Pope can dispense with all the Laws of the
Church, but more particularly with the Obedience due to himself, it is evident
from hence that all the effect this Decree can have, is only to make it
necessary for Confessors to procure a Faculty dispensing with it, before they
may possess their Penitents with these Opinions: which, how easily it may be
obtained at Rome, is well enough known.

So that by this Decree these two Points are clearly made out, that such
Opinions are maintained by many Casuists in the Roman Communion; and that this
notwithstanding they may be still taught among them.

DECRETUM S. S. D. N. D. INNOCENTII DIVINA Providentia Papae XI. quo 65.
Casuistarum Propositiones ad minus tanquam scandalosas and in praxi perniciosas
damnavit, and sub poena excommunicationis ipso facto, and S. Sedi Apostolicae
reservatae ab ullo defendi vel edi prohibuit.
Feria v. die 2. Martii 1679.
IN GENERALI CONGREGATIONE Sanctae Romanae, and Universalis Inquisitionis
habita In Palatio Apostolico Vaticano coram Sanctissimo D. N. D. Innocentio
Divina Providentia Papa XI. ac Eminentissimis, and Reverendissimis Dominis S.
R. E. Cardinalibus in tota Republica Christiana contra Haereticam pravitatem
Generalibus Inquisitoribus, a Sancta Sede Apostolica specialiter deputatis.

SAnctissimus D. N. Innocentius Papa XI. praedictus ovium sibi a Deo creditarum
saluti sedulo incumbens, and salubre opus in segregandis noxiis doctrinarum
pascuis ab innoxiis a foel. record. Alexandro VII. Praedecessore suo inchoatum
prosequi volens, plurimas propositiones partim ex diversis, vel libris, vel
thesibus, seu scriptis excerptas, and partim noviter adinventas Theologorum
plurium examini, and deinde Eminentissimis, and Reverendissimis Dominis
Cardinalibus contra haereticam pravitatem Generalibus Inquisitoquisitoribus
subjecit. Quibus propositionibus sedulo and accurate saepius discussis eorumdem
Eminentissimorum Cardinalium, and Theologorum votis per Sanctitatem Suam
auditis. Idem Sanctissimus D. N. re postea mature considerata, statuit, and
decrevit pro nunc sequentes propositiones, and unamquamque ipsarum, sicut
jacent, ut minimum tanquam scandalosas, and in praxi perniciosas, esse
damnandas, and prohibendas, sicuti eas damnat, and prohibet. Non intendens
tamen Sanctitas Sua per hoc Decretum alias propositiones in ipso non expressas,
and Sanctitati Suae quomodolibet, and ex quacumque part exhibitas, vel
exhibendas ullatenus approbare.

1. NOn est illicitum in Sacramentis conferendis sequi opinionem probabilem de
volore Sacramenti, relicta tutiore, nisi id vetet lex, conventio, aut periculum
gravis damni incurrendi. Hinc sententia probabili tantum utendum non est in
collatione Baptismi, Ordinis Sacerdotalis, aut Episcopalis.

2. Probabiliter existimo, Judicem posse judicare juxta opinionem etiam minuu
probabilem.

3. Generatim durn probabilitate, sive intrinseaca sive extrinseca quamvis
tenui, modo a probabilitatis finibus non exeatur, confisi aliquid agimus,
semper prudenter agimus.

4. Ab infidelitate excusabitur infidelis non credens ductus opinione minus
probabili.

5. An peccet mortaliter, qui actum dilectionis Dei semel tantum in vita
eliceret, condemnare non audemus.

6. Probabile est, ne singulis quidem rigorose quinquenniis per se obligare
praeceptum charitatis erga Deum.

7. Tunc solum obligat, quando tenemur justificari, and non habemus aliam viam,
qua justificari possumus.

8. Comedere, and bibere usque ad satietatem ob solam voluptatem non est
peccatum, modo non obsit valetudini, quia licite potest apptitus naturalis suis
actibus frui.

9. Opus Conjugii ob solam voluptatem exercitum omni penitus caret culpa, ac
defectu veniali.

10. Non tenemur proximum diligere actu interno, and formali.

11. Praecepto proximum diligendi satisfacere possumus per solos actus externos.

12. Vix in Soecularibus invenies, etiam in Regibus superfluum statui. Et ita
vix aliquis tenetur ad eleemosynam, quando tenetur tantum ex superflou statui.

13. Si cum debita moderatione facias, potes absque peccato mortali de vita
alicujus tristari, and de illius morte naturali gaudere, illam inefficaci
affectu petere, and desiderare; non quidem ex displicentia personae, sed ob
aliquod temporale emolumentum.

14. Licitum est absoluto desiderio cupere mortem Patris, non quidem, ut malum
Patris, sed ut bonum cupientis, quia nimirum ei obventura est pinguis
haereditas.

15. Licitum est filio gaudere de parricidio Parentis a se in-ebrietate
perpetrato propter ingentes divitias inde ex haereditate consecutas.

16. Fides non censetur cadere sub praeceptum speciale, and secundum se.

17. Satis est, actum fidei semel in vita elicere.

18. Si a potestate publica quis interrogetur, fidem ingenue confiteri, ut Deo,
and fidei gloriosum consulo, tacere, ut peccaminosum per se non damno.

19. Voluntas non potest efficere, ut assensus fidei in seipso sit magis
firmus, quam mereatur pondus rationum ad assensum impellentium.

20. Hinc potest quis prudenter repudiare assensum, quem habebat supernaturalem.

21. Assensus fidei supernaturalis, and utilis ad salutem stat cum notitia
solum probabili revelationis; immo cum formidine, qua quis formidet, ne non sit
locutus Deus.

22. Non nisi fides unius Dei necessaria videtur necessitate medii, non autem
explicita Remuneratoris.

23. Fides late dicta ex Testimonio Creaturarum, similive motivo ad
justificationem sufficit.

24. Vocare Deum in Testem mendacii levis non est tanta irreverentia, propter
quam velit, aut possit damnare hominem.

25. Cum causa, licitum est jurare sine animo jurandi, sive res sit levis, sive
gravis.

26. Si quis, vel solus, vel coram aliis, sive interrogatus, sive propria
sponte, sive recreationis causa, sive quocumque alio fine, juret, se non
fecisse aliquid, quod revera fecit, intelligendo intra se aliquid aliud, quod
non fecit, vel aliam viam ab ea, in qua fecit, vel quodvis aliud additum verum,
revera non mentitur, nec est perjurus.

27. Causa justa utendi his amphibologiis est, quoties id necessarium, aut
utile est, ad salutem corporis, honorem, res familiares tuendas, vel ad
quemlibet alium virtutis actum, ita ut veritatis occultatio censeatur tunc
expediens, and studiosa.

28. Qui mediante commendatione, vel munere ad Magistratum, vel Officium
publicum promotus est, poteris curn restrictione mentali praestare juramentum,
quod de mandato Regis a fimilibus solet exigi non habito respectu ad
intentionem exigentis, quia non tenetur fateri crimen occultum.

29. Urgens metus gravis est causa justa Sacramentorum administrationem
simulandi.

30. Fas est viro honorato occidere invasorem, qui nititur calumniam infer,
si aliter haec ignominia vitari nequit; idem quoque dicendum, si quis impingat
alapam, vel fuste percutiat, and post impactam alapam, vel ictum fustis fugiat.

31. Regulariter occidere possum furem pro confervatione unius aurei.

32. Non solum licitum est defendere defensione occisiva, quae acut possidemus,
sed etiam ad queae jus inchoatum habemus, and quae nos possessuros speramus.

33. Lictum est tam haeredi, quam legatario contra injuste impedientem, ne vel
haerediras adeatur, vel legata solvantur, se taliter defendere, sicut and jus
habenti in Cathedram, vel Praebendam contra little possessionem injuste
impedientem.

34. Licet procurare abortum ante animationem foetus, ne Puella deprehensa
gravida occidatur, aut infametur.

35. Videtur probabile omnem foetum, quamdiu in utero est, carere anima
rationali, and tunc primum incipere eandem habere, cum paritur; ac consequenter
dicendum erit in nullo abortu hornicidium committi.

36. Permissum est furari, non solum in extrema necessitate, sed etiam in gravi.

37. Famuli, and famulae domesticae possunt occulte heris suis surripere ad
compensandam operam suam, quam majorem judicant salario, quod recipient.

38. Non tenetur quis sub poena peccati mortalis restituere quod ablatum est
per pauca furta, quantumcumque sit magna summa totalis.

39". Qui alium movet, aut inducit ad inferendum grave damnum tertio, non
tenetur ad restitutionem istius damni illati.

40. Contractus Mohatra licitus est, etiam respectu ejusdem personae, and cum
contractu retrovenditionis praevie inito, cum intention lucri.

41. Cum numerata pecunia pretiosior sit numeranda, and nullus sit, qui non
majoris faciat pecuniam praesentem, quam futuram, potest creditor aliquid ultra
sortem a mutuario exigere, and eo titulo ab usura excusari.

42. Usura non est durn ultra sortem aliquid exigitur, tamquam ex benevolentia,
and gratitudine debitum, sed solum si exigatur tamquam ex justitia debitum.

43. Quidni non nisi veniale sit, detrahentis auctoritatem magnam sibi noxiam,
falso crimine elidere?

44. Probabile est non peccare mortaliter, qui imponit falsum crimen alicui, ut
suam justitiam and honorem defendat. Et si hoc non sit probabile, vix ulla erit
opinio probabilis in Theologia.

45. Dare temporale pro spirituali non est simonia, quando temporale non datur
tamquam pretium, sed dumtaxat tamquam motivum conferendi, vel efficiendi
spirituale, vel etiam quando temporale sit solum gratuita compensatio pro
spirituali, aut e contra.

46. Et id quoque locum habet etiamsi temporale sit principale motivum dandi
spirituale, immo etiam si sit finis ipsius rei spiritualis, sic ut illud pluris
aestimetur, quam res spiritualis.

47. Cum dixit Concilium Tridentinum eos alienis peccatis communicantes
mortaliter peccare, qui nisi quos digniores, and Ecclesiae magis utiles ipsi
judica verint ad Ecclesias promovent, Concilium, vel primo videtur per hoc
digniores non aliud significare velle, nisi dignitatem eligendorum sumpto
comparativo pro positivo; vel secundo locutione minus propria ponit digniores,
ut excludat indignos, non vero dignos; vel tandern loquitur tertio quando fit
concursus.

48. Tam clarum videtur, fornicationem secundum se nullam involvere malitiam,
and solum esse malam, quia interdicta, ut contrarium omnino rationi dissonum
videatur.

49. Molities jure naturae prohibita non est. Unde si Deus eam non
interdixisset, saepe esset bona, and aliquando obligatoria sub mortali.

50. Copula cum conjugata, consentiente marito, non est adulterium; adeoque
sufficit in confessione dicere, se esse fornicatum.

51. Famulus, qui submissis humeris scienter adjuvat herum suum ascendere per
fenestras ad stuprandum virginem, and multoties eidem subservit deferendo
scalam, aperiendo januam, aut quid simile cooperando, non peccat mortaliter, si
id faciat metu notabilis detrimenti, puta ne a Domino male tractetur, ne torvis
oculis aspiciatur, ne domo expellatur.

52. Praeceptum servandi festa non obligat sub mortali, seposito scandalo, si
absit contemptus.

53. Satisfacit praecepto Ecclesiae de audiendo Sacro, qui duas ejus parts,
immo quatuor simul a diversis Celebrantibus audit.

54. Qui non potest recitare Matutinum and Lauds, potest autem reliquas Horas,
ad nihil tenetur, quia major pars trahit ad se minorem.

55. Praecepto Communionis annuae satisfit per sacrilegam Domini manducationem.

56. Frequens Confessio, and Communio, etiam in his, qui gentiliter vivunt, est
nota praedestinationis.

57. Probabile est, sufficere attritionem naturalem, modo honestam.

58. Non tenemur Confessario interroganti fateri peccati alicujus consuetudinem.

59. Licet Sacramentaliter absolvere dimidiate tantum confessos, ratione magni
concursus Poenitentium, qualis v. g. potest contingere in die magnae alicujus
festivitatis, aut indulgentiae.

60. Poenitenti habenti consuetudinem peccandi contra legem Dei, Naturae, aut
Ecclesiae, etsi emendationis spes nulla appareat, nec est neganda, nec
differenda, absolutio; dummodo ore proferat, se dolere, and proponere
emendationem.

61. Potest aliquando absolvi, qui in proxima occasion peccandi versatur, quam
potest, and non vult omittere, quinimmo direct and ex proposito quaerit, aut
ei se ingerit.

62. Proxima occasio peccandi non est fugienda, quando causa aliqua utilis, aut
honesta non fugiendi occurrit.

63. Licitum est quaerere direct occasionem proximam peccandi pro bono
spirituali, vel temporali nostro, vel proximi.

64. Absolutionis capax est homo quamtumvis laboret ignorantia Mysteriorum
Fidei, and etiamsi per negligentiam, etiam culpabilem nesciat Mysterium
Sanctissimae Trinitatis, and Incarnationis Domini Nostri Jesu Christi.

65. Sufficit illa Mysteria semel credidisse.

QUicunque autem cujusvis conditionis, status, and dignitatis illas, vell
illarum aliquam conjunctim, vel divisim defenderit, vel ediderit, vel de eis
disputative public, aut privatim tractaverit, vel praedicaverit, nisi forsan
impugnando, ipso facto incidat in excommunicationem latae sententiae, a qua non
possit (praeterquam in articulo mortis) ab alio quacumque etiam dignitate
fulgente, nisi pro tempore existente Romano Pontifice, absolvi.

Insuper districte in virtute Sanctre obedientiae, and sub interminatione
Divini Judicii prohibet omnibus Christi fidelibus, cujuscumque conditionis,
dignitatis, and status, etiam speciali, and specialissima nota dignis, ne
praedictas opiniones, aut aliquam ipsarum ad praxim deducant.

Tandem, ut ab injuriosis cotentionibus Doctores, seu Scholastici, aut alii
quicumque imposterum se abstineat, and ut paci, and charitati consulatur idem
Sanctissimus in virtute Sanctae Obedientiae eis praecipit, ut tam in libris
imprimendis, ac manuscriptis, quam in Thesibus, Disputationibus, ac
Praedicationibus caveant ab omni censura, and nota, necnon a quibuscumque
conviciis contra eas Propositiones, quae adhuc inter Catholicos hinc inde
controvertuntur, donec a Sancta Sede recognitae super iisdem Propositionibus
judicium proferatur.

FRANSISCUS RICCARDUS Sanctae Romanae, and Universalis Inquisitionis Notarius.
Loco (...) Sigili.

ANno a Nativitate D. N. Jesu Christi millesime sexcentesimo septuagesimo nono.
Indictione secunda, die vero 4 mensis Martii, Pontificatis antem Sanctiss; in
Christo Patris and D. N. D. Innocentii Divina Providentia Papae XI. anno
tentio, suprodictura Decretum, affixum and publicatum fuit ad Valui^s Basilicae
Principis Apostolorum, Cancellariae, Apostolicae ac in acie Campi Florae, ac in
aliis locis solitis, and consuetis Urbis, per me Franciscum Perinum, ejusdem
Sanctiss. D. N. Papae and Sanctissimae Inquisitionis Cursorem.

FINIS.
THE DECREE Of our Most Holy Father INNOCENT by the Divine Providence the XI.
Pope, by which he has condemned 65 Propositions of Casuists, as at least
scandalous and pernicious in practice, and has Prohibited them to be defended
or published by any, under the pain of Excommunication ipso facto, and that to
be reserved to the Holy Apostolic See.
Thursday the 2. of March, 1679.
In a General Congregation of the Holy Roman and Universal Inquisition, held in
the Apostolic Palace in the Vatican, before our most H. Father Innocent, by
the Divine Providence the XI. Pope; and the Most Eminent and Most Reverend
Lords, the Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, being specially deputed by the
Holy Apostolic See, to be the General Inquisitors for the whole Christian
Commonwealth, against all Heretical Pravity.

OUr said most Holy Father Pope Innocent the XI. considering seriously the
salvation of the Sheep committed to him by God, and designing to prosecute that
healthful work that was begun by his Predecessor Alexander the 7th of happy
Memory, of separating the hurtful Pastures of evil Doctrines from those that
are not so, has gathered many Propositions, partly out of Books, Theses, or
other Writings; partly out of some late Innovations, and appointed them to be
examined by several Divines, and has since laid them before the Most Eminent
and Most Reverend Cardinals, who are the General Inquisitors against Heretical
Pravity. Which Propositions having been diligently; exactly, and frequently
discussed, and the Opinions of the said most Eminent Cardinals and Divines
having been heard by his Holiness, the said most Holy Father having maturely
considered the Matter, has at present appointed and decreed, that the following
Propositions, and every one of them, as they are set down, shall be damned and
prohibited, as being at least scandalous and pernicious in practice; like as he
does hereby damn and prohibit them. His Holiness not intending by the Decree to
approve in any manner, other Propositions that are not here expressed, that
either have been or shall be hereafter presented to him.

1. IT is not unlawful in the Administration of the Sacraments to follow a
Probable Opinion concerning the Validity of the Sacraments, rather than one
that is more safe; unless that the forbidden by a Law, Agreement, or the hazard
of some great Damage. Hence it follows, that an Opinion only probable is not to
be followed in the conferring of Baptism, or of Priestly or Episcopal Orders.

2. I think it Probable, that a Judge may give sentence according to an Opinion
that is less Probable.

3. Generally when we do any thing trusting to the Probability of it, whether
it be Intrinsecal, (Which is grounded on Reason) or Extrinsecal (that is
grounded on Authority) were it ever so small, so we do not go beyond the bounds
of probability, we act always prudently.

4. An Infidel that will not believe, trusting to an Opinion that is less
probable, shall be thereby excused from his Infidelity.

5. We dare not condemn a man of Mortal sin that never had any act of love to
God, but one, in his whole life.

6. It is probable that the Precept of loving God does not oblige rigorously,
and of it self, no not once every fifth year.

7. It only then obliges us when we are bound to put our selves in a state of
Justification, and have no other way left us by which we can do it.

8. It is no sin to eat and drink to satiety only for pleasure, so that it does
not prejudice our health; for the natural appetite may lawfully enjoy its
proper acts.

9. The use of Marriage only for pleasure, is free of all fault, and even of a
venial defect.

10. We are not bound to love our Neighbor by an internal formal act.

11. We obey the Command of loving our Neighbor by external acts only.

12. It is hard to find among secular persons, even Kings, an abundance; so
there is scarce any body bound to give Alms, if one is only obliged to give out
of their abundance.

13. One may without Moral sin be troubled for the life of another, so he does
it with due moderation: and one may rejoice at the natural death of another,
and desire and wish it with inefficacious desires, so it be not out of dislike
to the person, but for some temporal advantage.

14. It is lawful to desire the death of ones Father by an absolute desire, so
that it be not desired for the Fathers hurt; but for his good that wishes it,
that he may thereby obtain a good Inheritance.

15. It is lawful for a Son to rejoice for the Murder of his Father committed
by himself, when he was drunk, for the great riches which may come to him by
inheritance.

16. Faith does not seem to come within any special or absolute Precept.

17. It is enough to have one act of faith in our whole life.

18. If one is examined by the Civil Power, I advise him to confess the Faith
Ingeniously, as a thing both for the glory of God and of the Faith; but if he
is silent, I do not condemn it as sinful of it self.

19. It is not in the power of the will, that the assent of Faith be more firm
in it self, than the weight of the reasons which enforce it does require.

20. A man may prudently reject a supernatural assent which he had formerly.

21. An Assent of Faith that is supernatural and profitable to salvation, may
consist with a probable knowledge of Revelation only: Yea, even with a fear by
which one apprehends that God has not spoken it.

22. The faith of one God seems only to be necessary by an indispensible
necessity, but the explicit belief that God is a rewarder seems not necessary.

23. Faith in its large sense only from the evidence of the Creation, or some
such motive, is sufficient for Justification.

24. To call God a witness to a lie in a light matter, is not so great an
irreverence, that he either will, or can damn a man for it.

25. If a man have cause for it, whether it be small or great, he may lawfully
swear without an intention of swearing.

26. A man either alone or before others, may either when he is asked, or of
his own accord, or for his diversion, or any other end swear that he did not do
a thing which he really did; having a secret meaning, either of some other
thing which he did not do, or of another way of doing it, or of any other truth
which he adds to it; in which case he is in truth neither a liar, nor is he
perjured.

27. A just cause of using those secret meanings is as often as it is necessary
or profitable for the preservation of life, or honor, or saving ones goods, or
for any other act of virtue; so that the concealment of truth seems in that
case expedient or desirable.

28. He that is promoted to a Magistracy, or Public Office, either by the
means of some recommendation or present, may with a mental reservation take the
Oath which Kings usually require, not regarding the intention of him that
exacts it, because he is not bound to confess a secret crime.

29. A pressing and great fear is a just cause of dissembling in the
administration of the Sacraments.

30. It is lawful for a person of Honor to kill a man that intends to
calumniate him, if there is no other way to avoid that reproach. The same is
also to be said, if one gives another a box in the Ear, or cudgels him, and
runs away after such beating or cudgelling.

31. A man may regularly kill a Thief that he may thereby save one Crown.

32. It is not only lawful to defend the things that we possess by killing such
as invade us, but like wise the things to which we have only aright begun, and
which we hope to possess.

33. It is lawful to an heir, or one to whom a Legacy is left, to defend
himself against him that hinders him injustly to enter on his inheritance, or
to receive his Legacy by the same means, that a Professor or Prebendary may use
against such as hinder them from their possession.

34. It is lawful to procure an Abortion before the Conception is quickened,
least the Woman being discovered to be with Child should be either killed or
defamed.

35. It seems probable that all Conceptions as long as they are in the Womb,
are without a reasonable Soul; and that they then begin to have one when they
are first born, and by consequence there is no Murder committed in any Abortion.

36. It is lawful to steal, not only in extreme necessity but in a heavy one.

37. Servants of either Sex may secretly steal from their Masters, for the
value of their service, if it is greater than the Salary which they receive.

38. A man is not bound under the pain of mortal sin to restore that which he
stole by many thefts, how great soever the sum total may be.

39. He that moves or persuades another to do a hurtful thing to a third
person, is not bound to make up the damage which is thereby sustained.

40. The contract of Mohatra is lawful, though made with the same person, and
with a reselling of the same thing, before agreed on, with a design of gain.

41. Since money laid down is more valuable than that which is only due, and
all men value money that is present, more than that they look for, a Creditor
may expect more than the stock from the borrower, and be thereby excused from
being an Usurer.

42. It is not usury, when somewhat beyond the stock is looked for, so it be,
not exacted as due by justice, but as due by benevolence and gratitude.

43. Why may it not be said that it is only a Venial sin in any to lessen the
great authority of another, which is hurtful to himself, by charging him with
some false crime.

44. It is probable that he does not sin mortally, who fastens a false crime on
another, that he may defend his own justice and honor; and if this is not
probable, there is scarce any Opinion probable in Divinity.

45. It is not Simony to give a temporal thing for the spiritual, when the
temporal thing is not given as the price; but only as a motive for the
bestowing or doing the spiritual thing; or when the temporal is only a
gratuitous, compensation for the spiritual, or the spiritual is a compensation
for the temporal.

46. This does also take place, though the temporal thing be the principal
Motive for bestowing the spiritual; nay though it be the very end of the
spiritual thing, and be more highly esteemed than the spiritual.

47. Whereas the Council of Trent says that they sin mortally, and participate
in other men's sins, who do not promote to Churches those whom they judge more
worthy, and more useful to the Church; that Council did thereby mean either by
the more worthy only, that such as are promoted should be worthy, using the
Comparative degree for the Positive; or by an Impriety of speech, the more,
worthy are mentioned, that persons unworthy may be excluded, but not such as
are worthy; or Thirdly, the mean of a match of two, that then the more worthy
be preferred.

48. It seems so clear that Fornication has no real evil in it self, but is
only evil because it is forbidden, that the contrary Opinion is plainly against
all reason.

49. Voluntary Pollution is not forbidden by the law of Nature; So that if God
had not forbidden it, it had been often good, and that to which men might be
sometimes obliged under the pain of mortal sin.

50. It is not Adultery to lie with a married woman, if her Husband gives
consent; and it is enough in that case for a man to confess that he committed
Fornication.

51. A Servant who lets his Master rise upon his Shoulders to go in at a
Window, knowing that his design is to defile a Virgin, and does serve him by
bringing a Ladder, opening a door, or doing some such thing in concurrence with
him, sins not mortally; if he does it for fear of notable prejudice, to wit,
least he be ill used by his Master; be looked at awry, or turned out of doors.

52. The Precept of observing Festivities, setting aside the scandal, does not
oblige under the pain of mortal sin, provided that it is not out of contempt.

53. He satisfies the Precept of the Church for hearing Mass, that hears two,
yea even four parts of it of several Priest that Celebrate.

54. He that cannot say his Matines and Lauds, but can say the rest of his
Hours, is bound to nothing, for the greater part draws the lesser with it.

55. A man may obey the Precept for Receiving the Sacrament once a year, by
Sacrilegious Communicating.

56. Frequent Confession, and Communion, even in those that live as Heathens,
is a mark of Predestination.

57. It is probable that a natural attrition, so it be honest, is sufficient.

58. We are not bound to confess the custom of any sin to a Confessor that asks
it.

59. It is lawful to absolve one Sacramentally, that has made but a half
Confession, when there is a great crowd of many Penitents; such as for
instance, may happen on a great Festival day, or a time of indulgence.

60. Absolution is neither to be denied nor delayed to a Penitent, that has a
custom of sinning against a law of God, of Nature, or the Church, even though
there is no hope of his amendment, if he says he is sorry and purposes an
amendment.

61. One may be sometimes absolved that continues in the nearest hazard of
sining, which he neither can nor will withdraw from, even though he does
directly and on design seek it, and thrust himself in it.

62. The nearest hazard of sinning is not to be avoided when a profitable or
honest occasion of flying from it does not occurr.

62. It is lawful to seek directly the nearest hazard of sinning for the
spiritual, or temporal good, either of our selves, or of our Neighbors.

64. A man is capable of Absolution, though he lies under an ignorance of the
Mysteries of Faith; and even though by a Negligence, that is his own fault, he
knows not the Mystery of the most Holy Trinity, and the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

65. It is sufficient that he once believed those Mysteries.

WHosoever of whatsoever condition, State, or dignity shall defend, or publish
these or any of them conjunctly, or severally; or shall treat or preach of them
by way of dispute, either publicly, or privately, except it be to argue
against them; he does thereby ipso facto incurr an actual Excommunication latae
sententiae, from which he cannot be absolved (except in the hour of death) by
any how eminent soever their Dignity be, but only by the Pope for the time
being.

Moreover, he strictly Prohibits in the virtue of Holy Obedience, and under the
pains of the Judgments of God, all faithful Christians, of what condition,
dignity and state soever they be; though under some singular or most
extraordinary Character, that they shall not reduce the foresaid Opinions, or
any of them into practice.

Finally that all Doctors or Schoolmen, and all other Persons do for the future
abstain from all injurious contentions; and our most Holy Father commands then
(...) the virtue of Holy Obedience, that they study to maintain Peace and
Charity, and that as well in their Printed and Written Books, as in their
Theses, Disputes, or Sermons, they abstain from Censures, Nicknames, or
Reproaches of all sorts, concerning those Propositions which are yet
controverted on both sides, among Catholics, till the Holy See having
considered them; shall give Judgment about them.

FRANCIS RICHARD Notary to the General Inquisition of the Holy Roman Church.
IN the Year from the Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1679. the Second
Indiction, the 4 of the month of March, the Third Year of the Popedom of our
most Holy Father Innocent by the Divine Providence the XI. Pope. The foresaid
Decree was offered and published at the Gates of the Basilica of the Prince of
the Apostles; and in the Apostolical Chancery, and in the Field of Flora, and
in the other usual and customary places in the City, by me Francis Perin
Messenger to our most Holy Father the Pope, and to the most Holy Inquisition.

The End

