SATURDAY NO SABBATH: Or, the SEVENTH-DAY SABBATH Proved To be of no force to
the Believing Gentiles in the times of the Gospel, By the Law of Nature, Moses,
Christ.

BEING An account of several public Disputations held at Stone-Chappel by
Paul's, London; Between Dr. Chamberlain, Mr. Tillam, and Mr. Coppinger, of the
one party, And JER. IVES of the other.

In which the Arguments and Answers on both sides are impartially recommended
to public view.

Together With an Appendix, in which the said Question is more fully and
plainly discussed for the better information of the weak, and wherein all the
Arguments levied for the defense of the Jewish Sabbath are answered

By JER. IVES.

-- Or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath Days, which are a SHADOW of things to
come; but the Body is of Christ,

Col. 2.16, 17. Strangers not Circumcised may do any work for themselves on the
(Jews) Sabbath Days: for the uncircumcised stranger is not commanded to keep
the (Jews) Sabbath Days,

Maim Treat. of the Sab Chap. 6. Sect. 1. Chapter 20 Sect. 14. London, Printed for
Dan. White at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard, and Fran Smith in
flying-Horse Court in Fleetstreet. 1659.

To the Believers in Christ, especially they who are in bondage to the Jewish
Sabbath, and more particularly to those in Colchester, Grace and Peace be
multiplied from the God of Peace.
IF our Souls were but affected with the sad and deplorable condition of the
Churches of Christ, by reason of those great divisions that are among them,
upon the advancing of every novel opinion, we should take up the wish of the
Prophet, and say, Oh that our head were waters, and our eyes a fountain of
tears! especially if we consider what great dishonor it brings to God, who is
and would be known to be a God of peace and not of confusion in all the
Churches of the Saints: and as God is dishonored, so the edification of the
Churches are hindered; whilst their Religious discords prove as great an
obstruction to their spiritual building, as the confusion of Languages did to
the building of Babylon: and as discord among Christians hinders their
edification, so it hinders the conversion of others; for if a Jew or an Infidel
come among Christians, and observes the several Opinions that are among them,
may they not have just cause to say, You are mad? Oh then! as you tender Gods
honor and your own edification, and the worlds conversion, follow the things
that make for peace.

And in order hereunto, let me give you some Cautions.

First, That you be careful how you take up an opinion, or receive anything for
truth, before you have well weighed and considered of it. The foolish (says
Solomon) believes EVERY thing: but the prudent will consider his steps, Prove.
14.15. plainly showing, that some are so foolish, that if they do but hear a
thing, they will inconsiderately and rashly receive it. Too much of this folly
is at this time among professors, who run to receive every new thing that they
hear of, before they are able to give a Reason for the truth of the thing they
so receive. These men often prove troublers of the Churches peace; and turn the
joy she had of a sudden Proselite, into great sorrow; and that either by their
unruly and disorderly promoting their new received opinions, to the disturbance
of the peace, and hinderance of the growth of the Churches; or else by their
sudden departing from those Notions, that they hastily and inconsiderately
received. For it is worth observing, that those that hastily embrace a thing
(though it be truth) seldom do remain permanent Professors of it: this our Lord
Christ teaches us in the parable of the sower, Mat. 13.5. compared with the
20. where it is observable of the seed that fell among stony ground, how that
ANON it sprung up, but it SUDDENLY withered away for want of root: which Christ
interprets to be for want of understanding, as appears, if you but compare this
hasty Professor with the professor who is said to receive with understanding,
ver. 23. whereas the other is said to receive it incontinently, ver. 20. he
departs from it as suddenly, ver. 21. I speak not this to the end that I
might discourage people from hasting to keep Gods commands; but that, according
to the Proverb, they should make no more have then good speed: for sad
experience tells us, that the Churches have sped very ill by such rash
inconsiderate members, who have proved disturbers of the peace, while they have
been in; and many times have made havoc of the Churches peace in their going
out, by drawing others after them.

Secondly, As I would caution you to be careful in receiving, so I would
likewise have you careful in the promoting any thing that you have so received.

In the first place, take heed of being too hasty in the venting that thou have
newly received: for if once a man has vented an opinion in public, it will be
hard to recant, though it prove very erroneous: how sad is it then to see men
dispute in public for that to day, when they doubted of the truth of it but
yesterday!

2. Be careful in promoting of any thing thou have received passionately and
uncharitably, branding all that differ from thee as Law-breakers and denyers of
Scriptures, calling all Ranters, Quakers, Papists, Atheists, etc. that deny the
truth of thy opinion, as Mr. Tillam does in his Treatise of the Sabbath, page
6. and accusers of Christ, and reproachers of the Apostle Paul, page 122, 123.
again, he calls those that do not agree with him in this point about the
keeping of the seventh-day Sabbath, baseborn muck-worms, page 26. But no wonder
Mr. Tillam speaks at this rate, since as he confesses in his Book, That
sometimes his affection did outrun his judgment.

Likewise Mr. Spittlehouse in his Book called, Error blasted, wherein he uses
a great many words in Capital Letters, instead of Capital Arguments; taking
that for granted which he ought to have proved (viz.) That the Seventh-day
Sabbath is a moral precept: then having shamefully begged the Question, he
manfully infers, That all that are otherwise minded, are breakers of Jehovahs
Royal Law; when he himself (from that Text much insisted on by them, Mat. 5.17.
to prove the Seventh-day Sabbath a command to believing Gentiles) faints in the
way of his proof, by saying, It is PROBABLE Christ preached that Sermon to the
multitude, as well as to the twelve among whom there were Gentiles. But what if
one should say, It is certain that this was preached while the first Tabernacle
was standing? and that it is improbable that he preached to Gentiles, because
preaching to the Gentiles seemed so strange to Peter, Acts the 10? might not a
man have better ground to evince the one, then he has to infer the other,
(viz.) because Christ preached to the multitude, that therefore two of the
twelve were Gentiles? and yet for all he confesses, that it is but a PROBABLE
conjecture, yet he has the confidence to imbark himself in a Paper Frigot,
manned with great words, to encounter with all for Law-breakers, that are not
Seventh-day Sabbath-keepers. Comparing Mr. Ives who disputed against his
opinion, to a beaten Cock, that was ready to hide his head in any hole, page
27. Which if he did, this ensuing account of the Disputations will make appear.

In the mean time, let every one that reads Mr. Spittlchouse his forementioned
Book, see how he rather blasts himself then his erring Adversary: for he goes
to prove against Mr. Ives, That the Sabbath ought to be kept by the Law of
Nature, in his Postscript, page 26. and yet in page 28. he cries out against
Mr. Ives, for that he went to disprove the Morality of it by the light of
Nature; comparing him to the Quakers, that adhere to the light within them: you
may see then how mischievous a thing it is for a man passionately to promote an
opinion; it makes his affection outrun his judgment, or else surely Mr.
Spittlehouse would not have taken Arguments out of Natures Oracle to confute
Mr. Ives (as he thought) and after decry Nature as corrupt, blaming Mr. Ives,
for adhering to her dictates when he had labored as in the fire, but two pages
before, to prove the Law of Nature holy, just, and good: How much then does it
concern us to lay aside passion in the promotion of that we conceive to be
true, lest we pull down that with one hand we set up with the other?

3. In the promoting of thy Opinion, be more studious for Arguments then
Rhetorical flourishes, which (together with railing Accusations) usually supply
the place of Arguments; a strong sign of a weak Cause. And of this Mr. Tillam
is sufficiently guilty: though at our Disputation he decryed Syllogisms, and
refused to answer them; calling them the intising words of man's wisdom, when
his Book is full of such kind of Humane wisdom, almost in every page, where he
Courts all the Liberal Sciences for terms of Art to garnish his Book: as first,
Grammatical terms, telling his Reader of a Future Tense, and a Gerund in do,
page 15, 73. and as though he were writing an Almanac, he abounds with
Astronomical Phrases, as Meridian-Heights, the Suns Station and Retrogradation,
Meridian glory, the celerity of the Sun when mounting the other Hemispere, the
interposition of the Terrestrial Globe, makes their Meridian the Antipodes
Midnight, Cloudy Speculations; the Moon in her constant inconstancy, and the
Stars in the expanded Firmament, the Empyreal Heavens, etc. page, 8, 36, 42, 44,
166. Neither does his book want Rhetorical expressions to carry on that which
he wants Arguments to maintain; calling those that are Prosolited to his
seventh-Day Sabbath-keeping, Ingenious, mounting, refined Spirits; and others,
base-born muck-worms, page 28.

Again, He calls the contrary Opinion, A shadie Speculation, page 8. Again, he
is full of such Phrases as these, (viz.) Ideas of the Deity, Igitur,
Emphatical, Demonstrative Particles, High Encomiums, Intrinsical, Abstruse and
intricate Perspicuity, the superlative presence, celerity, distracting
Labyrinth, etc. page 9, 12, 92, 47, 54, 82. Logical and Poetical terms are
frequently found in his writing: as Dilemma's, Scylla and Charybdis, Meanders,
Ariadnes Clue, the Father of Demons, etc. Who would think that aeman should
garnish his Book with such Phrass as these, and yet resuse Academical Learning
in Disputation, as savouring of fleshly wisdom? nay, though he decryed
Syllogisms as a carnal way of Discourse, yet he sometimes does Syllogise in his
Book, as the Reader may see in p. 19. I cite not these passages to the end that
I might be thought to be a hater of humane learning, for I know it is of great
use, and deservedly to be honored; but to the end that the Reader may take
notice that Mr. Tillam can cast honor upon learning when he thinks it will
honor his Cause, but when it is used against him, or makes for the detecting
his error, then he decries it as vain, and says, he is sure that it is not of
God, etc.
and its worth observing, that while Dr. Chamberlain did Dispute
Syllogistically, when he was Mr. Ives his opponent, Mr. Tillam did not show any
public dislike of such kind of disputation: but when Mr. Tillam came to
respond to Mr. Ives his Arguments, then he inveig'd against it as a carnal
thing: and yet for all this, when Mr. Tillam came to take upon him the part of
an Opponent the next day, Mr. Ives desired him if he would not discourse
Syllogistically, that he would prove the Position by plain Scripture; to which
Mr. Tillam replied, That there was no Text that in so many words would prove
what he had asserted. Then Mr. Ives asked him why he blamed people for proving
their practice by a Consequence, as he did in his Book, page 96. if he could
not prove his own practice without a Consequence? hereupon he was forced to
take Sanctuary at a Syllogism, as hereafter will appear, though all along he
blamed Mr. Ives very sharply for using such a carnal weapon to discourse withal.

Let me beseech you therefore, from what has been said, to suspect those men
who are full of entising words, and empty of solid Arguments: and this is not
only my advice, but the Apopostle's, who tells us, 2 Pet. 2. That with fained
words some shall make merchandise of Gods people; and therefore he bids the
Colossians, in the 2 Chapter of that Epistle, To take heed lest any man
beguiled them through intising words. You see then, that good men may be
spoiled of their joy, and Churches of their peace, by such who by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. Be ready
therefore to vent nothing for truth, but what you may be able to give a REASON
of to them that ask you, with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15.

Lastly, Let me Caution thee to have a care not only how thou receivest an
opinion, and how thou promotest it, but also how thou keep and retainest it:
if thou find that it is truth thou have received, know, that her price is
far above rubies, and no pleasure is to be compared to it, says Solomon, Prove.
8.11.

This the Poet saw, when he elegantly expressed the estate of that man that had
gained the knowledge of the Truth, saying, That it was a pleasure to stand upon
the shore and to see ships tossed upon the Sea, and to stand in the window of a
Castle to see a Battle and the adventures thereof below; but no pleasure is
comparable to the standing upon the vantage ground of truth, (a hill not to be
commanded, and where the Air is always clear and serene) and to see the errors,
and wrandrings, and mists, and tempests in the vale below: provided that this
prospect be with pity, and not with swelling or pride. And as another says
well, It is a Heaven upon Earth to have a man's mind move in Charity, rest in
Providence, and turn upon the Poles of Truth: Oh then! when you shall have
received the truth as it is in Jesus, walk in it, and be not easily persuaded
to move from the truth unto which thou art called, for any base or by-end
whatever; and the God of truth shall at last recompense all thy Labors in it,
and thy sufferings for it.

But is thou art convinced that some things whereof thou have been persuaded
are errors, be not ashamed to confess thy mistakes; knowing, that it is so far
from tending to thy shame, (whatever Satan or thy own heart shall persuade
thee) that it will be a crown of glory and honor upon thy head, Prove. 4.8, 9.

And in hold and contending for the Truth have a care lest thou over-valuest or
undervaluest the truth thou make profession of, by counting those Truths
essential to salvation and Church Communion, which are not so; or on the other
hand by counting the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, but circumstantial
things, and things without which a man may be saved: have a care then, lest
thou by thy rigidness in things of less moment, should disturb the peace of
the Church, and offend the Consciences of thy weak Brethren for whom Christ
died: the like care ought to be taken of the other extreme of judging the
Substantials of Religion as circumstances, lest by so doing we break down the
whole Fabric of the Christian Religion, and lay wast the profession thereof,
by counting the props and stays of it as indifferent things.

Having cautioned you about the receiving, maintaining, and retaining of the
truth, my desire is, that you make use thereof in judging these ensuing
Conferences about the seventh-day Sabbath, which I have carefully published for
the stopping of slanderous mouths, who have misrepresented the Disputations;
and also for the satisfying them that doubt, and confirming of those that are
weak, that they be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, and
tossed to and fro with every wind. If then by these threshings there be any
thing beat out (that lay hid before) by which thy soul may be strengthened, and
thy hungry desire after truth satisfied, give God the glory; and if by the
light hereof any darkness or weakness is discovered, bless the Father of
lights; and if you do receive light, walk in it; that you may be found the
children of it: and that this may be the end of our writing, and reading,
praying, preaching, and disputing, is the prayer and desire of

Your affectionate friend and Brother in the faith, I. I.

BEing by the Providence of God, and the entreaty of many of His People, put
upon this work, I hope I shall do nothing therein, of which I shall need to be
ashamed in my self, or blamed by any that were hearers and impartial Judges of
the ensuing Conferences, at the Bar of whose Tribunal I now stand: and for
those that are captious, and lie in wait for my halting, I shall appeal from
the Bar of their partiality, to the Judge of all the World, whether in this, I
have not walked uprightly. And whereas there is somewhat added by way of
Observation; both upon the Arguments and Answers, as occasion is offered, I
thought good to give notice, that whatever occurreth of this kind, I have put
in a different Character, to avoid mistakes that so the unwary or the
uncharitable Reader might not confound what is added for further information,
with what was offered in the Disputation. And if thou find a more methodical
account of Mr. Ives his Arguments then Mr. Tillams, know, that Mr. Tillam did
refuse to observe any Logical Method, either in this Arguings or Answers; and
therefore what thou find amiss of this kind, do not impute to the partiality
of the Scribe.

And whereas thou find some of Mr. Tillams words methodized and put into
Arguments by Mr. Ives, it is no more then what was offered in the Disputations,
that so the Audience might understand the force of M. Tillams Orations, and to
what they did amount, when summed up into Arguments.

And for what was offered by Dr. Chamberlain, I confess it was more Methodical;
but how rational, it concerns not me to determine.

And as touching the last Dispute, which was with Mr. Coppinger, it was
appointed, to the end that he as Respondent, should give some fresh Answers to
what Arguments Mr. Ives had alleged against Mr. Tillam, and Dr. Chamberlain
the two first days; and likewise to the end that he might answer what other
Arguments Mr. Ives had further to urge, against the observation of the
seventh-day Sabbath: which whether he has so done or no, the consideration
hereof will give thee satisfaction: and for the better Information of the weak,
I have at the end of the Disputations, given a short and brief account of my
(...) against the seventh-day Sabbath, (...) of all the Objections that I have
ever met with, seem those that are contrary minded, with brief Answers
thereunto; to which I desire as plain a Reply may be given, if any shall (...)
print any thing further upon this (...) and this I take to be a more profitable
way to decide Controversies of this kind, then any other that I know of.

Having thus given notice of the Method here intended, I now come to give an
account of the Disputations, the first whereof, was on Thursday the sixth of
January, 1658. at which time the people being assembled, Mr. Ives propounds
this ensuing Question:

Mr. Ives. The question I shall offer to be disputed this day, is, Whether
there be any Law that binds the Gentiles to keep the seventh day Sabbath?


Dr. Chamberlain. I demand first, what you mean by Law, secondly, what you mean
by Gentile. I pray explain these terms in your question.


Mr. Ives. When I demand whether there be any Law, etc. my meaning is,
Whether the Law of Nature, the Law of Moses, or the Law of Christ does require
the Gentiles to keep the seventh-day Sabbath: and by Gentiles, in the question,
I do mean all the world, except sews, and such as were Proselyted to their
Religion.

And from the question thus explained, I do demand, Whether there be any Law
that binds the Gentiles to observe the seventh-day Sabbath.


Dr. Chamberlain. To your question I answer, that the Gentiles are bound to
keep the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Ives. This I deny, and therefore I do desire you to prove it: and when it
comes to my turn to be Opponent, I shall prove that the Gentiles are not
required to keep the seventh-day Sabbath; in the mean time I pray prove that
they are.


Dr. Chamberlain. 1. Arg. That Gentiles are required to keep the seventh-day
Sabbath, I thus prove: That which is commanded for Strangers to observe, is
commanded for Gentiles to observe: but the seventh-day Sabbath is commanded for
Strangers to observe: Ergo, the seventh-day Sabbath is commanded for Gentiles
to observe.


Mr. Ives. If by stranger, you mean only the stranger that WAS within Isreal's
Gates, then I deny the Major, because the stranger within the gates was the
Proselyted stranger; and therefore it follows not, that because the
Proselyted strangers WERE commanded, that therefore the Gentiles that were not
proselyted, ARE under this command; which you are to prove, according to the
fence explained in the question.

And if by stranger, you mean all strangers, then I deny the Minor, and say,
All strangers ARE not commanded to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.

It might further be replied, The stranger was commanded to be circumcised,
Genesis 17.12. And he that is eight days old, shall be circumcised among you,
every man-child in your generation, that is born in thy house, or is bought
with thy money of ANY STRANGER that is not of thy seed. Does it follow, because
that strangers WERE to be circumcised, that therefore they ARE to be
circumcised? and in like manner, it does not follow that because the strangers
within Isarel's gates WERE to keep the Sabbath, that the Gentiles without their
gates ARE to keep the Sabbath, which is that the Doctor was to prove for this
Argument is so far from proving the Gentiles ARE to keep it, that it does not
prove the Gentiles in the Question WERE to keep it: for the Question is of all
Gentiles except Proselytes; and the Argument from the twentieth of Exodus,
proves no Gentiles but Proselytes; for so Mr. Ainsworth in his Annotations upon
this place, says, That for Stranger, the Greek Version reads Proselyte; and he
further adds, That it was the Opinion of the Rabbis, upon this place, That
strangers, not circumcised, might work for themselves openly upon the Sabbath
day, as the Jews did on a working day.


Dr. Chamberlain. The Commandment does expound strangers, and says not only,
Thou Jew, but, Thou Proselyte, thy son, and thy daughter, and the stranger that
is within thy gates.


Mr. Ives. It follows not that it was to any stranger without the gate,
because the stranger within the gate was commanded: and unless you can prove
that it was to all strangers without the gate, unproselyted, it does not reach
the difference in question, and therefore I still demand your proof of the
Minor Proposition.

For it is observeable, that though Israel was to restrain the strangers from
labor, yet the strangers were no other then such as were circumcised within
their gates, and under their Law; which is nothing to our purpose, who live in
England, under the Gospel.


Dr. Chamberlain. I think I have proved it sufficiently.

Hereupon arose some difference concerning the terms of the question, and
thereupon some that stood by, desired that it might be put into such general
terms as might comprehend the difference. It was thereupon agreed, that the
question should be put into these terms, viz. Whether all Christians are bound
to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.


Dr. Chamberlain affirms, That all Christians are bound to keep the
seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Ives denies, That all Christians are bound to keep the seventh-day
Sabbath.


Dr. Cham. I being in the place of Opponent, shall undertake to prove That all
Christians are bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath: which I thus do: They
which are bound to keep and observe the Royal Law, are bound to keep and
observe the seventh-day Sabbath: But all Christians are bound to keep and
observe the Royal Law: Ergo, all Christians are bound to keep and observe the
seventh day for a Sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I answer by distin, uishing of the Royal Law: for if by Royal Law
you mean all the Ten Commandments, then I deny the Minor; otherwise I deny the
Major.


Dr. Chamberlain. By Royal Law, I mean the Ten Commandments spoken of Exodus 20.


Mr. Ives. Then I deny the Minor, and say, That all Christians are not bound to
keep all the Ten Commandments, because they are not bound to keep the
seventh-day Sabbath.


Dr. Chamberlain. All that are bound to abstain from sin, are bound to keep all
the Ten Commandments: but all Christians are bound to abstain from sin: Ergo,
all Christians are bound to keep all the Ten Commandments.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Major; and though I confess all Christians are bound to
abstain from sin, yet it does not follow, that therefore they are bound to keep
all the Ten Commandments, because (as I have said) they are not bound to keep
the seventh-day Sabbath, which was one of the Ten.


Dr. Chamberlain. They that are bound to abstain from the transgressions of the
Law, are bound to keep all the Ten Commandments; but all Christians are bound
to abstain from the transgressions of the Law: Ergo, all Christians are bound
to keep all the Ten Commandments.


Mr. Ives. Sir, you do not prove the thing denied, but instead thereof, give us
the same again; for what difference is there between abstaining from sin, and
abstaining from transgressions? I therefore, because it is the same Argument,
give you the same answer, by denying the Minor.


Dr. Chamberlain. Then I further argue: If every sin be a transgression of the
Law, then they that are bound to abstain from sin, are bound to keep all the
Ten Commandments; but every sin is a transgression of the Law: Ergo.


Mr. Ives. This is but the same we had before, though differing in words and
therefore I deny the Major.


Dr. Chamberlain. Then I offer further, That they who are bound to keep every
point of the Law, are bound to keep all the Ten Commandments; but all
Christians are bound to keep every point of the Law: Ergo.


Mr. Ives. This is upon the matter but the same again: for what difference is
there between all the Law, and every point; and therefore I still do deny the
Major, and require you to prove that all that are bound to abstain from sin,
are bound to keep all the Ten Commandments.


Dr. Chamberlain. If the breach of every one of the Ten Commandments be sin,
then all that are bound to abstain from sin, are bound to keep all the Ten
Commandments; but the breach of every one of the Ten Commandments is sin: Ergo,
they that are bound to abstain from sin, are bound to keep all the Ten
Commandments.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Minor.

The Minor may justly be denied, because that it is not a sin now to work upon
the seventh day (commonly called Saturday) which was one of the Ten
Commandments among the Jews; and therefore though all Christians are to abstain
from all sin against the Law they live under, yet they are not bound to abstain
from sinning against a Law they are not under.


Dr. Chamberlain. I prove the Minor from Jam 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.

From whence I argue:

He that is guilty of sin, does not abstain from sin.

But he that breaks any one of the Ten Commandments is guilty of sin:

Ergo, he that beaks any one of the Ten Commandments, does not abstain from sin.


Mr. Ives. This Argument concludes not the terms denied in the Syllogism;
however, I shall deny thn Miner, and say, That one of the Ten Commandments may
be broken, which is the Command that required the Observation of the seventh
day, and yet I may not be guilty of sin.


Dr. Chamberlain. He that is guilty of the breach of the whole Law, is guilty
of sin:

But he that breaks any one of the Ten Commandments is guilty of the breach of
the whole Law: Ergo.


Mr. Ives. I answer, By distinguishing of the term HE, in the Major
proposition: for if you do not mean every he, then I deny the Syllogism.

And if you do mean every he, or every one, then I deny the Minor, for these
Reasons:

First, this text that you refer to in your Argument, was written to the Twelve
Tribes, Jam. 1.1. and therefore you cannot reasonably conclude, that because
the twelve Tribes were bound to the whole Law, that therefore every believing
Gentile is so bound.

Secondly, if the Gentiles were writ to in this Epistle, yet I do deny that
they are required to keep all the Ten Commandments; for there is no such thing
in the Text.


Dr. Chamberlain. This was written to the twelve Tribes as Christians, and
therefore to every Christian.


Mr. Ives. I say as before, that every he in the intent of our question is not
concerned in this Epistle; and if they were, yet these words, The Ten
Commandments, which are in the Argument, are not in this Text; and therefore
every one of the Ten Commandments, as understood by you in the Argument, must
be concluded from hence, or you do not prove the thing denied.


Dr. Chamberlain. Lest you should equivocate about this word Law, the Apostle
cites the sum of the Second Table, and he does not mention any part of the
First Table: by which it appears, that by the Royal Law, he intends the Ten
Commandments; unless you will say, that by the Second Table is meant the whole
Law.

Therefore I (...)

He that is bound (...) keep the whole Law, is bound to keep all the ten
Commandments.

But every Christian is bound to keep the whole Law.

Ergo, Every Christian is bound to keep all the Ten Commandments.


Mr. Ives. Forasmuch as you have not said any thing new, but what you have said
already over and over, I therefore answer, by denying the Major; and say, That
a man may keep the whole Law in the sense of this text, and yet not be bound to
keep all the ten Commandments in your sense. And though I do confess we are
bound to keep and observe all the other nine Commandments; yet we are not bound
to observe the command for the seventh-day sabbath, which is one of the ten
Commandments.

And whatever is moral in the Commandment as to A time to serve God, I confess
we are to observe that also, though we are not tied to the seventh day.


Dr. Cham. Well then, I will prove the Major, thus:

If the ten Commandments are contained in this word, the whole Law, Then they
that are bound to keep the whole Law, are bound to keep the ten Commandments.

But the ten Commandments are contained in this word, the whole law.

Ergo.


M. Ives. I deny the minor, and say, that in the sense of this text, this word,
the whole law, does not contain all the ten Commandments.


Dr. Cham. I further argue:

If there be never a Commandment but is a point of the whole: If every one of
the Ten be a part of the whole: If every part of the Ten be contained in the
whole: If he that breaks one Commandment is guilty of the whole; Then he is
commanded to keep the whole.

But he that breaks one Commandments, is guilty of the whole.

Ergo, He is commanded to keep the whole.

It is observable, that the Doctor made three essays to bring forth a Syllogism
to prove the thing denied, but could not bring them into perfect Syllogisms: at
last he makes a Syllogism that concludes not the thing in controversy.


Mr. Ives. I deny the whole Syllogism, because it concludes not the matter in
question: for the thing in question is, Whether they that are bound to keep the
whole Law in the sense of that text Jam. 2 are bound to keep all the ten
Commandments, and by consequence the Seventh-day Sabbath; and your Argument
concludes we must keep the whole, and all the Commandments: which was never
denied.


Dr. Cham. If you deny Scripture, I have done with you.


Mr. Ives. I do not deny the Scripture, but your Syllogism, which concludes not
the thing in question, as I have shown you once and again.

As it has been answered, that S. James does not write to Gentiles, and that
he does not enjoin the ten Commandments, by this word, The whole Law, and so
consequently not the Seventh-day Sabbath: so it may further be answered, that
if those words, The whole Law, should respect the Law of Moses, then if
believing Gentiles are bound to the whole Law, they are bound to Circumcision
also, and every other Ceremony of the Law: therefore there Apostle says, Gal.
5.3. that if they were circumcised, they were bound to keep the WHOLE Law. By
which it appears, that the believing Gentiles that were not circumcised, were
not bound to keep the WHOLE Law.

So that when St. James enjoins the keeping of the whole Law, he tells us what
Law he means, in Chap. 1. v. ^^. compared with Chap. 2. v. 12. where he call it
the law of Liberty, by way of distinction from the law of Moses, which is
called a yoke of Bondage, Gal. 4.3, 9. and Acts 15.10. which law of Liberty is
called the law of Christ, Gal 6.2. and is no less then the Gospel that is
preached, which S. James bids them not to be forgetful hearers of, Jam. 1.25.
but admonishes them to look into the perfect law of liberty, and to continue
therein.

So that the Doctor had no reason to say that the Scripture was denied by his
Respondent, because he denied the Law that required the Seventh-day Sabbath to
be contained in the whole Law mentioned by S. James. It seems then very
strange, that in a free and public Disputation, the Doctor should charge his
Respondent for denying the Scriptures, because he denied his sense thereof:
which was all that the Doctor said unto this last Argument. And the time of his
Opponencie being ended, the Doctor was by Agreement to answer Mr. Ives his
Arguments, which take as follows.


Mr. Ives. I shall undertake by the help of God to prove that all Christians
are not commanded to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath.

If the Gentile Christians are not commanded to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath,
Then all Christians are not commanded to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath.

But the Gentile Christians are not commanded to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath.

Ergo, All Christians are not commanded to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath.


Dr. Cham, There is no such kind of creature in the world as a Gentile
Christian.


Mr. Ives. Sir, I will show you such a kind of creature, since you seem to be
ignorant: therefore pray look into Acts 21.25. and you shall see that the
Gentiles are called believing Gentiles; which is all one with Christian
Gentiles.

And if we mind Acts 11.20. compared with verse. 26. we shall see in verse. 20.
that the Gentiles believed, and turned to the Lord: and these were called
Christians at Antioch, verse. 26. and yet the Doctor says he never heard of any
such creature in the world as a Gentile Christian.


Dr. Cham. I pray then say, Believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath: and then I will deny the Minor.


Mr. Ives. I wonder Sir that you should quibble about terms, and trouble us so
often to alter the terms in the Question: as first, for the term Gentiles, you
afterward alter, and will have it all Christians; and now for Christian
Gentile you would have it believing Gentile. Well Sir, be it so: I will then
prove that believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath;
which is the Minor proposition denied by you.

If believing Gentiles are bound to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath, Then they are
bound by the law of Nature, by the law of Moses, or the law of Christ.

But they are nor bound by the Law of Nature, the Law of Moses, or the Law of
Christ, to keep the seventh-day sabbath.

Ergo, Believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath.


Dr. Cham. Believing Gentiles are bound by the Law of Moses, which is all one
with the Law of Christ: therefore prove your Minor.


Mr. Ives. If the believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath
by the Law of Moses, then they are bound to keep it by the Law that was given
to Israel.

But the believing Gentiles are not bound to it by the Law that was given to
Israel.

Ergo, Believing Gentiles are not bound by the Law of Moses to keep the
seventh-day sabbath.


Dr. Cham. I deny the Minor, and say, that the believing Gentiles are commanded
to keep the seventh-day sabbath, by the Law that was given to Israel.


Mr. Ives. I prove the Minor, thus:

If the Law that was given to Israel, was given to none but Israel, Then
believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh day sabbath by the Law
that was given to Israel.

But the Law that was given to Israel, was given to none but Israel.

Ergo.


Dr. Cham. I deny the Minor, and say, that Law was given to other Nations
besides Israel.


Mr. Ives. That it was given to no Nation but Israel, I prove out of Psalm.
147.19, 20. He has given his laws to Jacob, his statutes and judgments unu
Israel: he has not dealt so with ANY Nation and for his judgments THEY have
not known them.


Dr. Cham. I do distinguish of giving the Law: there is a giving as a
privilege, and a giving by way (...) punishment. Now though it was not given
to any Nation but Israel as a privilege, yet it was given to other Nations by
way of punishment to judge them by it.


Mr. Ives. I do confess it was given to no Nation as privilege, according to
what you say: and do say, that it was not given to any other Nation by way of
punishment, but the Nation Israel: which I (...) prove:

If that Law that was given to Israel, had been given to any other Nation by
way of jud^^ment, Then other Nations would ha^ been judged by it.

But no other Nation was to be judged by it.

Ergo, it was not given by way of judgment to any Nation but Israel.


Dr. Cham. I deny the Minor, and say, that the Law of Israel was given to other
Nations, to judge them by it.


Mr. Ives. If no Nation shall be judged by Isreal's Law, but those that lived
under it, Then it was given to no Nation but Israel to be judged by it.

But no Nation shall be judged by it, but they that lived under it.

Ergo, it was given to no Nation but Israel, to be judged by it.

Here the Doctor urges the former distinction again, about giving by way of
privilege, and giving by way of judgment: which is a vain distinction,
because no Law does judge any body but those that were bound to keep it, and by
keeping of at, were capable to enjoy the privileges of it.


Dr. Cham. Upon the former distinction, I deny the Minor.


Mr. Ives. I prove the Minor, viz. that no Nation shall be judged by Isreal's
Law, that did not live under it, by the text, Romans 2.12. As many as have sinned
without the law, shall be judged without the law; and as many as have sinned
under the law, shall be judged by the law.


Dr. Cham. That is true; and therefore I say other Nations lived under that Law
of Israel, so as to be judged by it.


Mr. Ives. That other Nations did not live under it, so as to be judged by it,
I prove thus:

If there be any other Nations to be judged by Israel's Law, Those Nations are
either recorded in the Scripture or other Histories.

But neither the Scriptures nor other Histories do record any such thing: Ergo.


Dr. Cham. There are Scripture-records that show us that other Nations shall be
judged by Israel's Law.


Mr. Ives. I pray then Sir assign those Scripture-records.


Dr. Cham. I shall then assign Rome 2.14, 15. with Romans 3.19. In Rom 2. it is
said the Gentiles should be judged, though they had (...) the Law.


Mr. Ives. That Is true (...) this text makes against you direct (...) so far
from saying the Gentiles were (...) Law, and therefore should be judged by it,
that it says the direct (...) were without it, and therefore (...) without is.


Dr. Cham. But it is said in Rom, 3. That whatsoever do law says, it says to
them that are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and that all the
world may become guilty before God. Here is ALL the WORLD are become guilty by
what the Law says to them that are under it.


Mr. Ives. That Is true: but how does it follow that all the world are under the
Jews Law, because by a Law God will find them guilty? or how can this be
proved to be Moses Law, since the text before cited by you, says some were not
under Moses Law?


Dr. Cham. You see that the same things were writ in the heart, that were given
by Moses: for the text says, They (viz the Gentiles) did by nature the things
contained in the Law. And therefore it matters not whether it was the Law given
by Moses, or no.


Mr. Ives. Here Sir you have given away your cause at once: for my business
has been to show you, that the Seventh-day Sabbath is not required of
believing Gentiles by Moses Law, because Moses Law was not given to the
Gentiles; which is that I have been proving, and you have been denying: and now
in the conclusion you say it matters not whether it were the Law given by Moses
or no. So then I have proved the thing denied all this while, by your own
words, because you had your liberty to except against the enumeration of Laws,
in the Syllogism, and you excepted against the Law of Moses, saying, The Law of
Nature, Moses and Christ were all one: so that if the seventh-day sabbath be
not required by Moses Law, it is not (by your own confession) required by the
Law of Nature, or the Law of Christ: and that it is not required by Moses Law,
I have proved, and shall prove further, by this Argument.

If believing Gentiles are commanded to keep the seventh-day sabbath by virtue
of Moses Law, then they are commanded by that Law, Exodus, 20.

But the believing Gentiles are not required by that Law, Exodus 20. to keep the
seventh-day sabbath.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not required by Moses Law, to keep the
seventh-day sabbath.

Here Dr. Chamberlain forbears to respond to Mr. Ives his Arguments, and
thereupon Mr. Tillam takes upon him the place of a Respondent, whose Answers
follow.


Mr. Tillam. For my part, I am against this Syllogistical way of Disputation,
and I had though you and that Gentleman that stands by you Meaning Mr. Denn.
had been against all Academical ways and rules of Disputation also.


Mr. Ives. Truly Sir, we had more reason to think you should be FOR such a way
of Disputation, then you had to think we were against it, because you pretend
to make use of so much in your late book; however, See the Epistle.
give me my liberty to argue this way, as I have given Doctor Chamberlain; and
when it comes to your turn to oppose, take what way you will, so you prove the
thing denied, I pass not; in the mean time, answer my Argument.


Mr. Tillam. I pray repeat it again.


Mr. Ives. The Argument is as before:

If believing Gentiles, by virtue of Moses Law, are commanded to keep the
seventh-day Sabbath, then they are commanded by that Law, Exodus 20.

But believing Gentiles are not commanded by that Law, Exodus 20.

Ergo, the believing Gentiles are not commanded by virtue of Moses Law, to keep
the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. The Gentiles were bound to keep the Law that was given by God to
Israel, and particularly, that of the seventh-day Sabbath; and yet not by Exodus
20. ONLY, for they were commanded in Exodus, 16. also.


Mr. Ives. My Argument does not say they were bound by the 20th of Exodus ONLY,
but that if they are bound by Moses Law ((...) you say they are) then they are
bound by that Text Exodus 20, where the sabbath is required, among other Laws to
be observed: (...) but that the same things might be required elsewhere: now if
I prove this Text in Exodus 20. does not command the believing Gentiles to keep
the seventh-day sabbath, then I have taken away the force of those Arguments
you urge from thence, in the behalf of it.


Mr. Tillam. Well then, I say the believing Gentiles are bound to keep the
seventh-day sabbath by virtue of the Command Exodus, 20.


Mr. Ives. I prove the believing Gentiles, by that Text, are not bound to keep
the seventh-day sabbath, by this Argument:

If that Law that requires the Observation of the seventh-day sabbath, Exodus
20. be nor in force to believing Gentiles then believing Gentiles are not bound
by that Law Exodus 20. to observe the seventh-day sabbath.

But that Law that requires the Observation of the seventh day sabbath, Exodus
20. is not in force to the believing Gentiles.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not bound by that Law, Exodus 20. to keep the
seventh-day sabbath.

Here Mr. Tillam refused to answer to the Argument, because he would not be
tied to deny Ma^or or Minor; and therefore one among the Company calls upon Mr.
Ives to prove the Minor, viz. That the Law that requires the Observation of
the seventh day sabbath, Exodus 20. is not in force to believing Gentiles.


Mr. Ives. Well, because I would improve the time for Edification, though here
I might break off, and forbear to argue, when my Respondent shall refuse to
answer, yet be cause I am desired by some that stand by, I shall prove that
that Law is not in force, which I thus do:

If that Law which commands the observation of the seventh-day sabbath, Exodus
20. be in force unto believing Gentiles, then the punishment due to the
Transgression of that Law, by the Lawmakers appointment, is in force unto the
believing Gentiles also.

But the punishment due to the transgression of that Law, by the Lawmakers
appointment, is not in force to the believing Gentiles.

Ergo, that Law Exodus 20. that commands the Observation of the seventh-day
sabbath, is not in force to the believing Gentiles.

Here Mr. Tillam refuses to answer, and therefore one that stands by, denies
the Minor, and prays Mr. Ives to prove it.


Mr. Ives. I prove the Minor, viz. That the punishment that the Lawmakers
appointed to the breach of the Sabbath, required Exodus 20. is not in force.

If the punishment due to the transgrassion of that Law, Exodus 20. be in force
to the believing Gentiles, by the Law makers appointment, then the Lawmakers
has appointed some to other to inflict it.

But the Lawmakers has appointed none to inflict it.

Ergo, the punishment due to the transgression of that Law, Exodus 20. is not in
force to the believing Gentiles, by the Lawmakers appointment.

If we look into the Law of Moses, we shall find that whosoever did any work
upon the Sabbath day, was to be put to death, Exodus 35.1, 2. and Exodus 31.14,
15. And when they had found a man breaking this Law, in gathering sticks upon
the Sabbath day, they brought him to Noses and Aaron, and to as the
Congregation, to see what should he done unto him, Number. 15.32, 33 34, 35, 36
and they put him in ward, for it was not yet declared what should be done unto
him: then the Lord said unto Moses, The m^n sh^^^ die the death, (...) all the
multitude (...) him with ^ones, without the ho^^, are we find a Law given to
keep the Sabbath, ^od. 20. a punishment assigned by the Lawmakers which is
Death) Exodus 31.14, 15. the manner of ^e execution if prescribed by God, Number.
19.35. ^^ich is stoning with stones: the Executioners of this ^^nishment are
likewise appointed by the same Law, which is, all the multitude: And let all
the MULTITUDE stone him with stones, etc. Jer. 35 36. ^w if the seventh day
sabbath be in force by virtue of Moses Law, then it follows, that the same
punishment is in force, and the same Executioners are appoin^d, unless that any
body can show where God has freed the transgressors from the penalty of it, or
has appointed any other punishment then what is appointed (...) the Law of
Moses.


Mr. Ives. Because, Sir, you will not answer this Argument, by denying either
Major or Minor, I shall (...) on to prove that (...) which seems most doubtful,
which is the Minor Proposition, (vz.) That the Lawmakers has not appointed any
to inflict the punishment provided in Moses Law for the seventh-day Sabbath
breaking, upon believing Gentiles.

If the Lawmakers has appointed any to inflict the punishment (which by Moses
Law was to be inflicted noon Sabbath Breakers) it is either the civil
Magistrate, or the Ministers of the Gospel, or the Multitude.

But the Lawmakers has not appointed any of these Ergo.

Under the Law, the Sabbath-breaker was to stoned to death by the MVLTITVDE:
and if that Law, the seventh-day Sabbath be in force the MULTITUDE, then, by
the same Law, (...) MULTITUDE are to stone the seventh-day (...) has breakers
to death.


Mr. Tillam. I declare, that the Law given by God (...) Moses upon Mount Sinai,
is in force to all believing Gentiles: and thus I prove it.

Whosoever does expect the sun of righteou^ness to arise with healing under his
wings, th^^ are bound to observe the Law of Moses, Mal. 2, 3, 4. Remember the
law of Moses my servant which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel with the
statutes and judgments. So that the reason why Christians are bound and
encoun^ged to keep it, is, because it is the Law of the ten Commandments. And
here I might fram^ a Syllogism: but I will not take that conrse. And I might
say, That Law which contained these two causes, that faith, Thou shall not kil^
and, Thou shall not commit adultery, is the Roya^ Law, and that that law is the
law of the ten Commandments, and so consequently requires the keeping of a
Sabbath day.


Mr. Ives. I do perceive that Mr. Tillam either will no^ or cannot answer my
Argument, else surely he would not have forgotten the place of a Respondent,
and argue in stead of answering. For it (...) evident that he waves the
strength of my Ar^ments, and proposes Arguments of his own, (...) to little
purpose.

Surely this is true: for there is neither Argument nor Answer in what Mr.
Tillam last urged. (...) is no Answer: for he does not so much as (...) any
notice of Mr. Ives his Argument, one way (...) other. Again, there is no
Argument that con^^udes any thing in question, if those broken speeches (...)
violating the rules of Disputation) may be (...) with the name of Arguments.

For first, there is not one word of the seventh-day (...) in the Argument he
would seem to make (...) Mal. 4.2, 3, 4, no nor in the text it self.

2. There is not one word of believing Gentiles which are the subjects in the
question) neither in be text nor the argument.

3. The promises and excouragements which are (...) to those that keep the Law
of Moses, mentioned in Mal. 4. are as well made to the keeping the ceremonial
as the moral part of Moses Law: for the text says they were to keep that Law,
with the statures and judgments given in Horeb. Now if by this text the
Sabbath be enjoined, it is no otherwise enjoined then as it was among other
Statutes given in (...), of which the ornaments of the Priests was one. Exodus
29.9. and the burnt-offerings another, Lev. 3.17. both which are called
perpetual statutes, as any body may see that consults the texts.

4. If the Sabbath be required in this text, M^ 4. where there is an
exhortation to keep the Law^ Moses, etc. it is required of none but ^ews, w^
are granted in the explanation of the Question (...) be under that Law, as
appears verse. 4. Remember YE the law of Moses which I commande^ unto him in
Horeb for ALL ISRAEL, with (...) statutes and judgments. So that this text om^
proves what is granted, viz. that all Israel (...) under the Law given in
Horeb; but is far enoug^^ from proving that believing Gentiles are bound (...)
observe that Law, and farther from answering (...) Ives his Argument: which
because Mr. Tillam said nothing to it, Mr. Ives proceeded.


Mr. Ives. If God has appointed the same punishme^^ to be inflicted upon the
seventh-day ^^abbath^^ breaker in the times of the Gospel, as he di^appoint
should be inflicted upon the Jews Sabbath Breakers in the times of the Law; I
d^demand of all this Assemble, (since Mr. Tillam does refuse to answer) who it
is that God hath^^ appointed to punish the breach of the seventh-day Sabbath
among the believing Gentiles (...) the times of the Gospel; whether it be (...)
Civil Magistrate, or the Gospel-Minister? (...) whether every man shall rise up
and kill his brother, because he does not keep the seventh-day sabbath? And
although Mr. Tillam will not nor cannot answer this Argument, yet has he the
boldness to say, that they are all Atheists, Papists, Prelates, Ranters,
Quakers, and some Notionists, that gainsay the seventh-day sabbath; as appears
by his Book page 6.

Hereupon Mr. Tillam was provoked to answer.


Mr. Tillam. As for my Book, there is no such thing in it; if there is, it is
the Printers Errata: and therefore you that have a mind to know the truth
thereof, together with other things therein contained, you may buy it at
Livewel Chapmans in Popes-head-alley, or a^ Mr. Eversdens at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard.


Mr. Ives. It is strange you should be ignorant of your own book; and as
^rappe, that the Printer should err so foully as to put an Argument of five or
fix lines in your book, if it were not in the copy: and that it is in the
book, I shall show you.

Hereupon Mr. Ive^ took Mr. Tillams book out of his pocket, and read these very
words before all the people, viz. that Gods precept seconded by his practice
gives such full honor to the Sabbath, that I hear of none but Atheists,
Papist^, Prelates, Ranters, Quakers, and some Notionists, that deny it. Mr.
Ives having read these passages to the people, Mr. Tillam desires Mr. Ives to
hand the book to him; which Mr. Ives did; and when Mr. Tillam had read those
passages, he gives this answer.


Mr. Tillam. It is true, I mention these persons in my book: but I do not
compare all that deny the seventh-day sabbath to such, but all that deny A
sabbath.


Mr. Ives. Sir, that cannot be, because both Papistas and Prelates do
acknowledge A Sabbath, or a time to worship; and further, you allude to the
sabbath that God commanded and seconded by his practice, which was (say you)
the seventh-day; and thereupon tell your Reader, that you hear of none, save
Athei^^s, Papists, Prelares, Ranters, etc. that deny IT, meaning the
seventh-day sabbath; as any body may perceive that reads your Book: therefore
Sir, I cannot but wonder that you should be so confident in your opinion, as
thus to judge and censure those that are contrary minded, since you hereby
refuse to answer my Argument, and to assign who the Lawmakers has appointed to
execute the punishment which he has assigned in the Law of Moses for
sabbath-breaking; since you say, both that law and the punishment annexed to
it, is in force to the believing Gentiles.


Mr. Tillam. Well then, I will answer you, and I do say, that the great
lawgiver himself shall punish the breach of the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I demanded who the lawgiver has appointed under him to execute this
punishment; for so runs the Argument (viz.) he has appointed some or other,
etc. and you answer, He will do it himself: if this answer had been of value,
you should have denied the Major, which faith, if the punishment be in force,
etc. then the Lawmakers has APPOINTED some or other to inflict it; here you
might have denied the Consequence, and have told us that the punishment might
he in force, though moan were appointed, because the lawmakers might do it
himself; but this is not to the Question, because the Question now is, Who the
lawmakers has appointed, etc.


Mr. Tillam. Well then, I shall answer further, That sometime the lawmakers
does punish immediately, and sometimes by his destroying Angel, and sometimes
by men; and they are properly men, who are Magistrates in his Congregation, in
the Church, when he shall fulfill that prophecy, of restoring Counselors, as
at first; and Judges, as at the beginning.

It is observable, that though Mr. Tillam says, The punishment is in force,
yet he has not assigned who IS to inflict it, but in stead thereof, tells us,
first, that God does sometimes punish immediately: to this it may be replied,
that when he punishes immediately, it is when those whom he has appointed to
punish do not do their duty.

Secondly, He tells us, that sometime God does punish the transgressors of his
Law, by his destroying Angels: (...) which it may be answered, that this is
most commonly when the Magistrates and Ministers of Justice do neglect to
punish transgressors according as they ought: yet this hinders not, but all
this while some are appointed to punish the seventh day Sabbath breakers, if it
ought to be kept by the Law of Moses.

Thirdly, Mr. Tillam says. God appoints men to punish the breach of the
seventh-day Sabbath; and these men (he says) are Magistrates in the Church,
etc. but withal he adds, that such Magistrates shall be, when the Prophecy of
restoring Counselors as at first, and Judges as at the beginning, shall be
fulfilled: But does not this very saying leave Mr. Ives his Question
unanswered? For the Question is. Who God HAS appointed, etc. and the Answer
is, That there SHALL be Magistrates in the Church when the forementioned
Prophecy shall be fulfilled: but who then shall do it now, is the Question;
because the Text cited by Mr. Tillam, that exhorts to remember the Law of
Moses, does also call upon the same people, at the same time, to remember the
Statutes and JUDGMENTS; so that, if believing Gentiles ARE bound to observe the
Law of Moses, they ARE bound to observe the JUDGMENTS also.

So that Mr. Tillam may as well put off the observation of the Statutes, as the
observations of those Judgments God would have inflicted on the transgressors
of his Statutes: and it will not serve his turn to wait till God restores such
men: for the Law that commands the seventh day Sabbath of all the
Congregation of Israel, does command all the Congregation to stone the
Sabbath Breakers to death, being lawfully convicted (before a Magistrate) of
the fact. So that if Moses Law that requires the observation of the
seventh-day Sabbath be in force to the Congregations of believing Gentiles, as
it was to the Congregations of circumcised Jews, and the same punishment (as
has been argued) be in force to the one as well as the other, then by the same
Law, the believing Congregations among the Gentiles are bound (having convicted
any among them of Sabbath-breaking) to stone such a man to death: now though
such Congregations that do not keep the seventh-day Sabbath by virtue of Moses
Law, are not tied thus to do; yet all of Mr. Tillams opinion, I mean, all such
Congregations that hold themselves bound by Moses Law to keep the seventh-day
Sabbath, I say, all such Congregations stand bound to stone that member to
death, that shall be found to break it, having lawfully convicted him by two or
three witnesses: neither have they any other rule by that Law to put away such
an evil, or such an evil doer from among them: and this would hold good in all
respects, if God should at any time bring a Magistrate of the Commonwealth to
be a member in Mr. Tillams Church: then by his own grant, if they shall convict
a member for Sabbath-breaking before such a Magistrate, then such a Magistrate
by Moses Law ought to judge him guilty of death; and then it roundly follows,
that all Mr. Tillams Congregation must stone that man with stones till he die,
to put away the evil from among them.

Who then can be true to this seventh-day Sabbath-keeping, principally as bound
to it by Moses Law, but they must also submit their necks to such a yoke as
this, which is not consistent with that Law of love and charity, which ought to
be preferred among Christians in the times of the Gospel?

Thus having given a faithful account of the Arguments and Answers urged by Dr.
Chamberlain and Mr. Tillam, and Mr. Ives the first day, I shall now proceed to
the Arguments and Answers insisted on by both sides the next day, which was on
Friday 7 of Jan. 1658.

The people being assembled, Mr. Ives repeateth the Question, which take as
follows.


Mr. Ives. The Question agreed to be further disputed this day, is, Whether all
believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath; and I shall
desire, that whoever shall speak this day to this question, either as Opponent
or Respondent, may apply themselves to the right rules of Disputation.


Mr. Tillam. As to the question stated, I do freely assent to the terms agreed
on, and do say, that all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day
Sabbath: but as to your other Motion, viz. that we observe the Rules of
Disputation, this I told you yesterday, and do tell you again, that such a way
of Disputation is vain Philosophy, and the device of man's wisdom, and therefore
I shall not be tied to any such Method.


Mr. Ives. Sir, I do not tie you to this or that way; only I think you
mis-apply Scriptures, when you bring them to prove that making Syllogisms is
unlawful, when such forms of Arguing are frequently found in Scripture:
however, Sir, give me leave to use it, till I am persuaded of the unlawfulness
of it; and I shall give you your liberty to prove either by Syllogisms or by
plain Texts, That all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day
sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. There is no plain Text, that in so many words proves the
Proposition.


Mr. Ives. If there be no plain text to prove the Proposition, then you must
prove by consequence, which is upon the matter, the same with Syllogising; and
therefore I wonder you should be so much against such a way of discourse.


Mr. Tillam. I am not against Consequences or Inferences from Scripture, though
I am against disputing in Mood and Figure.


Mr. Ives. If you will not dispute by Mood and Figure, then I shall tie you to
bring plain Texts for what you affirm.


Mr. Tillam. There is not a Text says, in so many words, (as I have told you)
that believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath; but there is
Text that requires the People of God and the Servants of God to observe it,
and therefore by consequence, believing Gentiles are to observe it, if they are
Gods People and Servants.


Mr. Ives. Sir, what proof you have, you may spare it, till we are agreed how
to dispute: however, in the mean time, let me tell you, though you prove the
people of God, and the servants of God, were required to keep the seventh-day
sabbath, this will not reach our difference, because the Jewe were called both
Gods servants and People, whom we say were bound to keep it; but this does not
prove that all believing Gentiles are bound to it.


Mr. Tillam. Well, if I make it appear by those or the like consequences, that
believers in Gospel Times are to keep the seventh-day sabbath, I hope it will
suffice.


Mr. Ives. I wonder that Mr. Tillam should be destitute of plain Scripture to
prove his practice, especially considering that he blames men in his Book, page
96. for setting up Ordinances by Consequences, and calls such a practice
Philosophy, and vain deceits of men, whenas now himself has no plain Text to
prove his practice by.


Mr. Tillam. I think God has a design to promote my poor Book; therefore, if
any body have a desire to it, they may have it at Livewel Chapmans in
Popes-head-Alley, or at Mr. Eversdens in Paul's Churchyard.


Mr. Ives. SIR, we met not here to procure Customers for your book, but to
dispute; and therefore if you will prove your practice by plain Scripture, do;
for since you have cried down all other ways, both Syllogistical and
consequential, I see no Reason, why you should not keep to your own Rule,
prescribed by your self in your Book: however, that we may not spend time to no
purpose, I shall be content, so you prove the proposition, take what way you
will, provided that you prove either the Antecedent or the Consequence by plain
Text.


Mr. Tillam. Well then, I will proceed to prove, that all believing Gentiles
are bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath: Thus:

If that it be the duty of all men to keep the seventh-day Sabbath, then it is
the duty of every believing Gentile; but it is the duty of all men to keep the
seventh-day Sabbath: Ergo, it is the duty of every believing Gentile to keep
the seventh-day Sabbath.

It is worthy observation, that though Mr. Tillam had profaned the rules of
Syllogistical Disputation, and cried down all Consequential ways of proving the
lawfulness of any duty, yet he himself is forced at last to build up this
Sanctuary, that he has been pulling down, and hallow that way which he had
before profaned, by making use of it to prove his practice, though he had
before cried it down as profane.


Mr. Ives. Sir, you argue thus (viz.) If it be the duty of all to keep the
seventh-day, then it is the duty of all believing Gentiles: But it is the duty
of all men, etc. Ergo.

I deny the Minor (viz.) that it is the duty of all men to keep the seventh-day
Sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. This I prove our of Mark 2.27. where it is said, The Sabbath was
make for MAN, and not man for the Sabbath. Where it is evident, that the Law
was made for the Subjects, and not Subjects for the Law; even so the Sabbath
was made for man, and not man for the sabbath.

Again, Whatever was made for Adam, is made for all men; but the Sabbath was
made ^or Adam, because in the Text, it was made for man; and the word in Greek
is (...), and in Latin Homo, which comprehends all men, and so does Adam.


Mr. Ives. Mr. Tillam in his Book says, God is plain, page 96. and wonders
that people will bring Consequences in stead of plain Precepts; but it seems
there is neither plain Precept nor plain Consequence to be found for his
practice.

For first, there is neither a command to all men, much less to all believers
in this Text.

Again, I do confute your sense of the word Adam out of your own Book, page 14.
where it is objected, that ADAM being in honor, did not abide a night, Psalm.
49.12. your Answer is, that it is to be understood of such as the context
mentions, that trust in their wealth, etc. Here then you have confuted your
self, because somewhat may be said of Adam that does not concern every man;
therefore the Sabbath might be made for man, and yet not for every man.

Here Mr. Tillam did raise another Argument, instead of making good the former,
and therefore because that more was said to this Argument afterward, I shall
omit to mention the new ones either now or at any time hereafter, till I have
brought in first all that was said to the old; for many times (...) urged new
Arguments before the old ones were finished, and then was forced to leave those
new ones, to speak further to his old ones again.


Mr. Tillam. I confess, in the 49 Psalm the word Adam is restrained, but here
in the 2 of Mark it is not.


Mr. Ives. Well, if it be restrained there, then is not your Argument good,
(viz.) that whatever is said of man or ADAM, is said of every man.

Here Mr. Gosnold desired to speak a word or two touching the word (...) which
was in question, and told Mr. Tillam, that (...) does not sign fie every man,
unless (...) be joined with it.

To this Dr. Chamberlain replied, that none are excepted from the word (...),
though (...) be not joined.


Mr. Ives. But Mr. Tillam has confessed some are excepted, when he said, that
(...) in Psalm 49. does signify only such men that trust in their wealth; and
it is not yet shown, that Adam or man has a more universal signification the 2
of Mark, then in Psalm 49. since the ^^rd by his own confession is the same.

But I further answer, that it is frequent in ^^ripture to apply things unto
man, when yet does not intend every man; as first, it is said, Gen 8.21. I will
no more curse the ground for MAN'S sake, etc. whenas Noah and his Family were
exempted from the curse. Again Deuteronomy. 5.2^. it is there said, that God did talk
with MAN, ^^d he lives. Now here the word MAN is so fit from signifying all
men, that it is restrained to those people that were assembled about the
mountain; which were so far from all, that they were but a handful, in
comparison to the rest of Mankind.

This appears further, if we consider that saying in the 4th of Deuteronomy. and
compare it with the 5th: in the 5th it is said, that when God did give them the
Law, he spoke with MAN, and he lived: that this was only the Nation of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 4.33. tells us plainly; Did ever people hear the voice of God out of the
midst of the fire, as THOU have heard, and lived? and ver. 35. Unto THEE it was
showed, etc. and ver. 36. Out of heaven He made THEE to hear His voice. So that
Isreal's Law, in which the Sabbath was contained, was made for man, and yet not
for every man.

Again, God says, It is not good that man should be alone, Genesis 2.18. here the
Lord made a woman for Adam: but would it not be ridiculo^^ to reason thus:
Whatever the Lord made for Adam every man is bound to keep? would it not then
for low, that Paul and all other men sin, that have (...) wives, because the
woman was made for Adam? not this as good Logic as Mr. Tillams, who says The
Sabbath was made for man, and therefore every man is bound to keep it?


Mr. Tillam. If that Text alleged by you, Deuteronomy. 5. be understood of Adam,
then you have over thrown your Argument yesterday, wherein you denied the
extent of the Law of Moses to all men.


Mr. Ives. It is true, that if Adam, or the word man be always understood for
every individual man then my saying, that God gave the Law in Sina^ unto MAN,
does overthrow what I said yesterday, and to day too: but this is begging the
Question, and taking it for granted, that wherever any thing is spoken of or
to MAN or HOMO, that it is to be understood of every man; then which nothing is
more false, as I have already shown.


Mr. Tillam. As to what you objected from Genesis 8.21. I answer, that by Gods
cursing the ground for MAN'S sake, it is to be understood of all men
universally, because all men sinned in Adam.


Mr. Ives. (...) say again, that God did not curse the ground (...) the sin of
Noah, but for the wickedness of that (...), and therefore Noah is excepted:
when God (...) the ground was cursed for man's sake, he (...) of Noah, Thee have
I sound upright in this ^eneration; therefore you see that a thing may (...)
done for MAN'S sake, when it is not done or the sake of every man. So the
Sabbath ^ight be made for man, and yet not for every individual man, as has
been already shown once and again.


Mr. Tillam. Noah was under the curse; being made a prisoner in the Ark;
whereas otherwise he should have been free: and every man feels the curse of
Adam upon him.

Again, to the Text, Deuteronomy. 5. when the Word says, he spoke to man, he means
that he did not speak to children.

The question was not, Whether Noah did not in some measure suffer by reason of
the Deluge; but whether this curse was for his sake? Good men may suffer in a
common calamity, when the calamity may not be for their sakes, but for the sake
of those wicked men among whom they dwell.

Again, How could it be a curse for Noah to be saved in the Ark? I confess this
is such a Paradox that the world never heard of before. And whereas it is said,
God spoke with man, Deuteronomy. 5. to signify that he did not speak to children:
We^^ then, it follows from hence, that MAN is no^ always taken for every son
and daughter of Adam^ as Mr. Tillam has been pleading; but as God (...) said
to speak to man by way of distinction from children: so (as has been said) he
is said to spea^ to MAN when he did speak to Israel, by way (...) distinction
from all other Nations in the world, (...) has already been plentifully showed.


Mr. Tillams second Argument. If the Gentiles that could not be Prosolyte^ nor
joined to the Jews, were bound to kee^ the seventh-day Sabbath, then all men
we^^ bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath: bu^ that such Gentiles are so
bound, I prove out o^ Esai. 56.5, 6. Thus says the Lord to the Eunuch that
keep my Sabbath, etc. And let not the son of the stranger that is joined to the
Lord say, The Lord has surely separated me, etc.


Mr. Ives. I answer, first, These terms in the Text ar^ like the term MAN,
which you last insisted on: and how can an universal Proposition be concluded,
when the premises are but indefinite? But secondly, As this Text does not
respect all men, so it does not relate to believers in Gospel times, which is
the thing you are to prove: and that this Text does not relate to believers in
Gospel times, there are these Reasons in the Text it self.

First, Because it respects the time in which Sacrifices and burnt-Offerings
were to be offered, ver. 7. where God tells these men, whoever they are, that
if they do the thing that pleases him, that their Burnt-Offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon his Altar, etc.

Secondly, This saying in Esaias does not respect those strangers that should be
Proselyted (...) the Christian Religion in the time of the Gospel, but such as
were Proselyted to the Jews Religion in the time of the Law: for it is said,
that even them, he (viz. God) will bring to to his holy mountain, and make them
joyful in his house of prayer, ver. 7.

3. That this house of Prayer was not Christ's spiritual house, the Church of
the New Testament, appears by Christ's own words, Mat. 21.12, 13. And Jesus
went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought, and
overthrew the tables of the mony-changers, and the seats of them that sold
doves, and said to them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of
prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves. So that it appears plainly by the
words of Christ, that this house of which the Prophet speaks, was the
material temple, which they had made a house of merchandise by buying and
selling in it, and not the spiritual House of Christ in the New testament.


Mr. Tillam. I say the time spoken of in Esaias 56. is the Gospel Times, because
in the first verse it speaks of a Salvation to come, and a Righteousness to be
revealed: secondly, because it speaks of Eunuchs that were to be joined to the
Lord; which could not respect the times of the Law, because in the Law, Deuteronomy.
23.1. it is said, that an Eunuch shall not enter into the Congregation of the
Lord.


Mr. Ives. I answer, first by concession, that the time spoken of in the first
verse is the Gospel Times; but the Text does not say, they shall keep the
sabbath when those times come, but the Promises of the Benefits that should
accrue to them by Christ as his coming, used as motives to stir up the people
to do the things that were THEN required, as appears verse. 1. Thus says the
Lord, Keep judgment and DO justice, FOR my salvation is at hand, TO come; as
if the Lord had said; You that do expect benefit by the salvation TO come, in
the Gospel, must be very careful to do those things that are commanded in the
Law.

And whereas it is said that this must needs respect Gospel Times, because the
Eunuch is said to be admitted, which could not be under the Law; I answer,
first, that after ten generations he might enter, though not before; and there
was more then ten generations passed from Moses to the time of this Prophet
Esaias; so that though the Eunuch could not enter at first, yet after ten
generations, he might be admitted into the Jews Church.

Again, I have hinted that these could not be Gospel Times, because they that
shall be thus admitted shall offer Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings: to which you
have not answered a word.

Furthermore, he does not bid them keep the sabbath because salvation WAS come,
but because it was TO come; which shows, that those were duties to be observed
before the coming of JESUS CHRIST.

Lastly, Mr. Tillam says in his Argument, that they are the Sons of Strangers,
and such Gentiles as could not be joined to the Jews Religion; but the Text
says the direct contrary, (viz.) That the Son of the stranger HAD joined
himself to the Lord, verse. 3. and let not the son of the stranger which IS
joined to the Lord, etc. and the strangers that cleave to the Lord, verse. 6.
them will I bring to my holy mountain, etc.


Mr. Tillam. There is in the Text, Man, and the Son of man, to take hold of
this Righteousness, and therefore it must be understood of every man.

And whereas you say, here is Burnt-offerings in the Text, as well as keeping
the Sabbath; I answer: what is meant by Burnt-offerings, is doubtful, it being
a word of a various signification; but he that takes believers to be Priests,
may take their Services to be Sacrifices: and this I the rather think, because
the Text says, When this salvation is come, then they shall keep the sabbath.


Mr. Ives. Mr. Tillam adds to this Text diverse things, and the Scripture says,
Add not to his words, lest (...) reprove thee, and thou be found a liar, Prove.
306. As first, he says it is written, They SHALL keep the Sabbath, when this
Salvation is come (...) whereas the text does not say so, but bids them do
justice, and keep the Sabbaths, because the salvation was near to come, that by
so doing they might be a people prepared for the Lord, according as John by his
Ministry did prepare and make ready the people for the salvation (...) Christ,
by persuading them to obedience. Secondly, the Text says of these strangers,
as (...) have already shown, that they WERE joined to the Lord; and Mr. Tillam
in his Argument says they were not, and they could not be joined to the Lord.

Thirdly, Christ says, (if you will believe him^^ that this house, in this 56
of Esaias, is the material Temple, out of which he whipped those that bought and
sold; and this he calls a house of prayer, according as it was written by the
Prophet: but Mr. Tillam says, if you will believe him rather then Christ, that
this house of prayer is the Church of the new Testament.

So then, if by Christ's interpretation the Prophet speaks of the material
Temple, then the Altars and Sacrifices must needs be material Altars and
material Scrifices.

Fourthly, I would demand of Mr. Tillam, wherever Gospel-services are called
BURNT OFFERINGS: so that whereas he said, he would bring plain Text to prove
his practice, he turns all plain Texts into Allegories; and is this to argue
without a Consequence?


Mr. Tillam. The strangers mentioned in the Text are the Sons of Adam; and the
place unto which they shall be joined, is Gods house, which they did not enjoy
at this time, but were separated.

Moabs People must have ten Generations in the full profession of religion,
before they could be admitted; and so must these Eunuchs: again, the Jews would
not admit of Greeks into the Temple, which were Gentiles; which shows that this
Text speaks not of any other time then the time of the Gospel.

Whereas it is said by Mr. Tillam, that the strangers mentioned in the Text are
the sons of Adam, who ever denied that? for whose Sons should they be else?
uuless he will fall into the Fancy of some, that tell us of men before Adam.

And whereas he says, the Eunuch was to be separated to ten Generations, as
the Moabite was, this has been answered once and again, and he takes no notice
of it: for the Moabite and the Eunuch also, might enter into the Jews Church
after ten Generations, though not before, and therefore both the one and the
other might have been admitted in the times of this Prophet, which was more
then ten Generations from Moses, as has been said.

And whereas it is said, the Jews would not admit of Greeks into the Temple,
and therefore not of these strangers:

The answer is easy: for though the Jews would not admit of Greeks, or
strangers uncircumcised, yet they would have admitted of them, if they had
joined themselves to the Lord, by Circumcision.


Mr. Ives. If all these terms, Sacrifice and Burnt-offerings, and altar, holy
mountain, and house of Prayer, be Allegorical, as you imagine, by your thus
interpreting the text, then why may not the word Sabbath in the text, be
allegorically understood also?


Mr. Tillam. My reason is, because the text says, the house there spoken of,
should be called of all Nation^ A house of Prayer; which could not be true of
the Temple of Jerusalem, because all Nations could not be contained in it.


Mr. Ives. It does not follow, that all Nations should not, or could not so
account of Gods house in Jerusalem, as to call it a house of Prayer, because
that house could not contain them all. And secondly, the text says not that
all Nations should be contained in it, but that all Nations should so call it:
and that of all Nations it was so called, the Scripture says, Act. 2.5. that
there were at Jerusalem, devout men, out of every Nation under Heaven. And
thirdly, I shall desire again, that the text in Esaias under debate, might be
compared with Matthew 21.13, and 14. and then you will be able to judge,
whether Christ or Mr. Tillam is the best expositor of the house of God spoken
of in the 56 of Esaias; which is all I shall say to this Argument: and if this
text respects not the Believers in Gospel Times, as by what has been said it
does not; then has not Mr. Tillam proved his Argument, which was, that the
Gentiles that could not be proselyted (which he understands for Christian
Gentiles) were bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath: but I shall say no more.

Here Mr. Tillam left off being opponent, and Mr. Ives became Opponent, and Dr.
Chamberlain Respondent.


Mr. Ives. I am to prove, that all believers are not bound to keep the
seventh-day sabbath; and in order hereunto I have urged this Argument:

That if believing Gentiles are not bound, then all believers are not bound:

But believing Gentiles are not bound.

Ergo.

The Minor being denied, I proved it by this enumeration (viz.) If all
believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath, they are bound,
either by the Law of Nature, Moses, or Christ: but all believing Gentiles are
not bound, either by the Law of Nature, Moses, or Christ, to keep the
seventh-day sabbath: Ergo, All believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the
seventh-day Sabbath.

It was answered yesterday, that believing Gentiles were bound by the Law of
Moses to keep the seventh-day sabbath; some Arguments were then urged, to prove
that believing Gentiles are not bound by Moses Law to keep the seventh-day
sabbath; the last of which Arguments did relate to the 20 of Exodus; which I
thus framed, and do again urge it, that it may be answered.

If that Law Exodus 20, which requires the observation of the seventh-day
sabbath, be in force to the believing Gentiles, then the punishment due to the
trasgression of that Law, by the Lawmakers appointment is in force to the
believing Gentiles also.

But the punishment due to the transgression of that Law Exodus 20. by the
Lawmakers appointment is not in force to the believing Gentiles.

Ergo, That Law Exodus 20. that requires the observation of the seventh-day
sabbath, is ^ot in force to believing Gentiles.


Dr. Chamberlain. As to the Law of Nature, Moses, and Christ, (...) do not
think there is so many Lawgivers, as (...) have so many distinctions; but I do
own (...) 20 of Exodus for a binding Law, because (...) Savior says, Mat. 5.
I am not come to destroy (...) Law, etc. Now then, If not one jor or tittle
(...) the Law shall fail, then not the sabbath; and consequentially not the
punishment annexed ^wor^ the breach of it; for without punishment, (...) Law is
of no force: for the strength of the (...) being for the curbing of sinful
Nature, is (...) no use, unless there be a punishment, and without it the Law
would lose its force and ^^gor; and the execution of this Law is in the and of
such Magistrates as are Administrators ^^der Christ.


Mr. Ives. The Dr. should have directed his answer to my Argument, by assigning
a punishment appointed by the Lawmakers to be inflicted upon believing Gentiles
for not keeping the seventh-day sabbath; but in stead thereof, he confessth
that the Law is of no force without a punishment: well then, by his own
confession, if there be no punishment to be inflicted upon the believing
Gentiles, then the Law that commands (if any such there be) has lost its force
and vigor: and that the punishment is not in force; I prove by this Argument:
If the punishment due to the breach of the seventh-day sabbath, required Exodus
20. be in force by the Lawmakers appointment to believing Gentiles, then the
Lawmakers has appointed some or other to inflict it; but he has appointed
none to inflict it. Ergo.


Dr. Chamberlain. I shall find out a better answerer then my self, and that is
the Apostle Paul, Romans 13. and 1 Pet. 2.13. 1 Pet. 4.15. in which text, an evil
doer is the general word; and all evil doing is punishable by the Magistrates;
these are Sermons preached by Paul and Peter.


Mr. Ives. My Argument was, If the punishment in the LAW be in force, then God
has appointed some or other to inflict it; and if he has, I desired the
Doctor to assign who God had appointed to inflict that punishment upon
believing Gentiles, which was appointed in the Law for seventh-day sabbath
breakers; and in stead thereof, he cites several texts, which we well knew
before, none of which requires the Magistrate to punish the believing Gentiles
with death, for not observing the seventh-day Sabbath: For first, here is no
mention made of the Sabbath, nor of the punishment what it should be.

Secondly, If by the Magistrates punishing all evil, must be meant all the
evils against the first Table, as well as the Second, then the Magistrate may
and must determine all Doctrinal truths, and punish such as shall err from his
determination: which the Dr. will not allow.

Thirdly, the Dr. has at one blow given away the Cause which the good people
of this land have contended for in blood for this many years. Which is, that
they might have liberty to worship God according to their Consciences, and that
the Magistrate may not be a judge in Spirituals, to punish with death or
imprisonment all that differ from him in matters of faith or worship.


And lastly, It is a begging the Question, to take it for granted, that
Sabbath-breaking (I mean the seventh-day Sabbath-breaking) is an evil, before
it be proved to be so.


Dr. Chamberlain. I shall own, and have printed, that Magistrates are allowed
of God to punish the duties of the first and second Table; only with this
caution, that he is not to apply Legal punishments to Gospel sins, nor Gospel
punishments to Legal sins; and this I have proved out of the evidences of Peter
and Paul; so that as the Magistrate is to punish all outward Idolatry, Swearing
and Blasphemy, so also the Sabbath, but not that which is of man's invention;
but the seventh-day Sabbath which the Lord sanctified, and for which he calls
himself Lord of sabbaths; and Christ was both a keeper and preacher of this
Sabbath, Mat. 12.: now then, for a man to keep nine of the Commandments, and
say, the seventh-day sabbath which makes up the tenth is of no force, is
against Christ.


Mr. Ives. I have offered, that if the Magistrate be to punish all Idolatry by
Gods appointment, and also the breach of the seventh-day sabbath, then he must
also judge what is Idolatry, and what is Sabbath-breaking; and if so, the Dr.
may not be long before he be convicted. For Idolatry is not only worshipping
false Gods, but the true God in a salfe manner.

But secondly, Idolatry was in the Law punishable with death, and the
sabbath-breaker was to be stoned to death. Now if the Law of Moses be in force,
and the punishment thereof in force against those that keep not
Saturday-sabbath, and (as you have said) the Civil Magistrate is to inflict it,
then (according to your opinion) the Reason why we live, is, because of the
wickedness of the Civil Magistrate; for if the Civil Magistrate did but that
which you call his duty, we should all of us by your Opinion be stoned to death
before to morrow morning, that do not keep the Saturday-Sabbath.

Where then is our Christian Liberty? for by the Law of Moses I must be put to
death for not keeping the Jews Sabbath (if this opinion be true) though (...)
conscience I am persuaded that it is a weak and ^^ggerly Element, unto which I
ought not to be in ^^ndage: and yet so indulgent are men to their opi^^ons,
that having once espoused them, they will main^^in them, maugre the liberty of
all the conscientious ^^ople in the Land, I, and their own liberty too: for
(...) the same Rule the Magistrate may put a man (...) death that does not keep
the Jews Sabbath, (for (...) the Magistrate ought to do, if he should be of
(...) Doctors opinion; and hold that the seventh-day ^abbath required in the
Law, ought to be kept, and (...) at the punishment annexed to it ought to be
inflict^) I say, by the same Rule a Magistrate may (...) a man to death, that
is not persuaded to (...) this seventh-day Sabbath; another Ma^state, otherwise
minded, may put men of the Doctors ^^inion to death, because they do not keep
the first day ^abbath, which he holds himself, in conscience bound (...) see as
strictly kept, as the other does his Saturday- Sabbath.


Dr. Cham. I am not a Judge of Magistrates, but do submit unto them: secondly,
let none be afraid of this text, for he that is in Christ is above the Law, and
it was not made for him, for he that is in Christ cannot sin: Neither do I say,
that the Magistrates have power to punish spiritual sins with legal
punishments, but spiritual sins with spiritual punishments: and this they may
very well do, if they have but good Ministers to instruct them.


Mr. Ives. If the Magistrate must punish all evil (according to your sense of
that text) then he must punish spiritual as well as corporeal Idolatry, when
the Offender shall be convicted of it; and he must punish it according to his
Judgment and Conscience: so that if it be the Magistrates Duty to take away
the lives of their Subjects for not observing the seventh-day Sabbath, it
follows roundly, that the reason why we live, is because of the wickedness of
the civil Magistrate, a wickedness (if the Doctors opinion be true) for which
both Magistrates and People should die without mercy, if once a Magistrate
should be set up, that is of the Doctors persuasion.

But the main stress of my Argument lies in this, That God never appointed the
Gentile-Magistrates, to execute the punishment which he in the Law did command
should be inflicted upon those that broke the seventh-day sabbath, required in
Exodus 20. and to this the Doctor has given no answer, save that the Magistrate
is to punish all evil, etc. but he has not shown us that seventh-day
sabbath-breaking is an evil, nor that the Magistrate is to punish it according
to Moses Law, if it were an evil; which are the two main things that have been
objected, to which he has given no kind of Answer, though they have been
urged to him, once and again.

But instead of answering, tells us, that none should be afraid of the text, (I
suppose he means the texts in the Law, that threaten the breach of the
seventh-day Sabbath with death) his reason is, because he that is in Christ, is
above the Law, and (...) was not made for him; for he that is in Christ cannot
sin, etc. If this be true, that those that are in Christ are above the Law, and
that the Law was not made for them, I wonder why the Doctor should keep such a
stir to engage believers to observe the Law, and the seventh-day Sabbath, which
he calls a part of the Law. And if they that are in Christ (as he says) cannot
sin, then it follows, that either none are in Christ but those that keep the
Jewish Sabbath, or if they may be in Christ that do not keep it, then it is no
Sin not to observe it, since (if the Dr. says true) they that are in Christ
cannot sin: so that one absurd opinion is the cause of many; for is it not
absurd to say, that those that are in Christ cannot sin, and afterward charge
believers in Christ with (...), for not observing the seventh-day Sabbath?


Dr. Cham. Mr. Ives has been calling upon me to assign who God has appointed
to execute the punishment, which by Moses Law was due to the seventh-day
sabbath breakers; I further answer, That if the Magistrate must punish the
breach of all Law, then of the seventh-day Sabbath: an^ whereas Mr. Ives says,
that then the Magistrate must judge what is Idolatry and Sabbath breaking, if
he must punish all transgression relating to these Laws:

I answer, that it is no great matter to be (...) judge, since the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 6, 4 Set them to judge that are least esteemed in the Church: now
if the weakest are to be chosen for Judges, such Magistrates will not suffer
their eyes to be blinded with gifts; and he will inflict punishment upon false
witnesses especially when such Magistrates are assisted with Gods Ministers.

To some of the forementioned passages answer has been made, in that Mr. Ives
has told the Dr. that his urging the text (that says, the Magistrate is to
punish all evil) is impertinent, till he has proved the seventh-day sabbath
breaking an evil; and if that could be done, yet this text does not prove that
the Magistrate is bound to punish it by stoning the offender to death, which
Dr. Chamberlain says, is a punishment yet in force to the believing Gentiles.
And whereas Mr. Ives desired the Dr. to assign who should judge, he most
impertinently cites 1 Cor. 6.4. and tells us, that the weakest in the Church
should be chosen Judges. Well then, if the weakest should be chosen Judges,
etc. I demand, Whether they should be chosen out of that Church whereof Dr.
Chamberlain is a member, or out of a Church that is not of his mind about the
seventh-day sabbath? If out the Church that are of his mind, and whereof he is
a member, then we are all to be stoned to death without mercy, or to keep his
seventh-day sabbath, though it be never so much against our Consciences; but it
shall ever be a part of my Letany, From such Magistrates and Ministers of
Justice, Good Lord deliver us.

But if they should be chosen out of a Church that is not of the Doctors mind
about the seventh-day Sabbath, then it cannot reasonably be imagined that such
Magistrates would put that Law in execution that says the seventh-day
Sabbath-breaker shall be sto^ed to death, while the Magistrate himself does
tolerate the breach of it.

And lastly, whosoever does but read 1 Cor. 6. and4. and compares it but with
the occasion for which the Doctor cites it, which is to show whom God has
appointed to execute the punishment the Law of Moses has assigned for
Sabbath Breakers, they will see that the Doctor has manifested so much
weakness, that if weakness were a fit qualification for a Judge, (as he says
it is) he has bespoke himself worthy of a Judges place before all the Poople:
for if the weakest are to be chose Judges, I know not where we should meet with
a fitter man then the Doctor, who has so unfitly applied the Apostles words to
the case in hand.

Here the Doctor leaves off, and Mr. Tillam undertakes to answer to Mr. Ives
his ensuing Arguments.


Mr. Ives I am now to proceed to another Argumn^^ to prove that believing
Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh day Sabbath.

Which I thus do:

If believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath, then they are
bound by that text Jam. 2. where (you say) the whole Law is required to be kept.

But the believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath, by
that te^ Jam. 2. where (you say) the whole Law is required, etc.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.

The reason of Mr. Ives his urging this Ar^^ment, is to dis-mount the
confidence of his Antagonists, who build so much upon this text for the proo^^
of their seventh-day Sabbath: but to this, Mr. Tillam, being Respondent, did
refuse to answer, an^ therefore Mr. Ives went on to prove the Minor, because
his Antagonists grant the Major, viz. Tha^ if believing Gentiles are bound,
they are bound by the second of James, etc.


Mr. Ives. I shall go on to prove the Minor, (viz.) Tha^ believing Gentiles are
not bound by Jam. 2. to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.

Besides what I have said, that the Gentiles were without the Law that was
otherwise imposed upon the Jews, I shall further add.

If believing Gentiles are bound by that text Jam. 2. to keep the seventh-day
Sabbath, then it is because they are required to keep the WHOLE Law.

But believing Gentiles are not required to keep the WHOLE Law.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not bound by that text Jam. 2. to keep the
seventh-day sabbath.

Mr. Tillam refusing to answer, Mr. Ives proceeds to the proof of the Minor,
(viz.) That believing Gentiles are not required by that text Jam. 2. to keep
the whole Law.

If. believing Gentiles are not indebted to the WHOLE LAW, then they are not
bound by this text Jam. 2. to keep the WHOLE Law.

But the believing Gentiles are not indebted to the WHOLE Law.

Ergo, the believing Gentiles are not bound by this text, James 2. to keep the
WHOLE Law.

The Minor I prove thus:

If believing Gentiles are of the Uncircumcision, then they are not indebted to
the WHOLE Law: but believing Gentiles are of the Uncircumcision.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not indebted to the WHOLE Law.

The Major I prove thus:

If Circumcision makes the believing Gentiles debtors to the whole Law; then it
follows, that if believing Gentiles be uncircumcised, they are not indebted to
the whole Law: But Circumcision makes the believing Gentiles debtors to the
whole Law. Ergo, if believing Gentiles are uncircumcised, they are not debtors
to the whole Law.


Here Mr. Tillam begins to reply.

Mr. Tillam. If believing Gentiles are bound to other parts of James his
Epistle, then to this also: But Mr. Ives himself confesses believing Gentiles
are bound to other parts of this Epistle, as that of anointing with oil and
prayer, etc.

Secondly, I demand, Whether Mr. Ives does not obey the Lord Jesus Christ by
that which is mentioned in one single text; for so he does (as I am informed)
by acknowledging the practice of anointing with oil, which is mentioned in no
other text then in the Epistle of James.

Either then let Mr. Ives disclaim that Ordinance of anointing with oil (which
I hope he will have more Grace and godliness then so to do) or else acknowledge
this of James 2. to be of the same force, according to Romans 10, 11, 12.


Mr. Ives. Sir, You argue in stead of answering, which is not fair; however,
let me tell you, that it does not follow, that all an Epistle does belong to
the Gentiles, because some does; and there is no great difficulty to make this
appear: for, may not a Prophet speak against extortion, and against
unmercifulness to poor brethren, which is every bodies duty to fly from, and a
saying that belongs to all; yet may not the same Prophet exhort to
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, a duty that did belong but to some, and not to
all? So that it follows not that a man should disclaim those things that are
his duty in such and such a Prophecy, because there is mention made of things
that are not his duty.

May not a man as well say, that Mr. Tillam must own all the Ceremonies of
Moses Law, which I hope he has more Grace, then so to do, because he owns a
part of it (viz.) the seventh-day sabbath, and the punishment thereunto
annexed? I speak not this in favor to the disowning of any part of James is
Epistle, or any other part of sacred writing, but to show you how irrationally
Mr. Tillam argues: for is it not the same, You own a part of James his Epistle
(viz.) that of anointing with oil to belong to believing Gentiles: Ergo, You
must own all the rest? In like manner Mr. Tillam owns a part of Moses Law
(viz.) that of the seventh-day Sabbath: Ergo, Mr. Tillam must own all Moses
Law, and all the Ceremonies therein contained.

So likewise James in this Epistle, as Paul in some others, might speak some
things that more properly relate to Jews, and other some things that relate
more generally both to Jews and Gentiles.

Again, I have proved, that none but those that are circumcised were bound to
keep the WHOLE LAW. Gal. 5.3. in that universal sense in which Mr. Tillam
accepts this word the WHOLE Law, so as to include the seventh-day Sabbath; and
this is not my opinion only, but the opinion of the modern Jews, which say,
that whosoever will keep their Sabbath, must first be circumcised.


Mr. Tillam. There is no difference between Jew and Greek, 1 Cor. 12.12. Romans
10.11, 12. and if Mr. Ives will exclude one part of James his Epistle from
relating to believing Gentiles, he must exclude it all.

Again, Both Jews and Gentiles are to walk by one Law, and have but one
Lawgiver that is able to save and destroy.

Again, I say, that information of the modern Jews is false; and though they
have told us, that from the middle upward we are Jews, yet from the middle
downward we are Gentiles; but the other saying I do not remember.


Mr. Ives. Whereas he says, believing Gentiles are bound to the whole Law
mentioned in James 2. I add, that James himself being a Jew, and writing to the
twelve Tribes among which there were some believers, and very many unbeleevers,
as appears by the complaint he makes of the pride, and oppression, and unruly
talking that was among them; now from that Law, that these unrighteous Jews
pretended to live by, and to be justified by, the Apostle goes about to
convince them, by telling them, that whosoever should pretend to the whole Law,
and yet err in one point, he is guilty of all; as much as if he should say, If
you will be keepers of the Law, you must keep it perfectly, or you do nothing:
I would fain know, how such an interpretation (supposing it to be a false gloss
upon the text) should incur the censure of denying the whole of James his
Epistle to be of any use to believing Gentiles.

And although there be no difference between the Jew and Gentile in point of
justification and Gospel-priviledges, in as much as the Jew cannot be justified
by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Christ, even as the Gentiles are;
yet the Gentiles are not bound to observe all edicts that were at that time
imposed upon the Jews. And lest this seem strange, I pray consider Acts 21.23,
24, 25. where it is observable, that a holy Convocation of Apostles and Elders
being met at Jerusalem, did enjoin Paul to observe somethings which at no hand
they would have the Gentiles to observe, but gave them a solemn charge to the
contrary; for in the 23, and 24 verses, the Assembly of Apostles and Elders do
enjoin Paul, saying, DO this that WE say to thee: we have four men which have
a vow upon them, them take, and purify thy self with them, and be at charges
with them, that they may shave their heads, and ALL may know that those things
whereof they were informed concerning thee are nothing, but that thou thy self
walk orderly and keep the Law. But as touching the GENTILES which
believe, we have written and concluded, that THEY observe NO SUCH thing, etc.
Here we see a holy convocation of Apostles and Elders, guided by the Spirit of
truth, do require that of Paul being a Jew, that they expressly command the
Gentile. believers not to observe. Would it not be ridiculous then for a man to
say, that I must either observe all the Apostles injunctions to the Jews; or
else, that I must reject all the injunctions of the Apostles, even those that
concern the Gentiles? for after this rate Mr. Tillam reasons (viz.) that I must
either observe all James his Epistle, or none at all, because (says he) there
is no difference between Jew and Greek. Now then, by this place in the 21 of
the Acts you see there was some difference by order from the Apostles in point
of observation, but no difference in point of justification, which is the scope
of the Apostle in that text cited by Mr. Tillam, Romans 10.11, 12. There is no
difference between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord over all, is RICH unto all
that call upon him: so that the Argument remains unanswered: for all that Mr.
Tillam has said, because the Scripture says plainly that the uncircumcised
Gentiles were not bound to keep the whole Law, therefore from those words the
WHOLE LAW, the seventh-day sabbath cannot reasonably be inferred. Neither let
any one think to relieve himself by the help of this distinction (viz.) that
though believers are not to keep the whole Law, as it contains Morals and
Ceremonials, yet they are bound to observe the whole Law as it contains morals
only: for first, the Law of Moses makes no such distinctions as a whole, and a
whole Law; neither does the Scriptures of the New Testament make any such
distinction; for when it speaks of the WHOLE Law with reference to the Law of
Moses, it always includes both Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial Laws, which are
all but several parts of the Israelites WHOLE Law. But secondly, Suppose we
should allow the distressed the help of this distinction (viz.) that sometime
Moses Law is called the WHOLE LAW, with reference to the moral part of it only;
as suppose it so in this 2 of James now under debate, does it therefore follow
that the seventh-day sabbath is part of the moral Law? is not the imagination
of such a conceit as this a stranger to the heart of an ingenious disputant
who abhors to beg that Question he cannot prove^ for, could that be but proved,
which is so often taken for granted, (viz.) that the keeping of the seventh-day
Sabbath is a moral Duty, then the Controversi^^ were at an end; for doubtless,
all believers are bound to keep the whole Moral Law.


Mr. Tillam. Whereas you say, somewhat was enjoined upon the Jews that was not
upon the Gentiles; I question if this was not the Apostles weakness, for they
were subject to like passion.

For at another time a less matter then this (mentioned by you Act 21.) was
counted hypocrisy. Secondly, James is speaking of the Royal Law, but this
example of yours, relates to the Law of Ceremonies. Thirdly, if this Epistle of
James were written to believing Jews, then there is one Law for the believing
Jews, and another for the believing Gentiles; and if so, believing Jews are
bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath, and believing Gentiles are not: and how
can this be without confusion?


Mr. Ives. I answer to the last first, that then your book is full of
Confusion; for in your book you allowed both days to be observed, to wit, the
seventh day and the first day.

And secondly, the Scripture is full of confusion, if you say true; for the
Scripture tells us of the Jews observation of the seventh day, and the Gentiles
of the first day.

But secondly, it follows not that the believing Jews are bound by my
confession to keep the seventh-day sabbath, seeing that your term whole Law,
mentioned in James 2. does not prove the Sabbath to be there intended, any more
then it proves circumcision or any other Jewish ceremony.

Thirdly, when I cite a text to show that the Apostles being guided by Gods
holy Spirit, did order Paul (being a Jew) to observe some things which they
strictly commanded the Gentiles not to observe, Mr. Tillam answers, That this
was the Apostles weakness; by which it appears, that rather then Mr. Tillam
will be accounted weak, he will brand the Apostle Paul, and the whole Council
of Apostles and Elders, assembled at Jerusalem, with the Holy Ghost, with
weakness: but it is more likely that Mr. Tillam should be weak, then Paul and
all that Assembly, among whom the Holy Ghost was present, in so solemn a
Judgment.

And whereas Mr. Tillam tells us, that Peter played the hypocrite, Gal. 2.13.
in that he compelled the Gentiles to live as do the Jews; I answer, that this
is nothing to our purpose: First, because the text cited by me, Act. 21. only
speaks of Jews that were advised to live as Jews, and of Gentiles that were
forbidden so to live, verse. 25. but the text in Gal. 2. speaks of Gentiles
that Peter did compel to live as do the Jews, which is clearly another thing:
Now then, if this text cited by Mr. Tillam, Gal. 2. in which it is said Peter
was to blame for compelling the Gentiles to live as do the Jews; I say, if this
text serves any thing to the present controversy, it is to show that Mr.
Tillam plays the hypocrite, in that he being (as he calls himself) a Minister
of the Gentiles, does command the Gentiles to live as do the Jews, in keeping
the Saturday for a Sabbath.

And lastly, the second of the Galatians blames Peter sharply for compelling
the Gentiles to live as do the Jews, but there is none but Mr. Tillam, that
(...) ever heard of, that ever presumed to blame, not only Paul in what he did,
Act. 21. but also the whole Assembly of Apostles, in which the holy GHOST was
present; a piece of such great presumption, that scarce can be paralleled in
any story.

And whereas he says the instance Acts 21. is of the Ceremonial Law, and not
of the Royal Law; I answer, that all GOD's Laws are Royal: but secondly, though
the instance in Act. 21. be of a Ceremonial Law, yet it is sufficient to show,
that since the whole Law does comprehend both Morals and Ceremonials, that
believing Gentiles, who are not circumcised, are not bound to keep the while,
since they are excused from observing the Ceremonial part of it, by this text
Act. 21.

And whereas Mr. Tillam says, that, if the Epistle of James were writ to
believing Jews, then here would be one Law for the believing Jews, and another
for the believing Gentiles. To this I answer, that it does not follow, that
because this Epistle was ^riten to Jews that THEREFORE there should be (...)
Law for them and another for the Gentiles: but ^econdly, this absurdity (if it
be an absurdity) ^^ay as well be drawn upon the text, because it is ^^id, Jam.
2. that the Epistle was writ to the Twelve Tribes scattered abroad, etc. which
were Jews.

And lastly it has already been shown, that some things were enjoined upon
Paul, that was a Jew, which ought not to be enjoined upon the believing
Gentiles.


Mr. Tillam. Whereas Mr. Ives charge my Book for allowing that which I now
call confusion: I answer, that I confess when I was first persuaded of the
seventh-day sabbath, I did also acknowledge the first day of the week, but it
was upon the reason of antiquity, for as much as the seventh-day and the first
day were both observed in the first three hundred years: but when I observed
the same contention about Easter Day, I was convinced, and I do now believe,
that the first day of the week is in common with all other days: and whereas
Mr. Ives says, the Apostles preached in the Synagogues on the Sabbath days,
and in the Christian assemblies on the first-days of the week; I do say, that
that they never met in any Christian assemblies upon the first day of the week;
and Mr. Tina^ calls the first day of the week the sabbath Act. 20.7.


Mr. Ives. I answer to the last first, Whereas you (...) Mr. Tindal calls the
first day of the week (...) sabbath, so he does also call that day (...) which
John received his Revelation the Sunday, which other translations call the
Lord day; by which it appears, that without confusion Mr. Tindal thought the
Apostles might observe both days, as the state of Christian ^^fairs then stood,
and as your self have confess that both the Sabbath Day, and the Lords-da^
were observed in the three first Centuries.

And if Mr. Tindals Authority may be allowed then the first day of the week is
the Sabbath Day and then what becomes of your seventh day sabbath unless you
will keep two sabbaths? so that sin^^ you have cited Mr. Tindal, let Mr. Tindal
(...) the Controversy, who by your own confession ca^^ the first day of the
week the sabbath.

Again, when I said the Apostles did meet on both days without confusion, which
you said they could not; I spoke this, to show what Christians may do in point
of condescension to one another, and also to show, that if meeting on both days
was a practice (which you say is full of confusion) that then your Book was not
empty of confusion, in allowing both the one and the other, though you now deny
it.


Mr. Tillam. It is a great confusion for one part of an ^ssembly to meet upon
one day, and another ^^rt to meet upon another; and if any of our ^^iends do
so, they do evil: for they ought all (...) meet at one place, and at one time,
and to ^^rry one for another, and not to vary hours, ^uch less days.


Mr. Ives. I still think I have reason for my opinion, viz.) that those that do
pretend to keep the ^eventh-day, may keep the first day of the week ^o the
Lord, without being guilty of sin and confusion, although your sabbath now
under debate were true: but enough of this; I shall therefore proceed to
another Argument, to ^rove, that all believing Gentiles are not commanded to
keep the seventh-day sabbath: which I thus do.

If the seventh-day sabbath was a Law to none but Israel, and such as were
proselyted to their Religion, then all believing Gentiles are not commanded to
observe it:

But the seventh-day sabbath was a Law to none but Israel, and such as were
proselyted to their Religion, Ergo.

The Minor I thus prove.

That Law which was given as a sign between God and Israel, was a Law to none
but Israel: But the seventh-day sabbath was given as a sign between God and
Israel, Exodus 31.15, 17. Ergo, The seventh-day sabbath was a Law to none but
Israel.


Mr. Tillam. To the sabbaths being a sign, I answer, that it is either of
things past, or of things present, or of things to come; if of things past,
then it is a sign of the Creation of the world, or else it is a sign of his
sanctifying presence, which I have found in this observation: but that the
seventh-sabbath is a sign of good things to come, I utterly deny.

Again, If the sabbath was a sign, so were all the Commandments; and therefore
its being a sign does not make it void, any more then the rest of the
Commandments, which are also called signs.


Mr. Ives. Whereas Mr. Tillam says the Sabbath was a sign of the Creation, I
say it was not; for though Heaven and Earth be expressed in the command of the
sabbath, yet the sabbath is no where said to be given them for a sign that God
made Heaven and Earth; for though God's resting the seventh-day be a reason why
Israel should rest, yet this rest is no where called a sign of the Creation.

But there is more reason to believe from the text, that it was one of the
signs of the Covenant that God in a special manner had made with that people:
See Exodus 31, 16, 17. Eze. 20.12.

But further, is it not more rational to believe that the six days should be a
sign of Gods creating Heaven and Earth, then the seventh day on which he did
not work? which at the most can but signify to us, that then, or on that time,
God rested from all his work. But whoever considers of the signs that God gave
to Israel, shall find, that they were given them to distinguish that people
from all people in the world; and therefore Mr. Ainsworth observes upon Exodus
13.9. The Jews (says he) used on other days to wear their Phylacteries on
their arms, or foreheads, for a Sign or a Token to them, as the Lord commanded,
but they laid them by upon the sabbath, because (say they) the sabbath it self
is a sign: And therefore Josephus calls it, A Law peculiar to that People, De
bello lib. 2. cap. 16. And to this agrees the saying of Nehemiah, Chap 9.13.
Thou came down upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them, [the house of Israel]
and made known to them thy Holy Sabbath.

Again, whereas Mr. Tillam says, that the whole Law of the Ten Commandments
was a Sign, and therefore we may as well lay aside all, upon the account of
their being a Sign, as any one: to this I answer:

That it is not said of the Ten Commandments only, but of all the Law, as well
Ceremonies as Morals, that it should be as a sign upon their hand, it does not
therefore follow that these were all to continue.

But farther: It is no where said of all the Law, that it is a sign between
God and Isral, but rather a sign to distinguish them from all other people.

But lastly, if the whole Law of Moses were as a sign between God and Israel
(as Mr. Tillam supposes) then I answer, that as it was in the hand of Moses,
it was a Law binding to none but Israel, and such as were proselyted thereunto;
neither was it given as a sign to any other Nation.


Mr. Tillam. The seventh-day was a sign of the Creation of the World; for God
rested the seventh-day, says the Text.

Again, If that the Commandments are signs, they must either be between God and
his people, or else between them and the Devil.


Mr. Ives. That about a sign has been answered already, and I wonder you
should delight your self with needless repetitions: but however, take a word or
two in further answer, (viz.) That Gods resting the seventh-day is urged by
Moses as the Reason of the Law that injoyns Israel to keep the seventh-day, and
not as a Reason of the sign: so that though Gods resting is urged as the Reason
of the duty, it does not therefore follow, that it is the Reason of the sign:
but as I have said before, I shall say again, that if all the Commandments were
signs between God and Israel, as they were delivered to Moses upon the mount,
it does not prove that they were signs between God and any other Nation.

And as to your Objection, That if the Commadments were signs, they must either
be between God and Israel, or else between them and the Devil: But how does
this appear? might not it be a sign between Israel and all the Nations of the
Earth, to signify their special favor with God above other people; and does
not the text say, the Law should be as frontlets between their eyes, etc.
plainly showing, that God would distinguish this People by their Laws and
Privileges from all other people; and that by their Sabbaths and Circumcision,
and other Judaical observations they should be known to all people that did
converse with them, to be highly in favor with God.

And lastly, Their Laws, some of them, were called signs, because they did
signify something to come, and so did their Sabbath; therefore the Apostle
calls it a shadow, Col. 2.17. But I never heard that their Laws were signs
between them and the Devil.


Mr. Tillam. If the Creation of the world be a reason why Israel was to keep
the seventh-day sabbath, you must then (if you be Gods Israel) keep the seventh
day upon that reason, because they did enjoy the comforts of the Creation,
which God brought forth in six days: since then that Reason is the same to us,
that Law ought to be the same.


Mr. Ives. I answer, First, by telling of you, that you argue in stead of
Answering.

But secondly, lest you should judge tha^ there is strength in what you say,
see the weakness of it; for it does not follow, that because the reason of a
Law is always the same, th^^ therefore the Law should always be the same as for
instance, God gave a Law that the people of Israel should not eat Swines flesh,
nor the Cony, nor the Hare, because he the Lord their God (...) holy, therefore
they should not defile themselves wit^eating such things, Levi^. 11.43, 44.
Here you see the Reason remains, for God is holy, an^ will be so forever, but
the Law does not remain; for a man may eat of these Creature now, and not sin:
so in like manner the reason for the Jews sabbath may be the same, when the Law
may not be the same in every punct^^o of it.


Mr. Tillam. I answer, that God has given a toleration to eat such things, and
therefore now it is not a sin.


Mr. Ives. Then I have shown you, that the reason of a Law may be the same,
when the Law is not the ^ame, by your own confession.

Mr. Tillam making no further reply, Mr. Ives ^roceeds to a new Argument.


Mr. Ives. That which I have been doing hitherto, has been to show that Moses
Law does not enjoin ^he believing Gentiles to keep the seventh-day sabbath; I
shall now give an Argument from ^he Law of Nature, and prove, that we are not
^equired by that Law, to keep the seventh-day ^abbath; which I thus do:

That which the Law of Nature binds the Gentiles to observe, it convinces
them of sin if they do not observe:

But the Law of Nature does not convince the Gentiles of sin for not observing
the seventh-day Sabbath.

Ergo, The Law of Nature does not bind the Gentiles to observe the 7th-day
sabbath.

Here Mr. Tillam was desired to Object against the Argument proposed; but he
refusing, another that stands by, craves of Mr. Ives the proof of the Minor:
hereupon he proceeded.


Mr. Ives. The Minor I prove thus:

If the Law of Nature does convince the Gentiles of sin for not observing the
seventh-day sabbath, then it is manifest either in God word, right Reason, or
manifest experience, that they have had such convictions:

But neither Gods word, right Reason, or manifest experience does manifest any
such conviction:

Ergo, The Law of Nature does not convince the Gentiles of sin, for not
observing the seventh day sabbath.

This Minor Proposition being that which is denied, I shall therefore, because
it is negative resolve it into the answer of my respondent, (...) desiring him
to assign an instance, either in God word, right Reason, or manifest
experience, th^^ ever any Gentile was convinced of sin by the Law of Nature for
not observing the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. To the Argument out of the Law of Nature, I answer, that it does
convince men (...) sin for Idolatry; and yet ask a Papist if he (...) convinced
of sin for bowing to the Virgin Mary, and he will say, No.


Mr. Ives. Sir, You have not answered, nor assigned (...) instance; and for
what you say of a Papist, (...) answer, that it is one thing to live under a
Law that convinces of sin, and another thing to acknowledge such conviction:
as for example. It is said of the Holy Ghost, that he shall convince the world
of sin, and yet we all know the world is not convinced of sin, so as publicly
to repent and return.

Shall I then be so barbarous as to say, that there is not a Law convincing,
because men are not actually convinced of their Idolatry? for doubtless, the
most ignorant Papists have a Law, and the Spirit of God convincing them of sin,
though actually they are not convinced.

However, it is manifest that the light of Nature has at some time or other so
prevailed upon some of her children, as that to a great degree they have been
convinced of all Moral duties; but to this of the seventh-day, Nature never did
Proselyte any of her children.

Mr. Tillam making no further reply, and refusing to assign an instance either
in Scripture, or any other credible story, where Nature did ever convince the
Gentiles of sin for not keeping the seventh-day Sabbath, Mr. Ives therefore by
the request of the Company was desired to urge another Argument.


Mr. Ives. I proceed to the Law of Christ; and from thence shall prove, that
believing Gentiles are not bound to observe the seventh-day sabbath; which I
thus do.

That Law which is enforced by the appointment of Christ unto believing
Gentiles, some or other, at some time or other, have either been commended for
the keeping, or blamed for the breaking of it.

But none have at any time by Christ's appointment been blamed for breaking, or
commended for keeping the seventh-day sabbath.

Ergo, the 7th-day sabbath is not in force to the believing Gentiles, by
Christ's appointment.


Mr. Tillam. Anointing with oil is a Command in force since the Resurrection;
and yet none are commended for observing, or blamed for not observing of it.


Mr. Ives. I answer, That anointing with Oil is not my present work to manage,
otherwise it were likely I might say somewhat to it.

Here one that stood at M. Ives his elbow, whispered him, and bid him tell Mr.
Tillam, That Christ commended the woman in the Gospel, for anointing Him with
Oil; which Mr. Ives had no sooner said, but Mr. Tillam made this answer, that
the anointing required in James his Epistle, was to be done by the Elders of
the Church, and therefore the instance did not reach the Case: hereupon Mr.
Ives ingenuously confessed that it was not to the Case; only he told Mr.
Tillam and the Audience, that he had uttered it before he was aware, it being
suddenly suggested to him by one that stood by; however, it is observable that
the instance of anointing with oil is not a sufficient instance to abate the
strength of the Syllogism: for the intent of the Syllogism is to show, that the
seventh-day Sabbath is no moral Precept, as appears by the last Argument that
was brought to prove that the seventh-day Sabbath was not commanded by the
light of Nature, and the instance is in an institution that is not Moral: So
that the intent of the Argument was, that there was no MORAL Duty required by
Christ, but some were found blameable for not observing, or commended for
observing of it; otherwise doubtless, both under Law and Gospel, it is like one
may find some particular institutions, that we read of, which we shall hear of
no complaint for not observing, because they were not Duties universally to be
observed by all men, at all times, as Moral Precepts are; as for example: The
business of anointing with oil is the Duty of none but the Elders: but the
seventh-day-sabbath-keeping is (if Mr. Tillam say true) Moral, and to be kept
by all: and further, the Duty of anointing with oil, as it was to be done by
some persons, so also but at some times, (viz.) when any one of the Church was
sick: but the Sabbath was to be kept every seventh day, and that not only by
the Church, but all the world, if Mr. Tillam say true; so that the instance is
far and wide from the case in hand: for the intent of the Argument is, That if
Christ had enforced the seventh day upon believers, as a Moral Law, to be
constantly observed, some would either have been blamed for breaking, or
commended for keeping of i^: and this is true of all Moral Laws, being
universally to be observed by all; and there is not any one Moral Law, but some
in the new Testament are under blame for not observing it, or else praised for
observing it; but not one word is mentioned of this kind touching the 7th-day
sabbath, since the death of Christ; which makes me conclude, it died with Him.


Mr. Ives. I come now to another Argument, which take as follows:

If believing Gentiles, by an Apostolical toleration, may esteem one day above
another, or every day as they are persuaded in their own minds; then they are
not required by Christ to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.

But believing Gentiles, by an Apostolical toleration, may esteem one day above
another, or every day as they are persuaded in their own minds.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not required by Christ to keep the seventh-day
sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. I do affirm, that the 7th day is not included nor intended in that
text Romans 14. and for this see Exodus 16.4. where the word every day, is there
intended of every common day, not the Sabbath.

But if in the text Romans 14. it be understood of every day, without exception,
then you may not contend for the first day of the week.


Mr. Ives. Mr. Tillam excepts against the universality of the word every day:
which seems to me very strange: for when he cited that text Mar. 2.27. where it
is said, The sabbath was made for man, he would there have the word Man
understood of every man, though the word every man was not in the text.

But now I cite a text that has this word every day in it, and he tells us,
that this universal term must be restrained, and not be understood of every
day, though every day be the words of the text; the Reason he gives why every
day must be restrained, is, because it was restrained in Exodus 16.4. where God
says, that the people shall gather a certain portion of the Manna every day,
etc.

To this I answer, First, that it does not follow, that because a general word
is restrained in Exodus 16. that therefore it should be restrained in Romans 14.

But secondly, God himself restrains every day in the 16 of Exodus to the six
days in which they were to gather Manna, and expressly commands the resting upon
the seventh-day; but in the 14 of the Romans neither God nor the Apostle puts any
restriction upon the word every day; so that, though we must restrain general
words when God restrains them, there is no reason that we should restrain them
when God does not.

But then says Mr. Tillam, If you do not restrain this word every day, then
you do overthrow the keeping of any day. To which I answer, that we might very
easily deliver our selves out of the hands of this absurdity, if that were the
business in Question.

As for instance, we have been showing, that we are not obliged by Moses Law to
keep the seventh-day sabbath, nor no other Judaical days; and that now Christ
has taken away these observations, and has made all days alike, in that one
day has (...) more sanctity or holiness then another, by reason of any
Mosaical institution, by which formerly it was sanctified; and so by
consequence have showed, that neither Moses Law, nor Christ's Law, commands a
seventh-day sabbath upon that account; which indeed is the scope of the Apostle
in the 14 of the Romans, that so the believers might not bring one another to
bondage in such things wherein Christ has made them free: How then does this
absurdity fall upon the Arguments, (viz.) tha^ because we are left at liberty
in point of Mosaical obligations to days, that therefore we may spend this
liberty to the service of the flesh, and set apart no time at all to serve and
worship God in (...) this indeed would be contrary to the light of Nature,
which has taught all her sons to set apart (...) time, in which to worship and
serve their God. But if it should be said, that if God has left no command,
how much time, or what time; then we should not sin though we observed no time;
I answer, that this is an absolute non-sequitur: for first, God has not
appointed what maintenance the Ministers of the Gospel should have under the
New Testament; does it therefore follow, that we being delivered by Jesus
Christ from the Mosaical bondage of maintaining the Ministers according to the
Levitical Law, and since we are at liberty and not ^njoyned how much, or how
little, or in what kind they should be maintained, that therefore they should
have no maintenance at all? the like may be said in respect of a place of
worship, as well as a time; for God had under the Law tied the Jews to a place
of worship, but now he has delivered us from that bondage, and has made all
places alike, as to any Mosaical sanctity; does it therefore follow, that
Christians may from thenceforward choose whether they will meet any where or no;
or that one believer may run one way, and another another way, and so never
come to the place where the Church meets? too many such libertines were in
the Apostles days, and, to our great grief, we may say, there are too many in
our days that turn this Grace and Gospel-liberty into wantonness and
licentiousness. This I thought good to add in this place, to stop the carreer
of that conceit, (viz.) that because Christ has freed us from those days that
Moses his Disciples were hound to observe, and has left the Christians at
liberty herein, in that he has made every day alike, that therefore we may
choose if we will keep any day as all to the service of the Lord; this is not
only a sensual, but a senseless imagination: but more of this touching a day to
worship God in, and also what day we ought to observe for his public worship,
shall be shown in the ensuing Appendix to these Disputations.

So then (by what has been said) we may perceive, that we ought not to alter
nor vary the literal sense of a text, unless Gods word on right Reason do
warrant us so to do: but neither Gods word, nor right Reason does warrant us to
restrain the Apostles words, when he says, Some men esteem one day above
another, an^ others esteem EVERY day alike.

For by the same rule we may restrain general words when we have no warrant, we
may ushe^ in any absurdity: as for instance, the Scripture says, God made
every thing that creeps may not a man as well say, that there is some
creeping thing that God has not made, as say when the Apostle tells us, that
now the partition wall is broken down, and notwithstanding Moses Law you may
judge of every day alike without being judged a transgressor of it; that this
every day is understood but of some days commanded by Moses, and not of the
seventh-day sabbath? Neither have I disesteemed or excluded the first day of
the week by my Argument from hence, since the Argument is founded upon the
words of the Text.


Mr. Ives. Since Mr. Tillam makes no further reply to this Argument, I shall
urge one more out of the 15 of the Acts compared with the 21.

If the Holy Ghost has discharged the believing Gentiles from all the Law as
given by Moses, except as is excepted Acts 15. then the believing Gentiles are
not bound by the Law of Christ to keep the 7th-day sabbath:

But the Holy Ghost has discharged the believing Gentiles from all the Law as
given by Moses, except as is excepted Acts 15.

Ergo, The believing Gentiles are not bound by Christ to keep the seventh-day
sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. Yesterday this Gentleman granted nine of the Commandments in force
and binding to the Gentiles, and now he says none are in force, but those
expressed Acts 15.


Mr. Ives. I say, nine of the ten Commandments are in force, to day as well as
yesterday, and so is the fourth Commandment also as to a time for believers to
worship God in, but not as in the hand of Moses, for so says my Argument; but
as they are implanted in the hearts of men, and are now further explained and
enjoined by a better Mediator, who never enjoined the Gentiles to keep the
seventh-day sabbath.

This was the end of the second Disputation, at which time there was an
agreement to Dispute the same Arguments over again with one Matthew Coppinger;
which was appointed to be on Candlemas day then next ensuing, being the second
of Febr. 1658. at the place aforesaid: at which time and place Mr. Coppinger
was to answer to Mr. Ives his forementioned Arguments, and what new ones he
thought good to add.

The forementioned time being come, and the people being Assembled, Mr. Ives
propounds the Question which was to be disputed; which take as follows.


Mr. Ives. The Question to be disputed this day, is, Whether all believers are
bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath.

Which Question I resolve into this Proposition (viz.) That all believers are
not bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. All believers are bound to keep the seventh-day for a Sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I have urged one general Argument in the former Disputations, to
prove, that believing Gentiles are not commanded to keep the seventh-day
sabbath, which I am now to insist upon the second time, in expectation of your
Answers: which Argument is as follows:

If believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath, then they are
bound either by the Law of Nature, the Law of Moses, or the Law of Christ:

But believing Gentiles are not bound either by the Law of Nature, Moses, or
Christ, to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.

Ergo, Believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I answer, that believing Gentiles are commanded by the Law of
Nature, if by the Law of Nature you mean the Law written in the heart.


Mr. Ives. I do mean the Law written in the heart.


Mr. Coppinger. Then pray put your Argument in those ^erms, and then I shall
answer to it.


Mr. Ives. Though this be needless (after I have explained my meaning) yet that
we may not trifle about words, I shall consent; and thereupon proceed to prove,
That the Law written in the heart does not bind the believing Gentiles to keep
the seventh-day Sabbath: which I thus do.

That which the Law written in the heart binds the believing Gentiles to
observe, it convinces them of sin if they do not observe:

But the Law written in the heart does not convince the believing Gentiles of
sin for not observing the seventh-day Sabbath.

Ergo, The Law written in the heart does not bind the believing Gentiles to
observe the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I say, the Law written in the heart does convince the believing
Gentiles of sin, in that they do not observe the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. If the Law written in the heart does convince the Gentiles of sin,
for not observing the seventh-day Sabbath, then it is manifest either in Gods
word, Right Reason, or manifest experience, that they have had such convictions

But neither Gods word, Right Reason, (...) manifest experience does manifest,
that ever the Law written in the heart did convince the Gentiles of sin for not
observing the seventh-day Sabbath:

Ergo, The Law written in the heart dot^ not convince the Gentiles of sin, for
not observing the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I do deny the Minor, and say, that the Law that is written in
the heart does convince (...) sin for not keeping the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Ives. Sir, then you deny the Conclusion, and not the Minor, what ever you
say; therefore pray put in your exception against the enumeration in the
Syllogism, and show us, either from Scripture, Record, or Right Reason, or
Experience, that any have been convinced of sin by the Law written in their
heart for not keeping the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I shall then assign the Scripture Levit. 20.22, 23. where it is
written, that God cast out the Nations, for that they did not do all the things
that be commanded Israel to do: for thus it is written, ver. 22. Ye (viz.
Israel) shall therefore keep all my statutes and all my judgments, and do them,
that the land whither I bring you to dwell therein ^ue you not out.

And ye shall not walk in the manners of the na^^ons which I cast out before
you, for they commit? (...) all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.
From whence I infer, First, that the seventh-day Sabbath was included in these
words, ALL my ^^atutes, and ALL my judgments: and that ^^hese were enjoined to
the Gentile Nations, ^^prove by the 22 verse, where it is said, God ^^st out
the Nations (viz.) the Gentiles, because they did not do ALL those things which
he commanded of the people of Israel, among which their seventh-day Sabbath was
one great thing that was commanded: now then, If the Gentiles were cast out
because they did not observe ALL the Laws, and ALL the Statutes, and ALL the
Judgments which God commanded Israel to observe, among which the seventh-day
Sabbath was one, as appears by comparing the 19 chapter and 30 ver. where keeping
the Sabbath is mentioned among the Statutes of Israel.

I say, If the Gentile Nations were cast out for not observing all Israel's
statutes, and all their judgments, it appears, that the Law written in the
heart did convince them that they had sinned, in that they had not observed all
those things; and so consequently the Law written in the heart does convince
them of sin, for not observing the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I answer, First, that you have all this while argued, and not
answered.

But secondly, The text does not say, the Nations were cast out for that they
did not keep all Isreal's Laws, but for that they were guilty of all those
unnatural lusts mentioned in the former part of the Chapter, which he
commanddeth Israel to refrain, and withal to keep all his statutes, lest he
cast out them as he had done those Nations.

But thirdly, How does it appear, that these Nations were to keep ALL Isreal's
statutes, and all their judgments, by the Law written in their heart? for they
might otherwise come under the guilt of the transgressions of the Law of
Israel, then by Natures conviction; if that should be granted, that cannot be
proved (viz.) that the Nations were to keep all Isreal's laws.

Fourthly, If you say, that the Nations were convinced of sin by the light of
Nature, because they did not keep ALL the statutes that were given to Israel,
then it will follow that the light of Nature did convince them of sin, because
they were not observers of the Ceremonial Laws that were given to Israel, for
those are mentioned in the 19 Chapter of Leviticus among the Statutes of
Israel, as well as their Sabbaths and other things.


Mr. Coppinger. I do deny that Consequence; for it does not follow that the
Nations were bound by the light of Nature to keep all Isreal's Ceremonial Laws,
because they were by the Law writ in their heart to keep all their statutes and
all their judgments.


Mr. Ives. I say, the Consequence follows undeniable; for, if it be true as
you say, that the Nations were cast out because they did not keep all the
statutes and all the judgments that were given to Israel, and all these
statutes and all these judgments were taught them by the Law that was writ in
the heart, then I say it follows, that the Nations were to keep the Ceremonial
law of Israel, as well as their Mora;l then which to imagine, there is nothing
more absurd.


Mr. Coppinger. I say no more then the text, for the text says, You shall keep
ALL my statutes, and ALL my judgments, that the land spew you not out, as it
did those that wore before you.


Mr. Ives. I say, the land did loath her former inhabitants, because they did
not keep all the laws which the light of Nature had taught them to observe;
therefore God threatens Israel with the same judgments, if in case they either
contrary to the Law writ in the heart, or contrary to the Law given by Moses,
should be found transgressors: not that it follows, that the Nations were
bound by the law written in the heart to keep all Isreal's laws and judgments;
for then they were bound by the law written their heart to keep the Ceremonial
Laws also, as well as the seventh-day sabbath; which is ridiculous to imagine.


Mr. Coppinger. I say, that the Ceremonial Law is no part o^ that whole Law in
the Texts that I have mentioned, where all the Statutes, and all the judgments
are commanded to Israel; for there i^ not a word mentioned concerning it in the
whole chapter.


Mr. Ives. Neither is there a word of the seventh-day sabbath in any of that
chapter.


Mr. Coppinger. But you may remember, that I told you, that all the Laws
mentioned in Lev. the 20.22, 23, did include the Sabbath day, required in 19
chapter 30 ver. where it is said, You shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my
Sanctuaries; so that if the Nations (as I have said) were cast out, because
they did not keep all Isreal's Statutes, and all their judgments, then they were
cast out because they did not keep the 7th-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I answer as before, that the Text does not say, that the Nations
were cast out because they did not keep all Isreal's Laws, but because they
violated the law of Nature by those unnatural and unlawful lusts mentioned in
the former verses.

But secondly, If they ( viz. the Nations) were cast out, because they did not
keep all Isreal's Statutes, then they were cast out, because they did not
observe the Ceremonial Laws of Israel, as well as any of the rest. And lastly,
whereas you say, that the Sabbath mentioned in the 19 chapter, is included in
all the Laws mentioned in the 20 chapter: I answer, So is the reverencing the
Sanctuary required in the same ver, where the sabbath is required, and offering
of sacrifices, and counting the fruit of the trees as uncircumcised the first
three years after they were planted; I say, all these things are as truly
commanded in the 19 chapter as the seventh-day sabbath, and are as necessarily
included in that universal term, all the statutes, and all the judgments
mentioned in the 20 chapter: now then, by the same rule that you can say, the
law writ in the heart did require the Gentile Nations to keep all Isreal's
statutes, and so consequently the seventh-day sabbath mentioned in the
nineteenth chapter; I say, by the same rule the Gentile Nations are commanded
by the law written in their heart to keep the law that requires them to
reverence the Sanctuary and offer Sacrifices, and count the fruit of the trees
uncircumcised three years after they were planted; which cannot be imagined.


Mr. Coppinger. I answer, that though the reverencin the Sanctuary, and
offering Sacrifices, and counting the trees uncircumcised, were commandments
given to Israel; yet these are not called statutes and judgments: so that,
though the Nations were to observe all Isreal's statutes by the law written in
the heart, yet they were not to observe all other of their commandments;
therefore I answer you by distinguishing, and say, that the Ceremonial laws
were Ordinances and Appointments, but not statutes; and though the Nations were
to keep all Isreal's statutes by the law writ in their hearts, among which the
seventh-day sabbath was one; yet the Nations are not to keep those ceremonies
mentioned by you, for they are no where called statutes; so that statutes is
one thing, and Ordinances is another.


Mr. Ives. There is no difference, and this distinction is light as vanity, for
all Gods Ordinances are statutes and appointments, and the ceremonial
Ordinances were Gods statutes as well as other Laws.


Mr. Coppinger. Where any Laws are called Ordinances, there they are understood
for the ceremonial laws, and not for the ten commandments or law writ in the
heart; and where any commandments are called statutes, they are not understood
of the ceremonial laws.

Here Mr. Tillam stands up to justify Mr. Coppinger's distinctions (viz.)
that Gods laws were one thing, and his statutes and judgments another; and for
this he cites Mal. 4. where it is said, Remember ye the Law of Moses my
servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes
and judgments: from hence Mr. Tillam would have proved a difference between
statutes, laws and appointments.

Thereupon Mr. Gosnold standing by, told both Mr. Coppinger and Mr. Tillam,
that he wondered they should abuse the audience with such a needless and vain
distinction, since that in their conscience they knew that the word was
statutum est, and that there was no difference between the words statute and
appointment, save that the one was a Latin word, and the other an English
word; and further, that they might as well say, there was a difference between
likeness and similitude, as between statute and appointment. Mr. Den also being
then present did sharply reprove Mr. Tillam for justifying Mr. Coppinger, in
making this vain distinction, since that he pretended to learning and
scholarship: and as such a distinction does argue a man to have little of a
scholar, or else little of conscience; so it does argue a man to have but a
slender acquaintance with the Scripture, and therefore unfit to be a teacher;
for if either Mr. Coppinger or Mr. Tillam had been but competently acquainted
with the Scriptures, they would never have uttered before many hundreds of
people then assembled, that the ceremonial laws were never called statutes:
for, besides what has been said, whoever reads but Exodus 29.9, and 28. shall
find the priests office called a statute; and the Priests office shall be
theirs for a perpetual STATUTE: and the offering is called a STATUTE, Levit.
3.16, 17. and the offering is called, an everlasting STATUTE to make an
atonement, etc. Levit. 16.33, 34. Exodus 27.21. Exodus 28 43. Levit. 10.9. Levit.
23.14, 21. the resting from labor on the day of atonement is called a STATUTE,
ver. 31. Levit. 24.9. Numb. 19.21, 27. and 11. and 35.29. yet notwithstanding
all these texts, together with many more that might be named, these men tell
us, that the ceremonies were never called statutes.

Well then, since it is plain that the ceremonies of the law are called
statutes, it follows that the Gentiles by the law writ in their hearts were
not commanded to keep all Isreal's statutes; for then (as has been urged) they
were bound by the law writ in their hearts to keep the ceremonial laws of the
Israelites, which is among the firstborn of senseless imaginations: this being
the issue the Argument was brought to, Mr. Ives proceeded to another, which was
as follows.


Mr. Ives. That law which is not Moral, the Law of Nature does not bind the
Gentiles to observe.

But the law for the seventh-day sabbath is not Moral.

Ergo, The law of Nature does not bind the Gentiles to observe the seventh-day
sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor, and do say, that the law that requires the
seventh-day sabbath is a Moral law.


Mr. Ives. I prove the Minor thus:

That law which cannot be known but by written or unwritten tradition, is not a
Moral law.

But the Law for the seventh-day sabbath cannot be known but by written or
unwritten tradition.

Ergo, the law for the seventh-day sabbath is not a Moral law.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor, and say, that the law for the seventh-day
sabbath may be known another way then by tradition; for it may be known by the
law written in the heart.


Mr. Ives. I pray then assign a text that says the seventh-day sabbath may be
known by the law writ in the heart,


Mr. Coppinger. It is written in the second of the Romans and the fourteenth,
That the Gentiles which had not the law, did by Nature the things contained in
the law; now if they did by Nature the things contained in the law of Moses,
and the seventh-day sabbath was one thing contained in the law of Moses; then
if the Gentiles did by Nature the things contained in the law, then they (...)
the seventh-day sabbath: but the Text says, the Gentiles did by Nature the
THINGS contained in the law, and the seventh-day Sabbath was a thing contained
in the law. Ergo, (...) ( viz. the Gentiles) by the law of Nature, or the law
written in the heart, did keep the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. This is arguing and not answering: but if I should suffer you to
transgress the laws and rules of disputation, and let you argue when you should
answer; I know you are never able to prove, that the Gentiles without the help
of tradition were able to know the seventh-day sabbath by the law and light of
nature: and whereas you say, the Gentiles did the things contained in the law
by the light of nature, and therefore they kept the seventh-day sabbath; I
answer, first, that it is a difficult thing to conclude a particular
proposition, when the premises are indefinite.

For the Gentiles did by nature the things contained in the law, inasmuch as
they did some good which the law commanded, and forbore some evils which the
law forbad, as murder, and adultery, etc. it does not therefore follow, that
because the Gentiles did the things that were contained in the law of Moses,
that therefore they did all things therein contained.

May not a man as well plead for circumcision, and say, that the light of
nature taught people to be circumcised and to offer sacrifices, because
circumcision and sacrificing are things contained in the law; and the Gentiles
did by nature the things contained in the law, therefore they were observers of
circumcising and sacrificing by the light of nature? would not every sensible
man call this a senceless Argument? and yet thus Mr. Coppinger reasons: The
Gentiles did by nature the things contained in the Law; Ergo, they kept the
seventh-day sabbath: but I shall show in the ensuing Appendix, that the
Gentiles neither did, nor could keep the seventh-day Sabbath by the light of
Nature.


Mr. Coppinger. If the Gentiles did those things by the light of nature that
were contained in that law that forbad stealing and adultery, then they kept
the seventh-day sabbath, which was a part of the same law:

But the Gentiles by the light of nature did the things that were contained in
that law which forbad stealing and adultery.

Therefore the Gentiles by the light of nature did keep the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I do assure you Sir, if it were not but that I had compassion on the
multitude, and was unwilling to have them go away unsatisfied, I had not said a
word to your last Argument, because you know you were by agreement to answer my
Arguments; and in stead thereof you make Arguments, and turn Opponent, when as
you were by Agreement this day to be Respondent: however Sir, take this for an
Answer, that the Gentiles might do by nature those things that were contained
in the Law, that forbad stealing and adultery; and yet the consequence does not
follow, that therefore they kept the seventh-day sabbath by the light of
nature: as for instance, a man that keeps the law of the Turk, he observes a
law that forbids stealing and murder; does it therefore follow, that he
observes the Law of England, because he does observe a law that requires many
of the same things which are written in the English Laws?

In like manner many of those Laws which were written upon the tables of the
Gentiles hearts, were written upon Isreal's tables of stone; does it therefore
follow that all things that were written in tables of stone, were writ upon the
hearts of Gentiles?

Who is there but may perceive the non-concludencie of this Argument? may not a
man as well reason thus, The Turks observe the things that are contained in the
Christian Laws, therefore they observe all things that are commanded in the
laws of Christianity? and further, the Turks observe that law which the English
men observe, which requires that a man should not kill and steal, therefore
the Turk observes the English-man's Sabbath, which is the first day of the
week.

Again, The people in America observe the things contained in the Jews law,
which requires men not to kill and steal; does it follow, that therefore the
people in America observe the Jews seventh-day sabbath? Are not these kind of
arguings the same with Mr. Coppingers? for he says, that the Gentiles did by
Nature the things contained in the Jews law, and therefore they kept the Jews
sabbath; but does not the contrary to this appear? for are there not thousands
of good people in England, that do the things that are contained in the Jews
laws, in the Apostles sense: that yet never kept the Saturday or Jewish
Sabbath? and therefore for the further proof of this Argument, let me add, that
it is impossible to keep the Jewish or seventh-day sabbath without the help of
tradition, and therefore the observation of that day is not Moral; the reason I
shall give is, because if a man be sick of a violent distemper, that has
bereaved him of his Senses, yet when this man coms to his right understanding
again, he will know without a guide, that he should not kill, and that he
should not steal; but without the guide of tradition he cannot know what day of
the week it is, having lost his account thereof by reason of his distraction;
and therefore Common experience tells us, that this man is forced to ask those
that are about him what day of the week it is: now then if he did not know what
day of the week it was, by reason that he had been thus distracted, I demand
how he could know which was the 7th Day Sabbath; and if he could have known the
7th-day sabbath by the light of Nature, what need was there for this man being
come to his Senses, to inquire what day of the week it was that he was then in,
more then there was for him to ask, whether he might not kill or steal?


Mr. Coppinger. I shall prove the Consequence, namely, that if the Gentiles by
the light of Nature without tradition did do the things contained in the law,
that then they did keep the 7th-day sabbath by the light of nature, without
tradition.

Hereupon the Moderator did reprove Mr. Coppinger for attempting to argue
instead of answering Mr. Ives his Argument, and therefore did desire that Mr.
Ives would urge a fresh Argument, which was as follows.


Mr. Ives. That law which a man may have an absolute necessity to break, cannot
be a Moral law:

But the law for the seventh-day sabbath a man may have an absolute necessity
to break.

Ergo, the law for the seventh-day sabbath cannot be a moral law.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Major, if by moral law you do mean the law of
Nature, or law written in the heart; for it does not follow that a law is not
moral or written in the heart, because one may have a moral or absolute
necessity to break it.


Mr. Ives. I shall prove the Major thus:

If there be no absolute necessity for me to hate God or my neighbor, then
there is no absolute necessity for me to break the law in nature:

But there is no absolute necessity for me to hate God or my neighbor.

Ergo, There is no absolute necessity to break the law in Nature.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Major: for though there be no necessity for a man to
hate God or his neighbor, it does not therefore follow, that there is no
absolute necessity to break the law in nature.


Mr. Ives. I prove the Major thus:

If all the law written in the heart be contained in loving God and my
neighbor, then it follows, that if there be no absolute necessity to hate
either God or my neighbor, that then there is no absolute necessity to break a
law in nature:

But all the law written in the heart is contained in loving God and my
neighbor.

Ergo, It follows, that if there be no absolute necessity to hate God and my
neighbor, then there is no absolute necessity to break a law in nature.


Mr. Coppinger. I answer, first, that there may be a breaking of the letter of
the Law, as that of murder and adultery, and stealing; as for instance, Abraham
was commanded to sacrifice Isaak contrary to the letter of the law, which
says, Thou shall not kill.

Secondly, David was guilty of murder and adultery in the matter of Uriah and
Bathsheba, for which by the letter of the law he was to die the death; yet
there was a necessity for him to live, and be saved from the punishment,
contrary to the letter of the law.

Again thirdly, The Israelites robbed the Egyptians contrary to the Law, that
says, Thou shall not steal, and yet were justified: though the Law says, The
wicked borrow and pay not again; yet the Israelites did borrow of the
Egyptians, and paid not again.

Fourthly and lastly, They were not to take a wife that was a whore under the
law, and yet Hosea was commanded by God to take a wife of whoredoms, Hos. 1.2.
By all which it appears, that there may be an absolute necessity to break a
Moral law in the letter of it.


Mr. Ives. I answer, first, you have not answered to my Syllogism, which says,
There can be no absolute necessity to hate God or my neighbor: for none of
these instances that you have insisted on do show any such thing, for there is
nothing of hating God or my neighbor in any of them, being truly considered,
as I shall presently make appear.

Secondly, You tell us, there may be a necessity to transgress the letter of
the Law, and for that you urge several Texts; when as my Argument was not
grounded upon the letter of the law, but rather upon the Spirit of it (viz.)
the law written in the heart; so that the instances have not answered the
Argument however, I shall answer the instances: and first, you say, that there
may be an absolute necessity to commit murder, adultery, and stealing, etc. To
which I answer, that this is such a piece of Divinity that the world did never
hear of before; and the first instance you assign is, Abraham's being commanded
of God to offer up his son Isaak, etc. To which I answer, that if Abraham had
killed Isaak, it had not been murder: first, because he did not hate his son in
his heart, while he was going to offer him according to the commandment; and
therefore this instance does not touch the Argument, which says, there is no
necessity to hate God or my neighbor. But secondly, God commanded Abraham by
an immediate Law from Heaven, otherwise Abraham could not have pretended to any
necessity that would have justified him in this act, neither could he have been
judge of this necessity, unless God had required it: so that here was no
necessity for Abraham to murder, because of this commandment: therefore the
instance is impertinent.

Again, as touching the case of David in the matter of Uriah, there was no
moral necessity laid upon any to break a moral law, because David was not put
to death; for, and if there had been such a necessity, how does this reach the
Argument, that says, there is no necessity to hate God or my neighbor? for
the people did neither hate God nor their neighbors, in that they did not take
away the life of their King, for what he did against Uriah the Hittite. And for
your instance in the case of the Israelites stealing from the Egyptians, which
you say God allowed of, etc.

I answer, That first there was no absolute necessity for them to spoil the
Egyptians, and so consequently no necessity to break a law in nature, by hating
either God or their neighbor.

But secondly. God gave Israel favor in the sight of the Egyptians, and
thereupon the Egyptians let them have jewels of silver, and jewels of gold
voluntarily, and the Israelites did not take them by force, therefore there was
no breach of a law in nature: But lastly, had they taken these things by force,
it had not been a breach of a law in nature because that nature has taught her
children to seek for repairs of those that have impaired them, and to take it
per force, where it cannot be had by fair means: thus God (as well as Nature)
by a more then ordinary instruction tells the people of Israel, that they
should spoil those that spoiled them, which was but a just retribution upon the
Egyptians: agreeing with the law and light of Nature: Otherwise it is a sin to
steal upon the pretense of the greatest necessity; hereupon Agur says, Prove.
30.8, 9. Give me not poverty, lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain.

And for your last instance of the Prophet Hosea, his taking a wife of
whoredoms, which you say is contrary to a law; I answer, first, that it is not
contrary to the law that is in the heart, because that law cannot always
distinguish between a whore and a chaste woman, though it was contrary to the
law of Israel. Then secondly, though a man could distinguish between the one
and the other, yet there is no moral necessity for a man to take the whore, and
leave the chaste woman.

But thirdly, whereas you say, God commanded the prophet to take a wife of
whoredoms: I answer, that this is not spoken of carnal adultery, for the text
does not say he was commanded to take a wife that was a whore, but a wife of
whoredoms (viz.) a wife from a people that were guilty of great whoredoms in
departing from the Lord, a^ appears verse the second.


Mr. Coppinger. I make no necessity of a man's own making, but I say, God can
dispense with the breach of moral laws, by giving a countermand, and then the
breach of the sabbath is no breach; though the Priests in the law profaned it,
yet they were blameless; in like manner, if God make a law that a man shall not
shed innocent blood, yet Cods precept to Abraham makes it no breach of a moral
law; and so likewise in the other cases of the Egyptians stealing, and the
Prophets taking a wife of whoredoms; I say, these countermands make it no
breach of a Law: and so likewise upon the sabbath day, a man might lead an ox
or an ass to watering, and not break it, though it be a moral law; but if the
men in this generation may do that which the Jews and Disciples might not
lawfully do on the sabbath day, then you have taken off my exceptions.


Mr. Ives. Whereas you speak of a necessity to break a moral law, when God
countermand, etc. I answer, that then it is not murder in Abraham to slay
Isaak, or theft in Israel to take from the Egyptians, because they had an
immediate law from heaven commanding those very particular things; but does it
follow, that this law given to Abraham was binding to all, or that Gods
allowing of Israel to spoil the Egyptians should give me an allowance to spoil
my neighbor? and would it not be a sin contrary to nature for me to sacrifice
my child having no command, because Abraham would have sacrificed his child by
a command? and in like manner there can be no moral necessity to break a moral
law, by your own confession, without an immediate and particular command in the
case, as Abraham had in the case of Isaak and Israel in the case of spoiling
the Egyptians. Now then, if the seventh-day sabbath be moral as you say it is,
then you can have no moral necessity, by your own confession, to break it,
unless you have an immediate countermand from Heaven so to do.

Now then, since you say, the law for the seven-day sabbath is a moral law, how
do you make it appear, that God gave you an allowance to open your shop the
next day after you challenged me to dispute for the seventh-day sabbath, which
was the sabbath day you now plead for? and whereas you did pretend a necessity
so to do, I demand, Whether God ever gave you a command in obedience to which
you did open your shop upon the seventh-day sabbath? since you your self say,
that there must be a countermand to justify the doing any thing that
contradicts the letter of a moral law; now you have broke the letter of the
law, which you say is moral, and where is your countermand from God so to do?
And for the instances that you bring of men's leading an ox to water upon the
sabbath day; (...) was not a moral necessity, for they might have let the ox
stayed without water: if the law for the seventh-day sabbath had been a moral
law, they ought not to have broken it to save the life of their ox, no more
then a man may worship an Idol to save his own life, and the life of his
cattle; so that this very instance confutes your opinion, that the seventh-day
sabbath is not a moral law.


Mr. Coppinger. As touching my opening shop upon the seventh-day, which I say
is the sabbath, Mr. Ives did allow me so to do, because I was under some
promises to do some business that day in relation to my trade. But suppose I
did that which was unlawful, this does not prove what Mr. Ives says, that he
may break the sabbath; however, this is reflection and uncharitableness. Again,
I say, the moral law makes no difference between murder and killing; for it is
written Exodus 20. Thou shall not kill, etc. so that Abraham was a breaker of
that law, by going about to kill Isaak.

Also if a child were born, and the seventh-day of the week happened to be the
eighth day after the birth, then it was no breach of the law to circumcise the
child; but Mr. Ives has broken his promise, in that he promised to discourse
the Argument he insisted on the last day, but does not.


Mr. Ives. I answer to the last first, that I have not broken any promise that
I made, for I laid down one general Argument, which was the same I went upon
the last day, which I am yet prosecuting.

And secondly, You did also agree that I should urge new Arguments if I
pleased, as well as those which had been formerly urged: and whereas you charge
me with reflections and uncharitableness; I answer, that what I spoke did
relate to the dispensation that Mr. Tillam gave you to open shop upon your
sabbath, after you had engaged to dispute for it.

And I say, if the seventh-day sabbath be moral, then he could not dispense
with your opening shop upon it; for by this rule a man may plead a necessity to
break moral laws, although he has no countermand from God so to do: and
whereas you say, I did allow you to open shop; I answer, So I might, because I
am so far from judging the observation of the saturday-sabbath a moral duty,
that I judge it no duty at all, therefore I might dispense with your working
upon it; but how could Mr. Tillam, that believes with you, that the command for
the seventh-day is moral, give you a dispensation so to do? and further, how
could your conscience dispense with such an action, as to open your shop the
next Saturday sabbath that came, after you had engaged in public to dispute
the morality of that day?

And whereas Mr. Coppinger says, the Moral law makes no difference between
murder and killing, he might as well have said, that the moral law makes no
difference between fornication and lying with a woman, then which nothing is
more absurd. For the Moral law does not call all killing, murder; though murder
be killing; he might as well have said, because stealing is taking, that
therefore there is no difference between stealing and taking.

Here Mr. Tillam desires liberty to speak for himself touching what Mr. Ives
had objected against him, for allowing Mr. Coppinger to open shop upon their
Sabbath.


Mr. Tillam. Mr. Ives has done like cursed Cham in uncovering his brothers
nakedness; however, I went to bid Mr. Coppinger shut up his shop, be^ing very
much troubled all that night about it, and he answered me, that if he should
shut up shop, he should be accounted broke, which would be a scandal to his
profession: and further he told me, that he was under some promises which he
was to perform relating to his trade: however, he told me he would do not work
but what was of necessity to fulfill his promise; and gave the like charge to
his servants also.


Mr. Ives. What if Mr. Coppinger had made a promise to murder or worship an
Idol, should he have broken these laws to keep his promise? in like manner, if
working upon the Saturday-sabbath be a breach of a moral law, as he says it
is, then there is no reason why his promise should absolve him in the one,
rather then in the other: and truly, after this rate, it is an easy matter for
a man to make promises, and thereby (if this kind of arguing be good) absolve
himself from obeying any moral precept. And whereas Mr. Tillam says, he went
to Mr. Coppinger the night before, to desire him to shut up his shop the next
day; I answer, that what Mr. Tillam did after we parted that night, I cannot
tell; but this I know, that he allowed him the liberty of opening shop that
night, when we were i^ company together. And whereas Mr. Tillam says, that his
conscience was troubled all night about Mr. Coppingers opening his shop, it
seems then they were not agreed in their consciences concerning the matter of
opening and not opening upon their sabbath day.


Mr. Ives. I have shown, that the law for the seventh-day Sabbath is not a
moral law, because there can be no moral necessity to break a moral law, (...)
there may be a moral necessity, by Mr. Tillam'^ and Mr. Coppingers own
confession and practice, to break the seventh-day Sabbath: Therefore the Law
for the seventh-day Sabbath cann^^ be a moral law. I now proceed to show, that
as the seventh-day sabbath is not in force by any moral law, or law writ in the
heart; so in the next place, I shall prove it is not in force by the Law of
Moses; which I thus do.

Those which had not Moses Law to command them, were not bound by Moses Law to
keep the seventh-day Sabbath.

But the believing Gentiles had not Moses law to command them.

Ergo, The believing Gentiles were not bound by Moses law to keep the
seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny your Minor and do say, that the believing Gentiles had
Moses Law to command them.


Mr. Ives. If the believing Gentiles had Moses law to command them, then the
unbeleeving Gentiles had Moses law to command them also.

But the unbeleeving Gentiles had not Moses law to command them.

Ergo, The believing Gentiles had not Moses law to command them.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny both Major and Minor, and put you to prove both.


Mr. Ives. First, The Cousequence of the Major is good, because according to
your opinion and confession, the believing Gentiles are bound to obey the law
of Moses, by the law in nature; if so, then the unbeleeving Gentiles are bound
by the Law in Nature also, because the Law of Nature is the same to the
unbeleever in respect of the power of it, as it is to the believer.

And the Minor I prove (viz.) that the unbeleeving Gentiles have not Moses law
to command them; and this I do by the words of the Text, Romans 2.14. the
Gentiles which HAVE NOT THE LAW, etc.

Whence I argue.

That it was either the law of Moses, or the law of Nature which the Text says
the Gentiles had not.

But it was not the law of Nature.

Ergo, It was the Law of Moses.

Now it is manifest that they were not without the Law of Nature: for the Text
says, That was written in their hearts, ver. 15. therefore my Argument is
proved, that the law they were without was the Law of Moses; and therefore by
Moses Law they could not be commanded to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I do distinguish of the Law of Moses, as it was written and
unwritten. Now though the Gentiles had not Moses Law in writing, yet they had
it unwritten: so that it does not follow, because the text says, the Gentiles
were without Moses Law, that therefore they had it not in any sense; for they
had the same Law the Jews had, only they had it not in writing: as for
instance, the Records of the Law are kept at London, is not York therefore
under the same Law? But suppose we should read the Text as Mr. Ives notions it,
that the Gentiles had not the Law of Moses, would it not be ridiculous? and
further, this Law in the second of the Romans, is the Law that all were to be
be judged by at the day of judgment, ver. 27. which is one and the same Law
spoken of throughout the whole Chapter. Therefore the Law written in the heart,
and the Law upon Tables of stone, are all one and the same Law; so that they (
viz. the Gentiles) had the Law of Moses unwritten, though not written; and
therefore your Argument is not proved from the Text.


Mr. Ives. Mr. Coppingers Answer had been good, if he had shown us by the
Scripture that there was a Mosaical Law unwritten; which I think is a conceit
that the whole world is a stranger to; and if Mr. Coppinger cannot do this, his
Answer is no answer.

But secondly, that the Law of Nature, Romans 2. is not the Mosaical Law as he
imagines, appears, because then the Holy Ghost makes a needless distinction,
of having a Law, and not having a Law; and of being under the Law, and without
the Law, if there were no more difference then there is between London and York.

For those that live at York are under the written Law of England, though those
Laws are recorded at London, because Proclamations are written and sent down
and posted in their market places; so that the distinction is not made good by
the similitude: for York is as truly under the written law, as London, and in
no sense can be said to be without law; and so were all the cities of Judea,
though at a distance from Jerusalem, under the written law of Moses, because
they were to have copies of the law in every city by Gods appointment, to be
read among them. But the Gentiles are therefore said to live without the law,
because they had not the law of Moses; which distinction would be vain, if
whatsoever was written in Moses law in tables of stone, was writ in the hearts
of the Gentiles also; for then in no sense they could be said to be without the
law, and not under the Law.

And whereas you say the sense of the Text is not good as I notion it, you
might as well say the sense of the Text was not good as the Apostle notions it;
for I said no more in my Argument, then the Apostle said in the text, (viz.)
That the Gentiles were without law.

And lastly, whereas you say, this Law that the Gentiles lived under is Moses
law, because all were to be judged by it; I answer, that the contrary is most
true, as appears by consulting the text. For the Text does distinguish the law
of Nature from the law of Moses, because that every body shall not be judged by
the Jews law, but them that sinned without the law shall be judged WITHOUT the
law: whence I argue, that if the Law of Moses be so differenced, that God will
not judge every body by it, then the difference is more then in the mere
writing and transcribing of it: But the law of Moses is so different, that God
will not judge every body by it. Ergo, the difference is more then a mere
writing and transcribing of it.

As for example, Mr. Coppinger told us but now, that there was no more
difference between the Jews living under the law, and the Gentiles living
without the law, then there is between the people that live at York and London;
if the difference be no greater as he would make us believe, how coms it to
pass that at York, the people are judged by the same law as we are judged by at
London? and yet the Apostle says, The Gentiles that lived without the law,
shall be judged without the law; which plainly manifests both a formal and a
material difference between the law of Moses and the law written in the heart.


Mr. Coppinger. N^w I will show, that the difference does lie only in writing,
Romans 2.26, 27. where it is said, If the Gentiles in uncircumcision keep the
Righteousness of the Law, that his Unicircumcision should be counted for
Circumcision; And shall not uncircumcision which is by Nature, if it fulfill the
Law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision do transgress the Law?
Now how could the Gentiles uncircumcision be accounted for circumcision, if he
kept the Righteousness of the Law, if this Law were not the Law of Moses?

Again, the Difference is made in the word Letter, so that the fault of the
Jews is the greater, in that they despise the Law, because it is sent by two
Messengers from God unto them, both in writing, and otherwise planting it in
the hearts; so that the difference is opposed in the word Letter.


Mr. Ives. Mr. Coppinger says, the difference between the Law of Moses and
Nature is opposed in the word Letter: if so, then he has confuted himself, for
that they cannot be the same, if they are opposed one to the other.

But secondly, the Law of Moses is contradistinct from the Law of Nature, as
appears by that text, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21. where the Apostle says, That to them
that were without the Law, he was as without Law.

Now what could the Apostle do in a way of compliance to make the Jews believe
that he was not without the Law, and to make the Gentiles think he was under
the Law, if the Law of the one was no way differing from the other but in
writing? Then they could not be distinguished by Actions: but that the Jews
were distinguished from the Gentiles by their different Laws, is plain, in that
Paul did blame Peter for compelling the Gentiles to live as do the Jews.

But I shall further prove by reason, that the Law of Nature cannot be the same
with the Law of Moses, because that which is called the Law of Moses,
wherever it is mentioned, it is always understood of the whole Law, as well
the Ceremonial as the Moral, which I hope Mr. Coppinger will not say was all of
it written in the Tables of the Gentiles hearts: and this appears by the Text
mentioned by Mr. Coppinger, John 7.23. the Jews did circumcise a man, that the
Law of Moses might not be broken.


Mr. Coppinger. Mr. Ives says, That the Mosaical Law is opposed to the Law of
Nature, 1 Cor. 9.21. where the Apostle says, He was under the Law to them that
were under the Law, and without Law to them that were without Law. I answer,
That the Apostle could not make a difference between believing Jews under the
Law, and believing Gentiles without the Law; because that the Gentiles were
under EVERY part and parcel of the Law of Moses, as appears Gal. 3. As many as
are under the Law, are under the curse: and the Gentiles were redeemed from the
Curse of the Law, Gal 4.8. And could the Law curse them that were not under it?
I shall therefore show by and by that this Law which the Gentiles were under,
was the whole Law of Moses.


Mr. Ives. I answer, That the Gentiles that had a Law writ in their hearts,
were under the curse, annexed to the breach of that Law; and therefore Christ
came to redeem them from the curse of it: But does it follow, that because
Christ came to redeem the Gentiles from the curse of the Law, that therefore
the Gentiles lived under ALL, the Law, and every part and parcel of the Law of
Moses, and were in danger to suffer all the penalties and curses due to the
transgression of the Law of Moses?

But secondly, among the Gentiles there lived many Jews, as the Apostle says
in the Epistle to the Romans, chap. 2. Behold, thou (...) called a Jew, etc.
and yet they lived among the Gentiles who were Romans: so in like manner among
the Galatians lived many Jews, as appears by Peter's compelling the Gentiles to
live as do the Jews, Gal. 2. And again, it is said, Gal 4. That the child
differs nothing from a servant, etc. Which must needs be meant of the Jews:
So that Christ redeemed the Jews from the curse of their Law, and the Gentiles
from the curse of their Law: but this does not prove, that because Christ
redeemed both from the curse, that therefore both Jew and Gentile lived all
under one and the same Law. And this is further proved by the Apostle, Gal. 5.
when he says, Whosoever is circumcised, is a debtor to do the whole Law.

Whence I argue:

That if the Law of Nature had bound the Gentiles to keep all the Law of Moses,
then they had been indebted to the whole Law of Moses without Circumcision.

But the Gentiles were not indebted to the whole Law of Moses without
Circumcision.

Ergo, the Law of Nature did not bind the Gentiles to observe the whole Law of
Moses.

From all which it is plain, that the Apostle does distinguish between the Law
of the Jews and the Law of the Gentiles, and the curse of both according to the
breach of those different Laws they lived under.


Mr. Coppinger. Whereas you talk of Circumcision, I say that Christ has set us
at liberty from Circumcision, and therefore we ought not to be circumcised.


Mr. Ives. But Christ has redeemed none from the Law of Nature; which shows
plainly that the whole Law of Moses was not writ in the hearts of the Gentiles.

But secondly, if Christ has redeemed the Gentiles from the Law of Nature,
then though your seventh-day Sabbath were writ in the Law of Nature, yet the
Gentiles were not bound unto it.

And lastly, your answer was, That the Gentiles were bound to all the
Ceremonies of the Mosaical Laws; which I have disproved, by showing that the
Gentiles were bound to the Law of Ceremonies by the Obligation of Circumcision,
and not by the light of Nature.


Mr. Coppinger. I do say, That the Gentiles were under all the Ceremonial Laws,
as well as under all the Moral Laws, even by the Law writ in the heart, even
all the Law, all Sacrifices, every bit and every thing: Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed (...) etc. and Gal. 4. He has redeemed them that were under the Law,
etc. Meaning Gentiles as well as Jews. Now that this was the whole Law of
Moses, in that the same spirit writ the same things in the hearts of the
Gentiles that the Angel did command upon mount Sinai. Again, the Apostle
speaking of the Law, says, The man that does them shall live in them, Gal.
3.12. to this agrees Romans 10. So that all Moses law was the same with the law
written in the heart, and was for Jews and Gentiles indifferently, the one for
both people as well as the other: for God intended that the Tables of stone
should be kept in the hand of Israel, and from thence it was to be conveyed to
others, Romans the 9th and 4th.


Mr. Ives. I need make no further answer then to say, That Christ was made
under the Law to redeem them that were under the Law, that is, those that are
under the law of Nature, from the curse thereof; and them that are under the
law of Moses, from the curse due to the Transgressions thereof; and not to
redeem the Gentiles from the curse due to the transgression of the law of
Moses, which they are expressly said not to be under.

Secondly, that the Gentiles by the light of Nature were not under the whole
Law of Moses is clear, in that some lived in terra incognita, and also in the
Antipodes: and besides, the text says plainly, that the Gentiles were not
under the law, and I must stick to that, what ever you say, unless you spoke
more reason: and it is strange to me, that this should not be discerned, that a
person may be redeemed from the punishment due to him for transgressing the
Laws of the King of Spain, and another may be redeemed from the punishment due
to him for transgressing the laws of England, and after this it may be said of
them both, that they are redeemed from the curse of the law: but would it
reasonably follow from thence, that they both lived under one and the same Law,
in all points? in like manner it does not follow, that because Christ has
redeemed both Jews and Gentiles from the curse of the law, that therefore they
both lived under one law in all respects, as Mr. Coppinger imagines.


Mr. Coppinger. Now I will prove that the whole world by the light of Nature,
were under the whole law both of Sacrifices and Ceremonies, Gal. 3.11. No man
is justified by the Law in the sight of God, here the Apostle means the whole
Ceremonial law, as appears Heb. 14.10.


Mr. Ives. I demanded your Answer to that question, whether the Antipodes were
under all the Ceremonies of Moses law, and the people that were in terra
incognita; and to this you have said nothing, but alleged a text to prove,
instead of answering, which does not speak a word to your purpose, viz. That
the Gentiles are bound by the law written in the heart to keep the whole law of
Moses, even all the Ceremonies as well as Morals; which you are forced upon, to
escape the dint of my Argument, which was to show you that Moses law did not
require the Gentiles to keep the seventh-day sabbath, because the Gentiles did
not live under it, but without it, as diverse texts tell us plainly.

There are three notable things to be observed in Mr. Coppingers answer to this
Argument:

First, that he is forced to confess in words at length, that all the
Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law were writ in the heart.

Secondly, that this was a force put to save his credit, appears, because in
his answer to Mr. Ives his first Argument, but two hours before, or
thereabouts, he plainly denied that which this Argument forces him to confess:
for when he told Mr. Ives that the Nations were said to be cast out because
they did not keep all Isreal's Laws, Mr. Ives did ask him, whether the Nations
were cast out for not keeping circumcision, and other of the Jews ceremonies?
And when he saw that this Absurdity was like to fall upon him, he told us, That
though the Nations were to keep all Isreal's Statutes, yet (says he) they were
not to keep their ceremonies. So that though he denied this in his Answer to
the first Argument, as any one may see that looks back to it, yet here he does
confess it over and over, that the Nations by the light of Nature were to keep
every bit and parcel (for those are his words) of the Ceremonial Law of Moses,
as well as the Moral. And,

Thirdly, It is observable, that a little before, in page 156. he cites a text
in the ninth of the Romans, to prove that the Jews had the tables of stone
given them to keep, not only for themselves, but that they might convey the
things therein required unto the world. Now what need was there for Israel to
convey the knowledge of their Laws writ in tables of stone to the world, if
what he has said all this while be true, viz. that there was no difference?
for the very same Law (says he) which was in the Jews tables of stone, was in
the tables of the Gentiles hearts, save that one had it written, and the other
had not.


Mr. Ives. If believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath,
then they are bound to esteem one day above another.

But believing Gentiles are not bound to esteem one day above another.

Ergo, believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh-day Sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor: believing Gentiles are bound to esteem one
day above another.


Mr. Ives. I prove the Minor thus:

If there is an Apostolical Toleration to esteem one day above another, or
every day as one is persuaded, then believing Gentiles are not bound to esteem
one day above another.

But there is such a Toleration, Romans 14.5.

Ergo.


Mr. Coppinger. The strength of Mr. Ives his Argument lies in the universality
of the terms every day; and therefore I shall show that this general term ought
to be restrained.

As for instance: There seems to be as general a toleration given for the
eating of all things; and yet Mr. Ives believes eating of blood, and things
strangled, and meats offered to Idols, are excepted: in like manner is the
seventh-day sabbath to be excepted, when there is a toleration given to observe
every day alike. And

Secondly, if every man may walk as he is persuaded, then he may keep the
seventh-day sabbath if he be so persuaded.


Mr. Ives. I answer to the last first: That although I do not deny those the
liberty that observe the seventh-day sabbath; yet in as much as they condemn
others, and charge others with sin for not observing it; that is their fault:
for it is not a man's persuasion of the truth of a thing, that will make it my
duty; which is the only point in hand, viz. not what is a liberty, but what is
a duty.

But secondly, whereas Mr. Coppinger says That all days may be restrained,
because all things are restrained by the Holy Ghost, and therefore we may not
eat all things.

I answer, That if Mr. Coppinger can assign as good an exception against the
term every day, as I can against his general term every thing, I shall say this
Argument is answered. Now I will show you, that when the Apostle tells us that
we may eat all things, the Holy Ghost puts a restraint here, and tells us, That
meats offered in sacrifice to an Idol, together with blood, and things
strangled, are excepted, and may not be eaten, as appears Act. 15. compared
with Act. 21. Now if the Holy Ghost had said in the case of days, You may keep
every day alike except the seventh day sabbath, then there had been somewhat in
your instance, otherwise the instance confirms the Argument.


Mr. Coppinger. Here the Apostle does refer the Observation of days to their
own mind, and so he does the eating of all things; therefore Mr. Ives has done
my work for me, by assigning Acts 15. where blood, and things strangled, and
things offered to Idols, are excepted: If then I show that the seventh-day
sabbath is as expressly and particularly excepted, I have answered his Argument
by his own confession: and that it is excepted, you may see in Jam. 2. and Mat.
5.17, 18.


Mr. Ives. That which you promised, was, That you would show as particular an
exception of the seventh-day sabbath out of every day, as I had shown you
against eating all things; and instead thereof, you assign me two general
texts, where the whole Law, and every jot and tittle of the Law is required to
be kept and observed: both which texts have been denied to include the
seventh-day sabbath to be in force, because offering of sacrifices is required
in the fifth of Matthew, as well as other things; where Christ bids those to
whom he preached, to go and be reconciled to their brother, and then come and
offer their gift; which Law is not binding to the believers in these days.

But is it not strange that a man in his right wits should tell us, That he
would assign a text where the sabbath was excepted out of this word every day,
in as express terms as blood and things strangled are excepted out of every
thing? and instead of a particular exception, he produces two general texts
that have not the least word of a Sabbath in them: but does not this leave the
Argument unanswered? for by the same rule he can say, That the seventh-day
sabbath is not intended in this text, when the Apostle says, We may observe
every day alike; I say by the same rule, and with much more strength of reason,
it may be denied that the sabbath is included in those general terms, All the
Law, and the whole Law; but sure I am, that it was never heard of, that such
general texts were ever called express and particular exceptions against a
general term in a Syllogism by any that ever understood the difference between
a particular and a general term.


Mr. Coppinger. The texts I named tell us that the whole Law is to be observed,
and every tittle of it, till it be fulfilled, and the seventh-day sabbath was
included; therefore if any man teach otherwise, he teaches contrary to sound
Doctrine. And as touching bringing gifts to the Altar, and offering sacrifices,
mentioned in that Text Matt, 5. these things Christ has fulfilled and nailed
to his Cross And lyet when Mr Ives did dispute the next time with Mr.
Coppinger, he said, That Altar was not understood for a literal Altar; But
said, The Altar and the Gift in Mat. 5. was both to be understood
Allegorically: and yet here he does confess that the text speaks of such an
Altar and such a Gift that were types of Christ, and that ended at his death.
Compare therefore this saying with his Argument upon the fifth of Matthew in
the next ensuing Dispute.
; if not, they shall remain as long as Heaven and Earth remain, and so must the
seventh-day sabbath, unless Mr. Ives can show us that it is fulfulled by
Christ, and that because it has Heaven and Earth for its reason.


Mr. Ives. All this while there is no particular exception made against my
former Argument from the fourteenth of the Romans, as you promised me; but
instead thereof, you repeat the text Mat. 5. whence you infer, That Heaven and
Earth shall pass, before the law shall pass, till it be fulfilled; of which
law, the sabbath (say you) must needs be a part. What if that were granted?
does that prove that all the law mentioned in Mat. 5. is in force? have not you
confessed that offerings mentioned in the same chapter, were fulfilled and
abolished by Christ? which very Confession of yours, has made the text
incapable to do you that service for which you cited it.

For how can any man safely conclude any particular proposition to be binding,
from a general text, when he himself shall say, Some things intended in that
general text cannot be concluded from it as binding? so that the Argument yet
remains unanswered, (viz.) That believers have no tie upon them by virtue of
Moses law to observe one day above another; and therefore they are not tied by
Moses law to keep the seventh-day sabbath: And though we have this freedom by
Christ from the Mosaical institutions, it does not therefore follow (as some
fondly do imagine) that therefore we are not to set apart a time under the
Gospel to worship and serve God. Somewhat has been spoken to this in the
former Dispute with Mr. Tillam, and more shall be spoken in the ensuing
Appendix. But we proceed to the next Argument.


Mr. Ives. Because Mr. Coppinger confessed, that if the seventh-day sabbath was
fulfilled by Christ, (...) the Altar and Gifts, mentioned in Mat. 5. that then
we were not to observe it, otherwise it was to continue; I shall therefore show
that the seventh-day sabbath is fulfilled by Christ, thus:

If the seventh-day sabbath be a weak and beggarly Rudiment, then Christ has
fulfilled it.

But the seventh-day sabbath is a weak and beggarly Rudiment.

Ergo, Christ has fulfilled it.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor: The seventh day is not a weak and beggarly
Rudiment.


Mr. Ives. If all the times commanded in the Law of Moses are weak and beggarly
Rudiments, then the seventh-day sabbath is a weak and beggarly Rudiment.

But all the times commanded in the Law of Moses are weak and beggarly Rudiments.

Ergo, the seventh-day sabbath is a weak and beggarly Rudiment.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor: all the times commanded to be observed in the
law, are not weak and beggarly Rudiments.


Mr. Ives. If there was no time commanded to be observed in the Law, but days,
months, times and years, and all these were weak and beggarly Rudiments, then
all the times commanded in the law, were weak and beggarly Rudiments.

But there was no time commanded to be observed in the law, but days, months,
times and years, and all these were weak and beggarly Rudiments.

Ergo, all the times commanded in the law were weak and beggarly Rudiments.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor, and put you to prove, that the days, months,
times and years that were commanded to be observed in the Law, were weak and
beggarly Rudiments.


Mr. Ives. This I shall do from Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. the words are these: How turn
ye again to those weak and beggarly Rudiments, whereunto ye desire again to be
in bondage? Ye observe days and months, and times, and years: I am afraid of
you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.


Mr. Coppinger. These days mentioned in the Text, they are not the Jewish, but
the Gentile Observations of days, as appears by considering the eighth verse,
where it is said, They did service to that which by nature was not God; which
must needs be understood of the Gentiles.


Mr. Ives. Sir, you did but even now tell us, That the Jews and Gentiles were
under one and the same Law, and that the Law of Nature had all the Ceremonies
of the Jews contained in it: if you then said true, what reason have you to
imagine that the Jews might not do service to such as by nature were not gods,
even as the Gentiles did, since the Gentiles had, by your own confession, one
and the same law to inform them in the truth, and to show them what was error?

But secondly, the Jews did worship that which by nature was not God, many a
time and often, and therefore it does not follow that these words must be
restrained to the Gentiles only; for the Jews made them a Calf, and said it
was their god Exodus 32 8.

And to this might be added Isa. 2.8, 20. Mic. 5.13. 1 King. 9. and 9. and 1
King. 11.23. where it is said, that the Children of Israel worshipped
Ashtoreth, the god of the Zidonians, and Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and
Milcom the god of the Children of Ammon, etc. and it is further said, that when
God will bring them into their own Land, and convert them to the knowledge of
Christ, that he will cleanse them from all their Idols, Ezekiel 36.25. and 37,
23. By which it appears, that the Apostles saying, They did service to that
which by nature was not God, does not prove this spoken of Gentiles only,
since that the Idolatry of ^he Jews was one great cause of Gods scattering ^f
them among the heathen as at this day.


Mr. Coppinger. These days which the Apostle speaks of, were the Gentiles
days, which they did ob^erve in imitation of the Jews, as the Jews had (...)
Table of the Lord, and the Gentiles had a Table of Devils.


Mr. Ives. If you consult the text, together with what ^ath been said in my
former Reply, you will ^^nde that this was spoken of the Jews, and the ^^ewish
Rudiments, from which Christ came (...) redeem them, as appears Gal. 4.3.4.

Secondly, because they were such Rudiments under which the Jews were to
continue till ^e time appointed of the Father, Gal. 4.1, 2. ^ow the Father
never appointed any of the Gentiles Idolatrous Rudiments; neither did God
appoint any time for the Gentiles to con^^ue in them; therefore these could not
be (...) Idolatrous Rudiments of the Gentiles.

Thirdly, they are complained of for observing ^^ars; which clearly shows that
it does not relate to the superstitious times of the Gentiles, but to the times
that were commanded of the Jews in the Law of Moses: for it was never heard of,
that any Nation in the world did observe years, besides the Jew^ who indeed
were to keep the seventh year, and (...) Jubilee year, sacred, and not to do
any work (...) them.

Fourthly and lastly, the whole scope of this ^pistle to the Galatians, is to
reclaim the Jews from running back to the Mosaical Rudiments of the Law, who
did not only Judaize themselves, (...) would have compelled the believing
Gentiles to Judaize also: as appears by Paul's blaming Peter (...) so doing,
Gal. 2.14. and therefore he cautions (...) not to be entangled again with the
yoke of bondage (...) chap. 5. verse. 1. Which is the bondage of the Mosaical
Law, as appears verse. 2. and the same bondage which he feared they were turning
to in the (...) serving days, months, times and years, as any (...) may see
that compares the eighth and ninth very of the fourth of the Galatians.


Mr. Coppinger. The Apostle does detect them for observi^^ the Rudiments of the
world, as opposed (...) them of the Church of God: and this was (...) the time
that they knew not God, when (...) chose such days as he did not appoint.

Secondly, the Ordinances of the Law (...) glorious; therefore he could not
relate to the (...) when he speaks of beggarly Elements.

Thirdly, he labors to persuade them from such Idolatrous times, lest his
labor had been in vain in drawing them from their Idols.

Fourthly, These Galatians being under a strong temptation to the bondage of
the Law, and Paul having confuted them by telling of them that then they must
be circumcised, which ^ndeed was useless, hereupon they are ready to turn to
their own heathenish Idolatry again, as the Apostle feared.


Mr. Ives. I have assigned several reasons why these times could not relate to
the superstitious times of the Gentiles; to which you have answered not a word:
but in the stead thereof, endea^our to prove that these were spoke of Gentile
Rudiments.

First, you say they must be gentile Rudiments, because they are called the
Rudiments of the world, and opposed to the Rudiments of Gods Church. I answer,
that this proves not against me, but your self; for the Jewish Laws were called
the Rudiments of the world, Gal. chap. 4. verse. 3. which they ^ere to continue
under, as children under tutors, ^ll the time appointed of the Father. And you
^our self told us, That those Rudiments of the Jews were commanded and given in
charge to all ^he world, though now you seem to deny it. Again, you say the
Ordinances of the Law were glo^ious; therefore they could not be called
beggarly and weak. I answer:

First, though they were glorious, yet now Christ is come, that glory is no
glory in comparison, as appears 2 Cor. 3.9, 10.

Secondly, the Apostle says, that the glory thereof was done away; and
therefore they are weak.

Thirdly, the Author to the Hebrews calls the Commandments and Rudiments of
the Law, weak and unprofitable, which is all one with weak and beggarly even as
a man that is weak and beggarly is not able to do any thing to profit, even so
the Author to the Hebrews phraseth it, in saying. That there was a disanulling
of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.

And whereas you say the Apostle labors (...) draw them from Idolatrous times
and not Jew^^^ I have in the former Reply given answer to this by showing that
this Notion is contrary to the sco^^ of the whole Epistle: and whereas you say
(...) Galatians were under a strong temptation to the bondage of the Law, and
the Apostle having confuted that opinion, they presently run back to the other
extreme of heathenish Idolatry: I answer, (...) this conceit supposes two
Epistles to the Galatians for if conviction from Judaism had been the fruit of
one Epistle, turning them from the other extrea^ of Idolatry must be the fruit
of another Epistle because that which was written to remove them (...) of
Judaism, could not at the same time compl^^^ of their going to the other
extreme of Gentilism (...) as I have said, this Notion must be cast out as a
stranger in the house of this Epistle, unless Mr. Coppinger can find another
Epistle to the Galatians to entertain it in; therefore it is evident, that
these days, months, times and years, were the times the Jews were to observe
in the Law, among which the seventh-day sabbath was included, as shall be shown
more particularly in the ensuing Appendix.


Mr. Coppinger. If the times here called weak and beggarly, be the heathenish
times, then I have said something to your Argument, for all you say it is not
answered.


Mr. Ives. I do confess you have said something, but to what purpose, I shall
leave the people to judge; and if it do appear that they were the Rudiments of
the Law that the Christians were going back to, then you have not answered my
Argument, whatever you have said: I shall therefore leave it to the Judgment of
the Audience, and proceed to another Argument.

If the seventh-day sabbath was a shadow of good things to come, the believing
Gentiles are not bound to observe it.

But the seventh-day sabbath was a shadow of good things to come.

Ergo, the believing Gentiles are not bound to observe the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor; the seventh-day sabbath was not called a
shadow of things to come.


Mr. Ives. The text in the second of the Col. 16 and 17 verses, proves it,
where the Apostle says, The sabbath days were shadows of good things to come.


Mr. Coppinger. The Apostle does not say sabbath days; the word days is put in
by the Translators, and it ought to be read sabbaths.


Mr. Ives. I shall prove that the Translators did well to put in that
supplement, by showing that the Apostle intends sabbath days. My first Argument
is this:

Wheresoever the word sabbath is put without reference to such and such
sabbaths, there the seventh-day sabbath is always intended or included.

But here it is so put. Ergo.

As for instance, when the Scripture speaks of the Jews festival sabbath, or
their yearly sabbath there is ever some note of distinction to distinguish them
from sabbath days; therefore the yearly sabbaths were called Sabbaths of rest
for the LAND, Levit. 25.4, 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. 36.21. showing thereby, that for that
year the Land was to lie still, and not be plowed or sown.


Mr. Coppinger. I deny the Minor: the word sabbaths is sometimes simply put
without reference to such and such sabbaths, when the seventh day is neither
intended nor included.


Mr. Ives. Pray assign us that text where sabbaths is so understood.


Mr. Coppinger. I shall cite Esaias 1 and 13. where the text says, The new Moons
and Sabbaths God could not away with.


Mr. Ives. If you will answer my Argument, you must show me that the
seventh-day sabbath is not intended in this text; but I shall by another
Argument make it appear that sabbath days is not only intended in Col. 2.16.
but in Esaias 1 and 13 also; which I thus do:

Wheresoever this word sabbaths is mentioned with new moons, feasts and holy
days, there the seventh-day sabbath is intended.

But the word sabbaths is here so mentioned.

Therefore the seventh-day sabbath is here intended.

Show me but one instance where the word sabbaths is joined with new moons, and
feasts, and holy days, where the seventh-day sabbath is not intended, and then
I may have some reason to think the Apostle does not intend the seventh-day
sabbath in Col. 2.16, 17. and if you do so, I will give you the case.


Mr. Coppinger. If this were true, then the sabbath must always be joined with
new moons: but I can show you sabbath mentioned without new moons, that exclude
the seventh-day sabbath; and if I do so, then I have put in an exception
against the universality of your Argument.


Mr. Ives. If you can show me sabbaths mentioned without new moons, it is not
an exception against the Argument; for I have already shown that the yearly
sabbaths were mentioned without new moons. Again, their feasts were called
sabbaths, as the Jubilee and Feast of weeks; therefore I must tie you to the
enumeration in the text and Argument, and do demand an instance where the
sabbath is mentioned with new moons and feasts, that is not understood of the
seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. There is in the text an Adjunct of distinction, viz. Sabbaths,
which are shadows, etc. as if I should say, Fetch me my books in such a room,
plainly distinguishing them from other books in other rooms: and so these
sabbaths are called a shadow, to distinguish them from other sabbaths that were
not shadows. Now then Mr. Ives must show us that the seventh-day sabbath is a
shadow of the body of Christ, and I will grant the case.


Mr. Ives. If I prove the seventh-day sabbath a shadow of the Body of Christ,
Mr. Coppinger says he, will grant the case; and he has already granted that
the sabbaths mentioned in this text Col. 2. are shadows of the Body of Christ:
it remains then that I prove this word Sabbaths to intend the seventh-day
sabbath, and then I have proved that the seventh-day sabbath is a shadow.

The Argument then that I have made already does prove it; because, as I have
said, from the beginning of the Bible to the end of it, where ever sabbaths are
mentioned with new Moons and Feasts, there the seventh-day sabbath is always
intended: and till Mr. Coppinger can show us a text like this of Col. 2. where
sabbaths is mentioned with new moons, and the seventh-day sabbath not intended,
I have sufficiently proved that the seventh-day sabbath is here intended.


Mr. Coppinger. I made an Epithet of the distinction in my former answer, by
showing that the sabbaths in the text are called Sabbaths that are a shadow, to
distinguish them from sabbaths that were not shadows; and that therefore it
could not be meant of sabbath days.

And secondly, I have instanced Isa. 1.13. where the word Sabbath is mentioned
with new Moons; and it is not understood of the seventh day sabbath, because
the work which the text says was done upon those sabbaths, was contrary to the
work of the seventh-day sabbaths.


Mr. Ives. As for that which you call the Epithet of the distinction, though I
think it is scarce good sense, yet I shall answer your meaning, by showing you
that the Sabbaths in Col. 2. were not called shadows to Distinguish them from
the seventh-day Sabbath, as if that was no shadow, because the seventh-day it
self is called a sign, Exodus 31.13. even as circumcision was called (...)
sign, Romans 4.11.

Again, it does not follow, because he says Sabbaths that are a shadow, that
he excludes some Sabbaths that were not shadows, no more then when he says new
Moons that are a shadow, that he does hereby intimate that some new Moons were
not shadows to the Jews.

And as touching the text Isa. 1.13. where you say Sabbaths are mentioned with
new Moons; which could not be understood of the sabbath days, because (say
you) there was such work to be done which was contrary to the work of a sabbath
day.

I answer, that nothing is mentioned which (...) lawfully done on those
sabbaths, that was contrary to the work of the seventh day.


Mr. Coppinger. I shall show you that these sabbaths in Isa. 1.13. could not be
the sabbath days: as first, they are said, Isa. 1. to tread in Gods Courts in
the Temple, which they did not do on the sabbath days, for then they met in
the Synagogue. Secondly, here is all the Sacrifices and burnt-offerings, which
they could not offer upon the sabbath days.


Mr. Ives. First, it does not follow that all those religious duties mentioned
with the sabbaths, Isa. 1. were to be performed upon the sabbath days, any
more then the celebrations of their new Moons were to be celebrated upon the
sabbath days; and therefore if the duties there mentioned, could not be
performed upon the sabbath days, that does not prove the sabbaths mentioned
with new Moons in that text, does not intend the Sabbath day.

Secondly, you say they trod the Courts of God: this you call a work which they
could not do upon the sabbath days, because you say they met in the Synagogue
upon sabbath days.

I answer, That David magnifies the COURTS of Gods house, while as yet there
was no temple; which shows that other places were called the Courts of Gods
house, as well as the temple.

Thirdly, they might tread Gods Courts in the Temple upon the Sabbath days,
and therefore you confessed that the priests in the Temple might offer the
Sacrifice upon the sabbath day, and be blameless, which Christ supposes to be
their constant custom; but I believe never any seventh-day sabbath-keeper but
Mr. Coppinger, ever taught that it was a work that could not be done on the
Sabbath day, for People to tread in the Courts of Gods Temple.

Again, you say here was ALL their Burnt-offerings, and ALL their Sacrifices,
which you say could not be upon the seventh day sabbath offered, and therefore
Isaiah could not mean the seventh-day sabbath.

I answer, That the text does not say all their Sacrifices, but the multitude
of their Sacrifices; and therefore you grossly abuse the text: Just as if I
should say, Here is a multitude of People here assembled; does it reasonably
follow from such a speech, that ALL the People in England are here assembled?


Mr. Coppinger. The text speaks of their SOLEMN Assemblies, which was not wont
to be upon their sabbath days.


Mr. Ives. It does not follow, that because they were solemn Assemblies, that
they were such Assemblies that could not be upon the sabbath days; for Mr.
Coppinger meets upon the seventh-day sabbath, and will they say when they are
together, that it is not a solemn Assembly?

But if the Sabbaths mentioned Isa. 1.13. could not be the Sabbath days,
because they had solemn Assemblies upon it, then the seventh-day Sabbath that
Mr. Coppinger and those of his mind assembles on, is not the true Sabbath day,
because they have a solemn Assembly upon it.

But I have showed that the mentioning of these duties with the Sabbaths, does
not prove they were all to be performed upon the Sabbath there mentioned: but
however, that is most untrue, to say that the sabbath mentioned Isa. 1.13. is
not the Sabbath day, because those services there mentioned could not be done
upon the sabbath days, and that those religious duties there mentioned, were
contrary to the works of the Sabbath day, then which nothing is more false.


Mr. Coppinger. I have shown you a text where sabbaths is mentioned with new
Moons, that is not understood of the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I shall leave this Argument to the judgment of the Audience and
your own conscience; I have shown that sabbaths were shadows of Christ, and
therefore not binding in these days, to the believing Gentiles: I have also
given two reasons why the sabbath mentioned Col. 2.16. is to be understood of
the seventh-day sabbath.

The one was, because the word Sabbath is always understood for the seventh-day
sabbath, when it is mentioned without reference to their festival sabbaths.

And lastly, I have more chiefly insisted and do still insist upon this reason,
viz. That the seventh-day sabbath is intended by the Apostle, in Col. 2.16.
because sabbath is there mentioned with new Moons and Feasts, etc. and
throughout the whole Bible, wherever sabbaths is mentioned with new Moons and
Feasts, there the sabbath days are always intended; and therefore I do again
call upon my Respondent either to say that he cannot answer the Argument, or
else to show me a text where sabbaths are mentioned with new Moons, and the
seventh-day sabbath not intended, because no Scripture is of a private
interpretation.


Mr. Coppinger. I have showed you Isa. 1.13. where Sabbath is mentioned, and
the seventh-day sabbath not intended.


Mr. Ives. I have showed you that the reasons why you so conceive, have no
weight, and that the seventh-day sabbath is intended by the prophet Isaiah in
the sabbath mentioned with new Moons, Isa. 1.13. and therefore unless you will
assign any other instances to take off the force of my Argument, I shall,
because the time and my strength is very much spent, end the Disputation.


I come now to give an account of the fourth and last Disputation, which was on
the 22 of Feb. 1658. at the place aforesaid; at which Dispute Mr. Coppinger was
Opponent, and Mr. Ives Respondent: at which time and place the people being
assembled, Mr. Coppinger propounds the Question to be disputed on; which take
as follows.

Mr. Coppinger. THe Question to be disputed this day, is, Whether believing
Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. The question was laid down in general terms, and you have repeated
it in indefinite terms; not but that I could oppose it in those terms, but
because we have agreed upon terms, let us not now alter them.


Mr. Coppinger. When I say, Believing Gentiles are bound to keep the
seventh-day sabbath, my meaning is, all believing Gentiles.

Moderator.

Sir, then I pray put in those words, and proceed.


Mr. Coppinger. I say then, All believing Gentiles are bound to keep the
seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. All believing Gentiles are not bound to keep the seventh day
sabbath; and pray prove they are.


Mr. Coppinger. The first Argument I shall urge, is this:

If all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the royal Law in the second of
James, then all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

But all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the royal Law in the second of
James.

Ergo, all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I deny the consequence of the major Proposition: for though all
believers are bound to keep the royal Law mentioned in James the second, yet
they are not bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. If all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the royal Law in
the second of James, and that Law does contain the seventh day sabbath, then
all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

But all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the royal Law James 2. and that
Law does contain the seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Syllogism, because you do not conclude that which was
denied; for this Argument should have concluded, that if all believing Gentiles
are bound to keep the royal Law in the second of James, that THEN it follows
that they are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath: which was the consequence
denied in the Major Proposition of the former Argument.


Mr. Coppinger. If the royal Law mentioned in the second of James, be the whole
of that Law which in the Scripture prohibiteth murder and adultery, then the
seventh-day sabbath is one point of that Law.

But the royal Law mentioned in the second of James is the whole of that Law
which in the Scripture prohibiteth murder and adultery.

Ergo, the seventh day sabbath is one point of that Law.


Mr. Ives. Sir, I wonder you should pretend to dispute Syllogistically, and yet
make two Syllogisms that conclude not the Major proposition denied in the first
Syllogism: however, because I would not spend time about trifles, I shall
answer this Argument by denying the consequence of the Major Proposition; for
though the royal Law mentioned in the second of James be the whole of that Law
which in the Scriptures prohibiteth murder and adultery, yet it does not follow
that the seventh day sabbath is a point or a part of it, because every Law
which in the Scripture prohibiteth murder and adultery, does not command the
seventh day sabbath.

For murder was by the Law given to Noah prohibited, and so was adultery, and
yet the seventh day sabbath was no point or part of it: so that a man may keep
the royal Law, which in the Scripture prohibits murder and adultery, and yet
(...) keep the seventh day sabbath; for all the Patriarchs from Adam to Moses
kept that royal Law which in the Scriptures prohibits murder and adultery, and
yet never any of them kept the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. If that Law which in the Scriptures prohibiteth murder and
adultery, does also prohibit the breach of the seventh day sabbath, then it
follows that if the royal Law in the second of James be the whole of that Law
which in the Scripture prohibiteth murder and adultery, that then the
seventh-day sabbath is one point of that Law.

But that Law which in the Scriptures prohibiteth murder and adultery, does
also prohibit the breach of the seventh-day sabbath. Ergo.


Mr. Ives. If by the terms that law, etc. you mean, every Law which in the
Scriptures prohibits murder and adultery, does also prohibit the breach of the
seventh day sabbath, then I deny the Minor, because every Law which in the
Scripture prohibiteth murder and adultery, does not prohibit the breach of the
seventh-day sabbath; for the Scripture speaks of the Law given to Noah, and the
Law in Nature, and the Law of Christ: all these are royal Laws, and do prohibit
murder and adultery, and yet none of these prohibit the breach of your seventh
day sabbath: but if by that Law, etc. you do not mean whatsoever Law, then I
deny the Syllogism as fallacious.


Mr. Coppinger. I say, the whole Law is never mentioned where the seventh day
sabbath is excluded; therefore it is included.


Mr. Ives. I deny both Antecedent and Consequent.

For the whole Law may be mentioned where the seventh day sabbath is excluded:
but if that were true, the consequence does not follow, that the seventh day
sabbath is included; for the whole Law sometimes contains ceremonies as well as
morals: does it therefore follow, that ceremonies are always included in the
word whole Law, wherever whole Law is mentioned, except they are excluded in
so many words?


Mr. Coppinger. I say, the whole Law is no where mentioned where the sabbath is
excluded; and do you show me where it is.


Mr. Ives. If by excluding, you mean excluding in (...) many words, then I may
usher in the ceremonial Laws; for whole Law is never mentioned (as I have said)
where the ceremonial Law is verbally excluded: but does it follow that
therefore it is included?


Mr. Coppinger. I say again, if the Scripture no where speaks of whole Law, and
excludes the seventh day, then it includes it.


Mr. Ives. I have denied the Consequence over and over, and have assigned the
reason why I do so, and yet you make no answer to it.


Mr. Coppinger. My Argument was, That the seventh day sabbath was a part of
that Law which in the Scriptures forbids murder and adultery.


Mr. Ives. And I have answered to that Argument, by showing, that though the
seventh day sabbath might be commanded in a Law that forbids murder and
adultery; yet it follows not that every Law that in the Scripture forbids
murder and adultery, does command the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. It does command it; if it does not exclude it.


Mr. Ives. Pray let us have some Argument to prove, without repeating the same
things over and over; for I have told you That it does not follow that the word
whole Law does include the seventh day sabbath, because it does not in so many
words exclude it; for one may as well say the word whole Law includes the
observation of sacrifices and offerings, because those things are not excluded.

And if any shall say, That sacrifices are excluded in other texts, because the
ceremonies of the Law were called shadows, Heb. 10.1. I answer, That in another
text the sabbath day is excluded by the same reason, because the sabbath day is
called a shadow, Col. 2.16, 17.


Moderator. Mr. Coppinger, I suppose it remains for you to prove, that
wherever the words whole Law and royal Law are mentioned in the Scripture,
that the seventh day sabbath is included, if it be not excluded.


Mr. Coppinger. I have called for an instance of Mr. Ives, and he has not
given any, where the seventh day is excluded from the word whole Law.


Mr. Ives. I have told you, That if I could not show a text where the seventh
day is excluded, yet the Consequence does not follow, That therefore the
seventh day sabbath is included; as in the case of the Passover, and other
Judaical Rites, it does not follow that where these are not verbally excluded
from the word whole Law, that therefore they are included, and enjoined
wherever the whole Law is required to be observed.

But further, I say the sabbath is not included in the Law mentioned James the
second: and do you prove it.


Mr. Coppinger. You beg the Question, to say it is not included James 2.


Mr. Ives. Sir, I am Respondent, and the Respondent cannot beg the Question in
denying, but rather you do beg the Question by affirming the seventh day
sabbath is intended and commanded in the second of James, which you cannot
prove.


Mr. Coppinger. If you deny the seventh day sabbath is intended in the second
of James, you may deny it.


Mr. Ives. I do not deny it because I will deny it, but I will deny it because
I have reason to deny it.


Mr. Coppinger. Well then, I will prove that the seventh day sabbath is
commanded in this text James the second, thus:

If the Law in this text James the second, be the whole of that Law which in
the old Testament forbids blasphemy, murder and adultery, (for unto that Law
the Apostle James alludeth when he says, We must fulfill it according to the
Scriptures) then the seventh day sabbath is included and required in this Law
mentioned in this text James the second.

But the Law in this text James the second, is the whole of that Law which in
the Scriptures of the old Testament forbids blasphemy, murder and adultery.

Ergo, the seventh day sabbath is included and required in this Law mentioned
in this text James the second.


Mr. Ives. I answer, first, by showing that I may deny the Syllogism, because
it concludes not that which was formerly denied: for it is no more then what we
have had over and over, save that now instead of the word Scripture in the
prosyllogism, you add the Scriptures of the old Testament.

Secondly, I further answer by denying the Consequence; for though the Law
mentioned in the second of James be the Law which in the old Testament
forbids blasphemy, murder and adultery, yet it does not follow, that every
thing must be observed by the believing Gentiles, that the Law in the old
Testament requires; as for instance: That Law in the old Testament that
forbids murder and adultery, did also command them that they should circumcise
their Children, and offer Sacrifices. These were parts of that whole Law which
in the Scriptures of the old Testament forbids murder and adultery, as
appears Gal. 5. (...) For I testify to every man that is circumcised, that he
is a Debtor to do the WHOLE LAW.

Now who can deny but this whole Law did forbid murder and adultery? But though
we must abstain from these according to the Law of Nature and Christ, does it
therefore follow that we must observe every part of Moses Law, as that Argument
supposes? For is not circumcising called a part of Moses Law? John 7.23. and
sacrificing is called a part of that Law, Mat. 8.4, and is not honoring the
father and mother called Moses Law? Mark 7.

Now may not a man as well reason thus: If we must keep all that Law which in
the old Testament Forbids murder, and adultery, and disobedience to parents,
then we must keep circumcision, and offering of sacrifices; for these are parts
of that whole Law, of which the Law that forbids murder and adultery, and
disobedience to Parents, (...) a part? I say, is not this the same with Mr.
Coppinger? we must keep ALL that Law (says (...)) which in the old Testament
forbids murder and adultery: Ergo, we must keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Coppinger. I will prove that the whole Law in this text, Jam. 2. does
exclude Ceremonies, thus:

If the whole Law there mentioned, be that Law that Christians were to preach
and practice, then it does exclude Ceremonies.

But the whole Law mentioned in this text Jam. 2. is that whole Law that
Christians were to preach and practice.

Ergo, the Law mentioned in this text does exclude Ceremonies.


Mr. Ives. If it excludes ceremonies, then it excludes your former Argument,
which says, We are bound to keep the whole of that Law, which in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament did forbid murder and adultery; and also it
excludes your interpretation of whole Law, in Jam. 2.

For we cannot keep the whole Law, according to the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, in an old Testament sense, but we must observe the ceremonial as
well as the moral part: for the old Testament law, in which murder and adultery
were forbidden, had ceremonies commanded also; so that you have confuted your
self.


Mr. Coppinger. My Argument is of force, unless you prove the sabbath is
excluded from this word whole Law.


Mr. Ives. It is not of force, unless you prove the seventh day sabbath is
included, for ^ am R^spondent, and do deny it to be included, and do expect
your proof: for you confess some part of the whole Law is excluded.


Mr. Coppinger. If believing Gentiles cannot keep the whole Law in the second
of James, according to the Scripture, unless they keep the seventh day sabbath,
then the seventh day sabbath is included in this text Jam. 2.

But believing Gentiles cannot keep this law in the second of James, according
to the Scripture, unless they keep the seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, the seventh day sabbath is included in this text Jam. 2.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Minor.


Mr. Coppinger. If the Scripture in this text intend the Scriptures of the old
Testament only; then they cannot keep this Law, except they keep the seventh
day sabbath.

But the scriptures in this text respects the scriptures of the old Testament
only.

Ergo, they cannot keep this Law, according to the Scriptures, except they keep
the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. Your former Argument was of scriptures in general, and this Argument
restrains scriptures only to the old Testament: now the new Testament is
scripture, as well as the old, and therefore Peter says of some, That they
wrested Paul's writings, as they did other scriptures: so that if we can keep
the law that James injoyns according to the scriptures of the new Testament, we
shall do well.

But secondly, this is but semper Idem, the same over and over, what we had
before.

Thirdly, I deny the consequence of the Major Proposition: for believing
Gentiles may keep the whole law, Jam. 2. according to the scriptures of the old
Testament, in a new Testament sense, and yet not keep the seventh day sabbath.

Who is there but may perceive Mr. Coppinger runs in a Ring, which Logicians
call Circular Disputation?

Again, Mr. Coppinger has confessed, that ceremonies are abolished, therefore
it cannot in all points be kept according to the scriptures of the Old
Testament.


Mr. Coppinger. If believing Gentiles are bound to keep the whole law in the
second of James, according to the old Testament, and the old Testament
requires the keeping of the seventh day sabbath, then it follows that they
cannot keep the whole law, unless they keep the seventh day sabbath.

But believing Gentiles are bound to keep the whole law, according to the old
Testament; and the old Testament require^ the keeping of the seventh day
sabbath.

Ergo.


Mr. Ives. I deny both Major and Minor. For,

First, it does not follow, that because I mu^^ keep the law in the second of
James, according to the old Testament, that therefore I must kee^ the sabbath
required in the old Testament; (...) more then because I must forbear killing,
as it (...) written in the old Testament, that therefore must circumcise
according to the old Testament.

But secondly, I deny the Minor, and so That James does not require the keeping
of the whole Law, according to the old Testament.


Mr. Coppinger. I prove the Minor, thus:

They that break one point of the Law in the old Testament, they are guilty of
the whole, and cannot fulfill this law.

But he that breaks the seventh day sabbath, breaks one point of the Law in the
old Testament.

Ergo.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Major, and say, A man may break some points of the law,
contained in the Old Testament, and yet keep this Law, required in Jam. 2.


Mr. Coppinger. If you can prove that we can keep the law according to the old
Testament, and not keep the seventh day sabbath, you do something.


Mr. Ives. Your answer is impertinent; for the proof does lie upon you.

Secondly, you cannot prove we can keep the Law according to the old Testament,
unless we are circumcised; does it follow, that then we must be circumcised?

But thirdly, if I can prove that believers may keep the law in Jam. 2.
according to any scripture, without keeping the seventh day sabbath, it is
sufficient.


Mr. Coppinger. The strength of my Argument lies in this, That believers must
keep the Law according to the scriptures of the old Testament, which they could
not do, without keeping the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. And the strength of my Answer lies in this, That then they must be
circumcised, otherwise they cannot keep the whole Law, according to the old
Testament; to which you make no Reply.


Mr. Coppinger. I argue further:

If Christian Gentiles are bound to keep the whole Royal Law, as it is laid
down in this text, Jam. 2. then they are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

But Christian Gentiles are bound to keep the whole Royal Law, as it is laid
down in this text, Jam. 2.

Ergo, Christian Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

This Argument contains two Parts:

The one is, That Christian Gentiles are bound to keep this law, Jam. 2.

The other is, That this Law contains the seventh day sabbath.

First, he speaks to Christians in general, therefore to Gentiles, Because he
calls them Brethren, and writes to them as Believers, and tells them, that if
they kept the Royal Law, according to the scripture, they should do well; and
withal, tells them, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, is guilty of all.

Secondly, That the seventh day sabbath was a point of this Law, I thus reason:

If the Apostle refers them to the Scriptures of the old Testament, and they
could not keep the Law according to the old Testament, except they keep the
seventh day sabbath, then the seventh day sabbath is one point of this law,
Jam. 2.

But the Apostle refers them to the scriptures of the old Testament, and they
could not keep the law, according to the old Testament, unless they kept the
seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, they could not keep the whole Law, Jam. 2. unless they kept the
seventh-day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I have answered to this Argument over and over, and therefore I
shall take a little time to speak a few words more, and then I shall desire we
may go to a fresh Argument.

First then, this word whole Law, it either respects the whole Law that the
Jews were to observe, or the whole Law that Christians are to observe: if the
whole Law here, respect the Law that the Jews were to observe, then if we
should be bound to that, we should be bound to observe Ceremonies, as well as
Morals; for thus whole Law is understood, both in the Old and New Testament,
when it relates to the Laws the Jews were to keep, as appears, Gal. 5.3.
compared with 2 Chronicles. 33.8. where God tells Israel, that he will never remove
them, if they will keep the WHOLE law, with the Statutes and Ordinances.

But secondly, This word whole law, does relate to the Law of liberty, which
believers are to keep, which is opposed to the yoke of bondage, as appears by
comparing James 1. ver. 25. with James 2 and 12, where he bids them so speak
and so do, ^s those that should be judged by the Law of liberty, which is
opposed to the Law of Moses, for that it is called a yoke of bondage. So that
here is not one word of the seventh day sabbath; but indeed of a royal Law, and
a Law of liberty, which Christians are bound to keep according to the
Scriptures, in doing by all men as they would be done unto^ for what Law soever
Christ has commended and confirmed to us out of the Scriptures of the old
Testament, these laws indeed we must keep according to the Scriptures of the
old Testament: but Christ has not confirmed the Saturday sabbath, and
therefore we are not to look into the old Testament for our information therein.

Any otherwise then as the fourth Commandment enjoins A time to worship, and so
has something in it that is of use unto all.


Mr. Coppinger. I come now to a second Argument, to prove that all believing
Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

If Christian Jews are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath, and there is no
difference between Christian Jews and Christian Gentiles, then all Christian
Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

But Christian Jews are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath, and there is no
difference between Christian Jews and Christian Gentiles.

Ergo, all Christian Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I demand what you mean when you say, There is no difference between
Christian Jews and Christian Gentiles; do you mean no difference in point of
precept, or in point of privileges?


Mr. Coppinger. I mean no difference in point of Nations.


Mr. Ives. This is no answer to the question; my question is about difference
in precepts or privileges.


Mr. Coppinger. I answer, that there is no difference between the believing
Jews and Gentiles in point of precept.


Mr. Ives. Then I deny the Minor: there is a difference in point of precept.


Mr. Coppinger. Then you grant the Major, that says, If believing Jews are
bound to keep the seventh day sabbath, then all believing Gentiles are bound to
keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. If the Antecedent were true, the Consequence would not follow; and
therefore I do not grant the Major: however, I desire you to prove that part of
the Minor, as you have explained it, that says, Believing Jews and believing
Gentiles are all one in point of precepts.


Mr. Coppinger. If there be a difference between believing Jews and the
believing Gentiles in point of precept, it is either mentioned in the 15 of the
Acts, or the 21 of the Acts, or you must assign some other text where there is
a difference between Jews and Gentiles in point of precepts.

But it is not in the 15 of the Acts, not the 21 of the Acts, and you cannot
assign any other place.

Ergo, there is no difference between Jews and Gentiles in point of precept.


Mr. Ives. It is both in the 15 of the Acts and 21 of the Acts, and I can
assign other places: but first, I say it is in Acts the 21. and 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25. verses; the words are these: Thou see brother, how many thousands
of the Jews there are which BELIEVE, and they are all zealous of the Law. And
they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jew; which are among the
Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, That they ought not to circumcise their
children, neither to walk after the customs. What is it therefore? the
multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art come. Do
therefore this that we say to thee: We have four men which have a vow upon
them, them take, and purify they self, and be at charges with them, that they
may shave their heads: and all may know that those things whereof they were
informed concerning thee are nothing, but that thou thy self also walk
orderly, and keep the law. But as touching the Gentiles which believe, we
have written and concluded, that they observe no such things, etc.

Whence I observe these two things:

First, that here was an Injunction laid upon Paul and other believing Jews,
that was not laid upon the believing Gentiles: that they were believing Jews,
see verse 20. that this Injunction was not laid upon believing Gentiles, see
verse 25. where the Gentiles that believe are expressly forbidden such
Observations.

Secondly, these were no mean persons that did enjoin these things, but they
were a holy Convocation of Apostles and Elders, among whom the Holy Ghost was
president, as appears Acts 15.28. compared with Acts 21 and 25. So that if ever
there was an unerring Council in the world, this was one, who were guided by
the Holy Ghost that was sent to lead into all truth: and therefore it is
horrible presumption to think that these did err; and yet these do enjoin such
things upon the believing Jews, that they expressly charge the believing
Gentiles not to observe.


Mr. Coppinger. These Jews that they advise him to condescend unto, they were
such as had conspired the death of Paul; and therefore in point of prudency,
they advise him to condescend unto them.

Secondly, this could not be a precept, because the text says, That they
offered an Offering according to the Law, verse 26. now to enjoin such a thing
as this, would be to deny Christ come in the Flesh; and therefore it was no
other then a prudent advice that the Apostles and Elders gave to Paul to save
his life from those Jews that had conspired his death.


Mr. Ives. If the words to the Jews, verse 24. are but a bare advice, then we
may say so of their precepts to the Gentiles, verse 25. and of all others that
we like not.

Secondly, whereas you say, They were Jews that did conspire Paul's death, and
therefore they advised Paul thus to do to save himself from their malice and
fury; I answer, that these were believing Jews that were zealous of the Law,
and not those unbelieving Jews that went about to kill him, verse 31. which
unbelieving Jews went about to kill him, notwithstanding this condescension to
the Law; therefore the condescension was for the sake of the Jews that
believed, and not for the sake of those that conspired his death.

But thirdly, whereas he says the Apostles did advise Paul to condescend, but
did not enjoin it, for if they had enjoined him to observe the Law of
purification, then they did enjoin him to do those things which by consequence
did deny Christ come in the flesh. To which I answer, that according to Mr.
Coppingers Notion upon the text, they did ADVISE Paul to do that which by
consequence did deny Christ come in the flesh; and so the absurdity falls
nigh-hand as heavy upon him, as he would make it to fall upon me; for is it not
a great piece of wickedness for any body to give advice or to take advice
(supposing it to be but a bare advice) which by consequence denies Christ come
in the flesh, merely to save themselves from persecution? Now therefore,
supposing with Mr. Coppinger that it is but an Advice which the Apostles and
Elders give Paul, I demand whether it be a good or a bad advice.


Mr. Coppinger. As Circumstances might be, an advice may be good; and as
Circumstances may be, an advice may be bad.


Mr. Ives. But as this case was circumstanced, was the advice good or bad?


Mr. Coppinger. The advice may be good, when it is given to a good end: the
same advice may at some times be bad, when the like end is not intended.


Mr. Ives. We must not do evil that good may come (...) so that they ought not
to advise Paul to do that which you say denied Christ come in the flesh, upon
the pretense of saving Paul's life.


Mr. Coppinger. I say, as Circumstances may be, a man may be advised to do that
which at another time under other circumstances may not be done.


Mr. Ives. But I pray speak to the Case in hand; was this advice good or bad
which the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem gave Paul?

This Question Mr. Ives put over and over to Mr. Coppinger; who though he said
that it was but an advice which the Apostles and Elders gave to Paul, yet he
would not answer whether it was a good or a bad advice.


Mr. Coppinger. If I should grant that this WAS a precept that the Apostles and
Elders gave to Paul, yet this does not prove that there IS NOW a difference in
point of precept, though there was then; for my Argument speaks of the
present tense, viz. that there IS no difference between the believing Jews and
believing Gentiles in point of precept, and this text only speaks of what WAS.


Moderator. Sir, the Scripture ought to be our rule, and I humbly conceive that
we know not what is a duty but by reading of the Scriptures, and therein find
what was a duty.


Mr. Ives. First, I answer to Mr. Coppinger, by showing him that in his
Argument he told us that there was no difference between believing Jews and
believing Gentiles in point of precept, either in Acts 15 or Acts 21. So that
if this precept was but for that age, or for that particular occasion, yet I
have confuted his Argument, because his Argument says Acts 15 and Acts 21.
assigns no difference.

Secondly, this precept was to bind Jews under the like circumstances to the
worlds end, which under no circumstance could bind the Gentiles, because the
Apostles and Elders by the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, did expressly charge
the Gentiles to observe no such thing.

Thirdly, how far the observation of the Law of Nazarenes, was a type of
Christ, I am not so well acquainted with it, as to give an exact account; yet
this I know, That when it was most in force, it was but a voluntary service, as
appears Number. 6. So that if any man would be a Nazarene, he must take a vow to
perform the Law of the Nazarites; not that any body was bound to be a Nazarite,
any more then Ananias and Saphira his wife were bound to sell all their Estates
for to lay at the Apostles feet, for to be disposed for the common good of the
Church; yet having made such a dedication voluntarily, they were bound
necessarily to perform it: so Paul, having a vow upon him at Censhrea, was
afterward under a Law to perform it, and so were those other Votaries
mentioned with him, Acts 21. verse. 23. which vow the Apostles and Elders enjoin
them to discharge, verse 24. but do expressly forbid the Gentiles the
observation of any such thing: therefore I have shown that here was something
enjoined upon the Jews, that was not enjoined upon the Gentiles.


Mr. Coppinger. I do say, This was but an advice, and that it was no preept.

Hereupon one that was a Hearer at this Dispute handed up a Note to Mr. Ives,
wherein he did affirm that Mr. Coppinger did confess at Worcester House that
those words about which the Controversy did depend, Acts 21.24, 25. were
binding precepts, though he now said they were not precepts but advice.


Mr. Coppinger. I never said the words in the 24 verse, where the Apostles and
Elders bid Paul, and those men with him, purify themselves, etc. I say, I
never said those were precepts; but indeed I said that the words in the 25
verse were precepts, where the Gentiles are expressly forbidden the doing of any
such thing. I say, these indeed are precepts, and binding to believing Gentiles.


Mr. Ives. Sir, you have granted enough to confute your Argument: for admit the
words to the Jews in the 24 verse are no precept, but an advice, as you call
it, yet you have confessed that the 25 verse is a binding Law to the Gentiles,
that they should do NO SUCH THING. Well then, by your own confession, the
Gentiles are commanded not to do that which the Jews are advised to do; and
therefore there is a difference in point of precept, and your Argument is
confuted, that says, There is no difference: therefore I shall desire that the
Moderator would call for a fresh Argument.


Moderator. Sir, I think enough has been said to this Argument, and therefore
my advice is, that you would proceed to another.


Mr. Coppinger. All believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day
sabbath, I thus prove:

If it be the Doctrine of the new Testament, that Gods people ought to keep the
seventh day sabbath, then all believing Gentiles ought to keep the seventh day
sabbath

But it is the Doctrine of the New Testament that Gods people ought to keep the
seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, all believing Gentiles ought to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I pray what do you mean by the terms Gods people in your Argument?
because the Jews are called Gods people by way of distinction from other people.


Mr. Coppinger. I mean such as are bound to hear every word, and to observe the
principles of Religion, Repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, with
the Doctrine of Baptisms, etc.


Mr. Ives. If you mean all Gods people, and all believers without exception,
then there is no Medium in the Syllogism, for then the Argument runs thus: If
all Gods people are required, then they are all required.


Mr. Coppinger. I then argue thus:

If the Church of the Hebrews, by virtue of this Epistle to the Hebrews, were
bound to keep the seventh day sabbath, then all believing Gentiles are bound to
keep the seventh day sabbath.

But the Church of the Hebrews, by virtue of this Epistle to the Hebrews, were
bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I answer: First, if by Church of the Hebrews you mean Jews, then it
is but the same with the Argument we last dispatched, for then you said, If the
believing Jews were commanded, then the believing Gentiles were commanded.

And secondly, if you mean Gentiles, then I answer as before, That there is no
medium in the Syllogism.


Mr. Coppinger. I mean only that very Church as they were a particular
Congregation, distinguished from all other Churches, and then there is a
medium, viz.

If that Church were commanded to keep the seventh day, then believing Churches
are commanded to keep the seventh day sabbath.

But that Church was commanded to keep the seventh day sabbath.

Therefore, all Believers, and all other Churches, are required and commanded
to keep the seventh day sabbath.

And so consequently, all believing Gentiles.


Mr. Ives. I do deny both Major and Minor; for both Propositions are justly to
be excepted against.


Mr. Coppinger. I have two things to do; the first is, to prove that the Church
of the Hebrews were commanded to keep the seventh day sabbath; and the second
thing is, That if this Church was commanded to keep the seventh day sabbath,
that then all believing Gentiles were commanded to keep the seventh day
sabbath: which two things I shall prove.

First then, the text faith, Heb. 4.9. That there remains a keeping of a
sabbath to the people of God, for so it is read in your Margent; here then, is
a sabbath commanded, and the third verse tells us, that this was not commanded
only for the Hebrews, but for Believers in general, therefore it is said, He
that believes, has entered into rest: and that this was the seventh day rest,
appears, because the text says, He cease from his own works, as God did from
his: now God ceased the seventh day from his works, as the text tells us,
verse.4. therefore he does admonish them to take heed that they did not fall,
after the same example of disobedience, in breaking the Sabbath, as the
Israelites fell in the Wilderness; therefore if you read Chap. 2. verse. 15, 16,
17. you will find with whom he was grieved forty years, was it not those whose
Carcases fell in the wilderness? and that they fell for breaking the seventh
day sabbath, appears Ezekiel. 20.12, 13. Moreover also, I gave them my sabbath, to
be a sign between me and them, etc. But (says the 13 verse) the house of
Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness etc. and my sabbath they greatly
polluted; then I said, I will pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness to
consume them: and ver. 15. I lifted up my hand against them in the wilderness,
etc. because they despised my Judgments, and walked not in my Statutes, but
polluted my Sabbaths. And therefore David admonishes them in his time not to
harden their hearts as in the wilderness, Psalm. 95.7. but while it was called,
To day, to hear his voice, and not harden their hearts: so here, the Author to
the Hebrews tells them there remains the keeping of a sabbath for them and all
believers; but does bid them take heed of Isreal's sins in the wilderness, which
you see was Sabbath-breaking, as well as other sins, lest, as the eleventh
verse says, they fall after the same example of unbelief, or disobedience.


Mr. Ives. I shall show that you have wholly mistaken the text.

For,

First, you are to prove a rest or sabbath commanded, and this text speaks of a
rest that is promised, as appears verse 1. of Chap. 4. where the Author to the
Hebrews bids them fear, lest A PROMISE being left of entering into his Rest,
any should seem to come short through unbelief.

Secondly, the text, from the Greek, ought rather to be read A Sabbatism, then
the keeping of a Sabbath: however, the word is not SABBATH DAY; and when I did
dispute with you last, you would not allow that the word sabbaths in Col. 2.16,
17. should be understood of a sabbath day, though there was good reason to
understand it so, because the word day was not in the Original, though it was
in the English Text: but here you will have it to be understood of sabbath day,
though the word be neither in the English nor Greek text, and though there be
no reason why you should so notion it. But

Thirdly, this rest is not a rest commanded, or a seventh day sabbath rest,
because the seventh day sabbath, unbelievers and their cattle might have
enjoyed; but the rest here promised, is reserved only for believers, which
none else shall share in.

Fourthly, the rest here spoken of, is a rest that Joshua could not give them;
but he did give them the seventh day rest, therefore this could not be spoken
of the seventh day: see for this purpose the eighth verse of this fourth
Chapter, where it is said, that if Joshua had given them rest, he would not
afterward have spoken of another day; and then adds, that there remains
THEREFORE a rest to the people of God, verse. 9. Therefore? Wherefore? the
eighth verse tells us, because Joshua did not give them rest: so that this, if
it prove any thing, it proves against Mr. Coppinger, because it supposes some
other day, then what they enjoyed in the time of Joshua.

Fifthly, whereas Mr. Coppinger tells us, That it must be meant of the seventh
day sabbath, because the text says, He that believes cease from his own
work as God did from his;

I answer, That this does not prove a command for a man to forbear working upon
the seventh day; but it shows rather, the privileges that men shall enjoy
through believing, viz. that they shall rest from their labors: so says
Christ, Come unto me, all ye that LABOR, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28.
and verse. 29 Christ promises that they shall find REST to their souls; and,
Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord, for they REST from their LABORS,
and their works follow them, Rev. 13.14. in like manner, the Author to the
Hebrews would be understood, when he tells us that he that does believe, has
ceased from his labor, as God did from his.

Sixthly, though the Author to the Hebrews alludeth to the seventh day, upon
which God rested, yet this does not prove that therefore we must enter into the
Jewish or seventh day rest; no more then it proves we must enter into the
Literal Canaan, because he alludeth also to that Literal Canaan in which Joshua
conducted Israel: but he rather informs them, that as they under the Law had a
time of rest, and a place of rest, so they that did believe should have a day
of Grace, and a place of Glory, in which they should be like God, in rest for
ever, never to labor more, even as God rested and wrought no more, when he had
ended his six days work: therefore he bids them LABOUR to enter into his rest;
but the seventh day rest they might enter into without labor.

Seventhly, whereas Mr. Coppinger tells us, that the Author to the Hebrews
exhorts, that we should not fall after the same example of unbelief and
disobedience that the Israelites fell into, in the wilderness, which (says he)
was sabbath-breaking, as appears by Ezekiel. 20.16. as well as other sins,
therefore (says he) by the same example, must be understood that he cautions
them to beware of breaking the seventh day sabbath.

To which I answer, That this is a straining the text; for it does not follow
that he does admonish the Christians to beware of the same particular sins, as
Mr. Coppinger would notion it; but of sins in general: for first, we cannot be
guilty of loathing Manna, nor of murmuring at the waters of Meribah; and yet
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.6. That THESE were for our examples, etc. So in
like manner we cannot be guilty of sin in not observing the seventh day
sabbath, any more then we can be guilty of loathing Manna; and yet Gods
judgments upon them for all their old Testament sins, are set forth to us for
examples, not (...) tie us to the same duties, but to Gospel-Obedience in all
things, lest we incur the same of ^^eater punishments, by how much the more we
(...) against greater mercies.

Again, the Apostle gives the like Exhortati^^, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Do ye not know
that they that wait upon the altar, should live of the altar? even so has the
Lord ordained, that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. May
not a man as reasonably infer from hence, that because the maintenance of the
Levitical priesthood is here set forth as an example to teach us to take care
of Gospel Ministers, that therefore they must be maintained after the same
manner as the Priests were maintained that waited upon the Altar, as Mr.
Coppinger may say, Because Gods Judgments against Isreal's sins in the
Wilderness, are set forth to us for examples, that therefore we, who are
believing Gentiles under the Gospel, (to avoid the like Judgments) must do all
the Commandments, and believe all the promises that Israel suffered his
displeasure for in the Wilderness, for not obeying and believing?

Having thus answered you Paraphrase upon the text, I do again call upon you to
prove that the Rest or Sabbath spoken of Heb. 4. is a seventh day sabbath which
we are commanded to observe; for the sum of my Answer is, that this is a Rest
promised, and not a Rest or seventh day sabbath commanded: therefore pray let
us have an Argument for the proof of it.


Mr. Coppinger. My Exposition of the Text proves it well enough.


Mr. Ives. Pray draw your sense upon the text into an Argument, and let us see
if you can prove that here is a seventh day sabbath commanded.


Mr. Coppinger. I cannot put it into an Argument, because it refers to several
texts for the explaining of it.


Mr. Ives. I have answered to your interpretation already; and if you will not
urge an Argument from hence, I shall desire that you would proceed to an
Argument from some other texts.


Mr. Coppinger. If Christ did teach the observation of the seventh day sabbath,
then all believing Gentiles are bound to observe it.

But Christ did teach the observation of the seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, all believing Gentiles are bound to observe the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. Pray explain what you mean, when you say, Christ DID teach it: do
you mean before his death or after?


Mr. Coppinger. I do mean that Christ did teach the seventh day sabbath upon
the Mount, Mat. 5. Whence I thus argue:

If Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount did preach the seventh day sabbath,
then all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.

But Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount did preach the seventh day sabbath.

Ergo, all believing Gentiles are bound to keep the seventh day sabbath.


Mr. Ives. I tell you, Sir, that this is not fair arguing, when both
Propositions are justly to be denied: however, I deny the Consequence; for it
does not follow that if Christ did preach the seventh day sabbath upon the
Mount, that therefore all believing Gentiles are bound to observe it; for I
shall show some things that Christ commanded to be observed upon the Mount,
that Mr. Coppinger himself says, Believing Gentiles are not bound to observe.


Mr. Coppinger. I shall prove that all that Christ did preach upon the Mount,
and taught others to preach, believing Gentiles are bound to observe.

If all that Christ taught upon the Mount, and commanded others to teach, was
to abide as long as the Sun and Moon, and Heaven and Earth remain, then all the
believing Gentiles are bound to observe all that Christ taught upon the Mount.

But all that Christ taught upon the Mount, and commanded others to teach, was
to abide as long as Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon remains.

Ergo, all the believing Gentiles are bound to observe all that Christ taught
upon the Mount.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Minor: all that Christ taught upon the Mount is not to
abide as long as Heaven and Earth remain.


Mr. Coppinger. Then you must show us something that Christ did teach upon the
Mount, and command others to teach, that is not binding.


Mr. Ives. That I shall do; therefore pray look into Mat. 5.23, 24. Christ
there commands that a man should leave his gift at the Altar, and go and be
reconciled to his brother, and then Christ commands him to come and offer his
gift: these are commands given upon the Mount.

Secondly, they are such commands as he bids others to do and teach, ver. 19.
for they were to do and teach the least of those commandments.

Thirdly, these commands that are taught upon the Mount are not all in force to
believing Gentiles, because that command of leaving the gift at the Altar, and
coming to offer it upon the Altar, is not now in force: therefore all that
Christ commanded in his Sermon upon the Mount is not of force to believing
Gentiles.


Mr. Coppinger. The word altar and gift is variously taken as Heb. 13.10. We
have an altar whereof they have no right to eat that serve the tabernacle: and
so likewise the word gift is variously taken, as Christ is called The Gift of
God, Romans 6.23. and Paul tells the Corinthians, they came behind in no Gift, 1
Cor. 1.7. and Phil. 4.7. Not because I desire a Gift: and to this agree all
Interpreters, that gift and altar in this fifth of Matthew, and 23, 24. is
taken allegorically.


Mr. Ives. I answer to the last first; that Mr. Coppinger does abuse
Interpreters, or else he never read any; for I challenge him to show me any one
Interpreter that ever understood altar and gift in Mat. 5. allegorically. It is
true, that they sometimes make a spiritual application of these words; but they
all with one consent understand the words literally.

But secondly, Mr. Coppinger has showed us that altar and gift is variously
understood; but has not, out of this variety, told us which of these senses
should be put upon altar and gift in this fifth of Matthew.

But thirdly, I do challenge Mr. Coppinger, or any man else, to show me that a
gift at the altar is ever understood allegorically throughout the Scriptures,
from the Creation of the world to the death of Jesus Christ.

And lastly, that Christ does here intend a literal altar, appears, if we do
but consider Mat. 8.4. where we shall find that what Christ taught upon the
Mount, he exhorts the man that was cured of his Leprosy to observe; for as
soon as Christ descended from the Mount, he cleans'd the Leper, and then
commanded him to offer a gift as Moses had commanded; which could not be
understood allegorically.


Mr. Coppinger. The text that you last urged, does speak of a gift, but not of
an altar; and the text under debate speaks of a gift and an altar.

Secondly, This Christ bid the Leper do, that it might be a Testimony of him to
the Priest, that so if the Priest should ask him how he was cleansed, or who
did cleanse him, he might hereby have an opportunity to testify Christ unto
the Priest, and tell him that Jesus of Nazareth made him whole This cannot be
the true sense of the Lepers showing himself to the Priest for a Testimony, but
rather it was in observation of Moses Law which did command the Lepers to show
themselves to the Priest, that the Priest having viewed the Leper, he might
give a Testimony to the people, That this man was now fit to go abroad, who
before had dwelt in an out-house: See Lev. 14.
.


Mr. Ives. I answer to your last first: That if Christ did command the Leper to
show himself to the Priest, and offer an offering according to the Law, then
let the end for which he did it be what it will, your Argument is confuted; for
here is some part of the Law commanded by Christ before his death, that is not
binding to the believing Gentiles since the resurrection.

But secondly, whereas you say that this text Mat. 8.4. speaks of a gift, but
not an altar; I answer, that I never heard that the Priest in Moses Law did
ever offer a gift without an altar: my reason is, because Christ says, Mat.
23.19. That the altar sanctifies the gift: therefore this gift spoken of Mat.
8. must needs be a gift to be offered upon an Altar, as well as that gift
spoken of Mat. 5.


Mr. Coppinger. If you look into the text, it is said, The Leper was to offer
as Moses commanded; now if we will see how Moses commanded the Leper to offer,
let us read Lev. 14.4, 5, 6, 7. we shall there read of the Priests taking two
birds, and his killing one of them over running water, and that he did dip the
living bird in the blood of that which was killed, and then the Priest was to
let the living bird fly away into the open field: this indeed was to be done
for the cleansing the Leper: but here is not one word that the Priest was to
offer any thing upon the Altar, in all this Chapter.


Mr. Ives. Have a care, Sir, what you say; utter nothing rashly: for if you
look but into the 20 verse of this 14 of Leviticus, you shall see that the
Priest was to offer the burnt Offering and the meat Offering upon the ALTAR,
and the Priest shall make an Atonement for him, and he shall be clean.


Mr. Coppinger. But what if here was an Altar? this was spoken by Christ to the
leper, after he came off the mount; but our difference lay about the meaning of
the word Altar and Gift, in Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, Mat. 5.


Mr. Ives. I pray Sir, confess your Error for shame; for is it not a shame for
you to to tell us, that Christ commanded the Leper to offer his Gift without an
Altar, when Christ bid him offer it as Moses commanded? and when you turned to
the Law of Moses, did you not say, the Priest was to offer without an Altar?
and now I show you that the Priest did offer upon the Altar, for the clensing
of the Leper, you put it off, and tell me, What if there were an Altar? it is
not to your purpose; why did you not say so at first, and save us this labor?
but give me leave to tell you again, that it is to my purpose to show you the
Error of your Argument: for if Christ commands the Leper to observe all those
ceremonial observations for his clensing, then is your Argument false, that
says, All things that Christ commanded us in his Sermon upon the Mount, all
believing Gentiles are bound to observe to the end of the world; but you say
this that Christ commands the Leper to do, was not on the Mount, but as soon as
he came off the Mount, and this (you say) is nothing to Gift and Altar,
mentioned in Mat. 5. in his Sermon upon the Mount. I answer, That the
difference in places, especially so little difference as between Christ's being
on the Mount, and off from the Mount, could not make a difference in his
commands. Secondly, it cannot reasonably be imagined, that Christ would command
the Leper to do any thing when he came off the Mount, that was contradictory to
what he did command when he was upon the Mount; therefore I have great reason
to believe that the Altar that he commands them to offer their Gift on, in Mat.
5. in his Sermon upon the Mount, is the material Altar, like unto that which he
bids the Leper offer his Gift on, as soon as he comes off from the Mount, Mat.
8. and this I the rather believe, because that there is no text from the
beginning of the Bible to the death of the Messiah, that speaks of an
allegorical Altar.


Mr. Coppinger. It may be understood allegorically in this place, though it
might not be understood so in the old Testament; as for instance, the Apostle
speaks of a text out of the Psalms, in the third of the Romans, where he says,
They were all go^^ out of the way, etc. where he uses those general terms, in
a sense differing from the old Testament.


Mr. Ives. I answer: first, That the Apostle does not ^ut any other sense upon
those words, then David puts upon them in the Psalms: secondly, if he did, that
is no rule for you; as for instance, David says in the sixteenth Psalm, that
God will not leave his soul in hell, etc. this the Apostle says, Act. 2.31.
that David spoke of the resurrection of Christ: so in like manner, though I may
restrain a text, when God restrains (...), and allegorize a text, when the holy
Ghost ^oth warrant me; may I therefore allegorize a ^ext, when I have no
warrant, as you do this (...) Mat. 5. which I shall leave to the Assembly (...)
judge, whether the gift, and altar upon which Christ commands the gift to be
offered, be allegorical or literal? And if it be spoken of a ^aterial altar,
then have I confuted your Argument, by showing that some things that Christ
commanded in his Sermon upon the Mount, are not in force to all believing
Gentiles to the end of the world.


Moderator. I pray Sir, if you have another Argument, ^rge it briefly, for I
perceive the time is expired that you agreed to break off at.


Mr. Coppinger. I shall then briefly urge one Argument, which take as follows:

If the seventh day sabbath was of force before the death of Christ, to
believing Gentiles, then it is of force still.

But the seventh day sabbath was of force before the death of Christ to
believing Gentiles.

Ergo, it is of force still.


Mr. Ives. SIR, I wonder that you make Arguments that have not one true
Proposition in them; for this is like the last, both Propositions being false:
however, prove the Minor.

It is observable, that Mr. Coppinger, in the last Dispute before this, did
affirm, That all the Gentiles were bound to keep all the ceremonies of the Law
of Moses: now then if this be a good Argument why we must keep the seventh day
sabbath now, because we were to keep it before the death of Christ, then we
must be circumcised and offer sacrifices, for the same reason, because he
himself did confess that those things the Gentiles were bound to observe,
before the death of Christ.


Mr. Coppinger. If the Reason of a Law does remain the same that it was before
Christ's death, the Law does remain the same.

But the reason of the seventh day sabbath does remain.

Ergo, the Law for the seventh day sabbath does remain.


Mr. Ives. I deny the Major: for that which you call the reason of a Law, may
remain the same, when the Law does not remain: and for this, I shall give you
two instances, instead of many.

The first is Exodus 23.11. there you shall find that the reason why God would
have Israel to keep the seventh year for a sabbath, in which ^hey should not
gather that which grew of its ^own accord, it was for the good of the poor,
that the poor of thy people might be refreshed, Exodus 23. now a man may as well
say, he must let his and lie every seventh year, because the reason remains,
viz. That he may refresh the poor of his people: as he may say he must keep the
^eventh day sabbath, because the reason of that Law is in force, which is, That
his stranger and ^ervant, and cattle may be refreshed.

But further, there is another reason urged why we must keep the Law that
commands he seventh day sabbath, and that is (say you) because we believe, as
well as the Jews, that God made heaven and earth in six days, and ^ested the
seventh, therefore we as well as the Jews, must work six days, and keep the
Saturday, or seventh day sabbath: I say, this conse^ence does not follow; for
the reason why ^srael was commanded to sanctify the priests, ^he sons of
Aaron, was, because the Lord their God did sanctify them, Lev. 21.8. now
though I do believe with Israel, that the Lord does sanctify me, yet I am not
bound for this reason to sanctify the priests, the sons of Aaron: thu^ you see
by these two instances, that the reason of a Law may be the same, when the Law
is not the same.


Mr. Coppinger. As to your first instance, namely, that the seventh year was
commanded for a Mora reason: I answer, This was not an universal reason; for
the text faith, That the poor of THY people may eat, which was not for all: and
as to your second instance, I confess the reason does remain and is universal.
viz. That God does sanctify us; and therefore I say the Law remains, that we
should sanctify Gods Ministers still.


Mr. Ives. As for your Answer to my first instance, it does signify little:
for I say refreshing the poor is a moral and universal duty; and if than the
seventh year of rest was commanded for the benefit of their poor and cattle,
then by your Argument, if the reason of this Law, ( viz. that the poor should
be refreshed) do remain then it must needs follow, by your Logic, tha^ the
seventh year sabbath must remain, as well as the seventh day sabbath.

And as touching your answer to my second instance, I must tell you, that in
your Answer you have confuted your self; for you confess the reason of the Law
remains, which was given to Israel for sanctifying the priest.

Secondly, you say that the Law remains that we must sanctify Gods Ministers:
then by your favor, if you can make the reason of the Law for sanctifying the
Priest, the sons of Aaron, a reason why you should sanctify not the same but
another Priesthood, then I may make the reasons for sanctifying the seventh day
sabbath, serve for the sanctifying not the same but another day.


Mr. Coppinger. So you may, if you can prove the abolishing of the seventh day
sabbath, as I can prove the abolishing the Levitical Priesthood.


Mr. Ives. Then you have confuted your self again, and answered your own
Argument: for your Argument was, that wherever the reason of a Law remains,
there the Law remains; and you have confessed that the reason of the Law does
remain why God would have Israel sanctify the Priest, the sons of Aaron; and
now in your last answer tell me, That that Priesthood is abolished. So then, if
I could never show you that the seventh day sabbath was abolished, yet I have
confuted your Argument, by showing that the reason of a Law does remain when
the Law does not remain, and you have confessed both; for you say that the
reason why Israel was to sanctify that Priesthood, is the same still, viz.
because God sanctifies his people; and you confessed the Law is not the same;
for you say, The Priesthood is abolished.

But lastly, I have shown you in the former Disputation, that the seventh day
sabbath was abolished as well as the Levitical Priesthood; by an Argument which
you could not answer, which I raised from that text Col. 2.16, 17. with which I
shall conclude this Disputation: Let no man therefore judge you in meats or in
drinks, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new moons, or of the SABBATH
days, which are ASHA. DOW of things to come: but the body is of Christ.


Thus having given a faithful account of all the Arguments and Answer that were
insisted on in the several Disputations, without omitting of any one text of
Scripture, Argument or Answer, that was urged on either side; I shall leave the
whole to the judgment of those that are impartial, desiring of God that it may
answer the ends for which it is sent forth into the world, which is the glory
of Almighty GOD, and the establishment of the Weak: which is all that is herein
aimed at, by

thy Friend, J. I.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
I Thought good to give notice, that at the end of this last D^spute, I
promised that which is now by the Providence of GOD performed, viz. an ac^ount
of all the Arguments and Answers insisted on in the several Disputations: this
promise being made publicly, before the meeting was dissolved, Doctor
Chamberlain, and Mr. Tillam, and Mr. Coppinger being then present: at which
time, Doctor Chamberlain told me, That if I would print but two Arguments that
he would send to me, with Answers to them, I might print what I would; I
thereupon told him, that I would not only print and answer his two Arguments,
but also (God assisting) I would answer what other Arguments that either be or
any of them should send to me, provided they sent them within fourteen days
after: and for this 14 days, I staid 21 days, in all which time I heard not a
word from any of them; ^o, nor so much as an excuse from Doctor chamberlain,
though he did publicly challenge me to answer his two Arguments, and as
faithfully promise to send them to my house: which I wonder at, seeing he has
diverse times past by my door since then, (as I have been informed) and yet
never so much as left a word about it.

This I am provoked to certify, lest any that heard this promise from Doctor
Chamberlain, should think that I had received his Arguments and concealed them;
the thought of any such thing is far enough from the heart of him that is,

London, March 17. 1658/9. Thy Friend in the Truth, JER. IVES.

An Appendix to the former Disputations.
I Have annexed this ensuing Appendix, for the information fo the weak, and
those that are not acquainted with the Laws and Terms of Disputation; and it
may also serve for the general use of all that do desire to be satisfied in the
present controversy, who perhaps may not have leisure or patience to read all
the foregoing Arguments and Answers urged in the preceding Disputations: and
herein I shall observe this method. First, I shall lay down all those Arguments
that I have ever met with, which are levied for the defense of the
Saturday-Sabbath; with brief Answers thereunto.

Secondly, I shall urge the Reasons why I am persuaded the Saturday-sabbath is
not in force to the believing Gentiles.

Thirdly, I shall show some Reasons for the justifying the present practice of
the Christians in their Religious observations of the first day of the week,
otherwise called the Lord's Day.

And first, to the first, namely, the Arguments that are urged by some
Judaizing Christians for the defense of the seventh-day sabbath; and they are
of three sorts: the first sort are taken from the Scriptures, the second from
some Reasons in Nature; and the third sort of Reasons are taken from Tradition.
I shall plainly and briefly speak first to the first (viz.) those Arguments
that are alleged for the Saturday-sabbath ou^ of the Scriptures; and these
are, some taken from Texts out of the Old, and some from Texts out of the New
Testament: I shall first begin with those Arguments urged for the defense of
the seventh-day sabbath out of the old Testament, and they are of two sorts;
first, such as are taken from example: and secondly, such as seem to be
grounded upon a command.

The first Reason is taken from Gods example, Genesis 2.2. And God rested the
seventh-day, etc. and ver. 3. God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it:
Because that in it he rested from all his work which God had created and made:
whence those things are urged, first, That God sanctified this day, therefore
all believing Gentiles ought to sanctify it. Secondly, This was spoken while
Adam was in innocence, and so consequently to all his posterity.

Exodus 29.44. 2 Chronicles. 7.16. Secondly, whereas it is said this was spoken to
Adam, and therefore to all the world; I answer, that all that was commanded
Adam did not bind all the world at all times, as appears by the commandment
given to Adam to eat of the tree of life, Gen 2. and to forbear the tree of
knowledge of good and evil; these Laws are not now binding to all the world,
and yet they were given to Adam, and so to all men, had they continued in that
estate. So indeed Adam should have imitated God, had he continued in innocence,
in keeping a perpetual sabbath; for he should not have labored to add any
cubits to the stature of that perfect happiness, no more then God wrought to
add any thing to the six days work, which was made perfect and good; for Adam
was only to dress and keep what was already made, as God keeps and preserves
the world by his Providence; in this fence God works hitherto, (...) Christ
says, John 5.17. and in some such cases Adam should have imitated his Creator,
if he had not sinned. But thirdly, these words, And God sanctified the
seventh-day, are urged by Moses in Genesis 2. as a Reason why the Israelites in
his time did keep the sabbath, rather then to show that God sanctified the
seventh-day for Adam and his Posterity in innocence: my reasons are, first,
because all the Patriarks from Adam to Moses did not keep the seventh-day
sabbath, which was two thousand years and upwards, and in all this long tract
of time, not one word of the 7th-day sabbath-keeping or breaking.

Secondly, Josephus himself, a learned Jew, speaking of this rest, faith, That
Gods resting on the seventh day was the reason why the Israelites reposed or
rested upon that day, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Now had the Jews understood the
seventh-day had been sanctified before Moses, Josephus would have mentioned it
in his History of Amiquities from Adam to Moses, as well as other things,
especially considering the great occasion which he had to defend the Antiquity
of the sabbath, from the great reproach that was cast upon it by Appion of
Alexandria, who tells the Jews that their sabbath was derived from the Egyptian
word Sabbo, which signifies a disease in the Privy parts, which (says he) the
Jews were smote with after they had traveled six days from Egypt, whereupon
they were forced to rest the seventh-day, and therefore called it a Sabbath
from the name of the disease, which they called Sabbo. Now Josephus could not
have a better Argument to have vindicated the Jews sabbath against Appions foul
aspersions, but by showing to the world that the sabbath was kept from the
Creation of the world unto that time, and not taken up by the Jews in the
wilderness after they came out of Egypt. Now though Josephus does vindicate the
sabbath from being derived of the Egyptian word Sabbo, by showing that it was
derived from the Hebrew word Sabbath, which signifies rest; yet he never
vindicateth the Jews Sabbath from that other Allegation of Appions (viz.) that
the first beginning of it was in the wilderness, after that Israel came out of
Egypt, as any one may see that reads Josephus against Appion, Lib. 2. which
clearly shows, that the sabbath was not kept before Israel came into the
wilderness.

Thirdly, The Scripture usually speaks at this rate; for there is such a kind
of expression used by Moses in this very chapter Genesis 2.11. where he tells us
of the river Pison, that compasses the whole land of Havilah, where there is
gold, etc. not that this land was so called in Eden while Adam was in
innocence; for Havilah was not born till after the flood, by whose name this
land was known and called; and yet Moses by anticipation calls it the land of
Havilah, with reference unto that name which 1600 years afterward it did
receive: and that Havilah was not born till after the flood, appears Genesis 10.7.
and that the flood was more then 1600 years after the Creation, appears not
only by what the Scriptures tell us, but by the consent of Christian writers:
see August. de Civitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 20. and lib. 15. cap. 12, 14. and
yet Moses calls a Country by this name in his describing of the garden of Eden,
which was no otherwise true, but with respect to what it was afterward called;
in like manner Moses says, God sanctified the seventh-day, Genesis 2.3. which
also refers to the Law that God gave to Israel by the hand of Moses for the
sanctifying of it. And lest this seem strange, I shall give you another Text,
that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may stand: see therefore
Exodus 16.32, 33, 34. In the 32 verse the Lord did command that an Om^^ of the
Manna should be put in a pot to be laid before the testimony of the Lord, and
the 34 v. says, That as the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before
the testimony of the Lord: which was no otherwise true, but with respect to
what was done afterward; for as yet there was no Ark nor Testimony made, as
appears, if we consider that at this time the Israelites were sojourning in the
wilderness of Sin; and the command for the Ark, and the making of the
Tabernacle was not given till they came to Sinai, Exodus, 25.10. at which time
the Testimony was given to them, and yet mention is made of this before: so in
like manner, when Moses says Genesis 2. That God did sanctify the seventh-day,
he is to be understood in the same sense, as the other Text is understood,
where it is said, Aaron laid up the Manna before the Testimony, which relates
to what was afterward done when the Law was given: even after the same manner
does Moses speak in Genesis 2. when he faith, God did sanctify the seventh-day;
not that he did sanctify it in Eden, any more then Aaron laid up the Manna in
the wilderness of Sin before the Testimony; but that he did sanctify it when
he gave his Law to Israel: and this is further confirmed by what has been
spoken (viz.) that from the Creation of the world to the time of Moses, which
was above two thousand years, there is not one word mentioned of the
seventh-day sabbath, though occasionally there is mention made of all other
moral duties.

The next Reason that is rendered why believing Gentiles should keep the
Sabbath, is taken from the command in. Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, where God requires
Israel to keep the seventh-day sabbath; therefore Gentile believers are bound
to keep it.

I answer, That this Law was given to none but Israel, as appears Psalm. 137.19,
20. He has given his Laws to Jacob, his statues and judgments to Israel: be
has not done so to any Nation. Again, the Apostle tells us Romans 2. That the
Jews were under the Law, but the Gentiles were without the Law.

The Gentiles must keep all the nine commandments, therefore they must keep the
seventh-day sabbath.

I answer, They are bound to all the nine expressly and particularly by the
light of Nature, and the Law of Christ; but they are not so bound to the
seventh-day sabbath. Again, that Law of the fourth Commandment binds us as to A
time to worship, though not that time of the seventh-day. But secondly, might
not these men as well object this against the Apostle, who expressly complains
of the Gentiles for the breach of all the nine Commandments, but not a word
that they did not keep the seventh-day sabbath, as I shall show by and by?
which doubtless he would have had an occasion to have done, had the seventh-day
sabbath-breaking been a breach of a Moral Law, as well as the other nine
precepts.

Another Argument is taken from the Reasons of the Law given to Israel, which
are, first, God gave this as a Reason why Israel should rest the seventh-day,
because in six days he made Heaven and Earth: therefore if this Reason be
believed by Christian Gentiles, then this Law should be observed by them

Secondly, God commanded Israel to rest the seventh-day, because it was the
sabbath of the Lord their God: therefore if Jehovah be the Lord our God, his
sabbath must be our sabbath.

Thirdly, God did command this duty for the good of our servants and cattle;
therefore if we will show mercy to them, we must keep the seventh-day sabbath.

I answer to the first, that the Reason of a Law may be universal, and always
remain, when the Law does not remain; as for instance, the Reason why God would
have the people of Israel to sanctify the Priests the sons of Aaron, was,
because he was the Lord that did sanctify them, Levit. 21. 8. Now I hope all
Christian Gentiles, believe that God does sanctify them: but does it therefore
follow, that because God does sanctify believing Gentiles, that therefore they
must sanctify a Levitical Priesthood?

Secondly, The place of Isreal's worship was called the house of the Lord God,
does it therefore follow, that believing Gentiles must therefore sanctify that
place, because God is the God of the Gentiles? no more does it follow, that
because the seventh-day was the sabbath of the Lord, God, that therefore the
believing Gentiles must observe it.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, we must rest the seventh-day, that we may show
mercy to our servants and cattle: I answer, we can do that by resting the first
day of the week, as well as by resting the seventh. Secondly, If because that
we must show mercy, be a Reason why we should keep the seventh-day sabbath,
because Israel was to keep it for that Reason, then we must also drink deeper
of this cup of Judaism, and keep the seventh-yeer sabbath, because that was
commanded for the benefit of the poor, Exodus 23.11. That the poor of thy people
may eat, etc. So that the Reasons of a Law may have a being, when the Law has
none; as appears by the Reason of the sanctifying the Priest, it was, because
God sanctifies the people; yet though we do believe that God does sanctify us,
yet we are not therefore to sanctify the Legal Priesthood: in like manner,
though we do believe with Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, that God made Heaven and
Earth in six days, and rested the seventh, yet this is no Reason why we rather
then they should observe that day, any more, then why we should observe the
other Judaical Laws, whose Reasons are still the same, though the Laws are
changed.

The next Arguments follow from the Scriptures of the New Testament, and they
are such as pretend to command and example; even as the former: I shall first
speak to those Texts that are cited to prove that the seventh-day sabbath was
commanded in the New Testament: and the first is Mat. 5.17, 18. the words are
these: Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets; I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill. For I say unto you, that till Heaven and Earth
pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be
fulfilled. Whence it is inferred, that the seventh day sabbath was a part of
the Law, and therefore it should remain as long as Heaven and Earth remain.

I answer, first, that offering of sacrifices is also a part of this Law; but
does it follow therefore that believing Gentiles must offer sacrifices to the
end of the world? and that offering of sacrifices is a point of this Law, see
v. 23 24. where our Lord as truly commands, that a man should come and offer
his gift upon the Altar, after he is reconciled to his brother, as he does
enjoin any other duty; the like he commands of the leper that was cleansed,
Mat. 8.^.

Secondly, Christ says the same thing of the Prophets as well as of the Law,
that they shall not pass away till they are fulfilled, and yet many of them
were fulfilled in Christ's time.

Thirdly, Christ says of his own words, Matthew. 24.35. That Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but his word shall not pass; and yet the 34 ver. says, that,
that Generation should not pass away till all those things were fulfilled. The
meaning then was clearly this, that rather then either the Law or his word
should pass unfulfilled, Heaven and Earth should pass: which does in no wise
argue that all the Law and Prophets should remain unfulfilled till the Heavens
should be no more; for the Text tells us, He came to fulfill the Law and
Prophets: so that if all the Law and Prophets be unfulfilled, Christ did not
answer the end of his coming; and if any be fulfilled, then ALL the Law must
not last till the Heavens be no more; and if any be fulfilled, then the
seventh-day sabbath may be fulfilled, since the sabbath is called a shadow of
good things to come, Col. 2.16, 17. However, if any of that Law Mat. 5. be
fulfilled by Christ, no man can conclude reasonably from that Text, that the
seventh-day sabbath is in force.

Lastly, Though all this Law Mat. 5. was in force before Christ's death, yet we
are freed from the Law by the death of Christ, Romans 7.2, 3, 6. therefore no
Argument can be drawn from this Text to prove the seventh-day sabbath unless
Christ or his apostles had reinforced the observation of it after his
Resurrection.

I come now to the sixth Argument, and that is drawn from Mat. 24.20. ver.
where Christ bids the Disciples pray, that their flight was not on the Sabbath
day; whence it is inferred, that if Christ would not have had the sabbath
sanctified after his Resurrection, he would never have cautioned his Disciples
to pray, that their flight was not upon the seventh day sabbath, which was a
Prophecy to be fulfilled after the Resurrection.

I answer, that this proves no more that Christ would have the sabbath
sanctified by the believing Gentiles, then it proves he would have the winter
time sanctified; for he likewise bids them pray, that they might not fly in the
winter.

Secondly, if the sabbath had been in force, they might fly to save their lives
on the sabbath, and therefore that could not be the reason why they should pray
they might not fly upon the sabbath: for if Christ a allowed his Disciples to
walk through the cornfieldsd upon the sabbath, and pluck the ears of corn to
satisfy a little hunger, he would not (if the sabbath had been in force) have
judged it a breach of the sabbath for them to fly to save their lives.

Thirdly, The reason why they were to pray that they might not fly on that day,
was, because the seditious Jews (as stories make mention) were so zealous of
their sabbaths, that if any for fear of an enemy should have offered to fly to
save his life upon the sabbath, the Jews themselves would have laid hands first
upon him; therefore Christ bids them pray, that they may not fly then. lest
they should be in perils by their Countrymen, as well as by the Romans, who
should invade them: which perils of their own Countrymen they were not so
likely to meet with in their flight upon another day.

But it is further Objected, Why is that day called a sabbath day, which was to
come to pass after the Ascension, if Christ would not have it observed?

I answer, That it was ordinary for the Jews days to be called after the death
of Christ, by the old names they had before; as the Passover is frequently so
called by the Apostles, after those things were abolished, Act. 12.3. Act.
18.21. Act. 20.16. and so 1 Cor. 16.8. Paul faith, be will tarry at Ephesus
till Pentecost; so that Christ's calling it by the name of the sabbath day, does
no more prove it is in force, then Paul's mentioning the feast of Pentecost,
proves that we ought to observe the feast of, Pentecost.

It is said, after Christ was dead, that the women prepared spices and
ointments, and rested the sabbath day according to the commandment, Luke 23.56.
Therefore the sabbath day was a commandment in force after Christ was dead.

I answer, First, that these were not believing Gentiles, which are the
subjects under debate. But secondly, the Law of the New Testament was not
established till Christ's Resurrection, when he faith, Mat. 28.18. That all
power in Heaven and Earth was given to him; therefore no marvel that these were
found in their Old Testament observations. Thirdly, It was no easy matter to
take off the zeal even of believing Jews themselves from the Law of Moses,
after Christ was ascended: you see this in Peter, who was an eminent Apostle,
yet he had so much Conscience of the Law after the partition wall was broken
down, that he would not eat with the Gentiles, nor eat any thing which in the
Law was common or unclean, Act. 10.14.28. and so Act. 21.20, 21. there were
thousands of Jews that did believe, that were zealous of the Commandments; does
it therefore follow that those Commandments were in force? in like manner, it
does not follow, that because these women kept the seventh day sabbath
according to the command, that therefore the Commandment for the sabbath was to
be in force to believing Gentiles after Christ's Resurrection.

Fourthly, If this were a good Argument, the Jewish women kept the Sabbath
according to the Commandment after Christ was dead, therefore the commandment
is in force to believing Gentiles after his Resurrection; would it not be as
good an Argument, for a man to say, that Paul being a Jew kept the Feast of
Pentecost after Christ was risen, therefore believing Gentiles might keep the
Feast of Pentecost since Christ is risen?

Christ faith, the sabbath was made for man, Mark 2.27. which is to be
understood of every man; therefore it is a Law binding to believing Gentiles.

I answer, First, That all the whole Law of Israel was made for man, does it
therefore follow, that all that law was binding to believing Gentiles? and that
all that whole law that was given upon the mount, both Moral and Ceremonial,
was made for man; see Deuteronomy 5.24. You have seen this day, that God does talk
with MAN, and he lives. Now God was said to speak to MAN in this place, and
yet this word man is restrained to the Nation of Israel, unless any will be so
absurd as to think, that all the Laws given upon mount Sinai were for ever
binding to all the world: in like manner, the sabbath might be made for man, as
the rest of the Jews Laws were, which yet are not universally binding.

Secondly, It is said, That the woman was made for MAN, which is the same, and
yet it may be good for a man not to touch a woman, 1 Cor. 7.1. by which it
appears, that though a woman was made for Adam or man, yet a man may lawfully
live without a woman: so though the seventh day sabbath was made for man, which
in Greek is Anthropos, it does no more follow, that therefore every man must
keep the seventh day, then it follows that because a woman was made for man,
that therefore every man is bound to marry.

The next Scripture levied for to prove that the seventh day sabbath is
commanded, is Heb. 4.9. there remains a rest (or sabbalism) for the people of
God. From whence it is urged, first, that the people of God must keep a
sabbath, therefore believing Gentiles being Gods people, must keep a Sabbath.
Secondly, That this is the seventh day, appears (say they) because the Author
to the Hebrews alludeth to the seventh day, on which God rested, ver. 4.

I answer, First, by concession, that that sabbath or rest there mentioned, the
people of God both Jews and Gentiles shall keep and enjoy.

But secondly, This is not the seventh day sabbath or rest: first, because the
seventh day sabbath was a rest commanded; but this is a rest or sabbath
promised, as appears verse the first: Let us fear, lest a PROMISE being left of
entering into rest, any should come short through unbeleef.

Secondly, This could not be the seventh day rest, because it is a rest only
provided for believers to enter into; but unbeleevers might enter into the
seventh day rest, and so might their cattle also: therefore unbeleevers did
not, nor could not enter into this rest, ver. 11. Let us therefore labor to
enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbeleef.

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, that the Author alludeth to the seventh day rest,
because it is said, God rested the seventh day, ver. 4. I answer, This Text
does no more prove that the Gentiles are commanded to observe that time of
rest, because the Author alludeth to the seventh day, then it proves they were
to observe that place or rest, (viz.) the Land of Canaan, because he alludeth
to that place v 8. For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not after wards
have spoken of another day; by which words the Author does as truly allude to
the place of rest that Joshua conducted Israel to in Canaan, as he does allude
to the time of rest, that God rested on; and therefore this clearly proves that
both were typical; for Joshua did give them the rest in Canaan, and a rest upon
the seventh day, and yet he prophesies of another rest, and another day; which
clearly proves, this was neither the time of rest, nor the place of rest that
Israel did enjoy, that the Author means; but that place of rest and time of
rest, which under the Gospel the believers have in hope, and which after all
their labors and travels they shall at last have in hand, and rest from all
sorrow and labor (when that great sabbath shall commence) as God did from his
labor, when he had ended his work of Creation. To this agrees Mat. 11 28. Come
unto me all ye that labor, and I will give you rest: and Revel. 14.13. Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth faith the Spirit, that they
MAY rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

I proceed to the next Text of Scripture, which is much insisted on to prove
the seventh day sabbath is in force to believing Gentiles by a Commandment, and
that is Jam. 2.8, 10. where the whole Law is required, and where it is said, we
should not offend in one point; therefore the seventh day sabbath being a part
and a point of the whole Law, believing Gentiles are bound to observe it: to
this is added those words of Paul, Romans 3.31. We establish the Law.

Law, and whole Law, is variously taken in holy Scriptures; and therefore it is
not safe to conclude the seventh day Sabbath from such Texts, lest we are
forced at last to do as some did, who some years since began to profess the
Jewish Sabbath, because it was a part of the Law, and afterward came by the
force of the same reason to keep all the Jewish Ceremonies, because they were
parts of the whole Law, and at last went over Sea and turned Jews, and denied
the Lord Christ to be the true Messiah. And that the word Law is variously
taken, nothing is more manifest; for there is a Law of Moses, Mal. 4.4. and
Acts 13.39. there is a Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. there is the Law of Nature,
Romans 2.14. there is the Law of Works, and the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. there is
the Law of Bondage, Acts 15. and 10. Gal. 5.1. and there is a Law of Liberty,
James 1.25. and James 3.12. So speak and so de, as they that shall be judged by
the Law of LIBERTY.

Now the great Question will be, which of these Laws James means, when he tells
us, We must keep the whole law? if he means, the whole Law of Moses, then we
must, as I have said, observe Circumcision, because the Jews did Circumcise,
that the Law of MOSES might not be broken, Joh. 7.23. and the Apostle tells us,
Gal. 5.2. That be that was circumcised was bound to keep the WHOLE Law; so that
to understand this Text to be meant of Moses Law, will necessarily introduce
all Judaism; but if we should understand it (as indeed we ought) for the Law of
Liberty, and the Law of Faith, which is the Law that James speaks of in this
Chapter, and that Paul does speak of, when he says, Romans 3.3. He does
establish the Law: I say, if we understand the word Law in this later fence for
the Law of Christ, the Law of Faith, and the Law of Liberty; I demand where any
of these Laws do command a seventh day sabbath? So that what ever the Law of
Christ, and the Law of Faith and Liberty, and the Law of Nature do enjoin us to
observe, these we must observe in every point, or we shall be guilty of all, if
we wilfully break the least Command required in these Laws, which in no place
commands a seventh-day sabbath: and that James means the Law of Liberty, the
second Chapter 12 Verse will inform us. For when he had in the 10 Verse told
them, that be that sinned in one point of the Law was guilty of all; he tells
them in the 12 Verse what Law he means, and therefore bids so do, as those that
should be judged by the Law of Liberty: so that unless any body can prove, that
the Law of Liberty does command a seventh day sabbath, they cannot prove, from
this Text, that the believing Gentiles are bound to observe it any more then
they are bound to observe all the Jewish rudiments; the observation whereof,
experience tells us is the sad and evil consequence of this opinion.

The eleventh Argument to prove the seventh day sabbath, is more general then
the former, viz Because all Laws that were never repealed are in force;
therefore the seventh day sabbath is in force by a Law, because it was once
commanded and never repealed.

I answer, if by the not repealing of a Law, they do mean that which is not
expressly and particularly repealed, then we must keep the Passover; for that
was once a Law, and was never repealed expressly and particularly.

Again, we must keep the year of Jubilee, for that was once a Law, and it was
never expressly and particularly repealed. Furthermore, by this Argument we must
keep the seventh year for a sabbath, and neither plow or sow our fields, or do
any work for that whole year, because it was once commanded, Levit. 25. and it
was never expressly and particularly repealed: but does it therefore follow that
we are bound to observe these things? in like manner it does not follow that
the seventh day sabbath must be still observed, because it was once commanded,
and in so many words was never repealed.

But lastly, The seventh day sabbath is repealed in Col. 2. where it is called,
A shadow of things to come.

We come now to those Texts that are urged for Examples; and they are those
that tell us, that be Apostle preached in the Synagogue every Sabbath Day, Act.
13.14, 42. Act. 16.12, 13. Act. 17.2. Act. 18.4. Whence it is inferred, that we
ought to walk as we have them for an Example; therefore if they kept the
seventh day sabbath, we must.

I answer, Then we must meet in a Jewish Synagogue as well as the Apostles did
every sabbath day: if they must be our Examples for A TIME of worship, they
must be so for a PLACE of worship; for such places were as well commanded as
such times.

Secondly, The Apostle circumcised Timothy, must we therefore circumcise?

Thirdly, The Apostle Paul did observe the Law of the Nazarites, Act. 21. must
we therefore observe it?

Fourthly, The Apostle said, He must needs keep the feast of the Passover,
Act. 18, 21. Does it therefore follow that we must keep the feast of the
Passover? and yet after this manner do these men reason, (viz.) that they must
keep the seventh day sabbath, because Paul kept it.

Fifthly, The Text does not say Paul did keep the sabbath, any more then it
faith, he did reverence the sanctuary; but that having the opportunity of these
times and places in which the Jews were assembled, he made use thereof to
preach Christ unto them.

Having urged and answered those Arguments taken from commands and Examples out
of the Old and New Testament, I come now to those Arguments that plead the
seventh day sabbaths Morality, from Natural Reasons: and the first is, That the
seventh-day sabbath must needs be moral, because (as Mr. Spittlehouse told me
before many witnesses) that the seven Stars did preach the seventh day sabbath,
and therefore the Heathen kept the Saturday, which is so called of Saturn the
seventh Planet.

I answer, that first, this is vain Philosophy indeed.

But secondly, Mr. Spittlehouse is an ignorant Philosopher, and a more ignorant
Astrologer, in saying, that Saturn is the seventh Planet, which all writers in
Astronomy and Astrology do declare to be the first Planet, and accordingly so
place it and call it; and therefore the Heathen rather kept Saturday as the
first day then the seventh day, because Saturn is the first of all the seven
Planets.

But thirdly, The Heathen did keep every ninth day to Jupiter; does it
therefore follow that these were sabbaths that God required? Again, Plutarch
says of Theseus, that the Athenians offered to him their greatest sacrifices
upon the eighth day of October, because of his arrival that day from Cret^; and
they did keep the eighth day of every month because he was derived of Neptune:
and therefore Philo the Jew puts this difference between Jews and Gentiles
(viz.) that the Jews kept a day every week, but the Gentiles did but keep one
in a month; by which it appears, that the seventh day of the week was not more
honored by the Heathen, then the ninth day of the week, or the eighth day of
the month, on which they offered their greatest sacrifices.

But lastly, If it were lawful thus to trifle, might not a man as well prove
Sunday, or the first day of the week to be a sabbath, according to the light of
Nature, because the Heathen worshipped the Sun, as any body can prove Saturday
to be a sabbath, because the Heathen worshipped the Planet Saturn? but enough,
if not more then enough of this vain reasoning.

The thirteenth Argument is taken from the morality and perfection of the
number seven; that it is a perfect number, and therefore when the seventh day
comes we must rest: for the proof of this notion, they cite Scriptures that
magnify the number seven, as David's praying seven times a day, and Christ's
casting seven Devils out of Mary Magdelene; and seven years of plenty, and
seven years of famine in Egypt, amp;c.

To all which I answer, that one would think these men had suffered 7 years
famine in a want of Arguments for their opinion of the seventh day, or else
they would never catch at such things as these; but I remember Solomon faith,
to the hungry every bitter thing is sweet; therefore if these men were not
languishing for want of Arguments, they would never feed themselves with such
vain arguings. For may not the Papists plead this Argument for their seven
Sacraments, as well as these men can plead it for the seventh day sabbath?

But secondly, Are not other numbers both in Nature, sacred and profane
writings, as much set by as the number seven? as God made two lights, Genesis
1.16. and he made man two eyes, two feet, two hands, and two ears; so there was
two tables of the Law, and two Nations in Rebecca's womb, and two Testaments;
the like enum eration may be found of other numbers both in sacred and profane
writing: but this kind of arguing is more like Cornelius Agrippa's Occulr
Philosophy, then Christian Divinity.

The fourteenth, and last Argument is taken from the practice of the Church,
the three first Centuries after Christ; whence they infer, that if the
Christians so long after kept the seventh day, it is a sign that it was given
them in charge by Christ.

To this I answer, that the Christian Churches kept the feast of Easter 300
years after Christ, does this follow therefore that Christ gave the keeping of
Easter in charge to them? and that the Churches 300 years after Christ were
zealous of Easter day, is very obvious to all that have any acquaintance with
the stories of those times: see Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21.22, 23, 24. and herein
were the Christians divided; the Eastern Churches kept it at the same time the
Jews kept their passover, and, the West Churches kept it upon some Sunday
following after: in like manner were they divided about the observations of
their weekly days; the Ebionites (says Eusebius) were a fort of Heretics
that were zealous of the Law, and did own the Epistle to the Hebrews, but
denied the Epistles of Paul, for that he spoke against the Law; those did keep
the Jews seventh day with other Ceremonies of the Law, and celebrate the
Sundays in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, as other Christians do, lib 3.
cap. 24. The like says Epiphanius, lib. 1. Haeres. 3c. thus we see how the
Christians were divided in their practice about the weekly and yearly
observation of days, that we may as easily prove Christ left the feast of the
Passover in charge to the Christian world, as that he left the seventh day in
charge, because as the one was practiced, so was the other, for more then 300
years after Christ.

Having answered the Arguments levied for the Jews Sabbath; I shall now urge
reasons why the Jews Sabbath, or the seventh day Sabbath is not of force to be
believing Gentiles in the times of the Gospel, either by the Law of nature,
Moses, (...) Christ.

any of sin for not keeping the seventh day Sabbath, and yet it did convince
the Gentiles of sin for not keeping the other nine Commandments: now had the
Sabbath been a moral Law, or a Law in nature, then would nature as well have
reproved her children for the profaning of it, as it has reproved them for the
breach of all the rest: and that nature has reproved every man for the breach
of all other laws, which are moral, appears, if we view Romans 1.25. The
Gentiles, who had not the law of Moses, broke the first Commandment, in that
they worshipp^d the Creature MORE then the Creator, Romans 1.25. which was
against the first Commandment, that faith, We must have no other Gods bus one.
They broke the second Commandment, in that they did change the glory of the
incorruptible God into an IMAGE, made like corruptible man, Romans 1.23. They
broke the third Commandment, in that they blasphemed the name of God, Romans
2.24. But no mention of their breach of the fourth Commandment. They broke the
fifth Commandment, in that they were disobedient to Parents, Romans 1.30. They
broke the sixth commandment, in that they were guilty of murder, Romans 1.29.
They broke the seventh Commandment, in that they were guilty of fornication and
unlawful lusts, Romans 1.26, 29. They broke the eighth Commandment, therefore
the Apostle admonishes the converted Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.17, 28. that they
which had stolen should steal no more; showing that in the days of their
Gentile vanities they walked not according to the light of nature. Again, they
broke the ninth Commandment, 2 Timothy 3.3. without natural affection,
truce breakers, FALSE accusers. They brake the tenth Commandment, in that they
were guilty of covetousness, Rom 1.2. How often are the Gentiles charged with
these sins, both in the Old and New Testament, and yet they are never charged
by the Law of Nature for seventh day Sabbath breaking? and therefore Josephus
tells us that the Mations did imitate, and learned to keep a Sabbath of the
Jews: for (says he) our custom has spread it self among the Nations, etc.
clearly proving that the light of Nature never taught the Gentiles to keep the
seventh day sabbath, Lib. 2. contr. Appion.

Again, secondly, the Gentiles could not keep the seventh day by the light of
Nature, because they are not exactly able to compute the seventh day from the
Creation, by reason that the Sun stood still in Joshua's time, and hasted not
to go down for a whole day; and likewise the Sun went backwards ten degrees in
Hezekiahs time, which was almost half a day: by reason whereof, the light of
Nature was never able to make a perfect account of the seventh day from the
Creation.

Thirdly, a man cannot know the seventh day from the fourth, but by tradition;
therefore the knowledge of the seventh day is not moral; as for instance:
Suppose a man sick of a violent distemper that bereaveth him of his senses,
when he comes to his former understanding he will know his duty touching all
the nine precepts, and also touching the setting apart some time to serve God;
but as touching this seventh day, he cannot know this, but by the help of
tradition, having lost his account in the time of his sickness: which shows
that the seventh day is not commanded by the light of Nature, because by that
light a man cannot know the seenth day from the fourth or eighth.

Again, this Reason is further illustrated by the Travels of Sir Francis Drake,
who lost a whole day, and so did all their company, before their return for
England: so the Dutch in their Western Discoveries, by reason of the varation
of Longitudes and Latitudes, they had lost a day before they returned; which
they had never been informed in, but by the help of tradition: which shows that
Nature could not instruct the Gentiles in the knowledge of a seventh day. Now
these and the like cases puts an absolute necessity upon the world to be
ignorant of this Law; therefore it cannot be moral.

The second Argument which I urge to prove that the seventh day sabbath is not
in force to the believing Gentiles, is, Because they are not commanded by Moses
Law to keep the seventh day sabbath.

My Reasons are, first, because this Law was not given to any Nation but
Israel: Psalm 147.19, 20. Romans 2.14. the Gentiles had not the Law, etc

Secondly, if Moses Law be in force, then the punishment due to the breach of
the seventh day sabbath is in force; which was, That the Congregation should
stone the Oftender to death, Number. 15.35. which I have shown in the
forementioned Disputations cannot reasonably be imagined to consist with
Gospel-liberty.

Thirdly, if Moses Law be in force to require any thing of the Gentiles that is
not expressly and particularly required of them by Christ or his Apostles, then
we may, by the Argument of Moses Law, take a liberty to innovate what Judaical
Ceremonies we shall at any time have a mind unto.

viz. That the Gentiles are not required by Christ to keep the seventh day
sabbath.

First, because he has not expressly required any such thing in all the New
Testament, nor have any of his Apostles to whom he delegated a power to preach
the Laws of the New Testament, ever declared any such thing.

But secondly, the Apostle tells us, That the sabbath was a shadow of good
things to come, Col. 2.16, 27. Which must needs be understood of sabbath days,
as our Translators have rendered it:

First, wherever the word sabbaths is otherwise understood, the Holy Ghost,
for the help of our understanding, adds either that it is a sabbath for the
LAND, when he means yearly sabbaths; or else if they were festival sabbaths, he
refers us to the Feasts which-ought to be so sanctified.

But secondly, wherever sabbath is joined with new moons and feasts, there it
is always understood of the sabbath days, because all their other sabbaths were
included in their feasts, except the seventh day sabbath: See for this purpose
Exodus 34.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Lev. 23.3, 4. Ezekiel. 45.17. and 2 Chronicles. 8.13.

Thirdly, the sabbath day was called a sign by Moses, Exodus 31.17.

Again, my third Reason why Christ has not commanded the believing Gentiles to
keep the seventh day sabbath, is, Because the Apostle calls all the times that
the Jews observed in the Law, weak and beggarly elements, among which the
seventh day sabbath was accounted: see Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. Now the Jews days were
their weekly Sabbaths, their months were their new Moons, Numb. 28.11. Number.
10.10. 2 Chronicles. 8.13. Exodus 23.12. their times were three in the years, Exodus
23.14, 15. Deuteronomy. 16. from the first to the fourth was the feast of the
Passover; from the ninth verse to the thirteenth is mention made of the feast
of harvest, or feast of weeks; and from the thirteenth verse to the 26, you may
read of the feast of boothes or tabernacles; which were their times that they
observed: Then they observed years, which shows that this was spoken of the
Jews since, as Tacitus faith, No Nation wasted whole years as the Jews did: and
that they were by the Law to keep years as well as days, and months and times,
appears by the text, Lev. 25. where every seseventh year, and every year of
Jubilee, was commanded to be observed. Now if they had no time which they
observed, but days, months, times and years, and all these were weak and
beggarly Rudiments, then it plainly appears that their seventh day sabbaths are
weak and beggarly. This reason remains good, till some body shall show me that
the seventh day sabbath was not included in these words, days, months, times
and years.

My last R^ason why Christ never commanded the gentiles to ^^serve the seventh
day sabbath, is because the Apostle gives a toleration to the Christians to
keep every day, as they are persuaded in their own minds, either to esteem one
day above another, or every day alike, Romans 14.5. which liberty he could not
have given them, if Christ had confirmed the Law of Moses to the believing
Gentiles. But this Argument did meet with two Objections; the one was, that
this could not be understood of every day according to the letter of the Text;
because the Apostle gives a toleration to eat all things, and yet the Holy
Ghost, Act. 15. forbids the eating of blood, and things strangled, etc.

In like manner (say they) must we restrain the words every day, to be
understood of every day but the sabbath.

To which I answer, that the Holy Ghost has put a restriction upon the word
every thing; but neither Christ, the Holy Ghost, nor the Apostle has put a
restriction upon this word every day: therefore no mortal man ought to take
that liberty to restrain the words of a Text, when the Holy Spirit does not
restrain them.

The second thing Objected against this Argument, from Romans 14. is this, (viz.)
That if we are at liberty, and under no restraint, but may keep every day
alike, then there is no reason to observe any day.

The answer to this Objection makes way for the last thing intended, which is
to show, that though Christ has set us at liberty from those Mosaical
Institutions for the observation of days, and has made all days alike in
respect of any Mosaical sanctity; yet it does not therefore follow, that we may
spend every day to the service of the flesh, and choose whether we will set
apart any time to the service of God, as I have already hinted, page 90.

For first, God has freed us from that place of worship by the death of
Christ, unto which both Jews and Proselytes were enjoined to come up to
worship, which was in the Temple at Jerusalem: and now Christ has made every
place alike, in that one place has no more Legal or Mosaical sanct^ty then
another; does it therefore follow, that Christians may abuse this liberty, and
choose whether they will meet to worship God in any place or no? No more does it
follow, that because Christ has made all days alike in respect of any Mosaical
sanctity, that therefore we may choose whether we will keep any day at all.

Again, secondly, Christ has set us free from those Mosaical Laws which God
made for the maintenance of the Levitical Priesthood and Legal Ministry, and
has not enjoined us how much or how little the Ministers of the Gospel should
be allowed; does it therefore follow, that we may choose whether we will allow
them any thing or nothing? In like manner, it does not follow, because Christ
has taken away the Mosaical institution for the observation of days, that
therefore we may choose whether we will observe any day, or any time for the
worship and service of God.

But to this it is objected, That though Christ has taken away that kind of
maintenance, yet he has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.1.

I answer in like manner, that though he has taken away those Mosaical
observations of days and times, yet we are under a command to observe A time to
worship, as well as A maintenance for Ministers: my Reasons are, first, because
the light of Nature has taught all people to set apart some time to worship
and serve their God: for if the light of Nature does enjoin men to worship, it
does also enjoin them to observe some time in which they ought to worship.
After this manner the Apostle argues in the forecited Scripture, for the
maintenance of the Gospel-Ministery; showing that the light of Nature teaches,
That they which plant a vineyard ought to eat of the fruit thereof; and that
they which plow, should plow in hope, to be pa^takers of their hope: the like
reason (if not much greater) he urges, why they that sow spiritual things,
should partake of temporal things: so that though God has freed us from that
maintenance of Ministers, and that place of worship that was commanded in the
Law, yet there remains a moral obligation upon us to observe some place to
worship God in, and also to provide a competent maintenance for those that
administer spiritual things unto us. In like manner there remains a Moral
obligation upon us to observe A time to worship God, though we are freed from
all those days and times that the Law of Moses commanded his Disciples to
observe.

But 2. This does not only appear from the light of Nature, but from the
Scriptures also, which command, That we should not forsake the assembling of
our selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. Now if we must
frequent the Assemblies of Gods people, then we must observe A time to worship,
or else we cannot observe the duty that is here enjoined; for, if we may choose
whether we will observe any time of worship (as the Objection vainly supposes)
then we cannot perform this duty: of frequenting the Assemblies of the Saints,
which appears was a duty not only commanded, but practiced in the New
Testament, Jam. 2.2. Act. 11.26. 1 Cor. 11.20. 1 Cor. 14.23. in all which Texts
we are informed of the whole Churches meeting together in one place, according
as they were required; which they could not have done, had they not agreed upon
the place where, and a time when to meet together: so that if Christians must
meet together to worship God, they must also observe a time in order thereunto.

And as I have shown that A time and place ought to be observed for Gods
worship; I shall in the last place show, that the first day of the week ought
rather to be observed then any other day; and that, because the Churches of
Christ have enjoined us to observe that time for public worship, therefore that
time ought rather to be observed then another; for we are bound to hear the
Church of Christ in all things that she commands us to observe, provided, that
the Church does command nothing contrary to the commands of Christ: now that
the Church does not command any thing contrary and the commands of Christ, in
commanding us to observe the first day of the week, appears, because Christ
has not left us any one day or time in charge, rather then another; no more
then he has left any place of worship in charge, rather then another: and
therefore the Church does do nothing derogatory to the mind of Christ, in
appointing a time of worship, no more then she does in appointing a place of
worship: and that Christ has not left us a command to observe one day rather
then another, appears by that forecited text Romans 14. and therefore in all
cases Christ has given power to his Church to make laws, as appears, in that
he has given them power to appoint the place where the Church should assemble:
would it not then be sinful for any small inconsiderable number of the Church
to appoint another place to meet in, contrary to that which the whole church to
which they are related have agreed to, and chosen to meet in? Even so in like
manner will the Lord judge those men guilty of Schism that shall rent from the
Churches to which they are related, for no other cause but that they may keep a
day in opposition to that day appointed by the Church for the exercise of
Religion. Now unless these men can prove by express text that Christ has given
us a command to observe the seventh day sabbath; how will they escape the
sentence of refusing to hear the Church, and that other sentence of making
divisions contrary to the Doctrine which they have received? For in this case I
shall appeal to the Consciences of all those men that keep the seventh day
sabbath, whether or no, if they should agree upon a certain place to worship
god, in yet if after this agreement some few of the Church should at the same
time in which their Church is assembled, refuse to come to them, and meet in
another place, where they list themselves, would they not judge those men
guilty of schism and disorder? now by what Law can they do it (since Christ
has appoint^d no particular place of meeting) but by the forementioned law,
that the Church ought to be heard in all lawful thing, and therefore no private
persons ought to contend against the Commands of the Church, when she commands
nothing contrary to sound Doctrine? Now then, since a time to worship is to be
observed, we remain bound in conscience to observe that day which the Church of
Christ commands us to observe, which is the first day of the week, till any
body can show us where Christ has commanded another day: How then will those
men excuse themselves from rending and tearing the body of Christ asunder, tht
rent from the Churches whereunto they were formerly related, for no other
reason, but for that the Church observes the first day of the week, and
refuses to observe the Mosaical or Jewish seventh day sabbath? Let me
therefore from what has been said, beseeoh all that love the Lord Jesus Christ
in sincerity, to tender the peace of the Church, and prefer the peace and
prosperity thereof above their chief joy; and rather let their tongue cleave to
the roof of their mouth, and their right hand forget its cunning, rather then
let their hearts forget the peace and prosperity of the Church, whom Christ
has purchased with his own blood; and let not these Disputations about a
sabbath day, eat out of our memories the great sabbath of the Lord that is
approaching, in which every one that keeps Faith and a good Conscience shall
rest with Christ from all their Labourings and Sufferings in this World, as GOD
did from his Labor when he made the World. Oh then! let us all labor and
strive to enter into that rest into which Christ is entered; and let us take
heed that while we are laboring to enter into that seventh day rest with the
unbeleeving Jews, that together with them we fall not into the same example of
unbeleef, in denying Jesus Christ to be our only Lord and Savior: into which
unbeleef and disobedience many have stumbled and fallen in these days, who
while they have been laboring to entangle others with the (...) wish yoke of
bondage, have fallen from the Grace of the ^ospel of Jesus Christ.

Thus having with all sincerity and plainness, as in the sight of God, answered
those Reasons that are alleged for the seventh day sabbath, and urged those
Reasons why I am persuaded believers are not to observe it, together with my
Reasons why I believe we ought to observe the first day of the week; I shall
leave the whole to the blessing of Almighty God, desiring that what is here
offered according to the mind of God, that God may have the glory; and whatever
has fallen from my tongue in disputing, or my pen in writing this
controversy, that savors of the flesh or humane frailty, I hope the Father of
mercies will pardon it, and so I hope will every Christian Reader into whose
hands this shall fall: which is all that is desired from him, who is,

Thy Friend in the Truth, JER. IVES.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Reader,
SOme few Faults have escaped, which thou art desired to Correct with thy Pen.

IN the Epistle, page 8 line 21. for aeman, read a man. Epist. page 11. l. 16.
for wrandrings r. wanderings. Epist p. 12. l. 10. for hold r. holding.

In page 27. l. 8. for Jer. 35, 36. r. ver. 35, 36. in p. 28. l. 22. for two
causes, r. two clauses. p. 63. l. 24. for poople, r. people. p. 78. line 12 for
seventh-sabbath r. seventh-day sabbath. p. 81. for Commadments, r.
Commandments. p. 90. l. 6. for no other, r. any other. p. 136. l. 1. for 156.
r. 133.


