A Sober Request to the Quakers:
Published by JER* IVES.
WHereas I have lately charged you in a public Meeting, that you are no
Christians, and that your Friends of the Ministry are mere Impostors; which
Charge you have endeavored to evade with various put-offs, Alleging that it
was besides the Business of the day; which is manifestly false: for, was it not
the Business of the day to examine the Charge against Tho. Hicks? And was not
this the first Article in your written Charge against him, that he writ a
Dialogue between a Quaker and a Christian? Now this being the first general
Article, what could be more material in order to his Vindication than for him
to prove (or some one in his behalf, and the behalf of Christianity it self)
that you are no Christians, nor worthy to bear so venerable a name? and if this
be made manifest it can be no fault to oppose a Quaker to a Christian.

But when I still enforced this Charge, and by several motives pressed you to
vindicate the honor of your Profession, by responding to what I had objected
against you. Will. Pen stands up and makes a Confession of his Faith in
Scripture expressions, which while you declaredly own such Books (written by
Quakers) as contain in them Doctrines no way reconcilable to Scipture-Language,
or Christian-Religion, but are destructive both of the one and the other, as I
am ready to prove, it plainly shows that this Confession was but a mere
Equivocation (an old art of Deceivers; who by good Words and fair speeches do
the more effectually beguile the hearts of the Simple and less wary Hearers)
for, what if your Discourses and Confessions of Faith be clothed with
Scripture Language now more than formerly, this does but render those
Confessions to be gross Equivocations, unless you will renounce your former
vile, absurd, and nonsensical Opinions, which I proved to your Face do make
void all rules of Christian Faith and Practice. And when by force of Argument I
had driven you to that strait that you could make no reply, and finding my self
under some indisposition of body after nigh six hours discourse with three of
you, I thought it advisable to quit the Meeting; which you making so ill an
improvem^nt of, for want of better Arguments Will. Pen crying out (as if he had
been among the Boys in Moor-fields) They run, they run; others of you report as
if I ran from the Charge, as being afraid or ashamed to own it: I say, your so
base and insolent behavior in my absence, who had nothing to the purpose to
answer in my presence, gives me the occasion to let you know, that I am neither
afraid nor ashamed to make full proof of what I have charged upon you, if you
dare appoint a Time and Place for that purpose. And then appoint whom you will
to Dispute the matter with me; provided none be admitted to speak but us two,
unless it be to correct any disorders either in the Disputants or Auditors; as
also that a certain hour be agreed on for the beginning, and another for the
ending of the Disputation for that day; and that neither party shall exceed the
limits of that time so agreed on, unless it be by mutual consent.

Upon these terms I earnestly request a Meeting with you to prove these two
things against you. 1. That you are no Christians, what ever you pretend. 2.
That your friends of the Ministry (as you phrase it) are Impostors,
False-Prophets, and men of lying Spirits.


Now if you shall not by all this be prevailed upon to meet according to this
Request, I hope you will not take it unkindly if I conclude, that you that talk
so much of the Light, care not how little you come at it, left your folly
should be made manifest; but if you take this for an unkind Conclusion, I hope
this will please you ( viz) that what ever you say of me, I shall pray that God
would Convert you to Christianity; and Subscribe my self,

Your Friend, JER. JVES.
POSTSCRIPT.
This Meeting is desired to be distinct, without respect unto any Meeting that
shall be a greed on between Tho. Hicks, and you, touching the matters you have
objected against him.



Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for F. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil near the
Royal Exchange. 1674.


