INFORMATION For the Earl and Countess of Southerland and their Children, as
follows.
I. THat the said Countess is the Eldest Daughter of David late Earl of Weymss,
who died in the year 1679. without Male Issue; whereby the said Countess has
undoubted legal Right for succeeding in the Estate and Honors of her said
Father the Earl of Weymss, according to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of
Scotland, which allows not a Father to Disinherit his Eldest Lawful Child, and
to prefer a Younger to their Inheritance, unless the Eldest were proved a Fool,
or a Person grossly Vicious, or Profligate, or had Married Dishonourably, to
Disgrace the Family, and contrary to Will of their Parents; none of which can
be alleged against the said Countess, who is not accounted a Fool, nor has
done any thing which will speak her Vicious or Profligate: And for her Matches,
first and last, the Family has no Dishonor by them, and she engaged in them,
by the special command of her Father.

II. It is to be considered in the 2 d. place, that the late Earl of Weymss did
not Purchase his Estate himself, but received it from his Ancestors for several
hundreds of years: So that by the Ancient Customs of the Nation, he had no
Right to dispose of that Estate, or put it by his Lawful Heir, since it was
none of his own Purchase.

III: Thirdly, It is to be considered, that the said Earl of Weymss did in June
or July 1649. Dispone all his Estate and Honors (failing of Lawful Heirs of
his own Body) to the said Countess, without any Clause of Revocation; and
Entailed it not only to her, but to any Child of hers, Son or Daughter (the
Eldest being first in the Provision) upon condition they assume the Name, and
hear the Coat of Arms belonging to the Family of Weymss: Yet in a little time
after, the said Countess her Mother being Sick, and on her death Bed; did at
the said Earl's desire, request her Daughter (upon the said Earl of VVeymss his
Importunity) to give up to his Custody the said Disposition and Entail, made in
the said Countess her Favors, because he did solemnly Swear, that he should
never destroy the same, but kept it entire for the behoove of the said
Countess, and her Children failing of his Lawful Sons, of whom he had then two
alive. The said Countess being loath to disoblige her Father, or disobey her
then dying Mother, brought the said Entail and gave it into her Mothers hands,
who said to the said Earl of VVeymss, My Daughter and I Trust you with this
Evident of hers, upon condition you will not destroy it, nor do any thing in
prejudice of it: That in case you have no Male Issue at your Death, she and
hers may be virtue of this Deed succeed to you in your Estate and Honors; to
which the said Earl answered, and Swore, That as he should answer to God, he
would perform it; and wished, that if ever he should make a Right, or other
Entail to any other person in prejudice of the said Countess, he wished the
person might be Accursed, and the Family might Perish: This was done in the
presence of the late Lord Burly, the late Lord Ruthvan, and the Lord of
Feyngies, Mr. Hooper, and diverse others, My Lady Ruthvan and Mrs. Law, who are
yet alive, were also present: So the said Earl Thanked his Daughter for her
Confidence in him; and answered her, That he would not abuse his Trust.

Notwithstanding of this, the said Earl having Married twice after the Decease
of his first Lady; and having by his third Lady several Sons and one Daughter,
was prevailed with by his third Lady, after the death of all her Sons, to make
a new Entail to his Daughter by her, in the year 1671 or 1672. by which he cut
off his Eldest Daughter the said Countess and her Posterity (as if they had
been Bastards) from having any Right Title or Claim to succeed in his Family;
which which was a Deed so contrary to the Law and Customs of the Nation, and to
Equity, Reason, and his solemn Oaths; which it seems he had forgotten, it being
more then twenty years, from the time he made those Oaths and Promises, to that
year in which he broke them, by making this new Entail to his youngest Daughter
Lady Margaret VVeymss, whom he gave in Marriage to Sir James Weymss, who by the
Duke of Monmouth's Moyen with the King, was afterward made Lord Bruntisland.

It is also to be considered, That the said Countess did Address her self to
her said Father the Earl of Weymss, before this New Entail to her prejudice was
completed, or her Sister Married, proferring to his Lordship, That it he would
continue the former Entail, and not alter it to the prejudice of her and her
Children, that she would procure for her Sister the said Lady Margaret, one of
the Noblest Matches of the Kingdom, who would promote her to greater Honors
and Estate than the Family of Weymss could render, and who would be satisfied
with the Lordship of Bothwell, which was a part of the Earl of Forfars Estate
as a sufficient Portion with the said Lady Margaret, and the rest of the said
Earls Estate might go as Addition to the Estate of Weymss; so that the said
Countess and he might succeed in that Family. But the said Earl of Weymss told
his Daughter. That he behooved to make this New Entail to his Youngest
Daughter, else he could not please his Wife nor have peace at Home: Saying
also, That he could not contend with his Wife and her Friends, being now broken
with Grief for the Death of his Ten Sons, and being Infirm with Old Age, being
then Sixty and two Years, and was truly failed both in Memory and Judgment so,
that when the said Countess desired him to Remember the Promises and Oaths that
he made to her and her Mother when Dying, that it might not trouble him when he
came to dye, if he should break these Oaths and Promises: Upon which he knocked
upon his Breast and said, Oh Daughter you wound me to the Heart in putting me
in mind of those things which I had absolutely forgot; and so run out of the
Room in a great disturbance: And he was so prevailed with by his Lady and the
said Lord Brunt-Island, who was then present with him, that they would never
suffer the said Countess to have access to speak to him any more, lest his
Heart should have relented toward her: Yea, they took him sworn that he should
not so much as receive a Letter from his Eldest Daughter, who did writ to him
and to his Lady, but the Letters were sent back without being opened: And when
the said Earl of Weymss went on to pass the Signature he had made to his
Youngest Daughter before the Kings Exchequer, notwithstanding that one
compeared from the Earl of Forfar and his Friends, requiting up a sight of the
said Signature before it should pass, as being the Eldest Son of the Eldest
Daughter of the said Earl of Weymss yet contrair to all Law this was denied
him, which made the said Earl of Forfars Agent protest for Remedy in Law,
before Session or Parliament: But the Earl of Rothoss, being then Chancellor
and Uncle to the said Lady Margaret, would not suffer the said Agent to have
the Benefit for the Earl of Forfar, that the Law did allow in such Cases, but
hastened the passing of the said Signature before it was three days affixed upon
the Wall, according to the usual Custom. Therefore the said Countess of
Sutherland has her Recourse to the Kings Majesty, Commissioner, and to the
High Court of Parliament, hoping that by his Princely Goodness and their
Justice they will cognoce the matter, so as to remedy the wrongs done to the
said Countess and her Childron, and to preserve the legal Succession in the
right Line in this Ancient Family (being Lineally descended from the second Son
of the Famous Mackduff Thaine of Fife, who restored King Malcolme Crammone to
the Crown of Scotland, and Killed the Usurper Mackbeth) so the said Countess
and Earl of Southerland, with the Earl of Forfar and Lord Strathnaver, do
humbly Implore the Justice of the said High Court of Parliament in their
behalf, it being not Justifiable nor Lawful to suffer a man in his old Age,
having then lost his Memory and Judgment, to wrong his Lawful Successor,
contrair to the first Entail made in her Favors, and the Oaths made by the
said Earl, to creat a Confidence in his Daughter, to give up the Entail made in
her Favors to him: So that this new Entail made to her prejudice, is an Act of
great Rigor and Injustice, and without any Precedent or Example, since by the
said Entail Strangers are preferred to her and her Children, and she and hers
totally cut off from succeeding therein: And that by the false Accusations made
of the said Countess to her Father.

It is also to be considered, That the said Countess has a Right and Just Claim
unto Considerable Sums of Money that were due to her second Brother Alexander
Weymss and to her Sister Lady Mary, as Bands of Provision made to them and
their Heirs, be the Deceased Earl of Weymss there Father, who made those
Provisions for them before he Married a second Lady, and delivered them to the
Custody of Robert Lord Burly their Grandfather, to be kept for the Benefit of
them and their Heirs, which Bonds will amount to by Principal, and Annual rent
to the Sum of 15000 pound Sterling, which the said Countess as Sister German,
and Heir to the said Alexander and Lady Mary. Entreats a Sentence of
Parliament, against her said Sister Lady Margaret Weymss, who possesses the
whole Estate of VVeymss: And has given the said Countess no Satisfaction for
the said Bonds; nor any part of her said Fathers Estate; all that she Received
being only her Mothers Portion, with a certain Sum, that her Aunt the Deceased
Viscountess of Stormont left her, which was paid to the Deceased Earl of
Angus, as Portion with his said Lady, she having Brothers then alive.

It is also to be Considered, That the Estate of the Earledom of VVeymss is
considerable enough, to suffer Division betwixt the two Sisters; since the
casual Rent of Coal and Salt is Reckened to be sixty Thousand Merks by year:
And has Rendered no less (as is informed) these two years bygone,
notwithstanding the War: So that in a peaceable time, it might render much
more. This is over and besides the Land Rent which is considerable enough, as
is well known to all the Noblemen and Gentlemen in Fife.

It is also to be considered, That the Delators the said Lady met with from the
Lord Chancellor Rothes in December 1679 and June 1680, has done her great
Prejudice, for then there was alive the Writer of the Tailzie and two of the
VVitnesses, and several of those persons that were present, and heard the Terms
upon which she committed the said Entail to her Fathers Custody; who are all
now Dead, save two Women. As also the Writer and three VVitnesses of the
Bonds were then alive, who for any thing she knows now two of them are Dead,
and a 3d out of the Country, which makes the Discussing of the said Process
more necessary, lest she drop off her self being now Old and Infirm.

It is also to be considered. That Unjust Methods were used to alienat the
Affection of the said Earl of Weymss from his Eldest Daughter, whom they made
him believe had accused him to the King as a Perjured and Unnatural Man, by his
breaking his Entail to her, and giving it to his Youngest Daughter: But in
effect the said Lady never Addressed her self to the King till after her Father
was two Months dead, having still hope that her Father would repent of what he
had done to her prejudice before he dyed; which he did by a Writ under his Hand
four days before he dyed, as the two Bailiffs of the Town of Weymss told the
said Countess so soon as she returned from London, after the said Earl his
Death; Declaring to her, That he called for them three days before he dyed,
and told them, That now his Conscience smote him for what he had done to
prejudise his Eldest Daughter, who was ever Dutiful and Kind to him: Therefore
he desired them to show her, that he had Revocked what he had done against her,
and had Reponed her to the Entail made in her Favors, and that he had enclosed
This in a Letter to her, which he had Sealled and delivered to a near Relation
whom he had taken Sworn that they should not destroy nor open that Letter, but
deliver it Safe and Entire into the Hands of his Eldest Daughter, which is not
yet done. Yea, the late Lord Brunt-Island and his Friends made the King
believe, That the Earl of Weymss had no Daughter alive but the said Lady
Margaret, and that the said Countess was only his Sister: So that the King was
surprised when the said Countess Addressed her self to him for Reparation; and
told her, That he was Misinformed, and was sorry she was so long a coming to
seek Redress, for now he heard it was too late.

Another Artifice used by the Adversaties of the said Countess, is, To make the
World believe that the Estate of Weymss was so ruined with Debts, that the Lord
Brunt-Island and the late Countess of Weymss did recover the same by the great
Sums of Money they brought to the Family. Ans: 1. There was not so great
Burdens on the Family as is suggested; and whatever was on it of Debt, was
brought on by the public Calamity in the Usurpers time: For which the Countess
of Sutheeland should not be punished, for it was in good Condition at her
Mothers Death. And as to the Sums of Money brought to the Family by the said
Brunt-Island, it is but false Alledgance, which the Earl of Weymss was induced
to acknoweldge to give as pretense to the said Lord for his succeeding in the
Family to Defraud his Eldest Daughter: For it is nottarly known that the said
Lord brought no Money to the Family but thirty thousand Merks, which purchased
the Castle of Bruntisland and the Lands about it: For the Leases that the
General Artillery had in England, did soon expire after the Lord Brunt Island
Married the said Lady Margaret Weymss. And for the Countess of Weymss passing
so much Debt of my Lord Weymss- Its Answered, That she did it with his own
Rents, and took Assignations blank to all these Bonds; by which she designed to
dispose of that Ancient Family to whom she pleased, and to defraud her Lords
Eldest Daughter tottally.


