THE Indictment and Arraignment OF John Price Esquire. Late Receiver-General in
Ireland.

With a Hundred and one other Protestants, at Wicklow, before John Keating Esquire
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas a Protestant, and Henry Lynch Knight Baron of
the Exchequer, a Papist: With variety of Arguments between the Judges and
Council, and the Lord Chief Justice Keatings Charge to the Jury.

A LETTER sent to and Read by the Judges in the Court, for a Loan for the
Popish Armies Subsistence.

With an Account of the Seizing and Condemnation of Sir Thomas Southwell, and
Two Hundred other Protestant Gentlemen at Gallaway. Sir Laurence Parsons and
several others at Birr and Maryborough, in the King and Queens County in
Ireland, and the Barbarous Execution of some of them.

Collected by a Person that was present, and took the same in Writing.

Licensed July 17 1689.

J Fraser



LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.

THE Arraignment and Indictment Of JOHN PRICE Esquire Late Receiver of IRELAND, and
One hundred other Protestants at the Town of Wicklow in Ireland.
JOhn Price Esquire Receiver General to the late King Charles the Second, having
his Country House in the County of Wicklow, at Ballinderry, twenty four miles
from Dublin, did for the safety and preservation of himself and Family, obtain
the Lord Deputy Tyrconnels Protection, (as many more of the English Protestants
living in the Country at the same time did) for the late King James going away
for France, and the Administration of the Government being put into the hands
of his present Majesty; the Lord Tyrconnel gave out Commissions (for the
raising a mighty Army) to any Irish Papist that would take one, and promise to
subsist, Maintain, and Cloth their Men for three Months; most of these New
Officers are men of mean Fortunes, not capable of subsisting themselves; their
men live altogether on the English, coming into their Houses in the day time,
and commanding from them their Meat and Drink; and often Robbing them in the
night, stealing away their Cattle. Likewise the Priests of every Parish obliged
all their people to furnish themselves with Half pikes and Skeanes, and bring
them to Mass, or not presume to appear there, on the penalty of
Excommunication, or a severe punishment; which caused all the Irish to Arm
themselves with the aforesaid Weapons; upon which Robberies, Thefts, and other
Outrages were daily committed upon the English; particularly in the County of
Wicklow, where some Hundreds were got together for that purpose, who gave
themselves the Name of Merry Boys, and had very great success in their thievish
attempts upon their Protestant Neighbors, that lived hitherto seem in their
own Houses; it is observable, what great power the Romish Clergy have over the
Irish, they arm themselves immediately at their Command, and yet to this day
have neither kept them from Robbing of the English, nor restored them any thing
taken away, which if they had been so minded, they might have done by the same
power; several of Mr. Price's Neighbors repaired to Ballinderry, to preserve
themselves and Goods; but an order coming out soon after, for the taking away
all Horses and Arms from the Protestants, both in City and Country; Colonel
Tool with a Party of his men came to demand what Arms and Horses they had at
Ballinderry, Mr. Ptice and the rest having the aforementioned Protection,
refused to obey their orders; and complaint coming to Dublin, Colonel Sheldon
was immediately sent away with a Body of Horse and Foot, against Balinderry;
Mr. Price upon his Approach presently submitted to him, who thereupon was made
a Prisoner, and all the rest of the men that were in the House; but the Prison
of Wicklow not being able to contain them, several of them were admitted to
Bayl, until the following Assizes, which began March the fifth last past, and
ended the eighth.

The Prisoners Names that were Indicted for this Treason, are as follows, viz.
1 John Price Esquire 2 Thomas King Gent. 2 Richard Westland Gent. 4 William
Heatly, Gent. 5 James Lewis Gent. 6 Edward Lewis Gent. 7 John Buroughs Gent.
James Bacon, Gent. 8 Thomas Borough, Gent. 9 Thomas Fetherston Gent. 10 Joseph
Chrichley Gent. 11 John Chrichley Gent. 12 George Chrichley Gent. 13 Tho.
Williams. 14 James Williams. 15 J. Clark. 16 Caleb Chad. 17 Tho. Bathe. 18
Joseph Thompson. 19 Tho. Halson. 20 Henry Gibson. 21 John Cock. 22 Tho.
Peterson. 23 John Ward. 24 William Turner. 25 Tho. Evans. 26 George Atkinson.
27 William Evans. 28 Robert Milton. 29 Will. Neale. 30 Will. Hill. 31 George
Dixy. 32 Stephen Robinson. 33 Charles Evans. 34 Stephen Rathborn Jun. 35 Edward
Philips. 36 John Colson. 37 William Wotton. 38 Henry Delauny. 39 Tho. Cross. 40
John Kempson. 41 Tho. Watts. 42 Edward Acton. 43 Robert Anthony. 44 Alexander
Hill. 45 James Hill. 46 John Hill. 47 William Savill. 48 Edward Jones. 49 Peter
Bland. 50 John Tomlinson. 51 Daniel Beyce. 52 John J^nes. 53 Tho. Howard. 54
Charles Friars. 55 Andrew Wills. 56 Mich. Wills. 57 Samuel Allen. 58 Tristrum
Tinesly. 59 Robert Ashton. 60 Henry Tuton. 61 Ralph Kidd. 62 William Fulham. 63
William Erwin. 64 Agabus Kidd. 65 Tho. Page. 66 Tho. Allen. 67 Rice Bibbin. 68
Nicholas Scot. 69 Arnold Sutton. 70 Alexander Rathborne. 71 William Holson. 72
Isaac Collison. 73 Jacob Collison. 74 William Edwards. 75 Peter Barton. 76 John
James. 77 John Jordan. 78 Randle Buroughs. 79 Richard Price. 80 Agabas Bardin.
81 Henry Moody. 82 John Buroughs. 83 Edward Hughs. 84 Edward Jemson. 85 James
Uton. 86 William Ryder. 87 Luke Young. 88 William Shorter. 89 John Goodwin. 90
James Tench. 91 Thomas Manning. 92 Edward Bowers. 93 Thomas Adams. 94 Robert
Dunbar. 95 Thomas Colston. 96 John Bromwell. 97 Samuel Price. 98 James Tipping.
99 Edward Graham. 100 Christopher Cooper. 101 William Phillips.
Grand-Jurors Names. Papists marked.
CHristopher Wickham. William Hoy. Cromwell Wingfield. William Wolverston.
Redmond Birne. Tho. Birne. William Birne. Pierce Cromwell. Toby Walsh. Toby
Tooll. Edward Burly. Leonard Frost. Peter Ayris. William Baker. Lawrence Tooll.
Richard Lamb. Daniel Birne.
After they were Sworn as usual, they received the following Charge:
L. Chapter Just. Keating's Charge to the Grand Jury.
GEntlemen, You that are here Returned to Serve on this Grand Jury, you have
this day before your Eyes the greatest Example, and the firmest Proof that a
Gracious Prince can give to the best of Subjects; you see his Sacred Majesty,
King James the Second, (whom God long preserve for the Protection of all his
good and dutiful Subjects, and for the subversion and irradicating of all those
who desire the Subversion of his Government, either by Foreign Force, or inbred
Conspiracy) notwithstanding the great Troubles on his own Person, yet he is not
wanting in his care toward you; and I dare boldly say, it is the last thing he
will relinquish in the World, after that of his own Conscience, the care of his
Subjects: He has sent us with his Commission to enquire into all the Maladies,
Diseases, and Sores within your County. He has likewise given us Command to
apply the healing Balsam of the Laws, which will preserve the Subject most
entirely in his Property. And I am sorry, I must tell you, that there was never
more need then now at this time: I am glad at the same time that I can say,
that the Mischiefs fallen on a great part of this Kingdom, and on no part more
than on this County, that is under the very Eye of the Government; I say, I am
glad it can be said to have arisen, for the most part, from a Rabble of People,
who have armed themselves without any direction from the Government, and that
with unusual Weapons; I mean Half-pikes and Skeans: Gentlemen, I must tell you
plainly, it looks rather like a Design to Massacree and Murder, than any thing
else. They do not belong to the Army, neither are they any part of them; but
these are the Vultures, Kites, and Ravens that follow Armies. Soldiers that
have traveled abroad, say, Such are not known among them there: I am told, and
very well assured, That in Foreign Parts, where these Vultures and Birds of
Prey are, it is hard for an Army to lie concealed, without being discovered by
them; for it is odds, but that a Horse or a Man drops where such multitudes of
People are. I am very far from laying this to the Charge of any that are under
Command; though it is possible, that some of them, under the scarcity they are
in, do give their assistance, or at least encouragement to these Robbers;
otherwise it could not be, that whole Flocks and Droves of Cattle are daily
driven away, and yet no one taken or brought to Justice for it. The King is not
wanting in his Care, he has given Directions to have the Laws put in execution,
that Criminals may be brought in and punished; and the Government has issued
out many Proclamations; but they are grown too familiar with them. You are to
enquire into this Matter, in order to bring to punishment, not only them that
steal, but those that receive. I am told that open Markets are set up in this
County of Wicklow: A fat Bullock for 5 s. and a fat Sheep for 1 s. but it will
fall heavy on them at last. Divines say, That God Almighty oftentimes makes the
very Crime to become their own punishment: And I verily fear, that a few Months
will produce a Famine in this Kingdom: And what succeeds, a Pestilence, and the
worst of all Pestilences; for it is observed, that a starved Rot is the worst
of all Rots; it falls out unhappily at this Season of the Year, when the Cattle
are breeding: Under the Old Law the Jews were not to sees the Kid in the
Mother's Milk; but these unmerciful Wretches go further than that, sparing
none, but destroying old and young, the increase and all. Pray, Gentlemen,
consider of it, and search the Houses of such as you have reason to suspect,
that had not any thing to eat the last Year, go now into their Houses, and you
will find whole Carcases of. Beef powdered up; nay, it may be, for want of
Salt, or Money to buy it, lying rotting and stinking. Let me tell you, it will
be your turn next, when they have robbed and spoiled your Protestant
Neighbors, they will come to you, unless you take speedy care to prevent it.
The King has done what he can, and the Government what they can; in vain is the
Law made, if Offenders be not brought to condign punishment. You all know there
has been an Invasion in England of a Foreign Enemy, the Prince of Orange; and
the same is designed on this Kingdom: The estects of an Invasion is not known:
Defense is natural to all Kingdoms and States, and therefore the Government has
given Directions for raising a greater Army, than at any time heretofore this
Kingdom ever had: It was so among the Romans of old, who in cases of necessity
did things clear contrary to the Fundamentals of their Laws. The same necessity
has put the King on arming here; (in France they have their Ban, and with us
our Commission of Array, from sixteen to sixty) but without any design that the
effects should be to arm the Country with Half-pikes and Skeans; they are fit
indeed for the Mountains, or to guard a Man's House, but not to go abroad with
at Noonday. Gentlemen, you that are Justices of the Peace, and Officers of the
Army, where ever you meet, you ought to secure them, and bind them over, and
know by what Authority they dare go abroad with such Weapons. I need not say
any thing to you in Defense of the King, for it is really and truly your own
Defense; and therefore I shall proceed into the Heads which are prepared for
your Enquiry at this time: Our business here is like to be very great, and our
time short, and therefore I shall not trouble you with small things, we have
greater matters than Assaults and Batteries. We have Desolations and Ruins to
show you and set before you, and without your care we are like to fall into the
Gulf of Misery and Destruction. The first thing we have to speak of, is High
Treason, we have no Petty Treason in Ireland. If any shall go about to Conspire
the Death of the King, Queen, or the Heir Apparent, the Prince of Wales, this
is High Treason at all times, it was so at Common Law, you must look to this
betimes, for if a blow be once struck here, there can be no retrieving of it.
If any one shall go about to Seize the Kings Person, or Imprison him, this
Gentlemen is Treason, there is but few steps betweeen the Prisons and Graves of
Kings; and by all the observation that I can make out of the English or Scotch,
or Irish Histories, where we have had swarms of Murdered Kings, that if once
they went into Prison, they seldom ever escaped with Life. Our King has more
reason than any to dread this, his Father who now is a Glorious Martyr in
Heaven lost his life, and the King himself ever since his Escape with Colonel
Bamfield from St. James's, has had so many miraculous Deliverances both by Sea
and Land, that we may conclude he is preserved for some mighty matter, or else
Providence had not done such great things for him; and it is but of late that he
himself is escaped out of Prison. I am told by Authority, and am ordered to
tell you, that he is expected in this Kingdom very suddenly, as a Place of
Refuge. He is the first King I think, since Henry the Second, except Richard
that has been in this Kingdom. It is a great misfortune that he should be
forced to it, but we may look upon it as a great blessing, that he should think
himself safe here, when he cannot be so elsewhere.

To Seize any of the Kings Forts or Ships of War, for these are the Bulwarks to
defend him against his Enemies, this Gentlemen is Treason.

To hold Correspondence with any of the Kings Enemies, or with Rebels in actual
Rebellion, or to join with them, this is Treason; you are not to enquire into
the punishment, but to open a door for the Petty Jury to enquire into the
matter of Fact, and what the Law is, shall by the blessing of God be our
business.

To Counterfeit the Kings Coin, or Clip it, and you have very little of it at
this time, therefore you had need be careful in a more especial manner, this
likewise is Treason.

It is likewise Treason to counterfeit the Great Seal of the King, for it is the
common Security, by which many hold their Estates, and some their Lives.

The killing of the Chancellor or any of the Judges or Justices of Oyer and
Terminer in the doing of their Duty, this likewise is Treason, not so much with
regard to their persons, as to the work that they are about, they representing
the Kings Person. The meanest Constable there, if he has his Staff in his hand,
and doing his duty, he that kills him shall dye the same death, as he that
kills the best man that wears Scarlet on the Bench. Gentlemen, I must tell you
another C^ime, and it looks like a mark of Infamy on this Kingdom. Murder in
England is but Felony, but it has been thought fit to make it Treason here, and
they that go out on Burning and Robbing Houses, they shall be Indicted for
Treason. And Clerk of the Crown, if any such be here, now take notice I will
have them Indicted for Treason.

The next thing for your Enquiry is Felony, that concerning the Life of the
Subject; for a man to kill his fellow Subject, this is Felony, if he does it on
a sudden passion and heat, a man may kill another in his own defense; for it is
natural for a man to kill rather than be killed, and therefore he shall have
his Pardon of course. But Gentlemen, this is not in favor of Duels, and only
where there is a great provocation, there is not a man but has some passion
about him, but for a man to go to bed with Malice, and arise the next morning
and go meet his fellow Subject and kill him, this is Murder and Treason in
Ireland.

The next thing that is Felony, is concerning the Goods of the Subject, for an
honest Laboring Man, that by the industry of his whole Life has gotten a fair
stock for the maintenance of himself, his Wife and Children, at night goes to
bed, and next morning when he arises, he is a beggar and wants Bread.
Gentlemen, it would make every honest man's heart bleed to hear what I have
heard since I came into this County, it is ill in other parts of the Country,
but here they spare not even the wearing Clothes and Habit of Women and
Children, that they are forced to come abroad naked, without any thing to cover
their nakedness; so that besides the Oath you have taken, and the obligation of
Christianity that lies upon you as you are Christians, I conjure you by all
that is Sacred, and as ever you expect Eternal Salvation, that you make
diligent Enquiry, let it never be said by any of you, that it was your
Neighbor, or your Neighbors Servant did it, and you are sorry for it, but
will not trouble your selves, I tell you it is every man's business, and I
beseech you look into it.

To break into any man's House after night fall is Felony, it is a sound sleep
that the Laboring man takes, but the idle Rogue that lies lurking and sleeping
all the day, at night he arises and seeks whom he may devour. If you were to do
the most Charitable Work, as building of a Bridge or Chapel, or mending a
Highway, how many do you think of these men with half Pikes and Skeines would
come to your assistance, not one of them He engage. But if a House or Town be
to be Plundered, they all run thither. All Riots and Routs are to be enquired
into, numbers of People may meet for their own defense, if they should hear or
see the Country Robbing and Spoiling. By a riotous Multitude coming to Burn
and Rob their Houses, in this case they may meet and desend their Goods, and
apprehend the Robbers, in order to bring them to Justice; but after all this,
they are not to contest with the Government, nor do any thing to the prejudice
of that; I told you, I would not trouble you with unnecessary matters, all are
lost in the greatest of Crimes and Outrages that are committed daily in the
Country round about.

If I should go through all the Heads of this Charge, it would take up more
time than we have to spend here, and therefore I shall shut up all and say no
more than this, that every man do apply himself to his Husbandry and Tillage,
to prevent that imminent danger of an approaching Famine, that seems to be
coming upon us, and that you make it your business to search after, and bring
to Judgment those Robbers that live on the Mountains, and while you continue to
do your duty, you shall have all the Protection the Government can give you. So
upon complaint of any Justice of the Peace, that shall be backward or unwilling
to appear against them, care shall be taken to punish such and make them
Examples. Go together Gentlemen, and consider of these things.

The Prisoners brought into Court. Clerk of the Crown. Set John Price to the
Bar, Tho. King to the Bar, W. Lewis, James Beacon, William Heatly, Tho.
Buroughs to the Bar, etc.

Hold up your Right Hands.


Cl. John Price, Tho. King, etc. You stand here Indicted for that you on the
25th day of February, in the 5th Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King
James the Second, at Ballindery in the County of Wicklow, with diverse others
wicked Traitors and Rebels, in a warlike manner, then and there did assemble
your selves, and a cruel and open War and Rebellion against our Sovereign Lord
the King, and his faithful Subjects of this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland,
did Raise and Levy, and did intend our Sovereign Lord the King to Death and
Destruction, to bring, and to Depose him from his Kingly Authority and
Government of this his Kingdom of Ireland, and to fulfill and accomplish this
your said traitorous Intentions and Designs, you the said Persons, with others
the said wicked Traitors and Rebels, the Day, Year, and Place aforesaid, did
arm your selves with diverse Warlike Weapons, as well offensive as defensive;
and did move and excite diverse others the Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the
King, to join themselves wickedly and traitorously, against the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the Duty of your Allegiance, and the Statute in
that Case made and provided, etc.


Cl. How say thou John Price, art thou guilty of the Treason that thou
stand here Indicted, etc. or Not Guilty?


Mr. Price. Not Guilty.


Cl. Culprit. How will thou be Tried?


Prisoner. By God and the Country.


Cl. God send you a good deliverance.


Note. The Prisoners were brought into Court in several parties, to be
Arraigned, as many as the Dock would hold at one time. The second time the Dock
was filled. Cl. Cr. Set Will. Fulham to the Bar, etc.

Thady Birne, the High Sheriff, stood up and said, My Lord, Fulham was cleared.


Bar. Lynch. Pray, Sir, who cleared him?


High Sheriff. The Chief Commissioned Officer that was here, Coll. Sheldon did
acquit him.


Lynch. He acquit him, how could that be? If there be nothing against him, we
shall acquit him.


J. Keating. Clerk of the Crown, Is he Indicted?


Cl. Yes, My Lord, a Bill of Indictment is found against him.

Pendergrass the Sub-Sheriff. My Lord, I will tell you, Mr. Sheriff is
mistaken; there was some Boys discharged, and he thinks Fulham is one of those
Boys.


Lynch. Sir, you do well to reflect on your Imployer.

High Sheriff to the Sub-Sheriff. You have done this to get Money for your
self: My Lord, Fulham was not concerned at all, and therefore was discharged.

Prisoner Lewis. My Lord, we are so crowded with a File of Musketeers and a
Searjant, that they take up our Chairs, that we cannot sit down; and they come
with their lighted Matches to our very Noses, and last Night a Piece went off
in the Room among us, we have not the convenience of quiet Repose, nor our
Friends the liberty of seeing us. My Lord, we were not born Lawyers, and
therefore desire we may have our Friends come to us, and Counsel to advise with.

This Lewis and Lord Galmoy are Brother and Sisters Children, and was offered a
Troop if he would turn Papist.

J. Keating. Mr. Lewis, you have been bred to the Law; but you shall have
Council allowed you; And you, Mr. Sheriff, you are not to keep them with
Firearms, nor with Soldiers. I saw a Centry at this Door yesterday, and
forbad it -- I remember that when Warren, Jephson, and Thompson were Tried in
1663. for a Design to surprise Dublin-Castle, because this was a great matter,
forsooth, they must be Guarded with Soldiers -- (They were Tried at the King's
Bench; and several Persons, desirous to see or hear, being gotten up into the
Arch in the Wall next the Court of Common Pleas,) as they were going up stairs,
a Piece went off, and shot a Man through the Head. I tell you, Mr. Sheriff,
that Brown Bill is your Guard (pointing at one in Court) the Law knows nothing
of Firearms; (speaking to the Prisoners) Gentlemen, I must tell you plainly,
that I received Directions from my Lord Deputy (by the Attorney General) that
you should have all the Justice imaginable.


Bar. Lynch. Mr. Sheriff, you must Command those Soldiers to be civil, they
are your Guards when you employ them.

Seventy Prisoners were Arraigned and returned back to Prison; 31 more that
were Indicted, and upon Bail, did not appear. Next day -- Thursday March 7th.
they were again brought to Court to their Trial; and the Jury was Impannell'd,
whose Names were as follows, Papists marked thus Viz. Thomas Cowdell. Phillip
Cradock. John Pew. Alexander Higden. Christopher Talbot. Garret Birne. Dudley
Keogh. John Keogh. David Tool. James White. Darby Tool. Garret Harold. Daniel
Birne. Patrick Mac Donnel. Patrick O Donnelly. Christopher Birne. Daniel Powel.
Richard Jonston. Theophilus Higgens. Nicholas Wall. Charles Tool. Anthony
Archer. Charles Birne. Cornelius Kenan. Tho. Elliot. Richard Baker. Thady
Birne. Francis Tute. James Moore. Hugh Birne. Bryan O Neal. Dennis Cullen.


Jailer, set the Prisoners to the Bar.


Cl. Cr. You good Men that are to Try the several Issues between the King and
John Price, etc. and other Prisoners at the Bar, that shall be given you in
Charge, etc. Jury, look at the Prisoners; Prisoners, look at the Jury, etc.


Cl. Cr. Thomas Cowdell, to the Book.


Prisoner Lewis. I Challenge him.


Cl. What is your Cause of Challenge?


Lewis. I Challenge him peremptorily.


Deputy K's. Council, Fitz-Patrick. My Lord, before they begin their
Challenges, let us know whether they will all agree in their Challenges;
otherwise we must be forced to Try them severally.

It was at length agreed, That if any one made a peremptory Challenge, the
other Prisoners were to be satisfied with it.
Coll. Tool en the Bench, speaking to L. Chief Just. Keating, My Lord, Mr.
Lewis has been Sub-Sheriff of the County, and knows all that have Freeholds.


J. Keating. It is the better for himself that he does know them.

Prisoner Lewis, continued to Challenge, until they had gone through the
Panel, and only two Gentlemen that were Protestants, Mr. Cradock, and Mr. Pew,
were Sworn.


Cl. Cr. Mr. Sheriff, a New Panel. -- The Sheriff gave in another of Eleven in
number, which were all likewise challenged by Mr. Lewis. -- Whilst both the
High and Sub Sheriff were looking about the Court, for to make up a third
Panel. Says


L. J. Keating. Mr. Sheriff, How many Freeholders have you on the Grand Jury?


Sheriff. Six, or Seven, My Lord.


J. Keating. You have been sparing enough of your Freeholders. The Law requires
that all the Grand Jury should be Freeholders, and have you but six?


Sheriff. -- There is but very few Freeholders in the County, My Lord.


C. Fitz Patrick. -- In Cases of necessity, My Lord.


J. Keating. You know the Law is so.


C. Fitz-Patrick. Yes, there is a Stature for it.


J. Keating. -- The Prisoner for his Life may challenge Twenty peremptorily,
without showing cause; and the whole World for want of Freehold. -- And shall I
put such a one on for his Life? Sir, I will not be hanged for any Body.


Fitz-Patrick. Was ever a Judge hanged?

Mr. Handcock, Council for the Prisoners. Yes, above twenty in a few Years.


J. Keating. Mr. Fitz-Patrick, I will not be hanged with Justice Belknap, nor
Tressilian neither.


C. Handcock. My Lord, they were hanged at Tyburn.


J. Keating. I think they were. -- The greatest part of this County is in the
hands of two or -- three Men, my Lord Strafford and Ross.


J. Keating. Who is here that is concerned for my Lord Strafford, and my Lord
Ross.


Court. Here is Dr. Hall on the Bench, for the Lord Strafford, and the Sheriff
is concerned for my Lord Ross.


J. Keating. Dr. Hall, and you Mr. Sheriff, let me tell you, I do not know but
that their Lordships have forfeited their Estates, for this day's work. -- In
the Act for Plantation, there was provision made for Freeholds, and there were
enough before the Wars. I fear these great Lords have swallowed up the
Freeholds their Ancestors made. I only tell you this.

The Sheriff by this time had drawn up a third Panel, being eight in number,
J. Keating. Mr. Sheriff, have you all your Freeholders here.


Sheriff. My Lord, we summoned all here.


J. Keating. On the first Panel you might have Returned forty, because you do
not know how far Peremptory Challenges will run; and you are obliged after to
Return a fewer Number when you enlarge your Panel, but you can never enlarge
it farther than it was at first.


Cl. Cr. Birne, to the Book.


Pris. Lewis. I Challenge him for want of Freehold.


J. Keating. Mr. Birne, have you a Freehold in this County?


Birne. My Lord, I have a Lease of Lives.


Pris. Westland. I Challenge him peremptorily.


Bar. Lynch. What, Sir, do you begin to Challenge? This shall not be allowed
you, to Challenge one upon another.


C. Hancock. My Lord, you are Council for the Prisoners.


Lynch. Sir, you are not to tell me my Duty; I will have you to know, Sir, I
shall give an Account for my self. I am Judge for the King too, as well as
Council for the Prisoners; and I am concerned for the King.


J. Keating ( Turning toward him.) And do you think I am not concerned as well
as you?


Lynch. Yes, my Lord, I speak for you as well as my self.


Coun. Fitzpatrick. My Lord, they agreed at first, that one Man should
Challenge for them all -- At this rate we are never like to get a Jury for
them; it is but an ill sign of their Innocence, that they are not willing to
come to a Trial.


Mr. Handcock, Council for the Prisoners. In the Peremptory Challenges they
agreed (but not in the Challenges for Freehold) and this peremptory Challenge
we will stand by.


J. Keating. I will tell you how I understood it; that in their Peremptory
Challenges, if any one of them Challenged, the rest should be concluded by it;
Mr. Westland has made a Peremptory Challenge, and they are willing to stand by
that -- however, Mr. Birne, stand by, do not go away, we may call you again.
Clerk of the Crown, proceed, -- etc. -- which he did, until he ended the Third
Panel.


Sub-Sheriff calls. Will. Baker. My Lord, he has a Freehold.


Baker. My Lord, I have no Freehold.


Keating. You see the Sub-Sheriff is a fit Man to be an Officer; he is blind --
he is indifferent.


High Sheriff calls. Peter Ayris. An. He is on the Grand Jury.


Keating. Mr. Sheriff, why do you call such?


Sheriff. I saw him in Court, and so I called him, my Lord.


J. Keating. There is already but five Peremptory Challenges made, so that they
may Challenge fifteen more peremptorily; and there is but two Sworn, so that
there wants ten.


Cl. Cr. Sheriff, see if you can get any more.


Sheriff. I see never a Freeholder in the Court.


Coun. Fitzpatrick. My Lord, the Sheriff ought to be punished for his Neglect.


Bar. Lynch. Sir, why did you not take care to Return a Jury of Freeholders?
You shall be Fined for it.


High Sheriff. My Lord, I have Returned all the Freeholders there is in the
County (I sent yesterday above Twenty Miles for one Gentleman here;) They are
all gone out of the Country; -- I hope you do not expect I should go to the
North, or Isle of Man, or England, or Scotland, among the Rebels, to Summon
them.


J. Keating. I do really believe you, Mr. Sheriff, you have done like an honest
Man; -- Mr. Fitzpatrick, what do you say in this Case?


Fitzpatrick. My Lord, I cannot tell what to say.


Deputy King's Coun. Hamond. What if there was not one Freeholder in the
County, must not Justice be done?


J. Keating. Can we make a Law for it?


Hamond. My Lord, I know that in case of an Ejectment, a Trial has been removed
from one County to another.


J. Keating. Can you by Law go to another County in case of Life?


Hamond. It appears there is not sufficient Freeholders in this County, the
Lands being in some few hands.


J. Keating. You know the Law is otherwise, and what will you have us, that are
Judges, do? Pray tell us, Sir, what you would be at?


Hamond. We would have it removed to the next County, or another County.


J. Keating. For Gods sake, Mr. Hamond, do not put us on making Law.


Lynch. Mr. Hamond, when did you hear that ever a Matter Capital was tried in a
Foreign County? In matters Civil, by Rule of Court, or Order of Chancery it may
be, but of a Capital Offense it was never known; and we are by our Commission
to Try Offenses committed against the Law in the Counties where the Fact was
committed. -- We must Try them in this County, and cannot remove them from one
County to another.


J. Keating. Mr. Hamond, because I would take you off this new Law that you so
much insist on, that in case of an Ejectment it may be Tried in a Foreign
County -- I tell you it cannot be Tried in a Foreign County: We have no Law for
it but that of K. James, and the Reason was, because of the Story that was here
on foot, for an Heir Male, if Collateral he carried it against the Heir
general. K. James he gave direction that in that case it should be Tried in a
different County. And that my Brother tells you of Trying in a different
County, by order of Chancery is this. A person comes in Chancery, and he
suggests, that such an one was too potent in such a County, and therefore he
desired it might be Tried in an indifferent County, or get such a Rule of Court
on such a suggestion. And this was the case of the Archbishop of --, when he
was Bishop of Limerick. And if Walcot might be believed, he said, was the
occasion of his running into Rebellion.


C. There is a Case in Hobart, etc.


J. Keating. I would undeceive you in that particular. As in the Case of Austen
and Colonel Garret Moor. If in the County of Gallaway it was Austens, if in
the Kings County it was Colonel Moors. So that you see in disputable Cases, the
Law has regard, that it be Tried by Juries in proper Counties. And truly I
think it one of the most reasonable Laws in the world, that a man shall be
Tried by his Country, by the Neighborhood; and it has given ground to a good
English Proverb, He that has an ill Name is half Hanged. A Man's Repute among
his Neighbors goes a great way in this matter. When his Neighbors shall say
they never knew ill by him. And this Man to be carried out of the County of
Wicklow, to be Tried at Wexford, you may by the same rule bring a Jury from
Tyrone, or the farthest part of Connaught. There is nothing like what you say
in the Law.


Hamond. I do not say that ever I met with such a thing in the Law.


Lynch. And do you think that we will make the President.


Hamond. That two or three persons should have almost the whole County.


J. Keating. Before God I believe they think they have little enough, whatever
you may think of their having too much.


Lynch. What you say Mr. Hamond, if there be any thing in it, we shall advise
with all the Judges. The Judges declaring their Opinion, that the Prisoners
after being Arraigned, could not be admitted to Bayl.


C. Suxborough, to Baron Lynch. My Lord, you took Bayl for Captain Ruth at
Kilkenny, after his Arraignment.


Bar. Lynch. What, Sir, do you reflect on me? There was no Evidence appeared,
and my Brother bayled him as well as I.


Suxborough. I say he was Bayled.


Hancock. My Lord, Mr. Cooper at Galaway was Bayled by your Lordship likewise.


C. J. Kenting sent privately to Dublin to the Deputy, acquainting him, that if
they were left in prison until the next Assizes, they would certainly perish,
they having lost all they had, and the County was not able to maintain them;
upon which he received Orders to Bayl all but Seven of the Principal, viz. John
Price Esquire Tho King. Richard Westland. William Lewis. James Bacon. Joseph
Crichley. George Crichley.


Who are kept close Prisoners in order to their Trial the next Assizes, which
will be in this Month of July. Upon the taking these Gentlemen Prisoners, the
Soldiers and Rabble plundered and spoiled all the English Families in
Balinderry, Redrum, Balina-Clash, etc. and the Irish Women with their Skeanes
came afterward and stripped the Women and Children Naked, leaving them in a most
miserable and deplorable condition, having not left them either Bread, or any
Food in several Towns, but carried all away with them. And as an Irish man a
Tanner declared to several at the Assizes, in the hearing of this Relator, That
one Captain Tool had for his share Twenty six Horse Loads (or more) of
Plunder; and the Lord of Lowths Troop of Dragoons that were quartered in
Wicklow Town, had great quantities of Woollen and Linen Cloth, Women's Clothes,
Pewter and other Goods in abundance. But the L. C. J. Keating coming there to
the Assizes, and having an account of the extreme poverty and misery the
Protestants thereabouts were reduced to, did encourage their Petitioning, and
where they could find their Clothes, etc. he endeavored to help them in the
recovery of them. And Mr. Richard Lamb having Ten fat Bullocks taken away by
Colonel Tools men, and brought to Wicklow, and there killed and eaten by the
Soldiers. He preferred a Petition to the Court, Colonel Tool being present on
the Bench.


L. C. J. Keating. Colonel Tool you heard the Petition read, do you know any
thing of these Oxen Mr. Lamb had taken from him by your Soldiers.


C. Tool. My Lord, I will tell you how it was; Mr. Lamb had sold the Bullocks
to Mr. Price, and as they were driving them to Balinderry, the Soldiers met
them and took them away.


L. C. J. Keating. But Mr. Lamb was at home at his own House, and not at
Balinderry, the Bullocks were to be paid for upon Mr. Lambs delivering them to
Mr. Price at Balinderry, your Soldiers took them away from his Servant several
miles from Balinderry; I see no reason why Mr. Lamb should not be paid for them.


C. Tool. My Lord, Colonel Sheldon came down soon after with the Kings Army,
and I advised with him, and he ordered they should be killed for the Army,
which was done accordingly.


L. C. J. Keating. Pray Colonel Tool however, Mr. Lamb ought to be paid for
them; he was not concerned with Balinderry, but kept his own House.


Council Fitzpatrick. My Lord, his House was a Garrison too?


Mr. Hancock. For shame Mr. Fitzpatrick, a Thatcht Gabin a Garrison; I find you
are for making all Protestants Rebels that live peaceably at home in their own
Houses.


C. Tool. My Lord, I have no more to say to the matter.


Clerk of the Crown. Calling over the Gentlemen of the County, called one --
Savil Gent.


Savil. Here I am, my Lord, God knows, a poor Gentleman, being Robbed of all,
and not a penny left me to buy a pint of drink.


L. C. J. Keating. Pray Sir when were you Robbed?


Savil. The last Wednesday they came and took away what little they had left
untaken before, my Wife and Childrens Clothes, Robbing me of all.


L. C. J. Keating. Pray Sir, what value may your loss be?


Mr. Savil. Truly my Lord, I have not yet computed my loss, but they have taken
away all; I desire your Lordship will discharge me from attending the Court,
for I have not where withal to subsist while I am here.


L. C. J. Keating. Sir, I am sorry for you, I discharge you.


L. C. J. Keating. Colonel Tool, Let the Officers be sent for into Court, to
here this Proclamation read, that is sent down here by the Government.


Tool. My Lord, they are here most of them, here is Captain Archbold, Captain
Tool, etc.


Clerk of the Crown. Read the Proclamation, the substance where of was, That
they should restore the Protestants such of their Horses again, as were not sit
for the Kings Service, etc.


J. Keating. Calls for it from the Clerk, and giving it to Colonel Tools hand,
who stood next him on the Bench, Sir, Pray take this Proclamation, and I hope
you will take care that obedience be given to it.


Tool. My Lord, we have received other Orders, Colonel Sheldon who is our
Chief Commander, has given directious to have them kept for Draught for
Carriages.


J. Keating. Nay, Sir, if Colonel Sheldon must be obeyed before the Government,
I have no more to say, I have done.


Tool. My Lord, I shall obey it.


J. Keating. Pray then Coll. Tool, let the Horses be sent for, while that I am
here, that what Horses are not musterable may be returned: I cannot in my
Conscience go about to fine Men, for not appearing at the Assizes, when they
have not a Horse left them to ride on.


The further Proceedings at the Assizes at Wicklow, in Ireland: Being an
Account of the Trial of several Felons, etc. March the 6th and 7th, 1688/9.
SEveral were Arraigned for stealing considerable Numbers of Cows, Sheep, etc.
but the Evidence against most of them durst not appear to prosecute.

Leaghlin Birne Indicted for stealing Nine Head of Black Cattle, from one
Colwell: No Person appearing to prosecute, says,

J. Keating (to the Jury): Gentlemen, you have nothing against this Man; he was
born in the state of Innocence: But the truth is, the Parties dare not appear
against him.


Witnesses came in against Three Fellows, (viz.) Maurice Cavanagh, Edmond Poor,
William Bowland. Clerk of the Crown, Calling them to come and prosecute, and
they appearing. J. Keating. You that are Evidences against the Prisoners at the
Bar, I charge you as you will answer it before God, that you neither for favor
nor affection be inclined to spare any of these Villains; and likewise, that
you will conceal nothing of the Truth, as you will answer it at the Great Day;
for I tell you, the Cries and Groans of the poor Women and Children, and the
many Families that are ruined, and in great distress, will go up to Heaven
against you.


Evidence against Ed. Poor. My Lord, when I came to him, and asked him, why he
stole my Cows? He said, The Devil did make him do it. I spoke him fair, and he
gave me Money for my Cows.


Poor. I, my Lord, and he promised not to trouble me.


J. Keating. It was an unlawful Promise, the Law would not justify him in it;
he has done like an honest Man: If you paid the Money out of Conscience, you
did well; but I fear it was your danger of the Halter made you part with your
Money; for if 22 s. and Damnation stood in the way, I believe you would have
kept the Money: I am sure without satisfaction you cannot expect Absolution;
the Priest that gave the other Advice, for the Maddoge or Skean, will, I
suppose, tell you so.


Two Protestant Evidences against Maurice Cavenagh, for stealing several Head
of Black Cattle, hearing Judge Keating speak against Skeans, said, Evidence. My
Lord, when we seized him, we took a Skean away from him.


J. Keating. Sir, How durst you carry such an unlawful Weapon?


Cavenagh. My Lord, I am a Butcher, it was a Butchers Knife.


J. Keating. Ay, I do not question but thou can butcher upon occasion.


One Hicky spoke. My Lord, he is no Butcher; but one of the greatest Rogues in
the Country round us. I have been in pursuit of him several times.


Cavenagh. He is a Murderer, My Lord, do not believe him.


Evidence. My Lord, it was near ten Inches long, thick at the back, and sharp
point, every way a Skean.


J. Keating. Is that your Butchers Knife; you are a great Villain, for carrying
such a Weapon.


Cavenagh. I was ordered to have a Skean, my Lord.


J. Keating. Pray Sir, who ordered you?


Cavenagh. The Priest of the Parish.


J. K. A Priest, Sir, (turning to his Brother Judge) Do you hear that Brother.


Bar. Lynch. What Priest, Sir? What Priest? What is your Priest's Name?


J. K. Hold Brother. Come Sir, I shall not ask your Priest's Name; I believe
you will have occasion to see your Priest soon, to do you a better Office, then
to advise you to carry Skeans.


( And looking toward Coll. Tool, and two Priests on the Bench, next Sheriff
Birne.) J. Keating. A Priest, Gentlemen; a Priest is a Minister, and a Minister
of the Gospel, his Doctrine ought to be Peace, for the Gospel is a Doctrine of
Peace: When our Savior came into the World, Peace was proclaimed; and when he
went out of the World, he left it for a Legacy to his Disciples: My Peace be
with you. And pray Sir, tell your Priest so from me, when you see him. It is
not for Priests to arm or animate such Villains as you are for Mischief. I
shall not ask your Priest's Name.

Clancy an Irish Gent. My Lord, he belies the Priest; he is a Rogue.


Cavanagh. I do not: The Priests of every Parish did give orders to get
Half-pikes, and Skeans; and they were getting together in Companies, in every
Parish.


J. Keating. Who were they that were gotten together; such Fellows as you?


Cavanagh. No, my Lord, better Men then I; a great many that are here in Court.


The Jury withdrawing, and returning soon again, brought Poor and Bowland in
Guilty, Cavenagh Not Guilty. J. Keating. Gentlemen, you have acquitted the
greater Villain; at your Door let it lie.


The Ordinary being called to give Bowland and Poor the Book, for their Clergy.
J. Keating. Sir, I expect as true a Return from you, as if I were there my
self: The Times are so that Men must forget Bowels of Mercy. Ordinary, do your
Duty: What place do you show them?


Ordinary. My Lord, I show them the 50th Psalm.


J. Keating. Let them read the 5th Verse. -- This is an Act of Mercy; and I
know not why it should not be in Irish rather, the Country Language; it was
formerly in Latin, because the Romish Church has their Worship in Latin.


The Ordinary returned them both (Non Legit). J. Keating. You William Bowland,
and you Edmund Poor, you have been Arraigned for stealing of Cows, two several
Thefts: It is a great misfortune and sin to be guilty of such Crimes at any
time; but yours is so much the worse, because it falls in a time when there are
such general and vast Depredations in the Country; that many honest Men go to
Bed possessed of considerable Stocks of Black and White Cattle, (gotten by great
labor and pains, the Industry of their whole Lives) and in the Morning when
they arise, not any thing left them; but turned out of all, to go a begging,
all being taken away by Rebels, by Thieves and Robbers, the Sons of Violence,
that make every thing they lay their Hands on their own, on this side the Cape
of Good Hope; (where are the most brutish and barbarous People we read of)
there is none like the People of this Country; nor so great a Desolation as in
this Kingdom, at this day, any where to be found, and particularly in this
County: It is come to that pass, the a Man that looses the better part of his
Substance, choose ^ther to let that, and what he has besides go, than come to
give Evidence: And why? Because he is certain to have his House burnt, and his
Throat cut, if he appears against them. Good God! what a pass are we come to!
For what has any Man, if the stronger Hand can take it from him; it is better
to live under no Law, than in such a place. We have lived to see twenty nine
Years of Peace pass over our Heads: And I have sat on this Bench before now; I
pray God, that my lenity, and others, has not given Encouragement to these
Thieves and Robbers; there may be a Rogue in the Court, or one that is evilly
inclined (I know none) but take notice of this, the Government is at length
tired with Mercy, they see it does no good; and Examples and Punishments of
this kind, are not intended so much in a great part for the punishment of the
Offender, as for discouraging of others; to make them take warning by their
Example, that seeing what evil Courses bring Men to they may reform.

I will not take up time to tell you how the benefit of Clergy came; whether in
the room of the Cities of Refuge that were in the old times; I know that
Restitution was under the Jewish Law sufficient satisfaction; and if the Thief
could not make Restitution, he was to be sold for a slave, and the Money given
to the party. But as the world grows old, it grows worse, and those Lenitives
signify nothing for preventing Thieving and Robbery; for Thieves and Robbers
are like a Gangreen in the Commonwealth, they are worse then Drones in the
Hive. I cannot tell my self, that under the Circumstances we are in, I should
advise to pardon any that are taken in this general depredation that we are
under, and therefore you Bowland and Poor, that might have lived as safely
under the Laws, as the biggest man in the Kingdom, and none of your fellow
Subjects durst lay his hand upon you, but he was liable to answer for it; and
thus you might have lived to a fair old age, and ended your days in peace, but
you have chosen the quite contrary, for the Law provides likewise for the
punishment of wicked and offending persons, among which number you are found by
a Jury (...) Twelve able men of your Country; and therefore the Sentence of
the Law is this, That you be both and each of you taken from this place, to the
place from whence you came, and there your Irons to be struck off, and from
thence to the place of Execution, and there you shall be Hanged by the Neck
till you are Dead, and the Lord have mercy on your Souls.

And now let me give you advice, your time is short, spend it well, and flatter
not your selves with the hopes of a Reprieve or Pardon; and for you Poor, you
have shortened the work of your Life, you have gone a great way toward Heaven,
if that Restitution you made was out of Conscience. Mr. Sheriff, let them have
a Confessor sent to them, for Saturday is the day of their Execution. The Women
their friends setting up the cry in the Court.


J. Keating. They did not cry thus when the Cows were brought home to them,
they were busied then in the killing and the powdring them up.


The Copy of a Protection, or Pass, given by an Irish Officer to some Notorious
Robbers of the County of Wicklow, the Original being now in the hands of the
Bookseller in London, viz. I James Byrne, Ensign to Capt. Charles Byrne, do
hereby certify to you, Terlagh Kelly, Patrick Byrne, and Patrick Mac-Teige,
and William Doyle, to save you harmless for any Misdemeanors whatsoever.

As Witness my Hand this 24th. of April, 1689. James Byrne.



The following Letter being sent by the Lord-Deputy to the Judges of Assize,
was read in Court to the Grand Jury, etc.

By the Lord-Deputy, General, and General-Governour of Ireland.

AFter Our hearty Commendations, We Great you well. As His Majesty was
graciously pleased to entrust Us with the Government of this his Kingdom, so
upon the Invading of England, and upon receiving certain Information, that the
Prince of Orange does intend also to Invade this Realm, We have, for the
Defense thereof, raised a Considerable Army, far above what could be maintained
by the King's Revenue at the best of Times, and when the Trade of this Country
was in the most flourishing Condition; this we have done by the King's Command,
to support his Regal Authority, Crown, and Dignity, and to preserve the Lives,
Liberties, and Properties of all his Liege People within this Kingdom. And
since our Dangers are at hand, and that we may daily expect the Landing of an
Enemy, who intends the Subversion of His Majesty's Government, the total
Destruction of all his good Subjects. Here we find our selves under an absolute
Necessity to keep the King's Army still on foot, in order to our preservation
from the approaching Dangers. And though we have hitherto with all the Care and
Industry imaginable, and by the Generous Concurrence of the Officers, supported
the new-raised Forces, without being a Burden to any other of His Majesty's
People. Yet considering the decay of Trade, the great fall of the Revenue in
these distracted Times, the great Charges the Officers have been at in
subsisting their Men, it cannot be expected that the standing Forces can
hereafter be maintained without Supplies; and since the same cannot be done by
Parliament, We cannot think of a more effectual Expedient, than by voluntary
Subscriptions, by way of Loan, from the People; which, if Generously done, with
what may be made of the Revenue, may support the Army, and will stop all the
Disorders that may be committed by the Soldiers, which We shall always
endeavor to prevent with all the Care and Industry possible. By this Husbandry
may go on as formerly, and We shall be in a Capacity to form the Army so, as
that, with the Assistance of Almighty God, We do not doubt to put this Kingdom
in a perfect posture of Defense. We do therefore pray your Lordships to
Recommend this Weighty Matter effectually at the Open Assizes in every County
when you sit, to all the Inhabitants of such Counties, and to appoint the
respective Sheriffs of such Counties, to procure voluntary Subscriptions, by
way of Loan, from the Inhabitants of such Counties, of some certain Sum of
Money from each, to be subscribed to their Names, to be afterward satisfied by
them respectively, in Money, Wheat, Oats, or Oatmeal, toward the Maintenance
of the Army, to be paid in, or delivered to the respective Sheriffs, or their
Order, and in such places as the said Sheriffs shall respectively appoint, from
whom we expect an Account of their proceedings herein, and a Copy of such
Subscriptions as shall be made. We do not doubt but every True and Loyal
Subject will, according to his Ability, and the Exigency of the Subject Matter,
generously and cheerfully Contribute toward the carrying on of so Great, so
Necessary, and so Glorious a Work. We expect your Diligent Care herin, and so
We bid you heartily Farewell.

From His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the Second Day of March, 1688. Your very
Loving Friend, TYRCONNEL.


An Answer to the foregoing Letter being drawn up by the Grand Jury, and entered
into their Book, and presented to Sir Henry Lynch, setting forth the extreme
Poverty of their County, occasioned by the daily Ruin of the English, etc. That
they were not in a Capacity to subsist themselves, and therefore not capable to
raise any thing considerable for the Army; (Chief Justice Keating returning to
Dublin, and leaving Baron Lynch to go on to the other Counties, etc.) the said
Lynch told the Grand Jury before he discharged them, that the Writing they had
drawn up, was a Reflection and Scandal to their Country, would be taken very
ill by the Government, and did not question but it would be brought in
hereafter as an Evidence against them; and therefore Ordered it should be torn
out of the Book, which was done accordingly.

A Gentleman, taken by Sheriff Power and the Irish Army, with the rest of the
Prisoners Condemned at Gallaway, having made his Escape for England, writ the
following Letter to a Friend his Relation.

Dear Brother,
THE Excuse that I offer for my not writing, is this, That my thoughts were so
taken up, what with the Misery I apprehended my poor helpless Father, Mother,
Wife, and Children (which are all dear almost alike to me) were in, and an
endeavor to procure some Employ, whereby I should keep them, if they could
make their Escape, and my self from perishing; God is All-sufficient, who, I
doubt not, will provide for us, if we make but a right use of our Afflictions.
It was my Fortune to meet with some Friends, that promised, the first Men that
should be raised, to procure me some Employ; but when that will be, is so
uncertain, and to live a Drone amongst my Friends (who are almost in the same
Circumstance with my self) I looked upon to be so much below a Man, that I chose
rather to List my self a private Sentinel, whereby I proposed to be in the Road
(if my Friends missed) to hew out some Preferment in the mean time: As to my
private Condition, since it pleases God to bless me with Health, I hope to rest
satisfied. Yet I entertain hopes of a merry Hunting-Bout of my Countrymen, of
which Sport I had a little relishing taste, which serves to sharpen a greedy
Stomach, that longs to Revenge the Murder of my dear Sister Burdett, and their
Outrages to my Friends.

I never knew what Sorrow was, till I had the Account of my Sister's Death at
that dismal Gate of Liscarrol; it seemed such to me, for while I staid at it, I
made my Observation that there was not the least noise, as if all were dead.
The Apprehension of which did so overwhelm me, that often on the Road (not
thinking what I did) I burst out into Exclamations, charging my self with being
the Occasion of bringing my poor Aged Father, Mother, Wife, and Family, if not
to an untimely Death, yet to Sorrow and Misery; which (to aggravate the Crime)
I looked upon to be the worst Condition of the two. When I reached Moyallow,
though many endeavored to divert me, and I apprehended they might apply it to my
Cowardice, yet I was not able to lift up my Spirits, but being put to Bed,
where I had the benefit of an hours troublesome sleep. The next Morning I
resolved to think of nothing but Revenge, but having an Account of Captain
Boiles surrendering, which left us without hopes of making any Head in Munster,
Sir Thomas Southwell, Capt. Purdon, and about one hundred more of us resolved
to make our way to Sligoe. The first day we met with no Opposition, and at
Night Baited at a Widdow's House about six or ten Miles from Lymerick, where we
staid for three or four hours, then mounting with the Moon, we marched on;
early next Morning Capt. Mills overtook us with a Party of Horse, soon after
riding near a strong Castle, with a large Bawn well walled in, we understood it
was fortified by English, where we took an Opportunity to Refesh our Horses,
upon which their went a Rumor, that my Lord of Clare had taken the Castle,
which made the Sparks of the Country think them happiest that could reach us
first, to share in the Plunder. Having Advice of it, we drew up near the Gate,
to receive about 20 Horse, that were Riding full Speed to us; but when they
perceived the Mistake, they hung their Ears, tamely suffering us to disarm and
dismount them; but at the Request of the Garrison, who were loath to leave
their Families; and understanding by us the state of the Country, which might
well make them despair of holding out, that they might fare the better, we
returned both Horses and Arms. Thence we marched toward Brians-Bridge, the
Roads being very bad, we rid scattering, the Front at least a Mile from the
Rere, which a Party of Dragoons perceiving, lay in Ambush, and as we moved by,
they made about 12 Shot at us altogether, which by God's Providence did no
hurt, most of us that were there being armed with Back, Breast, and
Head-pieces, but we soon answered them in their own Language, each Man siring
both his Pistols and Carbine, before we stired out of the place, which proved
fatal to some of them, two being killed, and a third wounded, which made the
rest imagine we were angry, and rudely, without begging our Pardon, they run
away, but (to little purpose) we imprudently hunted them for 2 or 3 hours,
their Horses being fresh, they got off clear, only one of our Bullers happening
to overtake the Cornet's Horse, gave his Master an Opportunity to exercise his
Feet for 3 or 4 Miles with us. The next Opposition we met with, was at the
Bridge in the County of Clare, the end of it being fortified with a strong
Gate, and near it two Houses that commanded each side, but the Cowardly
Soldiers were easily persuaded to set it open, upon our promise that we would
do them no hurt, but on the other hand they were threatened (if they did not) to
be cut with the Gate in pieces. Thence we made toward Killalow, where a
Company of Foot was quartered; when they perceived us coming near, they would fain
have fortified themselves in the Cathedral, but the poor old Bishop refused the
Key, for which I fear he has sufficiently suffered. Then they bethought
themselves to send a Messenger to know what we would be at: Our Answer was,
that we designed to hurt none that desired to be peaceable, which they made a
promise to be, whereupon we did resolve to make that our Stage for that Night,
so that every man's business was only to find the best Quarters he could for
himself and his Horse. 'Twas my luck to hit where I met a Friend, and yet a
Papist, who was extremely importunate that I should wave the thoughts of going
any further on my Design urging that he did not doubt to make such Friends as
would protect me and mine with our substance; but if I would not be ruled, my
Undertaking was so rash, that he feared the next would be of my being hanged or
killed among the rest. My reply (with thanks for his kindness) was, that I
would make even that Doom my choice, rather than it should be said, I flinched
for fear; still he was more urgent, till in short, I gave him to understand, I
was so far from having any thoughts of returning home (where I thought I could
be no better than a pissing-post to every Cur) that if I were at that instant
there, I would make it my business if I could find out any possibility of
compassing it, to overtake the Party I was then in. Then finding how I was
bent, he charged me not to offer to stay there that Night, for that,
notwithstanding his Promise, the Captain sent an Express to Lymerick, and that
he did not question but about Midnight they would be upon us, which when I
acquainted Sir Thomas with, we resolved upon a further march; while some were
getting ready, others took occasion to disarm a Guard that had the Bishop's
Horses in their Custody, which trouble we eased them of, Mr. Hawkins the
Clergy-mans Brother, and some of the Bishop's Servants went along with us. The
Arms, according to our Promise, we returned, and taking the Bishop's Blessing,
we went that Night to Mr. Purdon's near the Shannon-side; as soon as we
alighted, I advised Sir Thomas to procure a trusty Servant of the House to go
to Killalow to give us an account if there should any follow us thence, and
then Will. Southwell and I stole to bed, but as soon as we had the benesit of
the Moon, we made ready to move forward, fearing that our Enemies should break
Scarriff-Bridge, there being a Company of them in Tomgreny-Castle. Next day
James Power, who is High Sheriff of the County of Galloway, having an Account
the day before of our march that way, he raised the Country, and riding out
upon the Hills as a Spy, perceived how our Men, as well as our Horses, were
almost beaten out, and how we were at a loss for the Road, which made him so
kind, as to place Guides (for they secured what English there were in the
Country) but with directions to carry us to a certain Pass, where not above two
could ride at a time, near which they lined a Ditch on the right hand with a
Company of Foot, on the other, behind a rising ground, lay another Company, in
the midst against the Pass they drew up a Trcop of Horse with some Volunteers;
when they were perceived by us at a distance, we resolved to put the best face
on it that we could, and when we came up to the Spot, we drew up and shouted,
which made the Volunteers flinch back, and some run quite away. They made
Proposals of a Composition, which at sirst were refused, but upon second
thoughts, considering (our Horses being so harrassed) the best way was to fight
on foot, and that when our shot should be spent, the Rabble (who were at least
2000) would be worse upon us than those of the Army. We agreed to the
Conditions, which were these, That we should deliver all our Horses and Arms
that were Musterable, except those that the Gentlemen among us then rid, and
their Pistols and Swords; and that our Servants should have sufficient Nags
given them instead of theirs, and that they should give us Passes, and procure
us Protections, and send us a Convoy, if desired. The Gray Horse was so beaten,
that I was forced to alight, and lead him to the Front, where I was resolved to
appear, though on foot, but there were but few in the Company that performed so
well, till about half an hour before the Rabble falling upon our Rere, (some of
them being so besotted for want of Rest, that they fell off their Horses) they
shot one Morgan Williams in the Head, who lately was a Student in
Dublin-Coliedge, whereupon Lieutenant Chinnery, my self, and about half a dozen
more of us faced about, and making at them, they run away, being at lest 400 in
Number, in which pursuit, the poor Gray, making what speed he could in a stony
place, came down on all Four with such force, what with the weight of my Iron
Doublet, Cap, and other Lumber, that I thought he had broken all his Bones as
well as mine, but I soon scrambling up, gave him my helping hand, which was
hardly sufficient to get him on his feet, for he was almost quite spoiled with
it: When I have the same advantage of my Countrymen (which I do not yet
despair of) I Will return you as good or better Horses than your own, with thanks
in the mean time, the latter is all the Reward I can give you. That Night, for
Convenience of Lodging, we went to Loghreagh, which was their Quarters, where
we slept without Rocking. The next day, instead of a Convoy, they secured us
with strong Guards at the Gates, flattering us that they dared not let us go
till they knew the pleasure of the Government, and that they would write by
their Quartermaster so favorably on our behalf, that they did not in the
least question, but that our Conditions should be performed to a tittle; but I
soon smelt out their Treachery, which made me resolve to venture on making my
Escape while I had the Liberty of the Town, but my Friends often dissuaded me
from it, still hoping the best, and judging it both hazardous and impossible to
be done, for that the very Countrymen, as well Irish as English, could not
stir a Mile without Passes. The fourth day I could not brook the haughty looks
of the Villains any longer, which made me resolve to go on with my Design that
Evening; but about half an hour before the appointed time, unexpectedly one
Mahony, who is now a Captain in the Army, altogether a stranger to me,
whispered me in the Ear, that he would carry me off to Sir Henry Waddington's,
who engaged him so to do, being formerly his Servant. I was glad to carry my
Captain's Coat under my Arm, and lead his Horses out of the Gate, which I
looked on to be the best Employment that ever I had; but while I was at Sir
Henry's I had the Honor to pass for the Captain's Cousin, and by his Name. I
had several narrow escapes afterward, which would be too tedious to write. In
three or four days after from Sir Henry's I had the sad Prospect of my Friends
march toward Galloway-Goal, who, as I was credibly told, had severe Usage, and
were all Condemned to be Hanged and Quartered, but the late K. James Landing
about that time, their Execution was deferred, but it proved no benefit to one
Brown, a Gentleman of a 100 l. a Year near Moyallow; he was of our Company, but
the last State-day we had, whether his Horse tired, or he had a desire to run
all hazards with his Wife and six Children, which he left behind, making his
way homeward, he was taken, and sent to Lymerick, from thence to Cork, where
the first Gracious Act the King did, was to see him Hanged and Quartered.
However at the Request of some Friends he strained his Conscience to grant Sir
Thomas and the rest a Reprieve, which was sent to Galloway by John Raines, a
Merchant of Mayallow, who was employed by the Gentlemen to follow the King to
Dublin, with Letters to their Friends to make Interest for their Pardons. He
happily took Cloghstokin in his way, where I was preferred fortunately to his
Service, and gravely carried his Cloak-bag behind me to Dublin. The Imbargo
being taken off, the first fair Wind I set Sail, and just as I was ready to go,
I met a Friend that told me Mr. Handcock was in Town, and that he desired to
see me, which immediately I made my business, and finding him in his Chamber,
was very civilly received by him, but we had not many words together, because
of other Friends that flocked in, some with the News of fresh Losses in his
Stock, which he gave a patient Ear to, declaring, that he did not reckon upon
any as his own. My time being short, I told him, that I came just to kiss his
Hand, and that if I made any stay, I should lose my Passage. Then taking my
leave, he went to the Stair-head, where he kindly pressed two Guineas upon me,
saying, That of a little I must take a little, for that he judged my hurry from
home might hinder me from providing Money. 'Twas a seasonable Kindness, and
shall never be forgot, whilst he lives, that is unfeignedly

Your Affectionate Brother, T. W.


A LIST of those Protestant Gentlemen that are Prisoners at Gallaway, and who
entered their Plea (Non Cull) but afterward withdrew the same, and submitted to
the Mercy of the late K. James; and were condemned accordingly, March. 18.
1688/9.
SIR Thomas Southwell, Bar. Tho. Mylls. Tho. Ponsonby. John Ponsonby. William
Gunn, Sen. Richard Gunn. William Gunn, Jun. John Blenerhasset. Robert Foulkes.
Thomas Badham. Arthur Dillon. Bartholemew Gibbons. Stephen Palms. John Morris.
Thomas Purdon. Jasper Coxe. James Howard. Abraham Cokely. John Toppin. Caleb
Cokely. Jonnthan Bowls. Abraham Mylls. John Watkins. John Wilkinson. Richard
Conran. William Southwell. John Sandys. Edward Percivall. Thomas Creed.
Nicholas Eyres. Thomas Busted. Oliver Walsh. Tho. Salmon. Garret Foulks. Daniel
Hood. John Chinery, Sen. Robert Bradley. Christopher Ely. James Roberts. George
Foulks. James Keating. Roger Atkins. Andrew Nash. Robert Toppin. Francis Wise.
John Sanders, Sen. John Sanders, Jun. Robert Hern. Edward Raymond. John Atkins.
Benjamin Deacon. Nicholas Owens. John Benson. Tho. Benson. John Tedder. John
Raynes. Aaron Stiff. John Threadway. John Butt. Bartholemew Purdon. Charles
Norcutt. Tho. Fawkins. Stephen Catts. Richard Frankinson. James Balf. William
Sanders. Robert Conran. Richard Waglin. John Maning. Edward Pomroy. James Cane.
John Crow. John Green. Joseph Me. Thomas Allen. George Allen. Joseph Whiting.
Thomas Comins. Valentine Tailor. George Woodman. Richard Pennall. John
Sandford. Tho Collis. Christopher Holmes. Christopher Hilliard. James Huggins.
William Walker. Richard Summers. Nathan. Rowles. John Colvin. John Whitaker.
Robert Pheby. Edward Sanders. Peter Raynes. Joseph Barnes. Richard Chinnery.
Nicholas Chinnery. Walter Ross. John Salmon. William Salmon. William Do.
George Ridly. John George. Roger Long. Tho. Lachford. Richard Choppin. Tho.
Williams. Hugh Lawson. Matthew Choppin. Matthew Couch. John Brooks. David
Fitzgerald. Tho. Blenerhasset. Luke Thomas. John Smith. Nicholas Conner. Robert
Pope. John Laundy. Robert Robinson. Michael Daly. Henry Parr. John Frith. John
Bagnor. Edward Oliver. Chistopher Oliver. Joseph Watkins. William Howes.
Richard Simmons. Daniel Doer. John Hooper. John Collyer. Henry Portway. William
Gibson. Peter Bailey. Matthew Thompson. George Hall. Henry Thomas. John Thomas.
William Ally. Thomas Casey. William Uppington. John Fowler. George Harding.
Phillip Burke. William Williamson. William Gee. John White. John Norcott.
Bartholemew Horn. Robert Leven. George Bryan. Simon Grissith. James Graham.
William Atkins. William Armor. John Flynn. William Sanders. Phillip
Whittington. Charles Daly. Tho. Curtiss. Richard Curtiss. William Coxe. Hugh
Whitlock. Francis Barnet. Tho. Raynes. William Victory. Henry Perry. Thomas
Gibbs. Samuel Carter. Ralph Emerson. William Frye. Bennet Beasly. George Lane.
John Ettris. John Hull. Tho. Thompkins. Nathaniel Daniel. William Cask. John
Lewis. William Rice. Tho. Stringer. Phillip Teckly. William Sawyer. Daniel
Kelahar. Tho. Lane. John Backhouse. Tho. Andrews. Hugh Caly. Anthony Mackcoagh.
Joseph Allen. Tho. Casy. Nicholas Purdon. Joseph Purdon. Katherine Gunn. Tho.
Moor. Joseph Martyn. John Morgan. Tho. Warner.
The Four last named Persons escaped; and Mrs. Katherine Guna (Wife to William
Guun, Junior; and Daughter to Colonel Townfeed) was Acquitted, because she
accompanied her Husband, (though mounted and armed as the rest of the Party
were). And when the Enemy appeared so numerous, Captain Mylls telling them:
Gentlemen, We have the Sw^rd before, and the Gallows behind: She courageously
seconded him; giving her Advice, Rather to Fight, and Die honorably, than to
submit to the Mercy of their perfidious Enemy: For she had resolved when she
came abroad with her Husband, to undergo the greatest Hardships and Dangers
they should meet with, then stay at home, and be subject to the insolent Abuses
of the unmerciful Irish Soldiers. Some whereof coming to the House of a
Gentleman, one Mr. Burdet, his Wife great with Child, espying them, endeavored
to shut the Door, they forced in upon her, and with their Pistols shot her dead.

Sir Thomas, and all the other Gentlemen were Condemned to be Hanged and
Quartered: The Judge persuading them to rely on the Mercy of so Gracious a
Prince; for he did not in the least doubt of their Pardon; a Reprieve being
already sent them, before their Trial, persuaded them to comply with it. But to
this day they remain under the Sentence of Condemnation, upon a further
Reprieve obtained by their Friends application to the late King, and promise to
get the like number of Papist Prisoners sent over from England, in exchange for
them.

At Birr, in the King's County, three Protestants condemned to die, viz. Sir
Lawrence Parsons, Knight. Johnathan Darby, Gent. Jam's Rascot, Gent,
The Articles that were given to Sir Lawrence Parsors, upon the Surrender of
his own House, were brought in against him at his Trial, and was the only
Evidence whereby they condemned him, there being no other Evidence but those
Articles; the Judge declaring it was High Treason to Article with the King.

At M^riburough, in the Queen's County, eleven Protestants were condemned; two
of which were executed, (viz.) Th^mas Lewis, and George Maxwell, being hanged
and quartered: Two have since made their Escape, (viz.) John Lewis, and --
Flaharty; and are said to be gotten for (...). Two Brothers of the Lindseys,
and some others, died in Prison.

After the abovementioned Eleven were condem^ed, Baron Lynch being informed by
some Person, that the Prisoners should say, They durst not put them to Death, (
if they did, the Prince of Orange would reveage-their Blood) he ordered them to
be brought into Court in their Irons, with Ropes about their Necks; and
examined the Jailer, whether he did not hear them say so: he said, He had not
heard them say so, since their Condemnation: the Sheriff taking up the Bible,
kissed it, and said, My Lord, by the Oath I have taken, I heard them say so
last Night. Upon which Iynch ordered their Execution the day following. But
their Friends, with others, cried out Mercy: So Lewis and Maxwel only were
executed. Mr. James the Minister, and the other six are Reprieved for some time.

FINIS.

