A CONFUTATION OF A Late PAPER, ENTITLED, AN ANSWER TO THE Lords Protestation.
IN A LETTER to a GENTLEMAN.
SIR,
I Have Received Yours, where you tell me, You are highly satisfied, that the
Lords did only what they ought to have done, in Rejecting the Impeachment of
Mr. Fitz-Harris; And this you have Gathered out of a Little Paper your Nephew
sent you, Entitled, An Answer to the Lords Protestation. Now Sir, to Undeceive
You as well as many others, on whom it is like that Paper might prevail, I have
written this following Discourse, where I shall not undertake to Strip every
Word or Sentence, but only Confute those more considerable Arguments, by which
the Author would have us think, He has not only proved it lawful for the Lords
to Reject, but almost unlawful for them to Receive the Impeachment.

In the first Place he says, The Parliament is the most High Court of the
Nation; and then, it is Rational to think, That any Crime whatsoever does not
fall under the Cognizance of it.

That the Parliament is the Highest Court of the Nation is very true; And it is
as true, That the Commons have right to Impeach any Subject for Treasons or
Crimes whatsoever, that concern the King or Kingdom; It Is not to be supposed.
That by these words any Crimes, the Protestation means all Crimes, such as
Felonies, Trespasses, Assault and Battery, which indeed fall not under the
Cognizance of Parliament, but such only that Concern the Kingdom, as this of
Fitz-Harris does, and for which Impeachments are usually brought, so that this
is a Crime that concerned the whole Nation; It did Entitle the whole Nation to
a prosecution of it, and then for the Lords to hinder this Suit, was certainly
a Denial of Justice to the whole Nation.

But if this should be admitted, in a short time the Jurisdiction of other
Courts would fall to the Ground, and it may be supposed, the Lords would think
it necessary to have Perpetual Parliaments for determining Crimes of the lowest
Nature.

Very well, Sir, that because the Lords Assert a Right in the House of Commons
of Impeaching for any Crimes that Concern the Kingdom, that they do also
Assert, That all Offenses that lie at the Suits of particular Persons should
also be Tried by Way of Impeachment; so that by our Authors Inference one would
think, that the Lords Protestation did mean, That none should be burned in the
Hand or Whipped, but such as were Impeached by Parliament; Which is as far from
the meaning of those Noble Lords, as our Author is from Truth and Ingenuity, in
saying, That they would think it necessary to have continual Parliaments for
the determining all Crimes, because they would have an Impeachment prosecuted
according to the usual Practice of Parliament.

But if this be a valid Reason against the Lords for Rej^cting the Impeachment;
it infers a Right of Trying all Treasons in Parliament, because they Influence
the Parliament, and are best determined in Parliament.

No, I think not, it only infers a Right of Trying such Treasons in Parliament
as ought there to be Tried, such as shall lie under an Impeachment, not such as
are by Way of Indictment, which the very Protestation proves; for the Reason
why the Lords Protested, was not because it was a Treason, but because it was
prosecuted by those that could do it no where but in Parliament; And to stop
Prosecution there did quite incapacitate them of prosecuting; And if stopping
of all Prosecution be not a denial of Justice to the Parties prosecuting, I do
not know what is.

If there were any force in this Argument, the Right of Trying High Treasons
was never understood before this time, for there have been Traitors Triedout of
Parliament.

Sure our Authors Intellectuals at the Compiling this Work were indisposed with
some Vertigo, otherwise he could not have so Egregiously mistaken the Sense of
the Protesting Lords, as to think that by their Protestation they did mean,
That the right Way of Trying Treasons was only in Parliament; Whereas it is
clear from what they did, that they did only mean such Offenses are to be Tried
in Parliament as are Prosecuted by the Commons, that can do it no where else.

By Magna Charta no Man is to be Condemned but by lawful Judgment of his Peers.

So that to Try a Commoner in Parliament, when the Lords are not his Peers, is
contrary to Magna Charta, and highly unlawful; Indeed, if Magna Charta did say
just as he does it would be so; But Magna Charta not only says, That no Man
shall be Condemned but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, but it also says Or by
the Law of the Land; So that there may be a lawful Trial of a Commoner, and
according to Magna Charta, and not by his Peers, the Disjunctive proves; and
that the Law of impeachment is the Law of the Land, and not contrary to Magna
Charta; All must confess, when they consider how many there have been Tried of
the Commons by way of Impeachment, since the making of Magna Charta, and not
the least Objection made against the Lawfulness of the Proceeding, till our
Authors Brains were delivered of this Brat; But pray mark the disingenuity of
the Person, in endeavoring to impose on the World, by Mincing the Quotation,
taking the Words that serve for his Turn, viz. By lawful Judgment of his
Peers, and leaving out the words, By the Law of the Land; As if these were not
as much of Magna Charta as the former.

It Is the Opinion of Lawyers, that Acts made against the Fundamental Laws, of
which Trials by Peers is One, are in themselves void.

So that it seems the Powers that laid these Fundamentals were greater then the
present Powers, else Acts now made would be binding; But where was that Power
Lodged, either in the King by Himself, or in Him Joined with his Parliament;
Now it is impossible, that the King should have more Power without then he has
with his Parliament; And it is as irrational to say, That the King has not as
much Power now as in the time of Henry the Third, so that now there being as
great Power in an Act of Parliament as ever, it clearly follows, That those
Fundamentals may be altered.

It Is dangerous and against the Liberty of English men, to Admit of Trials
without Juries; Innocents may be Harangued to Death by their Prosecutors, and
the vilest Criminals saved by the same means; Witnesses may Influence by
Passionate Expressions to Contract or Dilate their Evidence.

All this Amounts to a very high Reflection on the Parliament, intimating, That
there is not as much Justice as in Trials by Juries, that there the Innocent
are liable to be Harangued into a Halter, and Delinquents to be saved by Taking
Orations; Then it seems the Lord Stafford's Head was Harangued off his
Shoulders; for his being a Peer does not alter the usual Justice of the Court.
Surely, if the People was as knowing as our Author, they would Petition for an
Act against Impeachments, it being as he says, a Proceeding Attended with a
great deal of Injustice and Partiality.

But if the Commons desire to Impeach a Commoner, may they do it? Yes, if the
Lords are willing; for they are not Obliged to Pass Judgment on any against
their Wills but their Peers, as it is Proved from the Case of Bereford, Gournay,
and Others who in the 4th. of Edward the Third, had Judgment Passed on Them by
the Lords. And afterward it was Accorded by the King and all the Grands, That
albeit the Peers as Judges of Parliament, took upon Them to make and render the
said Judgment, yet that the Peers shall not for the future be bound to Render
Judgment on any but their Peers.

This Proviso was made in full Parliament with these two Respects.

1. To satisfy the Commons that they intended not by their Judgment to Alter
the Course of the Common Law, and therefore they declared against Power to do
this, and Confessed it was contrary to the Law of the Land.

2. To Preserve their own Rights to Judge none but their Peers, in Case of Life
and Death.

So then, this President is urged as an Argument to prove, That the Rejecting
of the Impeachment was lawful; But let us consider whether the Case of Bereford
and the rest be the same with the Case of Fitz-Harris; If it be, the Author
has surely overturned the Protestation; If it be not, it will no ways serve
his turn, Bereford by the Command of the King was brought into Parliament, and
there had Judgment at the Kings Suit, which by the Way was very Illegal; for
all Indicted ought to be Tried by their Peers; Fitz-Harris was Impeached by the
Commons, and at their Suit could be Tried no where but in Parliaments; And now
that these two Cases are not the same is very clear; And if not the same, then
our Author cannot from hence infer, That the Rejectment was lawful, for when a
President is brought for a Proof, the President must always be the same with
the thing that is to be proved; Now seeing the Case of Bereford and Fitz-Harris
is not the same, it necessarily follows, that nothing can be inferred from the
Case of Bereford, to the Case of Fitz-Harris; And indeed it is to me very
strange, That because the Lords Accorded, that they would not be Obliged to try
a Commoner, which ought to be Tried at the Common Law, our Author should infer,
That they are not likewise obliged to Try a Commoner, when he is prosecuted at
that Suit that can be Tried no where but before the Lords in Parliament; This
is to make an Indictment and Impeachment the same; And if so, then an
Indictment may be found by the Commons in Parliament, and an Impeachment may be
brought out of Parliament; To Assert which, would be the highest of Nonsense;
And indeed I should suspect that Man to be of a distempered Understanding that
should affirm it; It Is yet more apparent, this can no ways prejudice an
Impeachment, for that was done to assure the Commons the Lords intended not to
alter the Course of the Common Law; Thence it follows, That the Subject Matter
of that Act was such as ought to have been Tried at the Common Law, of which an
Impeachment is no part; And consequently, could not be concerned in this Act of
the Lords.

But it may be Presumed, that if the Commons should force an Impeachment on the
Lords against a Commoner, that may be Tried at the Common Law, and Vote that it
ought not to be Tried in an Inferior Court, Men may be apt to think it is a
design to delay Justice, or to get a Pardon.

Indeed I really think, that what induced the House of Commons to this
Impeachment was not a pure design of Prosecution, but because, they would
create an Opportunity of making a farther Discovery of the Design Fitz-Harris
was engaged in; But let the Motive be what it will, the Prosecution is still
the same, the Impeachment alters not whether the Commons did it with a design
of Prosecuting or Discovering; I shall pass by the Statute he quotes, for it
can no ways be applicable to our Business, because it only lays down the manner
of Proceeding on Trials out of Parliament.

But for the Lords to say, That an Impeachment and an Indictment are two
different Suits is a mere Quibble; for whether this Criminals Trial be by
Indictment or Impeachment it is the same Accusation; namely for Treason; And the
Prosecution in both Courts (which is really and truly the Suit) is for the same
End and Purpose, that is, the Punishment of the Delinquent.

I am highly sorry, to see a Man of great Knowledge and Understanding, as the
Reputed Author of this paper is said to be, so strangely Halt in his
Intellectuals, as to Assert that there is no difference betwixt an Indictment
and an Impeachment, because they are both Accusations, and both tend to the
same End, namely, the Punishment of the Delinquent; So then, according to our
Author, two Ways that lead to London, one of which comes from the North, and
the other from the South, are not really two different Ways, because they are
both Ways, and both tend to the same End. Yet I believe, there is no Traveller,
but would really think these Ways do plainly differ, notwithstanding they are
both Ways, and both lead to the same place; And I believe, there is no Lawyer
but our Author, but thinks an Impeachment and an Indictment two different
Suits, notwithstanding they are both Accusations, and both tend to the same
thing, namely, the punishment of the Delinquent; for that that makes them
differ, is not because they are both Accusations, and aim both at the same End,
but because the Parties prosecuting do it for different Reasons, one for
Himself, the other for the King; And seeing to prosecute for the King and for
ones self is not the same thing, it clearly follows, that an Indictment and an
Impeachment do really differ; And if so, then what the Lords Asserted in their
Protestation is not a mere Quibble.

But the Ground of the wonderful Reason is the different use of the two Words,
Impeachment and Indictment, both which signify an Accusation, and the design
of both is the same, and it matters not, whether Punishment be by the Lords or
by the Judges at Common Law, but the most equal Way will be by his Peer^^^* by
whom he may have the most equal Condemnation or Acquittal, there being not the
President that comes up to, or is parallel with this Case.

That an Indictment and an Impeachment do both signify an Accusation, is true;
And it is as true, that they are different Accusations, for one is the Kings,
and the other the Peoples; And seeing an Act of the King do really differ from
that of the People, it follows, that an Indictment and an Impeachment are two
different Suits; And indeed it had been no great matter, whether Fitz-Harris be
Condemned in or out of Parliament, had not the Commons by their Impeachment
Entitled themselves to his Prosecution, for by this Act they made it their
Suit; And although the Delinquent may be punished elsewhere, yet this is no
satisfaction to them, because not done at their Prosecution; So that the Reason
why the Lords Protested, was not because they thought Trials in Parliament,
purely Considered, more Legal then those out of Parliament, but because the
Delinquent was now Prosecuted at the Suit of the Commons, who could do it no
where but in Parliament, and to hinder Prosecution there, was to stop all
Prosecution to them, which certainly is Injustice.

Indeed I must Concur with our Author, that Trials by Peers is most Legal out
of Parliament; But if he means that it is the only Legal Way of Trying
Commoners, I cannot be of his Opinion; for I believe Trials by Impeachment
before the Lords; are as lawful and as just as Trials by Juries, and the Lords
as tender in Giving Judgment, notwithstanding they are not upon Oath, as the
Juries are, of their Verdicts; But what our Author means by these words, There
being not one President Parallel with this Case, I cannot tell, if he means,
That there never was a Case Parallel with the Case of Fitz-Harris, that is, the
Impeachment of a Commoner; Be sure he has Consulted no other History but Tom
Thumb or Guy of Warwick, for every Kings Reign abounds with Examples of this
Nature, and always thought both just and legal.

The Case of an Appeal, if rightly understood, signifies nothing, for who Sues
an Appeal must Sue it in proper Person, and to make an Impeachment of the
Commons the same with this Case, it must be made appear by Presidents out of
the Parliament Rolls, or Journals, or by the Common or Statute Law, that the
Commons have such an Action or Suit, as an Impeachment of a Commoner for
Treason, which may be Tried in an Inferior Court, given them before the Lords,
so as they cannot refuse to hear or judge it, or they do nothing.

That there is a great Parity betwixt an Appeal and an Impeachment no Man can
rationally doubt, in that they are both at the Suit of the Party prosecuting,
for an Impeachment is in the Name of the House of Commons, and all the
Commoners of England; The Prosecution is by themselves for themselves, and in
their own Names do they demand Judgment, which would be very unmannerly if the
Suit was not their own; Now I cannot Conceive how it it should consist either
with Law or Reason, that they should demand Judgment on a Person, if he was
not prosecuted at their Suit, so that though it cannot be made appear, that the
Commons have such a Suit as an Impeachment of a Commoner for High Treason,
which may be Tried in an Inferior Court; yet it is clear that there is a great
Similitude betwixt an Impeachment and an Appeal, in that they are both at the
Suit of the Party, and then this instance of an Appeal will stand the Lords in
some stead; for by this it appears, that the Offense for which Fitz-Harris is
Accused, may be Prosecuted at two several Suits, One by the King out of
Parliament, and another by the Commons in Parliament; so that there being two
distinct Prosecutions of the same Offense, it follows also that there are two
distinct Judgments, so that the Offense may be prosecuted and punished at one
Suit, yet this is no satisfaction to the other; And then Fitz-Harris may be
Tried, Condemned and Hanged upon an Indictment; And yet this is no satisfaction
to the House of Commons, because they had no interest in that Suit; and where
they had no Interest, they cannot be said to receive satisfaction.

So then, to what our Author and many more do say, who Plead up for the
Lawfulness of Rejecting the Impeachment, that it is no denial of Justice to the
House of Commons to hinder their Prosecution, because that very Offense which
they would punish may be punished elsewhere, is highly false, for the
Punishment of it there does nothing respect the Suit of the Commons, and then
certainly there can be no satisfaction; And seeing the Law has made two
distinct Prosecutions of the same Offense, so that the prosecution at one Suit,
is not the prosecution at the other; It does also necessarily suppose, that
there are two distinct Parties that may prosecute at their two distinct Suits,
so that one prosecuting and receiving satisfaction, is no satisfaction to the
other; for if it was, the Law would Frustra agere, in permitting two Suits when
one would satisfy all, Nam frustra fit per Plura, quod possit fieri per
pauciora.

Well, but it was no denial of Justice to deliver up Drake to the Common Law,
and therefore can be none to deliver up Fitz-Harris.

Indeed I concur with our Author, that the Lords delivering up Drake to be
prosecuted at the Common Law was no denial of Justice; yet that it was a denial
of Justice to Reject this Impeachment, is clear for this Reason, for here the
Commons required Justice, and in the first they did not, but let their Suit
fall; And where the Commons do not require Justice, there the Lords cannot be
said to deny it; But on the contrary, when the Commons require the Prosecution
of a Delinquent, then for the Lords to deny it, is without doubt a denial of
Justice; So that the Denial of Justice does not purely consist in the Lords
delivering over the Suit of the Commons, but their doing it when the Commons
require Prosecution of it in Parliament; Then seeing in Drake's Case, the
Commons required not any prosecution, and in the Case of Fitz-Harris they did
require it; it follows, that in the first Case it was not, and in the latter it
was a denial of Justice for the Lords to throw out the Impeachment; Besides,
there is a great difference betwixt the not receiving an Impeachment, and the
removing it when it was for some time Lodged; for in the latter Case the Suit
is Revived, and if the Commons do not prosecute it is their fault, but in the
first Case the Suit is absolutely Rejected, which is the Act of the Lords; Then
seeing there is so great a disparity betwixt the Cases of Drake and
Fitz-Harris, this instance will stand our Author in stead, for as I have
already said, He that quotes a President for a Proof, must always prove the
President to be the same with the thing that is to be proved, for A dispari non
valet Argumentum.

I have now done with our Author, I shall only add a word more, If the Commons
have a right to Impeach, it follows, they have a right to prosecute; and this
must be before the Lords, then sure the Lords Rejecting their Suit was the
denying them what was their right, and this certainly is a denial of Justice:
But some say, They have a Kight if the Lords please, so that this Right depends
on the Will of the Lords; but this is false, for their Rights, of which
Impeaching is one, are Founded on the Ancient Practice of Parliament, and not
on the Will of the Lords; And seeing the Lords cannot alter the Practice of
Parliament, where the Commons are concerned, without a breach of the Law of
Parliaments, it more strongly follows that this was Injustice. But it is
Objected, That if the Commons should have this, they might Impeach the whole
Nation, and so hinder the King of all Prosecution; That the House may Impeach
all is possible, but that they will is highly improbable; But this cannot
hinder the Kings Suit, for if the Commons do not prosecute in any reasonable
time, the Lords may upon Proclamation quit the Prisoner, who is still liable to
an Indictment.

SIR, I am Your Humble Servant. W. I.

LONDON, Printed for T. D. 1681.

FINIS.

