Rome is no Rule: OR, AN ANSWER To an Epistle published by a Roman Catholic
who styles himself, Cap. ROBERT EVERARD And may serve for an Answer to two
Popish Treatises, the one Entitled, The Question of Questions; and the other,
Fiat Lux: out of which Books the Arguments urged in the said Epistle against
the Authority of the Scriptures, and the pretended Infallibility of the Roman
Church are Collected. In which Answer, the authority of the Scriptures is
vindicated, and the Arguments for the Romish Infallibility Refuted.

By J. I.

Prove. 8.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him.

Job. 6.25. How forcible are right words, but what do your arguings reprove?

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Livewel Chapman, at his Shop in Exchange Alley in
Cornbil 1664.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
SInce the Word of God which he has exalted above all his Name, to be as a
light shining in a dark place, and as a Rule try Doctrines, whether they are of
Heaven, or of Men, is by Roman Catholics cried down, as altogether
insufficient for that purpose; by reason whereof they have, and do daily
beguile unstable Souls: I shall therefore, as a preface to this ensuing
Discourse lay before you the Judgment of Christ and his Apostles, and diverse
of the Ancient Fathers (who trod in their paths) touching the Authority and
Vsesulness of the Holy Scriptures, and compare them with the Judgments of the
Roman Catholics, that so trying all things, thou may hold first that which
is best. In the first place, it was the Judgment of Christ (whose Judgment is
believed by all Christians to be Infallible) That Men ought to search the
Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. And that the reason why the Jews did err in the
Doctrine of the Resurrection was, because they did not know the scripture, Mark
12.24. He judged that the reason why the Jews did not believe him, was, because
they did not believe the Scriptures, Jo. 5.46. He judged the Scriptures to be
Armor of proof against the Devil, Mat. 4.6, 7. He confutes his Adversaries by
them, Joh. 8.17. Mat. 12.4, 5. This was also the judgment and practice of the
Apostles; therefore they commend the Bareans for searching the Scriptures, Acts
17.11. Hence it was that they mightily convinced the Jews, showing by the
Scriptures, That Jesus was the Christ, Acts 18.28. The Apostle informs Timothy,
That they were able to make wise to salvation, and that they were profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and for Instruction in
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. And that if we fulfill the Royal law according
to the scriptures, we shall do well, Jam. 2.8. That they were written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10 11. And that
they were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
scriptures might have Hope, Romans 15.4. This was also the judgment of the
Fathers, who followed the footsteps of Christ and his Apostles. St. Augustine
says, upon the 8. Psalm, That God has bowed down the scriptures to the
capacity of Babes and Sucklings, that when proud men will not speak to their
capacity, himself might.

And again, the same Author says, That our Faith would reel and totter if the
Authority of the scriptures did not stand fast, de Doct. Christ. Lib. 1. Cap.
37.

St. Chrysostom. says, The scriptures are easy to be understood, and are
exposed to the capacity of every Servant and Plowman, and Widow, and Boy, and
therefore God Penned the scriptures by the hand of Publicans, Fishermen,
Tent-makers, Neat-heards, and Unlearned men, that none of the simple people
might have any excuse to keep them from reading, Hom. 1. in Mat.

Again be says, That whatsoever is required to salvation is all set down in
scriptures, neither is there any thing wanting there, that is needful for man's
salvation, Hom. 41. in Mat.

Justin Martyr says, That we should hear the words of the scriptures, which
are so plain and easy, that they need no Exposition, but to be rehearsed,
Dialogue cum Triphon. 213.

St. Hierome says, Whatsoever things men find and feign without the Authority,
and Testimony of the scriptures, as if they were from Apostolical Tradition are
smitten by the sword of God, see Comment. in Hagg. Cap. 2.

On the other hand, the Roman Catholics say, The scriptures are no certain
Rule, no Infallible guide; and that all things necessary to salvation, are not
contained in them; See the Books Entitled, the Question of Questions, and Fiat
Lux, and the Epistle Published by Everard, to which this Answer is Directed.
They forbid the People to use and search them. See Everards Epistle pa. 14. He
says, Those words in the 5. of John are so far from being a Command to search
the scriptures, that they rather seem a reprehension to all that have such a
conceit of them.

Again they say, The scriptures are fitted to the time, and are variably
understood; the sense whereof being one while this, and again, another while
that, according as it pleases the Church to change her judgment. See Cusan.
Ep. 2.37.

Again, The Bishop of Toledo's putting forth the Bible in diverse Languages,
puts the Latin Translation in the midst between the Hebrew and Greek, and then
says, the Greek and Hebrew he placed of either side as two Thieves, and the
Latin between them, as Jesus Christ.

Others of them call the Scriptures a nose of wax, that may be writhed any way,
and a dumb Judge, etc.

Now whoever shall but impartially lay the judgment, of these men concerning
the Scriptures in the balance of the Sanctuary, and compare them with what
Christ, his Apostles, and their followers judged of them, may easily see that
there is more excellency in the gleanings of the Scriptures, then in the full
Vintage of the Pope and all his Cardinals; whose Vines are like those of Sodom,
by reason whereof, the Nations have been intoxicated, and made drunk with the
wine of her fornication. For if they were not drunk, they would never quit both
Scripture and Reason, and the Spirit of God, all that by which they become both
Men and Christians, to hearken to the voice of the Romish Charmers, who rather
then they will want water to carry Proselytes to the Romish Sea, care not
though they open the floodgates of Atheism and Antiscripturism upon the
Christian World. For who sees not (but he that is willing to be blind) that
the arguments levied by them for wounding the reputation of Scriptures, are as
a sharp sword ready to pass through the reins of Christianity it self. For the
prevention whereof, I have published this ensuing Answer, which I do desire may
be impartially considered; and the Lord give you understanding in all things,
and open your understanding, that you may understand the Scriptures; that so
taking to your selves the swords of the Spirit, which is the word of God, you
may be able to resist all the adversaries of your precious souls, who daily
seek to make merchandise of you; and that you may so do, shall be the Prayers,
and Desires of thy Friend,

J. I.

Rome is no Rule: OR, An Answer to an Epistle published by a Roman Catholic
who styles himself Cap. ROBERT EVERARD.
BEfore I shall engage against the main body of this discourse, I shall take a
view of its Front and Rear, I mean the Title and Postscript: In the Title you
have the superscription of An Epistle to the several Congregations of
Non-conformists.

Here I would gladly be informed who you mean by this term of discrimination,
Non-Conformists, either you mean all that Conform not to the Church of Rome, or
all that Conform not to the Church of England; if you mean all that Conform not
to the Church of Rome, then the Church of England is concerned in this Epistle,
and reckoned by you among all other Sects and Heretics: but if by
Non-Conformists you would discriminate all that Conform not to the Church of
England, then your Mother the pretended Holy Catholic Church is concerned in
your Epistle, they being Non-Conformists to the Church of England, as well (or
rather as ill) as others; and good reason she should be concerned, since she
has furnished you with all your Weapons for this Warfare out of here Armoury:
and it is but a piece of gratitude to direct that to her which you so lately
received from from her: for he that has a hand to take, and not a tongue to
return thanks, deserves for the future to be both lame and dumb.

Having viewed the Superscription, I come to the Subscriber, and he is no less
then a Captain, Captain Robert Everard. But where was he a Captain, and whom
did he command? Let him speak for himself he is old enough. He tells us he was
at the head of a Troop in the rebellious Army: See his Postscript, p. 40.

But what a shame is this, that this Honor was not laid in the dust, rather
then prefixed in the Title of a Book? Surely had you been truly humbled for
that Rebellion, as you pretend, you would have said of all the honor that you
acquired thereby, as Ephraim said of his Idols; What have I to do any more with
you?

In the next place I cannot but observe the place where this Epistle was
printed, and if you will believe it, it was printed at Paris. I see you have
learned one, if not all the the three things which a learned man observes
Children soon learn of their Mothers, Pride, Revenge, and Lying: this last
appears in that you have made a Lie your refuge, by saying your Epistle was
printed at Paris. But let me ask you the Question which you ask your Reader, p.
20. who will adventure (say you) to make oath the Scriptures we have, agree
with the Originals? So say I, Who will adventure to make oath that this Epistle
was printed at Paris? Surely we are like to meet with little truth in the House
when a Lie in Capitals, and a Capital Lie is inscribed on the Porch, as a
London Printer will witness, to your ^ace, if occasion serve.

I come now to the Postscript, ^herein you caution your Respondent, p. 39. to
set down your own words as they lie entirely, without maintaining them: and
also, if he answers by Paragraphs, to set down your whole Paragraphs.

Sir, give me leave to tell you, that you require a thing impossible; for there
is in your Epistle so little of you, as any one may perceive (by your own
words) and by comparing it with the Book Entitled, ( The Question of
Questions, and Fiat Lux) that it is hard to say whether any thing by yours
besides these three words, CAPTAIN ROBERT EVERARD, and therefore if you would
have had a distinct Answer to all your Arguments, you should have distinguished
what had been yours, from what was other men's, by a different Character, as is
usual in such cases.

You go on in your Postscript and forewarn your Respondent, that be set not up
a Puppit of his own in stead of Answering. If he does set up a Puppit of his
own, he has done more then you, who have scarce set up any thing of your own,
besides your name. But (what) if be set up a Puppit of his own and call it
yours, (you say) he will not make your Arguments, but his own ridiculous. Truly
he may possibly make his own, but he cannot make your Arguments ridiculous,
because he knows not any one that is yours in all the Epistle.

The next thing you caution your Respondent is, That he would forbear all
reproaches and slanders against the Catholic Church, or Catholics in general,
or in particular, which (say you) is a fault Protestants are too much in
general addicted to.

Sir, I perceive this Counsel is easier given then taken, else why do you
reflect reproach upon Protestants in general in the same breath, in which you
invite them to forbear reproaches?

Again, You say, That the Presbyterians and Independents do by the Catholics
as they did by his late Majesty of glorious memory, and with our most dread
Sovereign that now is, and their Party, (viz.) to impute crimes to them without
end, and errors innumerable, without taking care to examine whether what they
charged was true or false.

Sir, I have four or five things to ask you; 1 Whether you did use to do so by
the Kings Majesty when you were an Independent, and at the head of your
Rebellious Troop? 2 Whether you believe the Kings Majesty has pardoned you and
all that were so wickedly minded? 3 Whether since you were pardoned, you would
have any to upbraid you with those pardoned Crimes? If not, then 4 Why do you
that pretend to so much Charity, do that to others, you would not be done unto?
Lastly, Why do you violate the Law of your Sovereign, who has forbidden upon a
penalty, that those things should be remembered against any that he has been
pleased to bury in Oblivion? But Sir, if you were not a Novice in the Catholic
Way, you might know that the people you are now fallen in with, have been the
most guilty (in speaking evil of, and doing evil to men in Authority) of any
that ever mentioned the Name of Christ; witness their traducing King Henry 8.
for that ever to be admired, and to be remembered work of his, in throwing off
the Popes Supremacy; how have the Romanists reported it as a Consequent of his
Lust and Levity? How then can they have any regard to the present Rulers, who
daily revile their Predecessors, wherein any of them have acted against their
Interests? witness both the Gunpowder Treason, and the Irish Rebellion. And
what good Allegiance can his Majesty that now is expect from you? Who forsaking
a People that destroyed one King, and pretending repentance for that, go and
join with a people whose Principle is to Depose and Destroy Kings.

Passing from your Title and Postscript, I now come to Encounter with the main
Body of your Epistle: In the Front whereof You place a Text out of the great
St. Austine against Manicheus, whose Words are these; If thou shall find any
one who does not as yet believe the Gospel, what will thou do when he shall say
unto thee, I do not believe? But neither had I believed the Gospel, unless I
had been thereunto moved by the Authority of the Catholic Church: Those
therefore to whom I submitted, when they required me to believe the Gospel; why
should I not yield Obedience to them, when they persuade me not to believe
Manicheus.

Thus speaks Austine, and more to the same purpose: lo which I Answer, That
this Text out of Austine may be applied to any Church as well as to yours; And
if the Church of England shall persuade any one that is a Jew, to turn, and
become a Christian, may he not say he did well to believe them when they
persuaded him to believe the Gospel? Why therefore should he not believe them
when they persuade him not to turn Roman Catholic? But to this Text I shall
subjoyne Two Texts more out of the same Author against the Donatists: The
Question (says he) between Us and the Donatists, is, where is the Church? This
is the Question, between the Protestants and the Romanists; He Answers, Let not
these Speeches be heard among you; This I say and this thou say, but let us
hear what the Lord says: There are certain Books of God, unto whose Authority
we both consent. There let us try our Cause; There let us seek the Church: And
again in the Scriptures, have we learned Christ; In the Scriptures, have we
learned the Church, Ep. 166. ad Donatift. Whosoever shall compare these Texts
out of Austine, may easily satisfy himself. What his Judgment was in the
Question between You and Us, (viz.) whether we should learn Christ and the
Scriptures from the Church, or whether we should learn Christ and the Church
from the Scriptures? To this purpose Epiphanius speaking of a Heritick, Says;
This Man is found differing from the HOLY SCRIPTURES, as will appear to all Men
that Read attentively: If he then dissent from them, he is altogether an Alien
to the Holy Catholic Church, Epiphanius Tom. 1. lib. 2. haer. 48. It seems in
his time, all men were permitted to read the Scriptures attentively, to inform
iheir minds in the Truth; whatever is now a days pretended to the contrary.

I proceed now to the Epistle it self; In the beginning whereof, Page 1. You
give an account of the Reasons of its Publication; which are; To Answer
Expectation, to prevent the World from censuring, and to manifest your charity
to your late dear Brethren, from whom you have received returns of Assection.

I did expect that among those Motives that prevailed with you to publish the
grounds of your change; I should have found you saying, that the Glory of God
had been the chief moving Cause: But I find not a word of that, and therefore
however you may have Answered the Expectations of others; I am sure you have
not answered mine.

But further you say, you published your Epistle, To prevent the World from
censuring: Sir, whatever you promised your self in the beginning of your Book,
your heart failed for fear of obtaining, when you had finished it; And
therefore you are forced to Ride Post after your Reader, and pray him, That he
would not up-braid you; As if you had some private ends of your own, in your
present change: See the Postscript in Page 40.

Which plainly shows that you had some mis-givings of heart, that all you had
spoken throughout your Book would not Answer your end, (Viz.) Keep the World
from censuring. And as for that other end, which you pretend in the publishing
of your Book; Namely, Charity to your late Brethren. Truly whatever you
pretend, they will scarce believe you, because in your Postscript you
uncharitably impute the Calumnies and Slanders that were cast upon his late
Majesty, and his Majesty that now is, to the Presbiterians, and Independens
Indefinitly without exception: Is this Charity? And this uncharitableness of
yours, is grievously aggravated; First, Because it is basely remembered by you,
who were in the same Condemnation with others; And, Secondly, Because it is
mentioned after it has been pardoned by the Kings Majesty; And is this your
grateful return for that love which your late Brethren have manifested to you?
If so, surely the charity of a Catholic, and the mercies of the wicked, are
alike cruel.

You proceed like a Roman Catholic, and in the latter end of page the 1.
Sound a Trumpet in your own praise, by saying, That your carriage was always
such, (while you was in Communion with them (meaning your late Brethren) As
gave them sufficient reason to believe that you was not Biased by world
interests and selfish considerations. But if any body believes so, they may
err; because they do not believe as the Church believes.

In the Second Page, you tell us, how you came to be acquainted with a Lay
Gentleman of the Catholic persuasion, and how he interrogated you about the
grounds of Christian Religion: The substance of his Questions was to this
purpose; Whether you were sure the Christian Religion in General was more true
then the Religion of Turks, Jews, or any others, etc? The Reason he gave for
this question was, that if neither your self, nor those that taught you, that
Christianity was the only safe way to Salvation was infallibly certain; or were
capable of any mistakes or error in this thing: Then it followed that
Christianity was but probable, and not certain.

From Page second, to the eighth, you recite what Arguments your Catholic
Friend used to prove these things to you, (Viz.) That we could not convince a
Turk or a Jew of the certainty of Christianity but by the Churches
Infallibility; Which I forbear to make a reply unto, partly because it is but a
Narrative of a private Conference between you and that Catholic Gentleman;
And chiefly because I shall have occasion to speak to the very same things in
my following Answers to your Arguments, to which I refer the Reader.

You come in the latter end of the 8. Page, to tell us what Effects this
Conference had upon your understanding; as that thereupon, You resolved to have
Recourse to Almighty God by Prayer for his Divine assistance, and to make it
your business according to your skill and understanding, to take a full view
of the Catholic Faith, and of Christianity, and laying aside all Prejudices,
Pride, and Humors; You Resolved to embrace (by the assstance of God)
whatsoever you should understand to agree to his most Holy Will and Pleasure.

Hereupon let me ask you a few questions; First, how are you sure you had a
Divine Assistance in this choice, as an Answer to your Prayers, since when you
made these Prayers, you were not a member of your pretended Catholic Church?
Secondly, How are you sure, since the heart of Man is deceitful, that your
heart did not deceive you, when it inclined you to Popery? Thirdly, When you
say you made this search according to the uttermost of your understanding, how
do you infallibly know that your understanding was not depraved, and that you
were not given over to an injudicious mind? Fourthly, Did you not pretend to
have used the same means to find out the true Church when you turned an
Independent, as you did when you did turn Papist? Lastly, If so, how are you
more able to Answer the Turk or Jew now, then you were when your Catholic
Friend began to discourse with you?

In the latter end of p. 8. and the beginning of the 9. You say, that You
gathered from Heb. 1^.6. Mark 16.16. Ephesians. 4.5. 2 Cor. 10.45. Heb 10.13. From
all which scriptures (where God requires Faith) you say) you thought it did
naturally follow that there must be some means appointed by God, by which we
may know this true faith from all false Opinions, or else you say, p. 10. that
prophecy would be ineffectual, Esaias 35. Say to them that are of a fearful
heart, Be strange, fear not, hebold your God will come and save you: Then the
eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstopped, etc. There shall be one high way, and a way, and it shall be called
the holy way; the way faring men, though fools shall not err therein.

Now since God has appointed such a way; Your great difficulty (you say) is to
find out the Rule and the Judge, since one party proposes the spirit to be
his guide; a Second, proposes Reason to be his Rule; A Third, proposes
Scriptures; The Fourth assigns the Holy Catholic Church, etc.

You answer to the First, and say, That the spirit bearing witness with our
spirts, or in plain terms, the private spirit is not that judge: Your reason
is, because any one, whether he be Jew, Pagan, or Christian, if he have but
confidence enough may pretend to the Spirit.

But since (you say) the great difficulty is to find out the Rule, I would
gladly know how this difficulty shall be infallibly resolved? For if the
private spirit within me must not resolve me, nor my reason must not be my
Rule, nor the Scriptures my Guide; then I have no light left me to show me the
Church, but the Church. Thus they deal like thieves, put out all other lights,
that should discover them but their own dark lanthorn; But if you shall say
that you prove the Church by Miracles; How shall I be satisfied that those
Miracles are not delusions? Since as many pretend to the spirit that have it
not; So many pretend to miracles that have them not: Then we must have faith to
believe those miracles are true, and if they are true, they are no otherwise
true but by the spirit of God: Then it is the same absurdity to believe
miracles by the spirits testimony, as it is to believe the Scriptures by the
spirits testimony: But this also implies a contradiction, for if I must find
the Church by the light of the spirit, persuading me that she does those
miracles by the power of God, then ^ave you contradicted your self, by saying,
The spirit is not the guide: But further, may not a man as well say that he
believes he has the spirit by the spirit; and that he believes the Scriptures
by the Scriptures; as you say, you believe the Church by the Church. I am sure
the last is the greatest absurdity, and may not a Turk say the same for his
way, that he believers Mahomet by Mahomet, and the Alcoran by the Alcoran, (as
you believe) the Church by the Church. Now if you shall say, you believe the
Church by the Scripture, then the question will be, how you know them to be the
Word of God? If you say, because the Church teaches they are so; then you run
round (like a horse in a Mill) proving the Church by the Scripture, and the
Scripture by the Church.

You give another Reason, why the spirit witnessing within us, is not the guide
appointed by God, (because by this none that ever pretended to it did reconcile
differences.

Pray let charity begin at home; if your Church be so infallible; why do not
you decide the differences that are between the Jesuits, and the Dominicans?
has not as endless controversies arisen among you? Has not as many Errors,
and Schisms sprung from you, as from any People professing Christianity? And
would not your divisions be greater, if the power of the Sword did not prevail
more then your pretended Infallibility? And whereas you say, St. John
prescribes a Rule to know the Spirit of Truth, from the Spirit of Error, 1 John 4. We are of God, he that knows God hears us, and he that is not of
God, hears not us; Hereby we know the Spirit of Truth, from the Spirit of
Error. Now what is this to your purpose, unless you would still beg the
question; That your Church and her Doctors, are intended in those words, WE and
US? But what if it be proved that you do not hear the Apostles? Then it follows
by the Text, and your own Argument, that you have the Spirit of Error. Now the
Apostle taught that a Man should examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup; but you deny the cup to the common people; is
this hearing the Apostles? The Apostle allows the Bishops to be Husbands of one
Wife; but you forbid that they should have any at all. The Apostles would not
have Prayers said in a Language that the People understood not; but you command
it. Christ and the Apostles commanded a diligent reading, and searching of the
Scriptures; but you forbid it, and yet you are the only Men that must be heard,
though you teach contrary to Scripture.

You go on, and say, That Reason must not be our Judge, because it must submit
to the Judge as a Subject, etc. I pray, what was your Judge? who resolved the
question which you say, had so much difficulty in it (viz.) who should direct
you whether any Church was Infallible, or no? or where that Church was to be
found? Did your reason guide you in this search or no? If it did not, I do not
wonder you made no better choice, but you say, Reason is not your Rule, because
it was to submit as a Vassal to that Rule and Judge. But Sir, Though the
Church of Rome, (which you call your Judge) do exercise such a Lordship over
the reasons of Men, I am sure you have given no reason why it should be so. You
say Reason is apt to mistake; and therefore we ought not to be governed by it:
But Sir, what if I say the Pope is apt to mistake; and therefore I ought not to
be governed by him. I am sure, if that be made to appear in the judgment of
Reason, then Reason will guide me to decline following such a blind Guide. As
for example, Liberius that was Pope about the year 350 fell into Arianism, and
subscribed to the unjust excommunicating Athanasius.

Again, The Council of Constance deposed Pope John 23. where it was proved that
he held there was no eternal life, nor Immortality of the soul, nor
Resurrection of the dead.

Pray Sir, let Reason judge whether I may follow such a Catholic Guide.

You add a third Reason to prove that Reason is not judge in matters of Faith,
for then (say you) it would follow that it is possible to please God, for
Reason would teach us how to please him.

May not a man from the same Premises infer that your Church is not the Judge?
because then it would follow that it is possible to please God without Faith,
because the Church would teach us how to please him. But you will say the
Church does teach us to please God by Faith; I say it is well if she do: But
what is this to the purpose, she did not teach us to please God by Faith before
it was required, and made known to us that God would be so pleased. In like
manner, Reason will direct a man to do the same when he is informed God
requires such a duty. But must not the Scripture, nor my private Spirit, nor
my Reason judge? I pray then tell me how I shall be the better for all you have
written? for if my Reason must not judge of the fallibility, and infallibility
of your Arguments, then you had as good have told your late Brethren thus: My
B^^^tren, I see that there is a great difference and contention among us,
whether the Roman Church be infallible or not; This Controversy cannot be
judged by a private Spirit, for that may sail; nor by Reason, because men's
Reasons are uncertain, and subject to variation; neither are the Scriptures an
infallible Judge of Controversies, therefore they cannot judge of this: Let me
therefore advise you of a way to decide this question. First, Agree that the
Roman Church is infallible, and then your contention, whether the Roman Church
be infallible, will soon be ended. An excellent advice, because (you say) all
other ways to judge and decide controversies are fallable.

You now come in the third place to enquire whether the Scripture be sufficient
to teach us the true Faith, etc. (You say) You found this highly contended for,
and several reasons urged for it. First, The words of our Savior, John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me. To this Text (you say) you found several answers
given which were satisfactory; I That it does not appear whether this in the
Original be the Im perative or the Indicative Mood, St. Cyril (you say) with
whom Beza agrees) takes it in the Indicative Mood.

What a strange Mood are you in then, to give an Answer to a Text which (you
say) you were satisfied withal? And in the same breath (you say) it does not
appear whether it be the Imperative or the Indicative Mood. Do you think
infallibility had any assinity with this Answer? Nay, you further say, that
they are so far from being a Command to all to road and search the Scriptures,
that they RATHER SEEM a Reprehension to all that shall frame that Conceit of
them. But how can this sense of that Text be Catholic, when in stead of an
infallible Exposition, you tell us it RATHER SEEMS to be so then otherwise? But
what if I should tell you that those words (Search the Scriptures) rather seem
a Command then a Reprehension? I should rather seem to be infallible then you.
You say, If it be the Indicative Mood, the sense will run thus. You do search
the Scriptures, and so it seems to be a Reprehension. But this is a sense
contrary to Chryfostome, Hom. 39. in Joan. Christ (says he) sends us to the
testimony of the Scriptures; then it cannot be that he should reprehend them.
And the College of Rhems translating the Text as we do, give this
Interpretation of it, He (viz.) Christ reprehendeth the Jews (not for reading
but) that reading daily the Scriptures, and acknowledging that in them they
should find life; that yet they viewed them so superficially, that they could
not find therein him to be Christ, their King, Lord, Life, and Savior. And in
the Marginal Note upon this Text, they say, that neither Jews nor Heretics
find the truth, because they search not the Scriptures deeply, but read
superficially. See Rhemish Annot. upon John 5. Now see how you contradict your
selves, you say the Scriptures are so far from being a Command to all to read
and search, that they rather seem to be a reprehension to all that shall frame
that conceit of them. And your Rhemish Commentators say that they are
reprehended because they did not search deep enough, for if they had, they
might have found Jesus to have been their Christ, their King, Lord, Life, and
Savior. And how can the said Annotators give that as a reason, why the ^ews
and Heretics did not find the Truth, because they did not search the
Scriptures deep enough. If either of these two opinions of your be true, 1 That
men are reprehended for searching the Scriptures. 2 That the Scriptures are not
an infallible guide to direct us to find the Truth, if the whole College have
translated and interpreted truly, then surely you and many of your Authors
speak falsely. But if you shall say the Scriptures may direct Jews and Heretics
to the truth, because they direct them to the Church, which is the Pillar of
Truth: then it follows, 1 That both Jews and Heretics ought to search the
Scriptures deeply, to find out the true Church. 2 It must rest upon their
private judgments of discretion to determine within themselves, whether the
Romanists or the Protestants be that true Church, after they have made this
deep and diligent search. 3 It follows that the Scripture is an infallible
guide, being deeply and diligently searched; and that the reason why both Jews
and Heretics err, is not the fallibleness of the Scriptures, but want of
diligent and deep search; which being used, they might have found Christ to
have been their King, Lord, Life, and Savior; they might have found the Truth,
and the Church, and consequently all things necessary to Eternal life.

You come in the 14 page to give a second reason why the words (search the
Scriptures) cannot extend to prove the conclusion; because (you say) if they
were uuderstood in the Imperative Mood (which cannot infallibly be proved
because) they cannot be profitable to work Faith in them that cannot read,
which (you say) are the greatest part of Mankind. (You say) it cannot
infallibly be proved that those words, search the Scripture, are in the
Imperative Mood: but have you that pretend to Infallibility, proved that they
are in the Indicative Mood. What a madness is this, that you should exact
infallible Interpretations from those that do profess fallibility, and not
perform an infallible Interpretation, when you pretend to be guided by a Church
that is infallible! But you say that if they were understood in the Imperative
Mood, they cannot work Faith in those that cannot read. But then it seems they
may work Faith in them that can read, because (as the Rhemists say) they can
show both Jews and Heretics the Truth, if they search deeply and diligently.
But secondly, How can general Councilsshew the Truth and beget Faith, since (if
they are infallible) every body cannot read their Decrees and Canons? If you
say they understand those Decrees and Canons, by the general Consent of those
that can read, then by the same means may a man that cannot read the Scripture
be guided by them.

3 You say, that by those words (search the Scripture) cannot be understood,
that the Scriptures should be our Judge and guide, because then they would have
excluded Christ, and after him his Apostles from being the infallible means by
which true Faith was to be taught to the World. But how does this follow, since
you say the Church under the Old Testament was a Judge, and an infallible
guide. But did their being an infallible guide till Christ, exclude Christ from
being a guide: and did Christ's being a guide when he was on the Earth, exclude
the Holy Ghost from being a guide when he left the Earth? In like manner it
follows not, because the Scriptures of the Old Testament (for of them Christ
speaks in the place under debate) were a guide to instruct men into the
knowledge of the Messiah, that they should exclude Him, His Spirit, or Apostles
from being Guides. But further it follows by the same parity of Reason, that
if the Scriptures of the Old Testament could not be an infallible guide,
because then they would have excluded Christ, and after him his Apostles from
being infallible guides. I say it follows by the same reason, that if Christ
and his Apostles were infallible Guides and Judges in matters of Faith, that
then they have excluded the Church of Rome from being that infallible Guide and
Judge which she pretends her self to be: and thus you have sharpened a Knife to
cut your Mothers throat.

You pretend page 14. and say, that the second Reason that is urged for sole
Scripture being a guide, is 2 Timothy 3.15. From a child thou have known the Holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to salvation through faith, which
is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works.

This Text (you say) proves not what is intended (viz.) that the Scripture
alone was the way, the rule, and means appointed by God to judge and decide all
doubts, etc. your Reasons page 15. are, First, That though They might be
profitable to such a man as Timothy who had faith already, yet they could no
way be profitable nor useful to one that had not faith, or did not believe them
to be the Word of God; for Faith comes by hearing, not by reading.

To which I answer, First, If the Scriptures are not a Guide to them that
believe not, why do the Rhemists say that the reason why Jews and Heretics do
not find Christ to be their King, Lord, Life, and Savior, is, because they
did not search the Scriptures deeply. Surely, you will not say, that Jews and
Heretics are Believers, and you say, they are no guide to Unbelievers; why
then do the Rhemists say, Christ reprehended them for not fearching the
Scriptures deeply? To what purpose then are Jews and Heretics blamed for not
searching the Scriptures deeply, if the Scriptures had been (as you say) no way
profitable to them? but further, you say, they are not profitable to them that
do not believe them to be the word of God. Suppose this were granted (which
cannot be proved) does it not follow that your Roman Church (by the same
reason) is no way profitable, no way a Judge, nor an infallible Guide to any
that do not believe her to be so: and by the same reason an Atheist may say All
gods providence are no monitors to him, All his judgments are no examples to
him, because cause he does not believe there is a God: Is not this as good
Logic, as to say the Scriptures are no way profitable to them that do not
believe them to be the Word of God.

You proceed to give another reason why this Scripture 2 Timothy 3.15. is not a
proof for what is pretended, because then if the Scriptures more solely
sufficient which Timothy knew from a child (they being but the Scriptures of
the Old ^estam^nt) it would follow that Christ, and the Now Testament, and the
Sacraments, and the Apostles, are at least not necessary.

I answer, if by the Scriptures sole sufficiency, (you mean) that they are
sufficient to bring men to salvation without Faith, Repentance, and Obedience,
then this is a Puppit of your own (as you Phrase it) for where is there any
Protestant of that mind; therefore you do but bark against the Moon.

But we say they are solely sufficient to direct us to those ways by which we
may obtain salvation. But then (say you) What needed Christ and the Apostles,
and the New Testament, if the Scriptures Timothy had learned (which were those
of the Old Testament) were sufficient? But then I answer as before, if Christ
and the Apostles were solely sufficient, what need is there of your Pope and
Council? So that by this Argument you either make Christ and his Apostles not
solely sufficient; or if they were, then what need this waste of a General
Council? But you may say, that a General Council was to direct people in
succeeding Ages. So were the Scriptures much rather, for whatever was written
aforetime was written for our Learning, upon whom the ends of the World are
come.

In the last place, you say page 15. The word All Scripture must either
signify every Scripture, as the Original word (...) ought to be rendered, or
All Scriptures that ever were; or All Scriptures that were when this Text was
written; or All that we now have. If it be to be understood of every Scripture
(or any Scripture) then you say it does prove too much, because then all the
Scriptures save one Book, are useless.

Though what has been said does sufficiently answer this innumeration, and
therefore I might be excused from answering any farther: yet because you
intimate a farther proof of what you now urge, I shall therefore when I meet
with it give a further Answer.

You come in the 16 page to tell your Reader, That you met with no Arguments
for the sole sufficiency of Scripture among those that were usually urged, and
therefore you resolved to see what could be said against this common General
opinion of all who oppose the Church of Rome, why the Scriptures could not be
this Rule and Judge.

You say, you have not met with any Arguments to prove the sole sufficiency of
Scripture to be our guide; but it was because you did not make a deep and
diligent search into them, which is the reason (as your Rhemists say) Heretics
never find the Truth. But why do you beguile your unwary Reader with this word,
(viz.) That the Scriptures are not a SOLE Guide? thereby to let him think that
you allow them in some sense to be a guide; when indeed your following
Arguments do manifestly declare that you would not have them to be any guide at
all.

Your first Reason why the Scriptures are not a Guide is, because they do not
answer the end, (viz.) the reconciling differences: for those who pretend most
to consult the Scriptures, do most of all disagree in matters of faith; and
interpreting the Scriptures.

To this I answer, First, May not a Heathen or a Jew allege the same Argument
against Christianity it self, and say that the Christian Religion is no safe
way to happiness, because of the differences that are among the Professors of
it?

2 May it not be said that the Apostles themselves were no certain Guides,
because they had divisions and contentions among them? and that they had,
appears by the testimony of St. Paul himself, Rom 16.17. Mark them that cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine, etc. And the same Apostle
tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.3. and 1 Cor. 11.19. That there was among them
envyings, strife, and contention, some holding of Paul, and some of Apollo,
some of Cephas. Nay, he further tells them, there must be Heresies among you,
that they that are approved, might be made manifest.

3 May it not as well be said of the Church of the Jews (which, you say, were
infallible) that they were no Guide, or at least, no certain Guide, because
there were differences and contentions among them, as there was between the
Pharisees, Sadduces and Essavaus; it is said that the Sadduces denied the
Resurrection, Angels, and Spirit: as you say the Scriptures are no Guide to
true faith, because men differ and and disagree in matters of Faith: But,

4 May you not as well say that Christ is not the Savior of the World, and
that he came not into the World to the end that the World might be saved,
because it does not appear that all shall be saved: as, say the Scriptures are
no Guide to end Controversies, because all Controversies are not ended.

5 May you not as well infer that the grace of God does not teach men to deny
ungodliness, because some turn the grace of God into wantonness: as say the
Scriptures are no sure Guide to faith and salvation, because many wrest them to
their own destruction?

6 May you not as well say, that the Primitive Church were no infallible Guide
to true faith, because they had disagreements and contentions among them: as
the strife between the Eastern and Western Churches about the keeping of
Easter, and they excommunicating one another? And the Question of Re-baptizing
bred the like differences between the Bishops of Rome, and the Western Bishops
of one Party, and Cyprian, Dionysius, and Firmilianus, with, most of the
Eastern Bishops of the other Party, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. c. 21. lib. 7. c. 3.
Cyp. Ep. 74, 75. Soc. lib. 6. c. 17. Soc. lib. 6. c. 21. I say, may not one
more truly infer these were no Guides, because they had dissentions and
divisions among them: as you may say the Scriptures are not a Guide, because of
the differences that are amongst Protestants.

7 And lastly, May I not infer as well from the like Premises, because there is
and has been differences among the now-pretended Catholics, as I have already
shown, that therefore their Church is no infallible Guide: as you may say the
men that consult Scriptures do not agree among themselves, therefore the
Scriptures are not the Guide.

Your second Reason follows in the 17 page which is but the same in effect
with the first, therefore the former Answer may suffice; only you tell us a
story of an Arian, or, (as the Question of Questions has it) an Arian Cobbler;
how that if you were to dispute with him about the Deity of Christ from Job.
10.30. I and my Father are one; by this Text (you say) you should think you had
proved the Question. But then (you say) your Arian would compare this Text with
john 17.21. where Christ prays to his Father, that his Disciples might be all
one thing, as thou (Father) are in me, and I in thee. But if you should urge
the Arian further, and tell him the Council of Nice gave the same
Interpretation which you do: (you say) the Arian would answer as the
Protestants generally do, that they have a worthy esteem of Councils, as far as
they agree with the Word of God; but where they disagree, in that he must
contradict them all.

To which I Answer, (setting aside the contraversie between the Arians and
Athanasians, as not coming within the verge of our present question) that if
the Arian Cobbler had been as Orthodox in all his other Opinions, as he is in
his opinion about the Holy Scriptures, and Councels (viz.) to think reverently
of Councels, and agree with them, as far as they agree with the World of Truth:
I say, if this had been all this Arian Cobblers Error, I should have judged him
a better Christian then a Roman Shoo-maker, or the Catholic Collier, who could
say no more for himself, being tempted by the Devil at the point of death, what
his faith was? Answered, I believe, and dye in the faith of Christ's Church:
Being again demanded what the Faith of Christ's Church was? Answered, The faith
that I believe in: See Apology Translated by Staplet. p. 53.

But you say, That you can urge against an Arian the Authority of the Council
of Nice, and their Interpretation of the Scripture, by which they Infallibly
decide the controversy; And here you think you have a more certain guide and
ground of your Faith then others, because they adhere to private spirits, and
private judgments up on the Scriptures; whereas you adhere to general Council.

To which, I Answer, First, Do you think that General Councels did speak and
teach in more plainness of Speech, and that they uttered words less subject to
be wrested by wrong interpretations, then the words of the Prophets and
Apostles were, who spoke as they were inspired by the spirit of God.

Secondly, How do you know that you have the true sense and meaning of the
Councels determinations, since their Decrees are as liable, if not more liable
to mis-interpretations then the Holy Scriptures.

The reason of this question is, because you did not hear them your self, and
if you had heard them, you might have mis-understood them, but if you say you
have read the Councels and so came to be informed: I do further demand how you
do believe by a Divine Faith, that you do not mis-understand the Councels in
what you read, and so collect a false sense.

Thirdly, If you shall say you have a Priest to teach you the sense of the
Councels, by which you understand what Doctrines are Catholic, and what
Expositions of Scripture are true, and what are false then I demand.

Fourthly, How do you believe with a Divine Faith, that what this private
Priest teaches is according to the Infallible Doctrine of the Church, since he
is a Man, and may err, and so teach his own private Opinion, for the Infallible
Doctrine of the Church.

Fifthly, Whether you may not be more subject to mis-understand the Scriptures,
either by the error of the Priest in Preaching, or the frailty of your
understanding in hearing, then others are in the reading of the Holy
Scriptures: And if so, why should you say the Scriptures are no guide, because
they may be mis-interpreted? For shame forbear to blame the use of a thing
because of the abuse of it: What if some are to blame, in that they have
wrested the Scriptures to serve their own interests; Are not you more to blame
to wound these men through the sides of the Scripture? What if (as one well
observes) That some are blind, and miss their way, and others are drunk, and
stagger out of it: Must we all conspire to wish the Sun out of the Firmament,
that we might follow a Will with a Wisp? And yet this is your kind of
reasoning, that because some are perverse and froward, and others are full of
darkness, prejudice, and corrupt affections, by which they cannot perfectly and
infallibly judge of every truth, that is contained in the Scripture; therefore
they must throw away the blessed word of God from being their rule and guide.

You proceed in p. 18. and tell us, That the third Reason which you thought was
forcible, was, that those who are thus far for sole Scripture, do not say that
one, or any particular number of the Books of Scripture, but all Scriptures
written by inspiration of God do, being joined together make up this Rule and
Judge; Hence (you say) you concluded that if any of these Books were lost, this
Rule was not perfect; Now that many of these Books were lost (you say) you
proved from those that remain, Number. 21.14. The Book of the Wars of the Lord
(and this (you say) is lost.) It is said of Solomon, 1 King. 4.3, 2. that he
spoke 3000 Proverbs, and his Songs were 1000 and 5; You conceive (you say) that
upon a just reckoning some of these will be wanting: We find named, 2 Chronicles.
9.29. The Book of Nathan the Prophet, the Prophecy of Ahijah, and the Visions
of Iddo; ( these (you say) are lost) as also those named, 1 Chronicles. 29.29. The
Book of Samuel, the Book of Nathan, the Book of Goda, and it is clear from Mat.
27.9. That part of Jeremy is lost; So also from Mat. 2.23. Where it was
foretold that Christ should be called a Nazaren; and 1 Cor. 5.9. Tells us that
the Epistle which our Canon calls St. Paul's First Epistle was not truly his
first; for there he says, I wrote to you in an Epistle, not to keep company
with Fornicatours: St. Paul also wrote an Epistle from Laodicea, and yet (you
say) you do not find this Epistle.

In Answer hereunto I cannot but take notice that you say you THOUGHT this
Answer was forcible; but where was your Mother that she did not enable you to
say, you were SURE it was forcible.

But let us see wherein this force lies; you say, Protestants do not believe a
certain number of Books to be their guide; but all the Scriptures written by
Inspiration from God, make up this Rule and Guide; and many of these Books are
lost, therefore this Rule is not perfect.

I Answer, First, That the Law of the Lord is perfect, and every word of God is
pure; and therefore there can be no imperfections in the word of God: but

Secondly, How does it appear that any of those Books which (you say) were
lost, had a Divine Image and Superscription upon them; or that they that did
write them we^e inspired by the Holy Ghost in the writing of those particular
Books? For it is very possible that they wrote many things upon particular
occasions, as Hezekiah wrote to Ephraim; and that sometimes their writings were
of no more inspiration from Heaven, then David's Letters were that he sent to
Joab by Uriah, or then Peter's practice for which Paul withstood him to the
face: But

Thirdly, What Infallible reason have you to prove that these sayings recited
out of these Scriptures may not refer to the Books of Samuel and the Kings
which we have extant, rather then to any Books that are lost.

Fourthly, How do you know that those writings (however the Penmen were
inspired) were intended by God for the perpetual use of his Church in all Ages.

Fifthly, How do you Infallibly know, that all the Canons or your Church, even
of those which (you say) are necessary to Salvation are preserved, and that
some very material things are not lost.

Sixthly, If you say there is none lost, then whether you do not make God in
his wise providence more careful to preserve entire and unmaimed the Canons of
your Councels, then he has been to preserve the Writings of his Holy Prophets,
and Apostles; And if you suppose any of the Decrees of your Councels has been
lost or maimed, then how do you know Infallibly, whether some that are lost,
are not as material as those you have? Thus the edge of your sword is turned
against your self: But

Seventhly, If any of the Books of the Old Testament were lost, that were by
God intended for the perpetual use of that Church to whom his Oracles were
committed, how then can you say that the Church of the Old Testament was
infallible, since she failed in that trust that was committed to her, (viz.)
the keeping of the Scripture? And if this was not a failing in her, in that she
lost part of the Scriptures, then she had not failed, if she had lost all; and
then it follows, that the Scriptures are so far from being a sole Guide, that
they are no guide at all, for if they are a guide, and a directer in any sense,
or if they are of any divine use, then it must be an error either of
ignorance, or wilfulness, to suffer them to be lost or maimed.

Eighthly, Whereas you say, that the Epistle of St. Paul which your Canon calls
the first to the Corinthians was not TRULY his first: I Answer then, your Canon
does falsely call it the first, and then how shall we believe when your Canons
are true? You had best tell your Mother she lies as soon as you can speak, and
then show a reason for it, by telling her That St. Paul says, he writ to the
Corinthians an Epistle before: Ergo, there is an Epistle before that which your
Canon calls the first: But Chrysostom understands it of the words going
before, wherein he had charged them to deliver the incestious person to Satan,
and to purge out the old leaven.

And that you may see how little cause you have to enveigh against Protestants
for their private doubtful, and uncertain expounding of Scriptures; Let me
give you the exposition of a whole College of Catholics upon this very Text
under debate: Either (say they) St. Paul means this Epistle in the words
before, or some other: See the Rhemists marginall Note upon the place. Surely
this is infallible indeed; it is either this or some other: At this rate of
Infallibility any private spirit shall interpret Scriptures all day long,
(viz.) either this is the sense, or some other.

Ninthly, and Lastly, If any Canonical Scripture be lost will not this redound
to the prejudice of the Roman Church: Since they acknowledge that they only
are the Church, and that the Church is the keeper of Divine Truths, and that
they have been the conservatours of the Scriptures to posterity. Now if any
Books be lost (as you say there is) how have they infallibly kept what (they
say) was long since committed to their trust? Thus you desperately venture to
wound the reputation of the Scriptures, though you make the Sword, by which you
do it, to pass through the reins of your darling infallibility.

In page 19. you come to a Fourth Reason, Why the Scriptures cannot be a guide
to conveigh Divine and Infallible faith to all; and that is, because they
cannot be understood by all, nay, (you say) they are very subject to be
mis-understood, if we will believe the 2 Pet. 3.16. Where speaking of St. Paul's
Epistles, (he says) there were some things hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned, and unstable wrest as they do also the other Scriptures to
their own destruction. It is in vain (you say) to urge that the Scriptures are
plain and easy in fundamentals, and in what concerns salvation; for we have
here a plain testimony that they are wrested to their own destruction;
therefore they cannot be a safe rule, nor any rule at all to the ignorant etc.

Though this Argument be answered already, yet I answer further, in the words
of a learned man, That if the Scriptures are so hard to be understood, and the
Pope can infallibly interpret them, what a madness and childishness is it for
the Catholics themselves to lie swaggering and contending with one another,
before all the world with fallible mediums, about the sense of Scripture, when
they have one among them that infallibly can interpret them, and that with such
Authority, as all men are bound to rest in, and contend no further? And the
further mischief of it is, that of all the rest, this man is always silent as
to exposition of Scripture, who alone is able to part the fray. Now methinks
this argues a great want of good nature, that the Pope can see his Children so
fiercely wrangle about the sense of Scripture, and yet will not give out the
infallible meaning of every place, and so stint the strife among them, seeing
he can do it if he will.

But again, how does it follow, that because the Scriptures are hard to be
understood, and are by some wrested to their damnation, that therefore they are
either no Guides at all, or at the best but uncertain ones. Pray let me ask you
a question or two, May you not as well say that Christ was no infallible Guide,
because many of his words were wrested by the Jews to their destruction? as
that of his destroying the Temple and building it in three days? Job. 2.19. And
did not they wrest his words to their own destruction, when Christ said, Mat.
26.64, 65. that he was the Son of God, and they thereupon said he had spoken
blasphemy, and therefore needed no other witness against him: and likewise they
said, he blasphemed when he told the man that was sick of the Palsy, that his
sins were forgiven. So that speech of Christ was hard to be understood to
learned Nicodemus, Job. 3. Except a man be born again he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Does it follow from hence that Christ was not an infallible
Guide?

Again are the Canons and Decrees of General Councils more secure from being
misinterpreted then the Scriptures; or do they use more plainness of speech
then the Spirit of God used in the Scriptures, or is nothing that they
determine of necessity to salvation? If so, then why may not their words be
wrested to the destruction of those that are unlearned or unstable, as well (or
rather as ill) as the Scriptures. And if so, I demand whether this be not as
good, nay a better Argument against themselves, (viz.) some wrest the judgment
and definitions of the Church to their destruction; Ergo, the Church is not an
infallible Guide to all, nor indeed any Guide to the ignorant, which are the
greatest part of mankind? Is not this the same (if not a better) argument, then
to say, the unlearned wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; Ergo, the
Scriptures are not an infallible Guide to all, nor any Guide at all to the
ignorant.

I come now to consider your 5 Reason, which is, That if the Scriptures be a
Guide, Rule, and Judge, it must only be meant of their true Original and
Authentic Writings, and not of corrupted Copies; and therefore if we have not
the true Originals, our rule is imperfect. And again page 20. you say, If we
had the Originals, it would be hard to find a man that does so infallibly
understand the Originals, as to give us a true translation. This you endeavor
to prove out of several Protestant Writers, page 20. and 21. (viz.) That we
have not the Originals themselves, nor undoubted Translations, and therefore
the Scriptures are not an infallible Guide.

To which I answer, That though what has been spoken already might suffice to
this Argument, yet to make full measure running over, let me add, that this
very Objection lies with the like force against General Councils. For, first,
how do you know with a divine certitude, that you have the true Original and
Authentic Writings, wherein those Decrees were contained? Secondly, How do you
know with a divine certitude, whether the Scribe that committed them to Writing
was an honest man or not? Thirdly, How do you know with a divine certitude,
that these Councils, Decrees, and Canons, are truly and infallibly translated,
since they were written in a Language that I know not. If you say I have them
translated by private Doctors, then I query if private Doctors are infallible?
If they are, what need is there of a Pope, or a General Council? If they are
fallible, why may they not fail, when they tell me they have faithfully
interpreted and translated the sense of Councils and Fathers? But if they being
private persons can give the true sense of Councils and Fathers, why may not
men of the same ability for Learning and Piety give as perfect a Translation,
and as infallible an Interpretation of the Scriptures of the Apostles and
Prophets? So that the Argument cuts as much with one edge as the other. If the
Scriptures be guide and rule, it must be meant of Authentical and Original
Writings, or of infallible Translations of them into several Languages, etc.
say you. In like manner I say, if the Decrees of General Councils are
infallible, it must be understood of the Original and authentic writings
wherein those Decrees are contained, or of infallible Translations of them into
several Languages, since they were not given out in a Language that the Common
people understand. Now none will swear (to use your own words, page 20.) that
these are the Originals of the Decrees of those Councils, some of them being
more then a thousand years old. Neither will any swear that the Translations of
these Decrees agree with their Originals: Ergo, The Decrees and Determinations
of Councils cannot be an unquestionable and infallible Guide to true faith.

Thus you make people believe that if they come to your Church, they shall have
every thing certain; but I do demand (if any should follow your advice) how
they shall be thus assured, since your Church has been so palpably negligent,
as to suffer whole Books to be lost, and to suffer the Originals of those that
remain, to be corrupted, and also to suffer infinite variety of reading to come
into them; by which you say, It cannot be discerned infallibly which is the
true reading, and which is the false. And whereas you say, That we are so far
from having St. Mathews Original, that we know not what Language it was writ
in; or whether he who transtated it into Greek was an honest man or not.

I answer, If your Church were (as you pretend) the sole Keeper of the
Scriptures, they are worthy to die (as David said of Abner) because they kept
their Master no better. Are they the Church to which no unfaithfulness can have
access, when they have lost the Original of St. Mathews Gospel? These are worse
then the unprofitable Servant; for in the day of account, though he did not
improve his Talent, yet he did not lose it; but could say to his Master, take
that which is thine own. But you that have been entrusted with the heavenly
treasure of sacred Writings, it seems, cannot acquit your selves at this rate;
for you have lost the Original, and cannot tell whether that Translation that
you have was done by an honest Man or a Knave.

But further, If this be true, what becomes of that Text which you cite, as the
firstborn of your strength, Mat. 16.18. upon which you found your Churches
infallibility: for if one ask you, how you prove the Church infallible? you say
by that Text, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it. But how do you prove it from this Text? if (as
you say) the Original is lost, and you cannot tell whether he that translated
it into the Greek was an honest man or no?

You come now, page 22. to a sixth Reason, which is but the same in effect with
the former, (viz.) That whatsoever is a sufficient rule, must be plain and
clear in all necessary points: the Scriptures (you say) are not plain and clear
in all necessary points; therefore etc. This is the sum of your Argument, and
for this you give diverse instances of things necessary to salvation, that are
not set down in Scripture, The first is, in page 22.23. That it is not set down
in Scripture what a Sacrament is, and how many there be, or whether there be
any or no?

To this I answer, That you strive about words; for it is not necessary to
salvation to believe that those institutions should be called Sacraments, which
are usually so called; and if it were, then it would be necessary that we
should know what and how many Institutions should be so denominated: but it
suffices that those Institutions which we call Sacraments, are plainly set
down in Scripture, together with the persons who should observe them, and the
manner how they should be observed.

You come to a second thing necessary to be believed that is not in Scripture;
namely, That all the Books of the Holy Scriptures be the word of God. This say
is not absolutely necessary to salvation; for it may be possible for one to
believe all the matter of the Bible to be the Truth of God, and thereupon be
saved, who may yet doubt, whether every one of the Penmen did write by
inspiration. And again, When it is said and believed that all the material
Objects of Faith, and those divine Verities which Christ revealed to his
Apostles, and they to the Churches, are laid down in Scripture. It is manifest
that the Scriptures themselves are excepted, they being not received as the
material objects of our faith, but as the means of conveying them unto us: and
if a man did believe the Doctrine of salvation contained in the Scripture, it
should not hinder his salvation, though he knew not whether there was any
Scripture or no?

Again, Many of those whom you Canonize, did not allow of some part of the
Scriptures; and many whole Churches differed about the Authority of some Books;
which Churches must all be damned, if the believing those Books had been
necessary to salvation.

You proceed and say in the third place, That it is necessary to salvation to
believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but this (you say) is not plainly
set down in Scripture.

I answer as before, This belief cannot be necessary, where the Scriptures are
not proposed; for God does not require men to believe upon pain of Damnation,
when he has not given means in order thereunto.

But 2. Whoever shall consult the excellent precepts, the glorious promises,
together with that great Spirit of Holiness and Self-denial that is contained
in the Scriptures, must needs say, that they have the image and superscription
of heaven upon them; and from thence be as certainly persuaded that God was the
Author of them, as if it had been written with the beam of the Sun, that so
many Books are the Word of God: nay, and more certain, because That one
sentence might sooner have been expunged, or defaced out of the Scriptures then
that Spirit of Light and Truth which breaths in the faces and consciences of
men, from all the quarters of them.

Your other instances that follow, are such as we have either taken notice of
already, or else they are such that are not necessary to salvation, and
therefore are impertinently alleged to weaken the guidance and conduct of the
Scripture in order to that blessed end. But since you are so able to lay
stumbling blocks in the way of the Scriptures, that thereby men might stumble
and fall, let me see if you are as able to remove some stumbling blocks that
lies in the way to your infallible Church.

First, Is not the Sacrament of Penance, as your Church teaches, necessary to
salvation?

But secondly, How can you be infallible that this Sacrament is administered by
a true Priest? for if it were not done by a true Priest, then it is
ineffectual, and so you must die without absolution, or else you must grant
that others beside a lawful Priest may remit sins. But if none can do it but a
lawful Priest:

Then Thirdly, How shall you be infallible of those things that are necessary
to make a true Priest? as first, that he was lawfully baptized with due matter
and due form of words; and that the Bishop which Ordained him a Priest, did
Ordain him completely, with due matter, form, and intention? You must know that
the Bishop that made him a Priest, was a Priest himself. But suppose these
doubts were assailed, which cannot be; and that you are certain, he that is to
absolve you were a true Priest; yet still the doubt will remain, whether he
will do you that good he can? and whether he will pronounce the words of
absolution with an intent to absolve you? For perhaps he may bear you some
secret grudge, and project your damnation for a revenge. He may, for ought you
know, be a secret Jew, or Anti-Trinitarian, and so far from intending your
forgiveness of sins, and salvation by this Sacrament, that in his heart he
laughs at all these things, and thinks sin nothing, and salvation but a word.
All these doubts must be clearly resolved before you can (upon your Roman
Catholic grounds) assure your self that this man that absolveth you is a true
Priest, and that he gives you true and effectual absolution; or else when you
have done all this for your salvation, you may have the ill luck to be damned;
which makes salvation a matter of chance and not of choice; and if so, what are
you the nearer for being a member of a pretended infallible Church. Much more
to this purpose might be urged, and yet you cry out, that the Salvation of
Protestants relies upon fallible and uncertain grounds. Whoever would be
further satisfied in this matter, I shall desire him to read that learned
Treatise of Mr. Chillingworth, Entitled, The Religion of Protestants, a safe
way to Salvation. Your next instance is, The Contradiction, that seems to
appear in Scriptures, which (you say) argues them to seem untrue, and for this
you instance, 2 King. 8.26. compared with 2 Chronicles. 22.5. and Mat. 1.17.
compared with Luke 3.35, 36. which places (you say) seem to contradict each
other.

I Answer First, If they are but seeming contradictions, then they do not
weaken the reputation of Scriptures.

Secondly, The resolving those seeming contradictions are not necessary to
salvation, because it is not necessary to salvation to know when Ahazia began
to Reign, not whether there were 41 or 42 Generations between David and Christ;
and therefore those Objections weaken not the guidance of the Scriptures in all
things necessary to salvation, which is the thing in question.

But lastly, why does your Church put her candle under a Bushel, why does not
she set forth an infallible translation of the Bible? For it may be those
seeming contradictions in those forecited places was occasioned by the error
of the Scribe, or the error of the Translatour. But has not greater
inconveniences attended the keeping the Canons of your Church? If they have
not, how comes it to pass that there is contradictions in Scripture, and none
in Councils? It seems your Church has faithfully preserved all things
uncorrupted for the benefit of posterity, but the word of God. You proceed,
page 25. to a seventh Reason, Why the Scriptures are not a sole guide, because
then they would have been so in the Apostles days; and if they had, then the
Authority of the Apostles (you say) must have ceased so soon as they had made
an end of writing?

I Answer, That it does not follow that the opinion of the Scriptures being the
sole guide, should exclude the Apostles from being guides when they were living.

May not a Man as well say, that Peter's being the sole head of the Church (as
you pretend) did exclude Christ (that gave him his Authority) from being head
while he was yet living on the Earth; and that a man that directs and solely
guides you by Epistles, how to negotiate your affairs, should thereby cease to
be a guide if he were present with you, or that he should thereby be rendered
unable to resolve any doubtful word in that direction. No more does it follow,
that the Scriptures being held to be the sole guide, should exclude the Penmen
from either being guides, or giving an infallible interpretation of their own
words, while they were yet alive. But what is all this to the Roman Church
being an infallible guide? The Apostles might be guides to the Churches while
they lived, both by their words and writings; But since they are deceased, we
know no furer guide then their words, to which to do well to take heed, as to a
light that shines in a dark place.

And for those other things that you say follow in probability upon the
Scriptures being our guide; I shall say nothing to them, because they are but
probable conjectures of your own brain.

Your last reason which you urge, why the Scripture is not a sole Judge, is,
Because (you say) in effect it is to make it no judge at all, but to make every
man and woman to be their own judge, to take upon them to read and understand
them.

May you not as well say, that your Church is not the judge, because every man
and woman must judge for themselves, whether she be so or no, before they join
in Communion with her: As say the Scriptures are not so, because a man must
judge for himself, whether he rightly understand it or no?

Is there not as great a controversy in the World, which is the true Church
among all the pretenders to it, as there is, which is the right sense of
Scriptures among the various readings and interpretations thereof? Now how does
a man's judging for himself, after he has weighed Arguments and compared Text
with Text render the Scripture to be no guide, any more then your hearing and
examining all the Arguments and Reasons which are alleged for the True Church
among all pretenders to it and afterward according to your understanding judge
which is true, renders your self, and not your Church the true guide. And yet
this is your Argument, Every man judges for himself which is the true sense;
therefore the Scriptures are in themselves no judge at all.

In the close of this Argument, p. 26. You conclude, That if God loved the
souls of Men, he would have provided some sure means by which they might have
been assured of the true faith, etc. without leaving them to the Scriptures to
be interpreted by each one, as he thinks best.

May not I reply as before, That if God loved the souls of men, he would have
left them some sure means to find the True Church among the many false
pretenders to it, and not have left it to themselves to choose which Church in
their private Judgment they shall think is the true one.

Having done with your negative positions, viz. That the private spirit,
Reason, and Scripture is not the sole Judge; you come to infer from the whole,
That the Catholic Church is this judge, and that God had always such a Church.

This you endeavor to make good by saying, God had such a Church Two Thousand
Years before any Scripture was written; And to demonstrate this you say;
Circumcision was brought in by Abraham, and practiced by the Church without
Scripture to try it by, etc.

I Answer first, If the Pope will bring in any new Law or Canon with that
Authority as Abraham brought in Circumcision, we will believe him without a
Council, or desiring him to prove it by Scripture. But

Secondly, It seems here is some other Rule and Guide beside Reason, Scripture,
the private Spirit, and the Church; for here is no Council to decree
Circumcision, nor private spirit to suggest it, nor reason to contrive it; But
here is God appearing to Abraham, and commanding it by an immediate voice from
Heaven; So that this was Gods way of guiding his People then, and not by
General Councils, and of this opinion is Chrysostom Hom. 1. in Mat. who
conceives God might use other means; and this agrees with that saying, Heb.
1.1. God in sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke to our Fathers by the
Prophets.

Lastly, If the Scriptures are liable to many exceptions (as you say) by which
they are rendered incapable of being our infallible Guide, then I demand how you
know what was transacted in the World the first 2000 Years, and whether there
was any Church at all in those times. If you say you are by the Hystory of the
Scriptures guided to believe what was done 2000 Years before the first Penman
was born; I demand how you can believe this, since they are so fallibly and
subject to so many exceptions as you say? But further, may I not with more
certitude believe what Moses and all the Penmen of Holy Scriptures writ of
things they were eyewitnesses of, then you can be of what Moses writ the first
2000 Years that were expired before he was born?

You come in page 27 to a second Argument, Namely, That the Church of the Jews,
were so the Jews, (I suppose you mean an infallible guide) after the Scriptures
were written; and for this purpose you cite, Deuteronomy. 17.8. The man that will do
presumptiously, and will not hearken to the voice of the Priest or unto the
Judge that man shall dye. I answer, The Scripture says, Pro. 16.10. A divine
sentence is in the lips of the King his mouth transgresses not in judgment;
Does it follow from hence, that all Kings are infallible in their judgments:
But how and by what Rule were these priests to judge whom the People were to
obey upon pain of death. Ezekiel tells us, Chap. 44.24. And in Controversy
they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge it according to my
Judgment, they shall keep my Laws and Statutes in all their Assemblies, and
hollow my Sabbaths. But did these Priests and Judges always judge according to
Gods Law? were they always infallible in their Sentences? How comes it to pass
then that Aaron sinned in hearkening to the voice of the People, when they
required him to make them a Calf? Exodus 32.2. and v. 7. It is said, They had
corrupted themselves. Where was this Churches infallibility at this time? and
v. 8. They turned aside quickly out of the way, which I commanded them. And
again, where was the infallibility of the Priest, when he appointed them v. 3.
To break off their earing which were in their ears to make a Calf? Surely in
this they were an excellent type of the Roman Church, who were quickly
corrupted from their Primitive Purity. Again, Ezekiel. 22.26. It is said, The
Priests have violated my Law, they have profaned my Holy things, they have put
no difference between the Holy and Profane, neither have they showed
difference between the Clean and the unclean, and have hid their eyes from my
Sabbath, and I am profaned among them: Neither was this the fault or a few,
but the Text tells us, v. 30. That God sought for a Man among them, that should
make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before him for the land, but he found
none. Where was the Priest; and the infallible church all this while, whom the
People were to hear upon pain of death? So that the Text by you cited, Deuteronomy.
17. is abused; for they had plain Laws written, which were to be a guide to
Priest and People; which if the Priest did not judge accordingly, (as many
times they did not) the People were not to hear them.

Your other Text is Mat. 23.2, 3. the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair,
all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do.

I Answer, If by sitting in Moses's chair, you understand their teaching the
People according to Moses Law, we are of your mind, for so it appears in the
forecited Text in Ezekiel, and in all such things the People were to hearken to
them. But if by sitting in Moses Chair you understand their Public Authority,
and that whatsoever they so taught was infallible; This I deny, for they did
sometimes like the Pope, Mark 7.7 Teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men,
and v. 8. Laid aside the Commandments of God (as you do the Scriptures) that
they might hold the traditions of men, and v. 13. Made the Word of God of none
effect by their traditions. But if the Church of the Jews which was represented
in the great Synedrion could not err, then it follows, that all Christian
Religion must be discarded. For if she was infallible in that judgment, she
made of Christ and his Doctrine, then there remains nothing, but that we
renounce both him and it, and turn either Jews or Pagans.

But lastly, It appears that Christ himself had not this opinion of the
infallibility of the Jewish Church, which you have, because then he should have
referred all he taught to be decided by them, whether it were true or no. But
instead thereof he appeals to the Scriptures, and offers Himself and his
Doctrine (as we do at this day) to stand or fall by their verdict, and to their
Authority of the Church he opposes that of the Scripture, to which he knew the
other ought to give place, John 5.39.46. Mat. 22.42, 43, 44. Luke 24.27.

You come in the third place, in p. 27.28. to prove that there shall be an
infallible Church under the New Testament, your Texts are Esaias 2.23, 3. Esaias
35.8.54.3.13, 17. Esaias 59.21. Esaias 60.10, 12.

To which I answer, First Why are these Texts brought to prove an infallible
Church, when the Texts themselves (you say) are no infallible guide, how then
can they guide us to your infallible Church? But,

2. How does it appear that these Texts are to be applied to the Church of the
New Testament? Much less does it appear, that they are to be applied to your
Roman Church.

3 These promises to the Church are made upon condition, like that promise,
Ezekiel 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes; here (to use your own words) is the Spirit of Truth promised to
preserve them from error. But this is not absolutely promised without
condition; for the 37 ver. says, For all this he will be enquired of them. And
to this agrees those Texts in the New Testament, Act. 5.32. The holy Ghost
which God has promised to them that obey him. Luke 11.13. My heavenly Father
shall give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. By all which it appears that
God did not promise to guide the Church absolutely and irresistably, whether
they would or no: but upon their faithful adhering to what they had been
taught, he promises his Spirits continual supply for their continual
instruction.

But 4. Whereas it is said, Esaias 35.8. that there shall be away that fools
shall not err therein, (which is a Text so much insisted on by you.) I demand
whether this Text does imply an impossibility of erring? If so, then we may as
well go to a Fool to be guided, as to a Pope, because it says; The wavering
men though. Fools, shall not err therein: so that this Text as truly concludes
infallibility in any body, as in the Pope and his Council.

But 5. To speak somewhat in particular to that Text, Esaias 59.21. As for me
this is my Covenant with them (says the Lord) my spirit that is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor but of the mouth of thy seeds seed from
heneforth and forever.

To this Text I answer, That these words are rather a charge that Gods Word
should not depart from them and their seed, then a promise of any such thing.
And therefore Mr. Calvin (whom you sometimes produce upon the like occasion)
grants that the words will bear an Imperative construction, God requiring them
thereby not to quench his Spirit, which he puts into them, nor forsake his Word
which he should teach them; so that as the Covenants on his part to give them
his Word and Spirit, so he requires on their part that they should not resist
nor quench it; and to this agrees Junius, and therefore he translates those
word; in the beginning of the verse, As for me, De me autem, i. e. but as much
as concerns me: thereby showing, that as God had concerned himself in putting
his Word and Spirit into them, so they were concerned to see that it did not
depart from them. And therefore unless you can prove that the Church of Rome is
the Church here prophesied of: and also that these Texts are not understood
conditionally; and if conditionally, that the Church of Rome has observed
these conditions, you have but beaten the air in the citation of them.

You proceed to a fourth Argument to prove that there must be an infallible
Church, from several Texts of the New Testament; the first is, Mat. 16.19. Upon
this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it.

To which I answer, First, that you have lost the Original of St. Mathews
Gospel, (as you confess) and therefore you know not whether this Text be so in
the Original, and this further appears because you say, page 20. that you
cannot tell whether he that translated it was an honest man or not.

But 2. The words upon which this Controversy depends (viz.) the Rock and the
Gates of Hell are a Metaphorical expression, from whence Logically you cannot
infer your conclusion.

3. No Scripture is of private interpretation: Now to interpret the prevailing
of the gates of Hell, for the prevailing of Error, is a private
interpretation, first, because Error and Heresy is never so called in all the
Scripture: 2. Because Sheol, which the Greek translates haiden or haides, and
we in English Hell, is frequently taken for the Grave.

And of this mind was Chrysostom, who paraphrasing upon these words of Christ,
says, If the gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, much more
shall they not prevail against Christ; therefore be not troubled when thou
shall hear that I am betrayed and crucified. By which it does appear that this
Author understands by the gates of Hell prevailing, that Death and the Grave
should neither prevail over Christ nor his Church, and therefore he could not
understand thereby that it was a promise the Church should not err, and that
the gates of Hell is understood for the gates of the Grave, see Esaias 38.10.
Hezekiah said when the fear of death came upon him, that he should go to the
gates of Sheol, i. e. Grave. So Job 38.17. Psalm. 9.13. Psalm. 107.18.

4 Again, As the gate of Hell cannot be understood for Error, so the Rock here
spoken of, cannot be understood for Peter's person, because it is more agreeing
with the sense of the place, being compared with other Scriptures, and the
Analogy of Faith to understand it of Christ, who is the Rock of Ages, and the
chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20. and 1 Cor. 10.4. they drank of that spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.

So that Peter having professed Christ to be the Son of the living God, our
Lord tells him, that Upon this Rock (or Christ, whom he had made profession of)
he would build his Church; and that though he might be put to death (to use the
words of Chrysostom) yet Peter ought not to be troubled, because death should
not have dominion over him, the gates of death should not prevail against him,
who will swallow up death in victory.

But lastly, What if we pity the poor, and grant you that which you are never
able to prove, (viz.) that by the Gates of Hell not prevailing should be
understood, that Error and Heresy should not prevail against the Church: Yet
it does not follow from hence, that the Church shall be preserved from all
Error. Might you not as well say, that none that believe can sin, because sin
shall not have dominion over them; and that it was impossible for Saints to
die, because Christ has promised them the victory over death: as say, that
because Christ has promised Error shall not prevail over them, that therefore
it is impossible the Church should err in any thing.

Your next Scripture is, Mat. 18.17. He that will not hear the Church, let him
be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publican.

I answer, 1 It does not follow from hence that the Church cannot err, no more
then it follows from your former Arguments, that the Scribes and Pharisees
could not err, because Christ commanded to hear them; But,

2 This Text proves more then you allow; for it proves, that particular
Churches cannot err; for of such a Church Christ speaks, and not of the Church
representative in a general Council; my reason is, because one that is offended
with his brother, if he cannot reclaim him, he must tell the Church, which
cannot be understood for any, but that particular Church among whom he resides;
which, you say, are such as may err in judgment.

3 By the same parity of reason, a single private man cannot err, because the
Text says, he ought to be heard if he admonish his brother of his fault, ver.
15, 16, 17. and that it is his brothers sin if he do not hear him: and the Text
further says, If his brother do hear him, that he has gained his brother.

But if this brother might err, then he might err in admonishing, and the
admonished person in stead of being gained to the Truth, might be gained to an
error. This is the sum of your Argument, I am to hear the Church, therefore
the Church cannot err; might you not as Logically infer, that because I am to
hear a single private brother, therefore a single private brother cannot err;
and by this you would make all the Sons of your Church infallible, like the
Pope your Father; and by this rule Parents are infallible, because they must be
heard by their children.

Your next Scriptures are, Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always to the end of
the world: and Joh. 24.16. I will pray the Father, and he will send you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, which
the World cannot receive: and ver. 26. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost
which the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things into your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you: and Chap.
16.17. I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot hear them now;
howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth.

From which you infer, that if Christ and his Spirit should be with his
Apostles for ever, to lead them into all Truth; it follows, they shall be
preserved from all error.

To which I answer, 1. That this Text in St. Matthew cannot be a good argument
for you, because (you say) you have lost the Original of St. Mathews Gospel,
and cannot tell whether he that did translate it, was an honest man or no.

2 The Spirit of Christ might preserve the Apostles from all Error, and yet
not be engaged to secure the Church from erring to the end of the World.

But 3 I answer further, If this promise was made that the Holy Spirit should
lead the Church in all Ages, into all Truth, it does not follow (as I have
said) that it should lead them irresistably; though it might lead them
sufficiently.

But 4. May I not as well infer, that because the Spirit was promised to
convince the World of sin, because they believe not in Christ, that therefore
all the world cannot be but effectually and irresistably convinced, as you may
say, that because the Spirit is promised to lead into all Truth, that therefore
the Church cannot err, but must be effectually so led.

5 It is called the Spirit of Truth which the World cannot receive, meaning
notorious and wicked men. Now then this Spirit some of those Popes which you
call the Apostles successors, could not have, because many of them have been
notoriously and confessedly wicked; all which does plainly show, that this
promise of the Spirit was made to direct and guide us into a further knowledge
of the Truth, till we come to be perfect in Christ, upon condition that we are
faithful in what we already know. Like unto that promise, Joh. 17.17. If any
man do his will, he shall know of his doctrine: and to this agrees the Rhemi^^
Testament, translating that Text of John 14.15, 16. If you love me keep my
comandements, and I will pray the Father, and he will give you another
Paraclete that he may abide with you for ever. Now how can I be infallible that
the Pope is thus guided, unless I do infallibly know that he loves God and
keeps his Commandments?

6 You say, (...) into all Truth, implies preserving from all error: but this
follow, not, not more, then because the Scriptures say, Gods goodness leads to
Repentance, that therefore all men should be preserved from impenitency.

And lastly, If leading into all truth, implies preserving from all Error, how
comes it to pass, that since your Church (as you say) is an infallible guide
into all Truth, that she does not preserve all her sons from all Error? And if
you shall say see does guide them all sufficiently though not efficiently,
although that be false, yet you have answered your self. For though Gods Spirit
and goodness be sufficient to lead to Truth and Repentance, yet it does not
follow, but there are (as sad experience teaches) multitudes of erring and
impenitent persons.

Your next Text is, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and some Teachers, for perfecting the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ till we come in the union of the
faith; and ver. 14. that we be no more children in understanding, etc. From
which Text you would prove that the succession of the Apostles in the Church,
was to preserve people from being tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, but what then? does this prove the Church cannot err? This means was
used by God for the perfecting of Saints, and yet we see that they are full of
imperfections. Thus God may teach, and the Church not learn; Gods Spirit may
lead, and the Church (like Rome) may be refractory.

Your last Text is, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church of the living God, the Pillar and
ground of Trust. Hence you would infer, that the Church cannot err, because we
may securely rely upon her, as upon a Pillar. To which I answer, That these
words do not respect the universal Church) as you would have it, but the
particular Church which Timothy had the oversight of, in which Paul admonishes
him how he should behave himself.

But 2. If this were granted that the universal Church is here meant, and not a
particular Church; I answer that this proves nothing to your purpose because
Churches and People receive their denomination ordinarily from what they should
be in point of Duty, and not from what they are by necessity. Thus the
Disciples are called the Salt of the Earth, because they were in duty to be so,
and not that there, was a necessity that they could not have been otherwise;
else it had been in vain to threaten them that if they lost their savor they
should be good for nothing, but to be trodden under foot. In like manner the
Church is the Pillar of Truth, and ground of in point of Duty, and yet this
does not hinder, but she may neglect and violate this Duty, and become the
Teacher of Error.

But lastly, The Church may be the Pillar and Ground of Truth, not only because
she should be so, but because in all Ages she is so, in that she teaches and
maintains all things necessary to salvation, but yet she may for all that
err, and be mistaken in some profitable points; and as a Man may be a man that
has some lameness and deformity of Body, so may the Church be a true Church,
though it may be corrupt in Doctrine and Practice, which it will hardly be
freed from till the day in which she shall be presented to her husband a chaste
spouse without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

You proceed, and in p. 30. Assign a fifth Argument, That the Church of God
was the Rule and Judge, and the Infallible Guide, when Christ and his Apostles
was upon the Earth, From whence you would infer, that it is so still; Sir, I
can very well own the Antecedent, and deny the Consequence: But you say, There
is no Reason why the Church should not be so still, unless it be said that the
Apostles were Infallible Guides till the Canon of the Scripture was finished,
and that then Infallibility ceased, etc. But then (you say) what will be the
Consequence; if that the Canon of the sequence; if that the Canon of the
Scripture which the Apostles finished be now uncompleated by the loss of those
Epistles, and Parcels of the Apostles Writings, which (you say) you have proved
to be lost.

I Answer, It will not follow that we shall need your bind guide, if what you
say were true: But Secondly, It follows that your Church is fallible, because
she has not faithfully kept those Epistles, that she says, were committed to
her trust, as I have told you once, and again.

Thirdly, Whereas you say, p. 31, If we had the whole Canon, yet it were not
sufficient to decide all Controversies now on foot in matters of Faith. Sir,
this is but the same over and over, for does it follow, that because all
Controversies are not decided, that therefore the Scripture is not sufficient
to decide them? Surely then it follows, your Church is not sufficient to decide
all Controversies, because the Controversy between the Jesuits, and the
Dominicans, and the Franciscans, and the Dominicans are not yet decided.

But Lastly, You may as well say, that the Grace of God does not sufficiently
teach Men to deny ungodliness, and worldly last, because the world lies in
wickedness, as say the Scriptures are not sufficient to decide Controversies In
Faith, because Controversies in Faith are not decided. This is your Romish
Reasoning.

You come to your last Reason, in page 32. and tell us, Tell none of those
difficulties that were proposed to prove the Scripture not to be the Rule, are
capable of being objected against the Church.

This Argument I have already Answered, by showing that the same and greater
absurdities are objected against your Church. But however I will Examine your
First Reason, since I have not yet met with it, and that is, Because the Church
(you say) is capable of answering those, ends, for which it is proposed, in
that all that submit to it, are of one Faith.

I Answer, Then the Church of England may be this True Church, for all that
submit to her are of one Faith, and if any are not, it is because they submit
not.

Your other Reasons have fallen under consideration in the Answering of your
Arguments about the invalidity of the Scripture, to which I refer the Reader.

You proceed to Answer an Objections page 32. which you say, is, made by those
of the separation (viz.) that these Texts, which you have urged, are to be
understood by the Church Triumphant, and not of the Church Militant in the
World; And after you have set up this pupper of your own (as you phrase it) or
man of straw, you spend your 33, 34, and 35 Pages to fight against it, and
therefore I shall do nothing to part the fray, because that supposed notion is
no friend of mine; therefore I shall leave you to struggle with it as well as
you can.

Having taken it for granted, that there must be an infallible Church, you come
in the last place, page 36. to resolve which is this Church, and this (you say)
is the Roman Church; the sum of your Argument, is this; God has appointed
some Church upon Earth to be our Infallible Judge; Ergo, the Roman Church must
needs be this Infallible Church, because no Church differing from it (that is
none but the Roman Church) can be this Infallible Church.

I Answer, That this in effect is a Woman's Reason, to say, that you are
Infallible, because you are Infallible; for you say, The Roman Church must
needs be so, because none but the Roman Church can be so. No marvel you tell us
Reason must not be our Judge, for fear it should condemn such un-manlike
Arguing: But you add further, page 37. That the Church which is appointed by
God to be this Infallible Judge, must needs have this condition, that she own
her Infallibility.

To which I Answer, That then there was no True Church the first 300 years,
because that there was none that ever owned Infallibility in your sense, unless
it were the Church of Laodicea, who like Rome, said she was rich, and increased
in goods, and had need of nothing, whereas she was poor, and miserable, blind,
and naked.

So that the whole Argument is made up of presumption, for you presume some
Church is Infallible, and then you presume your Church must needs be so,
because no other Church own themselves to be Infallible; but you must needs
give us a better Reason, or else, while we make any use of Reason, we shall not
believe it to be so; for what if any Church should have the confidence to call
themselves Infallible, then your Argument would fall to the ground, and the
Question would then be to be decided either by the Word, or by the Sword, which
of the two were truly Infallible.

Having Answered your Arguments, I shall propose a few Questions to
considerations, wherewithal I shall conclude.

Whereas you say, There must be an Infallible Church on Earth to judge of all
differences?; and that this Church consists of a Pope reciding in, and defining
with a general Council, in which it is represented by its Pastors out of all
Nations; I querie first, How was the Church guided for the first 300 years, in
all which time there was no such general Council?

Secondly, In what time and place was the Church ever so universally
represented by her Pastors out of all Nations, if not, then how could she be
Infallible, being not so represented?

Thirdly, If the Church be no otherwise Infallible, but by general Councils, as
aforesaid, then how can we be guided, when there is no General Councils as at
this day?

Fourthly, If you say we may be guided by those Canons and Decrees which they
made in their respective Sessions; Then I demand how I shall rightly
understand, that those Laws and Canons are truly Translated and Interpreted
since they were given out in a Language that I understand not?

Fifthly, If you shall say, I may know them from the mouth of the Pope, or
Chief Pastor, then I querie whether it may not be possible for him to err,
since many Popes have been Heretics, and have taught contrary to the Law of
God, as that Pope did that told King Henry the 8th, he might marry his Brothers
Wife.

Sixthly, But suppose the Pope did not err in giving me the true sense of
Councils, and their Decrees, then I querie, How every private person shall have
his judgment informed in the Truth without going to Rome?

Seventhly, If you say he may be resolved at home by the Pastors in several
places; then I querie, whether those Pastors may not err, since it is
manifest, that the several Pastors and Churches of Asia did err; and then how
can the members of this Church be sure, they are under an Infallible conduct to
Eternal Life, and that these Pastors teach according to the Doctrine of the
Infallible Church?

VIII. Since you say, that General Councils Lawfully Called by the Pope, their
chief astour cannot err, I querie, How I shall be infallibly assured, when
Councils are so called? Since sometimes the Pope may come in by Simony and
Usurpation, as Boniface the 3 did, and sometimes be a Heritick, as Lyberius
was, who subscribed the Excommunication of Athanasius, in which cases they
ceasing to be lawful Popes, I would then know how I can be sure of a lawful
Council?

IX. Since there must be always a lawful succession of Popes, to make a lawful
succession of True Ministers; How shall I know infallibly that the Minister
that I heat did lawfully so succeed; and this I would know, because if he be
not a lawful Minister, I may not lawfully hear him; And since that sometimes
Heretics have been Popes, and sometimes the Chair has been Usurped, and once
a Woman was Pope, and sometimes there has been two at once; How shall I that
am to hear a private Pastor know whether his Ordination did succeed from a
lawful Pope, and not from some of these?

X. How shall I know what Council I may infallibly adhere unto, since one
Council has opposed another, and some cleave to one Council, and some to
another; the Roman Church they test in the Niceen Council; the Greek Church
they rest in the Council of Arminum, both which, are contrary to the other: how
shall any one be assured of the truth of all those things with a divine
certitude? And yet you make the world believe that all your ways are so plain,
that a fool cannot err in them, and that the Scriptures are doubtful guides,
when no Religion in the World is perplexed with more doubts then yours.

XI. If your Roman Church be this Infallible Church, and all her Doctrines
Infallible, then I querie, if it be not sinful to doubt of the Truth of what
she teaches?

XII. If it be not a sin to doubt of what your Church teaches, then why do you
blame us for questioning your Infallibility?

XIII. But if it be a sin to question the Churches Doctrine, then how came the
Baraeans to be commended for searching the Scriptures to see if what Paul
preached was so or not; and whether might not their searching the Scriptures
have run them upon all those inconveniences of mistaking by false Pointings,
corrupted Copies, false Interpretations, to the multiplying of Sects and
Heretics, if it might, why are they commended for searching?

XIV. How can the reason of the Jews erring be, because they did not know the
Scriptures, if the knowledge of them would not have been a sufficient guide to
the Truth?

XV. But if you shall say, we cannot know the Scriptures but by the true
Church, then I querie, how shall I know the true Church, since there are as
many different opinions about which is the true Church, as there is about which
is the true sense of Scriptures?

XVI. If you say the Scriptures decide the question, and guide us to the true
Church, then whether this be not to speak Daggers, to prove the knowledge of
the Scriptures by the Church, and the knowledge of the Church by the Scriptures?

XVII. But if you say we know the Church by universal Tradition, then I querie,
whether your Church can be so known, since a great part of the Christian World,
has and does disown her; witness the Greek Church, together with most of the
Churches in Europe?

XVIII. Whether then you can show such an universal Tradition for your Pope and
Church, as we can do for the Scriptures, to which we do well to take heed, as
to a light that shines in a dark place till the day dawn, and the Day Star
arise in our hearts.

XIX. Where was the Infallibility of the Roman Church in the time of
Athanasius, when he complained, totus mundus Arianizat, that the whole world
Ariantized.

XX. I demand, Where will be the Visibility and Infallibility of your Roman
Church in the time of the great Antichrist? which your Rhemish Annotators say
shall come toward the end of the World, and abolish the public Exercise of
all Religion, wherein consists the worship of the true God, and shall pull
down all kind of Religious worship save that which shall be done to himself
alone: See Rhem. Annot. on 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. How will your Church appear
conspicuously and universally to be a guide to Fools infallibly in those days?

FINIS.

