THE Corrector Corrected: Or, some Sober REFLECTIONS On a late BOOK of Mr.
THOMAS DANSON's, Published by him (as he pretends) to Correct an immodest and
false Account (as he calls it) of two Conferences between him and Mr. Ives,
formerly Printed about the Saints Perseverance.

By which the former Accounts of the said Disputations are Justified, And Mr.
Danson's latter Account justly blamed, as being filled with Impertinencies,
Railings, false Accusations, unchristian and unmanly Reflections upon the
Person, Opinion, and Trade of his Antagonist.

Evidenced to the Judgment of every Ingenious Reader.

By Jer. Ives.

Job 11.3 Should thy lies make men hold their peace? And when thou mockest,
shall no man make thee ashamed?

Contemptum stulti contemnere maxima laus est; Contemni a stulto dedecus esse
nego.

London, Printed 1672.

THE Corrector Corrected, etc.
IT has always been, and still is the Method of the adversaries to Truth, to
make Calumnies and Falsehood, the greatest part of their offensive Armor;
having learned that old Greek advice, That to Calumniate stoutly, for that how
perfectly the wound of reproach be healed, there will remain a scar; and though
we wipe away with never so much care the dirt thrown at us, some sullage will
be left behind: Accordingly this was the Expedient the Pagans used against the
Primitive Christians, to put them in the Skins of Beasts, and shapes of
Monsters, and then worry them to death. Had this been only the stratagem of
Heathens, the wonder had long since ceased: But alas! these Unchristian Weapons
have been too much used in Christian Warfare; as if Christianity could not
subsist without a Heathenish Auxiliary, It is sad to observe these Pagan
Copies, so often transcribed by Christian Combatants, who though they pretend
to advance Truth, yet make Calumny and Falsehood their Instruments. Now that
these have been the chief Weapons of Mr. Danson's Warfare, together with his
idle and bald Similitudes, his Illogical Arguing, his giving the go-by to that
he could not answer, his notorious falsifying of what was both said and
Printed; with which not only his disputing, but his late Book abounds withal;
the evincing whereof is the ground of this present Undertaking.

I shall begin with his Calumniating, wherewith he begins his Book, telling the
Reader in the very beginning of his Epistle, That I am guilty of such
Immorality in Conversation, that they are ashamed of me that do agree with me
in Opinion; again, that I am guilty of detestable Arrianisme, and denying the
Godhead of Christ, and that I have never repented of it as he knows of; and
therefore all Christians by Profession have cause to be ashamed of me, etc.
Upon the whole of this Charge, I shall make these modest Demands.

First, What Mr. Danson means by Immorality? For if by Immorality he means a
coming short of the strictness of the Moral Law, which is to love God with all
my heart, and my neighbor as my self, I must with the rest of mankind plead
guilty; and if this be Mr. Danson's meaning, he should not have thrown the
first stone till himself had been without sin: But if by Immorality he means
some capital and notorious Crimes, (for that seems to be his meaning, because
he says they are such, for which those are ashamed of me that agree with me in
Opinion) I here upon demand.

Secondly, Whether Mr. Danson charge me with Immorality upon his own
knowledge, or upon hearsay and report? If upon his own knowledge, why did he
not use means to reclaim me before he did publicly defame me? and instance the
particular Acts wherein I was thus guilty, together with the names of his
Evidences: If Mr. Danson had this story of my Immorality but upon report, I
demand whether it is not gross Immorality, contrary to the Law of God and
Nature, not only to take up, but to Print a report or reproach against ones
neighbor? It Is contrary to the Law of Nature, because Mr. Danson would not be
so served himself; contrary to the written Law of God, Levit. 19.16. Psalm.
15.3. Jer. 20.10. Ezekiel. 22.9. which expressly forbids taking up reports against
our neighbor.

Thirdly, I demand whether Mr. Danson thinks George Whitehead did well to
report, and Print in his Book of the Divinity of Christ, Page 49. that he was
given to gameing, Bowls, and Nine-pins, etc. Yet however George was more
ingenious; because he instances the particulars of his Charge, and not like Mr.
Danson, to traduce in general terms, and instance in no particulars. Now if
this was ill done in him, thus to report of Mr. Danson, surely it cannot be
well done of Mr. Danson, thus to take up and Print Reports against me.

Fourthly, Whereas Mr. Danson says, that such is my Immortality, that they are
ashamed of me that agree with me in opinion; I demand how that can be, when I
have conversed this 30. years among those of my own opinion, and with whom I
still have my conversation through the Grace of God, whom I dare appeal to in
this matter, and who were the men, as Mr. Danson confesses in the 2 Page of
his Epistle, that did substitute me to dispute with him, though he says they
are ashamed of me.

As to the second part of this charge, that I am a detestable Arrian, and deny
the Godhead of Christ, for which all Christians should be ashamed of me; this
because it is a particular instance, requires a particular Answer: I therefore
deny that ever I denied the Godhead of Christ; I did never by Word or Writing
assert any such thing, but the contrary. and I challenge any man to prove it
either from my Words or Writings; for there is no other way of proof that I
know of, and to put the matter further out of doubt, and roll away this
reproach. I do profess before God, Angels and Men, that I do believe Jesus
Christ to be God blessed for ever, Amen, according to Romans 9.5. not only my
Lord, but my God, John 20.28. And to the truth of this I appeal to all
Christians that know me, whether I have not, and do not give Divine Honor and
Adoration to Jesus Christ the Son of God, of whom the Author to the Hebrews
thus speaks, and which I do firmly believe, Heb. 1.8. But unto the Son he
says, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever: Whence it is not only men, but
even all the Angels of God are required to Worship him, Ver. 6.

Lastly, upon the whole of this charge I demand, whether he that publishes, or
reports any one for scandalous and blasphemous, (for such is imorality and
denying the Godhead of Christ) and does not publish his Evidence, ought not
justly to be suspected to be the Author of those reports, and the Inventor of
those evil things.

After he has done with this, he begins to beat me with barbarism, telling me
that I out-faced him, Epist. Page 3. That I was more bold then wise; because I
sent to him to desire him to appoint time and place to view the Copy of the
disputes before I Printed them, Epist. Page 4. Again in Page 49. he says, I
make no Conscience of lying to slu my Adversary, and that I was rude and
clamerous, and that he could not be heard for my rudeness, Page 40. 50. He
reflects upon my Trade, Page 8. calls me impudence in the height, Page 58.
Tells me I have a brow of Brass, Page 84. So in the dispute he called me
ignorant, disingenious, impudent fellow, see my Book Page 156. 158. and in Page
41. of his Book, he calls me ignoand disingenious, upon the whole I demand of
any man that has not polluted his credit and his Conscience to, whether such
words of this Preacher are ever like to Administer Grace to either hearers or
readers? 2 whereas he charges me with rude and uncivil behavior in general
terms; I demand whether he has instanced in all his Book of any one hard word,
rude or uncivil expression that fell from my lips in the disputations, or from
my Pen in the publishing of them, though often provoked by his ill language. I
challenge envy it self to give me an instance and yet this man complains of my
rudeness, and in his Epistle Page 2, confidently tells his Reader, that those
that were absent knew how I demeaned myself as perfectly as they that were
present: Surely he thinks all that know me have a Spirit of Divination, else
they could never know my behavior, ^s PERFECTLY in their absence, as if they
were present with me, and to make me amends; for all this he tells his Reader
in his Epist e Page 6. that he forbears to enlarge; because it would but give
tht world a sight of rudeness and impertenency in their natural deformity. Now
the man think I must thank him for his favor, but I shall only say, stul orum
gratia in grata. He complains Page 65. that he could not be heard for my
Stentorian voice, a hard word, which he found in some of his Boys Dictionaries,
taken from a Gracian, whose name was Stentor, who with his voice, it is said,
would make a greater noise then 50. men together, such a voice I have, if you
will believe Mr. Danson, thus this man's Tongue does traduce by instinct, and is
so venomous that it cannot touch unless it sting, and his Pen drops a train of
sly and malicious words, and that (he thinks) is enough to blow up any ones
reputation by this Art (as one well observes) Men are wounded with doubtful
intimations, and stabbed with an oblique like look, it is but raising
suspicions, and an indifferent Logitian will find out the Catagorical meanings
of those oblique reprochings, and as if slanders lay point blank with the level
of his Genus he begins to sow this Seed in the morning of his Book, and in the
evening of it this hand does not rest; he says in the close of his Book, That
there is not a ruder sort of people (the quakers not excepted) then the
Arminian Anabaptists, and this he says is the common opinion that sober persons
have of them, thus you see that one person is too mean a prey for his great
Spirit to quarry upon, a whole party is little enough to fall by his fatal
blows, thus as with the Jaw bone of an Ass heaps upon heaps we fall by
thousands, I shall close this with a sober saying of Dr. Sibs upon the
Canticles Page 285. This (says he) is a thing that springs from the poisonous
pride of men's hearts, that when they cannot raise themselves by their own worth
they will endeavor to do it by the ruining another credit. Thus Mr. Crandon,
Mr. Eyres, Mr. Bagshaw, deals with Mr. Baxter, the former by solemnly accusing
him in print for a Papist, and the second by charging him also in Print, that
when he writ against Antinomians, that he meant Antipapists, and that he was a
Socinian, and a Papist, and a Jesuit, so confession of Faith, Page 6. the
latter, viz. Mr. Bagshaw accuses him for one of the worst sort of Heretics;
Bagshaw Defense of the Antidote, in his Advertisement at the latter end of the
Book: And this way the Jesuits went to defame Luther and Calvin, by spreading
it abroad, that they denied the Majesty of God, and the Deity of Christ. This
way Mr. Edwards in his Gangrena took to bespatter all persons whose Opinions he
could not confute; and this way Mr. Danson takes to bespatter me, as if his
design were more to blast his Adversaries Fame, then to confute his Errors;
and for the better effecting of it, his Book abounds with uncouth and bald
Similitudes, thereby to affect the ears of the vulgar, whose temper is aptly
suited to receive ill impressions.

In page 57. of his Book, when he could not reply to the force of my Answer, he
instead of rejoyning, tells his Reader, that my Answer did me no more service,
then a Mouse struggling to get out of a Tar-barrel; and in his Epistle, page 2.
as if he had lately been at a Cock-fighting, he says, If he should not have
disputed, I would have crowed like a Cock on a Dunghill; but to whom this
similitude is best applied, may easily be discerned: for when I sent a Letter
to Mr. Danson, to tell him I could not meet at the time he appointed me, and to
which I never agreed, yet this man sent me word in a Letter, that he would not
alter the time, (though of his own appointing) but accordingly met (if I may
use his phrase) upon his own Dunghill, viz the place of his own appointing,
where he took the liberty to crow, sufficiently knowing before that there would
be none to oppose him. He further adds, as if he had been at a Fencing-School,
that if he had not disputed, my party would have gone away singing, IO
TRIVMPHE: And in page 6. of his Epistle, as if he had lately been at the
Bear-Garden, he comes in with his Bearish Similitude, and tell me, That like
the Bear I licked my Cubs into a better shape then they had at their Birth.
Sure this is barharous English for a Scholar to talk of the Birth of Bears:
Again, in his Epistle page 5. he says I made him father my brats. Is not this
rich Rhetoric? But his stock of Similitudes being all exhausted, he goes a
borrowing of a greazy one of Dr. Tho. Goodwin, as himself confesses in his
Book, page 37. by which he would compare the increase of Grace to making of
Candles; When a Candle (says he) is put into a Fat of boiled Tallow, every
time it is put in, it comes out bigger and bigger, etc. Really it argues a man
has but a little Learning, and a very barren Wit that must go a borrowing for
such sorry Similitudes: Thus you see he loves to disport himself with Tropes,
Metaphors, and Similitudes. But to proceed, his Logic corresponds with his
Rhetoric; for if it be true as he says, (then which nothing is more false)
that I did not rightly l^y down some two or three of his Arguments in his own
terms; and if it were true, that sometimes I denied the major when the
Syllogism was Hypothetical, and therefore should have denied the Consequence
rather; suppose all this that he corrects me for, were deservedly to be
corrected, yet that which he does not deny when I accuse him of it, I hope that
may be taken for granted, (and that his silence herein, according to the
Proverb, may well be interpreted for consent) and and then let the Reader but
consider how often I charged him in the Dispute with begging the Question,
instead of proving it with attempting to make Arguments several times one after
another, and could not for a long time conclude the Question; see page 84. to
91. of my Book: And did not I in the Disputation thrice appeal to his Friend
Mr. Fowler, who also gave it against him? which did not satisfy him, but still
he would have argued without concluding the Question in debate. See page 94.
how often did I charge him with running in a Ring, and disputing circularly,
and of false Syllogisms, arguing idem per idem, to all which he makes no
defense, but says page 43. I wronged him by saying, he argued that what ever
was potential has been done; yet as if the man and his senses were parted, he
confesses he argued, that if Believers can fall away, some have; and that he
did argue a posse ad esse, which is in English the same thing; therefore I
conclude, that he being conscious of the Truth of what I charged him withal,
he thought it the best way to pass it over in silence, as he does those
Quotations out of St. Austin, where I show beyond contradiction, that not only
^e, but Prosper and Fulgentius, and the Church of God for thirteen or fourteen
hundred years were of my mind touching the Point in Question; which he makes no
reply to, though this was stiffly denied in the Disputation.

Again, page 43. of my Book, I charge him with taking up my Interpretation of
the first of John to confute the Quakers, when he discoursed with them; and
with taking up the Quakers Interpretation of the same Text, to confute me, as
any man may see, that compares 42, 43, 44, 45. of my Book, with page 3, 4. and
6.36. and 44. of his Book called The Quakers folly, much like those fraudulent
Chapmen, that have one weight to buy by, and another to sell by. Now he in his
late Book, instead of answering so material an Objection tells the Reader page
9. that it is so trivial, that it deserves a smile rather then an answer: An
easy way to answer Objections, which was a frequent humor in Mr. Danson, and
many others of his way then present at the Disputation, to fall a laughing and
scoffing, on purpose to animate the people in so doing; see my Book page 114,
115. for no other reason, but because I told them that the Seed of God, 1 John
2. might be understood for the Word of God, according as Christ interprets the
phrase, Mat. 13. And though I blamed him and them in their Disputations for
their Levity; yet he neither denies the Charge, nor makes any other Defense.
But I understand that this is not the first time that he and his party has
been charged with it; George Whitehead in Print complaining of it, in his
Account of the Disputations between him and Mr. Danson, though I confess Mr.
Danson says more for himself in his reply to George Whitehead, then his
conscience would suffer him to say in his reply to me, viz. that he did speak
several times to still the people of his Persuasion when he disputed with the
Quakers; though he would never open his lips upon that account, in his
disputing with me; though he saw me take so much pains to entreat those of his
party to be silent and civil.

Likewise when I charge him with saying, he could not prove his major
Proposition, page 84. so great was the straight he was then in, that he is not
yet out of it; for else we should have heard him say something for himself in
his Reply, but not a word of this.

Another main thing he gives the go-by, is my charging his Doctrine with
Novelty, and to symbolize with Antinominianism, to those many Instances I bring
of the Antiquity of the contrary Opinion, quoted by Mr. Baxter out of St.
Austin, and others, he says nothing, but quotes Dr Kendall, Hier. Zanch See
his Book page 80, 81 but not a word what they say; and surrher tell us, that
St. Austin writ a Book de persev. Sanct, and distinguishes often between
common and special grace: But what is this to the purpose? Da^h this take off
the force of what St. Austin says about the possibility of true Believers
falling away, (which I urged in my Book once and again, and he s^ith nothing to
it) and to what I alleged out of Mr. Baxter, he says page 81. that worthy
person does not determine against what he holds; What a piece of impertinency
is here? Do not I say once and again, page 173, 175. that though it was not Mr.
Baxter, own persuasion, yet he confesses it was the persuasion of the Church
of God for thirteen or fourteen hundred years; and for this Mr. Baxter quotes
good Authority, which instead of taking off, he says not a word to, only
tells his Reader what I told him before, that Mr. Baxer dissents from me. But
what is this to the purpose, unless I had charged Mr. Baxter with being of my
Opinion.

But the Ancient Churches, as well as Modern, which I do say were of my mind,
Mr. Danson has no mind to meddle with; and whereas I do charge their Doctrine
to symbolize with Antinomianism in many particular Instances, too plain to be
denied; instead of taking off those Instances, he brings in Mr. Carril, to whom
he says he subscribes, which, says he, speaks the sense of them, (meaning of
those men whose Books I quote) see his Book page 81. where he quotes these
passages from Mr. Carrill, on of his Comment upon these words, Job 10.15. If I
be wicked, woe unto me, etc They (says he) put dangerous suppositions contrary
to this, that say, Let a godly man be never so wicked, let him sin as much as
he will, yet it sall be well with him [this says Mr. Danson is the language of
such as Dr. Crisp, which Mr. Ives quotes, and we disown] and then he adds,
though there be a truth in it, that how much soever a godly man sins he
shall be pardoned. For the unriddling this Riddle, I must make these enquiries.

First, Whether it be not as dangerous a supposition to suppose that if a godly
man sin never so much, he shall be pardoned, as to suppose that if a godly man
be never so wicked, it shall be well with him, since the latter of these Mr.
Carril and Mr. Danson both say is contrary to what Job supposes; but the
former they say has a truth in it.

Secondly, Since Mr. Danson says, that it is the language of such as Dr. Crisp
to say, that let a godly man sin never so much it shall be well with him, which
(says he) is the language which we disown; yet withal he adds, that there is
a truth in it, that how much soever a godly man sins he shall be pardoned;
whereupon I demand how Mr. Danson can disown it, and in the next Sentence say
there is a truth in it?

Thirdly, I demand how it can be a dangerous supposition, and yet a true
supposition? To suppose that if a godly man sins never so much he shall be
pardoned; for he says there is a truth in it, and yet says it is dangerous;
but what danger is there to assert and believe a truth, unless it be a danger
to Mr. Dansons reputation when his people shall perceive him so palpably
contradictious to himself?

Fourthly, Whereas Mr. Carril and Mr. Danson (both say) that there is a truth
in that supposition, that how much soever a godly man sins he shall be
pardoned; and yet in the next words tells us, that the Scripture uses no such
language. And Mr. Carril (upon the same place in Job) says, The Spirit of God
makes no such supposition; and the form of wholesome words, teaches every man
rather to speak thus, if I am wicked woe unto me: Hence I demand how there can
be a truth in any divine Doctrine which is not the language of holy Scripture?
No marvail Mr. Danson was angry, and called me a conceited ignorant Fellow,
when I called upon him for a plain Text to prove his Doctrine; see my Book,
page 156. since he says there is a truth in this Doctrine, though (he says)
it be not the language of the Scripture, nor according to the form of wholesome
words.

He that can resolve these questions, and can reconcile such palpable
contradictions, shall be my magnus Apollo (viz.) that a Doctrine can be
dangerous and contrary to what Job speaks, and yet true, a supposition as the
Spirit of God no where supposes, and which is not found in the language of
holy Scripture, and form of wholesome words, and yet true; and which Mr. Danson
himself says he disowns, and yet after all this says, there is a truth in it!
When Mr. Danson has reconciled these Sentences, I will have them advanced into
the number of Orthodox paradoxes. But what is all this to the matter objected
in page 104 of my book (viz.) that Mr. Danson says in his book of the Quakers
folly, page 38. That David when he was guilty of Murder and Adultry, was not in
a condemned, but a justified state; This though I charge him with it once and
again; yet like a man afraid or ashamed, he passes by it, and says nothing at
all to it; and whereas I charge others of them (in diverse if their books which
I refer to in my Appendix) with saying the regenerate dye in Christ, though
they dye in impenitency; and that the people of God need not question their
condition, though their sins be never so great; and that God loved the
Corinthians in their Adulteries, Idolatries, and ungodlyness, as much as when
they were believers, washed, justified, and sanctified. And that it is not the
manner of Gods people to confess and forsake their sin in order to Salvation,
and that they that cannot preach mex sins are forgiven, till they see them
repent and reform their lives, are ignorant preachers, and that no sin any true
believer can commit, can move God to hate them, neither will God love them ever
a whit the worse, though they commit never so many and so great sins; These are
the Antinomian notions I charge Mr. Danson and diverse of his Brethren withal,
of which charge he in his book promised to clear them. See his Epistle to his
book, page 6. But I think they will never give him thanks for his labor, when
they shall find that he takes no notice of all these pernicious doctrines,
asserted by them, and charged upon them, as any one may see that reads his
book; but instead of clearing them, brings Mr. Carril to speak the same thing
for them all, by which he confirms the whole charge, (viz.) that if a godly man
sins never so much, it shall be forgiven him, though the Scripture (says he)
uses no such language. But if this godly man have not sinned himself out of
his senses, he will never believe such Ministers that tell them of pardons that
are not to be found in the Scriptures, nor supposed by the spirit of God, as
Mr. Carril and Mr. Danson confesses; see Mr. Carril upon Job 10.16. and Mr.
Danson subscribing to him in his book page 81.. Sure I am a little ticket from
Rome (as one calls it) will as soon assure a godly man of pardon, though he
sins never so much (as Mr. Danson can assure him in the like case, if such
doctrines are not the language of holy Scripture) For would not this be a
wonderful Cordial to a godly man in an hour of desertion and temptation, to
tell him that he need not be cast down; for though he has sinned never so much
against God he shall be pardoned; and to assure him of the truth of this
comfortable Doctrine, tell him Mr. Danson says, and Mr. Carril says, there is
a truth in it, though it be not the language of holy Scripture. Were it not
much better for this godly man to send for a Romish Priest, and take absolution
from him; for in so doing he shall have the Faith of their Church for his
assurance, though he has no word of God for it, and I think that as good, if
not better, then the assurance of such pardons Mr. Danson talks of, which he
says are not found in the language of holy Scripture.

Other antinomian passages he has, p. 32. 33. which like the Papists he
accounts for truth, though they are not found in the language of the holy
Scripture, (viz.) that David in his committing Murder, and Adultry, did never
wickedly depart from God, and to prove this, he suborns the 18th. Psalm for a
witness, where David says, I have not wickedly departed from God: whence he
infers, that David never wickedly departed fron him. but whoever considers 2 Samuel 22. shall find that David likewise faith, that he did not depart from Gods
statutes, and Psalm. 119. v. 101, 102. I have (says David) refrained my feet
from every evil way, and I have not departed from thy judgments. May not a man
as well argue that David never sinned, because he says, I have refrained my
feet from every evil way, and that he had never departed from Gods statutes
because he says, I have not departed from them, as say as Mr. Danson says,
that because David says, I have not wickedly departed from God, that therefore
he never wickedly departed from him; For by the same parity of reason that
David did not wickedly depart from God in the committing Murder, and Adultry;
because he says, I have not wickedly departed from God: I say by the same
reason he did not sin in committing Murder, and Adultry; because the Scripture
likewise says in the forecited places, that he had refrained his feet from
every evil way.

Again, we have more of this Antinomian Spirit moving upon the Superficies of
the 30th. and 31st p. of his book, in words at length and not in figures, he
says, though Christ might justify a divorce; yet it appears not that he will
sue out one against any believer that is guilty of bodily Adultry.

This is the man that tells his Reader in his Epistle, p. 6. that he will
vindicate their doctrine from the charge of Antinomianism, and that he disowns
the language of such as Dr. Crisp, etc. p 88.

Now in p. 195. of my book, I quote Dr. Grisp in his Sermon of Christ is the
way, saying, that if a believer be overtaken with a gross sin, none dare serve
a Writ of Damnation upon him.

And though Mr. Danson would make his Reader believe, he disowns Dr. Crisp etc.
yet he says the same thing; for he says, Christ will not sue out a divorce
against a believer, though guilty of bodily Adultry. Dr. Crisp says, none can
serve a Writ of Damnation pon them, though they are guilty of gross sins. Thus
you may see how Mr. Danson clears himself of Antomianism, and disowns Dr.
Crisps Language; just like him that to clear himself of worshipping the
similitude of the Virgin Mary, and to disown any such charge said, that he did
not worship her similitude; but he worshipped her likeness; after this rate
does Mr. Danson disown Dr. Crisp, and Antinomianism.

I now proceed to answer his false charges touching our conferences, which I
doubt not but I shall discharge my self of in the judgment of all impartial
persons, at a better rate then Mr. Danson has cleared himself of Antomianism.

The two main things he charges my book, with is, omissions of many things that
past in the Disputes; and asserting some things to have been spoken by him,
that he never spoke.

To this I answer, First, that I did not write out the Disputes my self; but
they were writ out by a person that is neither Presbyterian, nor Anabaptist,
who took both days conferences in Characters; and had no reason that I know of,
to be partial; and who is ready if need be to arrest upon Oath, that those
things were asserted by Mr. Danson in the conferences which he denies in his
book; among which, this is one passage, in page 83. of my book, (viz.) that
whatever is potential has been done: this Mr. Danson in the 43d p. of his book
says, were not his but my words.

But besides what may be evidenced by him that writ the Dispute, that these
were Mr. Dansons words; I offer the consideration of what is published in p 83,
84 of my book, where this very proposition of Mr. Dansons, was more largely
debated him, and I pressed him to the proof of it, to that height, that he was
forced to answer he could not prove it; as any may see that reads my book p. 84
and which he does not so much as deny in any part of his own book.

But further, to show my sincerity in this matter, and that I did no way design
to abuse Mr, Danson, or he World with falcities; I writ to him to appoint me
time and place when and where I might meet with him, that he might have liberty
to correct the Copy, that it might be published by consent, the Copy of which
Letter is printed in my Book, and confessed by Mr. Danson in the 4. Page of the
Epistle to his Book, and for which he tells me I was mo^e bold then wise. Now
let all ingenious men judge whether my thus sending to him to come and view the
Copy, and correct it if need were, did bespeak me to be a person that intended
to misrepresent him, and whether his refusing to meet me upon so fair an
invitation, and upon so just an occasion; does not rather bespeak him too
conscious of his own folly, and therefore was unwilling to meet, least he
should have been contributary to the manifestation of it

Besides (as Mr. Danson deridingly tells his Reader once and again) I had all
my Arguments written in my Note Book, and so might be better capable to correct
any error in the Scribe. then Mr. Danson, who was so far from having Arguments
in his hand, that at some turns he had none in his head, but sometimes when he
was right in his Premises, he was out in his Conclusion, and other whiles when
he concluded the thing denied, his Premises was false, from whence he would
infer it; this I have charged him with several times, which was so manifest,
that he durst not in this matter plead not guilty in all his Book, and
therefore I leave any to judge, whose Judgments are not forestalled, whether
(these Circumstances considered) I have added any thing to the conferences, or
imputed any thing to Mr. Danson, but what in truth he is chargeable with.

But I have an Argument yet more convincing, to prove he charge me falsely;
because he complains that I have left out of my Book diverse things to the
weakening his Arguments and Answers, that I might render him ridiculous. Now
that man as shall be so daringly bold as to tell his Reader once and again,
that I have left that out of my Book which is plainly and expressly in it, may
be justly suspected to speak falsely in other things, and that he charges me
falsely in this matter, appears,

First, In Page 2. of his Book, he says, the term true believers was not in
the minor proposition denied. Now whoever looks into the 2. and 3. Page of my
Book shall see it is both implied and expressed, besides he expresses it in his
own Book in his repition of the Argument, Page 2, and yet he says, the term
true believers was not in the minor proposition, I see the Proverb is true that
A -- must have a good memory; for he reports the words in his own account he
gives of the dispute, and presently after says those words were not in the
Arguments.

Secondly, He says Page 2 that in my account of the conference, I left out his
distinction of what was impossible to be done, by reason of the Divine decree,
or promise though otherwise possible, [with respect to the nature of the thing]
all this (says he) Mr. Ives left out.

When I have not only put it all in; but have added a Paraphrase upon that
distinction in a different Character, and that I have put in this distinction
in my answers, appears in the 27 Page of my Book, where you have me speaking to
Mr. Danson in these words. You gave this distinction that the command was
possible in it self, or in relation to the subject commanded, but not possible
with respect to the decree of God.

And in a few lines following, I Print Mr. Danson repling in these words. I
said that those Cautions that are given to visible believers in general, that
they should take heed of falling away, did suppose the possibility of it in the
nature of the thing (in true believers also) because man is but mutable, and
Grace is but a Creature, and therefore certainly may be lost, and yet it is
certainly impossible as to true believers upon the supposition of the Divine
decree, and Christ promise to presence and uphold the Grace of true believers,
to which I subjoyn in a different Character as a further Answer upon his
distinction, this is just as if a man should say the whole earth is possible to
be overflowed with Water, with respect to the Nature of the thing, though with
respect to the decree of God it is impossible, but then I add, that if God has
made such a decree, no man has any more reason to fear a universal inundation,
because of such a decree, then he had to fear it if it were impossible, with
respect to the nature of the thing, in like manner if it be impossible to fall
from Grace with respect to the decree of God, there is no more reason to fear
falling then there would have been, had it been impossible with respect to the
nature of the thing. Thus I not only mention his distinction, but takes pains
to argue it of in Page 27 and 28. of my Book, and yet this man has the
confidence to tell his Reader in Page 2. of his Book, that I left it out, and
relate only his denial of the Major.

Thirdly, A third omission he charge me with is that in my Book, I left all
the explication (he gave) of inlightning which he infered from 1 John 5. Luke
4.1. how that all inlightning was not a Character of true believers unless the
Devil, be a true believer; See his Book Page 10. Now that this is a notorious
falsity any one may see, that reads my Book, Page 46. 47. in which Pages I
bring in Mr. Danson, thus answering upon this distinction. A person (says he)
may be so far enlightened (and not a true believer) as to assent to this
proposition that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, 1 John 5. compared with Luke 4
4. here are both the Texts that he grounds the distinction, and the explication
it self, and then in Page 47. I bring him in giving a further explication of
himself in these words, I have shown you (says he) that pesons may be so far
enlightened, as to believe that Jesus is the Christ, as the Devils themselves
did, yet (he says Page 10.) all this explication of inlightning I have
omitted, if men can speak falsely at such a wilful rate, they deserve not to be
credited when they speak the truth.

Fourthly, He says I omitted his Argument of the 1. John 3.9. Whosoever is
born of God cannot sin, etc. see his Book P. 47. Now see my Book Page 101, 102,
103. where I bring in Mr. Danson, not only quoting the Text, but inferring from
it several times that believers cannot sin as wicked men do, as a y may see
that reads my book, where I express and r^peat his Arguments with all his
improvements of it, and yet this man says says I have omited it.

Fif^hly, He says my disingenuity is remarkable, that I leave out the word
Spiritual, which (says he) I did often, perhaps not always add as a limitation
of the promises made to Israel; See his book p. 56.

Here Mr. Danson charge me with an Emphasis, not only for being
disingenious, but adds, that I am remarkably disingenious for leaving out the
word Spiritual, in his argument on Jer. 32. But Mr. Danson is the more
remarkably dishonest for falc^fying my book, and abusing his Render, that
perhaps may never compare both ^ooks together, for this very word Spiritual I
mention six times in 5 pages one after another, as spoken by Mr. Danson by
which he limits the promise in the 32d of Jer. as made to Israel in things
spiritual; and yet Mr. Danson is so carnal as to say, I am remarkably
disingenious for leaving it out; for proof hereof, read my book p. 131. where
you will find, I charge him for running in a Ring, and disputing circularly;
and therefore pray him to prove the promises in Jer. 32. are made to all true
believers: then I bring in Mr. Danson, giving this answer, IN SPIRITUAL THINGS
says he, here I mention the word the first time, again, I mention it the
second time in page 132. where I charge him with saying, whatever is predicated
of all the Israel of God, is predicated of all true believers; to this I bring
in Mr. Danson giving this answer, I told you (says he) IN SPIRITUAL THINGS.
The third time I mention it, is in p. 132. That there may be some promises made
to the Israel of God, that are not appropriated to all true beleivers; I bring
Mr. Danson in using this limitation, I say (says he) as to SPIRITVAL blesings;
I mention him using the same phrase a fourth time in the same forecited p. 133.
this clause (says he) I will put my fear in their hearts, IS SPIRITUAL, my
argument (says he) lies in that; the fifth time I mention the word, is in p.
134. of my book, there I bring in Mr. Danson speaking thus, I bring this Text
(says he) to prove that the phrase the Israel of God, comprehends all true
believers; because (says he) that the promise that is here made is SPIRITVAL.
A 6th. time I mention the word, is in p. 135. of my book, where I tell him, he
is to conclude that all the promises that are made to the Israel of God, are
made to all true believers: To this I bring in Mr. Danson, giving this answer,
I say (says he) it is the promise in SPIRITUAL things.

I have put this word Spiritual in Capitals, that all may see he is as
capitally Criminal in depraving my Writings, both in the words, and very letter
of them, as he is in defaming my person; for every passage that threatens
danger to his cause must be mutilated and dismembered; and as Sampson was by the
Philistines, lose its hair and eyes, and then (as one well observes upon the
same occasion) be made sport for the whole party.

6ly Mr. Danson accuses me in p. 49. of his book for saying, that the promise
of the Land of Canaan had no condition expressed or implied in all the
Scripture, which is notoriously false; for it was only a stranger that was at
the Dispute, that did accuse me for saying so, but I presently convinced him of
his mistake: for which he publicly craved my pardon, as I relate it in my
book, 122. and which is not denied by Mr. Danson; and yet he mounts upon
confidence, and says I said so.

7ly. Whereas in my Appendix I charge Mr. Danson, and diverse other Ministers;
for making one heart with Dr. Crisp, by their publishing Antinomian notions,
that tend to Ranterism: Mr. Danson replies, that how smooth^y soever I th nk to
ca ry it, Dr. Crisp speaks of the Elect; but the other Divines speak of
Believers; See his book, p. 82. But this is as false as the rest; for I
sometimes bring in Dr. Crisp, applying these notions to Believers, as well as
they see my book, p. 195. none (says he) dare serve a Writ of Damnation on a
Believer, though he should b^ overtaken with gross sins; and some of those
other Divines, as he calls them, applies the like sayings to the E ect, as well
(it not as ill) as Dr. Crisp, for Mr. Eyres (whom Dr. Owen commends, and whom I
quote in my book, p. 196. (says, that the Elect Corinthians had no more sight
to Heaven after they believed, then they had in the midst of their Fornicators,
Th^fts, and Extortions; And yet this man tells his Reader a story as if it were
Dr. Crisp that applied these sayings to the Elect; their Ministers understood
them of Belieuers.

There are many more of this kind, which I forbear to name, knowing that these
instances may serve sufficiently to show all so^^^ Christians what spirit
inspired him in inditeing: his book, which though it consists of six sheets of
Paper, about 3 of those sheets are spent in creating new Argum^nts and Answers,
that he confess^th were not urged in the Dispute; all which will show that he
has better ski l to answer Arguments of his own making then mine: But I shall
leave the Reader to judge whether Mr. Danson has sufficiently answered my
Arguments, or proved his own, by comparing the books together.

FINIS.

