THE Inconveniences of a long Continuance Of the same PARLIAMENT.
THAT there is a necessity of a Government among Mankind, is admitted by all
wise men; but to convince mad men and fools of this, is too great a task.
Johannes Woolebius in his Compendium, Theolo. Christ. says, that it is unworthy
in a Christian so much to seem to mistrust the Divine Authority of the
Scripture, as to make any question of it. It being a Principle so necessary to
be believed, as it ought not to be brought into doubt by Disputes. To the like
purpose it may be said that it is unworthy in an English Cummonwealths-man, to
bring it into debate whether or no the Sovereignty of this Realm be in the King
alone, dis-joyned from any other persons; and true it is, there are as yet but
few, if any, that dare be so hardy, as positively to say otherwise, whatever
their thoughts be, and though their Actions seem to look that way: And
forasmuch as the word Commonwealth has been of late years for the most part
applied to the Government when it is in the hands of many: It might not be
impertinent to insert here what a Commonwealth is. A Commonwealth therefore is
a lawful Government of many Families, and that which unto them in Common
belongs; and the end and design thereof is, that the wicked be punished, and
the good and just protected. So that it is as much, nay, rather more a
Commonwealth, and tends more to Common good when the Government is in the hand
of one man, than in the hands of many; and for this we have the general consent
of all great Politicians in past Ages, who after the trial of all sorts of
Governments, and comparing the Conveniences and Inconveniences of each, have
concluded that Government best for the generality of the people, when the
Sovereign Power to Command was in one man, and not in many: For oftentimes even
where a Tyrant has Reigned, and he removed, and the Commonwealth changed into
a popular State, the People have been soon sensible that the change has been
much for the worse, and that instead of one Tyrant they had a multitude of
Tyrants to oppress them. Yet the Dissolution or Prorogation of a Parliament
has been of late looked upon to be so high a violation of Right, and so great a
point of mis-government, as if thereby our Liberties were lost, and our Lives
and Estates subjugated to the Arbitrary Power and Pleasure of our King; or else
we falsely conclude it impossible that the King can be so wise as to Govern
without their Counsels. To remove which mistakes, and to quiet the minds of men
misled, these following Considerations and Collections out of English History
are offered to public view, whereby it will be most apparent that not only the
Proroguing but the frequent Dissolving of Parliaments is absolutely necessary
for preservation of Monarchy, our now established Government, and the best sort
of Government for the people of England, and most suitable to their temper; in
preservation whereof, our own preservation consists. But the long continuance
of one and the same Parliament, or the same Members in Parliament, which are
both alike, is the most pernicious thing imaginable both to King and People.

It is necessary for preservation of Monarchy, that Parliaments be often
Dissolved, because nothing makes it more manifest in whom the Sovereign Power
resides, for it puts them in mind by what Authority they have their Being,
whereas by a long Continuance they are apt to plead prescription to their
Seats, and think themselves dis-seized if removed thence, though by the same
power that placed them there.

In former times, Parliaments in this Kingdom consisted only of some of the
Nobility and wise men of the Nation, such as the King pleased to Call; and the
first time that ever the Commons of England were admitted to Parliament, was in
the 16th Year of Henry the 1st. which Parliament was Assembled at Salisbury,
and it was so Assembled of the Kings own Pleasure, not of any Obligation that
by Law lay upon him so to do. And certain it is, the Kings of England were no
ways obliged to Assemble Parliaments, or being assembled, to permit them to sit
during their own pleasure, till of late Years, that such vapors corrupted our
Region with a destructive Contagion. By the Ancient Statutes of E. 3. whereby
Parliaments were to be holden once a Year, and oftener if need were, cannot by
any reasonable construction be intended, so much to oblige the King to call a
Parliament, as to oblige the Subject to attend being called, and this seems the
rather to be so, for that those Statutes being but briefly penned by a
subsequent Statute of R. 2d. (as an Act explanatory of the former Acts) a
penalty is imposed upon every person having Summons to Parliament, that should
not come accordingly. But now by an Act of the 16th of his now Majesty's Reign,
he was prevailed upon to pass it into a Law That Parliaments should not be
intermitted or discontinued above three years. However (God be thanked) it is
yet in the Kings power, that if when they are Called they behave themselves not
well, His Majesty may, without violation of any Law, send them whence they
came; and, I hope, it will never more be otherwise, lest that if they had a
grant of not being Dissolved without their own consent, they would do as those
did that had the like power. And sure, it is no Soloecism that the like cause
may have the like effect.

A Parliament of the Modern Constitution is without Controversy very necessary
and useful, if they intend that which properly belongs to them; the business of
both Houses being to consult with, and advise the King in such things as he
shall require their advice in, and to represent to him publik grievances, such
as are real grievances, and not such as every whimble pated fellow esteems so;
but they are not to think to compel the King, under the plausible term of
Address, to exercise any point of Government, or to make any new Laws that he
likes not of. And it is proper and peculiar to himself only to judge what advice
is fit to be followed, and what to be rejected; for there may be some private
Reason of State for his so doing, which might be inconvenient to be publicly
known. This has been the ancient settled practice, and under which this Kingdom
has long flourisht, and it is not safe to alter it, for it being now the
declining Age of the World, most Changes (violent ones especially) are from
good to bad, and from bad to worst, and from worst to stark naught.

Is not the advantage of Monarchy above the Government of many, apparent at
this time to any seeing man, for, if His Majesty, like the Main Mast of a Ship,
had not been the stay of all, and had not as it were parted the fray by the
late Dissolution of the Parliament, all the Aristocratical rigging and tackle
of both Houses; if it deserves to be so called, had been torn in pieces by
faction amongst themselves, and this poor Kingdom thereby ere this, might have
been a second time in our memory blown up by her own inbred Divisions, and it
is not without precedent, that Parliaments are alike infallible as the Pope, or
his College of Cardinals, and have given as ill advice, and done as ill things,
and of late have been more troublesome than ever.

If it should be so that the advice of either or both Houses of Parliament must
of necessity be followed by the King, then would it not be properly an advice
but a command in effect; and where in a Commonwealth the Sovereign power or
Command is in more than in one, that Commonwealth is no longer a Monarchy, but
is degenerated at best into an Aristocracy, the Sovereignty being thereby
divided amongst many, and if we judge impartially, it must be acknowledged that
they that endeavor after that (viz.) that the Votes and Ordinances of the
House of Commons might have the force of Laws, are no less Enemies to the State
than they that would introduce Popery, for in both Cases it is but endeavoring
to alter the Government; to prevent which fond and dangerous attempt, the
frequent Dissolving of Parliaments is very necessary.

Diverse other Inconveniences will be prevented by frequent Proroguing and
Dissolving of Parliaments; for by that means the privilege of Parliaments will
not over long protect the Members thereof to delay and defraud their fellow
Subjects of their just and due Debts; which sort of practice for many years
past has been a killing oppression, when not only the Members themselves made
ill Use of that privilege, but many of them gave their Clerks Liberty to sell
blank Protections by the dozens, as the Pope does his Indulgences. And moreover
if any such, or other like vicious man, should by flattery and bribery get into
the Parliament, a Dissolution gives opportunity of discharging such from having
hand in so high a Trust; and great reason such should be discharged; for how
can it be expected that men unjust in their private concerns should be
otherwise in public Administration, which they will always strive to make
subservient to their bie-Interests?

By the long continuance of one and the same Parliament, it has happened, that
the Members thereof having long beheld the tempting, though forbidden fruit of
Supremacy, they have not scrupled to grapple with the King for a share of the
Sovereignty; and most commonly when they are a little settled they strive to
spoil the King of his Prerogative to usurp it to themselves; and rather than
fail of their designs, time has been that they have involved the people of
this Kingdom in a miserable War and Destruction of each other, when the thing
they seemed to insist on, was either of no moment at all to the people, or
something that had a very remote possibility of ever happening; whereby instead
of preventing the mischief, they drew it hastily upon us. There are too many
examples hereof in History, whereof to name a few: Let it be Impartially
considered, and then judge if there was a justifiable Cause for the Insolency of
that Parliament in Edw. the 2d's time, who being set on by some Lords that
envied Gavestons favor with that King, framed Articles of some trifling
grievances to be presented to the King, but added thereunto, the King must
banish Gaveston, else they declared they would rise in Arms against the King.
An Action much to the credit of Parliaments indeed, that they to gratify an
envious Lord or two, would not stick to stir up the Plague of a Civil War in
the bowels of their own Country, by engaging in a Rebellion against the King!
And they proceeded so far that they murdered Gaveston instead of bringing him
to a fair and Legal Trial, for no reason in particular that appears by Bakers
Chronicle, other than that the King loved him, and that he was in more favor
than they; and not long after they e'ne Deposed the King, and yet no
intrenchment upon the peoples Liberty or Property was committed by that King in
all his Reign, and it is expressly said of him he took no base Courses for
raising money. And although being forced to resign his Crown, he was content to
live a prive Life, and did so very quietly, yet his Seditious Lords thought his
Liberty too much favor for him, and caused him to be imprisoned; and in
carrying to Prison he was most barbarously abused, for being taken from his
Horse, and set upon a Hillock, and there taking puddle water to shave him with,
his Barber told him Cold water must serve for that time, whereat the miserable
King looking earnestly upon him, told him; that whither they would or no, he
would have warm water to wash withal; and to make good his words, he let fall a
shower of tears: and being carried to Prison, they lodged him in a Chamber over
Carrion and dead Carkesses, thinking thereby to have poisoned him: But when
they saw that would not do, a Letter was devised from a Lord to the Kings
Keepers, blaming them, for giving him too much Liberty, and for not doing the
service that was expected from them, and in the end of the Letter was wrote
this Line. Edvardum Occidere nolite timere bonum est. Which may be Englisht
either, It is good to kill Edward, do not fear it; or do not kill Edward, it is
good to be afraid to do it: But they took it in the sense intended, and most
inhumanly murdered the King. And (to see the fickleness of them) it is
Recorded, that they that despised him when living so honored him being dead,
that they could have found in their hearts to have made him a Saint.

It cannot yet be forgot, nor will the ill effects a while be overcome of that
Parliament, infamous for long, and of sad and direful memory, How in the time
of the best of Kings, when they all ruled, there was no rule at all, but that
upon pretense of removing evil Counselors, they removed from us all happiness,
and overwhelmed us with all the evils imaginable; and because some people would
make the world believe there is no preservation against Popery but by means of a
Parliament, be it remembered how poorly and sneakingly the Parliament in Queen
Mary's days, became Apostates to the Protestant Religion, drew up a
supplication to the King and Queen, wherein they showed themselves very
penitent for their former errors, and humbly desired their Majesty's to
intercede for them to Cardinal Pool the Popes Legate, and the Sea Apostolic,
that they might be pardoned of all they had done amiss, and be received into
the bosom of the Church, being themselves most ready to abrogate all Laws
prejudicial to the Sea of Rome: That this is no Fable, they that list may read
it in Bakers Chronicle. fol. 320.

Is it not apparent that what Execution has been done upon the late Popish
Plotters was by the Kings immediate Command? And the discoverers of Plotters,
and prosecutors of Papists are to this day encouraged by his Majesty. Were not
the Lords in the Tower several times brought to Westminster Hall, by the Kings
Command, in order to their Trial, but the House of Commons, were not, or would
not be ready for it, unless they might pluck a plume from the Prerogative, or
Peerage, to feather their own Caps withal? And whither they were not more ready
to kindle Coals of contention, when even in the House, not long since, some
laid hands on their Swords to draw at each other; I leave the World to judge.
Can any man then that loves the peace of his Country, be troubled at the
Prorogation or Dissolution of such a Parliament.

It is indeed to be found in our English Chronicles, that one Parliament had
the name of good, and that was in the Reign of Edw. the 3d. but it seems to be
so called in derision only; for the same Author says, they wrought ill effects;
to be more plain, there seldom or never was a long Parliament that did deserve
much commendation, or that was free from Faction: But that it was not
otherwise, much may be imputed to the fault of the Electors, who take not right
measures in their choice. And because good Parliaments are very useful to His
Majesty and People, it is to be wished men would observe the right means to
obtain such, whenever it should please His Majesty to give another opportunity
of a new Choice: and forasmuch as many of the Commons of our late Parliaments
were so vile as to take pensions for their Votes, as some of their
own-Fellow-Members give out, which if true, in all likelihood were given by
some corrupt Minister of State to promote the interest and designs of some
Foreign Prince, and some others of them were under very gross errors touching
Succession, whither out of a real mis-apprehension, or through a voluntary
mis-feasance, it is not proper here to determine. Only this I say, it is
somewhat strange, that men that are all for Religion, will not trust God
Almighty himself with that Prerogative, though he gives us his word for it That
the hearts of Kings are in his Rule and Governance, and turns them which way
it pleases him; and in another place it is said, By me Kings Reign, and
Princes do Decree: But of this more perhaps hereafter. Some others are mightily
enraged at their Dissolution, because it has put them to charges at their new
Elections, and perhaps by the intermission of a Parliament were forced to pay
some of their debts. These sort of men, if they meet again, unless they are
become Converts, will in all likelihood be doing mischief; therefore it would
be well, that not one suspected of such miscariages should be ever chose again.
There can be no Inconvenience in changing, for there is no Country or place but
what has several men fitter to be Parliament men than those; and the new men
may the better, and in more likehood act for the good of the Nation than the
old ones; for these will meet without any private prejudice or pre-engagement
in any Faction.

It cannot well be expected there should ever be a good Parliament as long as
men will be misled to their choice by extravagancy of expense, therefore they
would do well to consider what will a belly full of Ale signify in recompense
of their peace, it will be but like Esau's selling his birthright for a mess
of Pottage; neither ought the recommendation of any great man have any
influence upon our choice; but the good qualifications of the person ought only
to be respected.

Men's care in this concern is of very great Consequence, for a great Politician
says it, That it is more dangerous to the public when there is an evil Council
and a good King, than when there is an evil King, but a good Council; and that
we may always have a good Council, above all other rules, Gods own direction
for the choice of a Council in Israel ought to be followed, Assemble unto me,
says he, seventy of the most ancient of the people, wise men fearing God,
Deuteronomy. cap. 1. It is of dangerous consequence when the people have a slight
opinion of the parts and abilities of their Council, therefore it is that old
and not young men ought to be chose into this great Council; for most men are
apt to think slightly of those of alike Age with themselves, and though some
young men may be good and virtuous, yet the heat and vigor of their youth and
blood is apt to transport them into passion, and to too violent a prosecution
of what their unripe and unexperienced Judgments dictate. Solon therefore
forbad any young man to be admitted into the Senate, seemed he never so wise.

To conclude. God grant the Great Council the Parliament, whether the present
or a new one, that when they meet next, they may remember it is great grace and
favor in the King to Advise or Consult with them at any time, and therefore
may they not insist upon what belongs not to them, but render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's, and then God
will bless both our King and us. Amen.

FINIS.

