INDULGENCE Not to be Refused.

COMPREHENSION Humbly Desired.

THE CHURCH'S PEACE Earnestly Endeavored.

By PHILATHESEIRENES.

Let my Sentence come forth from thy Presence; let thine Eyes behold the things
that are equal, Ps. 17.3. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1672.

SInce His Majesty's Happy Restoration (wherein the Welfare and Unity of the
Church of England was and is still much concerned) it has been thought reason
of State, and so Resolved upon, that such Ministers as would not subscribe the
Declaration, and declare as in the Act of Uniformity in 1662. is required;
should not be capable of holding any Ecclesiastical Benefice, nor permitted to
preach. Many Ministers thereupon have since that time laid aside the Exercise
of their Ministry, as not being clear in some disputable Points therein
contained and prescribed; yet very well resolved, and in Conscience satisfied
in all things necessary to the true Protestant Religion, and their Allegiance
and Obedience to His Majesty, their most Rightful and Dread Sovereign, and to
the Being, Peace and Order of the Church of England, in whose Communion they
intend to live and die.

And it does very much refresh them, in this ten years last silence and
obscurity of theirs, that they neither harbor any principles of Disloyalty or
Schism; much less favored any practice of Disunion or Disobedience; but
intend to be found in the way of their Duty to God and the King all their days.

And it does not a little add to their contentment and comfort in their
Afflictions, That His Sacred Majesty has not only Declared them Loyal and
Peaceable, but also endeavored in His Speeches and Actions, a Legal and
Fitting Indulgence for them; and now done something preparatory hereunto in His
late Declaration.

For indeed the Act of Uniformity (although by the Subscriptions and
Appointments thereof, it has taken in many Grave, Learned and Worthy Persons)
yet others also are such taken in by it, who are not so well conditioned in
their Minds, Morals and Affections to the true Interest of the Church of
England, as others that are now laid aside: nor have they ever declared so much
for Her in Her Straights and Obscurity, as they have done, who are not therein
comprehended. So that it has not been an adaequate and sufficient Test, and
Standard of all men's integrity and peaceableness, nor wrought any great cure
upon our Divisions, so as was expected; but we are broken still, to the great
gratification of those that would invade or undermine the Church it self, by
their extreme Opinions and Animosities.

And it may be, upon these, or such like Considerations, some worthy Patriots
in Parliament, and some reverend Fathers have not been unwilling to allow the
Non conformists such relaxations; and that by Law, as may be consistent with
the Essentials of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; thanks
to them for their respects and good remembrance of us.

But I must confess there have not been wanting also some Ecclesiastical
Incendiaries and Boutefews, who have endeavored by their preaching and
writing, and otherwise, to keep the Flame alost, and the Wounds still fresh and
bleeding, to the ruin of many poor Ministers and their Families for ever: and
not without some inconvenience also to the Church and People of God; to whose
misguided zeal, and hectical heat, I shall offer nothing for the guiding of
their actions and passions, but the Church's present condition; and refer them
to their own Natural and Evangelical Affections; if there be any bowels of
Love, Ingenuity or Charity to the Church and their Brethren, who think
themselves as good Subjects, and as true Ministers and Members of Christ, and
as peaceable in their principles and practices as themselves.

And as for His Majesty's Gracions Declaration, March 1671. which many men
according to their fears and hopes, their interests and tempers, their ill or
good natures, make various constructions of (for Princes actions pass no more
without animadversions than other men's) what others say or think, it seems to
be a genuine, and natural effect of that antipathy and enmity, which is in His
Majesty's Disposition and Nature to all violent proceedings against those that
have truly tender Consciences: And if it reach further to others, whose
principles are not modest, nor honest; but grate upon the foundation, and tend
not to peace nor solid piety, it is but a pleonasme or overflow of that great
kindness which He always intended and expressed about matters of Religion;
wherein He had rather overdo in things so agreeable to His own good temper,
than seem to leave any out of the compass and umbrage of His Favor and
Indulgence; the fault being theirs, that know not how to govern themselves; not
His, that knows wisely to attemper severity and sweetness, and fitly to join
them together in the Government of His People.

Since which Declaration, there has lately come forth a busy Paper, the Title
whereof is, Toleration not to be abused; Or, A Serious Question debated and
resolved, Whether it be advisable, especially for the Presbyterians, either in
Conscience, or Prudence, to take advantage from His Majesty's late Declaration,
to deny or rebate their Communion with our Parochial Congregations, and to
gather themselves into distinct and separate Churches?

Which Question I suppose the Presbyterians will resolve in the Negative, as
well as the Proposer; and I must also acquaint him that there has been
scarcely any thing that looks like an Argument in his whole Debate, but has
been considered and ventilated with all respect and tenderness to the Church of
England.

Nor indeed can it be in reason and duty imagined, That His Sacred Majesty
intending by this Declaration, an Indulgence to tender Consciences, should
intend to leave out the greatest part of His Loyal and Obedient Subjects, who
are Dissenters; much less entangle them in any way of Separation or Schism
contrary to their Consciences and the Churches peace; which the Debater seems
to intimate.

So that if this Book be intended in kindness to direct the Presbyterians in
their way at present in things they could not else possibly have foreseen
without the Debaters help, or as a Mediator to move them to hold off a while
till the Bishops make their way more clear by some Episcopal License for
public places, in subservience to the Kings Declaration; or till some
Comprehension can be legally procured by Act of Parliament to make them stand
recti in foro Regni, Ecclesiae and Conscientiae, as well as other men.

Or if his end be really to advance the true Church of England, and not to
weaken it; to declare the sobriety of the Presbyterian principles and
practices, and not to blazon their infirmities, which they acknowledge to be
many as well as other men's; they have reason to thank him for his good
intentions.

But not for stating the Question for them; for it is in effect, to enquire
whether the Presbyterians may go according to their principles or not? whether
they may turn Independents or not? whether they may leave their relation to and
communion with the Church of England or not? which indeed is ridiculous and
contradictious. For the truth is, they seem (such as I am acquainted with) to
be so far from desiring to know whether they may go against their principles or
not, that they would not, though they might have a particular dispensation for
it; but desire to comport themselves as they have hitherto done toward their
Mother the Church of England, with all duty and good manners; and to have their
actions at the offers of their duty pass without offense or mis-representation.

CHAP. II. THerefore the Question in my opinion, ought to be this;
Whether the Presbyterians considering their great endeavors, and desires to
enjoy a Legal Indulgence and Comprehension by the Law of the Land, as to some
Scholastic and disputable points betwixt them and their Superiors, Fathers and
Brethren, which are not essential to the government of Church and State; the
government whereof many of them upon their Oaths, have obliged themselves not
to alter; and not being yet able to proeure it, and having given sufficient
testimony of their Sobriety and Peaceableness these ten years last past, may
not at this time accept of His Majesty's Indulgence in His Declaration without
offense or self-contradiction?

For the clearing whereof it is necessary to premise these things,

1. That the interest of the Church of England, both as to the being and
well-being of it, ought to be promoted and encouraged by all the Members and
Ministers thereof; and all safe means and ways as speedily and as effectually
undertaken as may be, for the advancement thereof; considering her danger from
Papists and Phanaticks, which offer to swallow up all, the one by an Infallible
Supremacy, the other by an Infallible Spirit; and both vain and counterfeit.

2. Those persons which you call Presbyterians, which have been secluded from
their Ministry these years past, by the Act of Uniformity, are not conscious to
themselves of any inward principle of Opinion, or Disaffection contrary to the
Church of England; and that many of them in all Counties have so behaved
themselves, by attending upon the worship of God, as it is now established, in
public, that the Ministers of their several parishes may and will testify
with them of the decency and inoffensiveness of their carriage and attendance
hitherto: though it may be, some others, where there have been no Churches, or
Ministers scandalous and unprofitable, may have adventured sometimes to have
preached in private for the Service of such a destitute people, and for some
maintenance too, happily for themselves and Families, which otherwise might
have starved; the manner of their Education unfitting them for manual Labor:
and all this without any affront to the Laws, or enervation of the strength and
Doctrine of the Churches to which they severally belong: therefore are not
altogether unfit to be comprehended in any Act, Statute, License, or
Indulgence, which may further the settlement and tranquillity of the Church.

3. And if so, it is not unsafe but profitable at all times to strengthen its
interest, and multiply and encourage such Ministers and Members as are ready in
their Consciences, and by their study, diligence, and peaceableness, to do as
much good as they can; since Turks, Papists, and they of the separation, are
all for the increase of their number; and the Church in the primitive times
looked upon it as its Glory, that there were added to it daily such as should
be saved; and Jews, Gentiles, and discontented persons were then converted, and
after their Conversion, Ordination and Usefulness in the Church, were
encouraged; notwithstanding some minute differences in Disposition and Opinion.
And methinks the Church of England should not at any time look upon it, for her
honor and peace, to narrow her own Interest, and perplex her Followers with
unnecessary Subscriptions, Impositions, or Altercations; especially considering
these Presbyterians are still so ready to stick by her, living and dying,
notwithstanding all their discouragements and disappointments; when as others
fall in with her more for her Dividends, than her Doctrine: and if a man may
see any thing in its causes, will make it appear so, if ever she should be in
danger.

4. Small and little considerations ought not for ever to keep the breach and
wound open; considering how these smaller matters were dispensed with, not only
in the Apostles times, and by persons and superiors who were divinely
inspired; but also in after-Ages, when differences arose about these little
things, and were very hot and high at the beginning; yet were very fairly and
prudently taken up when both sides had spent their heats; as particularly in
the business of Easter: which Irenaeus, though of Victor's mind, did endeavor
to compose, by a fair and fraternal Indulgence; and non molliter Victorem ipsum
reprehendebat, as Eusebius tells us, for being so fierce and imperious in a
Custom of that nature.

And it is likely the Papists would allow many things which they peremptorily
enough insisted upon in the beginning of the Reformation; as Priests Marriages,
and the Sacrament in both kinds, could they have the Church of England theirs,
as it was before.

And why our men should not do the like to their Brethren, of whose
peaceableness and soundness in the Faith, they have had so good experience, for
the Churches increase and glory: especially in minutioribus hisce, I understand
not why they should not be as tender of all her Members and Ministers, and
endeavor with as much prudence and indulgence, to keep them together in a true
Church, as her ancient predecessors did, and her Enemies and Underminers still
do.

Yea considering withal that with some persons they do it daily, and such
things are connived at, and indulged even amongst Conformists themselves: one
way they have in Cathedrals, another in Parochial Churches: some pray toward
the East, others do not so; some bow, others bow not: why then should there not
upon the same ground, be the same dispensations in other reputed Indifferences?
That which has been done may be done again in cadem materia.

Considering withal, that the substantial peace and unity which this brings
along with it, and is now obstructed, is really better than the external
decency and order which the strict imposing of these ^nn^o^ssaries may promote.

And besides, it is also said that even some of the very Doctrinal Articles of
the Church of England themselves are so cautiously and temperately warded (for
peace sake) that even they that have different sentiments and apprehensions
thereof, may and do subscribe them: And if this Liberty may be given in
Doctrine, wherein the Subscribers dispute pro and con; why may it not also in
Ceremonies and Mods of Worship, especially if the peace of the Church so
require it; I shall leave to my Betters to consider and determine.

5. Though great expectations have been, that more might have come in in all
this time; that the Church of England might have been more glorious in her
Numbers, Discipline, Uniformity and Ceremonies, yet because all men have not
the command of their own understandings, it has not fallen out accordingly:
And the King's Sacred Majesty well declares it, That He has found little fruit
of these ways of Coertim for these twelve years past. So that it has not only
pleased some Worthy Persons to move for a Comprehension in several Sessions of
Parliament, in order to the cure of our Divisions; which have hitherto been
obstructed, or laid aside: But it has pleased the Kings Majesty to give out
His own Gracious Declaration for Indulgence; which, whether it ought now to be
accepted by the Presbyterians, as the Case, or as their Principles lie, is the
Question.

It cannot be denied but that all the Presbyterians wishes and desires are to
enjoy their Liberties in public places, and to be restored to the exercise of
their Ministry again by the same Full and Legal Authority which thought fit to
lay them aside; that they may not seem to abet or espouse any unwarrantable
Separation, or be entangled in any real or reputed Schism, or offensive
distance or distinction, either in place or practice, from the Church of
England; to whom be all peace and prosperity.

Nor would they seem to neglect the discharge of their duty when called to it,
nor slight His Majesty's Kindness, so freely and graciously offered; especially
when He, in deep reason of State thinks it may be an Expedient to procure that
Unity and Reconciliation which all other forcible course could not hitherto
effect. Some think this the way for unity, others that it tends to Schism and
Faction: Whose Judgments should be followed? If we proceed, we offend our
Fathers and Brethren; if we refuse, we give occasion to our Sovereign to think
us a company of sour and ungovernable men, whom neither kindness nor severity
will soften: when as God Almighty, who knows our hearts, sees and knows
otherwise; and that we are ready, as far as we can, to obey; and where we
cannot, to suffer in all humble silence and submission.

Now the Question, as I said before, is, Whether the Presbyterians may not
according to their Principles accept of His Majesty's Indulgence without
offense or self-contradiction?

CHAP. III.
THe Affirmative I prove thus;

1. From the Nature of this Acceptance, which is a thankful Acceptance of His
Majesty's Grace and Favor; and an inward willingness signified in this outward
acceptance of His Majesty's Kindness, to be at the employment which they are
appointed and ordained to: Now inward thankfulness and sense of duty, and
outward preaching of the Gospel, with an earnest endeavor to promote Gods
Glory, the Kings Honor, the Kingdoms Happiness, the Churches Peace, and to
discharge their own duty in the several capacities and relations which the
Providence of God, and the Prudence of a Christian and Protestant Prince shall
cast us into, is not simply evil, which seems to be their Case, and to have no
intrinsecal or formal evil in it.

For Consequences which may fall out, or Offenses which may be taken
accidentally, or invidious reflections, while a man is doing his duty, these
are things incident and adherent to the most warrantable and just actions: and
are not to be taken any cognizance of where the agent is right in his
intentions, and the action in its substantial ingredients, as it is abstracted
from the Agent's infirmities and indiscretions, and the bystanders active and
passive miss-representations and ill constructions.

2. Such an Acceptance of a Favor from their Prince is not contrary to the
principles and practices of Presbyterians quatenas Presbyterians; for the
Notion and Principle that denominateth them such, is, that a Bishop is not an
higher Order or Degree of Ministry in the Church than the Priesthood: in other
things they agree with the established Doctrine and Faith of the Church of
England, and are willing to submit to the Discipline thereof as it is by Law
established.

And how such a point should make all this great difference, or be inconsistent
with the acceptance of a kindness offered them by His Majesty, is a thing not
to be conceived: it may be as well said, if the King should offer them a
Living, with their liberty, or public places to preach in, or a maintenance
for themselves and their Families, it is against their principles to take it.
But for my part, I neither take them to be such a company of fools as to do so;
nor do I believe does the Debater think so; nor do I believe would he himself
do so, if he had their Sentiments, or were in their Circumstances.

Nor is it against the Presbyterians practices, for they all along, together
with their Episcopal Brethren, accepted of the Liberty then offered and
indulged to them in the late times of Usurpation: and why they should not do it
now, in the Reign, and from the Hands of their most Rightful Sovereign, I see
not.

The Primitive Christians fell to their work, and blessed God when they had any
respite from the Tyranny and Oppression of Heathenish and cruel Princes: And
why they should either with scorn or fullenness reject any kindness from a
Christian, Protestant and Gracious Prince, is not to be apprehended.

Withal considering that there are as severe and resolved Presbyterians in
France, and other places, as we have here in England; and no body upbraids
them, that I can hear of, for going against their Principles and Consciences;
in accepting and improving the Liberty therein granted, to the Honor of God
and the peace of the Church.

Obj. But in France they have another Religion uppermost: and they are bound to
preach the Gospel, as it lies in their way in opposition to it: Here, there is
the same Religion which the Presbyterians profess, and the same Church which
they are Members and Ministers of, and they ought not to set up Altar against
Altar.

Answ. This is no setting up Altar against Altar, nor any undermining of the
Doctrine or Church of England on the Presbyterians part; but a subservient
Duty, tending to the Unity and Peace thereof, in such a capacity as His Majesty
has thought fit to place them. Some are appointed to rule as Bishops; others
to assist in Rule and Government as Deans and Chapters; others to preach the
Gospel in public Churches and Chapels: And if His Majesty give way to such as
you call Presbyters, to pursue the same ends in public Halls, or private
Houses, who can think much, since the work goes on in the lowest as well as the
highest Officers and places?

Obj. But the Presbyterians in former times preached and wrote against
Toleration and Indulgence; and if they do now fall in with it, they contradict
themselves.

Answ. Some did and some did not; but however in those days when Errors and
Heresies first appeared, there was greater need and reason of a severe
declaring against them and a toleration of them than afterward, when they had
so generally spread themselves all the Kingdom over; that if it had been
possible, they might have been prevented and crushed in the beginning: but
since they have grown now so far, other means must be used, and not the same
Methods followed with springing and overgrown Diseases.

Besides many of those that declared against such a Toleration, if not all of
them, are dead and gone; and there are others now who are postrati to those
times, who now suffer, who were not capable of saying or doing any thing about
public mattters.

To all which I add, that our Episcopal Brethren, if it should ever be
possible, that they should live under the same discouragement and disadvantage,
now from His Majesty, or any of His Successors, or the Law; which the
Presbyterians now do lie under, and had a grant of their Liberty offered them
in common with others, if they would please to let us know what they would then
do, notwithstanding all their Declarations and Reasons against Toleration,
Indulgence and Comprehension at this time: it is verily thought that the
Presbyterians are (...) so fully of their mind and principles therein, that
they would do accordingly.

CHAP IV.
THe third Reason arises from the Nature of their Ordination, and the necessity
that lies upon such as are Ordained to preach the Gospel, together with the
solemn promise, made by every Minister, to preach according to his Duty,
notwithstanding all difficulties whatsoever.

Which Argument, to my knowledge, has so far prevailed with many pious and
peaceable men, that they have thought it their duty to preach as they had
opportunity, notwithstanding all the Severities that have been enacted and
exercised to the contrary.

Though it may be others out of the great reverence and respect they had to
Laws and public Authority, and the great affection they bore to the Church it
self, and her peace and unity, thought it more meet and reasonable, for Orders
sake, to submit to their Censure, and to suspend the exercise of their
Ministry, till it should please God to prepare their way to their work, without
misprisions or offenses; judging withal that the Woe before mentioned belongs to
them that either through slothfulness neglect and slight their Duty, when they
have opportunity to preach or study; or through treachery and cowardice run
away from it, for fear of Jews, Heathens or Heretics, and does not concern the
Censures that are made in a Christian Church and State upon any of her
Officers, which, for order and peace sake, ought to be submitted to, though
they should be inflicted and denounced cum errante clave: and this made many
Ministers, especially, if not only, of the Presbyterians, to hold off in
silence all this time; which is some evidence of the Affection and Reverence
which they bear to the Church of England,

But being now the censure and penalty is taken off, and the way to their Duty
opened, and in a good measure cleared, and the Kings Majesty, who is in all
Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, Supreme Governor, not only suspending the
penal Statutes, but also willing to approve and allow persons to preach the
Gospel, and places to preach in: Considering their Ordination and Separation to
the Work of the Ministry, and the Obligation that lies upon them to their Duty,
from Gods precept, promise and threatening, I shall leave to consideration
whether the Presbyterians that accept of such Licenses, go with or against
their Consciences.

4. Considering the Exigence and Necessity of the Church, her affairs and
straights require all the help and assistance that can be got or made, for
refuting Errors, propagating of Truth, and edifying all good men in the Faith
and Knowledge of the Gospel: And if the Kings Majesty at Sea or Land have
occasion for Commanders or Soldiers in a present necessity, he will not refuse
even such as are disbanded; nor ought they to cast off or deny their Duty, when
called to it, for the Honor and Safety of their King and Country.

And therefore the Presbyterians make account, in such a case as this is, and
in such naughty times and days as we live in, when all kind of Vice, Errors
and Heresies do abound, that they ought not to neglect their Duty; but preach
the Gospel, licet non sit omnino secundum formam Statuti: In a time of public
calamity all men can lay on their hands, and employ their heads, and ought so
to do to prevent a common danger; especially when they are encouraged to it,
and indulged in it, by him that next to God Almighty, has the highest
authority here on earth.

And for any one in such a case to say, that men go against their principles if
they proceed, I wish such private and illlaid principles were considered of, if
there be any such; and how far they are obliging that seem to be so repugnant
to, and destructive of a common and public good.

CHAP. V.
NOw though these and many more Arguments of this Nature are and may be brought
for the Presbyterians preaching of the Gospel, though the Door be but half
open: considering also many of their pressing necessities, and the straights
which they and their Families are brought into by their long enforced silence.

Yet I must confess, that notwithstanding all this, great care and caution,
wisdom and prudence ought to be used in the use and improvement of this Liberty
which His Majesty has been pleased graciously to grant; As that those that are
of the same Church may not seem by any means to fall from it, by an
unjustifiable separation, or bear their people in hand that they begin, and
intend to proceed upon a new Church State; or that they were Ministers that had
received another Ordination in specie than the Ministers of the Church of
England now have; and also for the prevention of mistakes, conceits,
misrepresentations, and new offenses, if they that are Licensed, or frequent
Licensed Meetings, would have a reverence for, and attend upon Gods public
Worship in Churches and Chapels, at the usual times, or as often as
conveniently they may, it would be a full answer to many unprofitable and
ill-natured Scriblings, a great evidence of the Presbyterians integrity, of the
tenderness of their Consciences, and the constancy and consistency of their
principles, and of the great care which they have and all good men ought to
have of the Honor and tranquillity both of Church and State.

Or if considering the bitter and sore divisions that are amongst Fathers and
Sons, Brethren and Fellow Laborers of the same Church and Ministry, which tend
very much to the endammaging, if not the endangering thereof, if the Reverend
Bishops and others would but please to use what interest themselves or friends
have or can make in this next approaching Session of Parliament, that such
Ministers as are loyal and sober, pious and peaceable, may come to their work
again, by some Act of Comprehension, which has been often moved, and as often
openly obstructed and secretly undermined; that so there may be mutual
condescentions on both sides in order to Charity and Unity; I doubt not yet but
to see happy days; and the Congregations and Consciences of Gods people will
reap the happy fruits thereof; men's exulcerated minds and spirits will in a
short time be healed; the common adversaries and underminers of our Church and
the glory of it will be fully disappointed; Governors and Governed in their
several stations and places well contented and rejoiced; the Churches interests
of Doctrine, Discipline, Unity and Peace well strengthened and secured; and the
mouths of all true Protestants, both abroad and at home, filled with
acclamations of joy and gladness, and praises also to God for such an happy
reconciliation; with their constant prayers to Heaven (not forgetting the
Instruments thereof) for its prolongation and continuance, till Christ the Head
of his Church come to Judgment.

CHAP. VI.
Obj. NOw if any should object and answer, this would be a good way if matters
could be thus brought about; but it is sooner said than done.

Answ. It will be so in Heaven; and why some offers should not be made toward
making us more happy in the Blessing of Reconciliation and peace, as well as
more holy in the Acts and Duties of Sanctification, I see not. Holiness will
not be perfect till we come to heaven; and yet means are used to make persons
better and more mortified to the world, by preaching, praying, good Examples,
Education and Endeavors: and why may not the same means be used in relation to
Christian Concord and Charity? And though we cannot be perfect in this world,
yet we should be perfecting Holiness, Peace, Mortification and Reconciliation
in the fear of God.

Secondly, Neither is such a thing impossible to be done here in this world
quoad naturam rei; though I must confess while every party retain their
prejudice, passions, unkind remembrances of wrongs, and thoughts of revenge, it
is utterly impossible: it would therefore do well that every one in their
places, Superiors and Inferiors, would study and endeavor after those things
that make for peace, which is most certainly jure divino, whatsoever things be
or be not.

Where there are commands given, and promises made upon the observance of such
commands, there is no impossibility implied or included: It is a vain thing to
oppose against any of the Ten Commandments, an impossibility in them to be
observed: now peace and living in peace and charity one with another is
commanded, Re. 14.19. Let us therefore follow the things that make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another. 2 Cor. 13.11. Finally, Brethren,
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

And that it is practicable we see it daily; men can possess their souls in
peace, keep their Families and Corporations in peace; and other Churches live
in peace, and why may not ours do so too? Considering the great contentment and
comfort we shall all reap by it another day, it is no great wisdom for any of
us that have much and great work to do, and but a little time to live, that
have Sickness, Death, Judgment, Eternity, upon the matter all at hand, to
ruffle and discompose our selves and others by our heats and unkindness, to
make our own passage rough and stormy out of this world into another, and leave
all in anger, heats, and disorder behind us, when we are gone: all which might
have been happily prevented by our innocent and amicable condescentions one
unto another.

Let us not by any means leave the Family of God, the Church of Christ, and the
Household of Faith, in strife and contention, if we can any way help it, either
by deed or will before we die.

Sat infelicibus armis pugnatum: Sat communibus adversariis occasionis and
commoditatis ad nostrum exitium exhibitum: sat imo nimis affectibus indultum
malis: It is high time to be wise and good natured one unto another, to forgive
what God has forgiven, to dispense with such things as are dispensable, for
the attainment of such sure and staple blessings as are indispensably necessary
and essential to the life and being of our Church and Religion.

This, and much more may be said, but that such an one as I am must not
prescribe rules of Government and Jurisdiction to my Superiors and Betters.

Obj. But must the Laws of the Land vail to every schismatical, factious, and
private man's opinion?

Answ. No, by no means! But I pray let us not in fury and spleen nickmine such
for being so, as are upright in their hearts and consciences, and plain and
open in their outward actions for Truth and peace; and do as perfectly abhor
Schism and Faction, and any thing of that complexion, and more too than any of
their violent and virulent accusers; and dare say further, that they should
neither sleep nor die peaceably, if they were not as good Subjects to the King,
and it may be better, and as true in their principles and Consciences to the
Doctrine and Interests of the Church of England, as any or most of those that
make the loudest declamations against Schism and Faction, and the most
uncharitable and unchristian reflections upon their poor Brethren.

But it may do well that the true notion of Schism and Faction were truly
stated, and such as were truly such, were admonished, corrected and restrained;
and not the nocent and innocent, loyal and disloyal, hand over-head punished
and branded together promiscuously, and without any discrimination. Scarce any
one would suffer such work to be in their own Families (that upon the surmises
and whispers of a company of pick-thanks and bad men, that are not content with
the places they are in, but have a mind to rise by slanders and murdering other
men's reputations) and give way that such children as are in reality respective
and dutiful to their Fathers and Superiors, should be suspected, suspended,
ejected and disinherited, because they had neither parts, nor wit, nor
strength, nor faces alike.

And if it would please our Superiors to make trial, and if they find not those
who are accounted little less than guilty of Heresy and Sedition, both loyal
and peaceable, and also sound in the Faith, according to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, then let them bring the wheel over them again, and doom them
to perpetual silence and obscurity as persons invincibly obstinate, and
incapable either of encouragement or entertainment.

And if the courteous Reader please, let us a little consider what Learned men
say of Schism.

Schismatici dicuntur (inquit Aquinas) quia propria sponte and intention ab
unitate Ecclesiae se separant. Aquin. 22.2. qu. 39. Now how this can be said of
them who take their censure and seclusion from the Ministry, with all meekness
and mansuetude, and intend to live and die in communion with the Church of
England, either as Ministers or Members, let the world judge.

As S. Jerome tells us, ep. 62. Nos nec Ecclesiam scindimus, neque a Patrum
Communione dividimur, sed ab ipsis (ut ita dicam in cunabilis) Catholico sumus
lacte nutriti.

Schisma est contra pacem, quae est bonum participatum (says the same Aquinas)
Now how they can be guilty of Schism that pray for peace, petition for peace,
and by all good means pursue and promote peace, and are willing to undergo any
good test whatsoever which is essential to truth and peace, let all men see and
say their minds.

Schisma (inquit Camero) est secessio in Religionis negotio vel temeraria, vel
injusta, sive facta, sive continuata: Now that there is no secession is plain,
in such persons as I am speaking of, for they continue their Communion with the
Church of England, and do earnestly desire their service to preach the Gospel
may be accepted: And as for their rashness and unrighteousness in laying down
their Ministry, if it be done without either consideration or conscience, let
God Almighty judge and determine, to whom they appeal; as it is, Psalm. 17.2.
They desire their sentence may come from before him, and that his eyes would
behold the things that are equal.

Not every Separation (as Chillingworth tells us) but a causless separation
from the external communion of any Church, is Schism: Now they do so far deny
any causless separation, that they acknowledge no separation at all; but the
suspension of their subscription to some disputable points, for which they are
meekly and mixtly willing; though not (without some little regret, considering
their Ordinations and Duty) to be suspended from their Office till they either
see reason to subscribe, or their Superiors (to whom they humbly refer
themselves think meet) to give them some relaxation.

Chillingworth (also tells us) that not separation only, but unnecessary and
unlawful conditions of Communion, make a Schism, and that there, may be fugati
as well as fugitivi from the Church. And these people do imagine that this in
no wise belongs to them, because they impose nothing at all, but desire some
ease and releasement from the present Impositions.

Obj. But why should the Churches best friends be bound up to such hard terms,
and others that are not all out so, be dispensed with?

Answ. 1. It is not universally true that the Church of England's best friends
are all those and only those that have subscribed the Declaration in the Act of
Uniformity; for many think there are as good Subjects and as peaceable
Ministers out as in: however I dare say, some there are out that will not vail
to many others, that are now legally settled in their employments and Churches
in either peaceableness, or plain obedience.

Answ. 2. It is not usual for Children and Brethren of the same Family, and of
different constitutions, in point of health and weakness, except such as are
unnatural and envious, to think much with Parents tenderness to one Child more
than another; but on the contrary. Love and Fraternal Affection leads rather to
self denial and condescentions; the strong to the weak, the healthful to them
that are sickly, in order to mutual peace and preservation.

I never heard of any but one that having subscribed himself, being desired if
it were possible to get some fair interpretation or relaxation for his Brother
that was then in Limine, answered, No: but rather, if it was in his power, he
would endeavor to get his Bonds made heavier, who when time was, pretended as
much moderation as others of his Brethren.

3. I think, and all men see it, that there have been very great privileges
indulged in these ten years past, and continued to those dutiful Sons of the
Church who have been so fully satisfied in their subscriptions; and
discouragements answerable, upon them that have not: so that the one have been
rewarded sufficiently, and the other punished severely; and there the wisdom of
State has made a very great and remarkable discrimination.

And then the Case is, whether after all these great privileges and dignities
enjoyed by some, and the discouragements that have been upon others, and the
Church it self not being altogether free from danger, and from enemies on the
right hand and the left, whether it may not be advisable to take in all her
real friends, to strengthen her interest? and admit them again into the
Ministry, and allow them for themselves and Families such outward
encouragements for their service, as may be procured, or they presented to
(which remain but as gleanings ofter the Vintage, now that the other are served
and satisfied) which I shall humbly leave to the consideration of my Betters,
if the exigents of our Religion and Church, viz, the increasing of sin and the
decay of piety do require it.

4. But if all this were not so, there is no more reason that any should
complain now that posterity should come into their Ministry upon easier
conditions; that then all their predecessors before these times had easier
conditions than they. If a man will take occasion to think himself grieved at
every thing, he will never give over creating trouble to himself and all others
that are about him.

Obj. But why should the Laws be altered?

Answ. Those Laws that are moral and necessary, ought not to be altered, but
those that are alterable in their own nature, or temporary and expired, or in
time grown inconvenient, may be altered; si adsit as Aquinas speaks, evidens
necessitas, aut maxima reip. utilitas.

Laws and Ordinances (says Sr. W. Raleigh) made when men are good, do
oftentimes prove unprofitable, when they are become evil; and therefore are
some Laws made and abrogated according unto Accidents and Circumstances which
do happen.

Also new Laws which are made for a temporary trial of men's Loyalty and
Obedience when they have had their time and end; and when the utmost effects
are produced by them which they can do, may be abrogated and relaxed, as well
as made, without any reflection upon the Lawgivers themselves. God took down his
own Ceremonial Law after a certain time for the clearer advancement of his
Grace and Gospel; and so may earthly Princes do theirs too, or leave them as
they are in themselves indifferent, and also other incognoscible School-points
to which Assent and Consent is required, undetermined; when it appears to be
more convenient and happy for themselves and their people. So that no body
(that I know of) desires the Alteraton of any Law, but such as is temporary and
alterable: and where the alteration thereof is convenient and profitable for
Church and Commonwealth.

Obj. But the Presbyterians know not what they would have; if the Parliament
should make a Law for their satisfaction, they would never be satisfied, nor
can they agree amongst themselves what to desire: some are for one thing, some
for another; and whatsoever is granted, it is impossible that all the
Non-conformists should be pleased.

Answ. This Objection, when I heard it at first, seemed to me so
inconsiderable, that I verily thought it had never been objected in earnest;
but to have more of scorn and disdain in it, to make the Presbyterians
ridiculous, than of strength and reason to keep them as they are.

Yet since this Objection obtains some belief, and moves some well-tempered men
that are ready to do them a kindness, when it lies in their way.

I answer, That it is well known by their Principles and Papers what they would
have; and they are so far from being ill to please, that what the Bishops have
offered themselves before; or upon the Kings Restoration, would please them,
or His Gracious Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, in the year 1661.

Yea, and I might almost further add, what the Reverend Bishops think fit to
grant, if they intend a kindness to them whose Principles they themselves
understand; or to the Church it self in this great decay of Piety, and mighty
overflow of Atheism, Heresy and all manner of Debauchery, for want of
Preachers, would be very thankfully acknowleded and accepted.

Obj. If it be said what will please one party, will not content another.

Answ. There are two principal Reasons and Ends for making abatements in some
things which are now imposed: First, to keep the Ministers and Members of the
Church of England (that differ in smaller matters) together united against the
common Enemies, Errors, Heresies, and Schisms that threaten either to invade
or undermine the Church it self; and this may be done by a Comprehension.

Secondly, To prevent Sedition, and keep us in peace; and this may be secured
by such a Toleration as the wisdom of the Parliament shall think fit; they
being best able to give such Antidotes as may preserve the Churches Vitals, and
to cure and cherish such Members as are weak or corrupted, without amputation.

Comprehension is for strengthening the Churches Interest; and Toleration (if
our Rulers think fit to grant it) of such things as are tolerable; this is for
the Kingdoms peace.

Now the things which the Presbyterians desire to be comprehended in, are not
many nor great, nor in the least entrenching upon the Essentials of the Church,
her Doctrine or Discipline.

But some Circumstantials which our Church before they be commanded,
acknowledge indifferent, and some other Imposi^ions, temporary, which in a few
years according to the Act for Uniformity, do expire: these things we humbly
desire Dispensation for, are such as are dispensed with in other Churches; and
may be (I trust in our own) without any hazard to her Doctrine, Discipline or
Glory.

And as for the Toleration before mentioned, those that are called
Presbyterians, humbly account that it is no more a part of the Comprehension
which they desire for themselves, and would be content with, than Separation
and Faction, which this should cure, is part of their principles or practices;
or the persons that hope for it, are Presbyterians; or the Doctrines they hold,
the Doctrines of the Church of England; and therefore should be no more put
together with them by right, than the Church of England; with whom the Papists
do as indistinctly join them, as our Episcopal Brethren do with the
Presbyterians, from whom they have been pleas' to make a secession as well as
from themselves.

Yet notwithstanding, some even of them that are accounted of the Separation,
acknowledge the Being, Ordinances and Officers of the Church of England; and
are very grave, pious and learned men, who have done, and may yet further do
Her and Religion great Service by their Pens and Parts, whose Cases and
Liberties the wisdom of the Parliament (no doubt) but will take care of (when
these things come into consideration) according to the quality of their
persons, and the modesty of their Principles as well as others.

In the mean time, If I were to Petition, I should humbly beg it upon my knees,
that it would please our Gracious Sovereign, together with His Two Houses in
Parliament, in whose hands the relaxation and making of Laws are; that
according to the Loyalty and Integrity of their Hearts, Principles and Actions,
and no otherwise; that they would grant those who are reputed Presbyterians, a
liberty to preach the Gospel, with such Encouragements in their Ministry, by an
Act for Comprehension, or otherwise, as they in their grave Wisdom shall think
most convenient; that so all heats and animosities, on all sides, may be
quieted and quenched; and they that have been dead, in Law, for these ten years
past, may be revived; which may possibly also give decayed Piety, Peace and
Charity, an happy resurrection. Which God of his great Mercy grant for Jesus
Christ sake, Amen.

FINIS.

