A Peaceable Enquiry INTO THAT Novel Controversy ABOUT Reordination. WITH
Certain close, but candid Animadversions upon an ingenious Tract for the
lawfulness of Reordination;

Written by the Learned and Reverend Mr. J. HUMFREY.

By R. I. (...).

(...).

Ephesians. 4 15. London, Printed, 1661.

The Prefatory Epistle to the Reader.
Candid Reader,
SO I call you, because I would have you, for so I need you; knowing much that
I know but little, even so much, that consciousness of imbecility had almost
stupefied conscience of duty; and had those more ancient, more literate, more
judicious Classical Divines been but half so forward to vindicate their
ordinations, as they were to engage young Scholars to accept them, I should
have been a Reader ^wt^h you, whilst such had been our Writers: Though in other
points they have done worthily, yet shall I praise them in this? I praise them
not; they have been almost wholly silent; and therefore least the truth should
suffer, I have exposed these rude lines unto public censure: yet not
Dictator-like dogmatically determining, but Learner-like, humbly yet closely
enquiring: and hence it is, that you may observe so many Interrogations, and
other expressions, which you may understand interrogatively: yet this proceeds
not from the clearness of my knowledge of unanswerable doubts, but from
unanswerable doubts of the clearness of my knowledge: and where you find the
most determinative expressions, they are sometimes to be understood de posse
and non de esse; and where they are to be understood de esse, either in general
commendations, discommendations, or otherwise, you may do me right to
distinguish both persons, times, and places: more especially let not any
construction be be put upon any expression, contrary to the Authors intention,
that may produce the least disloyal reflection upon the Kings most excellent
Majesty's Person or Authority, whom I love and honor, fear and obey, pray and
praise the Almighty for: Neither let there be thought that here is the least
unworthy aspersion cast upon the right reverend Bishops (for so I dare style
them) whom I honor for their Learning and Gravity, Loyalty and Authority: Nor
any Citations, Interrogations or Animadversions, from or upon any book
whatsoever, be pressed with such an unnecessary construction as is
unwarrantable, or unworthy a Christian man. And though Mr. John Humfrey be the
very first in the Christian Church (that ever I heard or read of) that wrote a
whole Tract for Re^^ination: yet the reverend Author being learned and
moderate, the Tract ingenious and peaceable, I should account it disingenuity
to be abhorred, to deal disingeniously in the least with such a person: and
though we are so unhappy as to differ, not only about this point of
Reordination, but also about that other of general Admission; yet these making
no breach in the foundations of Christianity, shall make no breach, on my part,
in the bonds of fraternal charity: Nay this I hope, that peaceable humble
spirits will promote charity by the candid management of their differences,
whilst proud and peevish spirits waste theirs about the very punctilio's of
their unities. A judicious pious person without passion or faction, a Christian
Catholic without a party, is a Phoenix no less excellent then rare: Many have
taught this way, but few have trod it, and fewer will there be, when the
necessary Evangelical terms of peace shall be slighted, and new unnecessary
additionals shall be advanced. But yet if any shall break peace with me, as an
impossibility, or illegality on their false terms, yet I will keep peace with
them, if possible, on better terms. And verily what I have here written, was
not to kindle contentions, but to allay them; and he that will not believe me,
let him for his satisfaction but read Ecclesiastical History, where to his
grief he may observe what dividing, scandalizing contentions have risen about
Ordinations; for the preventing whereof in the Church of England, I have here
produced an expedient in order to accommodation, heartily imploring the Throne
of Grace, that our Protestant Bishops may never join with the Popish Idolatrous
Prelates, in decrying the Reformers and Reformation, the reformed Churches,
Ministry and Administrations; 1 King. 22.24.
Nor like Zedechias quarrel with Micha thus. By what way went the Spirit of the
Lord from me to speak unto thee? Mat. 13.55, 56.
Nor like the Pharisees, who said of Christ, Is not this the Carpenters Son? --
Whence then has this man all these things? Nor as the high Priest to the
Apostles, By what authority do ye these things? I find a notable Instance in
Petilian, Acts 4 7.
who pleaded the cause of the Donatists in the Council at Carthage against
Saint Augustine, who pleaded the cause of the Catholics; and having nothing as
it were, to say against Saint Augustine, he falls a quarrelling about his
ordination, Tu quis es? Filius Ceciliani, an non? Collat. Carth. tert. art.
227, etc.
Unde coepisti, quem habes patrem? Unde tua progenies, ubi tuum caput? Si non
habes, ergo, haereticus etc. Even so our reverend Prelatists have nothing
against me, and such as I, who were neither fighters nor fomenters in the late
unhappy wars, neither perjured, nor apostatical, by breaking either Oath of
Supremacy, Allegiance, or Canonical obedience, or contradicting our
subscription, having never been exercised with them, by reason of our minority;
We are no Covenanters, no Engagers, no Abjurers of the Royal Family; and if
others were engaged in rebellion, in schism, or the like, we will not own them,
nor justify them therein, if we know it. We abhor the murder of the late King,
the violations of the late Parliament, the late Usurpations, the uncharitable
oppression of several learned and pious Prelatists, and those rebellious
risings and mutinies since his Majesty's return; We now make it our business to
preach up peace and purity, truth and loyalty, and waving contentions, we
labor for moderation, and condoling the suppression of an honest party, we
would gladly rejoice in an accommodation; fearing not only the entangling
impositions, but also the dividing separation. Oh I wish again and again, that
they had never questioned our ordination; for sure I am, it has exceedingly
hindered an accommodation of the old differences, and promoted also new
dissentions. But for the removing this mountain out of our way to the Land of
Peace, I shall out of my penury offer this Manual of instruments, prepared,
first for my private use, wherein you have, after the Question propounded, 1.
Certain distinctions, in order to explication. 2. Certain propositions for the
stating of the Question. 3. Certain argumentative Interrogations for further
deliberation. 4. Certain Solutions of Mr. J. Humfreys Arguments for better
satisfaction. 5. Certain concessions in order to an accommodation. 6. Certain
Considerations humbly offered to the Imposers of Reordination, to persuade to
moderation.
By which I hope to manifest to the world, that we are not averse to peace, but
passionately desirous of it; not only ready to accept, but ready to offer the
most condiscending terms of agreement; and more hot yet in the pursuit of peace
shall we be, when we can see the practice of profaneness suppressed, and the
power and practice of holiness advanced, with the least considerable
encouraging condescension in lower, uninstituted, unnecessary things. But if
there be no condescension, no abatement, but rather swellings higher and
higher, then would I weep and wish with Jeremiah, Oh that I had in the
wilderness a dwelling place! Then will this old Question come in fashion again,
and deserve a debate: Whether a Minister be bound to preach the Gospel, when
discharged or silenced by the Bishops? I think it is not to be doubted, if
able, pious, painful Preachers should succeed us, and so the Church be little
or no loser, but we shall be the more glad, and the more at ease. But if our
Successors be insufficient or scandalous, to the hazarding of immortal souls,
what shall we do then? Not preach up rebellion, or faction, or the like; there
is no Question; but the Question is, Whether we should not preach the essential
Doctrines of Christianity, as that there is a God, a Savior, a Heaven, a Hell,
etc. with the necessary practices of faith, repentance and good works? And
though we cannot do it in one Church, whether we should not do it in another?
And if we cannot in any public place, whether we should not privately from
house to house? The Reasons which speak at present against our ease, are these.
1. Is not our office for the exercise? and therefore is not the office in vain
if not exercised? Frustra est potentia quae non reducitur in actum. 2. Have we
not promised before God and the Congregation, when we were ordained, that we
would (through grace) continue in this work to the end, notwithwithstanding the
discouragements we might meet with in this world? 3. Did not the true Prophets
go on to prophecy, and that in public, even when they were prohibited? 4. Was
not this Ministry instituted in times of greatest discouragement? and the first
Ministers sent forth as sheep among wolves, with warning to provide for
tribulations, and yet no dispensation granted more then to fly from one City to
another? 5. Did not the Apostles go on to preach the Gospel, though prohibited,
imprisoned, scourged, stoned, and many murdered and martyred? Its like these
kn^w of no Quietus est from Christ Jesus in this world. 6. Did not the Martyrs
and Confessors in the three first Centuries preach in houses, in wildernesses,
and caves of the earth, when in danger every day of their lives? 7. Are we not
bound to preach the Gospel, be instant in season and out of season? And how can
we be faithful if we neglect it? 8. Is there not a Woe to us if we preach not
the Gospel? 9. Have we not multitudes of poor, blind, naked, starved souls,
which are likely to be lost for ever, if we help them not? And are not these
moving objects of charity unto us, as well as such have been unto others? 10.
Would not seducers shame our silence by their boldness? Our forbearance by
their continuance? Much more might be added, but this may suffice to be
propounded to provoke to further consideration.
I know the devil, the flesh, and carnal friends will stupifie many a
conscience which they cannot satisfy: But oh that men were wise, to be quiet
with nothing, but what will bear them out at the dreadful day approaching, when
we must all account for our stewardship, when we may be no longer Stewards. Oh
let us all be faithful to God, whatever it cost us, and Heaven will shortly
make amends for all.

THE QUESTION Whether a Presbyter ordained by the Presbytery, may lawfully be
reordained by a Diocesan Bishop?
CHAP. I.
Wherein are premised certain distinctions in order to the explication of the
Question.

1. WE must distinguish betwixt Political Ministers, or Ministers of State, and
Ecclesiastical Ministers.

2. There are some that distinguish Ecclesiastical Ministers into Preaching
Presbyters, Ruling Presbyters and Deacons.

3. There are that distinquish preaching Presbyters into Presbyteri primi and
secundarii, or majores and minores; or Presbyters, ruling over Presbyters, i.
e. Diocesan Bishops, and subject Presbyters.

4. Let us distinguish betwixt Presbyters duly qualified, and unqualified
Presbyters.

5. Ordination may be considered either 1. As its a Magisterial Sovereign act
of Christ Jesus, consisting in the Institution of the office of a Presbyter,
determining the work and end, describing the person, qualifying by his holy
Spirit, and obliging in case of need to undertake the office, as also in giving
anthority to his Ministers to try men's abilities, and invest the qualified with
this power; and to his Vicegerents the Magistrates, commission to protect and
encourage; and to his people a liberty to choose such to watch over their
particular Congregations; or 2. As its a Ministerial act.


6. In the Ministerial act, we distinguish betwixt 1. The act of the Magistrate
allowing ordinations within his jurisdictions, as also allowing, commanding,
protecting and encouraging the faithful exercise of the Ministerial function.
2. The act of the people electing such a person to be their Minister. 3. And
the acts of the Ordainers, which are probation, approbation, benediction,
imposition of hands, and investiture; though these five are not all essential
to ordination, yet they seem to be all integral parts thereof.


7. We must distinguish an ordination to the office of the Ministry in the
Catholic Church, and a separation to the work of the Ministry in a particular
Church.

8. We should distinguish the usage of the word, Presbytery, either for the
College of Presbyters, or (as in some Ecclesiastical Writers) for the office
of a Prebyter.

9. We distinguish a College of truly ordained Presbyters, from a College of
unordained pretended Presbyters.

10. We distinguish betwixt heretical, schismatical, scandalous Presbyters, and
orthodox, peaceable and blameless Presbyters.

11. We distinguish betwixt Presbyters ordination in schismatical necessitous
times, and Presbyters schismatical ordination: or betwixt Presbyters ordination
in a collapsed Church, and Presbyters ordination in a Church constituted, and
otherwise constitute by Diocesans.

12. We distinguish betwixt the regularity of an ordination and the validity;
as also betwixt the irregularity and in validity; and the same either according
to Gods Laws, or man's Laws, which some call lawful and legal.

13. We also distinguish the lawfulness of imposing reordination, from the
lawfulness of submitting thereto when imposed.

14. We may distinguish the lawfulness of accepting in foro Dei, in foro
conscientiae, and in foro humano.

15. We distinguish the lawfulness of accepting without any necessity, and
under a necessity; and the kinds and degrees of necessity should be considered.

16. We distinguish a proper Reordination (if such a thing can be in the world)
from a confirmation.

17. Some distinguish betwixt a Reordination absolute, and a Reordination
hypothetical.

18. Some distinguish a Reordination accumulative, and a Reordination
destructive, i. e. of the former ordination.

19. Some distinguish betwixt Apostolical and Apostatical Bishops.

20. We must distinguish betwixt a Reordination wherein nothing is doubtful but
the reiteration it self, and a Reordination wherein the annexed concomitants
may be as doubtful as the repetition of the act; or betwixt Reordination in
thesi and in hypothesi: or in actu signato and actu exercito.

CHAP. II.
Containing certain Propositions, whereof many are presupposed in the Question,
and granted, though not by all men, yet mostly by the persons that are chiefly
concerned in the Question.

Prop. 1. IT is presupposed that Jesus Christ being Lord over all, has
instituted and ordained the office of a Presbyter, determined his work,
described his qualifications, empowered certain persons to set some apart to
this office, etc. for the converting of sinners, and the edifying of his body
Mystical.

Prop. 2. Its to be understood that the Presbyter is not a mere political
Minister, but an Evangelical Presbyter (for so you must give me leave to call
him) nor a mere Ruling, but a Preaching Presbyter, yet not one that rules over
Presbyters; neither is it to our purpose to enquire whether there be any such
Ruling Elders or Diocesans by divine institution, or not.

Prop. 3. It is to be presupposed that Jesus Christ by his Spirit does qualify
certain persons, and incline to undertake, and enable to discharge this
Ministry; and that the person in the Question is such a one, and that his
former ordination was not vacated through the want of any necessary
qualifications.

Prop. 4. It is presupposed that no man takes this honor to himself, but that
persons qualified are to be solemnly set apart, or ordained to this office; and
that the person in the Question does ipso facto acknowledge as much; or else to
what purpose does he trouble himself about Reordination?

Prop. 5. It is to be understood that this Ministerial ordination is the solemn
investing of a person qualified with Ministerial power, after and with
examination, approbation, benediction and imposition of hands, and that the
person in the Question has received so much from the Presbytery; and that the
fault lies not in the defect of any of these acts. Here (I confess) is
something more doubtful, as whether the Presbyters ordination be an ordination?
but this I leave to others who have spent more paper upon this Question, then
upon the other of Reordination: as also it seems doubtful to some, whether
ordination be an investiture with Ministerial power? This more directly lying
in my way, I shall endeavor to remove, before I step one foot further. I find
some that would make Ordination but a confirmation or testification of our
Ministerial Call. Thus that learned Casuist Baldwin, C. C. p. 1032.1033.
Ordinatio nihil est aliud quam publica and solennis legitimae vocation is
confirmatio, ut constet omnibus personam hanc non sibi ipsi rapuisse munus
Ecclesiasticum, etc. -- melius est vocare ordinationem solennem ritum quo
testificatur de legitima vocatione ordinandi, donisque necessari is, etc. its
well known that Ames, Hooker, and several of the Congregational brethren, place
the essence of the Ministerial Call in election, and make ordination but
adjunctum consequens. Now I acknowledge, if ordination should suppose a man to
be a Minister already, and to be it self but a mere solemnity, as the
coronation of an hereditary Prince; then there is not so much intrinsecal to
that ordinance, which may hinder its repetition: but let us not so slight
ordination before we hear what others say. Sum. in supplem. ad 3. part. p. 41.
in Sentent. Comment. 1.4. p. 14. De Effect. sacr. l. 2. c 19 De Min. Eccl. p.
182. De Min. Evan. p. 166.186. Miscel. Quest. p. 34.
Ordo signaculum quoddam Ecclesiae est quo spiritual is potest as traditur
ordinato, says P. Lombard, justified herein by Aquin as. So says that other
learned Schoolman Estius, Ordo Sacramentum est novae legis a Christo
inst^tutum, quo potest as spiritual is traditur, etc. So Bellarmine, In
sacramento ordinis adscribitur in numerum Ducum and Praepositorum hujus
militiae, and accipit potestatem distribuendi aliis bona Domini, etc. Gerard
says, Effectus ordinationis proprius est collatio potestatis docendi, and
sacramenta administrandi; ad illum ordinatio per se dirigitur, eundemque
perpetno and infallibiliter consequitur. M. Antonius de dom. l. 2. de Repub.
Eccles. 6.3. Sect. 24. etc. calls ordination Missio potestativa; which the
London Ministers and Gelaspy do well approve. The Confession of Wirtembergh
seems to hold forth the same doctrine; we cannot see (say they) what use there
is of those kind of men in the Church which are ordained for this purpose, that
they may have authority to sacrifice for the quick and dead: Therefore it is
evident, Harm of Confess. p. 266.
that except a Priest be ordained in the Church to the Ministry of Preaching,
he cannot rightly take unto him neither the name of a Priest, nor the name of a
Bishop. Mr. Firmin citing Gerards description of ordination before mentioned,
adds thus much more, with whom agree the stream of Divines, and the practice of
the Churches in New England. Which story of New England I confess I should
hardly believe, Schism p. 83.
did not a New England man tell it.

Lo here you see are two sorts of Divines; and what shall we do with them? We
will resolve to reverence them both, but pin our faith on the sleeves of
neither. I proceed therefore to enquire into the nature of ordination: And here
I grant, what indeed cannot be denied. 1. That Jesus is the principal
Constituent of the Ministerial power or office, and he is most properly the
Ordainer, and his Act is most properly ordination. 2. That the Gospel-Charter
is the Instrument to convey this power. 3. That a person qualified with
essential qualifications at least, is the only Recipient of this power. 4. And
may I not add That ordination is such an ingredient (call it by what name you
will) that where it is rightly put, there is Ministerial power conveyed; and
where it is not put, there is not, there cannot be regularly any conveyance?
So that you may call ordination either a solemn-publick Approbation,
Confirmation, Testification, or allowance, with some; or a potestative Mission,
solemn Investiture, Collation, the essence of the external Call (which external
and internal Call I understand much like to their external and internal
Covenant) with others; or what else you think fit; and I shall not quarrel with
you about words, provided it be acknowledged that it has the force of a
condition, or causa sine qua non. And though I might, with some, challenge
more, as due to ordination, yet I choose rather to content my self with thus
much, least catching at a shadow (with the Animal in the Fable) I should lose
the substance. And if I can but prove that ordination is thus much, i. e. that
which being rightly put, officepower will follow; and that which being denied,
the conveyance of power (according to the order of the Charter) is suspended,
this will be sufficient to my purpose.

1. I will argue a pari; because that will lustrate as well as confirm: In the
consti^uting of a King in a Kingdom elective (for ^n hereditary Kingdom, and
the Coronation of such a King will not reach our case, the Ministerial power
not being hereditary) ^ve consider, 1. The sundamental constitution of their
Kingdom, which instrumen^ally institutes the office of a King there, ^etermines
his power, and work, describes he person capable, and also impowers some
persons (it may be Princes, Peers, or People) to discern, elect, enthronize,
and crown upon a vacancy a certain person to ^e their King. 2. We suppose
several persons that are duly qualified, ready to accept and consent to be made
their King: Yet 3. there is not one of them made King e^ ^omine, because
qualified, without the probation, approbation, and constitution of the Judges;
but any one of them, being elected and constituted by the Electors and Judges,
^s King presently: Even so, etc.
Take another Instance; in the authorizing a chief Officer in one of our
Corporations; we suppose that the Kings Majesty is the principal Efficient
subtercelestial cause of their authority; likewise their Charter is the
instrumental cause, and qualified persons, according to the directions in the
Chart^^ are the capable Subjects of this authori^^ and the Burgomasters,
Freemen, or the li^^ are appointed, by this their Charter, to el^^ and
constitute this their head Officer (w^^ther Mayor, Bailiff, or Warden, matt^^
not.) Now notwithstanding the Kings thority derived in general, their Char^^^
deriving, a person duly qualified ready accept the office, yet notwithstanding
is n^^ this person a Mayor, Bailiff, or Ward^ except they that are appointed,
ordain h^^ to be so, nor until they have ordained h^^ to be so; but when their
act is past, then there authority derived from the King, the Charter, which
invests him with the office-power. Or as in the University, t^^ Statutes
authorize a person so and so a^ complished to challenge? the degree of Doctor
or Master; yet notwithstanding t^^^ person is not Doctor nor Master till he ha^
his grace in the Convocation, but then (...) is: Who is so dull as to be unable
to ma^^ application? By all which it appears, the Ordainers are necessary
occasions, if n^ constituent causes ( viz. in genere instr^menti, in specie
called Ministerial causes) this Officer qua Officer.

2. I argue, if ordination be but a me^solemnity, to which the conveyance of
^^wer to a particular person is antece^^nt, then is a person qualified, if
consent^^g, made a Minister before ordination; ^^a then are all persons
Ministers, being ^^alified and desiring the office, and having ^^portunity of
exercising. Might not such Doctrine reduced into practice occasion at Question
of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 12.29.
Are all Apo^les? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? ^^^c.

3. If ordination convey not the power, ^en a person ordained is really no more
a ^inister then he was before, though he may ^em somewhat more to the world;
but if ^^e should seem to be more a Minister be^^re ordination then after (as
he might to me of the separation) then to what purpose should he be ordained?

4. Why would the Holy Ghost (think ^ou) choose to use such expressions as do
^^ully set forth a proper investiture, if no ^uch thing were intended? The
(...) ^^sed for ordination ( Acts 6.3. (...), whom we may constitute ^ver this
business. And Titus 1.5. (...), etc. and ordain Elders in every City) is the
very ^me word that is used for the most proper investiture with office-power.
Acts 7.10.
When seph was by Pharach put into his office (...) Holy Ghost expresses it
thus, (...), etc. and likew^^^ in that Parable, Luke 12.44. and ma^^ such like
places.

5. Why should not our Ministers lo^^ upon their ordination as conferring the
office, as well as Aaron; and especially (...) Successors theirs? 2 Chronicles.
29.11. Heb^ 5.1, 4, 5.

6. It ordination be a potestative mis^^on, then it invests; but so it is
general concluded from Romans 10.15.

7. If ordination do not invest, how w^^ the gift, i. e. the office given
Timothy, wi^^^ the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery? 1 Timothy 4.14. or by
the laying on (...) Paul's hands? 2 Timothy 1.6. if that pla^^ be understood of
ordination, as some would have it.

8. How can ordination be said to be the committing or entrusting (as 2 Timothy
2.2. of faithful persons with the Gospel (...) preach it, if it convey no power?

Much more I perceive by the rising o^^ my own thoughts, may be said to prove
thi^ part of the Proposition, that ordination i^^ an investiture with power:
but methinks have made too low an halt at the threshold already, and therefore
I proceed to the Proposition.

Prop. 6. It is supposed that this work of ordination, is committed to certain
persons ordained themselves to the same office at least; and that the person in
the Question was ordained (as you must give me leave to call it) to the office
of a Presbyter by the Presbytery, or Presbyters validly ordained themselves;
and that our Question now is not about the Ordainers own ordination to be
Presbyters, or the Magistrates allowance of such ordinations, at least a
postfacte, or the peoples consent to such Ministers.

Prop. 7. Let us suppose that the Presbyters ordaining were neither heretical,
schismatical, nor scandalous, though possibly they ordained in heretical,
schismatical, and scandalous times, but were orthodox, peaceable and pious (as
many of them may rationally be judged to be) or at least that they were not
such as by their personal miscarriages to null their acts; and this we may well
suppose, because it is known, that Protestants and Papists do generally agree,
that ordinations made by Heretics, and Schismatics, are not, to nomine, null
and void.

Prop. 8. It is supposed that the former ordination received, was an ordination
to the office in the Catholic Church; and likewise that the latter ordination
imposed is to the same office in the Catholic Church; and that the Question is
not now about any particular inferior separation to a particular work, or
exercise of an office.

Prop. 9. It may be supposed, that the person formerly ordained by the
Presbytery, either knew not in those cloudy times where to find a Diocesan, or
knowing, durst not use him for fear of the Usurpers; or desiring ordination
from him, he durst not grant it; and so he looked upon himself as lying under a
necessity to receive Presbyterial ordination.

Prop. 10. It is supposed that the person ordained in this case of necessity,
is satisfied as to the validity of such ordination, though not possibly as to
the regularity, and that he dare not now disown it, nor his former acts done by
virtue of it; and therefore I may spare that great pains that some have taken
for the proof of the validity of Presbyterian ordination.

Prop. 11. It is supposed, that if the former ordination were valid in the
judgment of the person in the Question, then the denial thereof, and the
imposing another ordination, must needs seem very unlawful in his judgment.

Prop. 12. It is supposed that the Question about the lawfulness of
Reordination is not to be measured by the laws of men, but by the Laws of God.

Prop. 13. It is supposed that some things may be submitted to in a case of
necessity, which without that necessity may not; and as the person in the
Question would have the necessity of his quondam acceptance of Presbyterian
Ordination considered by his Censors; so undoubtedly that person himself should
consider the necessity of others in their present submission to Prelatical
reordination; which necessity (to speak ingenuously) will excuse a tanto, if
not a toto.

Prop. 14. It is supposed, that some Superiors deny the former ordination, and
forbid the further exercising of, or at least deny encouragement to such
persons as have that ordination only; and this is that which gives life to this
Question, which might otherwise have slept in oblivion.

Prop. 15, It is supposed that a Confirmation of former ordination will not
satisfy Superiors, nor any thing else besides a proper ordination by a
Diocesan; this evidently appears, in that the Bishop uses the same Questions,
Forms, and Ceremonies in the reordaining of one that was ordained before, as he
uses in the ordaining of one never yet ordained.

Prop. 16. It is supposed that the imposed reordination, though it may be
called an hypothetical reordination, yet it is absolute in the judgment of the
Imposers, yea and absolute in the form of administration (for ought I hear) by
the Reordainers.

Prop. 17. It is supposed, that though the Receivers of reordination may fancy
it to be only accumulative (if there can be such a thing) yet it is plainly
destructive of their former ordination in the judgment of the Reordainers; and
whether it be so in it self, is hereafter to be considered.

Prop. 18. It is supposed that this Question is not concerning reordination by
Bishops in thesi, but in hypothesi, not Metaphysical Bishops of our own
fancying, but such as are now in England, be they better, be they worse.

Prop. 19. It is supposed, that in reordination there is more to be considered
then the bare reiteration of Orders, even many numerical Forms, Expressions,
Injunctions, and Ceremonies, which if unlawful, will prohibit submission,
though reordination in astracto should be lawful.

Prop. 20. It is supposed, that the person in the Question, lying under a
double dedication unto God, one in baptism or sanctification, the other in
ordination; as also under strong convictions of the excellency of the Churches
peace, and the necessity of active obedience to the lawful Magistrate in things
lawful; and the hottest affections to immortal souls, multitudes whereof are in
mortal danger of being discouraged, scattered, corrupted, and starved (when all
that were presbyterially ordained are removed) through blind, idle, scandalous,
or superstitious Guides succeeding, will therefore do the utmost that he can
lawfully to obtain his liberty, and enjoy his opportunities to endeavor the
salvation of poor souls, the answering his own obligations, the promoting the
Churches peace, and ultimately the glory of the Lord Redeemer. And yet we may
suppose that the person in the Question does well understand, that we may not
do evil that good may come thereon, and is likewise well resolved to suffer
rather then to sin, and to leave his work (which he cannot do) to the Almighty
himself, rather then to go out of his way, and incur his dreadful displeasure
in the pretended performance of it.

CHAP. III.
Containing the main Proposition. -- That it seems unlawful for a Presbyter
ordained by the Presbyters, to admit a reordination by Diocesan Bishops. With
certain Interrogations in order to a Determination.

1. WHether is reordination an Ordinance of Christ, or not? If you say, an
Ordinance; then I ask, where has Christ instituted reordination in his holy
Gospel? Either let divine institution be produced, or else we can never believe
it to be an Ordinance of Christ Jesus; but who can find either Precept or
President in the whole Bible? I scarcely know any one that ever so much as
pretended to it till now of late; and what is now said, shall hereafter (Deo
volente) be considered: But if you say that reordination is no Ordinance of
Christ. 1. Do you observe, what everlasting blemish you put upon this solemn
business, in acknowledging it to be no divine institution? for then it must
needs be but a mere humane invention. 2. And how you expose it to all that is
said by the Nonconformists against superstition? 3. Do you well consider, that
what is reordination to the person in the Question, is one and the same with
the ordination of others not ordained before? and so denying that to be an
ordinance, do you not deny the other, and so run your selves upon a rock, that
would split both Church and Ministry, and expose your selves to the lash of
all men, except Papists and Brownists?
But if you say, that this Act, in reference to the unordained, is an
Ordinance, being ordination; in reference to the ordained is no Ordinance,
being reordination: Oh then consider, I beseech you, what sad work you make
with Christ's Ordinance; the same Act must be an Ordinance and no Ordinance at
your pleasure; the nature, end, and use must all be changed to serve your turn:
As if it were like the Camelion that can change its color to suit every
approaching object. The latter part of this Argument from the abuse the
Ordinance is used by that learned Estius. Porro apud veteres (says he)
apertissime de hoc Sacramento (i. e. Ordinis) scripsit Augustinus pluribus
locis; In senten. Com l. 4. in distinct. 24. p. 14.
unus locus est, l. 2. contra Epist. Parm. c. 13. ubi Sacramentum ordinationis
cum Sacramento baptismi ita comparat, ut dicat utrumque and Sacramentum esse,
etc quadam consecratione homini dari; illud cum baptizatur, istud cum
ordinatur, adeo neutrum repetendum esse, ne Sacramento fiat injuria.

2. Whether is this second ordination to some end, or to no end? If to no end,
then you take an Ordinance of God (if I may so call it) in vain, and so the
Name of God in vain, and so you break the third Commandment. If to some end,
then either to convey authority, or some other: Not to convey authority, for
that is done already, and so you do but actum agere, which is absurd (says Mr.
Humf.) a vain and needless work, say I, and so you still take the Name of God
in vain: If to any other end, then it is either instituted by Christ, or not;
If not, then you are guilty of abusing and perverting Christ's Ordinance: if so,
let the end be named, and the institution produced. What I find said already to
this purpose, shall be considered hereafter in due place.

3. Does not ordination add a new being to the person ordained? If not, then
may the person ordained be said to be no more a Minister then whilst
unordained: If so, then after reordination whether shall we admit a consistency
of two distinct beings, or a nullity of the one: if a nullity of the one, what
is that but to make a nullity of Christ's Ordinance? If two distinct beings,
then are there not two Ministers in one person? Which how two moral ministerial
beings can exist in one Minister, seems as hard to conceive, as how two natural
beings can exist in one person. Let it be considered, whether these spiritual
Parents, the Ordainers, can any more generate two spiritual beings of the same
kind, in these spiritual Children the ordained, then natural Parents can by two
acts generate two natural beings of the same kind in the same child? Whether
reordination in morality be not like regeneration in nature.

4. If we cannot admit a rebaptization, how shall we admit a reordination? They
were no babies that have argued from this Topic. l. 2. Cont. Epist. Parm. c.
13.
Thus St. Augustine argued about twelve hundred years ago: Quando ex ipsa part
(says he) venientes etiam Praep^siti pro bone pacis, correcto schismatis
errore, suscepti sunt, etsi visum est opus esse ut eadem officia gererent quae
gerebant, non sunt rursus ordinandi, sed sicut baptismus in iis it a mansit
ordinatio integra, quia in praecisione fuerat vitium, quod unitatis pace est
correctum, non in Sacramentis quae ubicunque sunt, ipsa vera sunt. l. 2. Epist.
32.
So Gregory (referente and Estio and Baldvino) Quid dicitis ut is qui ordinatus
est, iterum ordinetur? Valde ridiculum est; absit enim a fraternitate vestra
sic sapere; sicut enim qui semel baptizatus est, iterum baptizari non debet;
ita qui consecratus est semel, in eodem iterum ordine non debet consecrari. C.
C. p. 10^6.
Yea thus Baldwin himself affirms, Si baptismus a Pontificiis, and aliis
hareticis, substantiam bujus Sacramenti non convellentibus, acceptus, non est
iterandus, multo minus ordinatio, etc.

Though it is readily acknowledged, that ordination is in strict and proper
speech no Sacrament (though many things in lax discourse were formerly, and are
still called Sacraments) nor Seal of the Covenant of Grace, as Baptism, being
not extended (no not in potentia) to all sincere Covenanters; neither is there
any element instituted for an outward sign, etc. yet may we not reckon their
agreement in these. As Baptism is a solemn admission into visible
Church Priviledges, so is ordination into visible Church-offices; and as the
person baptized had a remote right before baptism; so the person ordained
being duly qualified, and providentially called; and yet as before baptism the
person could not regularly partake of the Lords Supper, present an Infant to
baptism, or the like; so before ordination the person qualified cannot
regularly baptize, administer the Lords Supper, or the like. Now the Question
is; If we cannot admit a new investiture with Church privileges by
rebaptization, how shall we admit a new investiture with Church Power by
reordination? What reason can be brought from the nature of an investing
solemnity against rebaptization, which may not be brought against reordination?
Yet how few in all the world have ever maintained a rebaptization of those that
were validly baptized before? The very Anabaptists (as we call them) will thus
far disown Anabaptisme, and say, if Infants baptism were not void, they durst
not baptize them again at age.

5. Whether does ordination beget a new relation in a person to the Church, or
not? If not, then are you no more a Steward, a Shepherd, a Ruler, a Teacher,
after ordination, then you were before; for all these are terms of relation,
and then you must either acknowledge, that there are no such Teachers or Rulers
among the ordained, or else that all are Teachers and Rulers among the
inordained, both which are sufficiently distant from truth. But if you
acknowledge that ordination does beget a relation, then how shall that relation
be iterated? Undoubtedly betwixt the Relatum and Correlatum there is but one
relation upon o^e foundation: As in marriage there can be but one only relation
betwixt man and wife upon that account; and therefore it is utterly in vain to
repeat marriage; for if you repeat it a thousand times, yet the relation will
be but the same, and not one jot the more; the husband is but a husband, and
the wife is but a wife, after ten thousand marriages, and so they were after
one. Even so will a Ministers relation to the Church be but the same if he
should be ordained a thousand times. Learned Hooker argues from this Topic
thus, Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 411.
They which have once received this power, may not think to put it off and on
like a cloak, as the weather serves to take it, reject it, and reassume it as
often as themselves list; of which profane and impious contempt -- but let them
know, which put their hands to this plough, that once consecrated unto God,
they are made his peculiar inheritance for ever; Suspensions may stop, and
degradations may utterly out off the use or exercise of power before given, but
voluntarily it is not in the power of man to separate and pull asunder what God
by his authority coupleth; so that though there may be through misdesere
degradation, as there may be just cause of separation after matrimony, yet if
(as sometimes it does) restitution to former dignity, or reconciliation after
breach does happen, neither does the one nor the other ever iterate the first
knot.

Concerning the iterability of the marriage solemnity, I shall speak in due
place.

6. If ordination be an Act of Christ, how then can we reordain without injury
to his Majesty? That ordination is Christ's Act, is plain in the nature of the
thing; for the Gospel and the Ordainers are but Instruments in the conveyance
of authority, but Jesus Christ himself is the original of all power, and the
principal Agent in the Conveyance of power by these Instruments, as has been
already explained, and is by mo^^ acknowledged. And if ordination be Christ
Act, then he put it forth in the first administration; and if so, then what can
a reordination be, but either a most unworthy denial of Christ's former Act, or
a presumptuous imposing upon Christ to exert a new Act, without all warrant on
our parts; o^ else a mocking of Christ, using his Act as n^ Act! This very
Argument you may fin^ used by Estius from a doubtful Cyprian thus Baptismum
repeti, inquit, Ecclesiasticae prohibent regulae, Insent. Com. l. 4. in did
in. 1. p. 1^.
and semel sanctificatis nulla deinceps manus iterum consecrans praesumit
accedere, nemo sacros ordines semel datos iterum renovat -- nemo impositioni
manuum vtministerio derogat sacerdotum, quia contumeliaesset Spiritus Sancti si
evacuari posset, quod ille sanctificat, and alia sanctificatione emendaret quod
semel ille statuit, and confirmat.

7. Is not reordination an injury to our incomparable Charter, by which is
conveyed from the King of Saints this power and privilege ministerial, to rule
in his spiritual Corporation? It is certainly true, that as Christ's Church is a
spiritual Corporation under himself the Head, so is his Gospel the Charter
thereof, by which Instrument (as (...) have said) the King of Kings ordains the
Offices, describes the persons ordaining and ordained, and gives power to both
to give and receive (in his limited way) authority to execute the same: And
further, it is here supposed, that the Officer in the Question is constitute,
according to this Charter, in all necessaries. Now to submit to another
constitution by those that deny the former, is it nor to desert, yea to
infringe and violate our Charter? To exemplify this matter, suppose an Officer
in one of our Corporations, constituted according to their Charter, should be
disowned for a true Officer, and required to admit a new Constitution, would
not the Burgesses and Freemen cry out, that this would be a violation of their
Charter? and therefore they will adventure the displeasure of great ones, the
trouble and vexation of tedious Lawsuits, the large expense of their treasure,
rather then thus to violate their Charter. Now judge whether ours be not a
parallel case.

8. Either you own the latter ordination as a proper ordination, or not as a
proper ordination: If as a proper ordination, then do you not, ipso facto,
renounce your former ordination? Yea though you should in words protest your
owning of your former ordination, yet do not your works in reordination disown
it, and give your words the lie? For it seems impossible for two distinct
proper investitures to be upon one person, as I suppose I have proved already:
and which I further strengthen thus; how can a single person be, subjectum
capax, of a twofold ministerial power, when the most excellent person in this
world is scarce subjectum capax of one? The whole man is but the subject of one
ministerial power; what then is left in that man to be the subject of the
other? But it may be, some wide-^^ared brain may fancy, that there is a
coallition of these two proper Ordinations, and the relations flowing thence;
but if so, I desire to know by what Law that can be, It is well known, that
moral beings depend upon some Law; and if there be any Law to unite these two
beings (the old man and the young man, the Presbyters and the Prelatist) let it
be produced, and I shall the g^ateful for such a discovery. But on the other
hand, if you say the latter is no proper ordination, which yet is a proper
ordination in it self, and so commonly used and esteemed, are you not guilty of
a mendacium in verbis? Nay more, shall you not, whilst in words you deny the
latter ordination, and yet indeed receive it, be guilty of a mendacium in
factis? May not, what moderate Bishop Davenant says against a Protestants
being present at the Mass, which yet in words he disclaims, thinking thereby to
salve his conscience, be fitly enoogh applied to this case? Determ. 7.
Hans pugnam externam (says the B shop) actionum cum interna mentis sententia
foedissimam simulationem dico, and mendacium nihilo tolerabilius quam si quis
expressis verbis se Missam Papisticam approbare testaretur; nam ad virtutem
veritatis pertinet, ut quis talem se exhibeat per signa exteriora, qualis
revera existit. At qui opponitur buic veritati cum aliquis per signa factorum
contrar^um ejus significat quod in mente clausum habet, quam simulationem
mendacium in factis licet appellare, uti recte Aquinas; qui itaque Pap staru^
missas examino aversatur, at que retinet interim externam hanc cum illis
particip^tionem, co damnabilius agit, quia quod mendaciter agit, sic agit
tamen, ut eum populus veraciter agere existimet. And Baldwin (how much soever
any may reckon him a Patron of reordination) speaks of the Popish Ordinations
thus, C. C. p. 1045.
Hac omnia partim superstistiosa, partim ridicula approbare cogitur is qui a
Pontificiis ordinationem petit; quis autem hoc bona cum conscientia facere
potest? neque excusat quod talis ordinatio cum protestation^ suscipitur,
ordinandum nimirum non Pap^sticas traditiones, sed dogmata Scripturae, sacrae
consona, nihilominus propositurum esset; nam protestatio haec facto est
centraria, quia ipsae ordinatio Patistica est pars doctrinae Papisticae, etc.

9. Whether it be not, ipso facto, to acknowledge that the person in the
Question is no Presbyter, when he shall step back to the Deacons office in
order to be a Presbyter? Here it is to be premised, that our reordained
Reordainers do make Deaconry a step or degree to Presbytery; and that no man
may be ordained a Presbyter that is not first ordained a Deacon; neither is
this abated in reordination. See the form of making and consecrating Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons; where it is declared, that here it must be showed unto
the Deacon, that he must continue in that office of a Deacon the space of a
whole year at the least (except for reasonable causes it be otherwise seen to
his Ordinary) to the intent he may be perfect and expert in the things
appertaining to the Ecclesiastical administration, in the executing whereof if
he be found faithful and diligent, he may be admitied by his Diocesan to the
order of Priesthood. The Canons made in the year 1603. inform us, that the
office of a Deacon, Can. 28.
being a step or degree to the M^nistry, according to the ancient Fathers, and
the practice of the Primitive Church, we do ordain and appoint, that hereafter
no Bishop shall make any person, of what quality or gifts soever, a Deacon and
a Priest both together on one day, but that the order in that behalf prescribed
in the book of making and consecrating Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, be
strictly observed: Hence it appears, that a Deaconry is a medium to Presbytery;
and therefore will not the use of this mean be an acknowledgement that the end
is not atrained? For acquisito fine cessant media. Again it is certain, that
the office of a Deacon is less then the office of a Presbyter; and will it not
thence follow, that he that seeks the less, does thereby acknowledge that he
has not attained the greater? Because Omne majus continet in se minus.

10. What is that office (not in name but in deed) that the person in the
Question must be ordained unto before he be reordained a Presbyter? either it
is the office of a Deacon or not; if you say it is, then 1. Where has the
Scripture made a Deaconry a step to Presbytery? 2. Where has Christ given the
power of baptizing unto Deacons? See the book of Consecrat of Bishops, etc.
3. Where has Christ separated the power of preaching and the power of
baptizing? 4. If our Deacons have a power to preach (as some say) then who has
power to suspend them constantly from the exercise? 5. Or who can acquit them
from the guilt of the constant neglect of their work? 6. But where has Christ
conveyed the power of preaching unto Deacons? 7. Where shall we place the
boundaries betwixt our Deaconries and Presbyteries? especially where shall we
find such boundaries in the Scripture? 8. How shall the re-ordained Presbyter
execute the real office of a Deacon, one part of whose work is certainly to
serve tables? Acts 6. beg.
for is not that work incompatible with the work of a Presbyter, especially in
great places? and was it not judged so by the Apostles? 9. How shall the
Presbyter promise to continue in the office of a Deacon only, as a probationer
for the Presbytery? 10 How can he believe that a Deaconry is a step to
Presbytery, when yet he is forced himself, to step from Presbytery to
Deaconry? if the motions of our speculations ascend from a Deaconry to
Presbytery, how then shall the motions of our practicals descend from a
Presbytery to a Deacontie? what cross-graind creatures would this make us? and
what contradictory motions would this produce in us? would not such a procedure
fit the person in the Question for this Motto (...)?


But if you say, this is not the real office of a Deacon, then 1. What office
is it? 2. By what authority instituted? 3. Why is it called the office of a
Deacon? 4. Why are men ordained into it, as the Deacons office? 5. Why are men
engaged to execute it as the Deacons office, etc.?
Let these things be considered, for consideration is the end of their offer,
not a positive present determination by the Author.

11. How many ordinations to the same office may a man submit unto? Take a
person that is now re-ordained, he was 1. Ordained by the Presbytery to be a
Presbyter. 2. He was ordained by the Bishop to be a Deacon. 3. To be a
Presbyter.
So then there is two, if not three ordinations to the same office passed
already. And if a man may submit to two ordinations, then why not to twenty?
and if to twenty, why not to two hundred, if any supposed necessity shall
require it? as once in a discourse a Gentleman of the passive conformable way,
being asked, what if the Magistrate should impose as many ceremonies in the
worship of God, as ever the Jews had, though not the very same, must we submit
to them all? Yes, said be. Suppose he should add as many more as ever the
Heathens had, must we submit to them all? yes also. And therefore what think
you? will it not be worth while to consider a little, where we shall stop or
stay, if once we leave Christ's institutions, Christ's boundaries?

12. Whether by a reordination we shall not create innumerable scruples in the
hearts of the people about the validity of our former consecrations of
Sacraments? and therefore if for the satisfaction of a scrupulous Clergy we
accept an hypothetical reordination, how shall we avoid the giving an
hypothetical rebaptization for the satisfaction of a scrupulous Laity?

13. Will not this reordination prove the greatest scandal to the Reformed
Churches? will they not sook upon it as disowning their Ordinations, their
Ministry, their Sacraments, their Churches, their all? for 1. Were not their
Ministers ordained by the Presbytery as well as ours? 2. Had not many of them
as much liberty, if not more, of attaining Episcopal ordination then ours? 3.
Did not some of them cast off their Bishops? which is the worst that can be
said by the Prelatists against ours, and against but a very few of them
neither. 4. Have not several of them declared in their Harmony of Confessions
their dislike of Diocesan Bishops, and Lord-Bishops, which is more then many of
ours ever did? 5. Have not several of their Chieftains written so voluminously
and learnedly against Diocesans, as few of ours were ever guilty of? how can it
therefore be denied but this reordination will sadly wound them through our
sides? and shall we make a small matter of so sad a business, as 1. To cast
such a reflection upon such famous and numerous Ministers and Churches? 2. To
make such a wide breach betwixt our selves and them, sometimes the Dearest
friends? 3. And to make it by backsliding from our former prefessions of liking
and loving them? 4. And hereby weaken the Protestant Interest? 5. And play the
devils and the Jesuits ^ame, whilst they stand laughing on? 6. And provoke
Protestant Princes and Pastors to set themselves against us, and it may be to
fight us by carnal and spiritual weapons? if this be a laughing matter, what is
lamentable? notoous is that story, how Doctor Holland (when Doctor of the chair
at Oxford) schooled D. Laud, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, yea and turned
him out of the Schools in the face of the University, for denying Bishops and
Priests to be one order, and that upon this very account, because it would set
us at variance with the Reformed Churches, which have always hitherto
continued in amity.



14. How shall we be faithful sons of the Church of England, if we should
disown that ordination which our Reverend Clergy have formerly owned? or own a
reordination which they have always disowned? How ambitious soever some of our
brethren are to be admired as the constant sons of the Church of England, yet
let me tell them, if they have nothing more to argue their constancy, then
their disowning an ordination which was always owned, and owning a
reordination which was always disowned, they may be long enough ere they
atrain that honor, except they attain it before they deserve it; likewise had
they no more to prove the unfaithfulness of the Presbyterians to the Church of
England, then because they will not desert the Church of England in these two
material points, they might twist sand long enough before they make ropes. And
here let no man buz into my ear such a Question as this, how can the Church of
England be unfaithful to the Church of England? for I hope none will confine
the Church of England to a few of her present Doctors, be they never so
eminent; neither will they understand by their faithfulness to the Church of
England, Bishop Jewel Defense of the Apol. part. 2. c. 5. di. 1. p. 120.
a faithfulness to a personal succession of Bishops; for what is that but
Popish? but to a Doctrinal succession, for that is Protestant. -- And here what
need I say much to prove that the Right Reverend Bishops; Doctors and Pastors
of our Church have owned Presbyterian ordination as valid? since that
incomparable Mr. Baxter has cited Bishop Jewel, Bancroft, Vher, Downame,
Disput. with Everard. 240. Trys. 541.
Davenant, Alley, Morton, Pilkinton, Prideaux, Overall, Bramhall, Bridges.
Bilson, and Andrews, all Bishops, and D. Field, Saravia, Powell, Chillingworth,
Bernard, Fern, Steward, Mason, with the Lord Digby, Grotius and Chisenhall, to
whom may be added the Revered D. Sanderson, D. Featley, Dr. ^^wnes, and D.
Forbess; and especially le^^^ the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons and Clergy
of England be forgotten, Irenicum.
who in their Book entitled, The institution of a Christian man, subscribed
with all their names, and dedicated to K. H. 8. an. 1537. c. of Orders. Nor K.
H. 8. himself who in his book styled A necessary erudition for a Christian man,
set out by authority of the Stat. of 32. H. 8. c. 26. approved by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, M. P^yns ^ub^sh. Tim. and Tit. p. 71, 72.
with the Nether House of Parliament, published an. 1543. in both which Tracts
they resolve, that Bishops and Priests by Gods Laws are one and the same, and
that the power of ordination and excommunication belongs equally to them both.
Now judge who are nearest the Church of England, the rigid Prelatist, or the
moderate Presbyterian. And that our honored Fathers were against the
reordination of the presbyterially ordained, appears partly from their owning
such ordinations as valid; and more fully in their constant admitting such to
preferment without any reordination. To instance in that famous story of the
three Bishops, whereof B. Andrews was one, that were to consecrate Bishops for
Scotland; and the Qu. being moved whether those Scotch Ministers should not be
reordained Presbyters before they were consecrated Bishops, and it w^ ^arried
in the Negative, and so they proceeded. Iremember not long since a Reverend
Minister and Prebendary told my self, that he having received Presbyterian
ordination beyond sea, who when he came over into England, went to a Bishop
about his ordination, who refused t^ reordain him: the judgment of Wickliff,
Hooker, Armachanus, and Mason, shall be given by and by. But if any one would
persuade me that the ancient Bishops were for such a reordination, I shall only
entreat him to produce a Catalogue of their names, with a citation of their
words; for seeing is believing. But I confess I have arrived at such a degree
of assurance, that few if any at all of the late Bishops (excepting A. Laud,
with two or three of his Proselites) that ever avowed a reordination of those
that were ordained by Presbyters; were those old dead Bishops but alive again,
they would quickly (I believe) remove reordinations, and such like altitudes.
Nay more yet, I do not believe that A. Laud, B. Mountague, or Bishop Hall,
though the highest in England that I have read of, did ever maintain that those
might lawfully be reordained which were validly ordained before; so then the
person in the Question must be satisfied, that his former ordination is void,
or else he departs from those three lofty Bishops; but if therein he be
satisfied, then he departs from others (in this at least) much more humble.
Judge now by this how we can accept a second ordination, and yet be faithful to
the Church of England!

15. Will not this submission to a reordination prove a confirmation of some
in certain false principles, and an enervation of others in certain true
principles, and so prove a lamentable scandal to them both? See the danger of
scandalizing your brethren, Jer. 23.14. Mat. 18.6, 7. Romans 14.14. ult. 1 Cor.
10.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. and 1 Cor. 8.9, 10, 11, 12. Now consider whether these
be not false principles. That there is an absolute necessity of a regular
succession of Bishops and Priests, that Bishops are a distinct order from the
Presbyters, jure divino, that the sole power of ordination as well as the
exercise of it lies jure divino, wholly in the Diocesan, or that a Diocesan
Bishop is ential to ordination. And so where there are no Diocesans, there are
no Ministers, no Ordinances, no Churches Organical, no Christians. See now how
naturally such a reordination tends to the lengthening the cords, and
strengthening the stakes of these principles: and likewise how craftily it
weakens the hands, and emasculates the hearts of those in England, and other
Reformed Churches which maintain the contrary. Little do some think how their
reordination has drawn tears from many an eye, and sob^ from many a spirit,
whom they would not have made sad; and encouraged many young ones to imbibe
those principles which otherwise they durst not have tasted; and how it has
been a sport unto some, mocking and scorning at men's fluid vertiginous humors,
whilst others have stood trembling to see their dangerous stumbles; and how it
has filled some men with hopes that all would do so, and therefore they need
to abate us just nothing: and others with fears, that too many would do so, and
therefore they dare trust us with nothing; and just as the unnecessary
Imposers, so the Weathercock-Turners do sadly promote the Brownistical
separation.

16. How can the person in the Question pray in faith for a blessing on the
second ordination, either before, in, or after the solemnity? for what ground
have we to believe that Christ will bless such an odd use, or I fear, abuse of
his ordinance, or, if you will, a humane injunction varnished over with
specious pretenses of Christ's institution? Whether there be any more then a
pretense of Christ's institution, try and see. 1. In Christ's ordination there is
a segregation of person from the world, which supposes hi^ in the world (in a
sense) before; but tha^ supposition cannot be admitted, and consequently there
is no segregation in reordination. 2. Is there not in Christ's ordination
special dedication of a person to God* which supposes that he was not so
dedicate^ before: now this cannot be supposed i^ reordination. 3. In Christ's
ordination i^ there not an investiture with Ecclesiastical power? which
supposes a defect of that power before; but not so in reordination.
Where then is the essence of the instituted ordination, or the natural
consequent^ thereof to be found in this new devised transaction? which must be
called a legal establishment, a Canonical confirmation, etc. Upon what
foundation therefore shall we build either our faith or hope, that God will own
us, or bless us in such a business?

17. Is it not worth while to consider whether the Reordainers themselves be
canonical, or not? not that I intend to slander in the least any of our Right
Reverend Bishops; only as I may without just offense, discover in thesi that
Bishops have as little regular authority to ordain as the Presbyters
themselves. 1. What has been thought of these Bishops which were never elected
by the Presbytery and Layity? Honorius ^he Emperor (as says Bishop Jewel)
writing to Boniface, says, Reply p. 171.
if two Bishops through ambition and contention happen to be chosen, we will
that neither of them be allowed as Bishop, but that he only continue in the
Apostolical See whom out of the number of the Clergy, godly discretion, and the
consent of the whole brotherhood shall choose by a new election. The same Jewel
tells us, that Greg. Presb. says, for that the election and instalment of Greg.
Nazian. was past before the Bishops of Egypt and Macedonia came, and so made
without their consent, that therefore they utterly refused to allow him, or
admit him as Bishop there, not from any dislike of the party, but for that they
thought themselves defrauded of their voices. -- The Council at Paris thus
decrees, Con. Par. (...). c. 8. Ge^. Bucer. de guber. Eccl. p. 332.
quia aliquibus in rebus consuetudo prisca negligitur, and decreta Canonum
violantur, placuit ut juxta antiquam consuetudin^m Canonum decreta serventur;
nullus Civibus invitis ordinetur Episcopus, nisi quem populi and Clericorum
electio plenissima quaesier it voluntate, non Principis imperio, ueque per
quamlibet conditionem contra Metropolis voluntatem Episcoporumque
Comprovincialium ingeratur, quod si per ordinationem regiam honoris istius
cul^^ pervadere nimia temeritate aliquis praesumps^rit, a Comprovincialibus
loci ipsius Episcop^ recipi nullatenus mereatur, quem indebi^ assumptum
agnoscunt. Siquis de Comprovinci^ libus recipere eum contra indicta
praesumpser^ sit a fratribus omnibus segregatus, and ipsoru^ omnium charitate
remotus. The Centuriator speak forth antiquity abundantly for elections; to
instance briefly in Cent. 3. p. 94 Vsitatum in Ecclesiis Orientalibus fuit, ut
a^ electionem aut ordinationem alicujus Episcopi venirent ex vicinia and plures
Presbyteri, (...) Episcopi, eique quem dignum eo honor cogu^^ vissent, Eusebius.
l. 6. c. 8.
manus imponerent, quemadmodum (...) Origenis ordinatione apud Cesaream factum
Eundem in ordinandis Presbyteris and Episcopi morem etiam Africanae Ecclesiae
observarunt; primum enim si alicui Ecclesiae praeficiendus and ordinandus
Episcopus esset, Cypr. l. 2. Epist. ad Com.
per literas Provinciis finitimis omnibus significabatur, posted ejusdem
provinciae Episcopi proximi quiqu^ veniebant, aut quique venire minus possent*
judicium suum per literas significabant, and deligebatur Episcopus ea plebe,
cuju^ Episcopus futurus erat, praesente, and access^^ manuum impositio; hunc
morem Cyprianu^ and in sua Ecclesia, and per universas feri provincias
observatum tistatur. -- Ordinationem Episcoporum aut Ministrorum in Ecclesiis
Asiaticis pracedebant suffragia (ut videtur) populi, Magistrautus, Cent. 4. C.
6. de ritibus circa ordinat. p. 243.
and aliorum Episcoporum and Presbyterorum, and exemplo probat Basilius Epist.
58. ad Meler. sine justis suffragiis ordinationem in seditionem interdum
exiisse. Et Constant. in Epist. ad Nicomedenses hortatur eos, ut sub pulso
Eusehio alium ordinent Episcopum, and eleganter inquit, medicina non sera
fuerit, si nunc salte^ delecto Episcopo fideli and integro respexeritis in
Deum, quod impraesentia est potestatis vestrae, and jampridem debuerat judicio
vestro esse perfectum -- and in Europaeis Ecclesiis ad electionem Episcopi
consensus multitudinis accedebat.

The Fourth Council of Carthage requires to the admission of every Clergy man
civium assensum, testimonium, and convenientiam. Can. 22. Lo. Com. Tom. 6.
Sect. 95, 96.
Gerard cites for the peoples right of Election, Ambr. Chrys^s. Orig. Isidore
twelve Popes, and many ancient examples.

This I suppose may suffice to show that non-elected Bishops are non-canonical;
but if any would see more, let them read D. Blondels Apol. p. 379 etc.
Gelaspies Miscel. Qu. 8. etc.

2. What if the Ordainers should at any time prove (quod absit Deus) lazy,
incontinent, intemperate, worldly or Symonaic^ persons? by what charter does
Christ conve^ Episcopal power to those that are notoriously such? or allow them
whilst such, to exercis^ such authority? and what has the Church decreed, and
the learned determined concerning such? The seventh Canon of the Apostles, as
they are called, determines thus Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus,
n^quaquam saeculares curas assumit; sin autem deji^iatur. Et Can. 25.
Episcopus, au^ Presbyter, aut Diaconus qui in fornication^ aut perjurio, aut
furto captus est, deponatur Can. 42. Episc. Presb. aut Diac. aleae au^
ebrietati deserviens, aut desinat, aut ceri^ damnetur: and Can. 44. Epise.
Presb. au^ Diac. issuras a debitoribus exigent, Conoll. Nic^n. can. 20.
aut desina^ aut certe damnetur. -- Likewise in the great Counc. at Nice, it
was determined, Quicunque ex lapsis per ignorantiam su^^ ordinati, vel
contemptum little qui eos ordinaverunt, hoc non praejudicat Regulae
Ecclesiasticae; cum enim compertum fuerit, deponantur. And Can. 18. deposes
those that are guilty of usury and oppression. Con. Anc. Can. 210.
The Counc. a^ Ancyra decreed, Siquis adulterium commiserit, septem annis in
poenitentia completi perfection^ reddatur secundum pristinos gradus. The
fifteenth Can. of the Counc. of Nice, and the 21. Can. of the Counc. at Antioch
disables a Bishop to remove from one City to another. The Centuriators say,
Testatur etiam August. quosdam Episcopos rebus saecularibus occupari, Cent.
Magd. Cent. 5. c. 7. p. 409.
and minus studiose operam sacris literis navare, eoque erroribus indulgere;
Idem queritur multos favore vulgi ad sacerdotia venire; and illum qui pecunia
Episcopatus honorem acquirat, non venire a Deo indicat. Bishop Jewel that mall
of the Papists says; As for the Bishop of Rome -- except he minister the
Sacraments, instruct the people, warn them, and teach them, we say that he
ought not of right once to be called a Bishop, or so much as an Elder; for a
Bishop, as says Saint August. is a name of labor and not of honor; that the
man that seeks to have pre-eminence, and not to profit, may understand
himself to be no Bishop -- S. Chrysostom. says, Multi sacerdotes, and pauci
sacerdotes; multi nomine, pauci op^re. Saint Ambr. says, Nisi bonum opus
amplectaris, Episcopus esse non potes -- And Wickliff, Papa vel Praelatus malus
and praescitus, est aequivoce Pastor, and vere fur, and latro. Saint Chrysos.
Qui ab hominibus ordinatus (and not by God) quantum ad Deum attinet, non est
Sacerdos aut Diaconus. Thus far that p^arless Jewel.

3. What power have heretical, schismatical or notoriously erroneons Bishops?
where does Christ give authority to those that are plainly bent to destroy
Christianity, to seduce his people? The Centuriators tell us two or three very
pretty stories so much to our purpose that I shall repeat them. Cent. 4. p. 244.
Oportebat autem (ut hic obiter moneamus) Episcopum manuum imponentem, non
suspecta esse religionis, sed orthodoxum; sie enim Moses Saracenus raptus and
ad vicinum Episcopum Lucium Alexandrinum ut ordinaretur adductus, manum ejus
quod Arianus esses religionis hostis and persecutor, far noluit, sed deduci
se jussit ad exulantes in montanis orthodoxos a quibus manuum impositionem
accepit. -- Simile exemplum Theod. etiam de Antiochio recitat; is enim Eusebio
magn^ illi Samosatensium Episcopo successor delectus, cum inter manuum
impositionem conversus vidisset Jovianum Pergensem qui brevi te^^pore cum
Arrianistis conjunctus fuerat, manum capiti suo imponere, repulit illam,
petiitqu^ne interesset numero consecrantium se; quod sufferre manum administram
blasphemiae sacr^rum se posse negaret. And that Reverend Doctor Field writes
that which may make some men's ears tingle to read; Cyprian (says he) Cecilius,
Posic. and other Bishops writing to the Clergy and people of the Churches of
Spain, whereof Basilides and Martialis were Bishops, who fell in time of
persecution, denied the faith, and defiled themselves with idolatry, persuade
them to separate themselves from those Bishops, assuring them that the people
being holy, religious, fearing God, and obeying his Laws, may and ought to
separate themselves from impious wicked Bishops, and not to communicate with
them in matters of Gods service: Quando ipsa plebs maxim habeat potestatem vel
eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. The same Doctor cites Ocham
thus; Si Papa and maxims celebres Episcopi incidan^ in haeresin, ad Catholicos
devoluta est omnis potestas judicandi.

So then when God shall punish a people with such Bishops, how Candidates can
desire ordination from them, judge you. Though their acts when done, may be
valid if the substance of the Ordinance were not neglected, yet that will not
justify their sinful bestowances, nor other sinful receptions.

18. Could you admit reordination in actu signato, yet how can you admit it in
actu exercito? Here it is supposed, that reordination in actu exercito, is
clothed with many accidents, which (quoad nos) are inseparable: the
particulars whereof may be seen in the book of Consecration of Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons; a scantling wherefrom I shall propound for
consideration, and leave the judicious and conscientious to make the
conclusion. 1. How can you persuade your selves that this second ordination is
no proper ordination, no new investiture with office-power? When yet 1. They
begin with an exhortation, declaring the duty and office of such as come to be
admitted Ministers. 2. It is said the Archdeacon, or his Deputy, shall present
such as shall come to the Bishop to be admitted Deacons. 3. If the Archdeacon
tell truth, then he presents these persons present to be admitted Deacons. 4.
If the Bishop tell truth, then the persons presented are to be ordered Deacons,
and to be admitted to the same. 5. The Directory in that book says, And if any
great crime be objected, the Bishop shall surrease from ordering that person.
6. It is said, the Bishop commending such as are found meet to be ordered, etc.
7. It is afterward prayed. Mercifully behold these thy servants now called to
the like office and administration. 8. It is further said, that the Oath of the
Kings Supremacy is to be administered to every of them that are to be ordered.
9. It is again in the direction said, every one of them that are to be ordered.
10. The Bishop calls the work you come about, a taking upon you this office and
administration. 11. Accordingly he tells you what appertains to the office of
a Deacon. 12. Afterward the Bishop expressly says, Take thou authority to
execute the office of a Deacon. 13. It is Also all that are ordered shall tarry
and receive the holy Communion the same day with the Bishop. 14. Then the
Bishop blesses God for the taking of those servants into the office of Deacons
in the Church of God. 15. The Archdeacon shall present unto the Bishop all that
shall receive the order of Priesthood that day. 16. The Archdeacon says,
Reverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons present to be admitted
to the order of Priesthood. 17. The Bishop says, Good people, these be they
whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day to the holy office of
Priesthood. 18. If there be any of you which knows any impediment or notable
crime of any of them, for the which he ought not to be received into this holy
Ministry. 19. The Bishop prays, Mercifully behold these persons, now called
to the office of Priesthood. 20. The Bishop calls it three times, The office to
which ye are called, or to the same purpose, in his exhortation. 21. In the
Bishops first Question, in the name of the Congregation, there are these
expressions called -- To the ministry of Priesthood. 22. The Bishop blesses
God for calling those persons to the office and ministry. 23. Receive the holy
Ghost, and take thou authority, etc. 24. In the Rubric following it is said,
If the orders of Deacons and Priests be given both upon one day. 25. Afterward
the ordering of Priests. 26. The ordering of Priests again. 27. The Deacons
shall be ordered.
Besides the title of the book, the form of making and consecrating, etc. so
that above thirty times in this book is the exercise called the ordering of
Priests and Deacons, though not in the same words, yet in others that are
tantamount, many whereof seem by no means applicable to a mere legal
establishment, or any thing less then a proper investiture with ministerial
power; and several of them being in prayers and promises, wherein an
equivocation and wresting of words is dangerous, therefore though we should
grant (which yet we deny) that ordination may be used to some other end then to
invest with power from Christ, yet we can by no means grant that it should be
administered by this form, which so plainly expresses what is not intended, and
is wholly silent in that which is only intended. But to proceed to other
considerations. 2. Can you cheerfully sing the Letany with the Congregation,
when you are reordained, according as it is appointed? 3. Can you join in
praying the Letany, which has in it so many stated repetitions, as also stated
alterations, the people being one while the public mouth, another while the
Minister; and their parts in prayer being so disjoined, that neither the
Ministers words, nor the peoples words, carry any full sense in themselves, but
depend upon supplies from each other? Yea, is there not such an alteration of
the speakers in the saying that most compendious concatenated form of our
blessed Lords own prescribing? 4. Can you pray in the Letanies general
expressions for all that travel by land and by sea? 5. Do you well understand
the Oath of the Kings Sovereignty, appointed to be administered to you, that ye
may be able to swear in truth, righteousness, and judgment? 6. Can you
profess before a Congregation, that you trust you are inwardly moved by the
holy Ghost, to take upon you the office and ministry of a Deacon, after so
long a time as you have been virtually a Deacon already? 7. Can you solemnly
profess, that you think you are truly called to the ministry of the Church,
that is, first to be a Deacon, and afterward a Presbyter, either according to
the will of Christ, or the order of this Realm? Where has Christ or this Realm
prescribed such a reordination? 8. Can you cordially promise that you will
gladly and willingly assist the Priest in divine Service in the Congregation
where you are placed? 9. Can you promise reverent obedience to your Ordinary,
who is (it is like) but of the same order and the same degree of that order, as
instituted by Christ Jesus? yea it may be he is but a lay-person exercising
spiritual jurisdiction; and also that you will submit to his godly judgment?
10. Can you receive a distinct authority to be a Deacon, and a distinct
authority to read the Scripture, according to the two distinct acts of
investiture? 11. Can you receive a distinct authority to read the New
Testament, without any express delivery of power to read the old Testament, or
any mention of it? 12. Can you comfortably receive the Lords Supper with them,
and according to them? View the form in the Liturgy. 13. Can you rationally
join in the last prayer in the ordering of Deacons, where they pray; that the
Deacons may so well use themselves in this inferior office, that they may be
found worthy to be called (which must needs imply Hereafter) unto the higher
Ministry in this Church? How can you thus pray, that you must exercise the
office of a Deacon, by the faithful discharge whereof you may be judged meet to
be made a Presbyter, and yet be ordained Deacon and Presbyter both on one day
(as some I hear are) wherein you neither have sufficient time for trial, nor
the proper judges present? 14. Can you join in the first prayer in the ordering
of Presbyters, Mercifully behold these thy Servants, now called to the office
of Priesthood, which seems to imply Not before? And the like in the third
prayer after the Letany. 15. What is that office of Priesthood according to
Scripture and the Laws of our Realm? And where are the Ministers of the Gospel
called Priests? 16. If ever you aim at commencing Lord Bishop^, how can you
obey that exhortation, wherein is this good Illation following, For this self
same cause ye see how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as much as ye may) all
worldly cares, and studies -- and that ye have clearly determined, by Gods
grace, to give your selves wholly to this vocation, whereunto it has pleased
God to call you, so that (as much as lies in you) you apply your selves wholly
to this one thing, and draw all your cares and studies this way, and to this
end? And can you promise the same? 17. Can you promise to administer the
discipline of Christ, when yet in the words of investiture there is not any
power given expressly of administering discipline? Nay more, are you not by
certain Canons restrained from exercising the discipline of Christ, or a great
part of it? 18. Can you promise to administer the Doctrine, Sacraments and
Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and this Realm has received
them, except you can approve the whole Hierarchy? and whether then? 19. Can you
promise to teach the people committed to your charge, to keep and observe the
same; that is, the Doctrine, and Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the
Lord has commanded, and this Realm has received the same, according to the
Commands of God? 20. Does not that expression, recoive the holy Ghost, seem to
imply some extraordinary gift, which the Ordainers can neither believingly beg,
nor the ordained believe that they shall receive?
How can that expression imply the office (as some great ones would have it)
since the authority is delivered expressly in the next words, A. Usher in Doctor
Bern. book 339. Mr. Hook. Eccics. pol. 412.
Take thou authority to preach, etc.? And especially how can that expression
intend the office, when yet it is used in the consecration of Bishops, wherein
no new office is bestowed, or received, according to the judgment of
multitudes of our late Bishops themselves? Look before you leap.

19. Whether does the person in the Question intend to undertake the cure of a
particular Church, or not? If not, to what purpose should he be reordained? Or
much trouble himself about this Question? If he do, then I ask whether he can
perform the conditions necessary to the procurement of Institution and
Induction? If he cannot get Institution and Induction, to what purpose is
reordination? If he can, then whether is it by the benefit of his Majesty's
gracious Indulgence, or by a full conformity? If by the former, let him
consider, whether he be like to keep his Benifice on the same terms that he
gained it; if he cannot, to what purpose should he trouble himself much to gain
that, which if he had he could not keep But if this must be by full conformity,
the I only add; 1. Have you well considere^ what that Government is that is
held fort in the 39. Art. book of Consecration, L^turgy, and Canons? 2. Have
you w^ considered what the Oath of Canonic^ obedience is, and to whom? 3. Have
yo^ thoroughly considered the Liturgy? 4. An^ the book of Homilies? 5. The
Canons And 6. the book of Consecration?
An^ have you attained satisfaction by perusin^ what is said thereupon?
Insomuch that yo^ can with a clear conscience subscribe, rea^ and use them?
Have you considered the natural fruits of growing principles, and ca^ you
relish them, etc.? Be not rash in you^ vows; for rash vows are too often as
rashly broken as made; and though the matter may admit no violation, yet the
rashnes^ will exact some lamentation.

20. Is not this reordination, whether hypothetical, or absolute, a mere
novelty seldom or never known in the Church o^ God this sixteen hundred years?
We rea^ indeed of great contentions in the Church anciently about ordinations;
but were they not generally determined either valid o^ invalid? If valid, where
shall we find a reordination? If invalid, how could there be a reordination? I
suppose I need to say but little more to prove this negative, till some one
else shall prove the affirmative. Yet I shall add something toward, not the
proof of the negative directly, but of an affirmative, that will infer the
negative; viz. reordination decryed both by Ancients and Moderns. The 67. Canon
of the Apostles (as they are called) runs thus: Si quis Episcopus, out
Presbyter, In sermon de ablutione pedum. Bellar. de sacram. ordin. l. 6. c.
10. Contra. Epist. Parm. l. 2. c. 13. Can. 38.
aut Diaconus secundam ab aliquo ordinationem susceperit, deponatur tam ipse
quam qui ipsum ordinavit. Cyprian, Nemo (inquit) sacros ordines iterum renovat.
St. Augustine says, Cur non potest dari ubi non recte datur, cum possit haberi
ubi non recte habetur? Anquid non habere aliud est, aliud non recte habere? Sic
and non dare aliud est, aliud non recte dare. Sicut non recte habent qui ab
unitate discedunt, sed tamen habent, and ideo redeunti non reditur; sic etiam
non recte dat qui ab unitate discedit, sed tamen dat, and ideo quod ab eo
accepit redeunti ad unitatem non reiteratur. Other words of the same Father,
and the words of Gregory you have before. The third Council at Carthage
determines thus: Illud autem suggerimus, mandatam nobis quod etiam in Cappuensi
plenaria Synodo videtur statutum, quod non liceat fieri rebaptizationes, and
reordinationes, vel translationes Episcoporum. This Canon is capable of such a
constructio^ as is point blank against reordination, no^ much unlike whereto
are the tenth and twentieth Canon of the Calcedon Council.

The Council of Trent (if that be worth regard) shall have leave to speak;
Siqui^ dixerit in tribus Sacramentis, baptismo scilicet, confirmatione, and
ordine, non imprimi characterem in anima, hoc est signum quodda^ spirituale,
and indelebile, unde ea iterari no^ possunt, anathema sit.

Thomas Aquinas has several flirts at reordination, as this, In suplem. ad 3.
part. Q. 33. art. 1. and Q. 35. art. 5.
Nullum Sacramental^ nec Sacramentum quod habet effectum perp^tuum, debet
iterari -- respondeo quod non es^ de necessitate superiorum ordinum quod aliqu^
minores ordines prius habeat, quia potestati^ sunt distinctae, and unum quantum
est de su^ ratione non requirit alium in eodem subjecti^ and ideo etiam aliqui
in primitiva Ecclesia ordinabantur in Presbyteros, qui minores ordines non
susceperant. Et tamen poterant omnia quae inferiores ordines possunt, quia
inferior potestas comprehenditur in superior^^ virtute; sicut sensus in
intellectu, Ducatus i^ regno: Sed postea per constitutionem Ecclesia
determinatum est quod ad majores se non ingerat, qui prius in minoribus
sfficii^ se non humiliaverit; and inde est quod qui ordinantur per saltum,
secundum Canones non reordinantur; sed id quod omissum fuerat de praecedentibus
ordinibus, eis confertur. The learned Magro affirms, In sentent. fol. 39.
That Sacramentum ordinis non iteratur circa eandem materiam; And when he had
discussed the several reasons of several sorts, some say, the indelible
character; some the reverence of the ordinance; some the fixing into a certain
state, etc. then he adds his own reason thus: Dico ergo quod causa praedictae
(so I suppose it should be printed) non iterationis est quod habent
sufficientem efficaciam respectu sui effectus, and hoc est generale omnibus
Sacramentis, and ideo nullum est iterabile. He answers, that from the Lords
Supper the consecration whereof is not iterable on the same elements; and
speaking of the uniterability of baptism, confirmation, and orders, he
concludes, Et hoc concedunt omnes.

Estius that learned Schoolman maintains this Position, Sacramentum ordinis
characterem and n^e amitti, n^e repeti posse; In Com. did Inct. 25. l. 4. p.
46. s. 5.
sicut in baptismo consecratur homo religioni, and familiae Christi, in
confirmatione autem militiae Christi, item ordinatione consecratur in
ministerio Ecclisiastico, sen functione publica (...) Ecclesia Christi; ea
^utem consecratio cu^ per petuum relinquat effectum, sive absolutu^ sive
respectivum, quem characterem dicimu^ de quo disputatur apud Scholasticos, ea
ratio^ amitti non potest, and proinde nec iterari, qu^ siquis tentaverit, nihil
efficit: ac nihilomin^ Sacramento cum tali consecratione dato fac^ injuriam;
deinque probat hoc Ecclesiae consen^ sus, quae semel ordinatos nunquam
reordinass^ legitur, unde merito definitum est hoc dogus primum in Florent.
Conc. deinde in Trident.

Bellarmine affirms, Baptismus non pot^^ repeti, De effect. sacram. l. 2. c.
22.
si fuerit semel rite collatus, and etia^ confirmatio and ordo.

Rivet also says, His non repugnavit Augustinus, vocavit ordinem Sacraementum,
In Cathol. orthodox. tom. 2. tract. 3. q. 14. p. 66.
s^^ fignificatione laxa; contulit cum baptismo, s^^ non aquavit; tantum
ostendit convenientia^ in eo, quod ordo non repeti debet, quemadmodu^ nec
baptismus, quodque uterque cum aliq^^ consecratione confertur, in his quidem
conveni^ unt, etc.

This Proposition following is given in (...) the judgment of those eminent
Divine^ Wickliffe and Fitchraphe (alias Armachanus) That one who was but a mere
Pries^ might ordain another, Mr. P^in's unbish. Tim. and Ti^. p. 7.
and that he who wa^ ordained only by a single Priest, ought not to doubt of
his Presbyter ship, or be ordained again, so as he rightly perform his clerical
office, because the ordination comes from God, who supplies all defects. Mr.
Baxter says, Disput. about Church Government, p. 189.
you must distinguish betwixt a General ordination to the office of the
Ministry, and a special ordination to a particular Church (as licensing a
Physician, and settling him over a City or Hospital) the first may be done but
once, in case it be truly done.

The Provincial Assembly at London, Jas Divin. Min. Evan. p. 147.
affirm that there is no Scripture to warrant the reiteration of ordination in
case of removal (much less without removal) the Apostles went about ordaining
Elders in every Church, and Titus was left in Crete to ordain Elders, etc. but
there is no mention made of any Commission for reiterated ordination, neither
indeed can it be; for ordination being the setting of a man apart to the office
of the Ministry, and not only to the exercise of it in such a place; though the
local exercise should cease, yet his office remains, and therefore needs not be
reiterated; to this truth we have the consent of the universal Church, who do
not only not allow, but condemn a second ordination. -- If the universal Church
be against reordination, what need I more? if I did, I might add both
Schoolmen, Commentators, Common-placemen, etc. in abundance, as no doubt our
Reordainers will acknowledge. But to prevent over-tediousness I forbear, and
pass on to see what is said for reordination.

CHAP. IV.
Containing animadversions upon that singular Tract of learned Mr. I. Humfrey,
wherein I shall neither unfaithfully conceal, nor scornfully slight the least
weighty expression, but shall carefully gather all the arguments scattered in
his book and faithfully recits them in his own words, and then add my returns,
leaving the censure to the judicious Reader.

Object. 1. IS drawn from Paul's circumcising of Timothy, and purifying himself
in the Temple. Acts 16.3.
When Paul circumcised Timothy, Act. 21.26.
and purified himself with the Jews in the Temple, these were things I count
indefinitely unlawful, yet commendable in tha^ case. I do choose to stand on
this ground though we may draw, nearer on probability.

R. 1. Is not a choice to stand on this ground an interpretative deserting of
all plain, proper Scripture Proof, and a depending upon a parallel? which
parallel I shall consider.

2. Were not those actions of Paul exerted in a period of time when the new law
against them was not sufficiently promulged? but our reordination is acted
sixteen hundred years after the full promulgation of the Gospel. And may it not
well be supposed that in that very interim of the ceremonies honorable
funeral, a far greater indulgence was permitted then might be permitted
afterward? Let Mr. Calvin that Expositorum facile Princeps, as Grotius once
called him, give in his judgment in answer to this objection. Com. in Acts
16.3.
Videtur enim res esse lusoria, ubi ab instituto Dei disceditur, atqui
circumcisio divinitus tantum ad Christi usque adventum mandata erat.

Respondeo circumcisionem ita cessasse Christi adventu ut t^men usus non statim
plane abolitus fuerat, sed liber maneret donec patefacta clarius luce Evangelii
omnes agnoscerent Christum esse finem legis. In Act. 16.3.
Piscator unfolding those words (...) says, is it ne repudiaren illum Judaei
tanquam incircumcisum, quia nondum intelligebant circumcisionem esse abrogatam.

Paraeus says, In Gal. 2.3.
Olim temporibus Apostolorum erat (scil. circumcisio) libera, cum legis
abrogatio esset in motu; post quam vero abrogatio perfecta and publicata est
omnibus circumcisis, Paraph. in Acts 16.3.
defiit esse libera. Erasmus says, Judaei nondum erant palam liberati ab onere
legis, quam oportebat paulatim aboleri.

Sanctius on Acts 16.3. is much to the same purpose.

Baldvinus says, In Gal. 2.3.
Circumcisio pro triplici statu Ecclesiae tripliciter considerari potest, vel
ut necessaria, v^l ut ind^fferens, vel ut noxia; necessaria crat in vet. Test.
-- indifferens erat sub initium nevi, ubi ad tempus retinebatur donec Synagoga
Judaica cum reverentia sepeliretur; noxia vero hodie est post quam Ecclesia
novi Test. confirmata est.

Gelaspy amongst a matter of fourteen differences that he reckons up betwixt
the Propish Ceremonies used by the Protestants, English Popish cerem. p. 61
and the Jewish ceremonies used by the Apostles, he gives these for the second
and tenth; Ours are proved to be in their own nature unlawful, theirs were
(during the aforesaid time) indifferent. Ours are urged after the full
promulgation of the Gospel, and acknowledgement of Christian liberty, theirs
before the same.

Cornel. a Lap. says, Legalia erant mortua, Acts 16.3.
sed necdum mortifera.

Luther says, Postquam enim Christus advenit, legis opera sic abrogavit, ut
indifferenter ea haber. possent, non autem amplius cogant.

3. How is it probable that these actions of Paul were either a proper legal
circumcision or purification? For my part I am apt to think, notwithstanding
the indulgence in this juncture of time, that Paul did not use any proper,
formal, legal circumc^sion, as binding to keep the Law of Moses, or
purification typifying any spiritual washing by the Messiah to come, but only
the external actions in some other way; and my reason is this, Acts 15:10.
If Paul had circumcised Timothy, as binding him to keep the Law of Moses, Gal.
5.2.
then he had brought him under an unsupportable yoke, and freed him utterly
from profiting by Christ Jesus. In like manner, if Paul to foreshew how the
Messiah to come should wash them in his blood, did purify himself, then should
Christ Jesus profit him nothing, because he, ipso facto, denied him to be the
Messiah. But let us hear what better judgments say to this business: Calvin
says, Circumcisio Timothei non fuit Sacramentum quale datum fuerat Abrahae,
and ejus posteris, sed ceremonia media, Acts 16.3.
and indifferns quae tantum ad fovendam charitatem, non ad pietatis exercitium
valebat.

Baldvinus says, Vtebantur enim Judaei tunc circumcisione non ut medio
conversionis, Gal. 2.3.
nec ut sigillo gratiae, quem usum habuit olim, sed ut signo externo in carne,
quo discernebantur a Gentibus, and hanc ob causam toleraban^ eam Apostoli, ita
ut non damnarent eos qui non eam recipiebant.

Aretius in Acts 16.3. says in effect the very same.

Gelaspy makes this difference betwixt the English Popish Ceremonies (as he
calls them) and the Jewish used by the Christians, English popish cerem. p. 61.
Our^ are imposed and observed as parts of God^ worship, theirs not so; for
where read we, tha^ (during the foresaid space) any holiness wa^ placed in
them by the Apostles? Again, our^ have certain mystical significations, theirs
no^ so; for it is no where to be read, that the Apostles either practiced them,
or prescribed them, as significative resemblances of any mysteries of the
Kingdom of God.

Hence I infer, that our case differs exceedingly from Paul's; for he had the
power over these actions in his own hands, and might use such expressions as
would best fit his own sense, and such modes as would best suit with his
intended, etc. But now the business of reordination is quite out of our hands,
and we are typed up to such expressions, forms and ceremonies as do clearly
hold forth a second proper ordination: so that all that can be hence argued, is
but this, that if we had reordination in our own hand, we might perform the
outward act of reordination to another end then the former, with expressions
sured to that end; but this being put out of our hands, the Argument is put out
of doors.

4. Though Paul did condescend for a time to the use of these rituals, to
prevent prejudice in the Jews, in hope to improve that time so as to take off
the Jews from those observations; but when he saw that the Jews were hardened,
and grew worse and worse, and there was no hope of persuading them, then Paul
would condescend no more, though to the endangering of his liberty, Gal. 2.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
and life, and all, as Saint Hierom well observes; Si Titus cum esset ex
gentibus, nullo potuit terrore compelli ut circumcideretur Hierosolumis
Judaeorum metropoli Civitate in qua tanta Paulus blasphemiae in Mosen flagrabat
invidia, ut postea ad Judaeis pene interfectus sit quando a tribuno liberatur,
and Romam vinctus ad Caesarem mittitur.

Hemmingius says, Doctrina ergo hic observetur de discrimine infirmorum, Gal.
2.3.
and obstinatorum; illis parendum est ad aedificationem, his nihil largiendum
quo Christiana libertas incolumis servetur.

Paraeus says well, Paulus igitur circumcidendo Timotheum ad scandalum
infirmorum fratrum evitandum, Gal. 2.3.
qui de liberate Christiana nondum erant edocti, non peccavit, quia necessitas
evitandi scandali eum ad hoc obligabat: Titum vero a circumcisione defendenda
recte etiam facit, quia falsam opinionem circumcisionis necessariae ad salutem
stabilire non debuit.

And Calvin says, Quemadmodum autem infirmis attemperare nos convenit; ita
malignis, and qui data opera insidiantur libertati nostrae, fortiter
resistendum est. Here might be added the words of Estius, Aretius, Dionys.
Carthus. Musculus and others, which speak the same thing, though in different
words.

But to conclude, I say, If we had the least hope of withdrawing our reverend
Reordainers from Reordination, by the condiscention of some thereunto, then
something might be said from this parallel; but alas! alas! -- So that now
whether Paul's circumcising Timothy make more for reordination, or his refusing
to circumcise Titus, though it endangered his liberty, make more against it,
judge ye.

Object. 2. Is drawn from the Instance of Paul and Barnabas. Mr. H. It may be
conjectured, and cannot be denied as certain, (for very good D^vines say it)
but that Paul was confirmed in his calling to the Ministry by Ananias (Acts 9.
with Acts 22.) which is ordination, and likewise Barnabas by the Church at
Jerusalem, that sent him to Antioch (Acts 11.22.) when yet they are both
separated after (Acts 13.) by the holy Ghost; and laying on of hands unto that
further work they are called to in Seleucia and Cyprus. How is it like that so
famous a Minister as Barnabas should be wholly without ordination before,
unless ordination be not so necessary a thing to the Ministry as we make it?
-- St. Paul is made a Minister by Christ himself, mark the words well, for they
are beyond dispute, I have appeared to thee for this purpose, to make thee a
Minister, and now I send thee to the Gentiles, etc. Acts 26.16, 17, 18. and yet
is he ordained after by the hands of men, Acts 13.3. Will any man say, the
imposition of hands did make him a Minister, or confer his office? That were
not only against that Text, but such a manifest wrong he would never put up,
who in express^ terms stands upon it, that he was an Apostle neither of men,
nor by men, but by Christ, Gal 1.1. which is the truth. It is plain then, that
a man which is a Minister, may be ordained; or that it is not necessary to be
ordained only to this end, to have the office conferred on him. Page 49, 50.

Resol. 1. Some deny that Paul and Barnabas were ever ordained Apostles by men
before that at Antioch. As for Paul, it is evident, that what Ananias said to
him has scarcely the least color of ordination; Acts 9.17.
The Lord (even Jesus that appeared to the^ in the way that thou came) has
sent me, that thou might receive thy sight, and b^ filled with the holy
Ghost: And what follow^ but this? And immediately there fell from his eyes as
in had been scales. ver. 18.
So that it is plain, that the work of Ananias was to restore Paul's sight, but
surely not to ordain him; for afterward it follows, that Paul arose and was
baptized. Sanctius and others give this reason against the conjecture of an
ordination in this Text. Which conjecture, I observe, a considerable number of
Commentators never dropped from their pens. And as for Barnabas, whether that
were an ordination in Acts 11. is very doubtful; for it might well be judged
but an occasional Embassy: And if it cannot be proved that Paul and Barnabas
were twice ordained by men, what will it avail to say they were twice ordained,
once immediately by Christ himself, and the other mediately? For how can this
justify a twofold ordination by men? Or if they had a twofold ordination, the
one extraordinary, the other ordinary, can that justify a twofold ordinary
consecration? Again, if the immediate sending of these Apostles hold forth any
thing to us, is it not answered by Christ's gifting and inclining persons to
undertake this office, which is Christ's immediate work? and is by some called
the internal Call; and then our ordination by men answers the supposed
ordination in Acts 9. And Acts 11. and then where is the third ordination to be
found, to justify this third Call (if with others I may so speak) or fourth
perchance exacted from us?

2. What if we should grant that action in Acts 13. to be a proper ordination,
yet (say some) it might be to a higher office then they had received before,
and such a second ordination who denies? Or what will it avail the Advocates of
Reordination?

3. To what purpose is this, Acts 13. brought to justify a second proper
ordination to the same office, exceptit be proved that such an ordination is
there intended? In which material business I admire that ingenious Mr. H. was
so much overseen; for through the whole tract, I find not the least Argument
advanced (as I remember) to attempt such a proof; though the proof thereof lies
wholly on his part, as is clearly evinced, thus. He being to prove the
lawfulness of a second ordination by Scripture, argues thus: If Paul and
Barnabas were reordained, then so may we; but Paul and Barnabas were
reordained; ergo. Neg. Minor. He proves his Minor from this, Acts 13. We deny
that separation to be a proper ordination, such as ours in the Question; it
lies therefore upon him to prove it; which he has not done: I shall now
therefore advance several Arguments toward the proof of the contrary, viz.
that here is meant no proper ordination to an office, but only some benedictory
separation to the exercise of their office among the Gentiles.

1. The Holy Ghost required no more but a separation to the work, (...). Not
mentioning the office in the least.

2. Luke tells us expressly, that after Paul and Barnabas had done their work,
they returned to Antioch, whence they were recommended to the grace of God by
fasting and prayer for the work which they fulfilled. Act. 14.26.
(...). And let it be considered whether those Greek Fathers which call this an
ordination (...) may not possibly intend ad exercitium Apostolicum potius quam
munus.

3. Saint Luke tells us, as it was a work, so a work which they quickly
fulfilled. And if by work you understand office, then the sense is this; they
fulfilled their office, or finished their office to the Gentiles; then which
what need to be more harsh, or contrary to truth? for Paul executed the
Apostolical office among the Gentiles long after; though that particular
expedition to which they were separated at Antioch, was quickly accomplished.

4. How can this Text bold forth a proper ordination from men, when yet Paul
stands to it, that his office was neither of man, not by man? Gal. 1.1.

5. If this were an ordination to an office, then either to the Apostolical
office, or some inferior office? not to the Apostolical office; for how could
Simeon, Lucius and Manasses who were but Prophets at the most (for ought I
find) ordain Paul and Barnabas to be Apostles? how could inferiors ordain
superiors? if you maintain that they can, your Reordainers will con you no
thanks for your pains; for then their trite Maxim, Nil dat quod in se non
habet, and their other oracle, That a Bishop is essential to an ordination,
will presently fall to the ground; then will they have no foundation for their
condemnation of Presbyterian ordination, or justification of reordination. Yea
you will run upon that which may possibly prove a greater rock then either of
these. (To say nothing of that Scripture, the less is blessed by the greater,
so notably scanned by M. Pryn) you must then make men of inferior
qualifications suitable to their inferior offices, Tryers and Judges of those
more eminent qualifications required in the bearers of superior offices, for
which work they seem to be utterly unfit. Here it is supposed that the
extraordinariness of this instance hinders not from being ordinarily exemplary;
for if it should, the whole objection falls without any more ado. But then on
the other hand this could not be an ordination to any office inferior to the
Apostolical. Acts. 14.4, 14.
1. Because Acts 13. and 14. are express that it was to the work of the
Apostles, and therefore not to any inferior office. 2. In the execution of
this work, as they act like Apostles, so they are called Apostles. 3. It cannot
be rationally denied but they were Apostles before, and then it cannot be
rationally affirmed that the Doctors at Antioch would ordain the Apostles to
inferior offices; for this would be a degradation of their persons, and a
diminution of their office, and needless; for Omne majus continet in se minus.


6. Though its true the separation of a person from amongst the fraternity to
the Ministerial work does imply ordination, because the exercise of authority
supposes the existence of that authority; yet the separation of a person from
amongst Ministers to this or that part of their work, implies no such thing,
but rather the contrary. Now its evident that the Text holds forth but a
separation of Paul and Barnabas from among Ministers (for it is said there were
certain Doctors and Prophets at Antioch, among which Saul an^ Barnabas are
named, and but to a wor^ which they had sufficient authority to discharge, a
greater authority then which these Prophets and Doctors could not confe^ on
them. And hence methinks here i^ something of a probability, that this wa^ only
a solemn benediction when they wen^ upon this sudden and new expedition.

7. It is said when Paul and Barnabas were separated to this work, Acts 14.
that they were commended to the grace of God for the work which they
fulfilled. Which seems also to imply that the main business of this exercise
wa^ no ordination, but an united solemn beging of the assisting prospering
grace of Go^ in the exercise of their Apostleship among the Gentiles to whom
they were sent; and surely this is nothing more (abating only the imposition of
hands of which hereafter) then what has been common, as well as good, in our
country, when a Minister removed to a new charge.

8. It is strange that never any Divine this sixteen hundred years, or very few
could discern any foundation in this Term for reordination; its well known that
reordination has been generally disavowed through the Christian world; and if
any acknowledge an ordination in this Acts 13. then they deny any from men
before to the same office; and if they acknowledged any by men before, then
they generally deny any ordination here. T. 3. Q. 74. disp. 34. Sect. 1. Jus
Divin. Min. Evang. 147, 148. Disput. of Church Government, p. 189. Synopsis p.
824. De Min. Angl. p. 46, 47.
Observe how Suarez interprets this Text, Haec manuum impositio nobis tantum
deprecatoria, non etiam consecratoria videtur. Learned Chamier and Mr. Hooker
of N. E. are cited by the London Ministers, as concurring with them in this
interpretation. Distinctious Mr. Baxter after he had distinguished the office,
and the exercise, and affirmed a reordination to the first unlawful, then he
adds, It is not like as the separation and imposition of hands on Paul and
Barnabas was to their first Apostleship. Willet brings in the Rhemists thus
interpreting this Text, that Paul and Barnabas were admitted, ordered and
consecrated by them; he adds the judgment of the Protestants, which we say
not, but they were only sent out to the execution of their office, being before
chosen of the Spirit. Learned Mason says, Haec manuum impositio non eo
spectabat ut Episcopalem gratiam eis largiretur, sed (docente Scriptura) ut
segregarentur ad opus ad quod Spiritus sanctus assumpsit eos, and ut
commendarentur (precibus scilicet and jejunio) gratiae Dei ad opus quod
mpleverunt: and to this interpretation I am most ready to subscribe. To
conclude, if it cannot be proved that Paul and Barnabas were ordained before,
and that they were ordained here, and that to the same office, all falls; and
truly I cannot see how these can be proved, and I hope you will not wonder
because I find not one Interpreter that ever pretended to such a sight.

These premises may serve to take down another argument advanced for the
support of Reordination.

Object. 3. Drawn from a new devised end of Ordination, fancied to be public
allowance. Mr. H. p. 32, 33, 34. The reason of a precept is to be looked on as
a precept; to perform a precept against the reason of it, is to break it; to do
according to the reason, though not according to the precept, is to keep it. We
have no precept in Scripture for reordination, but we have here in this
instance (Acts 13.) the reason of it. Let any one tell me the reason of this
imposition of hands upon Paul by Lucius and Niger, who could not be made a
Minister by man, seeing Christ had appeared to him (as it is said) for that
purpose before, and I will presume to give the like or the same for our
reordination by the Bishop -- What then is the reason indeed hereof? is it to
give the Ministerial office, and nothing else? surely if it does that at all --
yet is not this the reason altogether for certain, because there is an instance
to the contrary, let any man cavil at it what he can. What then is the reason?
why really I think it is this, this solemn rite does give the current repute,
or valuation to a man of a Minister, so that he who was truly called of God
before, is now received as such by all, as to the exercise of his function with
freedom and acceptance, etc.

R. Though in this subtle discourse there are many notable excrescencies of an
ingenious fancy, yet this crafty device of a new end to ordination to prevent
prophanations, seems unto me the Monarch of all. Yet I think I may say of this
as well as the rest, acutile sonant, sed jacta reperiuntur obtusa. In order to
the discovery whereof I would first show what are the true ends of that action,
Acts 13. And secondly, that a public allowance was not likely to be the end,
whatever was. The ends mentioned are these three. 1. This action tended to a
solemn dismission of Paul and Barnabas from the great work at Antioch. That
they were engaged at Antioch, appears by those words, v. 2. As they ministered
to the Lord and fasted; their dismission appears in those words, ver. 3. When
they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.
Hence Piscator calls this forma dimissionis. Piscator in Acts 13.3.
So that indeed this action seems to be a valedictory dismission of Paul and
Barnabas by the Church at Antioch from their work there. 2. This action seems
to be a solemn separation of Paul and Barnabas to the Apostolical work among
the Gentiles, from ver. 2. Its said by the Holy Ghost, Separate me Paul and
Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called them. And that this work was the
Ministry among the Gentiles, is evident from their discharge of this work, Acts
13. and 14. 3. This action was intended as a recommendation of the Apostles to
the grace of God, for the assisting, protecting and succeeding of them in the
work to which they were separated, as appears Acts 14.26.
And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the
grace of God for the work which they fulfilled. So then here you have from
Scripture three ends of this action, dismission, separation, and
recommendation, but not the least syllable (as I observe) that holds forth a
proper ordination to these ends; for indeed it was not needful thereto, nor yet
the least syllable as holds forth any such a fourth end as public allowance:
And whosoever shall well consider the eminency of the Church at Antioch, where
the Disciples were first called Christians, and the eminency of the service
that the Apostles had done there, let him wonder if he can; that the Church
there should give these Apostles such a solemn, affectionate, Christian,
dimissory valediction. And do but think how glorious as well as how dangerous,
how difficult and how necessary the conversion of so many heathen nations by
two persons contemptible in the eyes of the world, must needs seem to be, and
then judge it strange, if you can, that the Antiochians should fast and pray
with all earnestness for the concurrence of Gods grace with Paul and Barnabas,
which alone could enable them to accomplish such an unlikely work. Surely here
is reason enough for all that was done, though reordination, and public
allowance never came in their thoughts. Thus having showed you what were
probably, yea certainly the ends of that fasting, and prayer, and imposition of
hands; I now come to show that public allowance, or current repute was not
probably the end intended thereby. 1. They could not intend a mere Political
allowance, such as ours by the Satute-law. 2. Nor a mixed allowance, such as
ours by the Canonlaw. 3. Nor a Scriptural allowance, such as ours by
ordination. 4. Nor a popular allowance or current esteem among the people. 1.
Such eminent Apostles stood in no need at all of esteem to be procured by the
Antiochians, Cor. 3.2.
any more then by the Corinthians. 2. If the Apostles had need, yet inferiors
seem to be utterly incapable to add esteem to Superiors; obscure and private
persons to famous Apostles. 3. If the Apostles had gone to other Churches where
the Antiochians were better known then they, in that case I confess the
Antiochians might have added something; but since they go to the blind Heathens
in very remote countries, that it may be, had never heard of the Church at
Antioch, or if they had, it is like never regarded it, except to revile and
reproach it, and therefore how can we imagine that the Antiochians separation
could add any thing to the Apostles estimation? 4. If the Apostles had need of
estimation, they could procure it to themselves by their admirable Doctrine,
and unheard of miracles, yea they were much more likely by their stupendous
miracles to add to the Antiochians, then the Antiochians at all to them. 5. How
can we think an ordination at Antioch, or anywhere else, is a likely medium to
create esteem for the Apostles in Paphos, Lycaonia, Iconium, or such like
blockish Countries or Cities, where it is like neither the quid nominis nor
quid rei of ordination was ever known until they were told them by the
Apostles! 6. If the Gentiles had ever heard of an ordination before, yet how
little did they esteem of it? and unlikely to add estimation to others is an
action not esteemed it self: do not we see even in England, that a man's parts
and gifts, his holy life, and unwearied labors add more to his estimation then
ordination it self? 7. How can we imagine that Paul would take an ordination
from men to add to his esteem, Gal. 1.1, 11, 12.
when he plainly denies any ordination from men, as a thing that would
undervalue him? 8. Had the procuring of estimation been their end, then would
they much rather have used letters of recommendation, which the very light of
nature (as well as Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.1.) shows us and all nations to be the
most proper medium, as appears by the practice of all Nations in sending their
Credentials and Testimonials with their Ambassadors. 9. What need Paul and
Barnabas be reordained to prove estimation among the Gentiles beyond seas? for
they had no more personal knowledge of the last ordination then of the first,
and might have been as well certified by the Antiochians of the first
ordination, as of the last; yea and much better, by how much the immediate Call
was more famous and wonderful then the mediate. 10. If Paul and Barnabas
suffered a reordination to create them esteem in a far country, then by the
same reason may a Minister, when he removes into a strange country, admit a
reordination to advance his local estimation, and so, toties quoties, then
which what is more unheard of? Neither could this reordination be to create
esteem among the Jews; for they were not sent to the Jews, but to the Gentiles;
and they had great esteem among the Jews before, as appears by their reception,
administration, and valediction; and besides Paul looked upon it among the Jews
as an undervaluing, to be accounted an Apostle of man, or by man, etc.



By all which I hope it appears, that in this Text is held forth no
reordination, to procure estimation. But here I would answer this Question
before I pass on to the next Objection. Why may we not submit to a reordination
to this end, (...). Though this end should not be found affixed to ordination,
either in this. Acts 13. or in any other Scripture; yet an end, a remote, a
higher end undoubtedly it is; for what is the end of ordination (according to
you) but the giving of power? And what is the end of that power, but the free
peaching of the Gospel?

Resol. 1. Were we not tied up to use Christ's Institutions according to
institution, but lest to prudential rules, and providential events, then might
something be yielded.

2. Did not the end give the species in morals, then might we be the more bold
to affix a humane end (for so this would be in esse relativo) to a divine
Ordinance; but seeing the end being of humane institution, will make the whole
Ordinance in its immediate relation to that end to be but of humane
institution; ergo, etc.

3. Would not this instance drawn into example, open a door to innumerable
prophanations of Gods Ordinances, then something might be granted; but because
it will, ergo, etc. thus I argue, If we may use an Ordinance of God at our
pleasure, for the attaining of an higher end, then why not much more for the
attaining of the highest end, the glory of God? And if so, then how many ways
may men abuse Baptism and the Lords Supper, if they do but conceit (as in our
case is little more) that their abuses will tend to Gods glory?

4. Were the expressions in the book of Consecration so lax, that they would
admit such a construction and use of ordination only, then there would be more
to be said.

5. Or if our reverend Bishops were so free to an accommodation, as to omit or
alter those (as to this new end) cross-grained expressions, which will signify
nothing less then a new investiture, then much more might be conceded.

Object. 4. Drawn from the supposed iterability of marriage. Thus Mr. H. p. 37.
So is marriage an entrance into the conjugal state. Suppose a couple married
only by the Magistrate, and as to some considerable effect their marriage is in
question, who would doubt, but upon such or any serious cause for it, they may
be married again by the book of Common Prayer? And why not upon this very
reason? Because there is nothing else in it, but that that form, which is
compiled in the book, for the entering, or (which is the truth) signifying the
entrance of two persons into wedlock, is now used to signify these to be
entered, or confirming them legally in that estate, which it will do as well as
enter them at first; who will say it is a sin or transgression to use it so? A
great piece of matter and misusage is it not? Apply the fame here, etc.

Resol. 1. We must distinguish betwixt the formal contract, and the solemnity
of marriage, and so I answer: 1. The formal contract, or marriage, in its
essential is uniterable, as Argument 5.

2. Marriage in its essentials is but a civil contract (as I suppose) but
ordination is a religious, and therefore we may be more bold in the case of
marriage, then in the case of ordination.

3. Though marriage in genere be Gods Ordinance, yet in specie, I conceive, it
has no divine institution in any positive Law, neither has the solemnity; and
hereupon there is a latitude, and upon this latitude marriage in specie is
become an humane Ordinance, which we may be somewhat more bold with, as I said
before; but now ordination in specie is a divine Ordinance, instituted in Gods
positive Law, and therefore we are incomparably tied up, then if there were no
such institution.

4. The formal contract, which gives the relation, may be, and often is before
the solemnity in marriage; but not so, I conceive, in ordination; for though
God has said of the ministerial honor, No man takes this honor to himself;
yet he has never said of conjugal honor, No man takes this honor to
himself, but rather the contrary. And though a man might not take this office
to himself, if no Law of the Land should forbid him, yet (for ought I know) a
man might take a wife to himself, if the Law did not forbid him. So that the
repetition of marriage is not the repetition of the proper formal contract, but
of the solemnity; but not so in ordination.

5. The proper end of the marriage solemnity is the satisfaction of the world;
and therefore if the first solemnity give not satisfaction, the proper end of
marriage seems to require a repetition; and hence it is, that there is no
profanation of the Name of God. But now ordination, as it is not a mere
solemnity, so its proper end is not the satisfaction of the world, but to
invest with ministerial power, which end is certainly attained in the first
ordination, and therefore its repetition must needs be a taking Gods Name in
vain.

6. Suppose that such a repetition of marriage should be imposed, as does
destroy your former marriage, null your relation to your wife, prove your
children illegitimate, r^cate your title to her estate, I presume you would
scarcely submit unto it: even so when such a repetition of ordination shall be
imposed as destroys Gods Ordinance, nulls our ministerial relation to the
Church, proves our administrations but an illegitimate brood, and that our
Church maintenance belonged not to us, how shall we submit unto it?

Object. 5. Drawn from the repetition of in Oath to confirm the same truth. P.
21.
Mr. H. May not the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy be repeated, and yet the
Name of God not taken in vain by it? And hence he would infer a repetition of
orders without profanation.

Resol. There is not much confidence put in this Argument, I presume, because
it is so quickly passed over; and therefore as quickly will the Answer be
dispatched. The great end and use of an oath among men, is to be for
confirmation to them the end of all strife. Thence it follows, Heb. 6.16.
if the first oath be ineffectual to attain its end, that its lawful to repeat
it in order to that end: and all that is implied in this necessary repetition
is this, that the proper end of the Oath w^^ not attained, and therefore we
repeat i^^ Yet undoubtedly to repeat an Oath whe^^ strife is ended, and the
Question in han^ resolved, and so the proper end attained, i^^ no less then a
breach of the third Commandment. The Application is obvious.

Object. P. 21.
6. Is drawn from the reptition of our prayers for the same mercies. Mr. H. Is
it enough to make our Liturgy unlawful, because we have in one service the Lord
Prayer twice over?

Resol. 1. There are more institute^ ends then one of prayer; and therefore
when one is attained, yet another may be unattained, for which end we continue
our prayers; but what is this to the repetition of that ordination, whose one
end is attained, and no other end unattained?

2. One great end of our prayers is the supply of our wants; and if those wants
ar^ not supplied at our first requests, our blessed Lord has taught us to
repeat them: whose example, Matthew. 26.39, 42, 44.
as well as our own necessity, in order to the end unattained, do clearly show
such repetitions to be no vanities. Yet undoubtedly that man which shall repeat
his requests for the bestowance of that numerical mercy which he obtained upon
his first request and possesses, let that repetition be to what end it will,
he shall be guilty of a vain repetition; as well as he that after a formal
Popish manner repeats his bead-rows, as if he should be heard for his much
speaking. And forasmuch as the Lords Prayer is summa petendorum, therefore to
use that Prayer after our Prayers, may be thought no vain repetition, because
when we have prayed fulliest, yet there may be something wanting to be supplied
by that comprehensive Prayer; yet the use of the Lords Prayer twice or thrice
in the same service, wherein the latter can supply no defect in the former,
whether it be not too like a vain repetition, let the more spiritual and
judicious judge. But now in ordination the end being certainly attained, how
can there be room for a repetition without profanation?

Object. 7. Is drawn from Christ's personal baptism by John Baptist. P. 30.
Mr. H. The common and general end of baptism was for remission of sins, yet
was Jesus Christ baptized, who was not capable of that end, but of some others.

Resol. 1. Suppose you should hold, that remission of sin was the sole end of
John's baptism, which our sinless Savior received, yet there is a Jesuitical
slick-stone to smooth over the business.

Cornel. A Lap. discovers it thus; Christus in se peccata nostra susceperat;
Mat. 3.13.
ergo quasi reus and paenitens Joanni se sistit, ut ab^ eo baptizatus in se
quasi luat and abluat peccata nostra.

2. But I suppose you will grant, that the great end of baptism was and is to
be the solemn admission of members into the visible Church; and this end, I
hope, our Lord Jesus was capable of attaining. And methinks here I have a fair
opportunity to lay open the very sinews of Christ's own Argument produced to
justify his desire of baptism, Mat. 3.13, 14, 15.
It behooves us to fulfill all righteousness. Righteousness being a conformity
to the Law, and the Law requiring this solemn admission of members into the
visible Church (otherwise John's baptism was a lawless thing) and Christ being
made under the Law, did not the Law of God bind him to baptism now, as well as
to circumcision in his infancy? So then Christ's baptism being the solemn
inauguration of a principal member, even the head of the Church, was therefore
neither in vain, having no end, nor yet monstrous, having no usual end.

St. Hierome gives the same reason thus: Triplicem ob causam Salvator a Joanne
accepit baptismum. Mat. 3.13.
1. Vt quia homo natus erat, omnem justitiam and humilitatem legis impleret. 2.
Vt baptismate suo Joannis baptisma comprobaret. 3. Vt Jordanis aquas
sanctificans per descentionem columbae, Spiritus sancti in lavacro credentium
monstraret adventum.


Chrysostom (or whoever was the Author of the imperfect work on Matthew) I
suppose aims at the very same reason in these words. Mat. 3.15.
Justitia siquidem est omnium mandatorum impletio; quia ergo inquit (Christus)
cuncta mandata perfecimus, hoc autem solummodo est reliquum, id quoque ipsum
oportet adjungi.

Cornel. a Lap. gives this as his eighth reason for Christ's baptism, Vt
Christus qui novam Christianorum rempublicam condere decreverat, in quam non
nisi baptizati adscriberentur, esset and in se Princeps baptizatus, ut sic per
omnia fratribus assimiletur absque peccato.

Pareus thus brings our sweet Savior speaking, Mat. 3.15.
Non enim jam adsum tanquam Dominus, sed tanquam servus Domini, Ecclesiae novae
atque officio inaugurandus.

So then Christ being baptized for one of the special ends of baptism, what
can this make for a reordination to no instituted end? Again, if Christ being
made man lay under a law to be baptized, what is this to justify those that
lie under no Law of God to be reordained?

3. But if neither of these ends should hold good; yet Cornel. a Lap. for fear
of failing has added seven or eight more, with the first and third whereof
Calvin himself agrees, and with the third Pareus, following Hilarious.

4. Who knows what special command the Lord Jesus had received from the Father
to come to John's baptism? There are great Divines that put such a Question;
but it is beyond all question, that we have no special command for reordination.

5. Or why might not Christ, being Legislator in his Church, affix his baptism
to what end he pleased? Which we cannot do by ordination.

6. How can we imagine that John would use any such words in the baptism of
Christ, Acts 9. begin.
as should either intimate a belief in the Messiah to come (as ordinarily it
may be he did) or the remission of sin through his blood by repentance (as
Matthew. 3.) since John knew full well who Christ was when he came unto him, as
appears Matthew. 3.13, 14. John 1.29, 30, 31. A learned person says thus,
Verisimile quoque est Joannem in ipso baptismo Christum populo demonstrasse;
cum enim forma baptismi Joannis fuit haec aut similis, baptizo te in nomine e
u^ qui venturus est, vel Creed in Messiam jamjam venturum, ut colligitur, Acts
19 4. Videtur quod Christo veniente, and baptismum recipiente, dixerit, Hic est
M^ssias quem venturum dixi. The same Writer affirms in his Comment. on Acts 19
4. Hinc colligunt S. Hieron. D. Thom. Mr. Sentent. Bonavent. Palacius and alii,
hanc fuisse formam baptismi Joannis, Ego te baptize in eum qui venturus est, ut
credas; hoc est in Jesum Christum, quem vobis mox ostendam: Christum vero
baptizans, dixit, Ego te baptizo in nomine tuo qui venturus es, ait Palacius,
etc. But in this (for ought I yet see) Bellarmine said true, Valde probabile
est Joannem nulla omnino forma uti consuevisse. l. 1. de Bap. c. 20.
So then if John used no form in baptism, this Ordinance might the more easily
be accommodated to this end, and not to that. But this is not our case; we have
no such liberty in reordination. Or if John did use a form, it is certain that
John was so faithful, that we would accommodate the same to the end of Christ's
receiving baptism: but if unfaithful, no doubt Christ would have commanded him
so to have done. But alas! this is far from our state; for if we come for
reordination, we must use such forms as are altogether accommodated to an end,
which by us must not at all be intended, and altogether unaccommodated to the
end chiefly, yea only by u^prosecuted.

Object. 8. Drawn from a supposed rebaptization. P. 85, 86, 87, 88.
Mr. H. Let us turn then to Acts 19. and we shall find there certain Disciples
at Ephesus, who were baptized into John's baptism. It is like that Apo^los
living there, a diligent Teacher, and knowing only the baptism of John, Acts
18.24.25. had baptized them. Now we are to know that this baptism, having the
same Author, Mat. 2.25. Matter, John 1.26. Form, John 1.32, 33, 34. Ends, Luke
3 3. and consigning the same Gospel, Mark 1.3, 4. was but one with Christ's
baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. Paul therefore catechizing them therein, thus instructs
them, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, laying unto the
people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is
(says he) on Christ Jesus. It follows, When they heard this, they were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Now the Question arises here, Who are
meant by they, in the Text? the people unto whom John spoke, or the persons
(the twelve men) to whom Paul speaks? Not the first certainly; then must these
words (that is on Christ Jesus) be John's interpretation, when it is plain he
did not know Christ by his name, when he baptized, until Christ came to him,
John 1.30, 31. Who are they then? Why the last, no doubt; for John and his
Disciples did baptize into one which should come (as it is said here) but it
was the Apostles and Christ's Disciples that baptized expressly in the name of
Christ Jesus, etc.

Resol. Though I observe a greater variety of opinions about the interpretation
of this Text, then almost of any other through the whole Bible; yet this I
observe also, that they all agree in this (whatever else they differ in) to
explode a repetition of the same valid baptism which is the only pillar of our
reverend Brothers Argument. Yea moreover it is very observable, that the very
reason of this so great diversity, was their detestation of rebaptization. I
find these ten several interpretations, none of which allow a repetition of
every way the same baptism, which therefore cannot support the repetition of
the same ordination.

1. Some think in that Text baptism is always to be taken Metaphorically for
the doctrine of baptism, that the sense may run thus; those twelve Disciples
which were only instructed in the doctrine of John, were afterward instructed
in the Doctrine of Christ.

2. Others say, that baptism may be taken always Metaphorically in that Tex^;
but in the first place for the Doctrine, in the second for the gifts of the
Spirit bestowed by imposition of hands.

3. Others suppose, that the baptism of John is to be taken Metaphorically for
the doctrine, and the baptism of Christ properly; and so, that these twelve
were but once baptized, and that not by John, but Paul.

4. O hers take the baptism of John properly, and the baptism of Paul
Metaphorically for the Doctrine, and so make but one baptism, and that by
John, not by Paul.

5. Some take the baptism of John properly, and the baptism of Paul
improperly, for the gifts of the holy Ghost.

6. Others take baptism properly in both; but yet observe that both these
expressions relate to John's baptism; and of this opinion are many of our
Moderns.

7. Others take baptism properly in both, and acknowledge a rebaptization; but
it was because those Disciples wanted the true baptism of John, and had only a
corrupt administration from some of John's Disciples, wanting the true form,
being not in the name of the Holy Ghost.

8. Others acknowledge a rebaptization, but it was through this accidental
corruption in the administration of John's baptism, the baptized being not
instructed in the doctrine of the Trinity, and of Christ's baptism with the
Spirit.

9. Others acknowledge a rebaptization, but erroneously administered by some of
Paul's Disciples before Paul came to them.

10. That Paul did indeed rebaptize whom John had baptized, but it was because
Christ's baptism and John's were not the same: And this way goes the Council at
Trent, Bellarmine, Estius a Lap. and (I think I may safely say) the Romanists
generally; and if I should add the Ancients also, I should not be much
overtasked to prove it; and this way Diodat. himself seems to go. And now I
infer, If any of these interpretations may be allowed, or if the uniform
consent and practice of the Catholic Church may be admitted, then is our
reverend Brother mistaken in his interpretation. And oh how strong and subtle
was that temptation, that trapan'd so learned a person into the justification
of one novelty by another, reordination by rebaptization? And what cause have
I, and such as I, to pour out our souls in that petition, Lead us not into
temptation?

But hold, I must not sit down as yet, there is another job of work behind, and
that is to saw asunder the Argument for this singular opinion; and which is
more difficult to resolve, amongst all these Divines, whose hand-saw to use; to
use them all at once is needless, if not impossible; to reject any out of our
shop, is prodigal, if not scandalous: and therefore I will only make use of
one, and let the rest lie by until I have more need of them. I shall not now
deny Christ's baptism and John's to be the same, but shall rather conject ure
that John's baptism was never iterated; and therefore I must proceed to answer
the Argument for the contrary.

1. It is certain that the whole history ( Acts 19.) was written by Luke, as
the Historian.

2. It is certain that the Question ( ver. 2.) Have ye received the holy Ghost
since ye believed? (which probably is to be understood of the extraordinary
gifts, as Calvin, Beza, Annot. etc. because it was to be received since they
believed, and the ordinary gift before, or in believing) was from Paul.

3. It is certain also, that that Answer, We have not so much as heard whether
there be an holy Ghost; (which is probably to be understood sutably to the
Question, of the extraordinary gifts, for John did tell his Disciples of the
person of the holy Ghost) was the answer of John's Disciples.

4. It is certain also, that that Question was Paul's, Unto what then were ye
baptized?

5. And the Answer following was the Disciples, Unto John's baptism.

6. It is certain also, that the explanatory reply. ( ver. 4.) was from Paul.

7. Neither do I see any evidence necessitating a denial of the next words
(When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus) to be
attributed to the people that heard John, saying, that he baptized with the
baptism of repentance, and that they should believe in him that should come
after him: But it is laid, that those words (that is on Christ Jesus) could not
be John interpretation, because John knew not Christ's name till afterward.

Resol. 1. I see no necessity that those words (that is on Christ Jesus) should
be taken for John's interpretation, but for Paul's: Paul tells them that John
said, that they should believe in him that should come after him; which
Periphrasis of Christ Paul explains by those words, That is, on Christ Jesus,
which Paul having done, he adds, When they ( i e. John's hearers) heard this,
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; that is interpretatively, In
the name of the Lord Jesus; but literally, In the name of him that should come
after him.

2. I see no convincing evidence that John was ignorant of the name of Christ,
till Christ came to him to be baptized: all that is proved by John 1.33. is
only that John knew not the person of Christ before, though the name Christ he
might know before; and it seems probable that he did so; for it is certain that
Herod knew the Messiah which was to come by the name Christ, Matthew. 2.4. so did
the Pharisees, John 1. 24, 25. yea the people of the Jews generally, Luke
22.67. yea the woman of Samaria, John 4.25. And can we think that all these
knew the Messiah's name, and that John did not? Again, is it not probable that
the Jews had sent to John, to know whether be were not the Christ, which John
denied, before Christ came to be baptized? John 1.19, 20.3.28. And does not the
name Messiah signify Christ? John 1.41. And can we think that John understood
it not? Again, the Angel having told Joseph and Mary, that their blessed Babes
name should be Jesus, Matthew. 1.21. Luke 1.31. And the b'essed Virgin being
Cousen to Elizabeth, John's Mother, and going to visit her, and continuing with
her three months, and conferring with her with the greatest mutual joy
concerning the holy feed, is it probable, that all this while the blessed Mary
did not tell her Cousen of her Child's name? And if Mary told Elizabeth, how is
it probable that Elizabeth, so good a Mother, would not tell her son John?
Moreover it being about thirty years space (as is conjectured) betwixt the
giving the name Jesus unto Christ, and the preaching of John, is it probable,
that all this while John did never hear Christ's name, Jesus? Especially being
his Kinsman, and his singular forerunner. By this, I suppose, it is probable,
that John did know the names, Christ Jesus, and so the Exegesis might be his;
but if it were not, it will not infer, that the persons spoken of were not
John's hearers. Thus having enervated the Argument for rebaptization; give me
leave to add a few considerations to evince the contrary.

1. If Paul repeated the same baptism, how does he say, There is one baptism,
Ephesians. 4.8.

2. If the same baptism may be repeated; how shall we gainsay the Anabaptists?

3. If baptism may be repeated, then may the thing signified by baptism ( viz.
the new birth, or entrance into the Church) be repeated, but that is impossible.

4. Calvin argues thus, Quod si priorem baptismum ignorantia vitiat, ut sit
altero baptismo corrigendus, primi omnium rebaptizandi erant Apostoli, quitoto
post baptismum suum triennio vix modicam syncerioris doctrinae particulam
degustaverant, etc. This Argument will hold good upon a more general accouns,
as well as upon this special.

5. Our English Annotators on this Text argue from the oneness of circumcision,
to the oneness of baptism; and so does learned Wallaeus de baptismo.

6. The end of Paul's action was the giving of the Holy Ghost, which was done by
imposition of hands; but by baptism where shall we find it? Calvin and Beza
both hint at this Argument.

7. Beza on this Text gives this reason, Particula (...) quae in graecis
omnibus codicibus summo consensu legitur, and particula (...) necessario
respondet, nullo mode, nullo (inquam) modo patitur ut hujus orationis seriem
discerpamus, quasi part Paulo, posteriori sit ipsi Lucae Scriptori tribuenda;
ergo haec quoque Pauli verba sunt, tum doctrinam a Joanne quidem annuntiatam,
and ab ipsis fide apprehensam ut vere Evangelicam, tum etiam baptismum illis
collatum, ut vere Christianum approbantis, quibus postea manus imponens
subsecutis iis demum donis, quae Spiritus sancti nomine prius significarat, and
de quibus fuerat ^os percontatus. This same reason is given by Wallaeus from
Calvin, as himself acknowledges.

8. We have the universal Church against rebaptization, not only in thesi, but
for ought I see, in hypothesi also. Enchir. in fol. c. de Bapt. p. 85.
Respondeo baptismum semel legitime collatum iterari non debere, tota Ecclesia
Christiana hactenus dedefendit, says Wallaeus. So that hence, I conceive, this
Text holds forth no rebaptization, and therefoee can be no warrant for
reordination. But what if John's baptism, which was extraordinary (as Diod. calls
it) were seconded with an ordinary by Paul, how can that justify the seconding
of an ordinary ordination with an ordinary? or what if John's non-conformal
baptism (as Diod. implies) were followed with a formal baptism in the name of
Christ, yet how can that justify the repeating of a Scripturally formal
ordination?

Object. p. 48, 49.
1. Is drawn from the supposed reordination of the Apostle. Mr. H. The Apostles
have one authoritative mission, Mat. 10.7. And they have another also, Mat.
28.19. John 20.21. They are doubly ordained then, and both ordinations
extraordinary.

R. The acts of Christ in order to the plenary perpetual Apostleship of these
twelve were various. 1. Christ calls them to be his Disciples, and declares to
some of them his purpose to make them Ministers: Mat. 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Mar. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Luke 5.10. 2. These being discipled, Christ calls
twelve of them to him, and points them out to be Apostles, but does not as yet
(I conceive) empower them, Mar. 3.10.11. Luke 6.13. 3. These twelve being
chosen out to be his Apostles, he gives them a particular temporary commission
to preach and work wonders, Mat. 10.1, 7. Mar. 6.7. Luke 9.1. 4. Christ
declares upon occasion what full power he will afterward give unto them, Mat.
16.19. 5. He gives them their full Commission at last to preach both to Jews
and Gentiles, i. e. to all the world, and to continue by themselves and
successors to the end of the world, and perfection of his Church, Mat. 28.22.
Mar. 16.15. Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. Ephess. 4.8.13.
So then here I fix, That it seems most probable that the Apostles had not
their plenary perpetual commission till after Christ's resurrection, and that
what they had before, was both temporary, and particular, limited only to the
Jews. And this I shall endeavor to confirm. 1. This Commission ( Mat. 10.7.)
was to last but for a time, Mat. 10.7.
appears, 1. Because the work that they were then empowered to, was to preach
that the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And therefore it should seem that when
the kingdom of God was come, that is the Gospel Church, that their power should
then cease. Calvin in locum, Hoc est quod dixi praeconium quo crigi populi
animos voluit Christus in spem propiuquae redemptionis. 2. Because the full
measures of the spirit were not given till after Christ's resurrection, and
therefore it is probable, not that full power which supposed those full gifts.
3. Because this former sending forth is expressly said to be for a journey,
Mat. 10, 9, 10.
for which journey they should provide nothing. 4. Because Christ tells them
they should not be able to perform their journey, Mat. 10.23.
and their work before the Son of man be come. 5. Because the Apostles not long
after they were sent forth, gathered themselves together, Mar. 6.30.
and return to their Master to give an account of their work. 6. Does not
Christ lay such a foundation for their last Commission, which seems to imply
that their former commission was not full. Observe our Lords words, All power
is given unto me in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.21, 22.
Go ye therefore and disciple me all Nations, etc. mark, go ye therefore;
wherefore? because now all power in heaven and in earth is given unto Christ
Jesus: it should seem by this that Christ waited for the full donation of power
into his hands upon his full and actual satisfaction, before he would grant
full commissions to his Apostles. Not unlike is that Ephesians. 4.8, 9. Calvin says,
Mathaeus vero antequam discipulis injunctum narret docendi munus, Christum de
sua potestate praefatum esse dicit, nec absre; non enim hic sufficerit
mediocris authoritas -- non enim aeternam potentiam jactat qua praeditus fuit
ante creatum mundum, sed, quam nunc accepit, dum ordinatus fuit mundi Judex;
immo notandum est imperium hoc non fuisse liquido cognitum donec a mortuis
refurrexit. Musculus dialogues thus, Quis ille mittens est? Mat. ult. dicit, In
Joan. 20.
Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo and in terra; quibus dictis, subjungit,
Euntes ergo docete, etc. 7. When Christ gave his Apostles a perpetual
commission, he expresses its perperuity, Mat. 28.22.
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. And when Paul mentions
this commission, he expressly mentions its perpetuity thus, Till we all come to
the unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4.13.
etc. but in the former intimations of Christ's commissionating his Apostles,
there is no mention of any perpetuity; as if the Holy Ghost did purposely put
this difference betwixt them. So then were our former ordinations but
temporary, as the Apostles first commission, then could we admit a second upon
expiration of the first: but since ours was an ordination to a perpetual office,
therefore these Texis cannot warrant any reordination in our case.


2. This former commission of the Apostles was but particular, limited only to
the Jews; Mat. 10.5, 6.
and this limitation was not of their execution only, but of their power, as
appears from the commission it self, Go not in the way of the Gentiles, etc.
and likewise from their latter commission, Mar. 12.28.
which runs thus, Disciple me all nations, etc. preach the Gospel to every
creature, etc. So that hence we may observe this difference betwixt these two
commissions; the former was limited to the Jews, with an express exception
against the Gentiles; but the later expressly to both Jews and Gentiles: So then
had our former ordination been to a private place, with an express limitation
to go nowhither else, then indeed upon our removal to the excepted place, there
would be need of a new Commission as well as with the Apostles; but our
ordination was to the whole work of a Presbyter in the universal Church,
without any limitation in our commission to a particular Parish, County, Nation
or People: therefore this instance neither as an instance, nor from the reason
of the thing, can justify our reordination. And to prevent the censure of
singularity in this interpretation, In Mat. 10. etc.
observe what Calvin says, Notandam tamen est de perpetuo Apostolatu nondum
haberi sermonem, sed tantum de praeconio temporali -- Nunc ergo mittuntur, ut
in Judaea tempus adesse promissae instaurationis, and salutis nuntient. Postea
ordinabit eos Christus ut evangelium spargant per totum orbem; hic tantum
adjuros sibi eos assumit. -- Postea docendi parts quas obierane illis
resignabit; atque hoc not are operae pretium est, non putemus stabilem fixamque
legem omnibus verbi ministris traescribi, dum praeconibus suae doctrinae mandet
Dominus quid eos ad breve tempus facere velit; quae inscitia noultos fefellit,
ut sine discrimine ad hanc normam omnes verbi Ministros exigerent. Paeraeus
likewise speaking of the difference betwixt these Commissions, says, In Mat.
10. begin;
Fere triennio illam praecessit; and illa quidem fuit universalis ad
praedicandum evangelium omni creaturae, Judaeis and Gentibus, non ipsis solum,
sed successoribus little ad finem usque saeculi delegata; ista vero singularis
sequentibus quasi praeludium -- Ineptissimi sunt Scriptura Interpretes, qui vel
perpetuam regulam Ministris Ecclesiae servandam hic praescribi volunt. I might
cite Aretius to the same purpose, with many others; but quotations puff up too
fast, and therefore I forbear.

Object. 10 From a supposed reordination of Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 2 Timothy
1.6. M. H. p. 4.

R. We will grant that 1 Timothy 4.14. is to be understood of ordination, and that
the (...) there is (...), for so is the sense of Divines; and though that
phrase, the authority that is in thee, seem harsh to vulgar ears, yet if
authority be a relation, it is an accident; or make authority what you can, it
will be but an accident, and then it must be in a subject, and that subject is
the Minister, or none that I know. And we will suppose that (...) is Caetus
Presbyterorum, because it is never used in Scriptture (says Bucer) for the
office; and what hands has the office to impose? and why would not the Holy
Ghost, if the office were intended, rather use (...) or (...)? beside the
stream of Divines both Ancient and Modern, Pryns Unb. Tim. and Tit. Ca^v^n in 1 Timothy 4.
run this way; Calvin though he gives another interpretation, yet he approves
this also. Presbyterium qui hic nomen collectivum esse putant, pro Collegio
Presbyterorum positum, recte sentiunt meo judicio; and lastly the new coined
distinction of (...) and (...) will utterly subvert the other interpretation.
Yet there are three several answers, each of which will take off the pretense
of Timothies reordination.

1. It is well known that several learned Divines do take that act in 1 Timothy
4.14. and that in 2 Timothy 1.6. to be one and the same ordination: some say, with
the laying on the hands of the Presbytery, may be meant Paul's hands; so Bishop
Bilson, Mr. Mason, Calvin, Gelaspy, De gubern. Ecc^^ 252.
and others; others think that Paul's hands were not the hands of the
Presbyteric, yet that both Paul's hands and the Presbyters were laid on
together; De Min. Ang^. p 44, 45. in 1 Timothy 4. Misc Qu. p. 101.
and so both concur in one ordination; so then if either of these were true (as
I confess I dare make a point of faith of neither) then there is no ordination
to be found here.

2. Its more probable that if these Texts must be understood of two
ordinations, that they were to two offices, the first to an inferior, the
second to a superior office; and perchance first to the office of a Presbyter,
and afterward to the office of an Evangelist. Gelaspy seems to lean this way.
Misc. Qu. p. 90, 103.
Its observable indeed that in the first Epistle Paul never gives Timothy any
higher Title then Bishop or Presbyter (which now at last are acknowledged to be
used by the Holy Ghost promiscuously) but in the second Epistle wherein Paul
mentions the laying on of his own hands, he styles him an Evangelist, 2 Timothy
4.5. and either here must be a twofold ordination, or else Timothy was ordained
per saltum, or else his second ordination is not recorded.

3. Some think (and I think it is most probable) that 2 Timothy 2.1.6. is not to
be understood of ordination at all, but of some special gift conferred by the
laying on of Paul's hands. 1. As Mr. Baxter says, It may be imposition of hands
in confirination, or for the first giving of the Holy Ghost after baptism,
(ordinarily used by the Apostles) that is there spoken of, which also seems
probable by the Apostles annexing it to Timothies faith, in which he succeeded
his Mother and Grandmother, and the following effects of (the spirit of power,
and love, and of a sound mind) which are the fruits of confirming grace,
admonishing him that he be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, which is
also the fruit of confirmation. 2. That very expression, stir up the gift, does
seem to imply that gift to be gratia gratum faciens; for it seems too improper
to say, stir up thy office. 3. The Apostle does somewhat critically use a
diverse particle in these two Texts, in the former (...) in the latter (...) now
the Question is, why should Paul use different words, if these were not
different acts? I am not ignorant that some say (...) is used to set forth
Paul's act in ordination, because he was the Ordainer; and only (...) to set
forth the Presbyters act, because they are only assistants in ordination.
But 1. This crotchet, though ingenious, yet it seems to be new. 2. Altogether
without proof. 3. And it seems to contradict most of our Protestant Divines,
even Episcopal as well as others that acknowledge a power of ordination in
Presbyters, and that their ordination without a Diocesan is valid, which they
would not do, had the Presbytery no power of ordination at all. 4. It supposes
ordination in this Text, which supposition is contrary to the two first
probabilities, that this gift was gratia gratum faciens. and not gratia gratis
data. 5. In Acts 13. there is the same word used to signify the act of the
Doctors, as was used to signify the Act of the Prophets. 6. This would
overthrow their new interpretation of 1 Timothy 4.14. which is to put Presbyterium
for the office, with a Parenthesis in the Text to help the same; and so make
(...) to signify Paul's act. 7. It will overthrow that testimony of the
Ancients so much magnified for understanding by a College of Presbyters, a
College of D^ocesans, for then (...) must signify their act. 8. If this (...)
signify the Presbyters consent only, then why should the Presbyters lay on
hands any more then the people? for the people were anciently to consent, and
to assist by their concurrence in prayer. 9. If Presbyters are Ordainers with
the Bishops (as some confess) then is it not against the nature of ordination;
for have not all ordainers the same causality? 10. But further to speak the
truth, whether it make for me or against me, these words, (...) and (...), are
often used promiscuously; instances are not rare of using (...) for per, and
(...) for cum.
And it is evident, that the whole Church, till of late (for ought I yet see)
has so understood the same in these Texts. But to leave it now to the
impartial Reader to judge, whether if (...) and (...) difference any things, it
be not more probable that they difference the interpretation of the holy Ghost
from an ordination, then an ordination from an ordination. But let it go how it
will with (...) and (...) yet sure I am that it is more probable, either that
Paul ordained ^ot Timothy at all, or that he joined with the Presbyters in
their ordination, or that the Presbyters ordained Timothy to one office, and
Paul afterward to another, a higher, then that Paul ordained him to the same
office to which he was ordained before.

All that I observe further in Mr. H. tract, is, the authority of Chemnitius
and Baldwin.

Resol 1. Methinks it is a Question, whether reordination be more credited by
these two authorities, or more discredited in that they are but two, and two
not of the Ancients neither. And though it is to be acknowledged, that these
two were learned and reverend Lutheran Divines, yet, no doubt, there may be two
score easily rallied against them, and it may be, as learned as they. I believe
no Reordained will ever adventure to pole authorities, and if they will not
number but weigh, they will get but little: But if they will needs urge me with
their bare authority, I must needs return to such an Ipse dixit, as we were
wont to return to the authority of Arist. at Oxford, Rationem Arist. expecto,
non authoritatem. Or our reverend Brother may be answered in his own words, or
rather St. Hieromes, Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, eadem
facilitate contemnitur qua probatur. But more particularly it is certain, that
Baldwin was against reordination (as appears by his seventh Argument produced
against it) where the person was satisfied of the validity of his former
ordination; Bald. C. C. 1039, 1040, 1041, 1042. Examen. Presb. 2. de Sacra.
ord. p. 401.
and only then for a repetition, when the person himself was not satisfied;
which I suppose is the case this day but of a very few in England. And as for
Chemnitius, he is so large in his discourse upon the Sacraments, that I thought
it not operaepretium to scan him all over, but this I found by the way, that in
the business of ordination he refers us to their August. Confession, wherein he
says, their Churches have explained themselves. August. Conf. l. 3. c. 11. f.
362
And there, I am sure, it is said more then once or twice, that Orders are
initerable: The very title of the Chapter of Orders is this, Ordinem, sive
sacram ordinationem vere (though largely, not as Baptism and the Lords Supper,
as Chemnet. tells the Trent Conventicle) Sacramentum isse, nec posse in aliquo
iterari. For explication and confirmation whereof they cite several sentences
of St. Augustine.

CHAP. V.
Centaining certain Concessions on the persons part in the Question, in order
to an accommodation.

1. WE may lawfully accept a general confirmation of our former ordination,
which confirmation pleaded, would work by way of Estoppel, as Mr. H. after the
Lawyers speaks. Instances both of giving and accepting such confirmation shall
hereafter be produced.

2. But if this general may not be granted, we proceed to particulars, and say,
that it is lawful to submit to the trial of our abilities, faith and manners by
those that shall be deputed thereto by authority. This seems to be employed in
that Command, 1 Pet. 3.15
(...). If to every one that ask, then much more to those in authority. If they
ask, and if of our hope, then of our faith and life, which are the foundation
of our hope. And this seems to be no more, then what our Lord Jesus, Peter,
Paul; and other Saints have submitted to before us.

Chrysostom says, Porro is qui volentibus, Ilt. 1.
hortantibus and gratias agentibus praeesse vult, si ea lege praesumit, ut
consilio proprio tantum omnia faciat, quasi nemini rationem rediturus,
tyrannice potius quam populariter hujus modi exercet officium.

3. It is lawful to attend the Bishop for, and to receive their approbation of
our qualifications and constitutions, if they please to grant it; and whether
their approbation be testified by word or writing, alters not the case. This
needs no proof, it flows so naturally from the former.

4. I it is lawful to accept, yea to seek a license from the Bishop to exercise
our ministerial gifts and authority. Exodus 5.
What is this more then to seek leave of any one that detains us, either by
right or by wrong, to go about our Master his business? Exodus 7.
What is this more then Moses and Aaron did in seeking to Pharach to let the
Israelites go to worship? Nehem. 2.
Or Ezra or Nehemiah did in seeking to Artaxer xes for liberty to go and build
the Temple? Acts 21.37, 39.
Or Paul in desiring Claudius Lysias to give him liberty to preach to the
people?

5. It is lawful to accept, yea to desire the prayers and benediction of a good
Bishop; prayers for the increase of ministerial abili^ies, continuance of
divine assistances and bestowance of abundant success. Were this all that the
Bishop would have, that he might give us his benediction in solemn fasting and
prayer, there were no reason to refuse it, but rather (I think) thankfully to
accept it. Did not the Elders of Ephesus receive Paul's benediction long after
their ordination? Acts 20.
And did not Paul and Barnabas use the prayers of the Doctors at Antioch long
after their ordination? Acts 13.
And are we not commanded to pray one for another? Jam. 5.16.
And is it not said, that the fervent effectual prayer of a righteous man
avails much? And God forbid that I should ever think, that there are not
righteous men among the Prelatical, or fervent effectual prayers that are
Liturgical. And methinks this might tend somewhat toward the satisfaction of
our right reverend Bishops, since so much of ordination lies in a solemn
blessing. St Augustine says somewhere, In Comment Sent. l. 4. p. 15. de
Gubernat. Eccle. p. 337.
that Ordinatio est oration super hominem cui imponuntur manus. And learned
Estius calls it, Benedictionis Sacramentum. And Bucer queries thus, Manus
impositio quid est aliud juxta Canonem uisi oration super hominem? Hanc ver^
orationem Presbyteris illucitam fuisse credibile cuipiam videatur?

6. It seems lawful to admit the imposition of the Bishops hands on the person
in the Question; this rises high, but from bottom to top I will give you a
survey of my thoughts. 1. Imposition of hands was of frequent use in the
ancient Church, Genesis 48.14, 15. Numb. 27.18, 23. Levit. 24.14. Deuteronomy. 17.7. 2.
It is not abolished in the Gospel, but continued, Acts 6.6.13.2, 3. 1 Timothy
4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. 3. That the use of imposi^ion of hands was various. 1.
Sometimes to signify the bestowance of some extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost, Acts 8.17, 18, 19.5.6. 2. To signify the working of some extraordinary*
cure, Mark 6.5. 3. The conferring of Ecclesiastical power, 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy
5.22. 4. The bestowance or desire to bestow some spiritual blessing, Gen 48.14,
15. Mark 10.16. 5. As a sign of consent or approbation, Levit. 24.14. Deuteronomy.
13.9.17.7. Numb. 8.9, 10, 11.

This imposition of hands by the Israelites might signify their consent to
their consecration, but not their consecration by themselves. 1. Because the
Israelites had no power to consecrate the Levites to an office to which they
were not consecrated themselves. 2. Because the Levites are said to be an
offering to the Lord, and the people were restrained from a personal offering.
3. It is expressly said, that Aaron should offer the Levites. 4. It seems to be
here as in the case of the bullock, Levit. 4.15. -- 6. Imposition of hands may
be used as a sign of confirmation, as many both of Ancients and Modernes do
conceive, and accordingly interpret that Heb. 6.2.7. This has been used as a
sign of a separation to a particular work, Acts 13.2, 3.8. This has been used
as a sign in popular election, say many great transmarine Divines, and some,
not Dwarss, at home, -- 4. By this various use you may see, that (...) is
iterable; as in confirmation and ordination, afterward: or as in Paul and
Barnabas, and the giving of the holy Ghost, and a separating to the Apostolic
work among the Gentiles; or as in Timothies ordination and a donation of a
special gift: 5. Likewise from the various use of this ^^te, you may see that
it is lawful for the person in the Question to admit imposition of hands: for
though it is true, it cannot signify to him either the bestowance of an
extraordinary gift, or the working of a miraculous cure, or the conferring
Ecclesiastical authority, or the confirmation of baptism, or popular election;
yet it may be used either to signify the Bishops benediction, or his
approbation and allowance, or his confirmation of our orders, or as a
separating us to this or that particular work.
Thus they that cannot admit the Bishops hands for one end, may do it for
another.

7. It is lawful for the person in the Question, upon his undertaking a new
charge, to admit a solemn separation by the Bishops and Presbyters with
fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands, unto that particular work. This I
take to be irrefragably argued from Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.

8. It seems lawful to admit all that is aforesaid, though a man should not
remove to a new place. If a Minister upon this change gave up his place for
lost, and his people gave up him, upon the dissolution of his legal title, if
he shall afterward gain a legal establishment, and have his liberty to proceed
in his labors in that part of the Lords harvest, he may (for ought I know)
accept the solemn Good speed, with the approbative (...) of the honest Bishop.
-- By this you may see, how strongly bent my soul is to peace; insomuch that
there is nothing that I can devise about ^eordination in the si, that the right
reverend Bishops can demand, but it shall be yielded, except only the formal
investiture with ministerial power.

CHAP. VI.
Containing certain Considerations humbly offered to those that are for the
imposing of reordination, to promote an accommodation.

1. CAn it be imagined, that Presbyterian ordination is such a groundless
novelty, as to be destitute of all authority? I confess I wondered when I read
the challenge of the late right reverend Bishop Hall, and heard the like from a
reverend Dean, to give any solid Instance in all antiquity of a Presbyterian
ordination. What did they think of Paul's ordination (as some call it) Acts 9.
by Ananias a Disciple? It is well known, that some would make the Bishops the
successors of the Apostles, of the seventy two Disciples; and if so, you know
what follows. Or what do they think of Saul and Barnabas their ordination (as
some call it) in Acts 13. by the Teachers at Antioch? Or what of Timothy's
ordination by the hands of the Presbytery? In Epist. ad ^vag.
1 Timothy 4.14. Or what of the Alexandrian Bishops consecrated by the Presbyters
(as St. Jerome tells us) for the space of about two hundred years next after the
Apostles? Or what of the like history of ordinations by the Presbyters
throughout Egypt by St. Ambrose and St. Augustine? Amb. In Ephesians. 4. August. q.
ex utroque Test. Q. 101. Inter Ep: Cyprian. epist. 75.
or whoever they were, yet to you it suffices, in that they are cited by your
selves for Ambrose and St. Augustine: or what of Firmilians assertion, that in
the Church, wherein all power and grace is seated, there preside certain
Elders, which have both the power of baptizing, imposing hands, and ordaining?
But to come nearer home, Bish. Usher de prieccle. Brit. 798, 799, 800.
What did they think of that so famous story, reported by so many great ones,
that the Scots from their first embracing of the Christian Faith, Anno 179.
till the year 430. were constantly instructed and governed only by Presbyters
and Monks, without Bishops? Dr. Blond. Apol. 314.315. B^xters disp. Chapter G^v.
97. Beda Ecc. hist. l. 3. c. 35.17, 21, 24, 25, 26. l. 4* c. 4. Dr. Blond.
Apol. 367, 368, 369.
Or what did they think of those so famous converters of a great part of our
English Nation, Segerius, Aidanus, Finanus, Colmannus, Tuda, Diuna, Ceollach,
Trumhere, Cedda, and others, who received their ordination successively from
Columbanus the Abbot, Presbyter of Hy Abbey, who came out of Scotland at the
invitation of Oswald King of Northumberland, in the time of the Heptarchy?
About that time, or somewhat after, was Augustine the Monk sent from Gregory
the great into the South part of England. Chy^^aeus in Chron. S^xon. l. 15 p.
456. Pryn ibid. 94.
Or what did they think of M. Luther, Doctor Medler, and other Presbyters, that
ordained Amsdorfius Bishop of Newburgh? Whosoever would see more Instances of
Presbyterian ordination, let him read Doctor Blondels Apol. Gersom, Bucer de
gubern. Eccl. and Mr. Pryn's Vnbish. Tim. and Tit.

2. Can it be valid or candid to argue from the condemnation of Novatus,
Aerius, Coluthus, or Maximus, to the condemnation of all Presbyters, ordained
by the Presbytery? Certain I am, that Bishop Downam and Bishop Bilson, that
argued from these against the regularity, yet would not argue from these
against the validity of Presbyterian ordination. But let us consider these
condemned persons severally.

1. Novatus, Eus^b. hist. l. 6. c. 42.
who was censured in the third Century, according to Eusebius: He was 1. A
Priest of Rome, puffed up with pride against those that fell in time of
persecu^ion through infirmity of the flesh, as though there were no hope of
salvation for them, yea, though they performed all that appertained to true
conversion, and right confession of faith. 2. He became the Author and
Ringleader of his own heretical Sect. 3. He was excommunicate and banished
the Church by a Synod of sixty Bishops gathered at Rome, with many Presbyters
and Deacons. 4. He was ordained a Priest by the favor of the Bishop (though
all the Clergy, and many of the Laity withstood it) who requested that he might
be permitted to allow only this one. 5 When he had presumptuously endeavored
to challenge to himself the title of a Bishop, not granted him from above, he
chose two men of desperate condition to be partakers of his heresy, whom he
might send to a certain corner of Italy, and there to seduce three Bishops,
plain, simple, and country men, by some crafty means, avouching that they must
in all haste come to Rome, feigning that they, together with other Bishops,
meeting to the same purpose, should appease and remove a certain Schism raised
in that City; these being simple men (as we said before) not knowing their
crafty and mischievous fetches, after their coming, were included by such lewd
persons as were suborned for that purpose, and about ten of the clock in the
night, when they were somewhat tipsie and well crammed with victuals, were
constrained to create him Bishop, etc. of which one of these Bishops repented,
and all deposed. 6. He had formerly been possessed of the Devil. 7. It was
doubted of his baptism, which at the best was on his bed in sickness. 8. In
persecution he denied himself to be a Priest, and forsook the Church of God. 9.
He caused the people at the Lords Table to swear by the body and blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ, they would never forsake him, and fly to Cornelius, ere he
would delver them the Sacrament, and instead of Amen, to say, I will not fly to
Cornelius --
Now then let any one judge whether all that were Presbyterially ordained, were
such as Novatus, or their ordinations like his; if they were, let them be
censured with him; but if not, we crave justice.

2. Let us consider the case of Aerius, who was condemned by Epiphanius for an
Heretic (as some say) for maintaining an (...) betwixt Bishops and Presbyters.
But I suppose that Aerius was condemned by Epiphanius on this account; yet I
hope you will not think Epiphanins's censure sufficient to make Aerius an
Heretic; for if you do, then you must acknowledge that he was an Heretic, for
denying prayer for the dead, for denying the Paschal Fast as Judaical, since
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. For on these accounts was he
condemned for an Heretic by Epiphan. Yea and other Doctrine: shall you find
condemned by Epiphan. for heresies, which the very Papists themselves will
acknowledge for verities. Haere^^s nomen rebus levissimis impingitur. Ludo.
Vlv. Quid est Pascha, says Aerius, quod apud v^s per ficitur? Iudaicis fabulis
rursus addicti est^s -- qua ratione nominatis post mortem nom na mortuorum?
Orat vivens, quid profuerit mortuo? Aerius -- Arianus qaidem in totum; aliter
enim non fentit quam velut Arrius, furiosus mente, elatus opinione -- magnam
mult^tndinem allexit -- sugabatur cum sitis ah Eccles^is, etc. quid est
Episcopus ad Presbyterum? Nihil differth^c ab illo unus enim est ordo, and unus
(inqu^t) honor, and unadignitas. Epiphan. haeres. 75.
2. It is evident, that Epiphan. understood by heresy, any doctrine
pertinaciously held against the Church, whether fundamental or not, and so his
heresy seems to me to be sometimes but a higher degree of, or an aggravated
Schism. 3. But if Epiphan. had understood the word heresy never so strictly,
yet Aerius, being an Arrian, might and is thereupon called an Heretic. 4. I do
not observe that Epiphan. anywhere calls Aerius an Heretic, merely and simply
upon the account of his Ifotomy; nay confident I am, that some Doctors of our
own do deny it, and particularly (if my memory exceedingly fail me not) Bishop
Jewel and Doctor Field. 5. If Aerius held an equality, not only in order, but
degree and dignity also, as no doubt (if Epiphan. may be credited) he did; then
some of ours, ordained by the Presbyters, cannot be brought under that censure.
6. But if it were heretical to say, that Bishops and Presbyters were but one
order by divine right, what then is Catholic? 7. It seems that Aerius was
furious and turbulent, and divided the Church of God, being settled; but so it
cannot be said of many Presbyterially ordained. So then what is the Instance of
a disowned Arrian, schismatical Aerius to orthodox peaceable Presbyters?


3. We come to consider the instance of Coluthus, and whether it be forcible or
friendly to argue from the pretended ordination of Ischyras by Coluthus to the
ordination by Presbyters. 1. Socrates ( Ecclehist. l. 1. c. 20, 21.) tells us,
August. in Eusebius. ecc hist. 595.
One Ischyras practiced privily such a kind of offense as deserved a hundred
kinds of death. 2. When he had never taken orders (it is said) he called
himself a Minister, and presumed to exercise the office of a Priest. 3. Nay
more, Athanasius accused him to have received no orders at all. 4. He raised
heavy slanders and reproaches against Athanasius, such as I scarce ever read on
before. 5. The Coluthians ( of which party Ischyras was) affirm, that the evil
of punishment comes not from God. 6. This Ischyras adheared to Eusebius us and
the Arian faction, as the other Meletians did; whom though Epiphan. will not
call Heretics but Sectaries, yet Socrates will, and gives us this account
thereof; Meletus, Bishop of a certain City in Egypt, ^^ccl. l. 1. c. 3.
beside sundry other causes, specially for that in time of persecution he had
renounced the faith, and sacrificed unto Idols, was deprived of his Bishopric
by Peter Bishop of Allendria, which suffered martyrdom under Dioclesian. 7. It
is said by Doctor Field and others, Of the Church, l. 3. c. 39
That Ischyras was deposed for being ordained by Coluthus a Presbyter; not
because such ordination was void in its own nature, but from the strictness of
the Canon. 8. If I might give my judgment upon the diligent perusal of the
whole story, I should say, That I fear irregular contentions, more then
irregular ordinations, caused such frequent deprivations; and that uncharitable
animosities, more then antiscriptural heresies, drew up such dismal charges
against each other.


And will not now adays some surmise, that these are the principles within,
when they see such practices without? But to conclude, according to the
history, what is the deprivation of a scandalous, heretical, schismatical,
unordained Ischyras, to justify the deprivation of holy, orthodox, peaceable,
ordained Presbyters? Reader, scorn not at these Epithets; for verily we will
submit to the severest trial before fit Judges; and those Presbyters that are
not found such, we will be content they should be deprived, on condition those
that are so may be confirmed.

4. Now I come to consider, whether the condemnation of Maximus by the
Constantinopolitan Council, and those that were ordained by him, will warrant a
condemnation of Presbyterian ordination? Gregory Nazianzen, the person chiefly
eoncerned in this transaction, assures us, that Maximus was a very wicked,
debauched person; thus he paints him; Poema de vita sua ad popul. Constant.
(...). Yea more he calls him (...): Yea the very Citizens of Constantinople
were mad at him, and accused his wicked life. 2. He invaded, without the
consent or knowledge of the Bishop, Clergy, or fraternity, the Church of
Anastasia in Constantinople, Gregory Nazianzen Bishop there being sick. 3. He
came in the night. 4. With many bribed persons. 5. Was ordained in the Church,
into which they brake, by certain Bishops of Egypt, and so out of their own
confine, sent by Peter Bishop of Alexandria (is Bishop Bilson calls them) But
(...), Perpetual Gov. 254.
and as Gregory Nazianzen faith of them. 6. He was ordained Bishop, In Apol.
339.
never being ordained Deacon or Presbyter before, as Doctor Blondel tells us. 7.
He was droven out of Constantinople by the people. 8. When he addressed himself
to the Emperor Theodosius, Greg. Na. Poem. ib.
he was repulsed with great wrath and formidable threats. 9. Yet not quiet, he
goes to Alexandria, and there drives Bishop Peter out of his Chair. 10. Though
it is true he was condemned by the Constantinopolitan Council, yet I find not
the least mention that he was ordained by Presbyters only, or for such
ordination that be was deposed. Take the Canon it self and make your best of
it: Propter totius indisciplinationis ^jus doctrinam quae Constantinopoli orta
est, Constant. Conc. Can. 6. secundum Merlin.
ut neque Maximus fuisse aut esse etiam putetur Episcopus, Statutum est neque
hi qui ab eo ordinati sunt qualemcunque gradum Clericatus obtineant, omnibus
scilicet quae circa cum vel ab eo gesta sunt, in irritum revocatis. Now where
is the word Presbyter to be found? or any syllable that should intimate any
Presbyterian ordination to be the reason of that censure? 11. It seems that
this was not the cause, in that all things done by Maximus were made void, as
well as his ordinations.


Now let any candid Reader judge whether the person in the Question have common
justice, when such persons and actions as these shall be drawn into example
against him?

3. Does it not well become these to pass over irregularities in others
ordinations, whose own are guilty of so many? how is it possible for any one to
condemn Presbyterian ordinations for irregularities and non-canonicalness, and
not condemn the Prelatical also? for is it not an irregularity to be
consecrated a Bishop without the election or consent of the People and
Presbytery? to ordain a man a Deacon and a Presbyter both in one day? and
without a public congregation, in a private chamber? and without the notice or
consent of the Bishop of the D^ocess? I might add, are Drunkards canonical? are
swearers? are cursers? are gamesters? are whoremongers? are Non preaching
Prelates and Priests? and are illiterate Mechanic Readers, etc?

4. As to the Statute Law of our Realm, is not that of capacity large enough to
admit to preferment those that have imposition of hands only from the
Presbytery? it seems so to be. 1. From the Act of the late Parliament,
confirmed in this present Parliament, ^egun May. 8.61. which confirms the
^udicial proceedings in the late interruptions, ^xe cised by virtue of the
authority from the late pretended powers, such as were many of the ordinations
by the Classes. 2. From the book of consecration, and the law establishing it,
neither of which have any clauses (as is asserted by a great Lawyer) that null
ordinations by other forms. 3. Because the Statute of 13. Eliz. c. 12. does
seem plainly to take in other ordinations then are according to our form; it
runs thus, Be it enacted by this present Parliament, that every person under
the degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend to be a Priest or Minister
of Gods holy Word and Sacraments by reason of any other form of institution,
consecration or ordering, then the form set forth by Parliament, or now used in
the reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lady, shall in the presence of the
Bishop, or Guardian of the spiritualities of some one Diocese, where he has or
shall have Ecclesiastical living, declare his assent and subscribe to all the
Articles of religion which only concern the confessions of the Christian faith,
and the Doctrine of the Sacraments. 4. It seems further undeniably clear that
the Law would allow such Ministers, in that formerly presentations,
institutions and inductions were granted to persons Presbyterially ordained,
and they so invested were deemed legal Incumbents, first fruits and tenths
received from them, and tithes paid to them; yea they had the very same benefit
of the law to sue for their tithes and profits, and to secure their propriety
as others had.
And certainly the law is not at all altered in this case. We judge of the
sense of the law by the uniform execution.

5. I beseech the Reverend Prelatists to consider whether the principles and
practices of the late Bishops do not oblige us to own Presbyterian ordination?
shall we not give occasion to some to account us apostatical, if we should
utterly disown such ordinations as the Church of England has hitherto owned?
and moreover if our Reverend Predecessors would join in communion at the
Sacraments, either formally by their presence, or virtually by their
approbation with those that were Presbyterially ordained, and we shall refuse,
do we not refuse to communicate with the Church of England? or the generality
of the chief Pastors, and infinite numbers of the members thereof?

6. What a lamentable blow would the nullifying of Presbyterian ordination give
unto the Church of God, especially the Reformed Churches? it is well known that
in the Reformed Churches their ordination is but Presbyterial; no not any
better in Denwark, or those other countries where they have Superintendents;
for those Superintendents have all their authority under Christ from the
Magistrate and Presbytery, without any Diocesans at all. And moreover some of
those Churches when they had Bishops, cast them out, and others when they were
offered, refused them: yet it is to be observed in how great concord we have
lived with them since the Reformation; and those that do now disown them, I
would have them speak out that the world may know them. Further, if the want of
Prelatical ordination will unchurch us, then greater faults will unchurch a
people much more; and then what will become both of the Eastern and Western
Churches?

7. Will not the nullifying of Presbyterian ordination give support to the
hypochondraick fears of melancholy persons, lest some in the Clergy should too
much indulge the unreformed Interest? it is well known that Bellarmines great
argument against the reformed Churches is hence, because they have no legal
Bishops, and therefore no Ministers, and therefore no Sacraments, no Churches;
now if any amongst us should deny the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists
idolaters, and acknowledge their Priests to be true Ministers, and their
administrations firm, but deny all the Protestant Ministers not Prelatical to
be true Ministers, and their administrations valid, who would think, etc.

8. What can be gained by creating this necessity of reordination? whether
Parsons, or people, or Parsonages? not Parsons, for its very observable that
multitudes will never submit to reordination; and of those that do submit, many
do it as to an unlawful thing on the Imposers part, though lawful on their own
part; and therefore they are not gained at all; and few other that I can hear
of. Not many of the people; for its most certain, that a huge number of the
sober people of this nation are much saded at the loss of those faithful
Ministers that submit not to reordination, and no small number saded at those
that submit; fearing that they will prove time-servers, and turn to any thing;
yea the more studious sort of the Gentry that read Bishop Usher, Bishop fuel,
etc. observe the variations from the old way, and are not well pleased; yea
many of the worst of all the people can see a difference betwixt drunkards and
sober men, painful Preachers and idle drones. But then, Parsonages and other
Livings be gained, there is no doubt: but then where shall we find men to
deserve them? To engross into Pluralists hands, and settle idle, drunken,
insufficient persons that will be content with little more then they deserve,
to the starving of poor son's, is abominable to God, Angels and men, and will
gratify none but the Devil himself and his off spring.

9. What will you do with those multitudes of Ministers that cannot submit to
reordination? It may be said, displace them. Oh what a sad and lamentable work
will that be, to ruin men, women and children, so many hundreds of families
for that which is disowned by all the Protestant Churches! But if they preach
in other Churches freely, being maintained either by their own temporalties, or
the charity of their Christian friends, or by renting farms, or the like, what
will you do with them then? silence them. Oh dreadful work! what silence
Christ's Ambassadors? whose Ministry he has sealed with the conversion of
souls, and who have been received as such by Gods faithful people, and the like
of whom have been always owned in England as well as elsewhere. Oh cruelty, to
take away the childrens bread and let them starve with hunger! but suppose that
they will not be silent, but will preach up and down either publicly or
privately, as they can meet with company, what will you do with them then?
imprison them. Oh sad still! what lamentable complaints will come then daily
both into the Court of heaven, as also into the Court on earth? who shall
maintain such multitudes in prison, or their families that while? what general
disatisfaction through relations, friendship and common compassion to honest
men in this suffering, will this beget? yea what if they preach in the prisons
to the people within and without? it may be, you will say, banish them. Oh
worse and worse! what, may not one kingdom hold on earth, whom one house shall
hold in heaven? how many of the Kings most peaceable, faithful, praying
Subjects, which are the best Subjects, will then be lost? how much of the
English treasure will then be transported? and what correspondencies with other
nations, and multitudes of such inconveniences will then follow? But it will be
the best way to put them to death. Oh worst of all! for how will the cry of
their blood come up into the ears of the Lord! and the report of their honest
peaceable lives, and comfortable deaths infect their very enemies, whilst they
see men debauched, lazy, and ignorant in their rooms! Oh that these things,
written not to provoke any to stubborness, but all to charity, might well be
considered, especially by those that so contrary to his Majesty's sweet
disposition, and gracious declaration, would trample their brethren under their
feet!

10. Who can produce any one suitable solid instance of reordination? where
shall we find one person for hundreds of years reordained, merely because his
ordination was by the Presbytery? verily he that shall undertake to produce
many such instances, and has accomplished his Herculean labor, shall be
crowned with laurel by my consent; but if such instances cannot be produced, as
I suppose they cannot, how then shall those that so much venerate antiquity,
affect a novelty? But it is said, the former ordination was no ordination, and
therefore there is no need to instance in reordinations. Let it be considered,
1. What is said against that by so many great ones. 2. Produce instances if you
can, of nullifying Presbyterian ordination, merely because such. 3. However,
what is imposed, is reordination to us, because we dare not disown our former
ordination. 4. However, let us have but the case stated and debated, that so
there may be satisfaction tendered as well as force;
I confess it has been matter of admiration to me, that so many should deny
such ordinations, and yet not one man that will write us one tract for our
satisfaction.

11. Would not an accommodation by the two great interests of the Nation in
this point by some general confirmation, be the most proper and profitable way
to the Church of God? 1. Has not the Kings most excellent Majesty promised
moderation, and prosecuted it also somewhat far? And have not the Nobility and
Gentry promised the like, and likewise the Clergy? And does it not become
faithful persons to remind their former declarations and professions, and to
perform them, least (as his Majesty was pleased to say to the present
Parliament (the generations to come should censure them as men of no fidelity?
2. Have not those called Presbyterians, been as faithful to his Majesty as any?
and suffered under the late usurped powers as well as any? and were they not
(in effect) the only instruments to bring in the Kings interest? when others
durst not so much as appear in many places, for fear of doing more hurt then
good: and must they now be trampled under feet by those whom they have
advanced? and ruined by those that they have raised from their ruins? Oh
horrible ingratitude! 3. Would not the rejecting of this Ministry be the
casting off the greatest and most lasting interest of the sober people of these
Nations, and so to proceed, what absolute impolicy? 4. And how certain is it
that so long as there is a conscientious people in England, there will be a
continuance of this interest! for what is it that they contend for, but to
unite Monarchy in the State; a Scripture-discipline, a preaching, powerful,
painful, holy Ministry, spiritual worship, and purity with simplicity of
administration in the Church? 5. How many Ministers, that in the late unhappy
wars were in the Schools, or Universities, and have never acted any thing
against either King or Bishops, but behaved themselves peaceably and
courteously to all men; how easily by moderation might these be gained? and how
quickly and pitifully are they generally lost for want of a due condescension?
some moderation would give life to their hopes, that it were possible for them
to perform the conditions of their desired liberty in the Ministry; but no
moderation creates despair, and forces them to believe it is as good suffer at
first as at last, for something as for nothing. 6. What beauty, what strength
would an accommodation add to the Church of God? yea and to the civil state
also? and what terror and amazement would it add to the Churches enemies? what
a security of men's legal propriety, what a promoting of charity, preventing of
contention, providing for immortal souls, rejoicing of hearts, would this
mutual condescension be? in this case of ordination, let the world judge
whether we have not gone two steps toward them, and whether their one toward
us would not unite. I should add more to this particular, but that it is so
excellently done already by Mr. Corbet in his interest of England, so quarreld
at, but unanswered by that Strange Respondent.


12. How commonly has a general Confirmation been used to prevent contentions
about irregular ordinations? if such a confirmation had never been planted
heretofore, it could not now have been expected; but having been granted in
greater provocations, it is to be admired that it should be denied in the less.
But let us proceed to some instances. In that first great Council of Nice,
Merlin de Council. Can. 8.
it was ordained that the Novatians (though as it is said by some, ordained by
Presbyters and in a schism) yet upon their return to the Catholic Church,
should have reconciliatory (...), and so remain in the Clergy. Thus the Canon
runs. Si qui voluerint venire ad Ecclesiam Catholicam ex Novatianis, placuit
sancto Concilio (...) ( reconciliatoria manus impositione^ accepta, says
Blondel) -- Hi vero qui ab illis veniunt, In Apol. P. 357.
si forte Episcopus fuerit, habeat sacerdotii dignitatem, nisi forte placeat
Episcope Catholico concedere ei etiam Episcopalis nominis honorem; si v^ro non
placuerit, inveniat ei locum, ut sit in parochia Coepiscopus, aut in Clero
Presby^r, and in civitate una non videantur duo Episcopi esse, and ille
omnimodo in clero ^^r manner videatur. To the same purpose, ^or ought I am sure
to the contrary, Tom. 7. Cont. Epist. Parm. l. 2. c. 13.
may ^e applied that of St. August. concerning ^he Dontatists. Et cum expedire
hoc videatur Ecclesiae ut Praepositi eorum venicentes ^^d Catholicam societatem
honores suos ibi non administrent, non eis tamen ipso ordinationis sacramento
detrahuntur, sed manent super eos, ideoque non eis in populo manus imponitur,
ne non homini sed ipsi sacramento fiat injuria; and si quando ignoranter fit,
nec animose defenditur factum, sed corrigitur cognitum, venia sacilius
impetratur: Deus enim noster non est dissentionis Deus sed pacis. Council.
Ilerden. thus determines, Qui contra decreta Canonum indiscrete clericos usque
nunc or dinaverunt, eis Dominus, vel sancta and Ecclesiastica charitas
ignoscat; amodo vero si in tali usu proruperint, decretum Canonum quod ciroa
little personas statutum est, id est ut nullum ordinare jam audeant, observetur;
vel qui deinceps ordinati fuerint, deponantur; hi vero qui tales hactenus
ordinati sunt, nullo tempore promoveantur. Here is rigor enough, yet not
exclusive of all charity. Yet further I shall cite a story out of M. Mason, De
Min. Aug. p. 169, 170.
to the extremest shame of uncharitableness. He urges against the Romanists,
that their Bonner, Bishop of London, Heath Archbishop of York; and Thurleby
Bishop of Ely, were ordained in a time when both ordainers and ordained were
pronounced both Heretics and Schismatics by the Pope of Rome, Sand. de
Schism. l. 2. p. 260. Unbish. Tim. and Tit. postc. p. 35. postc. p. 35.
and Cardinal Pool, when Queen Mary came in, Pontificis Legatus cum regnum a
priore schismate ac haeresi absolvisset, and Ecclesiae Catholicae
reconciliasset, Episcopos omnes qui sententia religionis erant Catholici, in
priore schismate factos confirmaret; ita pro legitimis habiti sunt Episcopis.
The same story I find in that Testimonial Writer Mr. Pryn, with two more. The
one is this, That sundry English Scholars who fled beyond the seas to preserve
their lives, liberty and religion, during her (i.e. Queen Mary's) bloody reign,
where they received ordination from Presbyters in many Protestant Churches of
Germany and Genevah, were not only allowed and presented to benefices as lawful
Ministers by our Bishops (...) Queen Elizabeth's reign, upon their re^^ England,
without any reordination, but one or two of them made Bishops without any
previous Episcopal ordination, and Archbishop Parker himself consecrated by
three Bishops and a Presbyter. The other story is of Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury, who coming from Rome, an. 670. confirmed Ceadda ordained before by
the Presbyter Monk of Hy Abbey. In the Synodical Epistle of the Council of Nice,
we have this eminent instance of the confirmation of those that were ordained
by Meletius, Hist. l. 8. c. 10, 24. Socrates in Harm. translat. l. 1. c. 6. p.
225.
who sacrificed to Idols in time of persecution, joined with the Arrians, and
was excommunicate of the Church, and (as Nicephorus says) took his Bishopric
to himself. There remained as yet touching the contumacy of Meletius, and such
as he had advanced to Ecclesiastical orders, to be determined of us, and what
the Council decreed touching him, thus understand; Well beloved brethren, the
Council being bent to deal with more clemency toward Meletius then he deserved
(for by just judgment he was worthy of no pardon) decreed that he should remain
in his proper City, that he should have no authority to make Ministers, no
authority to advance any to the Ecclesiastical function, neither to appear, nor
present himself in any other region, or in any other city for that purpose, but
only to retain the bare name and title of his office and dignity. They have
decreed further touching such as were entered into holy orders by the laying on
of his hands, that they after confirmation, with more mystical laying on of
hands, should be admitted into the fellowship of the Church, with this
condition, that they should enjoy their dignity and degree of the Ministry --
They who through the grace of God, and the means of your prayers were found no
maintainers of schism, but contained themselves within the bounds of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, void of all erroneous blemish, let these have
authority to consecrate Ministers, to nominate such as shall be thought worthy
of the Clergy, and in fine, freely to do all according to the Canon of the
Church. Let me add one instance more, Niceph. hist. l 11. c. 20.
and that shall be of Amphilochius, of whom it is storied, that he was
consecrated a Bishop by the Angels, which thing being known, Estius in Sentent.
Com. l. 4. in did. 25. p. 43.
certain Bishops without any further consecration admitted him to the Episcopal
function, bestowing upon him only a salutation and a kiss; and thus was a
doubtful ordination confirmed. By all which we see that good men and great men,
Politicians and Christians have thought such a general confirmation in the case
of doubtful ordinations, both lawful and needful, charitable and profitable;
and surely it may be imagined that when God shall give us divinely qualified
heads, and piously peaceable hearts, then shall we be ready to transcribe their
presidents into our practices, and draw their instanced confirmations into
healing imitations.

FINIS.

