INDULGENCE TO DISSENTERS IN RELIGION BY Suspending Penal Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical IS Destructive both to CHURCH and STATE.

Quid vanae sine moribus Leges proficiunt? Horat. LONDON, Printed for Richard
Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. 1673.

INDULGENCE TO DISSENTERS, etc.
Is Destructive both to CHURCH and STATE.
IT may justy seem strange to all reasonable and considering men, that those
Persons, who for these sundry years last part have under the pretense of a
thorough Reformation, but visibly to their own temporal advantage, endeavored
to bring the good People of this Nation into an hatred, as well of the
Ecclesiastical Government, as of the Forms of Gods public Worship and Service,
by so many good Laws heretofore established in this Land, and whereunto very
many of themselves had with their own hands formerly Subscribed: should now (in
stead of retracting their Errors, returning to their due Obedience, and
reducing the People, whom they have hitherto misled, to a righter understanding
of their Duty) expect to be gratified from the Church and State (to whom they
have done so much dis-service) by condescending to all their unreasonable
demands; and that under the pretense of tenderness of Conscience.

It had been well if these men, before they adventured to make their impetuous
and confident Applications in this behalf, had duly considered with themselves,

First, What little regard was had by themselves, whilst they were in power, to
the Consciences of such their Brethren, as continued steadfast to their honest
Principles of Loyalty to their undoubted Sovereign, and Obedience to the
established Laws: exposing their Persons to Beggary and contempt; and seizing
their Possessions to their own use, upon that only account.

Secondly, That if the pretension of tenderness of Conscience, and the giving
of ease and Satisfaction to such as so pretend should be admitted; the one as a
sufficient Plea for subjects to warrant their nonobedience to established Laws;
the other, as of it self a sufficient ground for Governors upon eyery such
pretension to change and innovate the said Laws; it could not be avoided, but
that in a short time all reverence to the Laws would be laid aside, the sinews
of Government so slackned, and Sovereign Authority it self grow into such
contempt; that Anarchy, confusion and ruin must needs ensue thereupon. For
there being the same reason of all Pretenders; whatsoever liberty, Indulgence
or concession shall be made, granted or allowed to any one Party or Faction so
pretending, the same in all equity ought to be made, granted and allowed to
every other Party or Faction (yea even the Papists themselves) that shall
pretend the same: whereof how sad the consequent will be, every man who will
but suffer himself to be master of his own Reason may easily understand.

Thirdly, In case any farther Concessions should be granted them, according to
their own desires, by improving this present Indulgence into an Act of
Parliament; what little assurance the Church and State can have of their future
peaceable demeanor and acquiescence in such Concessions: when as his Majesty's
gracious and unexampled Indulgence toward them, expressed in his late
published Declaration, has been so far from bringing them to any greater
degree of Moderation and Sobriety, as in all reason it ought to have done, that
it has rather (quite contrary to His Majesty's pious intentions therein) but
added to their obstinacy and insolency: as by their petulant expressions, and
malicious insinuations from the Pulpit and elsewhere does too evidently appear.

And indeed whoever considers the true state of things, cannot rationally hope
it should ever be otherwise; it being a certain truth (in which I am instructed
by a late learned Discourse of Eccl. Policy, p. 166.
Author) That a bare Indulgence of men in the free exercise of any Religion
different from the Public Profession, can lay no obligation upon the Party.
Perhaps when the rigor of a Law, under which they have smarted a while, is at
first relaxed, this indeed they may at present take for a kindness, because
it is really a favor in comparison to their former Condition; and therefore as
long as the memory of that remains fresh upon their minds, it may possibly
affect them with some grateful Resentments. But alas! these Affections quickly
vanish, and then what before was favor, is now become justice; and their Prince
did but restore them to their just and lawful Rights, when he took off his
Tyrannical Laws and Impositions from the Consciences of his best Subjects.
While those unjust Laws were in force, he oppressed and persecuted the People
of God; and therefore when he cancels them, all the kindness he is guilty of,
is only to repent of his Tyranny and Persecution, which is no savor, and by
consequence no Obligation.

Thus far that worthy Person; to whose Sentiments herein upon good grounds, I
do fully subscribe. For however these men may seem satisfied with this
Indulgence, (it being the most advantageous method that can at present be
employed) yet ere long (if Authority do not interpose) they will effectually
convince us; that it is not Indulgence, but a thorough Reformation, i.e. as sad
experience has explained it, a total extirpation of what ever is contrary to
their interest and designs, that each different party endeavors to establish.
The Reason of which procedure (as the same Id. p. 163.
Author informs me) is this fundamental Principle that runs through all their
Sects; That they are bound under pain of Eternal damnation to labor their
utmost to establish the Worship of God in its greatest purity and perfection:
and withal apprehending that way now established by Law defective and
superstitious, they cannot but be bound in Conscience to endeavor its utter
ruin and subversion.

This is a Point that would bear much enlargement, did I not rather desire to
draw it up briefly into this humble Petition, as it was formerly presented to
His most Excellent Majesty and his present Parliament, that They would please
in their great Wisdoms to consider,

Toleration disapproved? and condemned etc. p. 86.
Whether it be either Religion or Policy to tolerate those Persons or Parties,
which are persuaded in their Consciences, that it is a necessary incumbent
Duty, not only to hate and detest, but also by all those ways and methods which
they themselves shall think lawful, to weaken, alter, and extirpate the settled
Government of the Church? The which Alteration what influence it may have upon
the State, and how destructive it may prove to his Majesty's Crown and Kingdoms
(I hope it is no breach of the Act of Oblivion to remind them) the experience
of late years has suggested a very fatal conjecture. It will perhaps be here
urged (which is the only Objection worth our notice, and to which I now design
a full and satisfactory Answer)

That, Man being a rational Agent, acting from a free Principle of Election,
must be dealt with in a rational and moral way, i.e. by Persuasions and
Admonitions; and therefore, say they, when the Prelates and their Agents have
employed the best Rhetoric they can to exasperate Authority against those who
are Dissenters from them; we must then tell them, that it is neither the rigor
of Laws nor the severity of their Execution that can any thing avail them; they
have not to deal with Brutes, that are driven by force and compulsion; but with
Men, who have Consciences that must be satisfied in the Legality of their
Actings; and therefore it is the most prudent course; first, if they can, to
convince them in the Spirit of meekness; if not, then leave the success to God
by taking off the rigor of these Penal Laws, which may indeed make men
Formalists and Hypocrites, but can never work a real change upon their hearts,
or infuse true Grace into the Soul, To this I Answer;

That though Man be a rational Agent, Man a Sensitive Faculty as well as a
Rational; by the violent and irregular motions of which he is many times
hurried to such extravagancies, as would not only disturb, but, if not timely
prevented, even utterly subvert all Policy and Order; and therefore, that it is
the infinite care and good Providence of God, for the securing of humane
Societies, to ordain Principalities and Powers; by whose Authority are enacted
good Laws and Constitutions, which by Penalties annexed may restrain the wilful
violaters of them, who are commonly most led by the sway of their sensual
desires, and are usually more afraid of Sin for the sensible Evils which follow
it amongst men, i.e, for the Punishments that are inflicted upon their Bodies
and Estates, than for any kind of sentence that Reason or Religion can
pronounce against it.

Indeed were the Precepts of the Gospel as duly observed as they are generally
pretended, or would men be as readily Religious as we can tell them it is their
Duty to be so; could their Preachers as effectually make them temperate,
chaste, and just; honest and peaceable; and obedient to their Superiors; or at
least but restrain the contrary exorbitances, as they can show them a Text of
Scripture that requires such demeanours; could this be effected by their sole
Admonitions, there were then small need of a coercive Power. But since we live
not in Republica Platonis, but in face Romuli; Wherein, what through the
Corruption of humane nature; the Pride and Prejudice of men's Spirits, the
prevailing Interests of some Factions and Parties, the greatest part of the
Nation are miserably wanting in their Duty; living in a known disobedience to
the Laws both of God and Man. When Atheism, Profaneness and open Debauchery
shall vaunt it on the one hand; when Schism, Faction and Sedition shall insult
it on the other hand; when we are under such Circumstances as these, so as it
is in vain to think that empty talk should have any strong Operation upon the
Wills and Affections of these men, who have thus hardened their foreheads as
Brass against all Admonitions; I say things being brought to this pass, what
more effectual course can be taken than to call in the help of the Secular
Power: in all Humility to implore the aid and Assistance of His most Excellent
Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, in whose only power it is, next under
God, to reform these abuses. That they would seriously consider (and I beseech
God they may do it before it is too late) the destructive, yet natural
consequence of this Indulgence to Dissenters. For however fair and specious it
may be represented (the Devil himself is sometimes transformed into an Angel of
Light) yet there is methinks this following Reflection that should make it
irreconcilable to all true Lovers of their Country.

We cannot as yet be ignorant (which some men's Interest would have us to
forget) that three flourishing Kingdoms were lately involved in Confusion and
Blood: the best constituted Church in Christendom Schismatically defaced; and
the best of Kings destroyed and murdered by his Rebellious Subjects. Now if we
may be allowed to inquire into the Reason of these things, i. e. if it be
consistent with our Allegiance to prevent the like for the future; what was the
true Cause of all this Misery and Confusion?

Interest of England in matters of Religion p. 403.
The excessive Dominion of the Hierarchy, with the rigorous Imposition of
humane Ceremonies was accounted much of the malady of former times, which ended
in those deadly Convulsions of Church and State. Account of Proceedings, p. 7.
The strict imposing of the strict use of these Forms was the very thing that
disquieted these Nations, taking in the concomitant Ceremonies and
SVBSCRIPTION. But these things are too notoriously known to need any
enlargement: their own public Declarations, Remonstrances, etc. are sufficient
evidence if occasion shall requite.

And do we not now begin to repeat the same Methods, by which our ruin was at
first promoted? are there not tender Consciences to be satisfied, Dissenters in
Religion to be eased and Indulged? which whoever opposes shall he not, as
formerly, be voted an Enemy to His Majesty's Interest? And then must not evil
Counselors again be removed? by which Arts when a company of factious
designing men shall insensibly have tied the hands of the Loyal Party, and
thereby once more put themselves into a Capacity; what can we then expect but a
thorough Reformation, i. e. a total Extirpation both of Monarchy and
Episcopacy, as sad experience has already explained it?

Indeed, if Almighty God has designed us for ruin, (which our sins and
incorrigibleness have justly deserved) this Method will effectually promote it.
But if our gracious God have still a favor toward his People; and has a
purpose (notwithstanding our continued Provocations) to lengthen out our Peace
and Tranquillity; it is very much to be hoped, nay rationally to be expected,
that Authority will awaken; and by a vigorous and seasonable execution of Penal
Laws, convince all Offenders (both Protestant and Papist) that the Sword is not
born in vain. If this course be effectually taken, there is yet a well-grounded
hope, that both Church and State may flourish as formerly. But if this be
neglected I am then afraid (and I beseech God the event do not justify ray
fears) That This suspending of Penal Laws in Matters Ecclesiastical is but the
beginning of our sorrows.

The Reason of which sad apprehension is that known saying, Erranti nullus
Terminus. All the Art of man cannot possibly foresee, and consequently not with
any certainty prevent, the multiplied mischiefs of this intended Relaxation.
The heart of man is desperately wicked who can know it? and there is that
Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Revenge, carnal Interest in some factious
Persons, that if the Reins of Discipline be let loose (which have hitherto
restrained them) what other can be expected but our former Confusions, the
natural Center to which these things tend?

FINIS.

