The Pope's CURSE: Being an Excommunication OF THE Church of Rome, Against the
HERETICS IN ENGLAND.
BY the Authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and of the
Holy Canons of the Undefiled Virgin Mary, the Mother and Patroness of our
Savior; and of all the Celestial Virtues, Angels, Archangels, Thrones,
Dominions, Powers, Cherubins, and Seraphins, and of the Holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, and of all the Apostles and Evangelists, and of the Holy Innocents,
who in the sight of the Holy Lamb are found worthy to sing the new Song, and of
the Holy Martyrs, and Holy Confessors, and of the Holy Virgins, and of all the
Saints, together with all the Holy and Elect of God. We Excommunicate and
Anathematize him or them, Malefactor or Malefactors; and from the Threshold of
the Holy Church of God We Sequester them; that he, or they, be Tormented,
Disposed and delivered over with Dathan and Abiram; and with those that say to
the Lord God, Depart from us, we know not thy ways: And as Fire is quenched
with Water, so let the Lights of him or them be put out for evermore, unless it
shall Repent him or them, and make Satisfaction. (Look to your Bums Beloved,
for adad you will be all Duck'd.)

May the Father who Created Man, Curse him or them. May the Son who suffered
for us, Curse him or them. May the Holy Ghost who was given to us in Baptism,
Curse him or them. May the Holy Cross whom Christ for our Salvation Triumphing
over his Enemy, Ascended, Curse him or them. [I never knew the Cross was Alive
before] May St. Michael the Advocate of Holy Souls, Curse him or them. May all
the Angels, Archangels, Principalities and Powers, and all the Heavenly Host,
Curse him or them. May the Laudable number of the Patriarchs and Prophets,
Curse him or them. May St. John the chief Forerunner and Baptist of Christ,
Curse him or them. May St. Peter and St. Paul, and St. Andrew, and all other
Christ's Apostles, together with the rest of the Disciples, and the four
Evangelists, who by their Preaching Converted the universal World, Curse him or
them. May the Holy and wonderful company of Martyrs and Confessors, who by
their Holy Worship are found pleasing to God Almighty, Curse him or them. May
the holy Quire of holy Virgins, who for the Honor of Christ have despised the
things of the World, Curse him or them. May all the Saints, who from the
beginning of the World to everlasting Ages are found to be the Beloved of God,
Curse him or them. [ Coleman, Sibley, and the Jesuits which was Hanged at
Tyburn for Treason, it is Thirteen pence halfpenny to a Crucifix, that they
are Canonized for Saints before now.] May the Heavens and the Earth, and all
the Holy things remaining therein, Curse him or them. May he or they be Cursed,
where ever he or they be, whether in their House, or in their Fields, or in the
Highway, or in the Path, or in the Wood, or in the Water, or in the Church,
[Or at Mass] May him or them be Cursed, in Living, in Dying, in Eating, in
Drinking, in being Hungry, in being Thirsty, in Fasting, in Sleeping, in
Slumbering, in Waking, in Walking, in Standing, in Siting, in Lying, in
Resting, in Pissing, in Shitting; [O brave Pope!] in Blood-letting; may he or
they be Cursed in all the Faculties of their Body; may he or they be Cursed
Inwardly, and outwardly; in the Hair of his or their Heads; in his or their
Brain: May he or they be Cursed in in the top of his or their Head; in the
Temples; in the Forehead; in their Ears; in their Eyebrows; in their Cheeks;
in their Jaw-bones; in their Nostrils; in their Fore-teeth, or Grinders; in
their Lips; in their Throats; in their Shoulders; in their Wrists; in their
Arms; in their Hands; in their Fingers; in their Breasts; in their Hearts, and
in all the Interior Parts, to the very Stomach? in their Reins; in their
Groins; in the Thighs; in their Genitals; in their Hips; in their Knees; in
their Legs; in their Feet; in their Joints, and in the Navel: May he or they be
Cursed in all their Joints, from the top of the Head, to the sole of the Foot,
may there not be found any Soundness in him or them.

May the Son of the Living God, with all the Glory of his Majesty, Curse him or
them; and may Heaven, with all the Powers which More therein, rise against him
or them, to Damn him or them, unless it shall repent him or them; or, that he
or they shall make Satisfaction, Amen, Amen; so be it.

(Your Humble Servant Pope Innocent.)

Printed at Amsterdam in the Year 1688. For Jeremiah Lovechurch, at the Sign of
the three Bibles in Protestant-Lane.


