A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ASSIZES HELD IN WARWICK. August the First, 1681.

By John Inett M. A. late of University College in Oxon. now Vicar of Nun-Eaton
in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

TO John Chamberlain Esquire High Sheriff of the County of WARWICK. AND TO Sir
Charles Holt, Sir John Knightlow, Sir John Bridgman, Sir Charles Leigh, Sir
Andrew Hackett, Sir William Underhill, Sir Arthur Caley. And the rest of the
Gentlemen of the Grand Jury at the last Assizes.

Gentlemen,
HAd not your Commands prevailed over my inclinations, the ensuing Discourse
had never been more public than from the Pulpit; but deeming it ill manners to
dispute the justice or expedience of your Commands, and Obedience better than
Sacrifice, I resign to the Sentence you have passed; nor will I offer at an
Apology for that which has your Commands to publish, to vouch your approbation,
nor so much distrust your goodness as to doubt of pardon for this Address, to
implore your Patronage and Protection of a discourse of Righteousness, which by
your Authority is made public, and by your Example may be made useful; whom
God has placed on high, on purpose to give measures to the Piety, and Loyalty
of your Country; and from whom all inferiors must learn to distinguish Zeal
from Faction, Religion from Grimace, and steady from pretended Loyalty: And
that Country is happiest where the virtue, and consequently the reputation and
the interest of the Gentry are greatest: But where Vice that great Leveller
undermines their interest, and the Populace supplants them in their power, the
mischief is like the wounds of Conscience, insupportable, and with the wise man
we may say, who can bear it? I have no more to add but my prayers to Almighty
God, that from your Examples, your Country may learn to fear God and honor
the King; that Your light may so shine before the common people, That they
seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven; that you
may be Examples of Piety and Loyalty of succeeding Ages; that you may Eternize
the honor of our Country, and your names be had in everlasting remembrance:
Which shall ever be the Prayer of

Gentlemen, Your most Obedient and most Humble Servant, John Inett.

Prove. XIV. part of the 34. Verse. Righteousness exalts a Nation, etc.
IT IS said of the Ancient Romans, that they never began an action of any weight
and moment till they first consulted with their Gods; that they never sat down
to besiege a City till they had first invited the tutelary Gods to forsake it:
And fearing the prevalence of these their charms, 'twas customary with the
Nations against whom they fought, to offer a kind of violence to their Deities,
chaining their Statues to secure their presence and protection. The Roman
thinking no valor enough to take a City not deserted by the powers above: And
the Barbarian no courage sufficient to defend it when forsaken by them. Though
these are deplorable Monuments of humane frailty, and show us what wild
extravagancies we should run into, had we not a more glorious light than that
of Nature to be our Guide: Yet withal it demonstrates a reverence and
veneration to Religion imprinted by the hand of Nature; that the common notices
of Reason taught the Gentile World, that the glory of a People; the success of
Armies, and grandeur of Nations depend upon it: and can our thoughts be less
honorable, our sentiments less generous of that Religion which exacts the most
strict and regular justice, the most frank and universal charity; that commands
our Brother should stand as fair in our love as our nearest interest; that
derives its Being from the Eternal God, and by a series of Miracles has been
owned by the powers above? A Religion so highly conducive to the peace of
Societies, the interest of Nations, and the common good of mankind, that if
Life and Immortality were not brought to light through the Gospel, there is
enough to recommend it to the protection and care of Magistrates: which
naturally tends to heal the dis-orders of State, to make Subjects peaceable and
obedient, Armies successful, Princes Wise, Beloved and Glorious, and is that
Righteousness which exalts a Nation.

Nor is all this speculation, or the fond Idea of a cloystered genius, nor
Melancholy paradox of a thinking brain, but the result of experiment, and a
Maxim received in the politics of the wisest King: It Is a dictate from the
Throne of Solomon, and a foundation for the most happy Government laid down by
a Prince that had the Spirit of Wisdom for his Guide; it is he affirms, That
Sin is a reproach to a People, and Righteousness exalts a Nation.

The strength and weight of which assertion will be more clearly discerned if
we first inquire into the several notions of Righteousness.

First, Righteousness is sometimes taken for that distributive justice, which
consists in the enacting and due execution of Laws, for a terror to evil doers,
and a praise and encouragement of those that do well; and is so fixed to the
authority of the Magistrate, that what is justice when it has the stamp of a
power, may be a sin when acted by a uncommissioned hand. Heaven has determined
that he which imbrues his hands in another blood, shall atone for it with his
own: But has not left it a common right of mankind to execute wrath upon those
that do evil; but so annexed it to the authority which bears the sword, that
the death of the same Criminal that is justice by the Magistrate may be murder
by a private Person. And it is happy for us that the King of Kings has put his
sword into no other but his Vicegerents hand; that Power is not the standard of
Equity; that the greedy mind is not the judge of Right and Wrong; that
vengeance belongs unto the Lord, and by himself, or by his Substitutes, he
alone repayes. And this Righteousness is to the body Politic what the blood is
to the body Natural, the public health and vigor are preserved by a due
circulation of it; if it be too hot and run too high, the body is in a Fever;
if Phlegmatic and cold and run too slow, it is a Symptom of languishing and
consumption; but then the body is sound, when Righteousness and Mercy go hand
in hand, when they kindly mix together, and truth looks down from Heaven.

Secondly, But as Righteousness is taken for that justice which respects the
Magistrate, and is styled distributive, so it is taken for the second species
of justice, which respects all men in their conversation and dealings one with
another, and is by the Schools termed commutative. How much it is the duty of
all men especially of all Christians to do justly: How far Trade and Commerce,
and consequently the strength and glory of Nations do depend upon the justice
of her Subjects; are things so obvious that I presume it needless to insist
upon them, and shall pass to the third notion of Righteousness, and thus:

Thirdly, Righteousness is taken for that Piety that Heaven does justly
challenge from us, and is but another word for Religion, and in the sense of
our Savior, Christianity is nothing else but that Righteousness which does
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. Now because to be thus
righteous is a duty incumbent on us all, and this notion of Righteousness
comprehends both the other, I shall consider it in this comprehensive sense,
and in order unto that betake my self to the clearing of this Proposition which
the words of my Text very naturally offer.

1. Prop. That Religion tends to promote the interest and honor of Nations,
and the peace and welfare of mankind.

'Twould not become this place to attempt a survey of the maxims of Mathaivell,
to offer at an essay to expose Cardinal Palivicini's carnal policy, or show the
impracticableness of Vtopias Laws, nor worth time to attack the foundation of
Mr. Hobbs his Book de Cive; because the greatest votaries to Politics, that
sacrifice Heaven to interest, and make Conscience truckle to Reason of State,
yet do not pretend to the Conduct of Nations without recommending a show of
Virtue, and at least the Garb and Grimace of Religion. It Is enough therefore,
if without attempting, to show the weakness of these frames of policy, it be
made appear that Religion promotes the interest and honor of all Societies, by
showing, first, what it is that disturbs the felicity and peace of mankind, and
from what causes the ruin and subversion of Nations are derived: And,
secondly, the tendency of Religion to promote the welfare of mankind, the
peace, the interest, and the honor of Nations.

First, Let us inquire what it is that subverts Government, and undermines the
peace and welfare of States and Kingdoms. 'Twas Sin that invaded the joys of
Paradise, and first introduced misery into the world; 'twas that which once did
curse, which once did drown, and shall at last in flames consume it. And it is
her fruitful womb that diffuses misery throughout the Universe, nor need we
look further to find the original of these infelicities which disturb the
tranquillity and peace of mankind; but trace them home, and without the wisdom
of Solomon we shall find the true Mother of the Child; their lines and features
are so much alike, that the suffering very naturally carries us to a prospect
of the sin that brings it. Thus that the punishment might bear resemblance with
the sin, the earth divides to punish the Schism of Dathan and Abiram; and they
perished by fire, that with unhallowed hands snatched fire from the Altar.
Sodomes unnatural flames bring new from Heaven to consume it. The sword
punished the cruelty of Benjamin; and Achan's Sin pursues him through all the
Tribes, and at last seizes on the Criminal. If David's ambition carry him on to
number the people, judgment strikes directly at his darling sin, and cures his
pride by lessening the number he prided in. Follow Israel down to Egypt, and
their entertainment there carries us back to their inhumanity in selling Joseph
thither. View them in Babylon under the yoke of their new Lords the Assyrians,
the place minds us of the Idolatry they learnt from thence, and their captivity
points at their defection from their lawful Sovereign: And so legible are our
sins in the miseries that attend us here below, that he that runs may read. But
to pass by the consequences of sin so fatal unto Nations, because it may be
pretended that these are but the Accidental and not its Genuine and true born
issue; let us inquire if Sin may not ruin a Nation, though the Divine justice
stand neuter, and Judgment does not pursue it.

And here though God should withhold his hand, we shall find Nations may be
ruined by the sins thereof. Examine the mischief of Injustice, behold the black
train of Avarice, the Trophies of Discontent, the direful consequences of
Division; and what a flood of misery! what a deluge of sorrow does attend them!
View the sacrifices to Ambition, tell the number of Victims to that peevish
sin: How does that, like the Druids Deity, gorge it self with blood! And how
many lives to every year fall Sacrifices to the Ambition of Princes! And how
uneasy is it to its native soil, and to all the neighboring Kingdoms, when it
seizes upon a Throne! How ungrateful are the cries of the Orphan and the Widow,
there there is oppression in a Province! How meagre is the countenance, and how
Ghastly the looks of the poor, when his face is ground by the injustice of the
rich! See the consequences of discontent, when most retired it makes at least
one man miserable, but how often does it invade the peace of Kingdoms, imbroyle
Nations, and give Being to all the disorders that may entitle Kingdoms wretched
and unhappy! Such too are the issues of Division, to which we owe the Tragic
stories of intestine Wars. Let us compute the Massacres, sum up the Battles,
and lay together the fatal Periods and Revolutions of Men and Kingdoms derived
from no other cause, and 'twill be needless to draw together other Arguments to
prove Sin the Author of humane misery, the reproach of a People, the ruin of
Kingdoms, and the bane of Nations. And if it be Sin which ruins, by the rule
of contraries we are taught to conclude with Solomon, that Righteousness exalts
a Nation; which will yet be more clear from the second thing to be inquired
into, viz.

Secondly, The tendency of Religion to promote the interest and honor of
Nations and the peace and welfare of mankind. All Societies are made up of
individuals, and each man is capable of a twofold happiness, Personal and
Political; the one as man, the other as a member of a body Politic, and that
is most properly accounted subservient to the public weal, which contributes
to the felicity of mankind in this twofold estate. I shall therefore first
inquire how.

First, Righteousness tends to the common good of Nations, by contributing to
the happiness of each particular person, of which they are constituted and do
consist.

It Is essential to humane nature to contend for happiness, that the highest
degree of that we are capable of here below, is the result of Virtue and Piety,
is so notorious that the confessions of its enemies is enough to supersede all
further arguments. Ask the man who feels the sting of a guilty conscience, that
knows what it is to carry a Tormentor in his own bosom, to be always harrassed
with the frightful appendages of his own Vice; and he will soon resolve us who is
the happy man. Nay, take the jolly sinner that not only bid^ defiance to
Almighty God, but to the infirmities that attend upon other men, take him when
his Palate is cloyed, and his pleasures palled, when he has compared a Surfeit
and a Debauch together, and he will readily award for Temperance. But if he carry
on the Frollick, and resolutely for a time maintain a Paradox, but follow him
to the place where he is to take his leave of the World, and so can have no
temptation to belie his bypast minutes, there he retracts his erring
Sentiments, and with his last breath proclaims the good, the happy man; whose
pleasures are the joys of Temperance, and a holy Conscience, who hears not the
Orphans cries sound his injustice in his ears, and feels not the smart of a
wilful unrepented folly. And if the joys of good men were legible in their
faces, and with the eyes of sense we could but see the serenity, peace, and
complacency which hovers over virtuous actions; or view the holy man surrounded
by the soft and gentle whispers of the blessed Spirit, proclaiming Jubilee to
his Soul; or could the world be privy to the kind embraces of a holy conscience
preaching peace to the righteous, and gladness to the true of heart; the most
obdurate would retract, and it would be the common Contention, who should be
the most profitable servant to the Almighty, the most useful Votary to
Religion, and stand the fairest Candidate for Heaven. Besides all this, those
satisfactions which are the objects of sense, and stand high in the eulogies of
vicious, as well as good men, are the Children of Religion; to that we owe our
security from Violence, Rapine and Oppression; to that rejoicing under our own
Vine, and resting undisturbed under a Fig Tree of our own. Naboth enjoyes his
Vineyard, Vriah his Beloved, the Prince maintains his Right, and the Subject is
easy and undisturbed in his Lawful Property, when Religion is the common
Guardian; for our Secular interest, our Temporal peace, and all the blessings
which indear this present life are but feuditaries to it. Would thou have thy
honor unstained, thy person safe, and thy right uninvaded, when Righteousness
rules the Scepter there needs no Guard but Innocence. And what is thus rivited
to the private interest of Prince and Subject, can have no other but an
auspicious influence upon Kingdoms, and cannot be of meaner use than to exalt a
Nation: To which it tends a second way, and that is,

Secondly, By acquiring it an honorable esteem among other Nations. He that
will examine the unanimous sense of History, and the common sentiments of men,
shall still find a due veneration to the powers Divine, and exact and regular
justice set first in the Characters of an honorable and happy people. When
these flourish, not a Poet but calls it the Golden Age; and all Historians
however loose themselves, yet are loud in the applause of Justice, and are at
pains in their annals to perpetuate its Fame, and make the remembrance of it
live for ever.

This was the Basis of the Roman greatness, and the reputation of their
Generosity, and Religion gained them more Conquests than their Valor and their
Arms: whilst their courage vanquished Cities, their Religion carried its
Conquests to the very hearts, and overcame the men. And that Prince is ever
greatest whose Dominion is in the hearts of his Subjects. But then did their
Eagles begin to droop, their success to flagg, when Numa's spirit of Religion
was lost, and their Ancient justice and integrity began to fail; 'twas the
Punick Faith that frustrated their Valor, and their want of Religion that
stopped the progress of their Arms. When the justice and fidelity of a Nation
are rightly blemished, upon which all Leagues and Contracts, all Trade and
Commerce do depend, the credit is lost, it is abandoned by all other Nations,
left to confederate with its own vices, and combat with the anger of Heaven,
and the common contempt and scorn of men. For no Nation can be great in the
reputation of others, where there is not justice and fidelity to recommend it
to their Friendship and Alliance, and where these are wanting, All the world
looks upon such a Nation as God Almighty taught the Israelites to do upon
Egypt, as a Reed that may break or fail, may pierce or wound, but is unfit to
support the trust of another Kingdom. But reputation and honor are the shadows
of Righteousness, and do as certainly and as naturally attend upon at as the
shadow does upon the substance, or the rays, those Children of the Sun, upon
the Father of lights. And let the Champions of Atheism produce a single
instance of any Nation that truly honored God, that was not great in the
estimation and love of men. Besides giving it an honorable place in the esteem
of Foreigners, there is a Third way that Righteousness exalts a Nation; And
this is,

Thirdly, By reccommending the Government to the love of all its Subjects, and
making it their interest to promote its peace and welfare. When the Religion of
a Nation is engaged for the security of every individual; and the public
justice makes the Tradesman's shop as secure as if it were a Fort impregnable;
when it eases the cares of the laborious Husbandman, and is a Guard to the
Farmers Folds, his Barns, his Flocks, his Herds, and Fields; and gives liberty
to every Subject to rejoice in the fruits of his own labor, every man has a
share in the prosperity and peace of the public, and is bound by his interest
to promote them; and his private being incorporated with the public welfare,
he must recede from his own advantage, and renounce his private interest before
he acts the Traitor to the public. I cannot say, that this shall make Fools or
Madmen wise; that it shall heal the discontents, or eat out the proud flesh of
a Nation; that it shall make the Sons of Belial good Subjects; that it shall
work upon those whose very mercies are cruel, whose Principles make them
Traitors, and whose Religion is propagated by blood; that it shall sweeten the
nature of a discontented Achitophel, or reconcile those to the Government, that
think well of none but which is managed by themselves; that it shall take off
Absalom from making his Court to the rabble, and make him dutiful when the
hopes of a Kingdom bids him disobey: But with modesty and reason it may be
affirmed that where the Divine justice is made a pattern for the humane; where
laws are just and good, and these laws the rule of public justice: each
Subject stands bound by his particular interest to promote the peace and
welfare, and so far as in him lies exalt the honor of the Nation. Besides
these, there is yet a fourth way, viz.

Fourthly, by preventing the judgments that sin brings to ruin, and engaging
Providence to defeat the designs of ill men to undermine, a Nation. In the case
of Eli God has taught us that He will honor those that honor him, and those
that despise him shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2.30.

This is a common Rule to Providence in his dealings with mankind, and although
in the judgments of God, many things are unaccountable and past finding out;
yet generally his revealed is a rule to his secret Will, and he scourges those
that by their sins rise in Rebellion against him, and is their Savior and
Deliverer that fight his battles against their sins and follies; and no better
reason can be assigned for the periods of Families, subversion of Nations, and
those mighty Revolutions in the World, which swell so many volums of History.
He that will consider by what ways Empire and Dominion have circled from one
Kingdom to another, but look into the Origin of the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian
and Roman greatness, from what mean beginnings, and by what steps they grew up
into the great Monarchies of the World: And again, how unaccountably they
mouldred, sunk under their own weight, and fell back again to their mean
Originals; and how Prosperity and Grandeur wander from one Nation to another
People, must needs be sensible by whom it is that Kingdoms Triumph and Nations
prosper, who it is that pulls down one, and sets up another; nor need we run
further than the common observation of Historians, of the growth and decay of
Nations; or that account of it which God himself has delivered to the World, to
be resolved that it is sin makes the Rod to scourge the people, and
Righteousness is the most prevailing motive with the Almighty goodness to
defend them; nor do the Scriptures render any other account of the Halcion days
or various Scenes of misery in the Jewish Nation. But to examine all the
instances to this purpose, laid down in Holy Writ, or amass together the
examples in profane story, would require a Volume rather than a Sermon; and as
the Apostle says in another case, may be said in this, Time would fail me to
tell them.

It Is enough that every happy Government is built on justice; that
Righteousness is Guardian to the estate and honor of the great, the Champion
of the poor, and the Advocate of the Fatherless and Widow; that it cements and
preserves the bonds of peace and love; that it confines Prerogative and
Privilege to their proper Channels; that our Names, our Persons and our Beds are
defended by it, and is the best security and defense to Prince and People.
Certainly then, that which cuts off those Sins, which make the Almighty
Proclaim War with a Nation; that which tends to the Tranquillity and Peace of
every Soul; that which indears the Government to every Subject; that which
makes the World court the Friendship and Alliance of a People; that which
recommends a Nation to the protection and care of Providence; of such a
Righteousness we may well say, that it serves the interest, exalts the honor
of a Nation, and tends to promote the peace and welfare of mankind: Which is
the assertion at first laid down, and being now proved, these Two practical
Conclusions naturally follow.

1. Pract. Conclus. That he is a enemy to his own peace and security, and the
public welfare, that neglects the holy offices of Religion. For if all should
pursue the examples of those that are already Atheistical and Profane, and
Religion perish in the common Deluge of profaneness; this would put an end to
the old distinction of, Mine and Thine; Right would be but an empty and
insignificant word; and the claims of Allegiance and Property by Prince and
People sink to nothing. This would revive Lillburns name in a new race of
Levellers; and it would certainly be one of the first effects of a general
profaneness, to parcel out their estates and level their persons, with the
common Crowd, that now by the greatness of their examples give countenance to
the contempt of Religion, by which their persons are secured, and their estates
are guarded; and that reply once made to a Person of Honor, rallying at
Religion, That if there were no such thing, it would be no sin to stabb his
Grace, as his Father had been stabbed by another hand, teaches us how much each
man's security does depend upon Religion, how much it is each man's private, as
well as the public interest to promote it; and consequently how much he is an
enemy to his own peace and security, as well as the public good, that is not a
friend to Religion: And from hence arises a second practical Conclusion.

2. Conclus. That they are the best Patriots that are most Solicitous to do
good; and by their practice and examples, encourage righteousness in a Nation.
This is the way to make a Kingdom flourish, to establish it a renown great and
lasting; to make it amiable to its Subjects, admired by its friends, feared by
its enemies, and prosperous under the conduct and care of Providence, and with
the Psalmist may we say happy are the people that are in such a case, yea
blessed are the people who have the Lord for their God. Now that we may be this
happy people, and ours that Nation which Righteousness does exalt, let us
reflect upon the whole in order to our practice; and because God and our
Country command every one of us to do our parts in our several stations, I
shall conclude with a particular Application of this general discourse to our
selves.

It Is not the business I am called hither for to read Lectures of Justice to
you (my Lords) whose great experience, wisdom and knowledge in our Laws, make
you perfectly acquainted with the true and proper measures of it. But there
needs no Apology to Christian Magistrates, for the Gospel meek and humble
Method of Address, if as an Ambassador of Christ I presume to beseech Your
Lordships to maintain the glory of that God, by whom the higher powers are
ordained; the dignity of that Sacred Person you represent, and the honor of
the places which you fill; to persevere in that integrity which has made the
English Bench so glorious, and in your wise distribution of justice to fill up
all the measures of men, That fear God, hate Covetousness, and honor the King.
May you imitate that God you adore, in pleading the cause of the Fatherless and
the Widow, and righting those whose innocence and necessities recommend them to
your care; may your justice run down in such mighty streams, as may at once
bear down the reigning sins of the Nation, and the malice of your enemies
together; may your Righteousness make the Scarlet too great for envy, and stop
the mouths of those that blaspheme God and the King, and watch for your
halting; may every Sentence from your mouths, every stroke from your hands, so
entirely quadrate with our Laws, which are just and good, that discontent may
it self not blast your actions, nor dare to call them by the hated name of
Arbitrary: May your Righteousness be a terror unto Vice, an encouragement to
Virtue; may it bring glory to God, reputation to your selves, and exalt the
honor of our Nation.

But now lest any think justice the duty of Magistrates alone, and no
Righteousness but that of Governors requisite to exalt a Nation: I must
enlarge to show the duties our Religion, and our Country challenge from every
true English man, and every Orthodox Protestant.

Who is not sensible of that cloud which hangs over our heads, and is ready to
dissolve in showers of vengeance? How the Conclave contrives, and what active
emissaries it imploys to ruin and undo us? How our home bred quarrels lay us
open to their malice, and prepare a way to the Romans to take our place and our
Nation from us; and how much danger we are in, of their entrance at that gap
which we have opened by our own divisions: This is that we are all sensible of,
and the cry of the Kingdom is that of the disciples in the storm, we perish, we
perish; and yet whilst with them we own, nothing but the Lord can save us,
whose Piety stands in the Gap, whose Repentance invites the Salvation of our
God? But on the contrary, whilst we behold Church and State ready to be
sacrificed, how generally do we forget that iniquity is the ruin of a people,
and make no other use of our danger, but maliciously to reflect on the conduct
of our Governors? Thus, Isaac like, we carry the fuel though marked out our
selves to be the sacrifice, and by a conjunction of sin and folly, prepare a
Funeral pile for our selves, the best Religion, and the most excellent frame of
Government.

We, like David, are in a strait, seem to have nothing but choice of Plagues
laid before us; either to give up our Necks to the Roman Yoke, which our
Fathers were not able to bear; or else let the Kirk bore our ears to mark us
for her slaves, and with a solemn League fasten us to the stool of Repentance:
and our sins have brought us to such a pass, that there seems a fatal necessity
of the one, or other, or else to be ground betwixt them both. Though all this
be come upon us, we may add with the Prophet, who lays it to heart! Good God!
what shall we then do, or whither shall we fly! will thy goodness deliver,
which we have so much abused! or thy hand save, that is justly stretched forth
to punish us! is not vengeance thine, and wilt not thou repay! can our sins,
that are before thy Throne to cry for vengeance, come down unanswered! or our
horrid impieties escape thy hand! wilt not thou visit us for our sins, and will
not thy Soul be avenged upon such a people as this: That use thy forbearance,
thy mercies and deliverances, to encourage and heighten our sins, and
perpetuate our Rebellion against thee; that despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities; that use the clemency of a Prince to libel and reproach him, and fly
in the face of Government; plenty to fat themselves for the day of slaughter;
and peace but to gain time to prepare for war, and make the sword sharper for
the day of battle. Is this the way to make a Kingdom flourish, to invite
Foreigners to say we are a wise and understanding people, or buoy up the
sinking Credit of our Country? Is this the way to invite the Papist to forsake
his errors, to bring him to the embraces of the Protestant faith, and confess
there is no Religion that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as ours? And
is this the Righteousness that will exalt our Nation? No! it is these impieties
that are a reproach to the name of Protestant! it is these provoke the Gallick
cruelty to attempt to root out that Name from under Heaven; and affronts we
daily see put upon our Government, certainly help to kindle the rage of France
against our Brethren there. It Is these are a shame to the truth we own, a
dishonor to our God and our Country, and unless repented of, will certainly
be the ruin of our Souls, our Religion and our Nation.

What made Israel captive in Babylon, what gave them up to the Conquest of
Pompey, and to a final decision by the hand of Titus? what brought that
miserable bondage the poor Christians of the East labor under, and submitted
those once flourishing Churches to the Turkish power? If it were their sins, we
have as strong grounds to believe it just with God to take away his Gospel from
us, to permit Superstition to invade, and Idolatry once more to overrun us; and
as often as we contemplate how fatal sins have been to other people, and with
an impartial eye look upon our own, we must with our Savior cry out, that
except we repent, we shall all likewise perish.

I must therefore beseech you, Brethren, by all that is Sacred, by all that is
dear to wise and good men, for your Souls, your Religion, and your Countries
sake, that your light may shine before men, that with good works, and holy
lives you may adorn the Protestant faith and name, that you forsake your sins,
and turn unto the Lord your God; it is this must stop the wrath which is gone
out against us, stay the hand of the destroying Angel, and prevail with God,
that neither our Religion, our King, nor our selves may perish. Let us fore set
our selves to live up to that Religion which God has planted, and by a series
of miracles has preserved amongst us. Let us confute the Papist by living
better lives, manifest that we have a better Religion, by being better
Christians, and better Subjects. Let us put on the Armor of God, and not only
name the Name of Christ, but depart from all iniquity. Thus God will fight
against those that fight against us, and our Religion will stand impregnable
notwithstanding all the designs of men. Let me therefore beseech you, Brethren,
in this day of trial, when ruin impends, and judgment threatens; not to think
(as the practice of too many is) to excuse your neglect of Piety and Repentance
by imputing all our dangers to the ill conduct of our Governors; do not think
your love or zeal to your Religion, or your Country consists in reviling of
authority, or speaking evil of the Rulers of the people; but let us look at
home, correct the sins that lodge within our own walls, strive whose life shall
be the greatest ornament to our Religion, who shall be first in the way to
Heaven, and who fittest for the Crown of Glory and Immortality, and the
ineffable felicities of the Saints in light; thus at once you will serve your god,
your Religion, your Country, and your selves, and by the same methods promote
the honor of the former, and the interest and felicity of the latter. Thus
Heaven and Earth, your Present and your Eternal interest unite, to command your
utmost industry, to make Righteousness beloved, and practiced, Virtue sacred,
and Religion obeyed and honored. Thus shall we be the people in the happy
case, who have the Lord for our God. Thus may we be happy here, and blessed
hereafter. Thus that Righteousness which makes this Kingdom and our Religion
flourish, will make us shine at last like Stars in Glory, and that which exalts
our Nation, will exalt us all at last to Heaven.

FINIS.

