AN ACT For the Better Securing the Government by Disarming PAPISTS.



DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for the better Securing the Government by Disarming Papists.
FOR Preserving the Public Peace, and Quieting the Kingdom from all Dangers of
Insurrection and Rebellion for the Future.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled; And by Authority of the same, That all Papists within
this Kingdom of Ireland, shall before the First Day of March next Ensuing,
Discover and Deliver up to some Justice or Justices of the Peace, or to the
Mayor, Bailiff, or Head Officer of the County, City, Town Corporate, or place,
Respectively, where such Papist shall Dwell and Reside, all their Arms, Armor
and Ammunition of what kind soever the same be, which are in his or their Hands
or Possession, or in the hands of any other Person or Persons in Trust for
them, or at their Disposition, Notwithstanding any Lycense or Permission for
Keeping the same heretofore granted. And that from and after the said First Day
of March, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Ninety Five, it shall and may be Lawful
for any two or more Justices of the Peace within the Limits of their
Jurisdiction and Authority; And to all Mayors, Sheriffs, and Chief Officers of
Cities and Towns Corporate in their Liberties by themselves, or by Warrant or
Warrants under their Hands and Seals, Respectively, from time to time, to
Search for, Seize, or Cause to be Searched for and Seized, and take into his or
their Custody all such Arms, Armor and Ammunition as shall he Concealed in any
House, Lodging, or other Places where they shall suspect any such Arms, Armor
or Ammunition shall be Concealed; And such Arms, Armor and Ammunition so Taken
or Seized, upon Search and otherwise, as aforesaid, shall by the person or
persons so Receiving, Taking and Seizing the same, be preserved for the Use of
His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors: And the said persons shall return a true
and particular Account thereof to the Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom, for the time being, to the end the same may be
brought into His Majesty's Stores of War, or be Disposed of as he or they shall
think fit.

Provided Nevertheless, That no such Search or Searches shall be made in any
such House, Houses, or Lodgings, save only between the Rising and Setting of
the Sun, other then in Cities and their Suburbs, Towns Corporate, Market Towns,
and Houses of such Cities and Towns, if it shall be so thought Necessary, and
the Warrant or Warrants for that purpose do Direct and Appoint: And in Case
such Justices of the Peace, Mayor, Sovereign, Bailiff, or other Chief
Magistrate or Officer of any City or Town Corporate, after such Search made,
shall find Cause to suspect that any Arms, Armor or Ammunition remain
Concealed, and not Seized, as aforesaid, they are hereby Respectively Empowered
and Required to Cause such person or persons whom he or they shall suspect to
have Concealed the same to be brought before him or them, and to be Examined
upon his, her, or their Corporal Oath concerning the same.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That every such Papist
who shall have or keep any such Arms, Armor or Ammunition, who shall not
discover and deliver up the same by the time aforesaid; And every other Person
or Persons who wittingly or willingly shall have any such Arms, Armor or
Ammunition to the use of, or in Trust for any such Papist, Contrary to the True
Meaning and Intent hereof. And also Every such Person or Persons, who upon
Demand or Search made for such Arms, Armor or Ammunition, as aforesaid, shall
Refuse to Declare and Manifest to the Justice or Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Bailiffs, Head Officers, or other Persons Authorized and Empowered for Seizing
and Searching for all such Arms, Armor and Ammunition in manner as aforesaid,
what Arms, Armor and Ammunition they or any other to his knowledge, or with
his privity have, or shall Let, Hinder or Disturb the Delivery thereof to any
the said Justices of the Peace, or any other Person or Persons Authorized by
Warrant, as aforesaid, to Search for, Take and Seize the same, and Every other
Person and Persons who shall Refuse to make Discovery upon his, her, or their
Oath, to be Administered by such Justices of the Peace, Mayor, Bailiff, or other
Chief Officer of any City, or Town Corporate concerning the Premises, as
aforesaid, or being Summoned by Warrant under the Hands of two or more Justices
of the Peace, whereof Notice in Writing to be given to him, or her, or left at
his or her Usual place of abode, shall without Reasonable Cause Refuse or
Neglect to appear before such Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sovereigns,
Bailiffs, or other Chief Magistrates, as aforesaid, to be Examined as
aforesaid, Every such Person or Persons so Offending, Contrary to this Statute
in this behalf, shall Forfeit in manner following (That is to say) if such
Person or Persons be a Peer or Peeress of this Realm, he, she and they shall
for the first Offense Forfeit the Sum of One Hundred Pounds Sterling: And if
such person or persons shall offend a second time, Contrary to the True Intent
and Meaning thereof, then such person or persons shall for the second Offense
Incur the Penalty of a Person Attainted in a Praemunire; And being thereof
Convicted shall suffer Punishment accordingly. And if such person or persons
Offending herein, Contrary to the true Intent of this Act, shall be under the
Degree of a Peer or Peeress, then he, she, or they so Offending shall for the
first Offense, being thereof Lawfully Convicted upon any Indictment or
Information to be Exhibited at the Assizes or General-Quarter-Sessions of the
Peace, to be held for the County where such Offense shall be Committed, Lose
and Forfeit the Sum of Thirty Pounds; And shall suffer Imprisonment by Order
of the Justices of Assize, at the Assizes, or Justices of the Peace in their
General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace, without Bail or Mainprize for one Year;
and from thenceforward until he, she, or they shall pay the Penalty aforesaid.
And if such person or persons shall Offend a second time, Contrary to the true
Intent and Meaning hereof, then such person or persons so Offending shall for
such second Offense, being Convicted of the First Offense, Incurr and Suffer
all the Pain and Penalties of persons Attainted in a Praemunire, the said
Penalties and Sums of Money so to be Forfeit, as aforesaid, by such Peer or
Peeress, to be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any
of His Majesty's Courts of Record; In which said Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint
or Information, no Essoyne, Protection nor Wager of Law shall be allowed, nor
more then one Imparlance granted; One Moiety thereof to be and go to the Use of
His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and the other Moiety to such person or
persons who shall Sue for the same.

Provided always that this Act, or any thing therein Contained, shall not
Extend or be Construed to Extend to hinder or Restrain any Nobleman or
Gentleman from Keeping or Using a Sword, and a Case of Pistols, and a Gun for
the Defense of his House, or for Fowling, so as such Nobleman or Gentleman
before the said First Day of March, in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand, Six
Hundred, Ninety Five, shall make proof to the satisfaction of the Lord Deputy,
or other Chief Governor or Governors, and the Privy Council of this Kingdom of
Ireland, that he upon the Third Day of October, in the Year of Our Lord, One
Thousand, Six Hundred, Ninety One, was an Inhabitant or Resident of Lymerick,
or some other Garrison then in the possession of the Irish, or was then some
Officer or Soldier then in Arms under a Commission of the Late Ring James, or
those Authorized under him to grant the same in the Counties of Limerick,
Clare, Kerry, Cork or Mayo, or under their Protection in the said Counties; or
was then a Commissioned Officer in His Majesty's Quarters belonging to the
Irish Regiments then in being which were Treated with, not being then a
Prisoner of War, nor having before that time taken Protection.; and that he has
since Returned and Submitted to His Majesty's Obedience, and shall also prove,
as aforesaid, that he was upon the said Third Day of October within this
Kingdom, and so as such Nobleman or Gentleman has not any time since the said
Third Day of October, upon tender to him, Refused to take the Oath of
Allegiance Required to be Taken by an Act of Parliament in England, made in the
first Year of the Reign of His present Majesty, and of the Late Queen MARY of
Blessed Memory; and shall take the said Oath when he shall be thereunto
Required, or shall prove, as aforesaid, that he was upon the One and Twentieth
Day of July, which was in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred,
Ninety One, a Gentleman of Estate then belonging to the Town and Garrison of
Galway; But that such Nobleman or Gentleman, Respectively, so making proof, and
being qualified, as aforesaid, may Keep and Make use of a Sword, a Case of
Pistols and a Gun for defense of his House, or for Fowling, in such manner as
he might have done in Case this Act had never been Made, any thing herein
Contained to the Contrary in any wise Notwithstanding.

Provided always, That an Entry shall be made of such proof, and that no
Gratuity, Fee or Reward whatsoever shall be taken by any person other then the
Sum of One Shilling for the making such proof, or for the Entry thereof.
Provided always that no person shall be Convicted or Incurr any penalty upon
this Act for any Offense Committed Contrary thereto upon any Confession or
Discovery he or she shall make, being Examined upon Oath, unless such Offense
shall be made out by other proof, any thing herein Contained to the Contrary
Notwithstanding.

Provided always that the Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor or Governors,
and Privy Council of this Realm, for the time being, may by Order of Privy
Council, at any time after the said First Day of March, One Thousand, Six
Hundred, Ninety Five, Lycense any person or persons as he and they shall think
fit to keep such Arms as shall be particularly Expressed in such Lycense, in as
full and ample manner as such Chief Governor or Governors heretofore might have
done before the Passing of this present Act, Any thing herein Contained to the
Contrary Notwithstanding. Which Lycense shall be granted without any Gratuity,
Fee or Reward, other then the Sum of One Shilling for the Writing thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
End of this present Sessions of Parliament, no person whatsoever now, or at any
time whatsoever, Exercising or using the Mystery or Art of making any Locks or
Barrels for Guns, Muskets, Pistols, or other Firearms; or of making Swords,
Bagonets, Skeines, Knives, or other Weapons, shall take to Prentice, or Use,
Receive or Instruct as an Apprentice any Person of the Popish Religion, on pain
that Every Person so Offending in Entertaining such Popish Person to be an
Apprentice, or Using, Receiving, or Instructing him as such, shall for Every
such Offense Forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds to be Recovered by Bill, Plaint,
or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoyne,
Protection, or Wager of Law is to Allowed, nor more then one Imparlance
granted; The one Moiety of all such Forfeitures to be to His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, and the other Moiety to the Informer, or him or them that shall
or will Sue for the same.

And moreover the Indenture of Apprenticeship, and all Bonds and Contracts to
be made or Entered into, by Reason or Occasion of any such Popish Person being
put to be an Apprentice, as aforesaid, shall be void, and are hereby declared
to be void, and Every such person of the Popish Religion, who shall be
hereafter put to be an Apprentice, Instructed Contrary to the true meaning of
this Act, and who shall Exercise the said Art or Mystery, shall for Every such
Offense in Using or Exercising the said Art or Mystery, or any part thereof
Forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds to be Sued for and Recovered as aforesaid, to
the Uses beforementioned; And the Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sovereigns,
and other Head Officers of Cities, Buroughs and Towns Corporate, Respectively,
are hereby Authorized and Required to send for all Apprentices of such Persons
Exercising the Art and Mystery aforesaid, whom they shall suspect, and shall
tender to them the Oaths and Declaration following, to be by them Respectively
taken and Subscribed.

I A. B do Sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear True
Allegiance to His Majesty King WILLIAM.

So help me God.

I A. B. Do Swear that I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as Impious
and Heretical, That Damnable Doctrine and Position that Princes Excommunicated
or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of ROME, may be Deposed or
Murdered by their Subject, or any other whatsoever. And I do Declare that no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has, or ought to have,
any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preheminency, or Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God.

I A. B. Do Solemnly and Sincerely in the Presence of God, Profess, Testify and
Declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is
not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration thereof, by any Person
whatsoever; And that the Invocation and Adoration of the Virgin MARY, or any
other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now Used in the Church
of ROME, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do Solemnly in the presence of
God, Profess, Testify and Declare, That I do make this Declaration, and every
part thereof, in the plain and Ordinary Sense of the words Read unto me, as
they are Commonly understood by Protestants, without any Evasion, Equivocation,
or Mental Reservation whatsoever, and without any Dispensation already granted
me for this purpose, by the Pope, or any other Authority or Person whatsoever,
or without any hope of any such Dispensation from any Person or Authority
whatsoever, or without believing that I am or can be acquitted before God or
Man, or Absolved from this Declaration, or any part thereof, although the Pope,
or any other Person or Persons, or Power whatsoever should Dispense with, or
Annull the same, or Declare that it was Null and Void from the Beginning.

And the Refusal of such Person or Persons to take the said Oaths or Subscribe
the said Declaration shall be, and are hereby declared to be a Conviction of
such Persons so Refusing the same, of his being Guilty, as also of the Master
of such Apprentice, unless such Master shall prove that such Apprentice at the
time of Entering his Service was known or Reputed to be of the Protestant
Religion.

And be it further Enacted, That no Papist shall at any time from and after the
Twentieth Day of January, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Ninety Five, be Capable to
have or keep in his Possession, or in the Possession of any other Person, to
his Use, or at his Disposition, any Horse, Gelding or Mare, which shall be of
the Value of Five Pounds, or more; And that if any Person, being of the
Protestant Religion shall make Discovery upon Oath of any such Horse or Horses
to be in the possession of such Papist, or of any person in Trust for him, to
any two Justices of the Peace, or to the Mayor, or other Chief Magistrate of
any City or Town Corporate, That such Justice of the Peace, Mayor, or other
Chief Magistrate within their Respective Precincts, shall from time to time by
Warrant under his and their Hands and Seals Authorize, such person with the
Assistance of the Constable or his Deputy, or such other person as he or they
shall think fit, who are hereby Required to be Aiding and Assisting therein, in
the Day time only, to search for, and secure all and every such Horse and
Horses: And in Case of Opposition or Resistance, to break open any Door, and
bring such Horse or Horses before him or them; And such person being of the
Protestant Religion, and making such Discovery, paying or making Tender before
such Justices, Mayor, or other Chief Magistrate of any City or Town Corporate,
of the Sum of Five Pounds Five Shillings to the Owner or Possessor of such
Horse, or to such Justice or Chief Magistrate in his or their Absence; which
the said Justice or Chief Magistrate are hereby Authorized to Receive for the
use of such Owner or Possessor; And that from and after such payment, or Tender
and Refusal; The property of such Horse or Horses for which such Sum or Sums
shall be Respectively Tendered or paid, shall by Authority of this present Act
be Deemed and Adjudged to be Vested in the Person making such Discovery and
Tender, as if such Horse and Horses had been bought and sold in Market Overt;
And the said Justices of the Peace, Mayor, Bailiff, or other Head Officer is,
and are hereby Authorized and Required by Warrant under his and their Hands and
Seals, to Cause such Horse and Horses to be Delivered accordingly.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Person shall Conceal, or be Aiding or
Assisting in the Concealing any such Horse or Horses belonging to any Papist or
suspected Papist Refusing to take the Oaths and Subscribe the Declaration
aforesaid, such Person or Persons being thereof duly Convicted by the Oaths of
two or more Credible Witnesses before any Justice of the Peace of the County
where such Horse or Horses shall be Concealed shall be Committed to the Common
Goal, by Warrant from the said Justice, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprize by the space of three Months, and shall forfeit and lose to His
Majesty and his Successors treble the value of such Horse or Horses; which
value is to be Settled by the Justices of the Peace in their
General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace in the Respective Counties, who are
hereby Authorized to Continue such person in Prison until due payment of such
Sum of Money to the Use of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

And it is hereby Declared, That Every Person shall be Deemed and taken to be a
Papist within the meaning of this present Act, who shall Refuse to take the
Oaths, and Subscribe the Declaration herein beforementioned, when the same
shall be Tendered to him by any Justice or Justices of the Peace; which said
Oaths and Declaration the said Justices of the Peace and Chief Magistrates are
hereby Authorized and Required to Administer if any such person or persons
shall deny him or themselves to be a Papist within the meaning of this Act; And
if any such person or persons shall take the said Oaths and Subscribe the said
Declaration, the said Justice and Justices of the Peace shall Certify under his
hand his or their taking the said Oaths, and Return the said Declaration to the
next Quarter Sessions to be held for the said County, there to be Recorded, as
in such Cases is Usual.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Justice or
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sovereigns, Bailiffs or Chief Magistrates or
Officers of any County or Town Corporate, Respectively, shall Neglect or Refuse
to Execute any the Powers or Authorities which he or they is or are
Respectively Required by this present Act to put in Execution, Every such
Justice of the Peace, Mayor, Sovereign, Bailiff, or Chief Magistrate or
Officer, shall for Every such Default or Offense Lose and Forfeit the Sum of
Fifty pounds, to be Recovered in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, by
Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoyne, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall be Allowed, nor more then one Imparlance granted; The one Moiety of such
Forfeiture to be to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and the other Moiety
to such person as shall or will Sue for the same; And the said Offenders shall
be moreover, and are hereby Disabled and made Incapable, from and after his
being Convicted, to Act as Justice of the Peace, Mayor, Sovereign, Bailiff, or
Chief Magistrate, or Officer in any County, City, or Town Corporate in this
Kingdom.

FINIS.

