AN ACT TO Supply the Defects; AND For the better Execution of an ACT Passed
this present Session of Parliament. ENTITLED, An Act for the better
Suppressing Tories, and Rapparees; and for preventing Robberies, Burglaries,
and other Heinous Crimes.

DUBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley, 1697.

An ACT to Supply the Defects, and for the better Execution of an Act passed
this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the better suppressig
Tories and Rapparees; and for preventing Robberies, Burglaries, and other
heinous Crimes.
CHAP. XXXIV.
Whereas an Act made in this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for the better suppressing Tories and Rapparees; and for preventing Robberies,
Burglaries, and other heinous Crimes: Has not had it is due Effect, by Reason
there is not in the said Act, sufficient Provision made for prevention of
Murders and Maims, that shall, or may be Committed by such Robber, Tory, or
Rapparee. As also, by Reason of other Defects in the said Act, and some Doubts
arisen on the same, and Difficulties in Prosecution thereof.

For Remedy therefore of the said Defects, Explaining the said Doubts, and
Rendering the Execution of the said Act more easy.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty; by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That where any person
or persons, shall at any time after the Sixth of November, One thousand Six
hundred Ninety seven, be Murdered, Maimed, or Dismembered by any Robber, Tory,
or Rapparee, and the Offender, or Offenders, or the Major part of them shall
not be Killed, or Apprehended, and brought before some Justice of the Peace, or
other Magistrate, within Six Callendary Months, next after the committal of
such Offense, in Order to his, or their being Prosecuted for the same,
according to Law. The respective Grand Iuries of the several Counties in this
Kingdom, where such Fact shall be committed shall, and are hereby Required, at
any Assizes, to be held for such County, within One Year after such Fact
committed, to present, and charge upon the Popish, or Protestant Inhabitants of
such County respectively, and proportionably, according as the Number of such
Robbers, Tories, or Rapparees, shall be Papists, or reputed Papists, or
Protestants, as is herein after mentioned, the Sums following: (That is to
say) in Case of Murder, such Sum or Sums of Money, not exceeding Twenty
pounds; and in Case of Maim, or Dismembering any person, such Sum or Sums of
Money, not exceeding Ten pounds, as such Grand Iuries on consideration had, of
the Quality of the person Murdered, Maimed, and Dismembered, and circumstances
of his Family shall think fit; such Sum, in Case of Murder, to be paid to,
and for the Use of the Widow, and Children of the party Murdered; or if he
shall not be Married at the time of his Death, then to the Use of his Children,
or other next Relation: And in case of Maim or Dismembering of any person, then
such Sum to be paid to the Use of the person, or persons, so Maimed, or
Dismembered; or if he shall Dye before the Recovery thereof, then to the Use of
his Widow, Children, or other Relations respectively, as is aforesaid, in Case
of Murder: The said Sum or Sums, not be Assets in the hands of such Widow,
Children, or Relations, or liable to answer, or satisfy any Debt or Debts, of
the party Deceased; which Sum so to be Presented, shall be paid by such, and
born by the persons in manner, and according to the proportions following: That
is to say, where such Robbers, Tories, or Rapparees are, or shall be Papists,
or Reputed of the Popish Religion, by the Papists Inhabitants of such County;
and where such Robbers, Tories, or Rapparees are, or shall be Protestants, or
Reputed to be of the Protestant Religion, by the Protestant Inhabitants of such
County, and where the said Facts shall be committed by Papists and Protestants,
then by the Popish and Protestant Inhabitants of such County, in such
proportion, and according to the number of such Papists and Protestants, as
shall commit the same. For the Levying of which Sum, such Process in the
Nature of an Execution, shall Issue on such Presentment against any one, or
more of the persons chargeable therewith, and such Contribution had, Taxed, and
Levied for his Relief, against all the other persons Chargeable therewith, as
is herein-after Appointed in Case of Satisfaction, recovered for Losses, or
Injuries sufferred by such Robbers, Tories, and Rapparees.

And whereas the Method appointed by the said former Act, for the person or
persons Robbed, or Damnified, by such Robbers, Tories, or Rapparees, to Recover
Satisfaction for such Damage, is Tedious, Difficult, and Chargeable.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Cases where any person
or persons is by the former Act, Entitled to Recover Amends, or Satisfaction
for any Loss or Damage, Incurred, or Sufferred by any Robber, Tory, or
Rapparee; such person shall, or may pursue his Remedy for Recovery of such
Satisfaction, or Amends, at the next Assizes, to be held for the said County,
where such Offense was Committed, before the Judge or Judges of Assize, and
Grand-Iury of the said County, to be Impannelled, and Sworn at the said
Assizes, in the Method following: That is to say, The person or persons so
Robbed, shall at the said Assizes, Exhibit and Deliver to the said Judge or
Judges of Assizes, his, or their Petition, therein Praying such Satisfaction,
and shall set forth in such Petition, the time and place, when, and where, such
Robbery was Committed, or other Injury done to him or them, the several
particular Goods Lost, or other particular Damages Sufferred by him or them,
and the particular Value thereof, and by what Number of persons such Robbery
was committed, or Injury done, and of what Religion such Offender or Offenders,
or any of them were, with the Names and Descriptions of such of the said
Offenders as he does know, and such particular Descriptions of such others of
them as he can give; and the said matter shall thereupon, be Examined by such
Judge or Judges of Assizes, in open Court, in the presence of such Grand-Iury,
on the Oath of the party Robbed, or Injured, and such other Evidence as can be
produced touching the said Facts, according to the nature thereof; and the said
Grand-Iury shall thereupon, and are hereby Required, on Consideration of the
said Matter, amongst themselves, to make such Presentment touching the same,
and of such Sum or Sums of Money, as the person or persons so Robbed or
Injured, by such Offenders, ought to have, or receive for such Loss, Injury, or
Damage, and by what persons, whether Papists or Protestants, and in what
Proportions for each of them, the same ought to be paid, for which Sum so
Presented and Set, Process shall Issue, in the nature of an Execution against
any Inhabitant, or Inhabitants of the said County, chargeable therewith, and
all, and every the Inhabitants of the said County, who shall by such
Presentment be made Chargeable with, or Liable to all, or any part of the said
Damages, shall be Rateably, and proportionably Taxed for, and toward an equal
Contribution for relief of such Inhabitant or Inhabitants, against whom such
Process, in the nature of an Execution, is had; which Tax shall be Made,
Levied, and Raised, by such Ways and Means, and in such Manner and Form, as is
prescribed and mentioned in a former Statute, Entitled, An Act for the
following Hue and Cry, made in the Tenth and Eleventh Year of the Reign of King
Charles the First, in this Kingdom.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That if any person or persons shall
find him, or themselves Agrieved, by any Presentment to be made in pursuance of
this, or the former Act, such person or persons, in Case the Sum Presented to
be Raised, do exceed the Sum of Five pounds, shall, or may at the said Assizes
Traverse the same, which Traverse, shall be Tried at the same, or the next
ensuing Assizes, as the Judge or Judges, who shall allow the same, shall think
fit: And if on such Traverse, the Issue shall be found for the Traverser, such
Presentment shall be Discharged; and if the Issue shall thereupon be found
against the Traverser, he, or they, so Traversing, shall pay to the person or
persons, on whose behalf the Presentment was made, the Sum of Twenty shillings
for the Costs of such Traverse, and the said Presentment, shall thereupon be
final and conclusive to all persons.

Provided further, and it is hereby Enacted, That where the person or person so
Robbed, or Injured, does intend to proceed to recover Satisfaction for the
same, at any Assizes, against the Popish or Protestant Inhabitants of any
Barony, such person or persons, shall leave notice in Writing, with the
High-Constable of such Barony, of such his intentions, and against what
Inhabitants, whether Papists or Protestants, by the space of Eight days, at
least, before such Assizes; to the end that such High-Constable may give
public notice thereof to the Inhabitants of the said Barony, designed to be
charged therewith, that they may be provided, and have an opportunity to bring
Evidence for themselves, and oppose the making such Presentment, or otherwise
may Traverse such Presentment, after the same is made, if they shall think fit.

And it is hereby further Provided, That no such Presentment to be hereafter
made, shall at any time be removed by Certiorari, or the Prosecution thereupon
otherwise delayed, then by such Traverse, as aforesaid; and that for such time
only, as shall be necessary for the Trial of such Traverse, as aforesaid; nor
shall any such Presentment be at any time quashed for any Informality,
Imperfection, or Defect in form whatsoever.

Provided further, and it is hereby Enacted, That when, and as often as any of
the Goods, for which the party so Robbed, has received Satisfaction by such
Presentment, as aforesaid, shall be discovered, so as the same, or Satisfaction
for them may be recovered, the person or persons upon whom the Sum so
Presented, as aforesaid, was Levied, shall have the same, and the property
thereof, is hereby Declared and Enacted to belong unto, and be Vested in him or
them, and he or they shall or may Maintain such Action, and pursue such Remedy
for the recovery and getting such Goods, as the person or persons Robbed might
have, had or maintained, before such Satisfaction received by such Presentment
for the same, as aforesaid: Such Goods nevertheless, after the same shall be so
gotten or recovered, to be Sold for the Most the same will Yield, and the Money
made by such Sale, after the Charges for the recovery thereof are deducted, to
be distributed, and paid equally and proportionably unto, and among the several
persons so Taxed; toward the payment of the Sum contained in the said
Presentment, according to each of their said several Taxations, toward the
relief of the Persons on whom the Sum Presented was Levied; such Sale and
Distribution, to be Directed, Settled, and Ordered by the Justice, or Justices
of the Peace, Signing such Taxation; who are hereby Authorized and Required, to
Direct, Settle, and Order the same accordingly.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerk of
the Crown, for the County, where such Presentment shall be made, shall on
request to him made, make and deliver to any person or persons, desiring the
same, true Copies, Signed by him, of all such Presentiments hereafter to be
made, in pursuance of this, or the said former Act; and of all Warrants or
Orders for the Levying of any Money grounded thereupon; for each of which,
there shall be paid to the said Clerk of the Crown, the Sum of One shilling
only, and no more, and such Clerk of the Crown, is hereby required to make and
deliver the same accordingly.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing herein contained, shall not
extend, or be construed to extend, to annul, or make void any Verdict,
Judgment, or other Proceedings already had or obtianed in pursuance of the said
former Act, but that the same shall continue, and be as good, and effectual, to
all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been made, any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted, That during the continuance
of this and the said former Act, no Action or Suit shall be brought, or
prosecuted, for recovery of any Satisfaction or Damages for any Robbery
committed, or Loss, or Injury sustained, for which remedy is given by this, or
the said former Act, or any other Law or Statute whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, who already has, or hereafter shall commit any Robbery or Burglary,
shall while he is at large, and before he shall be Apprehended, or in Custody
for such Offense, make Discovery of any Two, or more, of such Robbers, Tories,
or Rapparees, being also at large, and not in Custody, so as such Two, or more
Robbers, Tories or Rapparees, shall thereupon be Apprehended, and Convicted for
such Offense, or shall Kill any Two, or more, of such Tories, or Robbers, as
shall be Indicted, and Proclaimed, according to the said former Act, and be out
on their keeping, at the time of such their being Killed, the person or persons
so making such D^scovrry, or Killing such Robbers, or Tories, as aforesaid,
shall not be proceeded against, for any Robbery, or Burglary, by him or them
committed, before the making such Discovery, or such Killing as aforesaid; but
shall be Entitled unto, and shall have, and receive His Majesty^s Gracious
Pardon for the same; which Pardon shall in such Case, also be a good Bar to any
Appeal, to be brought for such Robbery, or Burglary; and for that it has, and
may be doubted, whether on the bringing such Proclaimed Tory, Rapparee, or
Robber to the Bar, before such Judge or Judges, as are Empowered to Try, and
Pass such a Sentence on him, it be requisite to give in Evidence against him,
the Original Presentment made by the Grand-Iury, of his being a Tory, Rapparee,
or Robber, out on his keeping, according to the intent and meaning of the said
former Act: And also it has, and may be doubted, whether the Original
Proclamation, under the Great Seal, grounded on such Presentment, must be
produced in Evidence against him, or whether the Printed Proclamation Reciting
such Presentment to be made, and returned to the Clerk of the Council, of his,
the said Tories, Rapparees, or Robbers being so Presented shall be sufficient
Evidence at Law, wherein to give Judgment against him.

For clearing whereof, and that for the future so good and necessary a Law, for
the Quiet and Preservation of His Majesty's good Subjects against such
Proclaimed Tories, Rapparees and Robbers, may not by any such Scruples and
Nicities be eluded, or the Execution thereof delayed.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at all times heareafter, during
the continuance in Force of this, or the said former Act, the Printed
Proclamation, wherein any person is named, or mentioned to be Presented, by a
Grand-Iury of any County in this Kingdom, at the General Assizes, or
Quarter Sessions, held for the said County, to be a Tory, Rapparee, or Robber,
out on his Keeping, shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged sufficient Evidence
against such Tory, Rapparee, or Robber.

Provided, That before such Proclamation so given in Evidence, the Clerk of the
Council for the time being, or his Deputy, do Certify under his Hand and Seal,
on the Back of such Proclamation, That he has such Presentment, as by the said
Act is required, Returned to him, and remaining in his Office, wherein the said
Tory, Rappparee, or Robber is by name Presented, to be a Tory, Rapparee, or
Robber, out on his Keeping, by the same Name that he is Named, or Styled in the
said Proclamation, and that the said Proclamation was grounded thereon, and
that the Original Proclamation, under the Great Seal, agrees Verbatim with the
Printed Proclamation, whereon he has written such his Certificate, which
Proclamation, with such Certificate endorsed thereon, the said Clerk of the
Council, for the time being, or his Deputy, shall send to the several Clerks of
the Crown in this Kingdom, without any Fee or Reward.

And be it further Enacted, That this, and the former Act, shall continue in
Force, for Seven Years, from the Sixth of November, One thousand Six hundred
Ninety Seven, and to the end of the next Session of Parliament, after the
Expiration of the said Seven Years, and no longer.

FINIS.

