WILLIAM IDELL obtained his Majesty's Order in Council, in consideration of his
Service in retaking his Ship in the Bay of Cadiz from the Dutch, and his great
expense in attending to receive his Majesty's reward, his Majesty in Council
did order the said William Idell should have the Office of Registring Sales,
Pawns and Broaks, bought and sold in London and Suburbs thereof, in lieu and
recompense thereof, and referred the same to the Attorney General, who made his
Report as follows,

IN obedience to this Order, I have considered of the matter therein contained,
and I am humbly of opinion that such a course of Registring Pawns, etc. might
be so ordered, as might be very profitable to the Kingdom, as well to prevent
Robberies, Burglaries and Larcenies, as to help persons to their goods when
stolen from them; but I think the same cannot be done legally without an Act
of Parliament, and therefore it is fit the Petitioner should apply himself to
the Parliament.

W* Jones.

The Proclamation and Reasons following were shown.
Turner Mayor,
Martis vicesimo quinto die Maii 1669. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Dei
gratia, Anglia, etc. vicesimo primo.
WHereas the secret Pawning or Selling of Goods unjustly gotten, unto Brokers.
Broggers, Hucksters and others, and their vending of such Goods to others, has
been a long time observed to be the Ground and Nursery of Burglaries,
Robberies, Felonies, and Frauds, which the Care of former times has been
studious to reform and prevent: and to that end several Acts of Common Council
have been heretofore made, and an Office of Registry, for that purpose erected
and exercised within this City, to good effect, till of late years, that by
Interruption or remiss Execution, the former Evils so carefully provided
against, are revived and multiplied, to the great Mischief, Detriment and Abuse
of his Majesty's Subjects as experience shows by frequent instances at every
Sessions of Jail-deliver at Newgate; And this Court having considered of
reviving the good and diligent Execution of the said Office, and thereupon
taken order with the present Registers thereunto formerly appointed by this
Court, in pursuance of the said Acts of Common Council, who accordingly are
betaking themselves to the discharge of their Duty, and have provided Offices
convenient for that purpose in Aldersgate Street and in Houndsditch.

It is therefore, for the more effectual and perfect prevention and suppression
of the aforesaid Offenses, and other unjust and undue practices, and for the
better Execution of the said Office, and the Punishment of all such as shall
neglect the same; thought fit and Ordered by this Court, That all and every of
the retailing Brokers, Broggers, Hucksters, or such other persons inhabiting or
residing within the City of London and Liberties of the same, and which shall
keep any Shop or Room for the Buying or taking to pawn of any Goods, Apparel,
Household Stuff, Remnants of Silks, Uelvets, or of Linnens, or Woolen Cloth, or
such like other wares or Commodities, to sell again, or shall use to buy or
take to pawn any such Goods, shall and are hereby required from henceforth duly
to register the same; and in all other things to conform themselves to an Act
of Common Council in that behalf made the 19 day of June in the 20 year of the
Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James, as they will avoid the penalties
of the said Act.

And it is farther Ordered that for the better notice and information of the
Rules and Directions of the said Act in this behalf, the same Act together with
this Order, be forthwith printed and published.

Avery.

FIrst, By several Acts in Common Council, and Proclamations in London, and by
several Letters Patents from the Kings and Queens of this Realm, to several
persons: endeavors had been to erect and establish this Office, but the
Brokers disobeyed, because as it may rationally be conceived, they reap the
most profitable bargains of stolen Goods, and if discovered* there being no
Law to secure them from Indictments of Felony, they do desire to conceal them,
whereby not only the Thieves but also their Receivers escape undiscovered.

Secondly, If Buyers of Horses in open Fairs, a fortiori, Brokers, ought to be
secured for buying and taking Pawns in their open shop, and accustomed places
of Trade.


