AN ACT For Avoiding of Vexatious Delays, CAUSED By Removing Actions and Suits
OUT OF Inferior Courts.

AN ACT For Redress of certain ABUSES, IN MAKING Pewter and Brass.



DUBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley, 1697.

An ACT for avoiding of Vextious Delays, caused by Removing Actions and Suits
out of Inferior Courts. CHAP. XXXVIII.
WHEREAS there now are, and long time have been diverse Courts of Record, and
diverse Cities, Liberties, Towns Corporate, and elsewere, some of them being far
remote from Dublin, which were principally obtained for the Ease and Quiet of
such as should have occasion to Sue there for Debts and Wrongs, so that they
might with small Expenses, Receive Justice according to the Merits of their
Causes in those Inferior Courts, without being Compelled to Travel to Dublin,
but of late diverse of His Majesty's Subjects, having for Just and True Debts,
and other Good and Lawful Causes commenced Suits in such Inferior Courts and
Prosecuted their Actions and Suits many times ready for Trial, and the same
Causes being for the most part of small value, have been Removed into some of
His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, and being remanded by Procedendo, into the same
Inferior Courts, where the Action or Suit was first commenced, the same having
been again often times Removed into the same, or other of His Majesty's Courts
at Dublin, to the Intolerable delay of Justice, and great Expenses of Money,
and Loss, and Trouble to those which Justly and Honestly, by such Actions and
Suits, have sought only to Recover, or get Satisfaction for Debts, Duties or
Wrongs Owing, Due or Done unto them. For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Writ, or Writs
of Habeas Corpus, Certiorari, or any other Writ or Writs, Process or Processes
whatsoever, other then Writs of Error, or Attaint, to be Sued forth after the
Twentieth Day of November next, which will be in this present Year of our Lord,
One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, by any person or persons whatsoever,
out of, or from any of His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, or out of any other
Court or Courts, having, or pretending to have power to Award such Writs or
Processes to stay or remove any Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or Cause, Brought,
Commenced, or Depending, or hereafter to be Brought, Commenced, or Depending in
any Court or Courts of Record, within any City, Liberty, Town Corporate, or
elsewhere, which have, or shall have Jurisdiction, Power or Authority, to hold
Plea in that Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or cause, the same cause of Action,
Bill, Plaint, or Suit arising, or growing within the said City, Liberty, Town
Corporate or Jurisdiction, shall after the said Twentieth day of November next,
be Received or Allowed, by the Steward, Judge or Judges, or Officer or Officers
of the Court or Courts, wherein or to whom any such Writ or Writs shall be
Directed and Delivered, but that he and they shall and may proceed in the said
Cause or Causes, as though no such Writ or Writs were Sued forth, or Delivered
to him or them, Except that the said Writ or Writs be Delivered to the Steward
or Stewards, Judge or Judges, Officer or Officers of the said Court, before
Issue or Demurrer, joined in the said Cause or Causes so Depending, or to be
Depending in such Court of Record, in any City Liberty, Town Corporate, or
elsewhere, having Power to hold such Plea, so as the said Issue and Demurrer be
not joined in Six Weeks next after the Arrest or Appearance of the Defendant or
Defendants, to such Action or Suit commenced.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such Action,
Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Cause, which is, or shall hereafter, be brought,
Commenced, or Depending in any such Court of Record in any City, Liberty, Town
Corporate, or elsewhere, shall after the said Twentieth Day of November next,
be removed or stayed by any such Writ or Writs, Process or Processes, to be
Sued forth out of any of His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, or any other Court as
aforesaid: That if afterward the fame Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Cause,
shall be remanded or sent back again by any Writ or Writs of Procedendo, or
other Writ whatsoever; that then the said Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Cause,
shall never afterward be removed or stayed before Judgment, by any Writ or
Writs whatsoever, to be Sued forth out of any of His Majesty's said Courts, at
Dublin, or any other Court, as aforesaid, any Law, Statute, Custom, Usage, or
Restraint to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Cause, not concerning Freehold, or Inheritance, or
Title of Land, Lease, or Rent, which shall be Brought, Commenced, or Depending
in any such Court of Record, or any City, Liberty, Town Corporate, or
elsewhere, if it shall appear, or be laid in the said Declaration, that the
Debt, Damages, Things Demanded, does or shall not Amount to, or exceed the Sum
of Five Pounds, that then such Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Cause, shall not
be stayed, nor be removed into any of His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, or other
Court as aforesaid, by any Writ or Writs whatsoever, to be Sued, or Prosecuted
forth, or out of His Majesty's said Courts at Dublin, or other Courts, as
aforesaid, other then Writs of Error, or Attaint, any Law, Statute, Usage,
Custom, or Restraint to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Writ or
Writs whatsoever, shall be after the said Twentieth Day of November next,
Granted or Sued forth, out of any His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, or other
Court, contrary to the meaning of this present Act; that then it shall, and may
be Lawful to, and for the Judge or Judges, and Officer or Officers, to whom
such Writ or Writs shall be Delivered, to Disallow, and Refuse the same, and to
Proceed as if no such Writ or Writs, had been Granted, or Sued out, or forth,
as aforesaid, any Law, Statute, Usage, Custom, or Restraint, to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas some persons have doubted, whether an Act made in the Tenth Year
of the Reign of King Charles the First, Entitled, An Act for Expedition of
Justice in Cases of Demurrers, etc. And one other Act made in the said Tenth
Year of the said King Charles the First, Entitled, An Act for the Reformation
of Jeofailes, etc. Extend to Inferior Courts of Record.

And whereas an Act made in the Thirty Third Year of the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth, Entitled, An Act touching Mis-impleading and Jeofailes. And an
other Act made in the said Tenth Year of the said King Charles the First,
Entitled, An Act for avoiding Unnecessary Delays of Execution: And an other
Act made in the Seaventeenth and Eighteenth Years of King Charles the Second,
Entitled, An Act to prevent Arrests of Judgment, and Superseading Executions,
are found by Experience to be Good and Beneficial Laws, but do not Extend to
the said Inferior Courts; To the end thereof, that all His Majesty's Subjects
may have the full Benefit and Advantage of so Good Laws.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the several abovementioned
Acts, shall from the said Twentieth Day of November next, be, and be Construed
to be in Force, in all Inferior Courts of Record in this Kingdom, and shall be
as Effectual, and as duly observed in all the said Inferior Courts, as if the
said Inferior Courts had been particularly named and expressed in the several
abovementioned Acts.

And whereas in County Courts, Manor Courts, and other Inferior Courts, where
shall Actions of Debts and Damages, under Forty Shillings are Tried, sufficient
Encouragement cannot be given to Attorneys, or other persons Skilled in the Law
of this Realm, to practice, so that the Pleadings and Proceedings in the said
Courts, are not so Formal as by Law they ought to be, for the Ease of the
Subject.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all the said Inferior
Courts, which have Power to Try Actions under Forty Shillings, and no more,
that the Proceedings and Pleadings may be in English, and shall not for that,
or any other. Defect in Form, be Quashed or Vacuated if the same be Removed by
Writ of False Judgment, or otherwise, into any of His Majesty's Courts of
Record, any Former Law, Custom, Statute, or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An ACT for Redress of certain Abuses in Making Pewter and Brass. CHAP. XXXIX.
WHEREAS there is much Pewter and Brass, Made, Wrought, and Vended within this
Kingdom, which is not of such Fine Metal, and such perfect Goodness as the
same ought to be; and is Made, Wrought, and Vended oftentimes by very
Vnskillful persons, who understand not the True Making and Working of such
Metals, or by other persons, who use the said Art Deceitfully, all which Tends
much to the prejudice of His Majesty's Subjects, who have occasion to Buy, and
make Use of Pewter and Brass: For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from and after the
First day of January next, which will be in the present Year of Our Lord, One
thousand Six hundred and Ninety seven, no person or persons, using the Craft
or Trade of Pewters and Brasiers, or who Buy, Sell, Trade, or Deal in the same,
within this Realm, shall Sell or Change, any Pewter or Brass, New or Old, at
any place or places, save only in open Faires and Markets, or in their own
Public Shops and Dwelling Houses, upon pain that every person and persons,
Acting contrary hereunto, shall for every such Offense, Forfeit and Lose the
Sum of Forty Shillings, the one half to go, and be to the use of the Poor of
the Parish, where such Offense shall be Committed, the other half to the person
or persons, that shall Seize, Find, or Prosecute for the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons, from and after the said First day of January next, shall at any place
or places, within this Realm, Cast, Make or Work any new Pewter, or Brass
Vessel, but such as shall be of as good Fine Metal, as is the Pewter and Brass,
Cast and Wrought after the perfect Goodness required for the same, within the
City of London, upon pain of Forfeiture of all and every such Pewter and Brass
Vessel and Vessels so Cast, Made, and Wrought contrary thereunto, the one half
of such Forfeiture to be to the use of the Poor of the Parish, where such
Offense shall be Committed, the other half to the use of the Finder, Discoverer
and Prosecutor for the same* which said Offenses shall be Examined, Heard and
Determined in all Cities, and Corporate Towns, by, and before the Mayor,
Bailiff, Sovereign, Portreeve, or other head Officer of such City, or Town
Corporate, and in all other places, by and before two Justices of the Peace of
the respective Counties, where such Goods shall be so Seized, as aforesaid, who
are hereby Authorized and Required, to Examine the said Matters, on Oath of One
or More Witnesses, which Oath they are hereby Authorized to Administer, and to
Hear, Determine, and give Judgment thereupon, for the Forfeiture of such Goods,
to the Uses aforesaid, or otherwise for Discharging and Restoring the same, as
they shall see cause; which said Judgment so given, such Mayor, Bailiff,
Justices of the Peace, or other Officer, are hereby Required to Return, and
Certify to the Justices of the Peace, at the next Quarter Sessions, to be held
for such City, Town Corporate, or County respectively, to the Intent that the
same may be there Entered of Record.

Provided always, That no Pewter and Brass, shall be so Seized or Forfeited,
save only such as shall at the time of such Seizure, be in the possession of
some Pewterer or Brasier, or other person using the said Trade or Mystery, or
Selling such Pewter or Brass, or of some person or persons in Trust for him or
them, and not such as shall be in the possession of any other person not using
such Trade or Mystery, as the proper Goods of such other person.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That no manner of person
or persons, of what Degree or Condition soever, he or they be, from and after
the said First day of January next, shall make any Hollow Wares, That is to
say, Salts and Pots, or the like of Pewter, called Lay-Metal, which shall be of
courser or worse Metal then according to the Assize of Lay-Metal Wrought within
the City of London; and that the Makers of such Wares, shall make the same
Wares, with several and part^cular Marks of their own, to the intent, that the
Makers of such Wares shall avow the same, and such Wares may appear to be made
by them, and that all and every such Wares not so sufficiently Made, Wrought,
or Marked in Form aforesaid, found in the possession of the same Maker or
Seller, shall be Seized as Forfeited; and if the same Ware be Sold before such
Seizure, then the said Maker shall Forfeit the Value of the same Ware, so
Unlawfully Wrought and Sold, the One half of such Forfeiture, to be the Use of
the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be Committed, and the other
half to the Use of the Finder or Finders, Searcher, and Prosecutor for the
same; such Offenses to be Examined, Heard, and Determined as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, after the said First Day of January next, Using, Buying, and Selling,
of Pewter and Brass, shall have, or make use of any Deceitful, or False Beams,
or Weights, such person or persons, shall for every such Offense, Forfeit the
Sum of Five Pounds, the one half to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense
shall be Committed, the other half to the person or persons, Finding,
Discovering, and Prosecuting for the same, such Prosecution to be before such
respective persons, and in like manner, as for the other Offenses, against this
Act before mentioned; And such persons are hereby respectively Authorized and
Required, to Act therein, as in cases of such other Offenses; and if the said
Offender or Offenders, shall not be sufficient to pay the said Sum or Sums,
so by him or them Forfeited, that then it shall, and may be Lawful, to, and for
such person or persons respectively, before whom such Offenses shall be Tried,
to put such Offender in the Stocks, for the space of Two Hours, and after to
continue him in Custody, until the next Market Day, for the place where such
Offense shall be committed, and then in the open Market place, during the chief
time of such Market, to put, and continue him with his Head in the Pillory, for
the space of our Hour.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
Lawful, to, and for the Master and Wardens, of the said Crafts of Pewterers and
Brasiers, within every City and Burough, within this Realm, where such Master
and Wardens are; and where such Master and Wardens are not, then to, and for
the Head Officer, and Magistrates of the said City and Burough, to appoint
certain persons, most expert in knowing of the same, to make Search in Cities
and Buroughs where they dwell, for, and after such Offenders and him or them,
to Apprehend, or Cause to be Apprehended; and also to Seize such Goods as they
shall justly suspect to be made contrary to this Act, and Liable to be Seized
by Virtue thereof, and forthwith to bring such Offenders and Goods so
Apprehended and Seized, before the respective persons hereby Required to Hear,
and Determine such Offenses, in Order to their further Procedure thereupon,
according to the directions of this Act: And the Justices of the Peace within
every Shire, or County of this Kingdom, are hereby Authorized and Required, at
the General-Sessions of the Peace, to be held for their respective Counties, at
Michaelmas in every Year, to Assign and Appoint, Two certain persons, having
Experience in such Goods, to make Search in the Premises, in every part of the
said Shire or County, as well within Franchises, as without, except in Cities
or Buroughs, where persons are appointed for that purpose, by the Head
Officers, or Governor of the same, and to Seize such Offenders, and Goods, and
bring the same before such Justices of the Peace, who is hereby Required, to
Hear and Determine such Offenses, in Order to their further procedure thereon,
as aforesaid; and that in default of the Master and Wardens, or other the
persons to be Appointed, according to this Act, of Searching in manner
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful, to, and for any other person or persons
having Cunning, and Knowledge in the said Occupation, by oversight of the
Mayor, Bailiff, and Head Officers of the said Cities and Buroughs, to Search
all the aforesaid places, for any of the aforesaid Unlawful Metals, and
Unlawful Weights, in order to the putting of this present Act in due Execution.

FINIS.

