AN ACT For making the Collectors Receipts For Quit-Rent, Crown Rent, and other
Rents Due to the Crown, Full and Legal Discharges for the same; and for
Limitting their Fees thereon.

AN ACT For taking away the Benefit of Clergy IN SOME CASES.

DUBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley, 1697.

An ACT for making the Collectors Receipts for Quit-Rent, Crown-Rent, and other
Rents due to the Crown, full and legal Discharges for the same; and for
Limitting their Fees thereon. CHAP. XXXI.
WHEREAS the several and respepective Farmers of the Revenue of this Kingdom,
since the Restoration of His late Majesty King Charles the Second; and the
several Commissioners appointed since, for the management of the said Revenue,
have thought fit for several weighty Considerations, to Collect and Levy the
Quit-Rent, Crown-Rent, Composition, and all other Rents due to the Crown, by
Collectors, by them appointed, in the several Districts of this Kingdom, which
was principally intended for the Ease of the Subject, by saving them the
Trouble, Danger, and Expense, of sending their Money to Dublin, to be there
paid into the Treasury.

And whereas several Scruples have Arisen, amongst His Majesty's good Subjects,
which have made them doubt, whether the Acquittances given by such Collectors,
were, or ought to be sufficient Discharges to the Persons who have paid the
said Rents, against His Majesty, in any Prosecution made in His Name, in the
Court of Exchequer, or elsewhere; for Levying and Recovering thereof, in case
the said Collectors who have Received the same, have not duly Accounted for
such Receipts with His Majesty, as in Duty they ought: For Remedy whereof.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same; that the several
Acquittances already given by the Collectors, or Receivers, duly Authorized and
Appointed to Collect, and Receive the said Quit-Rent, Crown-Rent,
Composition-Rent, and other Rents: As also all Acquittances that hereafter
shall be given by any such Collector, or Receiver, during the time the said
Collectors were, are, or shall be so Employed, shall be Good, and Valid in Law,
to all Intents and Purposes, against His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors. And
that all such Acquittances so given, or hereafter to be given, shall be as Good
and Effectual, to all Intents and Purposes, as an Exchequer Acquittance duly
Passed and Entered in the several Offices of the Exchequer.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every the Collector, and Collectors of
the aforesaid Rents, shall upon Payment of the same, or any part thereof, give
and perfect to the person so paying the same, a full and Clear Receipt, or
Acquittance, for what he shall receive, in Parchment, under his Hand; wherein
he shall mention the Sum so by him Received, and for what Gales Rent, and for
what Land, and on what Account the same is paid to him. And for the
Encouragement of the said Collectors to do their Duty therein, with all due
Regard and Indulgence to the Country. And to prevent the Extortions and
Oppressions which may be committed by their Bailiffs, or Drivers, on the
Tenants Liable to pay such Quit-Rent, Crown-Rent, Composition-Rent, or other
Rent.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Collectors,
and every of them, may demand and receive the respective Fees hereafter
mentioned, and no more, or other Fee: That is to say, For every Acquittance
they shall give for any of the said Rents, for any Sum above Five shillings,
and not exceeding Twenty shillings, the Sum of Six pence, and no more, and for
every Sum above Twenty shillings, and not exceeding Five pounds, the Sum of
One shilling and no more, and for every Sum above Five pounds, and not
exceeding Fifteen pounds, the Sum of One shilling Six pence, and no more, and
for every Sum above Fifteen pounds, the Sum or Fee of Two shillings, and in
no case to receive any more for any one Acquittance then Two shillings.

And whereas several persons stand Charged with, or are Oblidged to pay several
Rents, for several Parcels of their Lands and Tenements, the same being Granted
under several and distinct Rents, to themselves, or others, under whom they
Claim, for which formerly, several Acquittances used to be given, though paid at
the same times, and by the same person, for which said several Acquittances,
distinct Fees have been paid, to the great Charge of the Subject; for Remedy
whereof.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where one person stands
Charged with the Payment of several and distinct Sums, in respect of several
Parcels of their Lands and Tenements, or where the same is in Charge, in the
name of other persons, not in possession of such Lands, the several Collectors
of this Kingdom, within their respective Districts, shall on Receipt of the
said Rents, or any part thereof, give to the person so in possession, as
aforesaid, and so paying the same, One Acquittance for what he shall so pay,
which Acquittance shall distinctly mention, as well the Lands and Tenements, as
the Rent so paid, and for what Gale the same is so paid, and by whom, for which
One Acquittance the said Collectors shall receive no other or greater Fee then
as aforesaid, And whereas, the several Acquittances to be made and given
pursuant to this Act, may be lost or mislaid, to the prejudice of the person
therein concerned: For prevention whereof.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Collector and Collectors of this Kingdom, shall every Year, prepare a Book,
wherein they shall Enter all the Receipts or Acquittances by them given, for
all and every the aforesaid Rents, under their Hands, and in the presence of
the party paying the same, which Receipt the said parties, or any other on his
behalf, may set their Names; for every which Entry, the said Collectors may
demand and receive Two pence over and above the Fees aforesaid; which Book, the
said Collectors, and every of them respectively, shall Yearly, before the
Stating of their Accounts, return under their Hands, and on their Oaths, into
the Office of the Auditor-General, where the same shall remain and be kept, not
only as a Charge on such Collectors respectively, but also as a Discharge to
the Subject, for all Sums thereby appearing to be paid as aforesaid.

An ACT for taking away the Benefit of Clergy in some Cases. CHAP. XXXII.
FORASMUCH as diverse Wicked, and Ill-disposed Persons, are Encouraged to Commit
Roberies upon Men's Persons, and in their Houses, and other Offenses, by the
Privilege, as the Law now is, of Demanding the Benefit of the Clergy.

Be it therefore Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, and by, and with
the Advice, and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That all
and every person, or persons that shall and at any time, from, and after the
First day of May, in the Year of Our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety
eight, Rob any other person, or shall Feloniously take away any Goods or
Chattles, being in any Dwelling House, the Owner, or any other person being
therein, and put in fear; or shall Rob any Dwelling House in the Day time, any
person being therein; or shall Comfort and Abett, Assist, Counsel, Hire, or
Command, any person or persons, to Commit any of the said Offenses; or to break
any Dwelling House, Shop, or Warehouse, thereunto belonging, or therewith used
in the Day time, and Feloniously take away any Money, Goods, or Chattles, of
the value of Five Shillings, or upwards therein being, although no person shall
be within such Dwelling House, Shop, or Warehouse; or shall Counsel, Hire, or
Command any person to Commit any Burglary, being thereof Convicted, or
Attainted, or being Indicted thereof, shall stand Mute, or will not directly
Answer to the Indictment; or shall peremptorily Challenge above the Number of
Twenty persons, returned to be of the Iuty, shall not have the Benefit of his,
or their Clergy.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons whatsoever, be Indicted of any Offense, for which, by Virtue of any
former Statute, he, or they are Excluded from having the Benefit of his, or
their Clergy, if he or they, had been thereof Convicted by Verdict, or
Confession; such person and persons, if he, or they stand Mute, or will not
Answer ^irectly to the Felony, or shall Challenge peremptorily above the Number
of Twenty persons, returned to be of the Jury; or shall be Outlawed thereupon,
shall in like manner be Ousted of the Benefit of his, or their Clergy, as if he
had been Convicted of such Offense, by Verdict, or Confession.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons hereafter be Indicted of Felony, for Stealing any Goods or Chattle, in
any County within this Realm of Ireland, and thereof be Convicted, or
Attainted; or upon his, or their Arraignment shall stand Mute, or will not
directly Answer to the Indictment; or shall Challenge peremptorily above the
Number of Twenty persons, returned to be of the Jury, he, or they, shall be
totally Excluded from having the Benefit of his or their Clergy. If it appear
upon Evidence, or Examination, before the Justices, that the said Goods, or
Chattles, were taken by Robbery, or Burglary, or in any other manner, in any
other County; whereof, if such person or persons, had been Convicted by a Jury
of the said other County, he, or they, are Excluded by Virtue of this, or any
other Act, from having the Benefit of his, or their Clergy.

And forasmuch, as Theives and Robbers, are much Encouraged to Commit such
Offenses, because a great Number of persons make it their Trade, and business,
to deal in the buying of stolen Goods.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, shall Buy or Receive any Goods or Chattle, that shall be Feloniously
taken or stolen from any other person, knowing the same to be stolen, he, or
they, shall be taken and deemed an Accessory or Accessaries to the Felony after
the Fact, and shall incur the same Punishment as an Accessory, or Accessaries
to the Felony, after the Felony Committed.

And whereas, it is a frequent practice for Idle and Disorderly persons, to
Hire Lodgings, with an Intent to have an Opportunity to take away, Imbezle, or
Purloin the Goods and Furniture, being in such Lodgings.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons shall take away, with an intent to steal, imbezle, or
purloin, any Chattle, Bedding, or Furniture, which by Contract or Agreement,
he, or they are to use, or shall be Let to him, or them to use, in, or with
such Lodging, such taking, Imbezling, or purloining, shall be to all Intents
and Purposes, taken, reputed, and adjudged to be Larceny and Felony, and the
Offender shall suffer as in Case of Felony.

And whereas by the Laws of this Realm, Women Convict of Felony for Stealing of
Goods and Chattle, of the value of Ten shillings, and upwards, and for other
Felonses, where a Man is to have the benefit of his Clergy, are to suffer Death.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That where a
Man, being Convicted of any Felony, for which he may demand the benefit of his
Clergy, if a Woman be Convicted for the same, or like Offense, upon her Prayer
to have the Benefit of this Statute, Judgment of Death shall not be given
against her upon such Conviction, or Execution, Awarded upon any Outlawry for
such Offense, but shall suffer the same Punishment as a Man should suffer, that
has the benefit of his Clergy allowed him in the like Case; that is to say,
shall be Burnd in the Hand by the Jailer, in open Court, and further be kept in
Prison, for such time as the Justices in their Discretion, shall think Fit, so
as the same do not exceed One Year's Imprisonment.

And forasmuch as such Men who have once had their Clergy, and such Women who
shall once have the Benefit of this Statute, may happen to be Indicted for an
Offense Committed afterward in some other County.

Be it therefore Enacted, That the Clerk of the Crown, Clerk of the Peace, or
Clerk of the Assizes, where such Man or Woman shall be Convicted, shall at the
request of the Prosecutor, or any other in His Majesty's behalf, certify a
Transcript Briefly, and in few Words, containing the effect and Tenor of every
Indictment and Conviction, of such Man or Woman, of his having the benefit of
the Clergy, or her having the benefit of this Statute, and Addition of every
such person or persons, and the certainty of the Felony, and Conviction to the
Judges and Justices in such other County where such Man or Woman shall be
Indicted; which Certificate, being produced in Court, shall be a sufficient
Proof that such Man has before had the benefit of his Clergy, and such Woman
has had the Benefit of this Statute.

And forasmuch as since the late Rebellion in this Kingdom, the stealing of
Cows, Sheep, and other Cattle, has been more frequent then heretofore, so as
it is become necessary, in Order to prevent the Committing Offenses of that
kind, that the Benefit of the Clergy should for some time be taken away from
such Offenders.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons, shall
from, and after the said First day of May, in the Year of Our Lord One thousand
Six hundred Ninety eight, Feloniously steal, or take away, any Cow, or Cows,
Sheep, or other Cattle, and shall be thereof Convict by Verdict, or Confession,
or shall stand mute, and will not Directly answer to the Felony, or shall
Challenge Peremptorily above the number of Twenty persons, or shall be Outlawed
thereupon, such person or persons, if such Offense shall exceed the Crime of
Petty Larceny, or the Cattle stolen shall be of greater Value then Twelve
pence, Sterling, shall not be allowed the Benefit of his or their Clergy, but
be wholly Ousted from the same.

Provided always, That this Act shall continue, and be in force, as to the
stealing of such Cow, or Cows, Sheep, or Cattle, for Three Years next ensuing,
and no longer.

FINIS.

