AN ACT For the more EASY, AND Speedy Securing, AND RECOVERY OF SMALL DEBTS.



DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT for the more Easy, and Speedy Securing, and Recovery of Small Debts.
CHAP. LX.
WHEREAS nothing would conduce more to the Advancement of Trade, Commerce, and
Industry in this Kingdom, then that an Easy, and Summary way, for the
Recovery, and Securing of Small Debts, might be found, whereby an Universal
Credit, might be Established among the Trading people of this Realm, without
the necessity of Tedious, and Costly Suits of Law. May it therefore please your
Majesty, that it may be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty; by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same; That in every
County, and every County of a City, and County of a Town, in this Kingdom of
Ireland; some person before the First Day of February, in this present year of
Our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, be appointed by His Majesty,
or by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Lord Justice, or Lords Justices, or
other Chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, for the time being, to be
Register in each County, or County of a City, or County of a Town; which said
person so Appointed, shall be a Resident, or Inhabitant, for the most part, in
such County respectively, wherein he shall be, as herein-after Employed, and
shall enter into Recognizance of Five hundred pounds Sterling, before some one
of the Judges of either Bench, or Barons of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
or before the Justices of the Peace, at the next Quarter Sessions, to be holden
for the said County, for the due Execution of his Office; Which said
Recognizance, shall be Filed of Record, in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer in
this Kingdom, some time before the last Day of the Ensuing Term, after such
Recognizance shall be acknowledged: And that every such Register, of any such
County, as aforesaid, shall, and may, by the Authority of this Act, have Power
to Appoint One, or more Deputy, or Deputies, to Officiate under him in such
County respectively.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such
Register, and Deputy or Deputies, before he, or they, shall take upon him, or
them respectively, the Execution of the said Office, shall take the following
Oath, before some One, or more of the Justices of the Peace of the said County,
or County of a City, or County of a Town, or before the Chief Magistrate of
such Town, or Corporation, or his Deputy, where such Register shall keep his
Office, (viz.)

I A. B. do Swear, that I will according to the best of my Skill and Cunning,
duly and faithfully execute the Office of Register (or Deputy Register) in this
County, according to an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the more Easy
and Speedy Securing, and Recovery of Small Debts, and that I will not Directly,
nor Indirectly, demand, take, or receive any manner of Fee, Reward, or
Gratuity, by reason, or Color of my Office, other then such Fees as are
allowed by the said Act.

So help me God.

And shall then likewise take the Oaths, and Subscribe the Declaration
mentioned and contained in an Act of Parliament, made in England, in the Third
Year of the Reign of His present Majesty, and the late Queen Mary, Entitled,
An Act for the Abrogating the Oath of Supremacy in Ireland, and Appointing
other Oaths; Which said Oath of Office, and other Oaths, and Declaration, the
said Justice or Justices of the Peace or other Chief Magistrate of such Town or
Corporation, or his Deputy, are hereby Authorized, Empowered and Required to
Administer. And further, that every such Register, Deputy, or Deputies
aforesaid, upon the Pain, Penalty, and Forfeiture of his, or their respective
Office or Offices, shall take the aforesaid Oath of Office, and the aforesaid
Oaths, and Subscribe the Declaration, at the next Quarter Sessions, or the next
Assizes to be holden for the said County, or County of a City, or County of a
Town, which shall first happen in Open Court, between the Hours of Nine and
Twelve, in the Morning; which said Oaths respectively, and Declaration, the
said Judges of Assize, or Justices of the Peace at their respective Sessions,
are hereby Authorized, Empowered and Required to Administer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said First day of February next, every person and persons having any Bond or
Bill, under Hand and Seal, for any Sum or Sums of Money, not exceeding Ten
pounds, principal Money, which said Bond, or Bill, being acknowledged before
any person who is a Justice of the Peace in this Kingdom, or before the Chief
Magistrate of any Town Corporate, and such Justice of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate, or his Deputy, Certifying such Acknowledgment, which
acknowledgment, every Justice of the Peace of this Kingdom, and every Chief
Magistrate of any Town Corporate, or his Deputy, are by the Authority of this
Act, Empowered and Required to take, and Certificate under their respective
Hands and Seals, to make, and deliver, to the party and parties interested in
such Bond, or Bonds, Bill, or Bills, which Certificate and Bond, or Bill, being
brought to the Register, or his Deputy, of such County, County of a City, or
County of a Town, wherein such person is a Justice of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate of a Town Corporate, or his Deputy, such Register, or his Deputy, or
Deputies, or one of them, shall in a Book to be Kept for that purpose, make an
Entry of the said Bond, or Bill, and Acknowledgment, at large, as also the
Receipts and Transfers, thereon endorsed, if any be, and from, and after such
Entry, the person or persons who perfected the same, his and their Goods and
Chattles personal, shall be thereby Bound and Liable to the said Debt and
Interest, from the day of Payment, in like manner, as if the same had been a
Judgment at Law.

And to the end there may be no Mistakes or Controversies, for, or concerning
the said Bonds, or Bills, in relation to the Wording thereof.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Bonds or Bills
as shall be Registered in pursuance of this Act, shall be Printed and Stamped
with His Majesty's Arms, and be in the Form following; That is to say.

KNOW all men by these presents, that (...) of (...) in the County of (...) do
Acknowledge my self to stand justly Indebted unto (...) of (...) in the County
of (...) in the Full and Just Sum of (...) pounds Sterling, to be paid to the
said (...) His Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at, or before the (...)
day of (...) to the which payment, I Bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators; and in default of Payment thereof, I do consent, that Execution
shall Issue against my Body, Goods and Chattles personal: Witness my Hand and
Seal, this (...) day of (...)

And in Case that there be Two or more persons Bound in the said Bond, the said
Printed Bond shall be Printed and made so, as to comprehended them, and to Bind
them Jointly, and severally. And to the end, Forged and Counterfeit Bonds, or
Bills, may be prevented, and the Subjects of this Land, sufficiently provided
with the said Bonds, or Bills so Printed and Stamped, at Easy and Moderate
Rates.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Register of any County,
or County of a City, or County of a Town, shall provide in every Market Town,
within their respective Limits and Precincts, a sufficient quantity of such
Blank Bonds, or Bills for Sale, Stamped with the King's Arms, and the name of
the County, whereof such person shall be Register. And that no person or
persons whatsoever, shall Expose to Sale in any such Market Town, as aforesaid,
any Stamped Printed Bonds, or Bills, other then such as shall be Stamped by the
said Register, or his Deputy, or Deputies, upon the penalty of Forfeiting Ten
pounds for each Offense, to such Register, to be Recovered by such Register,
thereby Injured, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no
Essoin shall be Allowed, or more then one Imparlance.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted, and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid; That no person or persons, shall be oblidged to pay more then one
penny for each of such Bonds or Bills.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That the Words used by
the party or parties, Transferring of the said Bonds or Bills, shall be these,
or to the like Effect following; That is to say, I A. B. do Transfer this Bill
to C. D. as Witness my Hand, this (...) day of (...) Anno Domini (...)



And in Case there be Two or more Obligees, then the said Transferrer shall be
in their Names, with proper Words to the Effect and Purport aforesaid, Mutatis
Mutandis.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, stand Indebted by such Bond or Bill, Acknowledged and Entered, as
aforesaid, and shall refuse to pay such Debt or Debts, at the time the same
shall become Due and Payable; Or at any time afterward, such Creditor or
Creditors, making Oath, that the Money Due thereon, has been Demanded, and the
Bond or Bill, Tendered to the party or parties Indebted, his, or their
Executors, or Administrators, at his, or their, place or places of Abode, or
Residence, the said Oath to be made before the Justices of the Peace, at the
Quarter Sessions, to be holden for the County, County of a City, or County of a
Town, where the said Bond, or Bill, is Entered in open Court, between the Hours
of Nine and Twelve in the Morning; Which Oath, the said Justices of the Peace,
are hereby Empowered, and Required to Administer; and which Oath, the said
Register, or his Deputy, are Required to Receive and Enter; then the said
Register, or his Deputy, at the same Quarter Sessions of the Peace, or at any
other Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said County, at any time within One
Year after the said Money shall become due, and payable, upon the Delivery to
him, the said Register, or his Deputy of the said Bond, or Bill, shall Issue a
Warrant of Execution, under his Hand, and Seal of Office, Directed to all and
every the High-Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Stewards, and
High-Constables of this Kingdom, against the person or persons, his or their
Executors, or Administrators Owing the said Money, or his and their Goods and
Chattles personal, for the Recovery, and Levying of the said Money, together
with the Interest which shall then be Due; as also the Costs and Fees, for
Entering of the said Bond or Bill, and for the Warrant of Execution, and other
Fees, according to the Directions and Limitations, herein-after mentioned and
expressed.

And to the end, all Disputes and Controversies, for, and concerning the
Payment, and Discharge of such Debt or Debts, for, or on Account of such Bonds
or Bills, may be prevented.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Payment or Payments,
shall be Esteemed, Valid, for, or on Account of such Bonds or Bills, unless the
same be Entered on the back of the said Bond or Bill, by the party or parties,
Interested therein, at the time of Entering of such Payment or Payments.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriffs,
Coroners, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Stewards, and High-Constables, who shall have
the Execution of the said Warrants, in their respective Counties, County of a
City, or County of a Town, Precincts, and Liberties, shall have full Power and
Authority, upon the Delivery of such Warrant or Warrants, to them respectively;
and are accordingly hereby required to Arrest, and take the Body or Bodies, of
the Person or Persons, against whom the said Warrants of Execution shall Issue,
if so be the Party or Parties, Plantiff or Plantiffs, his, or their Servant, or
Agent, shall desire the same: And in Case any Person or Persons, at such
desire, shall be so Arrested or Taken, by any of the aforesaid Officers,
appointed by this Act, who have not the Custody, or Keeping of Prisoners upon
Execution, out of His Majesty's Four Courts, that then the Person or Persons so
taken, shall be Delivered to the Plantiff, or his Servant, or Agent, to be
carried, and conveyed to the Sheriff, or other Officer, having the Custody of
the Goal of the said County, where the said Person or Persons shall be so
Taken, at the Charge and Peril of the said Plantiff; Who is hereby required to
Receive and Keep, him or them, in safe Custody; Which said Sheriff, or other
Officer, having the Custody of the said Goal, shall be chargable with the said
Debtor or Debtors, in like manner, as if such Debtor or Debtors, had been taken
upon a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, upon a Judgment at Common Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said several
Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Stewards, and High-Constables in
their respective Limits and Precincts, shall by the Authority of this Act, have
full Power and Authority upon such Warrant of Execution, against any person or
persons Goods, at the desire of the party, or parties, Plantiff, or Plantiffs,
his, or their Agent or Servant, to Seize and take the said person, or persons,
Goods, and Chattles personal, in Execution, and the same to Appraise by the
Appraisers of the Parish, or Barony, where the same shall be so taken or
Seized, and shall give the Debtor, or Debtors if so be he, or they may be
found, the First Refusal of the said Goods and Chattles personal, at the
Appraised Rate; which if the said Debtor, or Debtors, shall refuse, or neglect
to pay within Ten days after such Appraisement, then the said Goods and
Chattles personal, shall be sold and delivered to the Plantiff, his Servant, or
Agent, he, or they paying according to the Appraised Values, to the party or
parties Interested, whatsoever Sum or Sums of Money the same shall amount
unto, over and above the said Principal Debt,, Interest, and Costs, according
to the true intent and meaning of this Act, and for which, the said Warrant of
Execution, shall be a sufficient Authority to the said Sheriff, Coroner,
Bailiff, Seneschal, Steward, and High-Constable, and to every, or any of them,
and that the said Sheriff, Coroner Bailiff, Seneschal, Steward, or
High-Constable, shall make return thereon, in what manner the said Warrant was
Executed, to the Register of the County, or his Deputy, or Deputies, from
whence the said Warrant of Execution Issue, at, or before the next
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the said County, after such
Execution Executed; which Warrant of Execution, with the Return thereof, shall
be read in the open Court, and there Filed, and kept by the said Register, or
his Deputy, and in case the Sheriff, or any other Officer, as aforesaid,
appointed by this Act, shall on any such Warrant of Execution, take any person
or persons, or his, or their Goods, or Chattles personal, in pursuance, or by
Color of this Act, and shall refuse, or neglect to execute, or make return of
such Warrant of Execution in reasonable time, after the delivery thereof, and
according to the Direction of this Act, upon reasonable demand made by the
Plantiff or Plantiffs, his, or their Servant, or Agent, that then such Sheriff,
or other Officer, as aforesaid, refusing, or neglecting so to do, shall be
liable to an Action on the Case, at the Suit of the said Plantiff, or
Plantiffs, his, or their Executors, or Administrators, in like manner, as if
the same had been an Execution, Executed on any Judgment at Law, either upon
the Body, or Goods; and shall pay Treble Costs, in case Judgment shall pass for
such Plantiff, or Plantiffs, his, or their Executors or Administrators.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted and Declared, by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and every person, or persons, Plantiff, or Plantiffs in
every such Warrant of Execution, shall from time to time, and at all times
before such Execution, made and Executed, be at full Power and Liberty to make
his Election or Choice, whether he will have the Body or Bodies, or Goods
personal, taken in Execution, of the party, or parties, Defendant on such
Warrant of Execution, as aforesaid: And that the said Sheriff, Coroner, Baliff,
Seneschal, Steward, and High-Constable, and every of them, shall pursue the
Direction of the Plantiff, or Plantiffs, his, or their Servant, or Agent
therein; and in Case the Plantiff, or Plantiffs, his or their Servant, or
Agent, shall procure the said Defendants Body to be taken in Execution, then no
further Execution on the Defendants Goods, shall be during the continuance of
the said Defendants Imprisonment; or in Case the Plantiff, or Plantiffs; his or
their Servant, or Agent, shall procure such Defendants Goods and Chattles
personal, to be taken in Execution, which on Appraisment shall appear to be
sufficient to answer the said Complainants Debt, Principal, Interest, and the
Costs herein-after allowed; that then, no Execution shall be made on the said
Defendants person, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall, and may
be Lawful, to, and for such person or persons, to whom any Money shall be Due,
or Owing by such Bond or Bill, upon the back of such Bond, or Bill, in manner,
as is aforesaid directed to Transfer, or Assign the Money so Due and Owing,
together, with the Interest then accrued, or to accrue, and the Costs paid in
pursuance, or according to the Direction of this Act, to any other person or
persons whatsoever; and the same so Assigned, or Transferred, such Assignee or
Assigns, his, or their Executors, or Administrators, shall have the Entire,
and sole Right, Interest, and Property in the said Bond or Bill, together with
the Money, Principal, Interest, and Costs due thereon, Exclusively of any
Right, Property, or Interest of any other person or persons, his, or their
Executors, or Administrators, to whom the same was formerly Entered into, or
Transferred, or Assigned, and that no Release, or Discharge of any such former
Proprietor, after such Assignment, or Transferring, as aforesaid, shall any way
operate to the Prejudice, or Damage of the party or parties, to whom the same
shall be, as aforesaid, Assigned, or Transferred; but that the Assignee or
Transferee, Assigns or Transferrees, his, or their Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns, who have, or has the Right, or Interest in the said Bond or Bill,
shall have the Warrant of Execution in his, or their own Name or Names, in as
large, ample and beneficial manner, as if the said Bond or Bill, had been at
first made to him or them; any Law, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That the Transferring, or Assigning of such Bond or Bill,
shall not any way Extend, or be Construed to Extend, to oblidge the person or
persons, or Goods and Chattles of the party, or parties so Transferring, any
thing in this Act, or any other Custom or Law, to the contrary hereof in
anywise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any person
or persons, shall presume to Forge, or Counterfeit any Justice of the Peace's
Hand or Seal, to any such Bond or Bill, or the Hand and Seal, of Office, of any
such Register, or his Deputy or Deputies, to any such Warrant of Execution, or
to any Indorsments, by such Register, or his Deputy, or Deputies made,
Certifying that such Bond, or Bill, was Registered according to, or in Pursuance
of this Act, such person or persons so Offending, and thereof duly Convict,
shall suffer such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as a Felon, without Benefit
of Clergy.

And for the better preventing of all Partial, and Vnfair Practizes, by any
Sheriff, Coroner, Bailiff, Seneschal, Steward, or High-Constable, in the
Execution of this Act, or any part thereof.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall, and may be lawful, to
and for the Justices of Assize in their several Circuits, and Ridings, at their
General Assizes, and to, and for the Justices of the Peace, at their General
Quarter Sessions, in their respective Counties, where such Partial, or Vnfair
Practices, shall be by them, or any of them committed, or done: and they are
respectively hereby required, upon complaint thereof, to cause the party or
parties Offending, as aforesaid to be thereof Indicted; and in ease the party
Offending, shall not submit, he shall be with all reasonable speed Tried, and
if Verdict shall pass against him, or in case he shall submit, that then the
Judge, or Judges of Assize, or Justices of the Peace, or Major part of them,
shall, and may, by the Authority of this Act, and are hereby required to lay
such Fine as to them respectively shall seem meet, and reasonable, not
exceeding Ten pounds, the same to be Levied within Thirty days after such Fine
Imposed by Warrant of the said Court respectively, where the said complaint
shall be made, upon the Goods of the person so Offending, and Convict, as
aforesaid, without further Appeal, or Suit, in Law or Equity.

Provided always, That in Case the person so Offending, shall within the said
Thirty days, make Satisfaction to the party or parties grieved, and shall
procure his, or their Certificate, under his, or their Hands and Seals, to that
Effect and Purpose, to the Clerk of the Crown, or Clerk of the Peace,
respectively Directed, who is to Issue such Warrant, as aforesaid; that then,
and in such Case, the said Clerk of the Crown, or Clerk of the Peace,
respectively Directed, who is to Issue such Warrant, as aforesaid; that then,
and in such Case, the said Clerk of the Crown, or Clerk of the Peace
respectively, are hereby required to make stay of such Warrants, till the next
Assizes, or next Quarter Sessions respectively; at which time it shall, and may
be lawful, to, and for the Judge or Judges of Assize, or Justices of the Peace,
or major part of them, upon application to them respectively, at their General
Assizes, or General Quarter Sessions in open Court, the party or parties
injured, being first satisfied, as aforesaid, to reduce such Fine or Fines,
according to his, or their respective Discretion or Discretions.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case any person
or persons, as aforesaid, Taken in Execution by any such Warrant of Execution
in pursuance of this Act, shall Dye in Execution, the Debt shall not be
Discharged thereby, but be liable to be Levied, and Raised in manner as
aforesaid, by Warrant of Execution, upon his, or their Goods and Chattles
personal, wherever they may be found in this Kingdom. And to the end, Exaction,
or Extortion of Fees for, or concerning the Execution of this Act, may be
prevented.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Register's Fees,
for Entering the said Bond or Bill, and Certifying the same, shall be Six pence,
and no more; And for Issuing a Warrant of Execution, One shilling, and no more;
And for Entering of a Discharge of the said Bond or Bill, Three pence, and no
more; And for Entering each Transfer, if desired, Two pence and no more; And
that the Fees of the said Sheriff, Coroner, Bailiff Seneschal, Steward, or
High-Constable, for the taking of the said Obligor, or for taking of his Goods
and Chattles on the said Warrant of Execution, shall be One Shilling, and no
more; and to the Appraiser, or Appraisers of such Goods and Chattles personal,
Six pence in the pound, and no more; And to such Officer, or Officers, to whom
the Custody of the said person in Execution shall be Committed, Six pence in
the pound, and no more.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case any person
or persons, shall corruptly take, or make any False Oath, or Suborn, or Procure
any person or persons, corruptly to make such False Oath, for any matter, or
thing relating to this Act, such person or persons, corruptly making such False
Oath, or procuring such False Oath, corruptly to be made, being thereof
Lawfully Convict, shall for every such Offense, Incur and Suffer, such, and the
like pains and penalties, as are mentioned and prescribed, to be inflicted on
persons Offending in Cases of Perjury, and Subornation, by one Act made in this
Kingdom, in the Eighteenth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth of
ever Glorious Memory, Entitled, An Act concerning willful Perjury.

And for preventing of the Abuses or Irregular Proceedings which may be
otherwise committed or done by Registers, or their Deputies in the Execution of
this Act.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Register, or his Deputy,
or Deputies, of any County, or County of a City, or County of a Town, within
this Kingdom, shall, and are hereby required, to deliver to the Clerk of the
Peace, at every Quarter Sessions, and to the Justice of the Peace, who is
Chairman at such Quarter Sessions, and to each of them, a Book fairly drawn,
and Signed by such Register, or his Deputy, which shall be a true Copy of all
Entries made since the former Sessions; in which Books, the said Clerk of the
Peace, and Justice of the Peace, shall enter respectively, such Rules, Orders,
and Proceedings, as shall be made at that Quarter Sessions, and in open Court,
shall cause the said Register to read over his Book, comparing it with the said
Clerk of the Peace's Book, and the said Justices Book, and making them all to
agree; which being done, the said Justice of the Peace, Register, or his
Deputy, and the Clerk of the Peace, shall all of them in open Court, in the
presence of the Justices, composing the said Court, Sign their respective Names
in each Book, and then the said Justices of the Peace, shall keep one of them,
the Register another, and the Clerk of the Peace the third, which said Books,
or two of them at least, shall be from Session to Session, brought into Court
by the respective persons aforesaid.

FINIS.

