AN ENQUIRY: WHETHER Oral Tradition OR THE SACRED WRITINGS, Be the Safest
Conservatory and Conveyance OF Divine Truths, Down from their Original
Delivery, through all Succeeding Ages.

In Two PARTS.

London, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Sign of the Peacock in St. Paul's
Church Yard, 1685.

THE PREFACE.
DOubtless, it would more conduce to the honor of Christ, the Peace of
Christendom, and the Welfare of Souls, if Christians would agree at the least
in this; rather to live as becomes the Gospel we all believe; than curiously
dispute, Why we believe? For nice tamperings with, and eager contests about the
Foundation of Religion are apt rather to shake, than to strengthen the
Superstructures. It may prove a Snare to the profane, or unstable; who, when
they shall see the Ground of their Belief, and Eternal Hopes, not to be agreed
on after so many Ages, perhaps may be tempted to doubt, whether their whole
Profession be not aerie, and have no Basis at all.

Yet notwithstanding, if some will attempt to displace the true One, and to
justle in a false and ruinous Ground of Christian Faith and Practice, a due
regard to a matter of so great Importance may justify an appearance against so
dangerous a Commutation.

The Basis of Christian Belief suffers from more than one sort of Adversaries.
The injuries done to the Sacred Oracles of God by the impious Drollings, and
perverse Disputings of Profane and Atheistical Men are too notorious. The
Foundation of Faith has no part in the Value and Care of those Men, who scorn
Believing. But this Crew is abhorred by all, who have any ordinary sense of
Religion; or have not debauched even their Reason. Indeed, the danger is more
sly and spreading from those who seem to be more serious, and Friends to
Religion.

Among such, the Enthusiasts undermine the Holy Scriptures by pretense to an
extraordinary illuminating Conduct, and Incitations by the Holy Spirit of God.
But the Mode of this Sect commonly suites but with the more Melancholy and
Muzing Natures; and the Experience of their follies and risques within a while
exposes the Vanity of their Pretenses.

The Romanists way is the more generally plausible and winning. They present
the World with a Conveyance of Religious Truths, and a Rule of Faith. Whose
Sure Footing in Christiaty: Or, rational discourses of the Rule of Faith. p. 54.
Virtue (they say) is grounded on a far stronger Basis, than all material
Nature. Such they affirm the virtue to be, by which Tradition regulates her
Followers to bring down Faith unerringly.

And whereas (as seems by Cardinal De verbo Dei non Scripto. L. 4. C. 3. In
initio. 1. them. Ibid. C. 12. Sect. Dico secundo.
Bellarmine) they formerly divided the honor of being the Foundation of Faith
between Holy Scripture and Tradition; of later years, Oral Tradition has quite
carried away the Credit; and has been by some Zealous Asserters cried up for
the infallible Conveyance, Sure Footing. p. 98. 41:
and only Rule of Faith; That, from which we are to receive the Ibid. p. 117.
Sense of Scripture, which without This would be Ibid. p. 38.
quite lost to all in the uncertainty of the Letter.

That which is undertaken in the ensuing Papers, is an Enquiry after the Nature
of Oral Tradition, and its best strength, especially in Religious Affairs; as
also the full Force of Writings, especially of the sacred Scriptures; in point
of Conservation, and Conveyance of what is committed to them: Upon which
Enquiry it will appear, which of them is the most sufficient, and sure for that
purpose. And that of the There being only two grounds or Rules of Faith owned,
viz. Delivery of it down by Writing, or by Words and Practices. -- Ibid. p. 52.
two, which after Examination shall be found to be so, preserves to us ( and
materially considered, is) the Rule of Christian Faith; forasmuch as bringing
down to succeeding Times the Christian Faith unvaried and entire; which was
primitively committed to the Church by the divinely inspired Planters of it; it
may satisfy, and command our Belief; secures us from assenting to any thing,
but what is true. Whereas that which approves not it self to be such a faithful
Depository, and Convoy, provides us not with a Rule of Faith; deserves not that
Authority over our Souls; may betray us to believe a lie.

Hence therefore Oral Tradition's errability and defectiveness in Conveyance
(which shall be proved) disables it for being the overruling Standard of
Christians Belief and Practice in all Ages. And on the other side, the sureness
and safety of Conservation, and Transmission of Divine Truths by the Holy
Scriptures (which shall be proved likewise) qualifies them for the Trust and
Honor of being the Rule of Christian Faith through all Generations.

The Author is sensible, that the Competition between Oral Tradition and
Scripture has been already so excellently managed by Reverend and Learned
Persons, that this present Undertaking by an obscure man may be judged
Supernumerary, or worse. But he has observed, that it was Sancta Augustini
sententia est, and nota multis, and digna quae ab omnibus cognoscatur, optandum
esse, ubi Haereses vigent, ut quicunque aliqua scribendi facultate praediti
sunt, ii scribant omnes, etsi non modo de rebus iisdem scripture fint, sed
eadem etiam allis verbis fortasse scripturi. Expedit enim, etc. Bellarm. in
Praefatione ad Lectorem. Tom. 1. Edit. Ingolstadii, 1588.
Cardinal Bellarmine's Opinion; and he quotes and commends St. Augustine,
wishing, that in the Church's danger all, who in some measure could, should
Write; though they wrote not only of the same thing, but also the same in other
words. -- Fas est and ab host doceri: It may be fit sometimes to take Advice
from an Adversary, especially when he has so great and pious a Second.

This the Author hopes may be an excuse of his Adventure into the Public, and
that even his Gleanings after others plentiful Harvest (their Learned Labors
and Success) may yet be not altogether unacceptable, or useless to the
Christian Church.

THE CONTENTS.
PART. 1.
CHAP. 1. Of Tradition in general. Page 1. CHAP. 2. Of Oral Tradition, and, as
applied to Religion what is allowed, and what denied to it. Page 17. CHAP. 3.
Reasons against the Certainty, and Safety of Conveyance of Divine Truths by
Oral Tradition. Page 26. CHAP. 4. Experience against Oral Tradition's being a
certain Conveyance of Divine Truths. Page 46. CHAP. 5. The Arguments alleged
for Oral Tradition answered. Page 111.
PART. 2.
CHAP. 1. Sacred Scriptures proved to be the safest and most certain
Conservatory and Conveyance of Divine Truths. Page 157. CHAP. 2. Objections
answered. Page 203.
AN ENQUIRY: Whether Oral Tradition, or the Sacred Writings be the safest
Conservatory and Conveyance of, etc.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of Tradition in general.
SECT. I.
MAN is an active, capacious Creature; fitted for, and desirous of knowledge;
and furnished with variety of means for the acquisition of it. In general, we
come to know things in a twofold manner.

1. By the use, and upon the strength of our own Faculties, by our Senses,
whose Sensations, when frequent and uniform, we call Experience; by (a far more
sublime Principle) our Reason, which judges of, corrects, and improves what is
received by the Senses; forms simple Apprehensions, of them makes Propositions,
and of Propositions Syllogisms; i. e. discourses and elicites one Knowledge out
of another. A great many Notions, Propositions, and Discourses, relating to
some comprehending Subject, and cast into a Method, are called a Science, or an
Art, according to the Nature of the Subject, and the Scope in treating of it.

2. We attain to knowledge by Intelligence from others, being content to see
with their Eyes, and to hear with their Ears. And here the more easy Task is
well to understand the Information given by others, and which we take upon
Trust from them. The Knowledge and Assent yielded to thing, on this account,
and relying thus on Testimony, is called Faith, or Belief; which is different
answerably to the diversity of Testimonies.

1. Testimony is Divine, or that of God: And this has such a transcendent
Prerogative; that when once it is sufficiently clear, that God has indeed
affirmed a thing to be, or not to be; the Understanding may, and ought to
acquiesce in such an Affirmation without any hesitancy. For God cannot lie,
either ignorantly, or knowingly; because He is of infinite knowledge and
veracity.

2. Testimony is humane, or that of Man; and the Credit of this is exceedingly
below that of the former. It Is not alone possible, but too ordinarily
experienced, that Man is himself deceived, and then deceives others; nay, often
knowingly, and designedly deceives. Therefore Belief must be yielded to Humane
Testimony, with some suspense, and good wariness Yet even Humane Testimony
deserves and has a considerable Reputation: For it is of great Use, and of some
Necessity to Mankind.

Now, Tradition (considered, not materially, or as the thing delivered; but as
to what it formally includes) is Testimony: For the Assent which it begets, is
Belief; as Science and Opinion, are the Effect of Argumentation, Demonstrative
and Topical respectively. And whereas Testimony may be of one, or more Persons;
and of more Persons, at the same time, or in times following one the other:
Tradition is an Aggregation of Testimonies in a Succession, and dependence of
one upon the other: It is the delivery of a thing down from one Age to another,
in a way of Witnessing. By which it is distinguished from such a descent of
Opinions and Practices; in which they of the former, and of the following Age
(perhaps) Opine or Practice the same thing: But they do so for Reasons taken
from the thing it self; and not merely because the former Age told the next
Age, that the Age before them did so Opine or Practice. But Tradition imports,
an expressed or implied, and a successive witnessing concerning a thing by
Fathers to their Children, and that as received from their Fathers; and so on,
unto the Origin of the thing witnessed to.

SECT. II.
Testimony and Tradition (which is a Branch of it) may be supposed to be used
or alleged to a double purpose.

1. We may suppose it Appealed to as a Judge or Rule, defining concerning the
Natures of Things, and the Verity of Propositions relating to them: As whether
such and such Propositions, which concern Philosophy, or Mathematics, in
Aristotle, or Euclide, be true or false; or whether the Christian be the true
Religion, (merely because Christians affirm it to be so.) In the Application of
it, Humane Testimony and Tradition, is not so concluding a Medium. The
Determination, or Sentence of it is less valid, (unless, where there is a
concurrent general Attestation of Mankind;) nor is it so necessary (except
where some peculiar occasion obliges to trust another Credibility; as the case
is of young Learners of a Science, to the Notions and Genius of which they are
Strangers.) I said,

1. It Is less valid. For things do often so much retire themselves, and require
such a quickness and disengagedness of Understanding, to penetrate them; and
withal there is not alone a common shortness of men's Reason, but such an
exposedness also to biassing disadvantages, as render men much unqualified for
Deferences, and the final Vmpirage of the Natures of Things, and of the Truth
concerning them. Besides, there is scarce an Opinion, but is countenanced by so
many Votes; that if mere Testimony must sway a man's Judgment, he must believe
all, and consequently Contradictions; or he must believe none. And as there is
inconvenience; so,

2. There Is no such necessity to try the Natures of the Things at this Bar. For
Man has an enquiring and discursive Power, which being carefully exercised, and
improved, is able to pierce unto things, and to discover them even in their
retirements. And each Science, Faculty, and Art, have their respective
Principles, Hypotheses, and Axioms, by which the truth of things in each may be
examined; and unto which matters in controversy may be, and usually are
devolved.

And Men commonly think it their Right to have a Liberty to discuss things, and
the Judgment of others concerning them: Because though a Man be fallible as well
as others, and may be far inferior to others in natural and acquired Abilities;
yet he may be better satisfied concerning his own diligence and freedom from
Prepossession, Passion and Interest, than he can be of another; every Man
being best acquainted with the temper and secrets of his own Soul.

2. Humane Testimony and Tradition, may be alleged (which is it is proper
Verge) in point of Fact, and as deposing about the Existence of Things; and
that they are or have been: As that there were such Learned Men, as Aristotle
and Euclide; that they were the Authors of such Writings, as are entitled to
them: Or, that there were such Persons as Christ, and those who published and
propagated his Religion in the World; and that the Books which contain the
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, did come from those first Preachers and
Propagators of it. Against Testimony and Tradition, in the use of it, there lie
not those Exceptions, as did in the former consideration of it. For,

1. It is much more easy for Men to ascertain themselves about the Quod sit,
and that things are in matters of Fact; than to sound the Natures of Things; to
descry their coherences with, and dependences on each other; how far they may
be affirmed of, and inferred from one another. It Is far more discernable, that
some Seas ebb and slow, and in what time; than what the true Cause is of that
reciprocal motion; that such and such Propositions are in Aristotle or Euclide,
than to understand the just meaning of them; or (which is more) the truth of
them when understood. Very Sense suffices to satisfy in the (...), and that
such things are without the labor of the Understanding, and any operose
Discourse. Now, where is the more easiness of knowing things, there is the less
liableness to mistakes: And a less liableness to, and therefore a less
probability of mistake in others, is one reason why (caeteris paribus) to give
credit to their Intelligence the more securely.

2. Mankind is forced to content themselves with Information from Testimony in
multitudes of Things, which their Curiosity, or the Exigency of their Affairs
do engage them to be satisfied in, and yet their own Sense or Reason can give
no prospect of them.

Those many who never crossed, nor saw the Seas, must trust others Relation;
that there are such places, as Paris, Rome, Constantinople, both the Indies;
where these places lie, and what their circumstances are. The reason why Men
believe that they were born in such a year; on, or about such a day; and
therefore that they are of such an Age; that they were Baptized, and that such
is their Name; is, that they are told so. It Is not possible to come acquainted
with Times past: and with the diverse Revolutions, and Events of the numerous
Ages before we were born, otherwise than by Testimony from History. If we would
satisfy our selves, whether the Books in our possession, are indeed the Works
of the Authors, whose Names they bear; that, which we must have recourse to,
is; that these Books have been, and are witnessed to, are generally reputed to
be those Authors Works; i. e. there is a general Tradition for it.

For the two Reasons given, it is plain; that there is both a comparative
safety, and likewise a necessity (in a considerable measure) of reliance upon
others Testimony, and common Tradition, in many things.

SECT. III.
Notwithstanding what has been said on the behalf of Testimony and Tradition;
yet they are not such an Oracle, that their Responses must be received
indiscriminately, and without wary Examination. Though, where they well cannot
mistake, or deceive; or there is little, or no temptation to misrepresent
things; they may be trusty, yet both Written, and Oral Tradition are often
guilty of no small failures. Of the two, Oral Tradition is subject to the more
shortness and uncertainty. It is ordinary for Reports to pass from one to
another, to have a general Vogue; and yet to be very false. It Is usual for
Stories, which might be true enough in the first Relation of them, yet after
they have traveled through many Mouths, to be so much altered from what they
were at the first, that they look like one of Ovid's Metamorphoses. There are
Traditions from Fathers, which yet the Posterity have not Faith enough, or more
Wisdom than to believe. It will be found upon due Consideration, that, as when
a Man hears others talking at a good distance from him, only a noise, and now
and then a word or two come to his Ears, the Articulation of the rest being
lost by the way; insomuch that little, if any thing is understood of what is
said: So that from past and remote Ages, there arrive down to us but mere
generals; confused and very short notices of things; and the Credit of those
too comes weakened with acknowledgedly fabulous, or suspected intermixtures;
especially is this true of those Antiquities, which mere Oral Tradition wafts
to us.

Observe Families, one would think, that considering the love which Men have
for their Native Soil, the particular place of their Birth and Habitation; for
their Inheritance, and for the Stock, of which they are Branches; Young Persons
should be much inquisitive from their Fathers, and Fathers should delight to
Story to their Children, the Circumstances pertaining to these things. Yet
often (excepting some general Informations) comparatively little News is
brought of such concerns, and of particulars, which happened but three or four
Generations off; further than they can be certified from Registries, Deeds, and
the like Writings: It Is not unusual for Persons to enquire of the Church-Book,
how Old they are.

Books deserve care; they are a relief of Mortality; in them the Dead Authors
do in some manner survive themselves, and continue useful to the world, after
they have left it. Yet what a multitude of these has Tradition suffered to
perish, to be buried as well as their Authors; nothing to be left of them,
except (as an Epitaph) the Titles of them! Of many there remains no more than
some fragmenta, some scattered Limbs, as 'twere of a mangled Body. Several
Books are fathered upon certain Authors, of whom they have, it may be, no more
than the Name. Diverse are more or less corrupted; some so much depraved, ut
samnium in ipso samnio quaeratur, that the Books may be searched for in the
very Books, and scarce found.

Hence it follows, that Tradition is not so careful a preserver of it is
Deposita, as it should be; not so faithful a Relater of Things past, as that it
should be thought irrefragable; and that Belief should be subjected to it
promiscuously and without choice. Therefore there must be something else, and
beyond it, which may instruct us how to distinguish of Testimonies and
Traditions; which to mistrust, or to reject; and which to believe.

This Director is Reason; which in it is Debate and Decision of the due
Credibility of Testimonies and Traditions, and of the deserved precedence of
one to the other, proceeds upon the Circumstances of the Testifiers, and their
qualifications. These (in general) are, 1. A sufficient knowledge of the things
attested to: 2ly. Such Honesty and Integrity, as may incline the Testifiers to
relate things as they know them to be. Some of the particular Rules or
Cautions, in the accepting Testimonies may be, 1. The More the Testifiers are,
the stronger the Testimony is, and the More are to be preferred to the Fewer
(supposing a Parity of Circumstances:) 2ly. Forasmuch as generals, and the
substance of things, are commonly more easily knowable, and remembered, than
Particulars and minuter Circumstances, therefore Testimony may be more safely
credited in the former than in the latter. 3ly. Because Integrity is least to
be suspected or questioned, when not under temptation by Interest; therefore
the Testimony of clear, and uninteressed Witnesses may be the more confidently
admitted: 4ly. The nearer the Testifiers lived to the Times, in which what is
witnessed to, was spoken or done, the more valuable their Testimony is, for the
greater the remove is from what is Evidenced to, the more accidents might
intervene for the clouding and misrepresentation of it.

By this it appears, that Reason's Court is the Sovereign Judicatory, where
lies the last Appeal; here it being to be determined concerning the competency
and validness of the Testimony or Tradition.

So much of Tradition in general (whose so near alliance to Testimony at large
makes them much to agree in their use and force;) what it is; in what matter
most properly useful and argumentative: It Is Efficacy, and yet it is Failures,
into what it is lastly resolved; where the relief lies against a deception by
it in it is Vntrustiness.

I shall proceed next to consider Tradition, Oral Tradition, more particularly,
and distinctly, and as applied to Religion.

CHAP. II. Of Oral Tradition, as it is applied to Religion; and there, what is
allowed to it, what denied.
SECT. I.
I Come now nearer to the Question, which being moved both of Oral Traditions,
and of the Sacred Writings, Trustiness, and Certainty of Conveyance of Divine
Truths, etc. I shall give them a distinct Consideration.

And first I shall enquire: How sure and safe an immediate Conservatory and
Conveyance Oral Tradition is of Divine Truths (more speculative, or more
immediately practical, fundamental, or others) down from their first delivery
to the Church through succeeding Ages.

And before further procedure; it is granted, that Oral Tradition is of use in
Religion; yet not so much solitary, and by it self, as in conjunction with
Tradition Written.

1. It is yielded, that though there be many Dr. Cosins, the late Reverend Lord
Bishop of Duresme, in his Scholast. History of the Canon of Scripture, page 4,
5.

-- Ecclesia Testis est, and custos sacrarum Literarum. -- Ecclesiae Officium
est, ut ver as, germanas, ac genuinas Scripturas, a falsis, supposititiis, ac
adulterinis dijudicet, ac discernat. D. Whitak. de S. Script. Controv. 1.
Quest. 3. Cap. 2.

Article of Religion. 20.


internal (...), or Arguments clear in the Scriptures themselves, whereby we
may be sufficiently assured, that they were breathed from a Divine Spirit, and
are truly the Word of God. Yet as to the particular and just number of those
Sacred Books; every Verse and Sentence in them, whether they be more or fewer;
we have no better External and Ministerial assurance, than the Constant, and
Recorded Testimony of the Catholic Church, from one Generation to another,
which is a Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ.

2ly. It is confessed, that there are many particular Truths, which have had
the universal, continued Profession, and Oral Attestation of the Christian
Church from the Primitive to the present Times.

3ly. It is not denied, but that if there had been no Scriptures, yet Oral
Tradition might have derived some Truths to Posterity.

4ly. Let any Points be recommended to us by so large an Approbation, and
Certificate from Tradition, as Sacred Scriptures have, and we shall receive
them with all beseeming regard. But then,

1. We deny, that Oral Tradition is sufficient to preserve to us, and to
ascertain us of the several particular Truths, which concern Christian Belief
and Practice, together with the Sense of the Sacred Books.

2ly. Though there are several Divine Truths, which have had the universal, and
continued Profession of the Church; yet we deny, it would have been so happy,
if there had been no Scriptures.

3ly. Though there had been no Scriptures, Oral Tradition might have sent down
some Truths to Posterity: But they would have been but few, and those too
blinded with erroneous Appendages; most would have been lost; as in Hurricanes,
and among Rocks and Sands, some Vessels may weather it out, yet shattered, but
how many Perish!

4ly. As to the last thing; sure, our Adversaries cannot justly charge us with
the contrary; there being no Point maintained by them, and denied by us, which
has so ample a Recommendation.

But I shall resume the first Concession, and the annexed Denial, and shall
add: That there is a great difference between Tradition's Testification
concerning the Scriptures; and Tradition's conserving the many Divine Truths,
and Sense of them, and the safe transmitting them to all succeeding times. We
may rely upon Tradition for the former, which is a more general thing, and in
which Tradition was less obnoxious to Error; and yet not trust it for the
latter, which abounds in such a variety of Particulars, in which there is the
greater liableness to mistake and failance. The difference I urge may be
illustrated thus;

Suppose, one informs me of a Guide in my Journey; I credit and accept of that
Information, and thank the Informant. But I rest no farther on him; but follow
the Guide in the several Stages of my Journey. Or suppose, one directs me to a
very Honest Man, and a very knowing Witness in my Cause: When he has done so,
it is not He, but the Witness, on whom I must depend for a success in my Suit:
Nay, if the Witness should chance to depose against him, I may rationally
believe him, and he cannot refuse the Evidence because he himself, recommended
him to me, as a very credible Deponent.

The Application is obvious. The Church's Tradition testifies, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16,
17. Isa. 8.20.
that the Scriptures are the Oracles of God. These Oracles of God are a Guide,
a Witness, in the things of God, and which belong to Man's Salvation: They
affirm so much of themselves; and because they are Divine Oracles, and
testified by the Church so to be, they must be believed by us in that Claim.
Why now, though we owe and pay Thanks to the Church's Tradition for the
Preservation of Holy Scriptures, and Direction of Us to Them; yet we are not
therefore bound to resign our Faith universally to the Tradition of the Church;
but we may trust our selves with Scriptures Guidance, and Testimony in all
particular Matters of Faith and Practice. Yes, and if these Scriptures Witness
against the Church's Tradition, against some Opinions, and Practices of it, for
which Tradition is pretended; we ought to believe the Scriptures; and Tradition
cannot fairly decline the Testimony, though against it self.

SECT. II.
But against this it is urged: That there can be no Arguing against Tradition
out of Scripture. The reason is, Sure Footing in Christianity p. 10^.
because there can be no certainty of Scripture without Tradition: This must
first be supposed certain, before the Scripture can be held such. Therefore to
argue against Tradition out of Scripture, is to discourse from what is
(Tradition being disallowed) uncertain; which cannot be a solid way of
Argumentation.

To this I reply: (Omiting, that Tradition is not the only means of our
Certitude about Scripture,) That the Exception does not invalidate what I have
said; for thus it is: We do confess to receive the Scriptures upon the Church's
universal Tradition; and we allow this Testimony to be (in it is kind) very
useful and sufficiently certain; and this certainty of Tradition, quoad hoc,
for the Intelligencing us concerning Scripture, is supposed by us. But then we
do, and may, argue from Scripture thus supposed certain, against Tradition, i.
e. against what is uncertain, or false in it, viz. Any such Points of Faith, or
Practice; or such Senses of Scripture, as it would obtrude upon us; when as yet
they are perhaps contrary to Scripture; and the Tradition is far short of being
Universal; it may be, is very narrow, or feigned, rather than real. So that we
do not proceed upon an Uncertainty, but upon what is certain by Universal
Tradition (i.e. That the Books of the Old and New Testament, in the Number that
we have them, are the Holy Scriptures, and Oracles of God) against what is
affirmed, and can be proved by us, to be uncertain or false, in Tradition. As,
in a like case: Scholars argue from what is true and clear in Reason, against
what is false or dubious, though it have Reason pretended for it: Thus
discoursing from Reason against Reason; i. e. from what is really such, against
what is such, but in name and appearance.

The sum and result of the Premises is this: That, as we do not take
Tradition's Word for all the Doctrines or Practices, and Senses of Scripture,
it would impose on us; though we accept of Tradition's Evidence concerning the
Scriptures, as was in the beginning of this Chapter acknowledged: So nor are we
obliged to the former, by acknowledgment of the latter.

Having stated what may be allowed, and what is denied to Oral Tradition: Next
it shall be examined, what Reason and Experience suggest against its sureness
and safety of Conveyance: and likewise (after that) what either can pretend on
it is behalf.

CHAP. III. Reasons against the Certainty and Safety of Conveyance of Divine
Truths by Oral Tradition.
SECT. I.
IT is asserted; That the Body of the Faithful from Age to Age are the
Traditioners of Divine Truths; Sure Footing. p. 60.100, 101.
that in reality Tradition, rightly understood, is the same thing materially
with the living Voice and Practice of the whole Church essential, consisting of
Pastors and Laiety.

Now, before Reason can acquiesce in a Tradition by Pastors and Laiety, it must
(according to what has been premised) be well satisfied in the fitness of the
Testifiers.

The Qualifications of Persons for a due Testification (especially in so
weighty a matter as Religion) are, 1. Good knowingness of Fathers, and
Ancestors in Religion; as also due care and diligence of Fathers in teaching
their Children; together with good Apprehensions, Memory, and Tractableness in
the Children and Posterity. 2ly. Such a measure of Integrity, through all
descents, as may secure the successive Testifiers against all temptations unto
swerving from what they received from Fathers. Let these Qualifications be
farther considered of.

1. The first Requisites are good Knowingness of Fathers, together with Care
and Diligence; as also Apprehension, Memory, and Tractableness in Children; let
us examine how far these may be found in the Laiety.

I believe, that the value and zeal for Religion in the first and golden Age of
the Church made Fathers diligent to teach, and Youth to learn. But I doubt,
that this Temper (as is incident to Religious Fervors) might cool afterward;
and that when Emperors became Christians, Ease and Prosperity might beget a
restiveness, and neglect both in Ancestors, and Posterity. How well Fathers of
Families did perform their part, and how docile Children have been, throughout
the many hundred years before us, is out of our Ken. But if we may guess at
times past (as there is often a likeness in some measure of the ways of Men in
one Age, to those in another) by the times present, and nearer to us, it is to
be wished, (I fear rather than it will be found) that all, or most Fathers and
Governors of Families were such as Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.15.
and Joshua. Religion is too little minded in too many Families: The use of a
Catechism is too rare; and That, when used, is often little understood, and
less remembered. Commonly Parents teach their Children the Lords Prayer, Creed,
and Ten Commandments; and that is well. But these Rudiments are too slender a
stock for Children to set up with, as qualified Conveyers of the Body of the
Christian Faith. And if even these should pass down long by word of Mouth, and
not be Written, they would be in danger of Maims or Corruptions.

But it may be thought, Dr. James, in his Manuduction to Divinity. p. 108. Ex.
Jo. Avent. Conc. Bas. and M. S.
that Spiritual Fathers instruct Young and Old both, and capacitate them better
for being Oral Traditioners.

Yet, when the Priests were Fools, Stocks, and slothful Beasts; when they had
neither Scientiam, nor Conscientiam; neither Knowledge, nor Conscience; (as it
was complained in Old time) it is not likely, that then the Clergy were very
careful to instruct the Laiety; or that the Laiety should learn much from such
a Clergy. When of far later years, some in Ireland, The reverend Archbishop
Usher, in a Sermon Preached before the King, June 20. 1624. on Ephesians. 4.13.
who would be accounted Members of the Roman Church, being demanded what they
thought of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; not only rejected it with
indignation; but wondered also, that it should be imagined, any of their side
should be so foolish, as to give Credit to such a senseless thing: When
throughout a County in England, Dr. J. White, in his Preface to, The way to the
true Church.
the Vulgar Papists were unable to render an account of their Faith, or to
understand the Points of the Catechism, and uttered their Creed in a Gibberish,
ridiculous to others, and unintelligible by themselves: Then the Priests failed
in teaching the People, or the People in teachableness.

But, perhaps it has been otherwise since; and was then in those Countries,
where the Public and Authorized Profession of the Roman Religion gave their
Clergy more freedom of Access to, and of Conversation with, the Laiety. Yet,
there is an Opinion of the Romanists, which will not much forward the diligent
instructing of the Laiety in the Religion of Forefathers, viz. That The Author
of Charity mistaken, etc. In Dr. Potter 's Answer to it. page 183. 200, 201.
it suffices the Vulgar to believe implicitly what the Church teaches: And
that by virtue of such an implicit Faith, a Cardinal Bellarmine, and a
Catholic Collier are of the same Belief. This implicit Faith makes quick
work, and supersedes a distinct knowledge of Divine Truths; and then what much
need is there of a careful Teaching them? They, who speak not so broadly, yet
Azor Instit. Mor. Part 1. Lib. 8. Cap. 6. Sect. Tertio quaeritur. Et Sect. Sed
mihi probabilius, and verius.
say, it is the common Opinion of Divines, that it is necessary to believe
explicitly no more than the Apostles Creed (or the fourteen Articles, as they
speak.) Nay, some hold too, that if this explicit Belief be only of the
substance of the Articles confusedly and generally, it is sufficient. But, by
leave of these Authors, such an explicit Belief of the Apostles Creed only,
(much less a confused, and general Belief) cannot be sufficient (howsoever
sufficient it may be for other purposes) to qualify the Laiety for that great
Purpose, which, in these Papers, I am treating of.

But let the utmost be supposed, viz. That the Clergy now do, and formerly did,
discharge their Pastoral Duty, as amply and faithfully, as is requisite; yet
the Peoples usual immersion in secular business, and distractions; their
oscitancy in Religious matters, slowness of Understanding, frailty of Memory,
in the things of God, would hugely hazard their proficiency in so large and
clear a knowledge, as might fit them to be Authentic Trustees in the Delivery
of the Christian Faith from Generation to Generation.

What I have writ in this Section, proceeds not in the least from an humor of
reproaching any; not from any contempt of the Laiety; or, as if I expected they
should be Divines. I pay Acknowledgment, and Honor to many of the Laiety for
their singular Accomplishments in Religious Knowledge and Virtue: And it is out
of question with me (as much as with any) that the rest of them may with their
lesser measures of knowledge (for they have not generally advantages for higher
Seize; and the merciful God will not expect to Reap where he has not
Sowed) live good Christians, and be saved for ever. My only aim (and that in
prosecution of my undertaking) has been to show; how incompetent and very
casual Traditioners the Laiety, (who are exceedingly the greater part of the
Body of the Faithful) generally are of Divine Truths, in so full and distinct a
manner, as may be for their preservation and security against the emerging
encroachments of the contrary Errors through all Ages. So that by far the
greatest weight and strength of Oral Tradition must lie upon the Clergy; whose
proper business Religion is; whose Lips should preserve knowledge; and the
People should seek the Law at their Mouth. Yet in that very place, where it is
thus said of the Priests, it immediately follows: But ye [Priests] are gone out
of the way, Mal. 2.7, and 8.
ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, etc. Their performance had not
answered their Duty.

But (to say no more of that) how little Clergy and Laiety both are to be
relied on, as to an Oral indefectible Conveyance of Divine Truths shall be seen
on a second account, in the next Section.

SECT II.
2ly. To an exact and constant steadiness of Tradition there is requisite an
Integrity, a clearness of Spirit, an unencumbrance of Christians through all
Ages, with any thing which might sway them to a Belief or Profession, contrary
to that of the first Age.

Now, if we look abroad into the World, we shall see, that commonly Men take up
this or that Profession, side with this or that Party in Religion, more upon
the score of Education, Example, or Interest, upon some extrinsick Motive; or
upon some short and confuse Apprehensions; than upon an explicit knowledge, or
at the least a truly solid Conviction of those Tenants, by which those Parties
are distinguished. But to proceed more particularly.

Among others, there are four things, which have an usual and powerful
Operation upon Men's Belief and Profession, to the changing or smothering their
Persuasions, and the corruption of their Practice.

1. A wantonness of Reason is very incident to Mankind. Man loves Variety; and
conversing here below with little but what is mutable, in an unhappy kind of
imitation learns to affect change; and is apt to be cloyed with old Truths, as
with a wontedness to all things else. The hankering after some New things was
not peculiar to the Athenians, and Strangers among them, but is an itch natural
to all. And to cherish this affection for Novelty, there have not wanted
Broachers of new Opinions in most Ages of the Church.

2ly. There Is an (...) ordinary enough; a bending the stick too much the other
way, on pretense to make it straight; a Recoile from one Extremity to another:
Out of keenness in contending for a Truth, a Zeal for it, it has not been
unusual to overdo, and to retreat from an Error too far on the contraty side.
Both Illud interim caven^um, ne Erroris unius odio devolvamur in alium errorem.
Id si nullis fere veterum non accidit aliqua ex part, equidem non deprecabor
hominis ociosi notam, qui haec admoneam. Tertullianus, dum nimis acriter pugn^t
aaversus eos qui plus sat is tribuebant Matrimonio, delatus est in alteram
foveam: -- Hieronymus tanto ardore pugnat adversus eos, qui Matrimonium
efferebant, cum injuria Virginitatis; ut ipse sub iniquo Judice vix possit suam
tueri causam, si reus fiat parum reverenter tractati Conjugis, and Digamiae.
Montanus, dum ardentius oppugnat ill^s qui passim dignis, and indignis
aperiebant Ecclesiae fores, plus satis taxata severitate disciplinae
Ecclesiasticae, in diversum incidit malum. D. Augustinus, adv^^s^s Pelagium
toto studio dimicans, ali^^bi minus tribuit Libero arbitrio, quam tribuendum
putant, qui nunc in scholis regnant Theologicis. Possem hujus gener^s exempla
permulta commemorare, etiam ex recentioribus. Sed praestat (opinor) in re
odiosa non esse admedum copiosum. In Epistola praefatoria ad Opera Sti. Hilarti.
Erasmus, and Ardebant veteres Illi tanto sincerae pietatis, and Catholicae
defensienis ardere, ut dum unum errorem omnium virium conatu destruere
annituntur, saepe in alterum errorem oppositum deciderent, vel quodammodo
decidisse videantur. -- Sic Dienysius Corinthiorum Antistes, etc. In
Praefatione Lib. 5ti. Bibliothecae Stae.
Sixtus Senensis, have given us Instances of this in several of the Ancients;
as may be seen in the Margent.

3. It has not been uncommon (...) to have Men's Persons in admiration, (and
that not alone for Advantage, but) for their Learning, and Piety; so highly to
revere them, as before Christians were aware, to become overcredulous, and to
follow their Conduct. Some Heretics have been of sufficient Learning, and
appearing Sanctity; and have been adhered to in the Church by no small number
of Proselytes. The Reputation for Virtue, which once Pelagius had with St.
Chrysostom, and St. Augustine; his several Works; who were his Followers; what
noise his Opinions made in the Christian World; and how the Relics of them
were continued among the Massilians or Semipelagians, may be seen at large in
Historia Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 3.4, 5, 6, 7.
Vossius.

4ly. What a strong influence have Hopes and Fears upon Men! Hopes of Ease,
Profit, Preferment by their pleasing Insinuations gain great command over the
Soul, and are apt to bribe the Judgment. Fear of Evil, of Confiscations,
Imprisonments, Gibbets, and Stakes (though they are no proper Topiques to
convince the Reason, yet) work hugely upon the Passions: And Men are often
frighted from those Opinions, out of which they could not have been fairly and
quietly disputed.

It is the Observation of a Learned and Honorable The Lord ^f Falkland, in his
Reply, p 122.
Person, That in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, of many thousand
Livings which are in England, the Incumbents of not an hundred chose rather to
lose their Benefices for Popish Opinions, than to keep them by subscribing to
the Tenants of the Reformed Church of England: All who (for the greater part)
must be supposed for private Interest to have dissembled their Religion, either
then, or immediately before.

But if we look higher, there is what is much more remarkable: It is Famous,
there was a time when the -- Tum haeresis Arrii prorupit, totumque Orbem,
invecto Errore, turbaverat. Etenim duobus Arriis, acerrimishujus perfidiae
Autoribus, Imperator etiam depravatur. Dumque sibi Religionis Officium videtur
implere, vim persecutionis exercuit: actique in Exilium Episcopi, saevitum in
Clericos, animadversum in Laicos, qui se ab Arrianorum communione secreverant.
Sulpic. Sev. Sac. Histor. Lib. 2.
World turned Arrian, the Orthodox Profession being under Persecution.

After what has been said, among such hazards, such incident Biassings of the
Affections and Judgment, how unsafe must an Oral Tradition be; i. e. the
trusting of the great Concerns of Religion with Man's good Nature, his
Constancy, and Faithfulness to Divine Truths, through Ages!

But it may be, it will be replied to the mention of the Doctrines of Arrius
and Pelagius; and the bustle they made in the Christian world; that yet the
Catholic Doctrines did recover, and pass to after-Ages. And we are told, that
Sure Footing, p. 118, 119.
erroneous Opinions, and absurd Practices (though they may creep into the Church,
and spread there awhile, yet) can never gain any solid Footing in the Church:
Forasmuch as the Church is a Body of Men relying on Tradition, or the Authority
of Attesting Forefathers, not on the Authority of Opinators, etc.

In return to this, It Is confessed, that the Doctrines assaulted by Arrius and
Pelagius were rescued, and preserved. But,

1. In, and about that time, there was such a Constellation of Pious and
Learned Lights of the Church, as could scarce be paralleled in the Ages
before, or afterward. This might be an especial Cause, that those Truths
outlived their Opposition. It may be questioned, whether if the Errors of
Arrius, or Pelagius, had been started, and as vigorously managed, in the
Ignorant, and Corrupt Ages, which followed afterward, they might not have
found as easy an Entertainment, and have as generally prevailed, as some other
Errors did.

2ly. But how will it be proved, that it was by the strength of Oral Tradition,
that these Truths were recovered, and continued? To speak only of the Divinity
of Christ impugn'd by Arrius: (besides what has been said in the foregoing
part) 1. There was manifestly a Civil Cause interposing for the Restoration of
a public and free Profession of it. For as the Frown of the Prince,
Constantius, and his Party armed with force, suppressed the Orthodox Opinion:
So the contrary inclination, and favor of succeeding Princes, countenance from
the secu^ular Power, restored it. So that this Resurrection of that Truth was
not from Orel Traditions strength, an impossibility of its sailure; but was
owed to Causes extrinsick; and which might, or might not have been. For there
was no necessity, that the Emperers should be Orthodox, or Favorers of the
Orthodox Opinion; and if they had continued still Arrian, and Persecutors of
the Orthodox; and so there had been still the same Fears; it is as likely, that
Arrianisme would still have been the general Profession, as it is, That the
same Cause still existing, and working after the same manner, would produce the
same Effect. 2ly. If we look after the Religious Cause, why may we not ascribe
the Revival of the Truth to Holy Scriptures? For the Fathers had recourse to
Them, during it is Depression, and after it.

-- Vnum hoc ego per hanc dignationis tue sinceram audientiam rogo: ut
praesente Synodo, quae nunc de fide litigat, paucis me de Scripturis
Evangelicis digneris audite. --

Fidem Imperator quaeris, aud^ eam non de novis cha^tulis, sed de Dei libris.
--

Audi, rogo, ea, quae de Christo sunt Scripta, ne sub eis ea quae non Scripta
sunt, praedi^entur. Summitte ad ea, quae de libris locuturus sum. aures tuas.
In Lib^o ad Constantium Augus^um, propius ^^em.


St. Hilary, Truth's great Champion against the Arrians, is frequent in
Citation of Scripture for it. And in his Address to Constantius: He entreats
that Constantius would vouchsafe (the Synod being present, which debated about
the Faith) to hear him in a few words from the Evangelical Scriptures. And soon
afterward: -- Thou requirest my Faith, O Emperor; hear it, not from new
Papers, but from the Books of God. Where He opposes New Papers, or Writings,
not to Ancient Oral Tradition, but to the Divine Books. There is something more
to the like Sense in the Margent.

After him Nec ego Nicaenam Synodum tibi, nec tu Arimenensem mihi debes,
tanquam praejudicaturus, objicere. Scripturarum authoritatibus res cum re,
causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet.

Contra Maxim. Lib. 3 Cap. 14.


St. Augustine tells the Arrian Maximinus: He would not object to him the Synod
of Nice, nor should he urge to him that of Ariminum; but he would have the
dispute to be managed by Authority of Scriptures.

That, which was thus used in Proof and Defense of this Article of Faith both
under Persecution, and after it, why may not That deserve to have the honor of
it is Preservation, and Restitution, viz. the Holy Scripture? Especially when as
Holy Scriptures, being an unvaried and permanent Standard in all alterations of
the Church's State, have an aptitude for such a Purpose; whereas Oral Tradition
has no probable Energy for it.

For they of that Age, when Arrianism was generally regnant, either really
changed their Judgment about the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father;
and then (according to our Adversaries Principle) they would teach their
Children, as they judged, and believed themselves, and so the Arrian Opinion
would have continued: Or they smothered, and dissembled their Opinion out of
fear, and professed contrarily to their Judgment. And in this Hypocrisy either
their Children discovered them, or not. If not, then much the same Effect would
follow. If they did know it, then they would scruple to believe them even in
other Truths as Witnesses (and Traditioners are no more than such.) For
Hypocrisy weakens the Credit of a Witness, and gets him this disadvantage,
that he will be the more hardly believed, even when he speaks truth. And in
this particular Truth, Children would have been put at the least to the stand.
For though the Posterity might satisfy themselves, that the Age before the last
generally embraced the Tenent contrary to the Arrian; yet they might be tempted
to doubt, whether (as their immediate Fathers made show of believing the
Opinion they secretly condemned; so) in remoter Ages Forefathers might not
publicly profess the Divinity of Christ, rather out of compliance with the
humor of the Times they lived in, than from their Hearts; and so the Tenent
might have stolen down through following Ages, the manner of it is old reception,
and Hypocritical Profession being lost: For why might not Dissimulation be
incident to one, to a former Age, as well as to another, a latter? And all this
would be much more true, when an Error should possess the Church longer than
the Arrian did.

Having now examined by Reason's Test the two necessary Qualifications of the
Testifiers, and Guardians of Christian Faith through Centuries of Years; and
having proved, that the Dove can find no rest for the sole of her foot; that
they are too fluid and sinking for Divine Truth to fix on, to conside in for
safety in her passage through the many hazards of Time: I go on to Experience;
and to consider what the actual performance of Oral Tradition has been, how
faithfully it has acquitted it self.

CHAP. IV. Experience against Oral Traditions, being a safe and certain
Conveyance of Divine Truths.
SECT. I.
IF Oral Tradition be a certain and infallible Conveyance of Divine Truths,
which is the ground of it is pretended Supreme Authority in Religion; then there
has been an Uniformity, a constancy of the same Belief of the Church, from the
first through following Ages.

The Divine Scriptures indeed may retain their Integrity and Authority, though
They, who own them as the only certain Conveyance and Rule of Faith, swerve
from Them, and vary from one another, because they do not attend to, or
misunderstand them (as, though some things in St. Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16.
and other Scriptures were wrested by the unlearned and unstable to their own
destruction; who also differed from those who truly understood them; yet
notwithstanding those passages in St. Paul, and those other Scriptures,
remained still Canonical.) But Oral Tradition does so intimately and
necessarily include in it a successive Harmony of Forefathers and Posterities
Belief (it being a continued Testification of the one to the other,) that if
this Co-herence fails; if after Ages Belief contrariate that of the Primitive
Age; if one Church's Belief opposes that of another contemporaneous with it, or
perhaps agrees not well with it self at the same time, or else with what it was
in times precedent; then the Conveyance breaks; and so Oral Tradition forfeits
its claim to Infallibility, and consequently its arrogated Authority.

Let us then observe, what the harmony and agreement of the Church's Belief has
been through the several Ages of the World, from the first Delivery of the
Truths believed.

SECT. II.
When God made Man, he endowed him with such a rectitude of Nature, as might
enable him to glorify his great Maker, and to attain to his own Happiness. And
when Man had by eating of a forbidden Fruit, contracted a general Ataxie of
Soul, and particularly a great dimness of Understanding; God was pleased to
relieve him, and to repair the decays of his Knowledge of what concerned him
for Spiritual and Eternal purposes: Especially, doubtless God instructed him
(so far as he wanted supernatural Information) about his Nature and Unity, and
how he would be Worshipped. And questionless, the first Father of Mankind, and
the succeeding Patriarchs, did diligently teach their Children, what they
themselves had received from God. And their exceeding long Lives gave them a
peculiar opportunity to Catechize their Posterities through several
Generations; and to recover them upon any revolt from primitive belief, or
practice; and the extraordinary length of their lives was also equivalent to a
greater number of Traditioners. Adam, after the birth of Seth, lived 800 years,
with his Children, and Childrens Children, and above 200 of those 800 years
with Methusalah, whose death was but a very little before the period of the old
World. Methusalah was Noah's Contemporary, very near 600 years. Noah (that
Preacher of Righteousness) survived with his descendents 350 Years after the
Flood. And before their dispersion, and Plantation in remote places, They
(especially the Heads of the Colonies) had been educated, and influenced by
Noah, that just Man; and whom Gods familiarity with him, and special care over
him, ought to have rendered most venerable, and Them very dutifully sequacious
of Him.

So likewise the two first Traditioners, were incomparably considerable; Adam
and Eve, were the greatest Miracles that ever were. They could assure the
World, that they had a Being, when as yet there was none of their own Kind,
besides them: That they had near converse with the God that made them, (the Man
of the Dust, the Woman of a Rib of the Man.) They could truly relate to their
Children many strange things of the World, its State before, and presently upon
Sin. And it is likely there was such an Impress of Majesty upon the First Father
of Mankind, and a Prophet (as Josephus calls him) as might, and doubtless did,
much awe his Children into an obsequious Regard to what he told them. Then too
in the days of Noah, the drowning of the World in stupendous Waters, and the
Confusion of Tongues at the building of Babel were so rare and astonishing
Wonders, (...), etc. Jos. Antiq. Jud. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.

(...), etc. Joseph. Ibid.


as the world never since saw, and the memory of them so continued, and spread
though the following Ages, that the Flood, and the (a) Ark were mentioned by
all Barbarian Historians; and that (b) confusion at Babel was spoke of by a
certain Sibyl, and by Hago Grotius, ex Eusebio, in Annotatis ad Lib. de
Veritate Religi. Christ. page 244.
Abydenus.

One would think, that here was Defense enough, of Tradition from miscarriage;
yet notwithstanding all this, as the general Practice of Mankind was so vile,
All Flesh had so corrupted his way upon Earth, (which is all the account, that
Scripture egives) that God was provoked to wash the Earth clean in a Deluge, so
not long after the Flood, there was a great defection (in Practice, and Opinion
also) from what had been delivered from Pious Fathers, concerning God, and the
true Worship of Him; those Fathers, who were very qualified Testifiers; and who
reported to their Children, such Divine Wonders; as both might answer, for the
want of a greater Number of lesser Miracles, and likewise make the Children to
dread to reject what was delivered from God by Them. Yet for all this, (I say)
corrupt Notions of God, and of his Worship crept in; Polytheism, and Idolatry,
entered the World. Even Josh. 24.2.
Terah (who lived with Noah 127 years) and other Fathers of the Holy Abraham,
served other Gods. And how widely, Polytheism, Idolatry, and Superstition
afterward spread in the World, and what a long possession they kept of it, is
notorious.

Thus the world apostatized and past a Recovery by Oral Tradition, which rather
confirmed it in it is Apostasy, for thus Symmachus pleads for Heathenisme: Suus
cuique mos, suus cuique ritus est. Jam si longa aetas ^^thoritatem religionibus
faciat, servanda est tot Seculis fides: et sequendi sunt nobis Parents, qui
faeliciter sequuti sunt suos. Symmachi V. C. Relatio ad Valent. Theodos. and:
Arcad. Augustos, pro veteri Deorum cultu adversus Christianos.
Every People have their custom, each their Rites. Now if long time can give
authority to Religions, belief is to be given to so many ages, and we ought to
follow our Fathers, who have happily followed Theirs.

Unto which the Christian Poet Prudentius replies, to this Sense.

If there be such a studiousness and care of Antique Custom, and it pleases
not to depart from old Rites: There is extant in ancient Books, (He means the
Scriptures) a Noble Instance; that even in the time of the Deluge, or before,
the Family or People, who first inhabited the new Earth, and dwelt in the empty
World, served but one God, whence our continued Race derives its pedigree, and
reforms the Laws of the Piety of the Native Country.

-- Si tantum sludium est, and cura vetusti
Moris, and a prisco placet haud descedere ritu;
Extat in antiquis exemplum Nobile libris,
Jam tunc diluvii sub temporae, vel prius, Vni
Ins^rvisse Deo gentem, quae prima recentes
Incoluit terras, vacuoque habitavit in Orb.
Vnde genus ducit nostrae porrecta propago
Stirpis, and indigenae pietatis jura reformatis.
Aurel: Prudentius contra Symmachum. Lib. 2. SECT. III.
The State of Religion being so crazed, the world being so corrupt in Opinion
and Practice, God vouchsafed to reveal Himself to Abraham, and the other
Patriarchs, and at the last singled out the posterity of Abraham for his
peculiar People, Ps. 78.5.6.7, 8. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 17.
and established a Testimony in Jacob, appointed a Law in Israel, which he
commanded the Fathers: that they should make them known to their Children. That
the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be born,
who should arise and declare them to their Children; that they might set etc.
Among these Laws, God commanded the owning, and Worship of himself,
exclusively, of all pretended Deities whatsoever. He prescribed, in the
greatest accuracy, the Substance, and very punctilio's of his worship. And to
fence these sacred Injunctions, the better to preserve them from violation, at
the first delivery of them, God struck an holy dread into the People by
Thundrings and Lightnings, and a thick Cloud, so that all in the Camp trembled:
Exodus 19.16.
nay, so terrible was the sight, that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear
and quake. Heb. 12.21.
And to make all the more sure, there was superadded an explicit and formal
Covenant between God and the people, solemnized with the sprinkling of Blood,
part of it on the Altar, Exodus 24.3, 4.5.
and part on the People; and all the People answered with one Voice, and said;
All the words, which the Lord has said, will we do.

What a large and exact Provision was here made for the safe descending of what
God had committed to the People unto all Generations, and for the making them
trusty Traditioners! yet how strangely were they ever and anon declining from
the purity of what had been delivered to them; Fathers and Children profaning
the Divine Worship, and dishonouring God, by the mixtures of Heathenish Rites,
and Idolatrous Abominations.

In the Chain of Tradition the first Link broke. That very People, who had so
lately trembled at Mount Sinai, yet, though still so near that Mount, danced
before a Golden Calf: saying, These be thy Gods, Exodus 32.4
O Israel which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. If this fall out so
early, how much more likely was it, that the conveyance of Religion in its
purity to after Ages should fail! And the event was answerable. The Books of
Judges, Kings, and Chronicles, and of several of the Prophets, so abound in
examples of almost perpetual, and general defections from the Ancient Faith,
and Practice, that many quotations are needless, two will be enough. 1. In the
Reign of Ahab, Elijah mourned to God, that he only was left of the true
Worshippers in Israel (at the least of the true Prophets,) 1 Kings 19.10.18.
and that even his life was in danger. And though the All-seeing God comforted
him by the account of seven thousand, who had not bowed the knee to Baal: Yet
(as it seems, this was to Elijah an invisible Church; so) what were these seven
thousand to the multitudes of the rest of Israel? 2ly. In Judah, so great and
criminous was the Falling off from what God had anciently ordained, that good
Josiah rent his Clothes, when he heard the words of the Books of the Law read;
2 Kings 22.11.
and compared former and present Practice with what was there commanded.

Such were the Apostasies of the Jewish Church from Primitive Doctrine, and
instituted Worship, and for a long time, and without any relief, and
restitution from Oral Tradition (the intervening Reformation in Josiah's Reign
was owed to the Holy Scriptures:) 2 Kings. 23.2, 3.
Till God revenged those miscarriages sharply, but very righteously, first upon
the ten Tribes, and afterward upon the remaining two.

The two Tribes after seventy years Correction returned home, rebuilt their
City and Temple. But in time they split into several Sects, which were so many
degeneracies from the first Purity of their Religion. Our Blessed Lord reproved
them for their corrupt Traditions, as being a vain Worship, Math. 15.3.9.
and Evacuations of the Commandments of God.

The Jews have amongst them an Oral Tradition, expository of the Law Written,
and given (as is said by them) by God to Moses, entrusted by Moses with Joshua,
and the seventy Elders; and by them transmitted down from one Generation to
another. This that People have in -- Video Hebraeos omnes -- Legem, quae per os
tradita est, tanti facere, ut eam non modo aequent Legi Scriptae, sed long
anteferant, tanquam animam corpori; quo sine ea impossible sit, ut ipsis
videtur, Legem Scriptam intelligere aut observare: adeoque sine ea Lex tota non
sit nisi corpus ^ine Spiritu, etc. Episcopii Instit. Theol. L. 3. C. 4.
very high estimation, preferring it to the very Scriptures, and honoring it
with room in their Creed; of which one Article is: Leo Modena: History of the
present Jews, etc. Translated by Mr. Chilmead. p. 248.
I believe that the Law, which was given by Moses, was wholly dictated by God,
and that Moses put not in one Syllable of himself: And so likewise that that
which we have by Tradition, by way of Explication of the Precepts of the other,
has all of it proceeded from the Mouth of God, delivering it to Moses. Yet
Learned Men judge this fardle of Traditions to be a very Episcop. Ibid. Cap. 6.
per to^.
Figment; and that in some Age or other, Ancestors have imposed on the
Credulity of their Posterity; that Tradition has recommended to them, That, as
deriving from God which never had so sacred and infallible an Author.

After the foregoing Observation of the Church; and how little agreeingly with
it is first Model Tradition preserved it for two me morable and large Periods of
Time, I proceed to the Christian Church.

SECT. IV.
Being come to the Christian Church, let us first take some account of the more
early Ages of it.

As soon as the good Seed was sown, the Enemy came, and sowed Tares among the
Wheat. Tradition was not so viligant, but that many corrupt Doctrines and
Practices quickly arose, and spread in the Church. Else St. August. might have
spared his Book of Heresies, or the Catalogue would have been shorter.

But I shall insist on two or three Opinions only, which have been anciently
countenanced by great Names; and have been of considerable continuance in the
Church, and are now generally rejected, by the Church of Rome, as well as by
others.

1. That after the Resurrection, Jerusalem should be new built, adorned, and
enlarged; and that Believers in Christ should Reign with him there a thousand
years; was very early believed. Papias (the Scholar of St. John) Irenaeus,
Apollinarius, Tertullian, Victorinus, Lactantius, Severus, and a great
multitude of Catholic Persons were of this Judgment. St. Hierome, though he did
not hold, yet neither would he condemn this Opinion, because many
Ecclesiastical Persons and Martyrs had owned it. And St. Augustine thought the
Tenent tolerable, if abstracted from any carnality of Pleasures; and confesses,
that he himself once held it. We have all this in Bibl. Stae. Lib. 5. Annot.
233. and Lib. 6. Annot. 347.
Sixtus Senensis.

But (...), etc.

Contra Tryphonem. p. 307.


Justine Martyr, Elder than either St. Hierome, or St. Augustine, speaks of the
Millenarian Doctrine, as that which was embraced by all thorough Orthodox
Christians of his time: which affirmation (whatsoever is opposed out of him
elsewhere to the diminution of it) must mean, that at the least a very great
number of Christians were thus Opinion'd.

And though the Judgment of more sober Christians was more clean and
inoffensive concerning the Millenarian Reign, yet the apprehensions of many
were more gross and sensual; as were those of the Cerinthians, as Cerinthiani
-- mill quoque annos post resurrectionem in terreno regno Christi secundum
carnales ventris, and lihidin^s voluptates futuros fabulantur: unde etiam
Chiliastae sunt appellati. De Haeres. Cap. 8.
St. Augustine tell us, and that they were called Chiliasts.

According to In Johan. cap. 6.
Maldonate; St. Augustine's, and Innocent's the first Opinion of the necessity
of the Eucharist to Infants, prevailed in the Church about six hundred years.

This practice of Communicating of Infants is acknowledged by Ut enim
sanctissimi illi patres sui facti probabilem causam, pro illius temporis
ratione hab^erunt, ita certe ecs nulla salutis necessitate, id fecisse sine
controversia credendum est. Trid. Conc. Sess. 5. Can. 4. Caranz. Summa Council.
the Council of Trent. But they deny, that the Practisers of it had any Opinion
of its necessity; but used it upon some probable Motive only. And so they
Siquis dixerit, parvulis, antequam ad annos discretionis pervenerint,
necessariam esse Eucharistiae Communionem: Anathema sit. Sess. 5. Can. 4. De
Communione sub utraque specie, and parvulorum. Caran.
Anathematize them only; who shall affirm, that the Eucharist is necessary to
Children, before they come to years of discretion. Thus the Trent-Fathers.

But if Tradition Ancient and even Apostolical, and also Holy Scriptures, can
make a Practice necessary, then (particularly) St. Augustine judged the
Communicating of Infants to be necessary: For he -- Vnde nisi ex antiqua, ut
existimo, and Apostolica Traditione Ecclesiae Christi insitum tenent, praeter
Baptismum, and participationem Dominicae Mensae, non solum ad regnum Dei, sed
nec ad salutem, and vitam aeternam posse quenquam hominum pervenire. And
presently after two or three Quotations out of Scripture, he adds: Si ergo, ut
tot, and tanta divina testimonia concinunt, nec salus, nec vita aeterna sine
Baptismo, and corpore and sanguine Domini cuiquam spectanda est, frustra sine
his promittitur parvul^s. Porro si a salute, a^ vita aeterna hominem nisi
peccata non separant, per haec Sacramenta non nisi peccati reatus in parvulis
solvitur. S. August. De peccati merit. and remiss. Contr. Pelag. L. 1.
discoursed for it, both from Tradition and Scriptures. For when he had
asserted upon the strength of both those Topiques; that without Baptism, and
partaking of the Lord's Table none can be saved; he concludes, that therefore
without these, Salvation is in vain promised to Children. Without these: i. e.
Baptism, and the Eucharist also. So that, though the Sanctissimi Patres have good
words given them, yet the holy Augustine, and the rest who were of his mind,
must fall under the Trent-Anathema. And, considering the clearness of the
passage in St. Augustine; it is strange it should be said: [There is an
Objection, -- That S. Austine and Innocentius with their Councils, held that
the Communion of Children was necessary for Salvation; and their words seem to
be apparent. But who looks into other passages of the same Authors will find,
that their words are Metaphorical; and that their meaning is, that the Effects
of Sacramental Communion, to wit, an Incorporation into Christ's Body, which is
done by Baptism, is of necessity for Childrens Salvation. Rushworth Dial. 3d.
Sect. 13.] What passages they are, which do thus interpret those Authors
meaning, we are not told. But,

1. It is strange, that if St. Aug. and Innoc. intended Baptism only, and by
that an Incorporation into Christ's Mystical Body, to be necessary to Children
for their Salvation. They should at all mention the Communion of Christ's Body
and Blood, and the partaking of the Lord's Table, to be necessary to Children
for that purpose, what needed such a disert and repeated conjunction of
Baptism, and of the Eucharist, in expressing that necessity, if there was no
necessity of the Communion, but of Baptism only? What reason for it, except
they should be thought to have a mind to darken their Sense with Words. Nay, if
they meant one of the Sacraments only to be necessary to Childrens Salvation;
though they explicitly mention both; why may it not be said, that they intended
the Communion only, and not Baptism to be necessary for that end; seeing they
are in words as express for the Communion, as for Baptism?

2ly. As for St. Augustine, his word (in the Margent) will not without
extremity of injury admit of such a Construction, as the Author abovenamed
would (in his commenting way) obtrude upon them. For certainly when he says;
That [without Babtism, and partaking of the Lord's Table, and of the Body and
Blood of the Lord, no man can be saved] he meant properly, and without a
figure, why therefore, when he adds in way of Inference, [si ergo] if therefore
both these Sacraments, Baptism and the Body and Blood of the Lord, be necessary
to Salvation, in vain without these is Salvation promised to Children, sure he
means not metaphorically but properly likewise. Else his discourse would not be
homogeneous, the Inference would not be suitable to the Premises.

From what has been said it is plain, that St. Augustine's words are to be
understood in the most obvious sense, and unstrain'd by a Trope. And I am
persuaded, St. Augustine does not contradict Himself, disagree in other places,
from what he clearly means in this, and several others.

I shall add; that the necessity of Communicating of Infants, continued to be
maintained in the Greek Church in the days of Notandum quod ex ho^ quod dicitur
hic: Nisi manducaveritis etc. Dicunt Graeci, quod hoc Sacramentum est tantae
necessitatis, quod pueris debet dari, sicut Baptismus. In Johan. Cap. 6. p. 53.
Liranus; and much later, in the time of, Graeci -- Eucharistiam parvulis etiam
infantibus praeb^nt, Instit. Mor. part 1. L. 5 C. 11.
Azorius; and it is in use with the Ricaut of the Armenian Church.
Armenian Church to this Age. And of this usage among the Christians in
Habassia, in Egypt, and some others, Enquiries touching, etc. Cap. 22, 23, 25.
Brerewood may be seen.

3ly. That the Souls of the Saints departed enjoy not the beatifique Vision of
God till after the Resurrection, was a belief of the Church, for some ages,
Bib. Stae. Lib 6. Annot. 345.
Sixtus Senensts gives us a long Catalogue of Persons of Note, who inclined
this way; as James the Apostle, Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens
Romanus, Origin, Lactantius, Victorinus, Prudentius, St. Ambrose, St.
Chrysostom, St. Augustine, Theodoret, Arethas, Oecumenius, Theophylact,
Euthymius, Bernard, and Pope John the 22d. Of all these he says, that They
seemed to give Authority to the Opinion by their Testimony: Tho afterward he
endeavors to interpret some of them to a commodious sense, and excuses Others
of them by this; that the Church had not then determined any thing certainly in
this Article, M. Daille of the right use of the Fathers. Lib. 2. Cap 4. Vossii
Theses Hist^rico-Ecclesiasticae, de slatu Animae Separatae. Luc. 2. Th s. 1.2.3.
Authors have observed the stream of Antiquity to have run much this way, and
that (if it be not now,) it was believed, Daille Ibid. propius finem. Brerewood
Enquiries. Cap. 15.
and defended by the whole Greek Church, till of later years.

But the contrary to this was defined by a Definimus -- Illorum etiam animas,
qui -- in caelum mex recipi, and intueri clare ipsum Deum trinum and Vnum,
sicuti est. Conc. Flor. apud Caran.
Council, called first at Ferrara, but afterward removed to Florence, not yet
250 years ago. And De Beatit. and Canon. Sanctorum. Lib. 1^ Cap. 1. In initio.
Bellarmine calls the Denying to Souls, who need no purifying by a Purgatory
Fire, the clear sight of God immediately upon their departure, an Opinion of
Ancient, and Modern Heretics, and he names, (with much reverence to the
Fathers) Tertullian, as Primum ex Haereticis, the first of the Heretics, who
maintained it, That, which made the Cardinal so fierce, it may be, was, because
he conceived the Haec quaestio fundamentum est omnium altarum; nam idcirco aute
Christi adventum non ita colebantur, neque invocabantur Spiritus Patriarcharum,
and Prophetarum, quemadmodum nunc Apostolos, and Martyrs colimus and
invocamus, quod Illi adhuc inferni carceribus clausi detiner entur, Ordo
disputationis subnexas Praefationi ad septimam Controversiam generalem de
Ecclesia triumphante.
Beatifical vision of God by the Saints departed before the day of Judgment, to
be a Foundation of the present Worship, and Invocation of them. But howsoever,
he was more civil to John 22d. because a Pope, whom he brings off thus.
Respondeo imprimis ad Adrianum, Joannem hunc revera sensisse, animas non
visuras Deum, nisi post resurrectionem: ^aeterum hoc sensisse, quando adhuc
sentire licebat sine periculo Haeresis, nulla enim adh^c praecesserat Ecclesiae
definitio. Bellarm. de Romano Pontifice, Lib. 4. Cap. 14.
John (he says) was really, and might be of this Opinion, without danger of
Heresy; because there had been no determination as yet by the Church
concerning it. This necessarily implies, that if the point had been determined
before John's time, his Tenent would have been Heretical, therefore an Error in
Faith, and that it must so fare with those, whosoever have denied, or shall
deny it, since the Definition of it, and so a Tenent may be in one Age an
Article of Faith, which was not so in a former Age.

But I cannot conceive how this should be, how an Opinion should be coined an
Article of Faith in the Mint of Oral Tradition, which yet is affirmed to be the
sole Rule of Faith, (and which is the thing I have undertaken to disprove.)
For) 1. Neither can an Opinion advance into an Article of Faith, ex part sui,
in its own Nature, which was not so before, by virtue of Oral Tradition,
because that is but a Witness; does not enact Articles anew, but only conveys
down to us, such as were stamped Articles of Faith by Divine Authority, and
delivered to the first Churches Custody. Nor, 2ly. Can an Opinion improve into
an Article of Faith ex part nostri, come to be known to us as such, if it were
not known to be such in times past: Because every later Age depends for
Intelligence on the Age foregoing, and can know no more, than what that Age
informs of; and the foregoing Age could not teach the following one more than
it self knew. So that the Opinion of Pope John must have always been the same;
as much an Heresy (if at all an Heresy) before the Church's Determination, as
after it; or, as little an Heresy after the Church's Determination, as it was
before. And here by the way, Sure Footing. p. 116.
it may be observed, that though it is boasted, that the chief Pastor of the Sea
of Rome has a particular Title to Infallibility built on Oral Tradition, above
any See, or Pastor whatsoever: Yet the chief Pastor John did err in a material
and consequential point of Faith; a very Learned Adversary being Judge. And
this is but one Instance among many.

To draw toward an end of this Section. By a view of the two or three Opinions,
which had once no small countenance from the ancient Church, yet have been
since turned out of favor, and two of them been vtigmatiz^d, we may perceive,
that Oral Tradition has not been so even and regular in its Conveyance, as is
asserted.

And if the Ancient Church, so much nearer to the Apostles days, (nearer by so
many hundreds of years, than we are now; or our Fathers were, at the first
secession from the Roman Communion) did mistake, (as is yielded by the
Romanists) and Oral Tradition did decline so soon; how much more probable is
it, that it should grow yet more feeble, and corrupt at such a far greater
distance of time! As Waters which arise clear, and of qualities agreeing with
their Fountain, the farther they run, do the more contract a new relish, and
gather a foulness from the Channels through which they travel.

SECT. V.
I proceed to the Christian Churches since the more Primitive times; and as
they are commonly divided into the Eastern and Western Churches; so I shall
begin with the Eastern, and there speak of the Greek Church only. In which I
suppose, none will question, but that Christian Religion was planted in a very
ample and punctual manner; such, as might have secured a perpetuity of
Primitive Truths among the Professors of them, as well as among any other Body
of Christians.

This Church administers the Eucharist to the Laiety in both kinds; allows
Married Priests, denis Purgatory-fire, (to add no more.) In these things the
Roman Church differs from them: One of them therefore must err, and have
receded from what was delivered at the first to them. We believe the Roman
Church to be guilty of the Recess, and they to be sure will deny it. But yet,
which soever it be of the Churches, which is in the wrong (and one of them must
be so) Oral Tradition is guilty of Mal-performance of its Duty.

But moreover, this Church holds, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father,
and not from the Son: Which is a Tenent condemned by Protestants, and Romanists
both. And the Grecians misbelief in this Article was judged by Card. Bellarmine
so criminous, that he counted it meritorious of the sacking of Constantinople;
which happened accordingly (in his calculation) at the Feast of Pentecost,
Bellarm. de Christo. lib. 2. cap. 30.
as a Judgment of God upon them for this error about the Procession of his Holy
Spirit. And he adds, That many compare the Greek Church to the Kingdom of
Samaria, which separated from the true Temple, and for that was punished with
perpetual Captivity.

How far charitable in his Censure, and right in his Vossius de tribus Symboli;
in Addendis.
Chronology the Cardinal was, let others judge. But this is clear, that they of
that Communion (as they are very numerous, so) do generally consent in this
Opinion; that there has been an entail of it upon Posterity through hundreds of
years; and that though their Reduction has been more than once attempted, yet
endeavors have proved succesless: the wound may have been skinned over, but it
has not been healed. Idem. Ibid.
Though at the Councils of Lions and Florence, it is said, there was something
of a Closure; yet as soon as the Greeks returned home, there was presently a
Rupture again; and the Churches remained at as great a distance as before. And
they retain their old Error Ricaut, of the Greek Church.
to this day, and are observed to defend it with a particular dexterity.

The same Greek Church denies the Pope's Supremacy, that Summa Rei Christianae.
Bellar In Praef. ad lib. de summo Pontifice.
Diana of the Romanists. They may have yielded the Bishop of Rome a See Nilus,
(...).
Primacy of Order, and yet that too, not as enstated on him by Divine Right,
but indulged him by the favor of Princes, and Ecclesiastical Canon. But they
would never grant him a Superiority of Power and Authority: They will not
Ricaut, of the Greek Church.
yet allow it him.

These Opinions of the Greek Church cannot in the Judgment of the Romanists
(who hold contrarily to both, and are so especially concerned in the latter)
descend from Christ and his Apostles: Therefore they must confess, that
Tradition has miscarried. And Traditions miscarrying among so great, and
formerly renowned (though now afflicted) a Society of Christians, for so very
long a time, and in Points of such moment, must needs decry it much below that
value, to which its friends have enhans'd it.

SECT. VI.
Next shall succeed a consideration of the Western Church. And what Church in
the West would be more taken notice of, than the Roman? Where we are to find
the most accurate Tradition, or to despair of meeting with it any where. They
of that Communion having dressed up, and strengthened the Cause of Oral
Tradition with the greatest advantages, which their wit and learning can give
it; and claiming it as their Sure Footing, P. 116.
Privilege, to be the most infallible Traditioners of any Church whatsoever.

Two things here may be considered: 1. What the Accord is of the Roman with
the Ancient Church. 2ly. What her Harmony is with herself: How well Oral
Tradition has preserved her in both these respects.

First how little the Church of Rome comports, in her Opinions and Practices,
with the most ancient and purest Churches, has been demonstrated by many
Learned Protestants. I shall insist but on one thing, viz. The denial of the
Cup to the Laiety in the Eucharist by the Roman Church.

The Learned Cassander thought it could not be proved; that Non puto
demonstrari posse totis mill amplius annis, in ulla Catholicae Ecclesiae part
sacrosanctum hoc Eucharistiae Sacramentum aliter in sacra synazi e mensa
Dominica fideli populo, quam sub utroque panis vinique Symbolo, administratum
fuisse. De saera Comm. sub utraque specie. He is positive, and large in this,
in his Consultation likewise. Much to the same purpose, Alphonsus a Castro.
Tit. Eucharistia. Haeresi. 13.
For above a 1000 years the Sacrament of the Eucharist was otherwise
administered to the faithful People, than under the Elements of Bread and Wine
both. Several of our Adversaries give their suffrages with Cassander: And the
Greek Church administers to the Laiety in both kinds, to the present Age. But
let us come to that which will, with our Adversaries, be of more Authority.

The Council of Praeterea declarat, hane potestatem perpetuo in Ecclesia
fuisse, ut in Sacramentorum dispensatione, salva illorum substantia, ea
statueret, vel mutaret, quae suscipientium utilitati, seu ipsorum Sacramentorum
venerationi, pro rerum, temporum, and locorum varietate, magis expedire
judicaret. -- Quare agnoscens matter Ecclesia hanc suam in administratione
Sacramentorum Anthoritatem, licet ab initio Christianae religionis non
infrequens utriusque speciei usus fuisset, tamen -- hanc consuetudinem sub
altera specie communicandi, approbavit, and pro lege habendam decrevit. --
Sess. 5. Can. 2. Apud Caran.
Trent confesses, That from the beginning of Christian Religion, the use of
both Bread and Wine was not uncommon. Yet [licet] although such had been the
Primitive, and not uncommon usage; the Council approved of Communicating under
one kind, and decreed it to be observed as a Law. And this the Council did by
virtue of a (pretended) Power of the Church to appoint, and to alter, in the
administrations of the Sacraments, as should be judged expedient, for the
Communicants profit, and the Veneration of the Sacraments, according to the
variety of Circumstances.

Before this the Council of Hoc generale Concilium declarat, decernit, and
definit, -- quod licet Christus post caenam instituerit; and suis discipulis
administraverit sub utraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum;
tamen, hoc non obstante, sacrorum Canonum Authoritas, and approbata comuetudo
Ecclesiae servavit, and servat -- Et similiter quod licet in primitiva Ecclesia
h^jusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub ut^^aque specie; tamen haec
consuetudo, ad evitandum aliqua pericula and scandala, est rationabiliter
introducta, quod a conficientibus sub utraque specie, and a laicis tantummodo
sub specie panis suscipiatur. -- Sess. 3. Apud Eundem.
Constance had acknowledged, That Christ after Supper, Instituted, and
Administered the Venerable Sacrament to his Disciples under both kinds of Bread
and Wine; and likewise, that in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was
received by the faithful under both kinds. Yet [licet] although this was so;
and [hoc non obstante] notwithstanding this, the Council declared, decreed, and
defined, that the Bread only should be received by the Laiety. And this Council
thus defined, by virtue of certain Canons, and because of a Custom rationally
introduced for the avoiding certain dangers, and scandals.

We have had a clear and express acknowledgment of the Institution, and
Primitive use of the Eucharist in both kinds; of the generality, and very long
continuance of the Practice. We have this granted by two Councils, and by
others who were of the Roman Communion. How came it to pass then, that a
Primitive Institution and Usage, and that so long perpetuated, should be laid
aside, nay, decreed against by those very Councils; and that they, who should
say, that the Communicating under one kind only were Sacrilegious and Unlawful,
should be dealt with as Council. Constan. lbid,
Heretics? Why, we may observe two Reasons given in those Councils. 1. The
Church's Authority. 2ly. Expediency. Both these shall be considered of.

1. Of the Authority of the Church in the Case. I confess that the Church has
Authority in determining and altering things indifferent, as Edification,
Decency, and Order shall require.

But Governors of the Church must beware how they deal with That, which was so
remarkably honored with our great Lord's, and good Saviors solemn
Institution, and first Administration of it in his own Sacred Person; and that
in Commemoration of no less than of the breaking his holy Body, and of the
shedding his precious Blood, and for to show the Lord's death till he come. In
this August Ordinance, Times Place, and Gesture are Circumstances; but surely
Bread and Wine are Substantials. For to the substance, and integrity of a
Sacrament, do concur the Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum. -- ut Sacramentum
sit sacrum signans, and sacrum signatum. Pet. Lumb. Lib. 4 Distinct. 1. B.
outward, sensible Signs, as well as the inward, retired things signified; and
the Eucharist consists (as -- Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans terrena, and
caelesti. Adversus haereses. Lib. 4. Cap. 34.
Irenaeus says) of something earthly, and of something heavenly. And it is the
Trent Fathers caution, that -- Salva illorum substantia -- Conc. Trid. supra.
the substance of the Sacraments be preserved safe.

Now I desire to know of our Adversaries, whether they think that the Church
has power to lay aside the Wine and Bread both? I believe they would answer
negatively. Then with what reason, and by what Authority, do they dismiss One
of them, i. e. the Wine, and afford the whole Laiety but a dry Communion? Did
the Sovereign Ordainer permit any such halving, and mutilation of his
Sacrament? There is no such Permission to be found in the first Institution,
and Administration of it by Him; nor in the Doctrine, and Practice of his
Apostles afterward. How then should the Subjects (and Councils, and Popes too,
are no bigger) dare to make any distinction, where the Supreme Lawgiver Himself
has made none? Let things be scanned, and it will be plain, that the Sacramental
Bread and Wine, in the Administration of them to the Faithful, have the same
bottom; and that there is no reason, why if the One be alterable, the other may
not be so likewise. For, 1. There is the same express command of Christ for the
One, as for the Other, It Is said, 1 Cor. 11.24 25.
Do this: in the administration of the Wine, as well as of the Bread. And that
it may not be caught at, that it is said As for the words of our Savior (do
this in remembrance of me) they do no ways inser a precept of receiving in both
kinds. First, because our Savior said these words absolutely only of the
Sacrament in the form of Bread, but in the form of Wine only conditionally (do
this, as o^t as y shall drink, in remembrance of me;) not commanding them to
drink but in case they did drink -- that then they should do it in memory of
Christ. Dr. Vane's lost sherp, etc. page 311, 312.
of the Body Simply, Do this; but of the Cup, Do this as often as ye drink it: as
if there were a tacit intimation of a greater necessity of communicating of the
Bread, than of the Cup; and that therefore it were sufficient, if the Bread be
received, though the Wine be not: to preclude (I say) any such Evasion, St. Paul
presently applys the same [(...)] to the Bread, as well as to the Cup: 1 Cor.
11.26.
For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show, etc. 2ly.
Both these were administered to the same Persons. 3ly. There is the same end
expressly, and distinctly assigned to both: Do this in remembrance of me. 4ly.
There Is as much spiritual benefit, and comfort, which redound to the
Communicants by the participation of the One, as of the Other. The Wine appears
to have the advantage rather of the other sacred Element. For the Substance,
color, and manner of the delivering the Wine separately from the Bread, have a
peculiar Aptness to represent Blood, and Bloodshed; and consequently to impress
the quicker apprehensions, and spiritual sense of our blessed Jesus's bloody
death upon, and to excite the smarter affections in, the Communicants.

By what has been said, there is evident an Equal necessity of the use of both
the Sacramental Elements, and therefore the Wine is as little mutable, and
dispensable with, in the Eucharistical Administration, by the Churches and
Canons Authority, as the Bread.

As for Expediency of withholding the Cup from the Laity, and the Inexpediency
of the contrary: it is not safe, or consequential upon such grounds to
discourse against what is divinely instituted and commanded. But let us attend
to what is pleaded.

The Council of Constance proceeded in their Decree, upon a Custom rationally
(as they say) introduced, for the avoiding dangers and scandals, or offenses.
But, 1. why they should insist on, and commend a Custom as rational, which was
in truth but an Innovation (because contrary to the first Institution of the
Sacrament by Christ, and to the first and general use in the Churches of
Christ, and therefore unreasonable,) I cannot understand. Certainly, the
Council had showed the Prudence and Gravity of Fathers, if they had condemned
this Custom, as a Novel abuse, and had done that Right to the Sacrament, as to
have restored the Administration to what it was at the Beginning. But perhaps,
2ly. The Avoidance of certain dangers, and Scandals may be some excuse. Now,
what those dangers and Scandals might be, I should not have thought, but that I
find Card. Bellarmin (who De Euchar. Lib. 4. Cap. 24.6. neque ad hoc incommodum.
confesses, that Christ instituted the Eucharist under both kinds; and that
the Ancient Church administered in both kinds, yet) alleging Ibid. Sect. Sexta
ratio sumi potest ab incommodis.
some Inconveniences, which, he says, would follow upon a necessity of the use
of both Species. As, 1. Because of the Numerousness of some Congregations,
where yet there may be but one Priest. 2. Danger of Irreverence in casual
spilling the wine. 3ly. Some cannot drink wine. 4ly. Vines do not grow, nor is
wine made, in some Countries. This is the sum of the four Incommoda,
Inconveniences, in which I conceive there is not much. For, 1. If the
Congregation be any where so very large, and there be but one Priest, he may
procure an Assistant at the Sacramental Seasons, or the more days may be
assigned for Communicating. There be many great Congregations among
Protestants, each of which have but One Incumbent, and yet they do not find the
administration of the Bread and Cup both, to the People, to be unpracticable.
2ly. To avoid spilling, the Priest may put the less wine into the Chalice, and
tread the more carefully; this is an easi prevention of Irreverence. 3ly. The
persons, who have an Antipathy to wine, are but few, and it is unreasonable,
that a rare and extraordinary case should wholly suspend the force of a Law,
and supersede a Practice, with respect to All, and even Extra casum
extraordinarium, where there is no such extraordinary occasion. 4ly. It Is
known, that wine is common, and sufficiently cheap in those places, where it is
not made. Or if there be any odd Corner, where wine cannot be had, the third
answer may serve. So much for Expediency, and the avoiding dangers and scandals.

Con. Constant. Ibid.
They of the Council add, That it is most firmly to be believed, and not at all
to be doubted, that the whole Body of Christ, and his Blood, are truly
contained, as well under the species of Bread, as under the species of Wine.

It Is likely, that they meant this pretended concomitancy, as an Argument for
the no necessity of the Laieties having the Cup Administered to them, because
(as they say) the whole Body and Blood of Christ is contained under the Bread
alone. But (as they went upon a supposition, that there is a real
Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the very Body and Blood of
Christ, which we deny, and can never be proved; so) They boldly reflect upon
the Wisdom of Christ, who did Ordain and Administer Wine as well as Bread, and
that to the same Persons; and best knew, how he was present in the Sacrament,
and would be to the end of the World; best knew what was necessary, what
superfluous in his own Ordinance.

Certainly, Christ having declared his Pleasure, by what he said and did at his
Institution and Administration of the Eucharist, concerning Communicating in
both kinds, Christians (without puzling their heads about an imaginary
Concomitancy, or the like needless Subtleties) are to judge; that then they
partake of whole Christ in a Sacramental way; i. e. enjoy Communion of his
Body, and Communion of his Blood also; whenas they drink of the Cup of
Blessing, as well as eat of the Bread broken conformably to our Lord's own
Institution, and accordingly as his Apostle The Cup of Blessing, which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?

The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?

1 Cor. 10.16.


sorts them out, each respectively to the other.

Nay, suppose this fancied Concomitancy, yet it cannot be a Salvo for the denial
of the Cup to the People in the Eucharist. For there Christ is represented, and
Christians partake of him, as 1 Cor. 11.26.
dying; partake of his Body, as 1 Cor. 11.24.
broken, and of Blood Math. 26.28.
as shed; i. e. separated from his Body; but what is separated from his Body is
not Concomitant with it. Hence Par. 3. Qu. 76. Article. 2. ^.
Thomas Aquinas says, That if this Sacrament had been Administered at the very
time of Christ's Passion and Death; then the Body of Christ Administered under
the species of Bread would have been without the Blood; as also the Blood under
the species of Wine, would have been without the Body. Why, and so it must be
understood still. For things Arbitrarily Instituted (as the Eucharist was) must
be considered and used, answerably to the Will and Intent of the Ordainer. It
having then been Christ's pleasure, that his Sacrament should exhibit him, not
as he was before, or after his Death; but as dying and parting with his Blood,
Christians accordingly are to participate of his Body and Blood, considered
under such circumstances as then were, when he hung bleeding on the Cross; i.
e. When his Body and Blood were divided from each other, and therefore
significantly of this Separation (in point of congruity, as well as precept)
Christians are to receive the Wine, as well as the Bread.

I shall annex but one thing more. It is The Title of the Dialogue is [whether,
and how, Communion in both kinds is Faith?] And toward the end of it: --
Besides that the present Practice, (viz. administering in one kind) though
universal, does not deciare the Church's Faith, as in this particular, the
Council of Trent shows, declaring that the Pope may dispense upon just
occasion, which could not be in matters of Faith. Enchiridion of Faith. Dial.
14. page 75. By Fran. Covent. (Tho. White, as is supposed) Printed at Douay,
1655.
said, (the more, I suppose, to alleviate the Church's denial of the Cup to the
Laiety; when as yet the Author confesses, that among the Ancients, they did
more frequently and publicly give the holy Eucharist in both kinds) that this
is a Practice, but not a matter of Faith. But,

1. Ancient Divine Practices, and Usages, (such as the Sacramental
Administration) as well as Divine Doctrines, should be held sacred, and be kept
inviolate by Christians.

2ly. Faith is truly concerned in this Sacramental Practice. For in Religion,
and even the Agendis of it, the things to be done, Faith and Practice are
interwoven with each other; the former must guide the latter: The understanding
must be right in its Belief, before the Actions can be regular. Now, that
Christ did ordain the Sacrament, and command the Administration of it in after
Ages, in such a way as he himself had ordained and administered it, are
Credenda, things to be believed, though the Execution of, or Obedience to the
Command be a Practical. So then the Church of Rome, denying the Cup to the
People, and avowing it; disobeying a Divine Command, and maintaining that
disobedience, does offend in a matter of Practice and Faith both. For they do
not barely omit a Practice or Duty, but also oppose and evacuate a Divine
Command, and the obligation from it, which are Objects of Faith. And that Faith
has to do in this Affair, was the Judgment of the Council of Constance; whenas
they denounced, Council. Constant. Ibid.
that an Assertion of the unlawfulness, or sacrilege in administering in one
kind only, should be sufficient for a Man's Conviction of Heresy.

After all, which has been discoursed in this Section, it must be concluded,
that the Church of Rome have in their Half-Communion, and peremptory defense of
it, departed from primitive Institution, divine command, and the Church's
ancient general Usage, that Posterity has deserted Forefathers, and therefore
that Oral Tradition has not done its Duty.

SECT. VII.
Secondly, let us examine, what the Agreement is of the Romanists among
themselves. And if we find them at difference, then Tradition has not been so
faithful, as to bring Truth whole and sincere to them, for if Tradition were
full and uniform, it would keep them at Unity with one another.

But even among them there may be observed Parties; who though in Complement they
acknowledge one first Mover, yet have each their counter-motions; though that
Church boast of their Harmony, yet they have their discords; only, they are not
so loud perhaps, as those are, among their Adversaries. Let account be taken of
some of their Civil Wars.

The Contests, between the Jesuits and Dominicans concerning Grace, and
Freewil; Predetermination, and Contingency; as also between the Molinists and
Jansenists; are well known.

The Les provinciales, or the Mystery of Jesuitism. page 92.
Doctrine of Probable Opinions, and many practical Doctrines of the Jesuits
questionless please themselves, and likewise the page 194.
polite Saints, and Courtier-like Puritans: Yet others mislike them, and
believe they never descended from Jesus, nor from his Apostle, St. Peter.

The difference between the Cassandrians and the Church, in communion whereof
they live, is so great, as that it seems to be, as it were, one State within
another State, and one Church within another Church; (as Mr. Daille Of the
right use of the Fathers. Lib. 1. Cap. 11.
one reports who had reason to know.)

Some will have the Bellarm. De Council. Auctor. Lib 2. Cap. 14.
Pope to be above a Council; others, a Council to be above the Pope. Some
affirm, that the Pope Bellar. de Romano Pontif. L. 4. C. 2.
cannot err; Others that he may. Some are for the Pope's plenary Power, over
the whole world, both in Ecclesiastical affairs, and also Political; but others
allow him Idem de Pont. Romans L. 5. C. 1.
only a Spiritual Power directly, and immediately; yet in virtue of that
spiritual Power, to have likewise a Power indirectly, and that the highest,
even in Temporal matters. Of this latter Opinion Bellarmin himself was, yet it
seems the French denied the Pope's power in Temporals, whether directly, or but
indirectly; when as Bellarmin's Gold. in Repl. pro. Imp. cited by Dr.
Crakanthorp, of the Popes Tempor. Monarchy. Chap. 11.
Book against Barclay, (in which Bellarmin defends the Popes Power over
Princes) was so detested by that State, that in their public Assembly, they
did prohibit and forbid any, and that under the Pain of High Treason, either to
keep, or receive, or print, or sell that Book.

Exomolog. C. 40.
H. P. de Cressy calls Infallibility, to him an unfortunate word; confesses,
that Chillingworth has combated it with too too great success: will have it,
that the Church of Rome maintains no more than an Authority; and says, he has
reason, moving him to wish, that the Protestants may never be invited to Combat
the Authority of the Church under the notion of Infallibility. And to show,
that he is not alone in this; he makes very bold with the Council of Trent,
Ibid.
and Pope Pius 4th, if they are not on his side; for he shelters his Opinion,
under a Decision of the former, and a Bull of the latter, concerning the Oath
of the Profession of Faith. And likewise Dr. Holden (in his Quem and Cathel cae
Fidei consonum inveni, and, etc.
Approbation of Cressy's Book, without any Censure of this passage) says; (He
found it consonant to the Catholic Faith.)

If this be so, as Cressy would sain have it to be, then the Romanists and we
are not at so much distance, as we thought we had been: for of an Authority of
the Church, there is no dispute between us and them. But sure, there is more in
the case than so. For the Roman Catechism set forth by decree of the Council
of Trent, and by the Command of Pope Pius 5th. Quemadmodum haec una Ecclesia
errare non potest in fidei, ac morum disciplina tradenda, cum a spiritu S.
gubernetur, ita, etc. Catech. Romans Cap. 15. Quest. 15.
says, that the Church cannot Err in delivering Faith, and Manners, forasmuch
as it is governed by the holy Spirit: cannot Err, i. e. is infallible. And
this Church thus inerrable is that of the Roman Communion: for the same
Catechism Quid de Romano Pontifice, visibili Ecclesiae Christi Capite,
sentiendum est. De eo fuit illo omnium Patrum ratio, etc. Ibid. quest. 11.
says a little before, that the Roman Pontife is the visible Head of Christ's
Church. And the great Defender of the Romish Faith, Card. Bellarmin affirms,
that Catholici vero omnes constanter d^cent, Concilia generalia, a summo
Pontifice confirmata, non posse errare, nec in fide explicanda, nec in
tradendis morum praeceptis, toti Ecclesiae communibus. Bellarm. de Conciliorum
Autoritate. L. 1. C. 2. circa initium.
all Catholics do constantly teach, that General Councils, confirmed by the
Pope, cannot Err in Faith or Manners, in explicating the one, or in delivering
Precepts about the other. And in the same Chapter he adds; that -- Tota
Autoritas Ecclesiae fermaliter non est nisi in Praelatis, -- ergo idem est,
Ecclesiam non posse errare in definiendis rebus fidei, and Episcopos non posse
errare. Idem. Ibid. Sect. ex his enim locis manifest colligitur.
the whole Authority of the Church is formally in the Prelates; and therefore,
that the Church cannot err in defining matters of Faith, and that the Bishops
cannot Err, are the same Thing.

From what has been quoted, it seems that Dr. Cressy, and whosoever else may be
on his side, are considerably opposed by others. Indeed the Infallibility of
the Roman Church, and the great usefulness of it to them, is better understood
by them, than to be parted with.

Upon a survey of the forementioned Dissentions among Romanists themselves, the
clear inference is; that either Tradition is full, and plain enough in the
things disagreed about; and if so, then the Romanists themselves do not believe
Tradition, rest not in what their Fathers taught them, and so transgress their
own Rule of Faith; or Tradition comes down so divided, that it cannot unite
them; shines so dimly, that they cannot see their way by it (as In the points
of immaculate Conception, and the Controversies between the Jesuits, and the
Dominicans, etc. Exomolog. Chapter 82.
Dr. Cressy says, some learned Catholics are of Opinion) and so wander each
Party in a Path by it self. And this evinces Traditions impotency, want of a
sufficient plainness and certainty.

But here is a retreat, to which our Adversaries must be followed. There is a
Enchirid. of Faith. p. 17. 113. Some what to this purpose likewise Cressy
speaks, Exom. Chapter 28.
distinction made between the Faith and the Doctrine of the Church; between
Points, which are de fide absolute, and such as are de fide sub Opinione;
Points of Faith strictly so called, the denial of which would amount to
Heresy; and Points of Opinion rather than of Faith, and Theological
speculations only. Now it will be said by our Adversaries, that the Subject of
their Home-differences are not of the former, but of the latter kind, matters
of mere Opinion; and therefore that their differences do not disparage
Traditions care and sufficiency; that being maintained to be a Rule of Faith
only.

But to make such an Evasion useless; a strict and close dispute about Points
of Faith, (which are such, and which not) is with the more difficulty
manageable betwixt our Adversaries and us, because we differ about the Rule of
Faith. Accordingly, they account of a Point, as a Enchirid. of Faith p. 113.
and to the like purpose, Cresly, Ibid.
Point of Faith or of mere Opinion, as it is attested to, or not attested to,
by a sufficient Tradition; which they assert to be the rule of Faith; but this
is the thing in question between us. Therefore, as things stand, the way will
be to review the aforenamed Tenants controverted among the Romanists; and to
see what their tendency and importance is in Religion, in the Judgment of any
sober and unbiassed Christian; as also what our Adversaries own Sentiments are
concerning them. Then,

1. The freedom of the will in corrupted Nature; the assistance of Divine
Grace; Predestination to an Eternal State; the extent of the Redemption by the
Death of Christ; perseverance in Grace; look like material concerns in
Religion; and the respective statings of the Questions arising on these
Subjects are judged momentous by the controverting Parties: Les Provincia les;
Or, the, etc. p. 45. 41.
The Jansenists complain of sharp usage from the Molinists; that a Proposition
of theirs, [viz. That the Fathers show us a just Man in the Person of St.
Peter, to whom the grace, without which a Man cannot do any thing, was wanting]
was censured by their Antagonists to be [temerarious, impious, blasphemous,
worthy to be Anathematized, and Heretical;] and that their Persons have been
traduced, and defamed in Books and Pulpits; openly and publicly accused -- as
Heretics. --

The Controversies between the Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants, some of
the principal also between the Lutherans and the Calvinists, are much of the
same kind with them contended about between the Jesuits and Dominicans, the
Jansenists and Molinists; and yet sure the Romanists will have them to be more
than matters of mere Opinion, and Theological speculations only, in us
Protestants; because they take occasion from these and some other differences
of no higher a Complexion, (at the least cannot be accused to be such, by a
Romanist) to upbraid us with the C^arity mistaken apu^^ P^tter, want of Charity
(...) charged. etc. p. 58.
darkness and confusion of our Condition; and that our bitter Contentions and
Speeches declare us to be of different Churches and Religions. But if these
differences in Judgment and Heats, be of so high a nature, and of so desperate
effects in us, why not so in them also? For suppose that some Protestants
passions are more warm in these disputes, yet there are also many moderate Men
on both sides; and to make them of different Religions, there must be a
contrariety of Judgments, and even in matters of Faith; and if these be Points
of Faith in Protestants, what just reason can be given, why they should not be
such in Romanists likewise?

2ly. Les Previn (...) Let^e^. (...). p. 92.
The Doctrine of probable Opinions; and That an Opinion is then called
probable, when it is grounded upon some reasons of consideration; whence it
sometimes comes to pass, that the Opinion of one grave Doctor may render an
Opinion probable: Much of the Cas^^stical Divinity of the Jesuits; their Ibid.
L^tter 9. 186, etc.
easy Devotions; their knack of Ibid. Let. 7. p. 131, 132, etc.
directing the Intention; their Doctrine of Ibid. Let. 9. p. 202, 203, etc.
mental Reservation, and of the sufficiency of Ibid. Let. 10. p. 231, etc.
Attrition; their Salvo's for Ibid Let. 6. p. 115, and Let. 13. p. 285, 286,
etc.
Simony, Ibid. Let. 7. p. 134, etc.
Revenge, and Ibid. Let. 8. p. 171, etc.
Stealing; with several Practiques of the like stamp; certainly will be doomed
by any, who are seriously Christians, to be destructive of that fixedness and
soundness in the Faith, which is opposite to the levity of Children tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, etc. (Ephesians. 4.14.) and
of the Doctrine, which is according to godliness. (1. Tim. 6.3.)

3ly. If Tenants may be thought to be de fide, points of Faith, by their
influence on other Credenda and Agenda, things to be believed and done, and on
the Peace of the Christian World; then certainly those Tenants, which relate to
the Pope, and were even now touched on, must be Points of Faith, and that of
the first Classis. For whosoever can see through things, will judge, that they
are of vast inference, that on the determination of them must depend the
direction of the Pope in the exercise of his Power; and of Christians in what,
and how far to obey him, and his Commands, as to belief and practice. Prince's
Crowns, and their Subject's Loyalty are deeply concerned in them, and
consequently the Unity and Welfare of all the Churches, and States in
Christendom. But Card. Bellarmine himself speaks high enough. Says he -- De qua
re agitur, cun de prim^^u p^ntificis agitur, b^e issime d^cam, de summa rei
Christian^e. Id enim qu^eritur, debeatne F^^lesia diutius consist^^e, (...)
d^ssol^i, and con(...). ^^d eni^ al^ud est (...), an eporteat ab ^dificio fu^^
(...) n^u^n^r mo^ere, a gre^e pasterem, ^b exercitu imperatorem, sol^m^ab
astris, caput a corpore; quam an oporteat aedifictum ruere, g^egem dissipari,
e^^c^um sued^, (...) obs^u^ari, corpus i^cere? Bellarm. In Praefati^ne ad
Libros de su^nmo pontifice habita in Gymn^sio Romano. Anno. 1577. clica initium.
What Subject is treated of? whilst the Primacy of the (Roman) Pontife is
treated of, I will tell you very briefly. [It is discours'd] of the sum of
Christianity. For it is discussed, whether the Church must longer remain
entire, or fall asunder, and perish. He goes on, as in the Margent.

Why now, if the Pope have a Power given him by Christ, of Governing the
Universal Church of Christ; as was the definition of the Council of Florence
(apud Caranzam,) and the Christian Church be so infinitely concerned in the
Pope and his Government, as is affirmed; then it cannot be rationally
questioned, but that our Blessed Savior, and Lord, the Head of the Church, did
declare his Pleasure concerning the true state of the Papal Office, and Power,
to his Apostles; and charged them to Communicate it to the Church, to be
preserved through all Ages. The reason is, because it cannot be conceived
consistent with our Lord's Wisdom and Goodness, to have established an
universal Empire over Christians in Peter and his Successors; and yet not to
have determined, and given a punctual Scheme of that Power and Jurisdiction;
and consequently of Christians due obedience and dependence; seeing that (as is
pretended) such a Power was designed for the guidance and preservation of all
Christians in Truth, Holiness, and Peace: For the Papal Power without such a
clear stating of it, would be utterly insufficient for attaining such glorious
Ends. That which was intended to prevent, and to compose differences, would be
it self an unhappy occasion of the greatest ruptures, as it proves to be at
this day.

Forasmuch then as the Papacy is so transcendent an Interest of the Christian
Church, in the claim of our Adversaries; and that in plain reason, the fixation
and certainty of the Pope's Inerrability, and of the just latitude of his
Power, is so necessary to a fit discharge of the Papal Office for the behoof of
the Church; and that therefore Christ was not wanting in the Revelation, and
Communication of it to his Apostles and Church: Hence it follows, that because
the Romanists are so uncertain, disagree so much about it, therefore they
differ among themselves (not in Theological Quodlibets, or mere speculative
niceties; but) in very grave and substantial Points (let them call them Points
of Faith, or by what other names they please;) and which the Church was at the
first instructed in.

4ly. Between the infallibility of the Church (which the Supra.
Trent Catechism affirms, in which are contained the Sacrae Synodi decreto
Catechismus cons^ribitur, certaque formula, and ratio Christiani populi ab
ipsis fidei rudimentis instituendi. -- In Epist. dedicat.
grounds and principles of the Roman Faith; and which Bellarm. supra.
all Catholics teach) and the Authority of the Church only (which was Supra.
Cressie's belief, in which he was confirmed, Exomol. Cap. 41.
by very Learned Catholics) there is a very wide difference; and there are
consequent very diverse obligations and effects.

For if the Church cannot err, then, what it proposes ought to be believed as
soon as it is made known, and understood. But if the Church may err, and have
an Authority only, then its Articles and Canons may be soberly examined by some
standard which is infallible; and accordingly, as they shall be found to agree
with it, or to contrariate it; to yield, or to suspend Belief ( quietly, and
without more noise than what a meek submission to the Church's censure makes):
or also, Obedience to the Church's Authority, may be a disobedience to the
higher, and supreme Authority of God; who commands Christians Orthodoxy of
Belief, as well as holiness of Life.

I must not omit, that even about this so weighty Subject, (which we are now
upon; viz. Oral Traditions being the only Rule of Faith) the Romanists are not
at accord among themselves, (as I touched in the Preface) De verbo Dei non
scripto. Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Sect. Dico Secundo.
Bellarmine held, that the Word of God, or Revelation made by God, was the
whole and entire Rule of Faith. And this (he says) is divided into two partial
Rules, Scripture and Tradition. If Scripture be in Part a Rule, and Tradition a
Rule but in Part; then (in the judgment of Bellarmine) Tradition is not the
only Rule of Faith. And no question but still there are those, who are of
Bellarmines mind.

There Is a Confession of The Title of the 9th. Par. of the 3d Dialo. is, that
the dissension of the Catholic Doctors concerning the Rule of Faith, does not
hurt the certainty of Tradition.
Rushworth, that there is a Dissension of the Catholic Doctors concerning the
Rule of Faith; but he says, that this does not hurt the certainty of
Traditions. To clear which, and to satisfy the Nephews Scruple, grounded on
this Dissension, the Uncle says; Truly, Cousin, your Objection is strong, yet I
hope to content you. For -- I see no great matter in the variety of Opinions
amongst our Divines, etc. See what follows in the Margent. -- For you see, they
seek out the Decider of Points of Doctrine, i. e. by whose mouth we are to know
(upon occasion of dispute) what, and which be our Points, and Articles of our
Faith; to w^t, whether the Pope, or a Council, or both. Which is not much
Material to our purpose, whatever the truth be, supposing we acknowledge no
Articles of Faith, but such as have descended to us by Tradition from Christ
and his Apostles. Rushworth. Ibid.


But under savor, this variety of Opinions is very Material. For though
(suppose) all Romanists should agree to acknowledge no Articles of Faith, but
such as have descended to them by Tradition from Christ, and his Apostles;
should agree to acknowledge this, in general: yet if they are still to seek; if
it be still unresolved among them, who is the decider of Points of Doctrine; i.
e. by whose mouth they are to know (upon occasions of dispute) what, and which
determinately be their Points, and Articles of Faith, then there must be an
uncertainty among them about the Points and Articles of Faith. For the belief
of Articles of Faith can be no more certain, no more fixed and uniform, than
the Deciders and Mouths are, by which they are to know, what and which be their
Points of Faith: But that Decider and Mouth is yet confessedly unagreed on.
Hence it must follow, that Tradition is hurt, is sorely wounded in its
certainty: in that, it does not, either bring down primitive Truths so clearly,
that there needs no dispute about them, or at the least certainly determine,
who shall be the Decider, and infallible Mouth, from which to receive the
Decision of them: but leaves them, (when disputes arise) to wrangle it out
among themselves, as well as they can.

From the account, which has been given, it is manifest, that the Points, in
which the Romanists dissent from one another, are Points of Faith; or else that
those about which Protestants differ are not such, the Tenants disagreed about
among the Romanists being as material, and influential, as those controverted
among the Protestant formed Churches, or rather much more considerable.

Thus in the foregoing pages, Oral Tradition has been tried by Reason and by
Experience; (the few passages of Scripture quoted, being not intended for Proof
of the Thing in Controversy, but only used incidentally, and in a sense which
is obvious,) and is found guilty of so much uncertainty and failure, that it
deserves to be judged too insufficient to be trusted with the Conveyance of
divine Truths, down from their first Delivery through all succeeding ages.

But it may happen sometimes, that there may be Arguments against a Thing, so
plausible, and which may have so strong a seemingness of Demonstration, as to
engage the Judgment against it; and yet there may be Arguments too for it, so
far more cogent, and convincing, as (upon a weighing both) to preponderate the
other, and to determine the Understanding to the affirmative part. Let us see
then, whether the like may fall out in Oral Tradition, and having alleged the
proofs against its sureness, and safety of Conveyance, let us next consider
what, and how rational the Pleas are on its behalf, and whether they are
weighty enough to turn the Scales.

CHAP. V. The Arguments alleged for Oral Tradition.
SECT. I.
THE Defenses brought for the certainty and infallibility of Oral Tradition,
are such as follow.

1. It is pleaded, that Oral Tradition is a Sure Footing. p. 114.
Principle Self-evident to all Mankind, who use common Reason; that Ibid. p. 53.
Man's Nature is the Basis of it, according to those faculties in him,
perfectly and necessarily subject to the Operations and Strokes of Nature; i.
e. his Eyes, his Ears, handling, etc. that the Letter of thanks, etc. p. 87. 88.
way of Tradition is as efficaciously established in the very grain of Man's
Nature, as what seems most natural, the propagation of their kind; that Sure
Footing. p. 54.
the virtue by which Tradition regulates her followers to bring down Faith
unerringly, is grounded on a far stronger Basis, than all material Nature.

Answ. Indeed, a Principle Self-evident, deeply founded and radicated in Man's
very Nature, and more strongly grounded than all material Nature, deserves to
be heedfully attended to, and preserved inviolate. But let these high strains
be considered of.

1. As to Self-evidence: First Principles (most properly) are Self-evident,
being indemonstrable; not borrowing, but shining by a light of their own: Such
are, [It is impossible for the same thing to be, and not to be: The whole is
greater than any Part.] But in this Sense, Tradition (though the Author of Sure
Footing, calls it a p. 114.
first Principle) is confessed not to be Self-evident, for he undertakes to
demonstrate it, as well a p. 57.
Priori, as a Posteriori. Therefore he says, that there are Principles Letter
of thanks, etc. p. 24, 25, 26.
Self-evident in an inferior manner; not as incapable of demonstration, but
because they need none; being presently assented to by all, who have the use of
their faculties; the notions of them stealing universally into Men's
understandings, and there gaining a fixed entertainment undiscernibly.

The Instances given are; That [in a square space, it is a nearer way to go from
one corner to that which is opposite by the Diameter, than to go by the two
sides: Or, that things look less afar off, and bigger nearer hand.] It Is
affirmed, that Tradition is a Self-evident Principle of this latter kind.

But Tradition is not a Self-evident Principle even of this latter kind. That
Testimony and Authority (and Oral Tradition, which is one sort of That vast
Testification we call Tradition. -- Sure Footing. p. 54.
Testimony) has room among the Topiques, and is a seat of dialectical
argumentation, is evident enough; its use and necessity (in some cases) have
been acknowledged. But That Oral Tradition is a certain, infallible Medium;
That Sure Footing. p. 115.
Councils general and provincial, nay, particular Churches are infallible by
proceeding upon it, is denied by Protestants to be Self-evident, evident, or
but true. And though it is not material, what Protestants affirm, or deny in
other Points disputed between them, and the Romanists, farther than they can
prove; yet in this business their very denial is much sufficient, because the
Question is driven up to this, viz. whether they are Owners of so much Reason,
as is common to all Mankind. And let all judge, who have had conversation with
them, whether (as they are no inconsiderable part of Mankind, so) they have the
use of Common Reason or no; and (as one Argument of this) whether they deny
such plain Propositions, as were before instanced in; or any the like, which
are the Sentiments generally of Mankind.

2ly. (Which is of some kin to the former consideration, forasmuch as the
knowledge of first, and Self-evident Principles is in some Sense natural) Let
Oral Tradition's Foundation in nature be examined.

It Is confessed, that the Faculties of Seeing and Hearing; the Memory,
Understanding, Will, and Affections are from Nature, are natural to us; that
according to a Method of Nature, outward Objects do excite the Faculties into
Acts proper to each: That they being in motion do influence upon one another.
The Senses inform the Understanding; the Understanding trusts the Memory, and
gives impulses to the Will and Affections. Suitable to this procedure in
Nature, I grant, that Tradition strikes upon the Senses, and those strokes are
derived to the inward Faculties, and cause variety of impressions there. This
is all, which I can understand by the Faculties perfect and necessary
subjection to the operations and strokes of Nature; or by Traditions being
grounded and engrain'd in Man's Nature.

But now, how short is all this of a Proof, that Tradition is infallible, in
the strength of any Basis it has in the Nature of Man! Though our Faculties, and
their way of Operation be Natural, yet the Operations, or Exercises of them are
not beyond a possibility of Error, and mistake. Sure all will allow, that the
very Senses are not undeceivable, nor the Understanding inerrable; that the
Memory is frail and leaky; and that the Will and Passions are not impeccable.
And yet all these having to do in Tradition, it must be otherwise with them, or
else it is evident, that Tradition will be crazy, fallible, and uncertain. We
may conclude therefore, that as in Nature, and propagating the kind (which the
Author of the Letter of Thanks says, is most natural;) so in Tradition's
propogation and continuation of it self, there may have happened Abortions,
Superfetations, and monstrous Births; and that much less Tradition is grounded
on a far stronger Basis than all material Nature; whence it should have such a
virtue, as to regulate its followers, to bring down Faith unerringly.

SECT. II.
2ly. It is urged, that the greatest hopes and fears imaginable (indeed
infinitely greater than any other whatsoever, springing from any temporal
consideration,) viz. of Heaven, and of Damnation, were proposed, Sure Footing.
p. 59, 60.
and strongly applied to the minds of the first Believers, encouraging them to
adhere to the Doctrines received, and deterring them from Apostasy; and that
this was in all Ages the persuasion of the Faithful.

Ans. It Is acknowledged, that the wisdom and goodness of God have endeared and
facilitated to Man his Duty by Method, the most imaginably Obliging. But if it
be argued from the Powerfulness of the Motives, and their prevalence too upon
the first Christians, unto their actual Effects upon the generality, or far
greater part of Christians throughout all ages since; such a procedure would
prove, that Christians generally have been, and are virtuous, as well as
Orthodox, that they have as piously imitated (and still do so,) the Apostolical
sanctity, as that they have been unvaryingly constant to the Faith, the
Apostles preached and wrote. For without question the one, was as strongly
pressed upon the first Christians and resented by them, as the other; and the
same Propositions were made to both,: Heaven was offered as the gracious Reward
of holy Practice, as well as of right believing; and Hell was threatened as the
Punishment of an evil Life, as well as of Heresy.

But it is too well known, that primitive Purity, Zeal, and Care for Religion
did too soon wear out of the Heart and Practice of Christians. An Eternity of
Blessedness and Misery were known but too little, and seriously thought on.
Present and material Objects, worldly Pleasures, Profit and Grandeur, beat
smartly upon the Senses, and inveigle the sensual Appetite; by which Men are
too commonly more governed than by Reason or Religion, and the strict dictates
of either. Heaven and Hell being things future and spiritual; and, for want of
a frequent and vigorous Application of them to particular Actions, work but
faintly, and much unsuccesfully. Such has long been the course of this World,
and still is. And it is not likely, that Men should have much more care of their
Childrens Souls, than of their own. Not as if Men purposed to Though Nature
incline men to sin, or vicious Appetites, yet can it incline them all to this
sort of sin, i. e. to teach their Children, what they think will damn them?
Sure Footing. p. 61.
damn themselves, or their Children; but they offend; are too profane or
indifferent, both as to Practice and Opinion; and so endanger their own, and
their Posterities Salvation, through Incogitancy and Improvidence; as a Bird
hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life.

No question, but there are, and have been in all Ages, very many good Persons,
who have looked not at things seen and Temporal, but at things not seen and
Eternal; who have endeavored to be sound in the Faith, and to have a good
Conscience in all things: But I wish, it could not without uncharitableness be
said, that such have been, and are much fewer than those, who travail the
broad way. Nor have even Holy Men been so advanced by their Spiritual
Condition, as to be priviledg'd from all Obnoxiousness to Error, any more than
wholly from sinning. They have still had some weaknesses of Understanding and
Passions not untemptable. It might be incident even to them (their remaining
frailty betraying them) to be drawn out of their road by temporal hopes or
fears; or the example of a great number of Christians of their times, moving
another way; especially, if they who gave the Example had a plausible
appearance of Holiness; which is much winning upon well-dispos'd Perons, and
apt to ensnare them, except they be the more wary; and we cannot be sure, that
the Virtuous in every Age were the most prudent and circumspect. Or suppose,
that Pious Parents should have been exempt from these infirmities and
misfortunes, which might at the least endanger Oral Tradition's miscarrying:
Yet what security have we, (have we not reason rather to suspect the contrary?)
that the Children were as Pious as the Fathers? And yet the indefectibleness of
Oral Tradition depends on the Childrens, as well as on the Fathers Piety,
encouraging them by the hopes of an Eternal reward to adhere to the Doctrines
taught them, and deterring them by the fears of an everlasting punishment from
parting with them; it depends upon all the Fathers, and likewise their
Childrens Piety and Constancy to Doctrines taught them throughout 1600 years.

Notice is taken of the Sure Footing. p. 61.
indisposition of Mankind by reason of Original corruption. But it is said,
This would not hinder, but that a great part would be virtuous, and would teach
their Children what, etc. And so a Body of Traditionary Christians would still
be continued to the very end of the World.

But only a great Part, and a Body, is not the Major part; and that which is
great, looked upon in its self, may be little comparatively, and in respect of
other things. And Rushworth Dial. 3. Sect. 13. Where he speaks on eccasion of
detaining the Cup from the Laiety.
grants, that the lesser number may be a sufficient Party to make a Tradition.
Here,

1. Is a great Fall from the large pretended Empire of Oral Tradition over
Souls, and its Potency riveted in the very Nature of Mankind. It might be
rationally expected, that a Self-evident Principle, whose Supra.
way is as efficaciously established in the very grain of Man's Nature, as what
seems most natural, the propagation of their kind, should work so strongly, as
to produce a more universal Effect, and that it should always keep, at the
least, the far greatest part of Christians firm in the Faith first delivered;
as in the propagation of the kind, sterilities and monstrous Issues are more
rare; generally Nature is fruitful enough, and regular in its productions.

2ly. I deny it to be Sure Footing p. 60.
certain, that (but) a great Number, or Body of the first Believers, and after
faithful in each Age, i. e. from Age to Age, would continue to hold themselves,
and teach their Children as themselves had been taught; would preserve and
derive the Body of Christian Faith as entire, and pure, as it was originally
committed to the Church; and this by virtue of the hopes of an Heaven, and
fears of an Hell. For how strongly soever these might be applied to the minds
of the first Believers; yet, that so strong and effectual an Application of
them was made by all Fathers to all their Children through all after Ages ( so
that the Ibid.
Cause should be always actually causing) is uncertain, nay, very improbable,
for the Reasons before given.

3ly. If a less number may be a sufficient party to make a Tradition, then
merely the comparative fewness of Catal. Testium veritatis A^rian R^gen. in
Histor. Eccles. S^avonic. Dr. Field. in the Appendix to the 3d. Book of the
Church.
those, who through several former ages held, some fewer, some more, of the
Points, in which we Protestants differ from the Romanists, and that thy moved
Eccentricks to the generality of Christians of their times, is no rational
Objection against them, and their Tenants, as if they were not truly Primitive;
nor, in a parity of Reason, did it justify the Romanists Tenants, that they
had got so large a Possession of the Western World; nor consequently did our
Fathers deserve to be called Deserters of Tradition, because they departed from
some Tenants and Practices of the Roman Church, which had stolen the general
Vogue in some former blind Ages. For it is not affirmed, that the greatest
number of Christians, but only a great Part, and a Body of them, would be
trusty Traditioners. A great Party, absolutely considered, may be but little
comparatively; and the Minimum quod sic in the case we are not told: Therefore
the general Prevalency of certain Romish Tenants at, and before the Secession,
did not conclude them to be therefore justified by Tradition (properly so
called;) nor did the bare comparative Paucity suffice to condemn them of
Innovation, who made the Secession.

SECT. III.
3ly. To assure Oral Tradition's infallibility, it is pressed; that there is an
Sure Footing. p. 236, 237. Author of Sure Footing. Ibid.
Obligation on Posterity to believe their Ancestors in a matter of Fact, or a
matter delivered to have been (not thought or deemed, but) done. And it is
confidently added, [I make account, there is not a Man in the World, or ever
was (such is the goodness of rational Nature given us by God) who in his
natural thoughts could ever raise such a doubt, or think he could possibly
frame his thoughts to a belief of the contrary. -- And it appears at first
sight to be a strange distortion, or rather destruction of humane Nature, which
can so alter it.] The Instances given, in which Posterity is obliged to believe
Ancestors, are Ibid. p. 217.
Alexander's conquering Asia, Ibid. p. 236, 237.
William the Conqueror's, Harry the Eights, and Mahomet's Existence.

Ibid. p. 219. 220, 221.
The proof of the Obligation on Posterity not to believe contrary to
Forefathers from Age to Age, is thus proceeded in, viz. The second Age after
the first was obliged to believe the first Age, because they saw with their
Eyes what was done: The third Age was obliged to believe the second, though they
saw it not, because the second Age could not be deceived in what the first Age
told them; and they must be conceived so honest, and withal such to be the
disinteressedness of the position, that they would not conspire to deceive the
third Age; and so those of the third Age have the first Ages Authority applied
to them. And by virtue of this same Argument, the same effect will be upon the
fourth, fifth, and five hundredth Age. This is the full substance (to the best
of my understanding) of the Author's Argumentation.

Ans. In reply to this, If the matter of Fact be but some general thing (such
as the Author himself has given Example of) there may be the more of Truth in
this Procedure; but then there is little in it; it comes not home enough to our.
business. But if the things done (or spoken) at, or about the same time, were
diverse; or if the thing, though one, were wrapped in several circumstances; then
the first Eye, or Ear-Witnesses might for want of a more close and steady
attention, mistake or forget some partitulars, and so might misreport, and
therefore might justly be disbelieved; or the second Witnesses from the first
(though suppose, things were truly and punctually reported to them by the
first, yet) might misunderstand, or forget something, if not much, of what was
related to them; or, if there should be no misinformation by the second
Witnesses; yet the third might misapprehend, or not well remember, what the
second told them. The same may be said of the Witnesses in the fourth remove,
or age, with regard to the third; and of those in the fifth, with respect to
these in the fourth; and so unto the five hundredth; till after a descent
through so many hazards and chances, what was done, or spoken at the first, be
at length wholly altered, or become very unlike to its Primitive self. Seeing
then there may be such failures in successive Testifyings, how can a Man be
bound to believe conformably to Forefathers; especially when as perhaps he is
distant hundreds of Successions from the speaking or doing the thing testified
of?

I may confirm the uncertainty of successive Testifyings through Ages by a
passage of an Adversary. Rushworth Dial. 2. Sect. 7.
He putting the Question, whether the very rehearsing, and citing another
words, do not breed uncertainty and variety? resolves it in the affirmative.
It Is true, he aims at the invalidating Scriptures certainty in conveying to
after-Ages the mind of the Authors; but what he writes is adaptable to words
spoken as well as written.

For (answerably to what he discourses Let us suppose the writer himself play
the Translator, as for Example, that our Savior himself having spoken in
Hebrew, or Syriak, the holy writer is to express his words in Greek or Latin.
And farther, that this which we have said of Translations be (as truly it is)
grounded in the very nature of diverse Languages, therefore unavoidable by any
Art or Industry, will it not clearly follow, that even in the Original Copy,
written by the Evanlists own hand, there is not in rigor the true and
self-significant words of our Savior, but rather a Comment, or Paraphrase,
explicating and delivering the Sense thereof. Nay, let him have written in the
same Language, and let him have set down every word and syllable, yet men
conversant in noting the changes of meaning in words, will tell you, that
divors accents in the pronunciation of them, the turning of the Speakers Head
and Body this way, or that way, the allusion to some Person, or to some
precedent discourse or the like, may so change the Sense of the words, that
they will seem quite different in writing from what they wree in speaking. --
Rushworth. Ibid. And the Title of the next (the 8th.) par. is: The uncertainty
of Equivocation, which of necessity is incident in all Writings.
in the Margent) Points of Faith in the Oral Tradition of them, must have (as
passed from one Country to another, so) been clothed in variety of Languages;
the diverse Accents in the pronuntiation of the words, passing through multitudes
of mouths, the diverse turnings of the Speakers Head or Body, this way, or that
way; the allusion to some precedent discourse, or the like, may change the
Sense of words, when spoken by one, from what they were, when spoken by
another, as well as make them different in writing, from what they were in
speaking; and Equivocation too is incident to words spoken as well as written.
So that, if for these reasons the Conveyance of the Faith anciently spoken or
preached by Scripture will be uncertain (as is said;) for the same reasons (if
they are truly reasons) the sense and meaning of the Divine Planters of the
Faith, will as uncertainly descend to us by an Oral Tradition.

All this while I have mentioned only casualties, and the more innocent
infirmities (as shortness in understanding, inheedfulness in Memory) incident
to Testifiers; on the score of which there may be a misrepresentation of
things, though there be no Conspiracy to deceive. But then if the question be
concerning the Soberness and Integrity of all the Testifiers, what assurance
can be given of them? There is a proneness in Men, (not alone out of
inadvertency, and precipitancy, but also) out of capriciousness and ambition to
be an Author, to substract, to to add to, to alter Stories; which meeting with
Credulity in others (as it often happens;) the Stories, and their Errata pass
current, and uncorrected. Besides, if there be not such a disinteressedness of
the Position (or thing testified,) which frequently falls out; then the Honesty
and Fairness of the Testifiers in their Relation may be the more questionable,
and others may be the more suspending in their Belief.

I suppose what I have said, is enough to show the descent of Testifications
from Age to Age to be liable to great failures; especially if it be applied to
Religion; where the Articles of Faith, the Sacred Practices and Senses of
Scripture (which concern all these) are so many; and withal, there are so many,
and so tempting Diversions of Men, as has been above proved.

But here it is replied, that Religion is rather a Remedy of the failures
attending on the descent of Testimonies. And to prove a far greater steadiness
of Oral Tradition in Religion's Affairs, than in any other; there are Sure
Footing. p. 224, 225, 226, 227, 228.
alleged the great Divine Author of Religion; the superlative Interest of
Mankind in it; the public miraculous Confirmation of it; the Preaching and
Reception of it in all, even the remotest parts of the World; the entertainment
of it among the first Christians, when they were at Age to judge of the
Miracles, and Motives to Christian Religion; and among the after Christians,
when they were yet scarce able to speak, much less to judge, and taught by
Nature to believe their Parents. And from hence are inferred an incomparable
recommendableness in Religion, and an Obligation to believe and to practice it;
and likewise a most forcible Obligation on Children to believe Parents
attesting to it.

Answ. I acknowledge that to be true, which is alleged in the just commendation
of Religion; and that it does deserve, and bind to a zeal, diligence, and
sincerity in the Treatment of it, far above what Men bestow on any worldly
thing whatsoever. I question not also, but that the incomparable remarkableness
of Religion did fix deep, and indeleble Impressions on the Christians of the
first Age; and on all afterward, who have known how to value love, and tender
it answerably to its true worth.

But this is that, at which I stop, i. e. Whether Christians have in all Ages
so cherished the even now named virtues for Religion, as to send it down to us
without any disguises, and in its genuine, and first Integrity; and this by
virtue of an Oral Tradition, and of Fathers long continued testifying to their
immediate Descendents; whether they have not been too cold, and careless for
it; or too, whether their zeal, for want of a governing Prudence, has not
sometimes transported them from one Error to an opposite one: Whether they have
been so single, and upright in the Maintenance of the Truths of Religion, as
the Simplicity of it does require (especially may we doubt of this Candor and
Ingenuity in those, who hold the Doctrine of Equivocation,) I think, that he
who has considered the Genius of Mankind, will see it probable enough; that
Christians may have given worldly Interests, and corrupt Passions, too great a
Preference in their dealing with Religion; the particular Truths and Practices
of it: And that, were it not for some Leading Men, Persons of Parts, and
Spirit, who sometimes sway the Age in which they live, (and yet these too may
be overborn by a dissenting Multitude,) the most would be too prone to turn
almost with every wind that should blow, and to steer their Course thither,
whence they might look for the greatest Temporal ease, and advantage. And this
Men might do, and yet Sure Footing. p. 230.
not as a pack of impudent Knaves, that conspired to abuse their Posterity,
purposely to damn them. For Men may act contrarily to their Duty, and to the
wrong of themselves, and of theirs eventually (nay, too often do so); and yet
not out of a desperate and formed purpose to destroy either.

From what has been discoursed, it follows, that the incomparable
recommendableness of Religion, and its obligingness to be believed, do not
conclude a continued, and necessary obligation upon Children to believe their
Parents through all Ages.

And yet suppose, that there were such an Obligation upon Children to believe
their Fathers; unless Children did believe such an obligation incumbent on
them, Oral Tradition would be still failable. For then Children, Posterity
would take the liberty to judge for themselves, and to vary from the Fathers,
as they should see reason for it. Or if they should believe as Fathers did, it
would be casual. Therefore (to make all sure) it is Sure Footing. p. 215, 216.
owned and undertaken to be proved; That every Age in the Church, and all
Persons in it, looked upon themselves as obliged not to vary in any thing from
the Doctrine and Practice of the precedent Age.

Yet I cannot discern in all the following Pages of that Author, any proof of
this, but only an attempt to prove an Obligation on those in every Age to
believe those of the precedent Age. But as this Obligation has been
sufficiently disproved; so yet if it were true, could it infer that they in
every Age looked upon, thought themselves obliged to believe those of the Ages
foregoing; for it is notorious, that Men do not always think themselves obliged
to believe, and to do that, which yet they are really obliged to believe, and
to do.

But I cannot discover any Indication of such a Belief of Posterity concerning
such an Obligation. It Is well known, that anciently, and in several Ages of the
Church, scarce a new Opinion could start up, but it found Abettors. It Is
strange, if there were indeed such a persuasion, as is pretended, fixed in the
hearts of Christians, that so often they should have left the Road, and turned
into an unbeaten Path in former Ages.

To come nearer to our own Times: The Relinquishers of the Roman Tenants and
Communion; the Deserters (as our Adversaries call them) of Tradition, were
(like the Crowd in St. John's Vision) a great Multitude, which no man can
number, of many Nations and Kindreds, People, and Tongues: People divided by
diversity of Climates, and vast spaces of Earth and Seas; of various
Complexions of Body, and Dispositions of Soul; of different Education, manner
of Life, and Civil Interests. This being undeniably true, how utterly
improbable is it, that so many Myriads, differenced by so many considerable
Circumstances, should so unanimously agree in a departure from the Roman Church
( i. e. in the Style of our Adversaries, in a defection from Tradition), if
there had really been such a common Charm, and great Principle regnant among
them, and uniting them in an Obsequious adherence to their Fathers Faith, and
in an opposition to any alteration of their Belief. Especially, it is yet the
more improbable, if it be remembered, that many of these adventured on a change
through the sharpest Persecutions. And the Successors of those first Reformers
have maintained the Secession toward two Centuries of years, and are so well
fatisfied in it, that they are generally averse from a return to the Roman
Communion; unto which nothing but force is likely to reduce them, if even That
can do it.

By this it appears, how highly improbable that Position is, viz. That it, is
impossible, that Men should not think themselves obliged to believe, Sure
Footing. p. 216.
and to do, as their Predecessors did.

Or if a very great improbability be supposed, and that the Secessors from Rome
had such a Belief of a Tie upon them unto the Faith, and Practice of Ancestors;
then for certain they acted contrarily to that Belief: But howsoever, Act they
did, and Counter to the Age then, and some Ages before. And even this will
weaken Oral Tradition's indefectibility. For what happened in this alteration,
may have happened in the Ages before: Though Children (suppose) did conceive an
Obligation upon them to the same Faith with that of their Fathers, and because
it was their Fathers; yet if they might move contrarily to them,
notwithstanding such a believed engagement, there might be a Rupture in
Tradition as surely, as if they had had no sense of such Obligation.

So that I do not see, if it should be granted, that there had been (and were
still) in all Generations such a persuasion of Posterities Obligation to
believe, and to practice just as Forefathers did, how such a Concession would
quite do Oral Tradition's business. For though it may be well argued negatively;
if Posterity did not conceive themselves obliged to believe and to do as their
Fathers did, there can be no certainty of Oral Tradition; yet it does not
necessarily follow on the other side, and affirmatively; if successive
Generations do believe themselves engaged to believe, and to practice just as
the foregoing did, therefore it will be sure, that they will so believe and
practice. The reason is, because Men do not always, (nay too seldom) what they
know it is their Duty to do. And though they, who first departed from Tradition,
might proceed against conviction of their Obligation to the contrary: yet their
Successors, not discerning the manner of the first departure, might continue it
(as the 200 Men followed Absalom) in their simplicity; till continuance grew
into a Prescription, and gained the Port of Tradition.

But, notwithstanding, that the so numerous Relinquishers of Rome render it
very improbable, that there was, or is a belief generally rooted in the minds
of Men, that they are bound to believe, and to do conformably to Fathers; yet
it may be perhaps said (to counterballance this); that they, who keep still
constant to Rome, and to Tradition, are remarkably numerous. And it is
confessed, they are too many. But it may rationally be questioned, whether all,
or the greatest part of them do stay in that Communion, out of a fixed belief,
that they are bound to believe as their Fathers did. I am sure, their Being of
that Church does not evince such a Belief in them; because there are diverse
other Causes, which may detain them on that side, besides such a persuasion; As
Ignorance, Education, Prepossession, and Wontedness to it; variety of great
Preferments and Grandeur, secular Pomp and Splendour; the profitableness and
pleasingness of some Doctrines; fear from the Princes, who are Popish, and of
Civil Penalties; dread of Ecclesiastical Censures, and of the Inquisition. Were
they of the Roman Party more free, the Rod not so held over them, were
Punishments not so severely threatened, and executed on Revolters, we should
better understand, how devoted submitters they were to Oral Tradition; and how
much they were convinced of it as a necessary Duty, not to let their Faith
alter from that of Ancestors.

The sum of this Section is this; 1. That it has not been proved, that there
is an Obligation on Posterity to believe Forefathers, nay the contrary has been
proved. 2ly. That if there were such an Obligation, yet it is not necessary,
that Posterity should conceive themselves to be under such an Obligation. 3ly.
That if they did conceive themselves to be so obliged, yet it does not
necessarily follow, that they would move according to their Sense of such an
Obligation. Therefore on this third Head there is not sufficient security given
for Oral Tradition's infallibility.

SECT. IV.
4ly The Author of the Answer to the Lord Falkland's Discourse of the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome says; P. 10, 11, 12.
That a deeper root, which greatly strengthens, and reduces into action, the
efficacity of Tradition, is; that Christian Doctrine is not a speculative
knowledge, but it is an Art of living, -- a practical Doctrine. -- The
consequence of which is, that it is not possible, that any material Point of
Christian Faith can be changed as it were by obreption, whilst Men are on
sleep, but it must needs raise a great scandal, and tumult in the Christian
Commonweal. -- We remember in a manner as yet, how Change came into Germany,
France, Scotland, and our own Country. Let those be a sign to us, what we may
think can be the creeping in of false Doctrine; specially, that there is no
point of Doctrine contrary to the Catholic Church, rooted in any Christian
Nation, that the Ecclesiastical History does not mention the times and combats
by which it entered, and tore the Church in pieces.

Here Is another Argument for the great Efficacy of Tradition; in that it
prevents Obreptions, so that the Church cannot be assaulted by any material
Error, but it is strait Alarmed, and then stands upon its guard, and
consequently is in a capacity to defend, and to preserve it self. And this is
one reason more, why the Church, receiving her Faith by Tradition, and not from
Doctors, Ibid. p. 44.
has ever kept her entire.

Answ. 1. But first (to wave a consideration, how little an alteration some
Doctrines cause in Christians Practice, whether they are held pro, or con) it
is denied, that it was not possible, that any material Point of Faith can be
changed, as it were by Obreption, -- but it must needs raise a great Scandal
and Tumult in the Christian Commonweal. For that there should be a noise, and
tumult in the Church, it was requisite that there should be a Breach of
Communion, a separation of one part from another. Thus it happened in the Arrian
controversy, and some others; there was a manifest siding, a departure of the
Dissenters from each other. Such was the Case too in Germany, England, etc.
Several Corruptions had possessed the Church of Rome for a long time; and that
Church made the Profession and Practice of those corruptions, a Condition of
Communion with her; upon which the Protestants withdrew from her Communion;
which occasioned the notice of the World; and the Guilt lies on them, who were
the cause of the Breach, who gave the Offense.

But there may have been Innovations in Doctrine, and Discipline too; and yet
the Members of the Church have still continued mutual Communion, and therefore
no cry have been raised, little, if any, notice been taken; not because of the
little consequence of the Doctrine or Practice; but (though it might be
considerable) by reason of its surprising manner of entrance. Some things in
their first beginnings, because small, and in their progresses, because
stealing on sensim sine sensu, by invisible steps, are often little, if at all
discerned; till arriving at some maturity, and a size, much exceeding what they
had in their Infancy, and sly growth, they then manifest themselves, and awaken
other's Observation. Is it not thus frequently in Nature? Are there not some
latent Diseases, which make secret attempts upon the Life, and undiscovered;
till by more sensible effects and rudeness to Nature, they warn the Patient of
his danger? Let us enquire, whether the like may not have happened in Religion
also.

It has not been uncommon for Persons of busy Parts, and good Credit for
Virtue and Learning in their times, to have moved in a little Sphere of their
own, to have held some Opinions against, or beside the general Vogue of the
Age. Now, suppose one such Person in Preaching or Writing, to have started a
Doctrine. This coming into the Church, commended by the Reputation and
plausible Arguments of the Author, wins the good liking of many, and is
passable as a probable Opinion for some years: Till in the next Generation,
through a wontedness to it, and a forgetfulness in what degree of assent it was
at the first entertained, it comes to be believed as necessary. Which advance
would be the more facile, and likely, if the Doctrine were such, as had not
been expressly defined against in any general Council, for then it would pass
with the greater show of Modesty; or were very advantageous, and particularly
were such to the governing Party in the Church (as suppose, the Doctrine of the
Supreme and Universal Domination of the Bishop of Rome; or that of Pardons and
Indulgences, etc.) for then Interest would cast another weight into the Scale;
and it might be judged convenient to be believed as necessary.

By a zealous straining of Expressions and Practices, there might in time be a
slip from the Mean, to an Extremity. The high and deserved Veneration for the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper might occasion some lofty expressions of it, and
reverential Gestures at the Celebration of it. And then from the Hyperbolies of
(...), etc. might arise Transubstantiation, and Adoration of the Host. There
may have been very anciently a Solemn and Public Commemoration of them, who
dyed in the Lord, in way of Thanksgiving to God for such holy, useful Persons;
and of recommendation of them, as Religious Exemplars to the People. It may be,
some too might pray for the Dead, out of a superabundant Charity; yet not for a
release of them from Pains, but for a more speedy consummation of their begun
blessedness. And hence in time might creep in an Opinion of a middle state of
the departed, and Prayers for the deliverance of Souls out of a Purgatory fire.
As the first Ages of the Church were Blessed with a multitude of Glorious
Martyrs, so the Christians of those Ages had a very high and fitting esteem of
them. Sometimes it was an use to pray at the Monuments of the Martyrs; to
address them also with Rhetorical Apostrophes; till at the last the Saints
departed came to be prayed to, and to be Worshipped. Thus it is intelligible
enough, how there might be alterations in the Church's Doctrine and Practice,
by stealth, and unobservedly; and this is sufficient to oppose to the Authors
(whom I quoted at the beginning of this Section); [ it is not possible, that
any material Point should be changed, as it were by Obreption, etc.]

But this secret and little notic'd Intrusion of Opinions, and Practices into
the Church, will be found to have been the more feasible; if we look back upon
former Ages in it, and the Genius of them. For a great while Learning was very
scarce, and Piety likewise. The Ignorance, Irreligion, and Debaucheries of the
Laiety, and Clergy also, were so notorious in the eleventh, and following
Centuries, that they occasioned the great and loud The Authors, and the
Collections out of them, may be seen, in Dr. J. White 's Way to the tr^e
Church, p. 113, 114, 115. In Dr. James his Manuduction. 103, 104, 105, 106,
107, 108. And in Dr. Whitby's Absurdity, and Idolatry of Host Worship (the
Appendix) from p. 70, to p. 108.
complaints of many who lived in the Roman Communion, and in the respective
Ages; and may provoke to wonder, and grief, Those who shall read them.

This being adverted to; it is so far from being impossible, that Changes should
invade Religion, that rather it is impossible, but that Doctrines and Practices
should be corrupted, and altered from their first Purity, in their passage
through so long and foul a sink, as those dark and impure Ages are represented
to have been. For as good Knowledge and Piety are great defensatives against
Error's seizure of the Judgment, so Ignorance in the Understanding, lewdness
and depravedness of the Will and Passions, make Men indifferent for Religion,
and unwary in the matters of it; dispose Men to a reception of Opinions and
Practices precipitantly, and without a due Examination of them, whence they
come, and what they are; without a discreet prospect, whether they tend, and
what their issue may be at the last. So that from what has been said, it is
more than likely, that there may have been Obreptions, points of Faith, and
Religious Practice may have been materially changed; and yet no great Tumult
have been raised in the Christian Commonweal, no Schism; because perhaps the
Innovations rushed not in the whole at once; but conveyed themselves into the
Church in a Climax, insinuated themselves by sly and gradual Transitions,
therefore with the less (if any) observations; especially might this surprise
be undiscerned in blind and irreligious Ages.

2. Secondly, as for notice of the changes of Opinions and Practices from
Church-Histories: So great is the use of Ecclesiastical Histories, that we may
with reason wish, we could rather boast of a plenty, than complain of their
scarcity; which yet Learned Men do, especially considering the great extent of
the Christian Church, for Time and Place; which necessarily afforded as huge a
variety of Events and Revolutions. Is. Casaub. in Proleg. ad Exercitat.
For above 200 years after the Apostles, till Eusebius Pamphilus, there was
none who did more than begin to design some History of the Church, rather than
seriously set about it. For a considerable while after the six hundredth year
that Idem. Ibid.
Learned Man (quoted in the Margent) doubts, whether to call those Ages, (...),
or (...), Times of Portentiloquie, or of Ignorance. But there are those, who
say as much, or more, and were Sons of the Church of Rome. The great Nulla res
ita hactenus negligi vis est, ac rerum Ecclesiasticarum gestarum vera, certa,
and exacta diligentia perquisita Narratio. Baron. in Praefatione ad Annal. Tom.
prim.
Annalist confesses, That nothing seemed to have been so much neglected, as a
true, and certain, and exact History of Ecclesiastical Affairs. And before Him,
it was acknowleg'd by Maximum saepenumero dolorem cepi, dum ipse mecum reputo;
quam diligenter -- Acta vero Apostolorum, Martyrum, deinque Divorum nostrae
Religionis, and ipsius sive crescentis Ecclesiae, sive jam adultae, op^rta
maximix tenebris fere ignorari. -- Fuere qui magna pietatis loco ducerent
mendacia pro religione confingere. -- Lib. 5. de Trad. Discipl..
Ludovicus Vives; That the Acts of the Apostles, of the Martyrs, and of the
Saints, and the Concerns of the Church, both growing up, and grown, were
unknown, being concealed under very great darkness. In this penury of
Ecclesiastical History, how much of the Changes in the Church with an abundance
of other very memorable accidents must have perished! In those Histories, which
were Written, and are still extant, we can expect no more than the most
remarkable Occurrents in the respective Ages, of which the Authors wrote (if
all those). That a Change in the Church should be remarkable, it was requisite,
that it should raise a Storm, cause a Public disquiet, and Breach of
Communion; which yet might not have happened, though there were an Alteration in
material Points (as has been shown above); and therefore Church-Histories (if
we had more of them to speak) might be silent of it.

And yet notwithstanding, Protestants can say more, viz. That Ecclesiastical
Writings are not so wholly unintelligencing; but that they do report, when, and
how several Points of the Romanists, controverted between them and us, got into
the Church; how and by whom they were observed, and resisted in the several
Ages of the Church. For which (among others) Way to the true Chapter p. 195, 196,
etc.
Dr. J. White may be seen. But I am not engaged necessarily to insist on this,
having said what is sufficient before.

SECT. V.
Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers, were Sure Footing. p. 126, etc.
once drawn into the Field to engage in the defense of Oral Tradition; but upon
after thoughts a Retreat is sounded to Two of them.

For the Author of Sure Footing says; That he Discourses from his Scriptural
Allegations, but Letter of thanks, p. 106.
Topically, and that in Citation of them he proceeds on such Maxims, as are
ut'd in Word-skirmishes, on which account he believes, that those Texts, he
uses, sound more favorably for him, than for us. But in Word-skirmishes (i. e.
Appearances ministered from Words, which may afford to a pleasant Sophister an
opportunity of making passages seem to favor his Hypothesis, when really they
do not so) I have no inclination to deal; and I conceive such a wordy
velitation to be below the Gravity of the Cause depending between us, and our
Adversaries.

Next, the Author disclaims his Quotations of Ibid. p. 105.
Councils to be intended against Protestants; if so, then I am not obliged to
take notice of them. As for the Fathers, I know, all Protestants do declare,
that they do highly value the Fathers, to such a degree as can be justly
demanded from them, and as the Fathers themselves, were they now living, would
require from them. And concerning their Testimonies (both of Holy Scripture,
and of Tradition) something shall be said in the Second Part, and there, on a
particular occasion.

I have now dispatched the First Part of my Undertaking and have evinced from
the Nature of Oral Tradition; from Experience or Event; and also by Answer to
the Defenses brought for it; That it is a very unsafe, and insufficient
Conveyance of Divine Truths down from their Original Delivery unto us. And here
I might rest, thinking that I had completed my work; if I might be allowed to
discourse after the manner of the P. 52.
Author of Sure Footing (with the change only of a few words) and to say: There
being only two grounds, or Rules of Faith owned, namely, delivery of it down by
Writing; and by Words and Practices, which we call Oral and Practical
Tradition; it is left unavoidably out of the impossibility, that Oral and
Practical Tradition should be infallible as a Rule, that Sacred Scriptures must
be such; and therefore that they are the surest Conveyance of faith. But I
shall not so crudely conclude my enquiry; but shall in a Second Part prove,
Holy Scriptures to be the most safe immediate Conservatory and Conveyance of
Divine Truths, down from their first Delivery, unto all after Ages: Only,
having been large in the First Part; I suppose, I may be the briefer in the
Second.

PART. II. Sacred Scriptures are the safest Conservatory, and Conveyance of
Divine Truths down from their Original Delivery through succeeding Ages.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
IF we may collect the Judgment of Mankind from their Practice, we may believe,
that in the Conveyance of Matters of Moment to Posterity, they judge the
Precedence due to Writings about Oral Tradition; because they so commonly
commit things of that nature to Books, though they know the Books themselves must
be trusted with Tradition and Providence. How much more should this Practice
take place in Religion, which concerns Men as highly, as their Blessedness
does! And besides common Practice, there is great reason, why the writing things
(especially Religious Doctrines, and Practices) should be preferred to the
hazarding them under the Custody of Oral Tradition; That rather than This being
the surest means of their preservation. For,

1. It is much less difficult, because there is much less required, to keep a
Book safe, and to hand it from one Generation to another, than to preserve a
great many of Opinions and Senses of that Book, and to transmit them from Age
to Age unaltered. To the former, mere plain honesty, and an easy care are
sufficient. Here Is no need of much Apprehension, and Memory, and of a constant
Care and Diligence to teach Posterity; here is no necessity of Posterities
scrupulous attention to teaching Fathers, and of an happy docility, or
promptness to learn, and all this through a long series of Ages. But these
Punctilios (as has been showed before) are necessary to a faithful and unerring
communicating of Truths to after-Ages in the way of Oral Tradition; therefore
there is the more of difficulty, and consequently the more likelihood of
miscarriage.

2ly. Books, if kept safe, do faithfully preserve what is deposited with them.
Their Memory (if I may so speak) never fails them; there is no need of an
operous care to teach them, or rather to remember them, what their Authors once
told them, committed to them. They warp not with the Times, in which they are
extant, though through several Generations. They are not subject to levity and
wantonness of Judgment; nor to rebound from one extremity to another; not to a
sequaciousness after Men, whose Parts render them remarkable. They are not
temptable by Hopes, or Fears. To be read, and to be accepted of, is their worst
Avarice or Ambition: Nor does the Paper or Parchment look the paler at a Rack
or a Gibbet; or the Characters fly thence upon Persecution. A Prison cannot
scare them, they are used to confinement, to a Chain (it may be) in a Library.
Thus it is with Books. But Oral Traditioners are exposed to all those
inconveniences (as has been before manifested,) whence their Traditions are
infected with an answerable craziness. Therefore for this second, together with
the first reason, Writings, Books, are the far less obnoxious; the more safe
Conveyance. And what has been said of Writings in general, is much more true
particularly of the Sacred Scriptures.

Object. Against what has been delivered there may lie some seeming prejudice.
It may be objected, that Writings have their fates, as well as their Authors.
They are not exempt from either a total perishing by the oscitancy and
carelessness of the Owners, or by violence from Enemies. Or at least they are
liable to corruption; and that either wilful, and out of design (as, speaking
of Holy Scriptures, by Heretics); or through the ignorance, or negligence of
Transcribers. Whence it will follow, that notwithstanding the comparative
easiness of transmitting Writings, and the Fidelity of them, if preserved; yet
they may be ravished by violence from their Possessors, how honest soever they
be; or they may be lost by them, if they should prove careless; or they may be
adulterated upon one account, or another. And so Writings may not be preserved,
or not preserved sincere and entire.

Answ. That losses and decays, alterations and suppositiousness, have been
incident to Writings, is confessed. Yet how many have escaped injury, through
long tracts of time have arrived safe with us, some plenty of them in Libraries
does manifest; for there have been (more or less) Lovers of Learning and
Antiquity, who have been Guardians to these Orphans. And Learned Men have
Methods (as Trial by Chronology, and the Customs and Modes of each Age; insight
into the Style and Genius of an Author; Collation of Copies, with others) by
which to distinguish the Spurious from the Genuine Works; and to right the
Genuine by requisite Emendations. And of such kind of reliefs Scriptures are
capable, as well as other Writings. But we shall see, that they have a much
greater advantage, and are secured, above all Writings else, by peculiar
Protections, and have been blessed with a special safety.

SECT. II.
Sacred Scriptures may be supposed to have been in danger from 1. Malice and
Design. 2ly. From Casualty and Neglect. And to have been in danger,

1. From Malice and Design of professed and public Enemies. 2ly. Of pretended
Friends, I mean, Heticks.

1. The open and professed Enemies of the Holy Scripture designed, and labored
for, their extinction. As no Professors of any Religion were ever so persecuted
by the opposition and fury of the World, as Jews first, and then the
Christians; so the Scriptures, in Sympathy with them, have been exposed to
great hazards, but yet have survived them.

When the Chaldeans had overrun Judea, wasted and plundered the Towns;
ransacked and destroyed the Metropolis, Jerusalem; had rifled, and ruined the
Temple; when they, who had escaped Slaughter, were carried away Captive into a
strange Land, and the Captivity there lasted 70 years. Whenas amidst all these
hurries, Vrim and Thummim, the Ark, the Pot of Manna, the Rod of Aaron; whenas
these (...), holy and choice Rarities of that People, and all their Glory sunk
in the Deluge of an universal devastation: Yet the Holy Scriptures, which then
were, triumphed over all these Calamities, (though the Copies were then but few,
in comparison of what they were afterward.) For soon after the return from
Captivity, and reedification of the Temple, Nehem. 8.6, 7, 8.
Ezra, -- also Joshua and Bani, -- caused the People to understand the Law; and
the People stood in their place. So they read in the Book of the Law of God
distinctly, and. --

Some time after this, under the Tyranny of Antiochus, The 1 Mac. 1.56, 57, 58.
Books of the Law which were found, were rent in pieces, and burnt with fire.
And wheresoever was found with any the Book of the Testament; or if any
consented to the Law, the King's Commandment was, that they should put him to
Death. Notwithstanding this Persecution, the Holy Book outlived this Scrutiny
and Cruelty.

In the Times of Christianity, in the Reign of Petav. Ration. p. 241, 242.
Dioclesian, there was an Imperial Edict, that the Churches should be
demolished, and the Holy Scripture should be burned; and though some were so
base, as to betray the Divine Books to the Enemy (who thence were called
Traditores;) yet they weathered out this Storm also.

Next to an invisible Divine Hand defending them, so many were the Copies of
the Sacred Books (especially after the Jews return from Babylon; and more after
the Gospel had been Preached and entertained in the World;) and likewise so
zealously did both Jews and Christians concern themselves in them, that the
Enemies might as soon have rooted out of the World the whole Generations of
Jews and Christians, as the Bibles.

2ly. For the same reasons, that there should be a Depravation of of Holy
Scripture, by Additions, Substractions, or Alterations in any thing material,
as to Faith and Life; that there should be any designed, and successful
Adulteration of them by Heretics, is not well conceivable. For so many were
the Scriptures in their Originals; so very numerous were their Qui Script. in
Graecam linguam verterunt, numerari possunt; Latini autem Interpretes nullo
modo, etc.

August. De Doctrina Christiana. L. 2. C. 11.5.


Translations, diffused throughout the World, where there were Christians; that
if Heretics did raze out some passages, or foist in others, in any way corrupt
the Text, they could do so but in some Copies, and in the Places where they
came. But that they should succeed in a corruption of all the Books, or of the
greater part of them, is not imaginable. Especially, whenas the Scriptures were
so continually, and diligently read by all Christians. So that such Impostures
must needs have been soon discovered, and warning been given to Christians to
beware of the Cozenage. For this purpose we have the Suffrages of Card.
Bellarmine, and of Sixtus Senensis.

Although (says the Eisi multa depravare conati sunt haeretici; tamen nunquam
defuerunt Catholici, qui eorum corruptelas dete^erint, and non permiserint
Libros sacr^s corrumpi, etc. De verbo Dei Lib. 2. Cap. 75. Et vero.
Cardinal) the Heretics have endeavored to deprave many things, (he means in
the Scriptures) yet there were never wanting Catholics, who detected those
Adulterations, and permitted not the Sacred Books to be corrupted. Quoniam (ut
Augst. inqu^t) licet omnes Fatres in hoc conspirassent, ut seipsos, atque alios
Scripturarum veritate privarent, (q^od imaginari non potest) non tamen
potuissent omnes undique codices falsare, etc. Biblioth. Sanct. p. 727.
And Sixtus Senensis, quoting St. August. tells us, that, though all Fathers
had conspired to deprive themselves and others of the Truth of the Scriptures;
(which none can imagine) yet they could not have corrupted all the Books every
where.

How hard it was to corrupt the Holy Scripture without detection, and an Alarm
to the Christian world, perhaps some guess may be made by the unsuccessfulness
of such an Attempt on Books much inferior to them. For when the Papists had set
a design on foot (and proceeded some way in it) of Purging the Writings of the
ancient Fathers, and of some moderate Authors, the Dishonesty soon appeared,
and was complained of.

SECT. III.
It cannot be thought, that through Casualty, or supine negligence the
Scriptures should expire, should be suffered to be a Prey to Moths, Mould, and
Worms; to linger away in a Consumption, or to be embezeled in Vulgar, and
Sordid uses, such as Ne thuris piperisve sis cucullus. Lib. 3. Epig. 2.
Martial warns his Book against. For that which does most envigor. Men's Care
and Industry for the preservation of a thing, is their high value, especially
Religious Veneration for it; and such, Jews and Christians have had for the
Scriptures, because known by them to be Sacred, to be the Divine Oracles, and
the Contents of them to be of Eternal Consequence to them.

The Jews, to whom pertains the giving of the Law, were most accurately
diligent in keeping the Revelations, given to them, most entire. De verbo Dei,
L. 2. C. 2. Hi Sigitur omissis.
Card. Bellarmine quotes Philo, affirming; That for above 2000 years, even to
his Time, not one word had been changed in the Law; and that any Jew would dye
an hundred times, rather than consent to any such change. He adds out of
Johannes Isaac, that the latter Jews adore the Law ut Numen, as a Deity; and if
it chanced to fall on the ground, bid a Fast for expiation of the mischance.
This Bellarm. relates, and this is one of his five Arguments, why it is not to
be conceived, that ever the Jews should have corrupted the Old Testament, out
of Malice to the Christians, as the mistake of some is. The admirable and
stupendous Care and Industry (as Heinsius calls it) of the Masorites is known;
who numbered every Verse, Word, and Letter: In Proleg. ad exercit. in novum
Testam.
And this they intended as Sepimentum Legis, a Mound, or Fence of the Law
against Alterations.

The Jews had not a greater, and more Sacred Estimation of the Law, than the
Christians had for both Law and Gospel, particularly the Fathers.

1. Their great laboriousness in the Study and Explication of the Sacred
Writings, in their many Comments, and Homilies, is an indication of their
incomparable Honor for them. In which work they did so abound, that suppose
the Bibles should be lost (which is supposed only, not granted) far the greater
part (rather the whole) might be recovered out of their Comments, Homilies, and
occasional Citations in their other Writings. As this is an Argument of their
singular Honor for the Scriptures, so it is a providential relief, and
supernumerary way of retrieve of them, supposing the loss of them.

2ly. The Fathers high estimation and reverence for the Scriptures, are legible
in Expressions concerning them, and Deferences to them.

Irenaeus thus begins his third Book: We have not known the disposition of our
Salvation by others, than those by whom the Gospel came unto us; which indeed
they then preached, but afterward by the Will of God delivered it to us in the
Scriptures, as the future Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. Afterward, in
the end of the 66th. Chap. of his 4th. Book; He bids all Heretics, (and
principally the Marcionit^^, and those who were like them, saying, That the
Prophecies came from another God) read diligently the Gospel which was
delivered by the Apostles to us, and read diligently the Prophets, and you will
find every Action, every Doctrine, and every Suffering of our Lord delivered in
them.

Tertullian against Hermogenes, C. 23. I adore the fullness of the Scripture. --
Let Hermogenes, and his, show that it is written. If it be not written. let him
dread the Woe, which pertains to them, who add, or detract.

Athanasius, in his Oration against the Gentiles, says: That the Scriptures are
enough for manifestation of the Truth.

St. Jerome. on Ps. 98. Every thing that we assert, we must show from the Holy
Scripture.

All things which concern Faith and Manners, are found in the plain places of
Scripture; according to St. Augustine, in the 9th. Chap. of his 2d. Book of
Christian Doctrine.

These are some (amongst others) of the Father's reverential acknowledgments;
their full and clear depositions for Holy Scriptures sufficiency for, and
Prerogative of, being the sole Rule of Faith; and in this Point they speak like
as very Protestants, as those who formed the The words of the Article are
these: Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required
of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be thought
requisite, or necessary to Salvation. Evangel. nigrum. Atram. Theol.
6th. Article of the Church of England. And these passages, so plainly proving
their so superlative esteem of the Holy Scriptures, do infer their most exact
diligence and watchfulness for their conservation and safety. And this is
sufficient for my purpose in this Section. But withal too I have gained an
Argument for my main design (viz. The Testimony of the Fathers;) forasmuch as
between Holy Scriptures being the safest Conveyance of Divine Truths throughout
all Ages, and Scriptures being the sole Rule of Faith, there is so necessary a
Connection.

And because the Romanists likewise allege the Fathers to give Countenance to
Oral Tradition, therefore the Testimony of the Fathers in our case shall be
farther considered of. And,

1. I will appeal to any ingenious Reader of them, whether the passages which
the Romanists cite out of the Fathers on the behalf of Tradition, and seemingly
the most diminutive of Scripture, do in any measure come near to such a course
Character of it; as that it is a Black Gospel; an Ink Theology, Sure Footing.
p. 194.
dead Characters, Waxen-natur'd, and pliable to the Daedalean Fancies of the
ingenious Moulders of new Opinions. If Men's thoughts may be judged of by their
words, sure the Fathers and Romanists Sentiments of the Scriptures were very
diverse.

2ly. Seeing there is a seeming contradiction of the Fathers to themselves
(because they are urged by both the disagreeing Parties,) it will be fitting to
enquire, whether there may not be a reconciliation of them to each other, and
of some of them to themselves. For this end I suppose a good means would be: 1.
Seeing the Fathers sometimes speak of Scripture without mention of Tradion, at
other times speak of Tradition, not mentioning Scripture; to examine how they
deliver their Sense, when they express themselves of Scripture and Tradition
jointly, and comparatively of one with the other. 2ly. To see, whether their
appearingly most favorable expressions of Tradition may not be very well
construed in a subordination of Tradition to Scripture, very consistently with
Scriptures Precedence to it.

1. Of the Fathers speaking of Scripture, and Tradition conjointly. I will
begin with St. Cyprian, in his Epistle to Pompey. Being pressed with Tradition,
he answers, Whence is this Tradition? Descends it from our Lord's and his
Gospel's Authority; or comes it from the Commands of the Apostles, and their
Epistles? God declares, that those things should be done, which are written;
saying to Joshua, The Book of the Law shall not depart from thy Mou^h, but thou
shall meditate in it day and night; that thou may observe to do all things
written in it. Likewise our Lord sending his Apostles, Commands all Nations to
be Baptized, and to be taught, that they observe all things, whatsoever he had
Commanded. -- What obstinacy, what presumption is it, to prefer humane
Tradition to the Divine Dispose or Command; and not to consider, that God is
angry and in wrath, when humane Tradition disregards and dissolves Divine
Commands? As God warns and speaks by the Prophet Isaiah, etc. And toward the
end of the Epistle, -- And this it behooves God's Priests to do at this time,
keeping the Divine Commands, that if Truth have declined and failed in any
respect, we go back to the source of the Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition,
and let the manner of our Actings take their rise thence, whence their Order
and Origin rose.

The preference of Scripture to Tradition by this ancient Father, is so plain
and undeniable, that it is replied, St. Cyprian's Testimony was writ by him to
defend an Error; -- and therefore no wonder, if (as Bellarmine says) more
errantium ratiocinetur, he discoursed after the rate of those that err; that
is, assumes false grounds to build his Error on. Letter of Thanks, p. 124.

But this is a mean Evasion. For though Cyprian was indeed in an Error, and did
mistake in his discourse; yet it cannot be affirmed with probability, or Charity
to such a Saint, and Martyr; that to gratify a private Opinion he would
affront so Sacred and Catholic a Principle, as the Rule of Christian Faith,
and degrade Tradition from being such, if he had indeed believed it to be so.

Yet if this should be granted to our Adversaries, the consequence would be
their inconvenience. For why might not more do the same, which St. Cyprian did?
and if some Fathers might desert Tradition, and fly to Scripture, merely to
serve a Turn, for defense of an Opinion, which they could not maintain
otherwise; why may it not be as well said, that other Fathers might baulk
Scripture, and advance Tradition; and for the same end, viz. to support some
Doctrine, or Doctrines, which else must have fallen? And upon this it would
follow, (beside the imputation of inconstancy, and shifting to the Fathers)
that we must be at much uncertainty, what truly was the Judgment of the Fathers
concerning the Rule of Faith; and that therefore the quotations out of them
must in a great part be insignificant for this purpose.

St. Basil, in his Tract, called; Questions compendiously unfolded, or
answered; says, It is necessary and consonant to Reason, that every Man learn
that which is needful out of the Holy Scripture, both for the fullness of
godliness, and lest they accustom themselves to humane Traditions.

It Is acknowledged by De amissi. gratiae. L. 1. C. 13.
Bellarmine, that this Author admits not Traditions unwritten; but then he
says, it is not certainly manifest, whether these Questions were the great
Basil's, or rather Eustathius's of Sebastia. Yet the same De Paenit. L. 3. C. 8.
Bellarmine confidently quotes them as St. Basils for Auricular Confession. So
that it may seem, that the Questions were before scrupled at, only because they
spoke in behalf of Scripture against Tradition, and against venial sins; which
is manifest Partiality.

But I shall bring a Testimony of St. Basil, which Bellarmine himself would own
to be St. Basils; who in his Book of the true Faith thus Discourses: If God be
faithful in all his sayings, his Words, and Works, they remaining for ever, and
being done in Truth and Equity; it must be an evident sign of Infidelity and
Pride, if any one shall reject what is written, and introduce what is not
written. This is a manifest Prelation of what is written, i. e. Holy Scriptures
to what is unwritten, i. e. Tradition, which Bellarm. calls the unwritten word
of God, in the Title to his 4th Book, De verbo Dei.

When St. Quid (inquam) Omousion nisi Ego and Pater unum sumus. Sed nunc nec
ego Nicaenam synodum tibi, nec tu Arimineusem mihi debes t^nquam
praejudicaturus cbiitere. Scripturarum Authoritatibus res cum re, causa cum
causa, ratio cum ratione concertet. Contra Maxt. Lib. 3. Cap. 14.
August. was willing to wave the Council of Nice to Maximinus, and to retire to
a Decision of the Catholic Cause by Scripture; certainly that great Person
judged Scripture without Tradion to be sufficient to prove an Article of Faith;
or else he betrayed the Cause by appealing to a Medium, which could not evince
it. For either the Nicene Council decreed the Consubstantiality of the Son with
the Father by Scripture without Tradition, (and then we have above three
hundred venerable Fathers on our side) or if they defined it in the strength of
Tradition without Scripture, or by Tradition sensing Scripture; then St.
August. parting with the Council of Nice, proceeding upon Tradition only, or
upon Tradition sensing Scripture, left himself nothing, or but the Letter of
Scripture (which according to our Adversaries, wants all the properties of a
Rule of Faith; Sure Footing. p. 29) to manage his Cause with.

By these Testimonies it is plain, it cannot be; that the Fathers should
express themselves Though some Fathers speak highly of Scripture, as that it
contains all Faith, etc. It is first to be marked, whether they speak of
Scripture sens'd, or as yet to be sens'd; and if the latter, by whom, etc. Sure
Footing. p. 140.
so highly of Scripture, only so far as helped and sens'd by Tradidition;
because, as to the Being a Rule of Faith, the Fathers separate Tradition from
Scripture, and set Scripture by it self.

Much more it is far from being It Is impossible, they (i. e. the Fathers)
should b^ld Scripture thus interpretable (i. e. by other means th^n by
Tradition) the Rul^ of Faith; it being notorious, that m^st Heretics against
whom they writ, held it theirs. And so had they held Scripture thus interpreted
the Rule of Faith, They could not have h^ld the Heretics, since they adbered
stiffly to that Root or Rule of Faith, however they might err in many particular
Tenants Ibid. p. 141.
impossible, that the Fathers should hold Scripture, not interpreted by
Tradition, to be the Rule of Faith, which yet is affirmed. And the Reason given
is as weak as the Affirmation is untrue. For if the Scripture, not interpreted
by Tradition, could not be held to be the Rule of Faith, because Heretics
adhering stiffly to it, as the Rule or Root of Faith, could not be held as
Heretics; then, nor could Tradition be held to be the Rule of Faith, because
Heretics (as the Sea Irenaeus quoted a little after.
Gnostics, and others) sticking to Tradition, as their Rule, could not be held
as Heretics. There Is a manifest parity of these Discourses, and the latter is
as concluding as the former.

But it is to accumulate injuries upon Scripture; because the mistakes and
perverseness of Men abuse it by false glosses, and compelled deductions,
therefore to judge it fit, it should forfeit its Authority. Our blessed Lord,
who so condemned the Jewish Traditions, held the Scripture of the Old Testament
to be the Jew's Rule of Faith; and the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection,
sure were held by him to be Heretics; and yet they disclam'd Tradition, and
adhered stiffly to Scripture only, as the Root or Rule of Faith.

Certainly, it is the impress and appointment from God, which constitute a Rule
of Faith, make it to be such; and Men prove Heretics, when they wilfully
wrong, pervert, and wrest it; but it is wonderful, that Heretics acknowledging
it to be the Rule of Faith ( i. e. paying to it what is due to it), or a
pretense that it favors their Errors, (which is a slander of it) should unmake
it a Rule of Faith, render it impossible to be held to be such.

2ly. In enquiry about the second thing proposed, it must be considered, that
the word [Tradition] has more acceptions than one: And that Tradition may be
used to different Persons, at different times, in a diverse manner, and to
several ends.

1. Tradition is taken sometimes (both in Scripture and Ecclesiastical Writers)
not for Oral delivery of Opinions and Practices to Posterity; but for what is
delivered by Writing, and even in the Sacred Scriptures. The Jew's Law and
Rites are said to be such, Act. 6.14.
(...), which Moses Tradition'd; and yet they were a part of the Old Testament.
St. Paul 1 Cor. 15.3.
(...), delivered to the Christians, (which he had also received) that Christ
dyed for our Sins, which was but (...), according to the Scriptures De Spiritu
Sto.
St. Basil says, that our Baptism in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, is according to the very Tradition of our Lord; and yet
this is Matthew. 28.19.
written, with St. Si ergo aut in Evangelio praecipitur, aut in Apostelorum
Epistolis, aut Actibus, continetur, observetur etiam and haec sancta Traditio.
In Ep. ad Pompeium.
Cyprian, that is an holy Tradition, which is either commanded in the Gospel,
or is contained in the Epistles, and Acts of the Apostles.

2ly. It is observed, that some of the Fathers had to do with such Heretics,
as denied the Scriptures, some part of them at the least, and set up other
writings in stead of them. In dealing with such, those Fathers were forced to
have recourse to Tradition, that so they might dispute with their Advesaries on
such a Principle, as they would allow, and this in way of condescension. 'T was
thus with Cum enim ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem convertuntur
ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi non recta habeant, neque sint ex autoritate, and
quia vary sint dictae, and quia non possit ex his inveniri veritas ab his, qui
nesciant Traditione^: Non enim per literas traditam illam, sed per vivam vocem;
ob quam causam, etc. Adversus baereses. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
Irenaeus in his Contest with the Gnostics. Who (says he) when they are argued
against out of the Scriptures, accuse the very Scriptures themselves; as if
they were not right, nor were of Authority sufficient; and because their Sense
is various and uncertain; and because the Truth cannot be found in them by
those who are ignorant of Tradition. This made Irenaeus in opposition to their
fictitious Tradition, and pretended living Voice, express himself the more
respectfully of such Tradition, as had brought down the Orthodox Doctrine from
the Apostles, in the several Churches. Not that he preferred Tradition to
Scripture; for what his Judgment was of Scripture, we have seen before; and
it is the observation of In Epist. nuncupatoria Irenaeo praefixa.
Erasmus, that he fights against the Heretics solis scripturarum praesidiis,
by the sole aid of Scriptures, i. e. Scriptures were his chief Weapons; and
that if he took up Tradition, 'twas but occasionally upon the froward impudence
of his Adversaries.

3. We must distinguish of Times. The Gospel was Preached, before it was
Written: It was written too, one part after another. And when the whole was
written, the Copies could not presently be many, and dispersed to all
Christians, especially the more new and remoto Converts. Nay, and had the
Gospel never been written, then the Church must have been satisfied (if such
the pleasure of God had been) with an Oral Tradition. Hence Quid antem si neque
Apostol^ quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat, etc. Adversus
haer. L. 3. C. 4.
Irenaeus might say: what if the Apostles had not indeed left the Scriptures to
us, would it not have behoov'd us to follow the Order of Tradition, which they
had delivered to them, to whom they committed the Churches; to which Ordination
do assent many Nations of Barbarians, which believe in Christ, having Salvation
written in their hearts, without Characters or Ink, by the Spirit, and
diligently keeping ancient Tradition. This (I say) Irenaeus might with reason
write, especially against those, Evenititaque neque Scripturis jam, neque
traditioni consentire eos. Idem. L. 3. C. 2.
who consented neither to Scriptures, nor Tradition (i. e. such as descended
from the Apostles.) But when as the whole Scriptures were long since written,
and plentifully Communicated to the Christian world, the Case is quite altered.

Besides, the nearer things are to their Origin, they are the more genuine and
sincere; but, at the farther remove they are from it, the more they are in
danger of changes and decays. Tradition must be conceived to have been much
more pure at the distance of an hundred, or an hundred and fifty, or two or
three hundred years, from the Apostles (and therefore then might be more
rationally argued from, in some cases,) than after 7, 8, or 9 hundred years; in
which revolution of so many more Ages, and after intercurrencies of many more
accidents, Tradition may be more suspected of that consumptiveness, and of
those changes, which Time brings upon all things; and therefore an Argument
from it would be much more infirm.

Farther yet, besides Oral, the Fathers of the more Primitive Times, might have
written Traditions; such Records to prove, that such a Doctrine, or Doctrines,
were professed by Apostolical Men, by Holy Martyrs, and Confessors,
successively to that present Age, as were then extant, but are perished since.
Age jam qui voles curiositatem melius exercere in negotlo Salutis tuae;
percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas apud quas ipsae adhuc cathedrae Apostolorum suis
locis praesidentur; apud quas ipsae Authenticae eorum literae recitantur;
sonantes vocem, and repraesentantes faciem uniuscujusque Tertul. de Praescrip.
Tertullian speaks of the very Authentic Letters of the Apostles, which were
even then preserved in the Churches. So that the Fathers might with the more
safety trust, and allege Tradition's suffrage, than we can, who live so
incomparably farther off from the Apostles Days, than they did; it being very
likely, that in such a far longer space of time, the more contingencies have
interposed to disturb the clearness of Commerce between them and us.

4ly. Proofs may be brought in a diverse manner, and for different uses. St.
Paul quoted Heathenish Poets, as well as the Law, and the Prophets. It Is usual,
where the Subject is properly manageable upon the stock of Reason, yet to argue
likewise from Testimony, to call in the concurring Judgment of others. In
Religion, Protestants do not believe the Fathers to be infallible, and yet it
has been usual with them to cite them, both in Homiletique Discourses, and in
Polemique Writings. Testimony, though it be not apodictical, yet it is plausible.
Example in point of Opinion, as well as of Practice is much gaining upon many;
is not alone commonly better understood, but more prevalent too, than Reason,
with many Capacities. And when it is the Testimony of many (as Tradition is) it
causes those of an opposite Opinion to appear the more singular in their
Persuasion; and singularity is not of the best Credit. So then the Fathers
might (on some occasions) use Tradition's Authority (the general consent of
Christians in some Truth, for one or more Ages) yet not demonstratively, but
topically; somewhat the more to repress or to disparage in other's Opinion, the
importunity of a petulant Adversary; to shame a contumacious Heretic (not, as
is said, Sure Footing, p. 140, to declare that the rejecting Tradition, and
adhering to Scripture, made him an Heretic); or they might urge it to the more
tractable, as a probable motive to assent; though not as a Rule of Faith, yet as
such a persuasive, as might be an occasion of Belief, and the better dispose
the Soul toward Faith and Assurance: Yet still supposing Holy Scriptures to be
the proper and ultimate basis of Christian Faith; and that such Traditions were
consonant to them, and not overruling of them.

I believe, that these considerations may be useful for the construction of the
Fathers in such passages, wherein they make the most honorable mention of
Tradition; and to show, that notwithstanding such a mention of Tradition, yet
they might yield to Scripture the Supremacy in the regulation of Christian
Faith, especially whenas they speak so reverently of Scripture in other places
of their Works; nay, and give them the Precedence, when they compare the one
with the other.

And thus (if after a digression, yet I think not an impertinent one) I have
proved the Father's unquestionable Care and Diligence in preservation of the
Holy Scriptures, by their Religious and unparalleled esteem and veneration for
them.

SECT. IV.
3ly. The Holy Scriptures are secured by God's especial Protection of them.
Reason suggests; that as there is a God, a Supreme, and first Cause, who made
the world, and also provides for the welfare of his great Workmanship; so that
the Divine Providence does mainly watch over those Creatures, on which God has
imprinted the fairest Characters of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness: Such a
Creature is Man. And this Divine Providence is the Catholic Sanctuary of
Mankind. After all Men's own projectings and labors, here is their last and
surest repose. They cannot with a rational comfort Trade, Travel, Eat, Sleep,
but with a sober hope of the Divine help and benediction. For if Divine
Providence smile not, all Men's wisest Counsels, and stoutest Endeavors will be
successless: They may go forth, and never return home; their Table may be a
Snare, and their Sleep Death, more than in a Metaphor.

Next, Religion tells us, that God has designed, and prepared for Man an
everlasting Blessedness, and determined of the due Qualifications of Man for
that Blessedness; and it is agreed, that in the Sacred Scriptures God has
revealed Himself concerning both. These Scriptures are the lively Image of God,
the fair Copy of his Will, a bright Express of his Truth and Holiness, a
Perspective into his Mind, and into many of his secret Counsels; authentic
Records of the many and glorious manifestations of the Divine Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, Mercy, and Justice, in making, governing all things, and in the
Salvation of Sinners.

From the dictates of Reason then, and much more of Religion, it is consequent,
that God has an especial Care, that the Scriptures be safe, on which he has
impressed so much of himself; which were Ioh. 20. uit.
written, that we might believe, and believing have life; and which were Romans
15.4.
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope; but how could they attain those ends, if they
should perish? if this light were extinguished, how much in the dark, and
forlorn would Man be!

This peculiar watchfulness of God over the Scriptures is acknowledged by the
Romanists. Ita velente Deo ut verae lectionis ^ntegr^tas, quam hominum
velmalitia, vel negligentia cor^uperent in partibus, in tota saltem
Ecclesiasticorum codi um universitate serv^retur; ne Ecclesia Christi per
aliquod tempus divinarum Scriptura^um integritate careret. Bibl. Sanct. p. 727.
Sixtus Senensis attributes the preserved incorruptness of the sacred Text, to
the Will of God. And Bellarmine De verbo Dei. L. 2. C. 2. Quintum and ultimum
argumentum.
argues from the Divine Providence for the preservation of the Old Testament
from any injury by the Jews. Indeed, he entitles Tradition likewise to Gods
special care, as the Cura ista non incumbit praecipue hominibus, sed Deo
Praeter-providentiam Dei, quae est praecipua causa. -- De verbo Dei non
Scripto. Lib. 4. C. 12.
principal cause of its pretended safety. And this is a Confession, that God is
in a particular manner the Guardian of that, by which he communicates his Mind
and Pleasure to Man; (for such a thing, i. e. The unwritten word of God, he
held Tradition to be.) But certainly Tradition cannot lay a just claim to such
an interest in Divine Providence, as the Scripture.

1. For first, besides what I have before proved, to the just diminution of
Oral Tradition; there was a providential dismission of it, and choice of
Scripture, to be the Conveyance of Gods revealed Will to his Church through
successive Ages. For whenas Oral Tradition had been in use for that purpose
before the Flood, and some while after it, and great had been the untrustiness
of it; at the length, God writ his Law Himself, and commanded what was written
to be kept with a great religious care. Afterward, as Moses, the Prophets, and
Hagiographers were inspired, their Revelations were written, so far as was
necessary to the Church's Edification. And when the People were in danger of
seduction, and it behoved them to seek to their God for instruction; they were
sent (not Children to their Traditioning Fathers; Is. S. 19, 20.
but) to the Law, and to the Testimony; and they were told, that those who
spoke not according to that word, it was, because there was no light in them.
Yes, and when the Church was generally corrupted, and therefore Tradition had
not done its Duty, the Churches relief was (not from the living voice of
testifying Fathers, but) from the Scripture, according to whose Canon abuses
were reformed. And for this Reformation, and because in it he performed the
words of the Law, which were written in the Book, that Hilkiah the Priest found
in the house of the Lord; Josiah stands renowned in Sacred Story with this
Character; Like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, 2 Kin. 23,
24, 25.
according to all the Law of Moses, etc.

This way of securing Revelations by writing was continued under the Gospel; as
we have them in the Evangelists, the Epistles, the Acts, and the Revelation.
And this course was as needful under the Gospel, as under the legal Economy,
if not more. For it being intended by God, that the Gospel should be propagated
beyond the narrow Confines of Judaea (where the Scriptures of the Old Testament
had lodged for hundreds of years) throughout the World, and among so many
Nations of such different Complexions, Customs, and Interests; there was the
more danger it should be disguised, if it had been committed to the frailty of
an Oral Tradition; as we know, that the more Mouths Relations pass through, the
more subject they are to alterations from their primitive truth; through the
ignorance, mistakes, prejudices, prepossessions, or wilfulness of the Relators.
Whereas a Writing, being preserved, is a perpetual standard, by which to
correct any such changes; for in these, Truth would be most likely still to
appear in its first Integrity.

Thus I have showed, how that after an experienced unsuccessfulness of Oral
Conveyance, God appointed another way, and so ordered it, that Law and Gospel
should be written. Now, if after, and notwithstanding such a Provision, yet it
should be God's intent, that Oral Tradition only should have the prerogative to
sense Scripture, and that Faith should be lastly resolved into Oral Tradition;
and therefore that This, not Scripture, should be the only Rule of Faith; it
must needs seem strange, and unaccountable to aany rational Christian, how it
should come to pass, that in the Sacred Scriptures there should be so many, and
such high Ps. 19.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Ps. 119. passim. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Ephesians.
6.17. Heb. 4.12.
Encomiums of them; that our Savior should bid the Jews, Ioh. 5.39.
search the Scriptures; should tell them, they Matthew. 22.29.
erred, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.42. Ioh. 10.34, 35, 36.
should dispute with, and baffle them out of the Scriptures; and by them Luke
24.25, 26, 27.
confirm his Disciples in the Truth; that his Apostles should proceed in the
same manner with the Jews: That the Act. 17.11, 12.
Beraeans should be commended for searching the Scriptures daily, whereupon
many of them believed; that St. Paul should mention it to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15,
16, 17.
as an encouragement or engagement of him to continue in the things he had
learned; that he from a Child had known the holy Scriptures; and that he should
presently add a description of Scripture, than which a more full one sure cannot
be used of the Rule of Faith, viz. That it is able to make wise unto Salvation,
through the Faith which is in Christ Jesus; that all Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works: I say, it is mighty strange,
that Scripture should be thus magnified, and yet none of all this should be
said there of Tradition: Nay, that either Tradition should be mentioned with
disgrace, as when our Savior Matthew. 15.2, 3.
condemns the Jew's Traditions of their Elders; and St. Paul Col. 2.8.
warns the Colossians to beware, lest any Man spoil them, -- after the
Tradition of Men; -- or where the word is found, yet that the sense of it
should not be useful to our Adversaries purpose; which that it might be, it
must be sufficient to prove, that there was more delivered by the Apostles,
than was written; and that what was so delivered was a necessary Point of
Faith. But when St. Paul praises the Corinthians, that they 1 Cor. 11.3.23.
kept the Ordinances, or Traditions, as he delivered them; when he tells them,
he had received that, which also he delivered to them; when he exhorts the
Thessalonians 2 These. 2.15.
to hold the Traditions, which they had been taught, whether by word, or (says
he) our Epistle; when he commands them 2 These. 3.6.
to withdraw themselves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received from the Apostle; there is nothing (I say) in
these places, which will necessarily infer, that more was delivered by the
Apostles, than was, or is written, and that what was so delivered was a
necessary Point of Faith, through all Ages.

Why now, it is a wonder, that if God (though he provided his Church with the
Holy Scriptures, yet) pleased to enstate Oral humane Tradition in the great
Office of sensing Scripture, and of being the only Rule of Faith; He did not so
order it, that Scripture should modestly acknowledge its Superior, but rather
let Scripture carry away all the honor from it.

2ly. A second reason, why Oral Tradition cannot plead so strong a Title to a
protection by the Divine Providence, as Scripture, is this. God's Providence
does ordinarily cooperate with, and prosper means answerably to their
comportment with, and likelihood to reach the end intended. Now it has been
before demonstrated, how weak and uncertain Tradition is; how fixed and able
Writings are, to conserve Truths once delivered; and therefore it is rational to
believe, that the Divine Aid does much rather assist to the preservation of
Divine Truths by the Holy Scriptures, than by Oral Tradition; the former being
much more servicable to the promoting such an end, than the latter.

Hitherto I have proved the continued preservation of Holy Scripture from
proper Causes of such an Effect; causes ministerial, and supreme; humane care
and vigilance, and Divine special Providence.

SECT. V.
4ly. Scripture's Preservation is manifest from the Event. Such have been the
happy success of Divine Providence's watchfulness, and of humane Care and
Diligence, that Christians do generally consent in this; that the Holy
Scriptures are de facto continued safe, and pure to us in all things, which are
necessary to be believed, and to be practiced, for the obtainment of
Everlasting Happiness.

The Church of Rome professes to have the Scriptures, and the Trent Council has
defined the Vulgar Latin to be those Genuine, Authentic Scriptures. How true
that Determination was for the Authentickness of the Vulgar Latin Bibles, is
not necessary for me to enquire; it is enough for me, that they acknowledge a
preserved Integrity of the present Scriptures.

So that there is not a Tenent, which we have more strong inducement to
believe, upon the account even of Tradition, than that the Divine Books (the
Scriptures, which we have) are indeed the Word of God, and have been faithfully
derived to us from the beginning; there being no Tradition more universal for
any Point than for this great important Truth; though Christians may run wide
from each other in other matters, yet they close in this Center.

I conclude then, seeing that the Holy Scriptures are much more fit to keep the
Truths committed to them safe, than Oral Tradition, if they be preserved; (as
has been proved) and likewise that the Holy Scriptures are preserved (as is
generally confessed, and even by our Adversaries); it must follow, that not
Oral Tradition, but the sacred Scriptures are the surest and safest way of
Conveyance of Divine Truths down from their Original delivery unto us; which to
demonstrate was the scope of this Undertaking.

CHAP. II. Objections answered.
SECT. I.
THere remain some things, which perhaps may be apprehended to reflect on the
Prelation I have given to Scripture above Oral Tradition, in the point of
preservation, which next shall be considered.

Obj. 1. The Almost innumerable variae lectiones in it still controverted. Sure
Fo^ting. p. 32.
many variae lectiones, diverse Readings, may seem to some a reason to question
Scripture's descent to us in a sufficient Purity. But,

Answ. 1. It Is a question, whether all those which go under the name of Diverse
Readings, do truly deserve that Title. For I conceive, that not every
Translation of the Bible (in whole, or in part); by whomsoever, and from
whencesoever, (as suppose) by some very uncertain, or justly suspected Author;
or not from the Originals, but from some Versions of them; no, nor that every
Copy of the Bible (in the Original Languages) found any where, or whether of
convenient Antiquity or not, are sitting to Minister matter for various
Readings of the Sacred Text; i. e. are such, as merit to be considered by
Learned Men, and may put them to the stand sometimes, which is the truest.
Certainly, none (if any Translations at all) but such as are immediately from
the Originals, have been performed by Authors of repute; or (if their Persons
are not known) who give in the work no jealousy of their Integrity; none but
Copies of sufficient Antiquity are considerable for such a purpose. And if such
a course, and some other cations were used; it may be a great part of the Army
of almost innumerable variae Lectiones would be disbanded.

2ly. But let them stand as they are mustred by some; they are not so
formidable, as to Nay so many (variae lectiones) in the New Testament alone
observed by one man, ( my Lord Usher) that he durst not print them for fear of
bringing the whole Book into doubt. Sure Footing. Ibid.
bring the whole Book into doubt; and doubtless the excellent Lord Primate
Supposing he said so, as the Author of S^re Footing reports.
Usher was more Good and Learned than to think so; though perhaps he might judge
the Printing of them to be less convenient, (not as if they were rationally
conclusive of any thing really disadvantageous to Scripture, but) lest the
Atheistical, or the weak, might take an occasion from them to disparage the
Scripture; which care to avoid the ministering occasion of scandal to others in
Religious matters, has ever been the wariness of the good and prudent. But as
for these diverse Readings; Dr. Br. Walton, late Lord B. of Chapter in Proleg. 7. ad
Biblia Polyglort. Qui etiam citat in eundem sensum Lud. Capellum in Proleg. 6.
some of the most curious Collecters of them have not discerned any alteration
made by them in the Scripture, which may wrong Faith or Manners.

In qua tamen tam longa and lata a textu criginario discessione divinam tecum
providentiam agnoscimus, and suspicimus: quod nulla extiterit tam damnosa inter
utrosque textus differentia, ut rectam fidem, quae ad salutem est necessaria,
labefactaret aut laederet. Jacobi Vsserii Armach. ad Ludov. Cappellum Epist.
And the Reverend Archbishop Usher (before named) confesses, and venerates the
Divine Care; in that (though he believed the Septuagint Translation widely to
differ from the Original Hebrew Text, and had no Opinion of it, as a ground
even of -- Haec mea sententia perpetua fuit. -- Ex quibusdam veterum
interpretationibus excerpi aliquas posse variantes te^tus Hebraici lectiones;
ex vulgata Graeca versione -- nullas. Idem. Ibid.
various Reaings; yet) there is no such material difference between the Hebrew
Text, and even that version, as may injure the Faith necessary to Salvation.

Our Adversaries, though they know of those numerous (as they say) variae
lectiones, yet notwithstanding scruple not to profess to have the Genuine
Scriptures, (as was said before) or if they have not, if they have been
careless in a matter of so grand moment as the Conservation of Holy Writ
entire, how should we trust to their fidelity in other things of less
Consequence, who yet claim to be the most credible Traditioners in the world?

SECT. II.
Ob. 2. If it should be thought a Ground to suspect the care of the Church, and
of Providence over Scripture; that, The Epistle to the Hebrews. Of St. Jam. 2.
Ep. of St. Peter. 2d. and 3d. Ep. of John. the Ep. Ju. the Revelation.
1. some Books of the New Testament are accounted now Canonical, which
Anciently were not reputed so. 2. That some Books (commonly called the
Apocrypha) are controverted, whether they belong to the Canon of the Old
Testament, or not; it is answered.

1. That it is no wonder, if all the Books of the New Testament were not
presently generally received by all Christians, who in, especially after, the
Apostles days, had multiplied into very great numbers; and lived dispersed in
diverse places, and very remote from each other. Time was required for all
Christendom truly to inform themselves of a business of so great weight; but
the reception of these Books ( never doubted of by all Christians; rather
doubted of, than rejected by some) was early enough to satisfy any sober
expectation. The Council of Laodicea, which was had in so much reverence and
esteem, by those of elder ages, that the Canons of it were received into the
Code of the Universal Church, was held Anno Dom. 364. The Bishops then
assembled together, Apud Caranzam.
declare in the last Canon, what Books of the Old and New Testament were to be
read publicly, and to be held as Canonical, and they only. And among those of
the New Testament are reckoned the Epistles before mentioned in the Margent.
The Apocalypse indeed is omitted; but it was omitted only, not rejected, it was
forborne to be named, because their Custom was not usually to read it in
public, for the special Mysteriousness of it. More may be seen of this in the
learned Dr. Cosins, late Bishop of Duresme; in his Scholastic. l History of the
Canon of Scripture, page 60. 61.


De Verbo Dei. Lib. 1. c. 17, 18, 19. also Cap. 16. concerning some little
portions of Holy Writ formerly controverted.
Bellarmine giv's a large account of the Attestations yielded to all these
Books, and to each of them; not alone by the Laodicean Council, but some others
also, and by several Fathers likewise, both before and after that Council.

Indeed after some Debates about them by some in the early days of
Christianity, they were entertained by the Church without contradiction.

2. The Controversy between us and the Romanists about the Canon of the Old
Testament has in it no great difficulty, it seems to be a plain case.

Those Arguments, by which De Verbo Dei. L. 2. c. 2.
Bellarmine proves, that the Jews did not corrupt the Hebrew Text, do as
strongly conclude, that they did not shorten the Hebrew Canon; for this latter
would have been as great a fault in them, as the former, rather a greater, and
would have been more difficult for them to have effected. Also De Verbo Dei.
Lib. 1. c. 8, 9, 10.
Bellarmine acknowledges, that the Book of Baruch is not found in the Hebrew
Bibles; that the fragments of Daniel, i. e. The Hymn of the three Children; the
History of Susanna, and of Bell and the Dragon; that the Books of Tobit,
Judith, the Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, and of the Macchabees, are not
owned by the Jews. Or if he had not confessed so much, there is evidence
sufficient from the Josephus contra Apion. Lib. 1. p. 1036. 1037.
Jews themselves, that Primis Ordinis Canonica Volumina, quae sola apud
Hebraeos in authoritate hahentur, Judaei, etc. Sixth. Senens. Bibl. Sanct. page
2. Certum est Libros hosce (Apocryphos sc.) ab Ecclesia, sive Synagoga Judaica
nunquam in Canonem censitos fuisse, tam ante Christi tempora, quam post, in
hunc usque diem. Sim. Episcopii Inst. Theolog. 226. P. Ricaut. Of the Greek
Church.
they never owned more Books, as Divine and Canonical, than the Protestants do;
and likewise the Greek Church agree with the Protestants in rejecting the
Apocrypha.

How then the Roman great Propugnators of Tradition, consistently even with
that very Principle, adopt more Books into the Canon, than the Jews ever owned,
is not by me conceiveable. For to the Jews were committed the Oracles of God;
they, above all in the world, best knew what was committed to them; they did
carefully preserve (as is seen before), and deliver to Posterity; and Posterity
could honestly come by no more than what was delivered to them: I do not
foresee, what exception can justly lie against this procedure. Therefore that
Bellarmine should say, though the Jews rejected these Books, yet the Ecclesia
Catholica Libros istos, ut caet ros, pro Sacris and Canonicis habet. De verbo
Dei. Lib. 1. C. 10.
Catholic Church (he means the Christian); and particularly the Trent Council
received them as part of the Canon of the Old Testament, is exceeding strange,
and a Riddle to me. Seeing that they have no countenance from the most
Primitive, general, and long-lived Tradition of the Jewish Church. And this is
enough to satisfy a rational Christian, and to refute our Adversaries, even by
their own Principle.

But yet, nor is it true, that there has been a truly Catholic reception of
those Books, as Canonical, even by the Christian Church. It is This deduction
of Testimonies is largly and satisfactorily made by the late Reverend Bishop of
Duresme, Dr. Cosins, in his Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture.
evinced by a continued series of sufficient Testimonies, from the first Ages
of the Christian Church, through the several Centuries, unto the Council of
Trent; that the Books which the Protestants call Apocryphal, were judged to be
such by Christians. Now, that the Council of Trent, above 1500 years after
Christ, and a fragment of Christendom, should vote the Apocryphal Books to be
entertained with a veneration equal to what Christians have for the
unquestionable Scriptures, was a boldness which was great enough, but can lay
no Obligation upon Christians.

The result of the Discourse foregoing, concerning the Books of the Old and New
Testament, is this. 1. Seeing the Books of the New Testament were never doubted
of, much less rejected, by all, were so early received by all. 2ly. Seeing the
Jewish Church never (for so many hundred years) admitted more Books into the
Canon, than Protestants do, likewise that the Christian Church did from the
beginning distinguish between the Canonical and Apocryphal Books (as has been
the concurrent Testimony of the most considerable Members of it, in its several
Ages.) Forasmuch (I say) that so it is; there can lie no rational Objection
against the sufficient care of the Divine Providence, or the Churches
diligence, in the preservation of the Holy Scriptures; upon supposal of which,
it can justly be pretended, that Christians must be uncertain about the
Integrity of the Scripture Canon.

I might add, that suppos^ there were a much more considerable uncertainty
concerning the truly Canonical Books of Scripture, both of the Old and New
Testament, than there is; yet there would be a fair Salvo for the care of
Divine Providence, and for the security of Christians necessary Belief and
Practice.

For I humbly conceive, that if 1. The Books of the New Testament, at the first
not generally received, were still as controversible, yet we should not be at a
loss for any Article of Faith; there being, in the Books never disputed of,
enough to establish it. Or, 2ly. Were it so, that it were altogether doubtful,
whether the Books called Apocryphal, were not as truly the word of God, as
those styled Canonical; perhaps, yet there is no Doctrine, which can be proved
from those Apocryphal Books, contrary to what we maintain against our
Adversaries. But this is Supernumerary, After the Author had confuted by
several Testimonies of the Ancients the Canonicalness of the Books, called
Apocryphal, he adds. Etsi in hac re long superior est causa nostra, nullam
tamen satis gravem causam video, cur acriter de numero Canonicorum librorum cum
Pontificiis digladiemur; and Apocryphos, quos illi in Canonem refer volunt,
usque adeo aver semmr, quasi Fides and Religio Christiana propterea vacillatura
sit, si illi in Canonem admittantur: Eisi enim non nego esse in iis quaedam,
quae vel contradictionem, vel falsitatem, vel absurditatem manifestariam prae
se ferant, and difficulter, aut cum iis quos Canonicos esse utrinque in
confess est, conciliari, aut cum historiae veritate, aut cum recta ratione in
gratiam reduci possunt; tamen non modo nulla esse in it is credo; per quae
dogmatis alicujus ad salutem necessarii veritas labefactari possit, sed and non
pauciora esse in iis, mihi persuadeo, quae convellendis Pontificiorum erroribus
faciunt, quam quae iis aut fulciendis aut stabiliendis servire possunt. Sim.
Episcopii Instit. Theol. p. 227. Afterward speaking of the Books of the New
Testament, anciently questioned, says he: Sive admittantur, sive non
admittantur -- Certissimum nihilominus manet, caeteris, qui extra controversiam
omnem positi sunt, abunde satis contineri universam doctrinam, and religionem
istam, quam Revelationem tertiam (intelligit, Religionem Christianam) esse
dicimus. Nullus enim in istis omnibus controversiis est apiculus, qui singular
aliquid habet inse, quod in aliis indubitatis desideratur, imo non abunde iis
continetur, ad Religionis, and doctrinae Jesu Christi tum perfectionem, tum
integritatem pertinens. Idem. Ibid. page 229.
and might be untrue, without any prejudice to what I have discoursed in this
Section.

SECT. III.
Obj. 3. Whereas I have said, that the safe descent of Divine Truths is so
greatly provided for, because they are treasured up in the Holy Writings; it
may be perhaps replied, that Oral Tradition is not destitute of this (...)
Advantage also. For one means which Bellarmine alleges of the preservation of
Oral Traditions, is Scriptura, writing them in the ancient Records of the
Church. Therefore he says, that De Verbo Dei non Scripto. L. 4. C. 12.
a Doctrine is called unwritten; Id^m. Ibid Chapter 2.
not because it is no where written, because it was not written by the first
Author, but,

Ans. 1. The Adversaries, I have to deal with, talk of Oral Tradition, as a
Plenipotent thing, which is a support to itself, and needs not the prop of a
Pen; is it self a spring of perpetuity to itself; and therefore, that the being
written must be an accidental, and no necessary Preservative of it.

This sure is the importance of several passages concerning it; viz. Sure Foot.
page 115.
Christian Tradition, rightly understood, is nothing, but the Living voice of
the Catholic Church essential as Delivering. Ibid. page 101.
None can in reason oppose the Authority of Fathers, or Councils against
Tradition. Ibid. page 103.
No Authority from any History, or Testimonial writing is valid against the
force of Tradition. So that Oral Tradition, is it seems, so far from a want of
assistance from any writings whatsoever, that it is their strength, and
overrules them.

There is yet more said, Ibid. page 56.
Oral Tradition is a Rule, not to the learned only, but also to the unlearned,
to any vuloar enquirer; therefore it must not rest on Books for its
Authentickness; for the unlearned and vulgar enquirers have not ability to
read, to examine, to understand Books; accordingly it is said, that the
Tradition of the Ibid. page 203, 204.
present Church is to be believed.

There is something to the same purpose in another Enchirid. of Faith. page 14,
15.
Author, who has formed his Book Dialogue-wise. After the Master had read his
Scholar a Lecture about Tradition; the Scholar asks him, Sir, It seems a matter
of great study, not easily to be overcome, except by very learned men, to know,
or to find out a constant Tradition, as to read all the Fathers, Liturgies, or
Councils --. Is it not therefore sufficient Testimony of this, if the present
Catholic Church universally witnesses it to be so? To this the Master, after
some premises, answers, It must by necessary consequence be concluded, the
Testimony of any age (he means, any present age) to be sufficient. And after a
while, he closes thus, This surely convinces the Testimony of any age to be
sufficient. Thus (whatsoever just exception this Divinity is exposed unto, yet)
it appears by the Authors quoted, that there are some such, as I have to do
with in this work, who maintain a self-sufficiency in Oral Tradition; and that
though it may have, yet it can sustain it self without the aid of Books.

2. Let it be, that Oral Tradition has help from Scripture, from writing; yet,
upon a Scrutiny it will be found, that in the last issue this relief will be
insufficient, so far, at the least, as to privilege Oral Tradition to be the
Rule of Faith. For, 1. Were their writings, the Conservatories of Tradition,
written by persons moved by the Holy Ghost, or not? If not, (and I suppose, our
adversaries will not affirm they were) then these writings have a great
disadvantage of the Holy Scriptures, which we profess to be the Canon of our
Faith; as great a disadvantage as must be between Books written by them, who
could not err, and those written by them, who might err; from whence it would
follow, that what is contained in the one, must be true; that the Contents of
the other, may be true, yet too they may be false, there may be that reported
in them, as delivered by Christ and his Apostles, which yet was not delivered
by them. But, 2. Were there Ecclesiastical Monuments of unquestionable credit,
and which did from Christ and his Apostles, through each age, exacty and fully
declare to us the consentient Doctrines and Practices of the universal Church,
it would be very material, and we should much rejoice in it; but the case is
otherwise.

For some while, there were very few (if any) writings, save the Holy
Scripture, which come to our hands. Justin Martyr is said to be the first
Father, About 150 years after Christ.
whose works have survived to this day. There are some Books, which pretend to
an early date, which yet are judged to be supposititious; some of them judged
to be so by the Romanists themselves, others proved to be such by the Cook, in
censu a quorundum Scriptorum. D. James's Bastardie of false Fathers. Daille.
Protestants.

For the first 300 years (as there was no complete Ecclesiastical History, so)
the Fathers now extant, were but few; and their Works too being calculated for
the times in which they lived, reach not the controversies, which for many
years past, and at this day, exercise, and trouble Christendom. This paucity of
the Records of the first ages Id autem esse tempus, quo quatuor prima Concilia
Oecumenica includantur, a Constantino Imp. ad Marcianum. Atque hoc vel
propterea aequissimum esse, quia primorum seculorum paucissima extant
monumenta; illius vero temporis, quo Ecclesia praecipue florebat, long
plurima, ut facile ex ejus aetatis Patribus, and eorum scriptis, fides ac
disciplina veteris Catholicoe possit agnosci Ita Perron. Sequitur Responsio
Regis. Hoc postulatum parum illis aequum videbitur, etc. Apud Is. Casaubonum in
Responsione ad Cardinalis Perronii Epistolam, page 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.
Card. Perron acknowledges, and does imply their insufficiency for settling
Catholic Faith; when as he would have recourse made for this purpose unto the
4th. and 5th. Centuries, because then there were most writers. Tho against
this, the learned Is. Casaubon excepts; and justly, forasmuch as it must be
presumed, that the stream of Tradition ran purest, nearest to its Fountain.

The Fathers after the first 300 years did often mix their own private
sentiments with the Doctrines of the Church. Nor do the Fathers express
themselves so, as that we may clearly distinguish, when they writ as Doctors,
and when as Witnesses; when they deliver their own private Sense, and when the
Sense of the Church; and if of the Church, whether it be of the Church
universal, or of some particular Church? some, who have diligently perused
their Writings, judge it not easy to find any such constant (...). It is
confessed by Rushworth. Dial. 3d. Sect. 13.
a Romanist, that the Fathers speak sometimes as Witnesses of what the Church
held in their days, and sometimes as Doctors; and so it is often hard to
distinguish, how they deliver their Opinions, because sometimes they press
Scripture or Reason, as Doctors, and sometimes to confirm a known Truth. So
that he, who seeks Tradition in the Fathers, and to convince it by their
Testimony, takes an hard task upon him, if he go rigorously to work, and have a
cunning Critic to his Adversary. So then, Tradition must in a good measure be
at a loss for succor from the Fathers Writings.

I conclude then, that Books, Writings have not given such advantages to Oral
Tradition, as to render it the safest and most certain Conveyance of Divine
Truths; but this Dignity and Trust is due to Holy Scriptures only; which having
been at the first penned by Persons assisted by the Divine infallible Spirit,
are stamped with an Authority transcendent to all humane Authority, Oral, or
Written; which have been witnessed to by the concurrent Testimony of the
Church, in each intermediate Age, since the Primitive Times; and which are at
this day generally agreed upon, as the true Word of God, by Christians, though in
other things, it may be some of their Heads may stand as oppositely, as those
of Sampson's Foxes.

SECT. IV.
There remains a Cavil, or two, rather than Objections, which shall have a
dispatch also.

1. We are told, that by desertion of Oral Tradition, and adherence to
Scripture we do cast our selves upon a remediless ignorance even of Scripture.
Sure Footing. P. 117.
[Tradition established, the Church is provided of a certain and infallible
Rule to interpret Scripture's Letter by, so as to arrive certainly at Christ's
Sense, etc.] And e contra, Ibid. p. 98.
without Tradition, both Letter and Sense of Scripture is uncertain, and
subject to dispute.] Again, Ibid. p. 38.
[As for the certainty of the Scriptures signisicancy, -- nothing is more
evident, than that this is quite lost to all, in the uncertainty of the Letter.]

2ly. It is suggested, that the course we take, is an Enemy to the Churches
Peace. Ibid. p. 40.
[The many Sects, into which our miserable Country is distracted, issue from
this Principle, viz. The making Scriptures Letter the Rule of our Faith.]

By these passages it is evident, that this Author will have it, that
Protestants have nothing, but the Letter of Scriptures, dead Characters to live
upon; and that upon this he charges their utter uncertainty in the
interpretation of Scriptures, and their distractions.

Answ. But Protestants, when they affirm, That Scripture is the safest and most
certain Conveyance of Divine Truths; and that consequently it is the only Rule
of Faith, do mean Scriptures Letter and Sense both, or the Sense notified by
the Words and Letter. And therefore the Author might have spared his Proof of
this conclusion, i. e. That Scriptures Letter wants all the -- properties
belonging to a Rule of Faith: It was needless (I say) to prove this to
Protestants. Well, but let Protestants mean, and affirm what they will; have
only the Letter of Scripture, and not the Sense of it, because they admit not
of Oral Tradition to Sense it. Scripture (it seems) is such a Riddle, that
there is no understanding it, except we plough with their Heifer; and likewise
without Tradition's caement we shall always be a pieces, and at variance
amongst our selves. But,

1. As to the certainty of Scripture's Sense; is Scripture (in earnest) so
utterly obscure? Will their Author say so of the Histories of Livie, or
Tacitus; or of the Philosophical Writings of Plato, and Aristotle; or of
Euclid's Elements? Could not God speak clearly, and intelligibly to Men (as Men
have done), and that in matters of the greatest consequence to them? or would
he not do so? The Assertion of the one, would impeach his Wisdom; of the other,
his mercy and kindness to Souls.

And if Scriptures leave us so quite in the dark, why do they call themselves a
Light, a Lamp; say, Ps. 119.105.13^. Ps. 19.7, 8.
that they enlighten the Eyes, and make wise the simple? Were the Books of the
Old Testament, the Gospels, Acts, and Epistles of the New Testament (in the
respective times in which they were writ) in themselves unintelligible by them,
to whom, and for whose Souls health they were writ? If they were so, then they
were useless and vain: And Oral Tradition could not expound them, which was not
in Being, when those Books were first, written; for That deals with the Ages
following the first, conveys what was at the first delivered unto Posterity.
Did God then write only to amaze his Church?

It Is acknowledged, that there are several (...) things hard to be understood
(which it might please God should be, partly to win the greater veneration to
the Scriptures, for what is obvious and presently seen through is in the more
danger of contempt; partly for the exercise of Christian's Industry, Humility,
and Charity toward each other, on occasion of dissent.) But howsoever, the
Scriptures are not so locked up, but that a comp^tent diligence, and a Beraean
(...), or readiness of mind, may be a Key to them, may open them in all Points
necessary to Salvation. And if in other things we remain ignorant or not so
certain, we may well bear with it, while we are yet but in via and not
comprehensores; on our way unto, but have not yet reached perfection.

That, which makes the noise of Scriptur's obscurity the more loud, is, that
Men are apt to look upon the many subtilties of the Schools, and Niceties of
Polemick Writers, as Articles of Faith; and that men have more mind to fathom
depths, and to humor their curiosity (for which end, I believe, the Scriptures
were not intended), and hence, are ever racking the Scriptures and vexing the
Sacred Text; than to exercise themselves in a sober understanding of what is
sufficiently plain, and in a conscientious practice of the Holy Rules of Life,
which are evident enough. If Christians would more seriously apply themselves
to these two things, they would find in the Scriptures employment enough, and
they would be more contented with their difficulties.

The Romanists have raised a cry of Scriptur's darkness upon another account,
and out of Policy. For having embraced several Tenants and Practices, which
Scripture does condemn, or not countenance (either it is wholly silent of them,
or they are but mere appearances there, which are snatched at); and yet it is
inconsistent with their grandeur, or profit, or the affected reputation of an
infallibility, to part with; they are feign to press Tradition to serve in
their Wars, and for the defense of them. Thus they have first made a necessity,
and then have invented a Remedy for it. But when all is done, the Remedy is
more imaginary than real. For how unsure a Conveyance, and consequently how
weak a Proof Oral Tradition is in matters of Christian Faith and Practice, has
been already evicted. So that if we must be ignorant of Scriptures Sense,
unless Oral Tradition bless us with the Exposition of it; and Scriptures no
farther a Light, than it is tinded at Tradition's Candle, we must sit still in
much ignorance, or wander in great uncertainties; for that cannot relieve us,
it is not that infallible Commentator it is pretended to be.

2. To the upbraiding us with our Distractions, I reply,

1. Before the charge can be made good, that the choice of Scripture for our
Canon was the cause of our many Differences, and that upon that pretense we
should exchange Scripture for Oral Tradition, it must be supposed, that Oral
Tradition is a sure and infallible clew to guide us out of the Labyrinth of
Errors into the way of Truth and Peace (the contrary to which has been
sufficiently proved.) For otherwise, to leave Scripture, and to follow
Tradition, would be to relinquish a Guide, or Rule, which being indicted by an
unerring Spirit cannot mislead us; and to choose one, which may and will carry
us out of the way. Nor will the pretense of Unity make amends for this. For
true Christian Peace cannot be otherwhere bottomed, than on Truth; when, and so
far as it is a Cement of Men to the disservice of Truth, it commences Faction.
Nor Reason, nor Religion allow, much less commend, an Agreement of Persons to
err together.

2. They, who have the most amorously espoused Tradition, have also their many
and great Differences (as has been showed above) only through Fear in some, and
Policy in the rest, they are hushed up more, than amongst us, and so do better
escape the observation and talk of the World. Nay, that Church may be justly
arraigned as the guilty cause of that, which they call a great Schism, viz. The
Separation of so many Churches from them (the Churches, called Protestant) by
their imposition of unlawful, and therefore impossible terms of Communion with
them. And (...).
Nilus tells the World, that their Imperiousness was the reason of the great
Schism between the Greek, and the Latin Church. (...). page 21. 22.


Thus, as the Church of Traditioners have no few Dissentions among themselves,
so they have given a beginning and continuance to the quarrels between them,
and a considerable part of Christendom.

3. There Is no need of fetching our Distractions from the Rejection of Oral
Tradition; there are are other true manifest Causes of them assignable.

Our Church once flourished with Peace (and that, without the aid of an Oral
Tradition) whilst the Reverend Bishops were suffered to govern it, and the
Royal was able to countenance the Ecclesiastical Authority. But when the pious
King, and blessed Martyr, was engaged in, and diverted by, the turmoils of a
Civil War, when Episcopacy was changed for Anarchy, when the Golden reins of
Government in Church and State were broken, then begun and increased our
Divisions and Calamities. Unto which, it may be, there were some assisting
Causes from without; some, who helped to kindle and to blow our Fires. And if
the Roman Church should chance into the like afflicted State with ours, it
would be obnoxious to the like Confusions. If the Mitre should be forsaken by
the secular Crowned Heads, and a mutinying multitude should pull their Holy
Father out of his infallible Chair; then it is not altogether improbable, but
that Children would less heavken to testifying Fathers; but that there would be
more Alumbrados, and the like Freaks might be acted among our Adversaries,
which tore our Church.

But withal, I think it seasonable to let my Reader know, that those Men so
called (i. e. Alumb^ados) in Spain were no other, in most of their Tenants and
Practices, than these our Quakers are now in England. -- ^ c^nfess, I am very
destitute of Books at this time, to ^^ve the Reade^ so g^od an account of this
b^^ness, as I could w^sh. All I can say of the at n^w is out of some F^^^^ch
Books, where I find a l^rge ^^dict against them, containing their several
Tenants, and ^^rers; where^f, etc. -- (...) ^lumbrado^ of S^ain (...) to be
known, and talked (...) the year of our Lord, 162^. -- Dr. Meric. Ca^a^bon.
T^^^tise of Euthusiasme. p. 17^, 174, 175.
and speaking in general, Christians are too apt to fail in holy prudence,
meekness, charity, and such pacifique virtues, thence arise too many breaches
among them; and a want of these virtues is incident to our Adversaries, as well
as to Protestants (for they are Sons of Adam too,) only they are wiser in their
Generation.

To conclude the Reply to the two last little Objections, and the whole
Treatise: Eternal Blessedness is our end; the means to attain to that great
end, are, right Believing, and holy Living. That which gives the Regulation to
Christian Belief, and Life, is the revealed will of God. But because the Divine
Revelations were delivered at the distance of many Ages from us, therefore
there is need of something, which may conduct them safe and entire to us; and
that, which is the safest and most certain Conveyance of them to us, is, that
fixed Standard or Rule, whence we are to take the measures of our Christian
Faith and Practices. Such a Conveyance, and consequently such a Standard or
Rule, I have proved, not Oral Tradition, but Holy Scripture, to be.

This being first established, there may then then be considered the
Perspicuity of this Rule (which is Scripture), and the Agreement, or Unity of
those, who adhere to it.

Here, 1. We may be sure, that this Rule is very sufficiently intelligible, and
clear in all things necessary for our direction to our Blessedness: But then it
must be left to Gods Pleasure, what difficulties and dubiousness he would mix
with that sufficient plainness; and we ought to be thankful for what is plain
in it, and not quarrel at the obscurities. 2ly. (...) Ar^^t. Eth. ^.1. C. 8.
We may be certain, that this Rule and Conveyance of Divine Truths to us (there
being so much Harmony in Truth) must be very apt (it must be its most genuine
effect) to harmonize Christian's Judgments, and Affections, and to beget a
peaceableness of mutual Conversation; yet too it must be judged very possible,
or rather more, that the folly and corruptions of Men may too much frustrate
this its most natural issue.

So that now, to conclude a thing this great Standard and Rule of Faith and
Manners, because it pretends to be the most plain; and also to make mere Unity
a Demonstration of the Truth, would be a crude way of Discourse. For first, a
wrong way may be smooth and easy enough, perhaps more plain than that, which
leads a Man to his Home: Next, not Truth only, but likewise Interest may hold
Men very fast together, and the Conscience of its own guilt and feebleness may
prompt to Error to strengthen it self by the closest Confederacies.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and Sold by Robert Clavel, at the Sign of the Peacock
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THe Annals of King James, and King Charles the First.

The Complete Conformist: Or seasonable Advice concerning strict Conformity,
and frequent Celebration of the Holy Communion. In a Sermon Preached (Jan. 7.
Being the first Sunday after the Epiphany, in the year 1682.) At the Cathedral,
and in a Letter written to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of Durham. By Denis
Grenville D. D. Archdeacon, and Prebendary of Durham. London, Printed for
Robert Clavel, and are to be Sold by Hugh Hutchenson in Durham.

A Sermon Preached at Windsor, before His Majesty, the Second Sunday after
Easter, 1684. By John Archbishop of Tuam. Published by His Majesty's special
Command. Both sold by Robert Clavel, at the sign of the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

3. King James not so much influenced by Gondamore, as is related by Mr.
Rushworth.

4. The Three Estates in Parliament who they were, in King James 's Speech in
Parliament, 1620.

5. An Authentic and Impartial Account of the beginning of the Troubles in
Scotland, and the Wars which ensued.

6 The True State of our late Civil Wars, their Beginnings, Causes, who the
Aggressors, etc. The rest are too large to take notice here, but may be seen in
the Preface.

Varenius's Geography in Folio English, Illustrated with many Copper Cuts.

Dr. Willis 's Works in Folio English.

The History of the Irish Rebellion, traced from many precedings Acts to the
grand Eruption, the 23d of Octobers 1641. and thence pursued to the Act of
Settlement, 1662.

Tracts Written by John Seldom of the Inner Temple, Esquire; and Translated by the
Eminent Dr. A. L. The 1st. Jani Anglorum facies altera, with large Notes
thereupon. 2ly. Englands Epinomis. 3ly. Of the Original of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions of Testaments. The 4th. of the Disposition or Administration of
intestate Goods.

Mr. Scrivener 's Body of Divinity.

Dr. Cumber on the Liturgy in Folio.

Mr. Sam 's Britannia. Ogleby's History of Africa, Asia, and America.

Bishop of St. David's 's Vindication of the Bishops Rights to Vote in Capital
Cases -- his seasonable Corrective.

The Complete Catalogue to the end of Easter Term, 1684.

Newly Published.
Short Discourses upon the whole Common Prayer, designed to inform the
Judgment, and excite the Devotion of such as daily use the same by Tho. Comber.
D. D.

The Laver of Regeneration, and the Cup of Salvation, Two plain and profitable
Discourses upon the two Sacraments. The 1. laying open the Nature of Baptism,
and earnestly pressing the serious Consideration and Religious Observation of
the Sacred Vow, made by all Christians in their Baptism. The other pressing as
earnestly the frequent renewing of our Baptismal Vow at the Lords Holy Table.
Demonstrating the indispensible necessity of receiving, and the great sin and
danger of neglecting the Lords Supper, with Answers to the chief Pretenses,
whereby the Absenters would excuse themselves.

The General Catalogue of Books Printed in England, since the Dreadful Fire of
1666, to the end of Trinity Term, 1684. To which are added a Catalogue of Latin
Books, Printed in Foreign Parts, and in England since the year 1670. Printed
for Rob. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.

ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 1. r. is, or involves in it Testimony. l. ult. for witnessed to, r.
tradition'd. p. 5. l. 16. for the Application, r. this Application. p. 8. l. 7.
for the use, r. this use. p. 9. l. 1. r. where there is. p. 19. l. ult. for
blinded, r. blended. p. 35. in marg. l. 21. for taxata, r. laxata. p. 40. l.
10. for part, r. paragraph. p. 49. l. 9. and 11. r. Methuselah. l. 12. del.
very near. p. 50. l. 23. for though r. through. p. 53 p. 65. in marg. l. ult.
del. p. p. 67. l. 4. for Authors. r. Others. l. 7. after this way, add or, at
least, uncertainty which way. p 94. in marg. l. 12. and 13. r. Cap. 10. Quaest.
15. P. r. p. 96. in marg. l. 5. for 82. r. 43. p. 105. l. 26. r. Christians are
to yield. p. 106. for or also, r. else. p. 107 l. 3. for Traditions, r.
Tradition. p. 149. in marg. l. 6 after p. 108. add Of this Cressy also may be
seen -- During those worst times thereof (i. e. the Church) when ignorance,
worldliness, pride, tyranny, etc. reigned with so much scope, I mean during the
time of about six Ages before Luther -- Exom. Cap. 68. p. 151. l. 2. del.
above. l. 4. r. Pamphilius. p. 154. l. 15. for all Protestants do declare, r. I
have the leave of all Protestants to declare. p. 157. l. 15, for Writings
about, r. Writings above. p. 162. l. 10. r. the holy Scriptures. l. 24. r. Or,
2ly. p. 168. in marg. l. 9. r. His igitur. p. 172. in marg. l. ult. del.
Evangel. nigrum. Atram. Thool. p. 178. l. 5. del. would, r. owns. p. 179. l.
19. for p. 29, r. 39. p. 211. l. 2. after semi-colon, r. what was committed to
them they did carefully preserve. p. 218. l. 15. for their, r. those. p. 224 l.
20. r. they have only. p. 225. l. 3. for their, r. this. p. 229. l. 3. r. is no
farther.


