INSTRUCTIONS AND RULES To be observed by the Muster-master General and his
Deputies, and the Officers of the Guards of Horse, Foot and Halberdeers, and
other the Officers of Troops and Companies of His Majesty's Army in this
Kingdom of Ireland. As also all Officers, Ministers and Artificers of the Train
of Artillery and Wards here.

BY THE Lord Lieutenant General and General Governor of Ireland.

DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet, 1667.

INSTRUCTIONS AND RULES. BY THE Lord Lieutenant General and General Governor
of Ireland.
ORMONDE.
I.

THat the Muster-Master General by himself and his Deputies, are to muster all
the Guards of Horse, Foot and Halberdeers, and all the Troops and Companies of
his Majesty's Army, Officers, Ministers and Artificers of the Train of
Artillery, ad all Wards within the said Kingdom of Ireland, every three months
at least, or as often as we shall think fit.

II.

That the Deputy Muster-masters, who are appointed to muster the Guards, Troops
and Companies, and Train of Artillery aforesaid, in their several Garrison or
Quarters, are not to give notice of their purpose so to do, until late in the
evening. And then they are to give notice to the Governor or Officer,
commanding in chief the said Garrison or Quarter, who is thereupon to have in a
readiness the Troops or Companies early next morning, every Officer and
Soldier in his proper Arms and Furniture, at the usual and accustomed place,
or such other place as the Deputy Muster-master shall appoint. Where the
Captain of each Troop and Company is to have in a readiness two Muster-Rolls,
containing the names of the Officers and Soldiers, fairly written
alphabetically according to the Sirnames, as is now usual. And that the Deputy
Muster-master before he proceeds to muster the Troop or Company, do take an
account of the Ranks and Files of each Troop and Company; and after he has so
numbered them, to call the Officers and Soldiers particularly placing a cipher
before their names, signifying their being present; and if any be absent, sick,
dead, discharged or run away, they are to be written so on their names. And
after the Roll is so called, the Deputy Muster-master is to count the Ranks and
Files again, that so he may be assured there is not any wrong done by the
Officers in causesing Soldiers to be mustered twice, or mistake on his own
part by marking more or less than he ought. And that such men as are to be
entertained that muster in the rooms of any dead, discharged or run away, be
entered for that Muster at the latter end of the Roll, and after brought into
the Alphabet. After the Muster, the Deputy Muster-master is to close the Roll
with the Officers, according to the usual manner, one Roll to be signed by the
Captain and all Commissioned Officers present, which is to be delivered to the
Deputy Muster master to be by him sent to the Muster-master General; according
to which Muster-Roll, Warrants are to be drawn for their pay: And the other
Roll is to be signed by the Deputy Muster-master, which is to be delivered to
the Captain, to be produced by him at the next Muster for an Examining Roll, to
the end if any Soldiers be wanting, it may be known what is become of them,
whether dead, discharged or run away: and that thereby the Muster-master
General may be able to render an account to Us from time to time of such
Soldiers as are received into any Troup or Company in the Army, and those
likewise that go forth.

III.

The Muster-master General and his Deputies are not to permit any Officer or
Soldier in the Army to pass muster, unless they shall produce a Certificate
under the hand of the Bishop of the Diocese, upon a Certificate made to him
under the hand and seal of the lawful Minister of the Parish wherein they are
quartered or Garisoned, that they had received the blessed Sacrament of the
holy Communion, according to the Discipline of the Church of Ireland, the
Easter or the Christmas next preceding the said muster: and this to be done
once every year.

IV.

That no Captain shall present at the muster, any Officer or Soldier to be
absent by License, except the same be under Our hand, which License is to be
entered in the Muster-master Generals Office, and the time limited set down on
the muster Roll: and that the entertainment of all Non-Commissioned Officers
and Soldiers, licenced to go out of the Kingdom, be stayed in the Treasurers
hands; and if they shall return within the time limited, Warrant shall be
granted forthwith to the Treasurer for the payment of their whole entertainment
during their said License: But if they return not within the time limited, then
their whole entertainment to be chequed, except they produce a Certificat or
Testimonial from the Mayor, or other chief Officer of the Port from whence they
shall ship themselves, that they were ready to come, but were stayed by
casualty of contrary winds and weather, or for want of passage, or by sickness,
And in case any Officer or Soldier, who is licenced to be absent from his duty
within the Kingdom, out-stay the time limited, then his pay is to be chequed
for such time, and the Cheque not to be taken off but by special Order in
writing from Us.

V.

That if any Officer or Soldier be absent from his muster, then he be returned
absent, and lose the benefit of such muster, unless it be in case of sickness.
which is to appear by view of the Deputy Muster-master, or by authentic
Certificate, if the person sick be far distant, or that they have special
License from Us as aforesaid.

VI.

That no Captain give License to any private Soldier under his Command to be
absent above fourteen days, and no such License to be of force, if any
Soldier be absent at muster.

VII.

That no Commission Officer shall pass muster till he first produce his
Commission to the Deputy Muster-master, and the same entered in the
Muster-master Generals Office, to the end he may receive his pay accordingly,
and that the Muster-master General may the better render an account to Us of
all the Commissioned Officers of the Army from time to time, as the same shall
be required.

VIII.

That if any Officer or Soldier be at any time taken prisoner, then, upon
attestation of the Captain, or other Officer commanding the Troop or Company,
the said prisoner is to be allowed on the musters during his imprisonment.

IX.

That no Officer shall entertain any person in the room of any Soldier, dead,
discharged or run away out of any Troop or Company, till the next muster day,
and his pay to commence from that day forward, and not sooner.

X.

Taking into Our consideration the evil consequence of Officers discharging
their Soldiers irregularly: No Officer shall from henceforth discharge any
Soldier mustered in his Troop or Company, until such Soldier be discharged by
a Court Marshal, or by order in writing from Us, or by the Soldiers consent at
muster, upon pain of being cashiered.

XI.

That no Captain, or other Officer of the Army shall in the tender or
presentment of his Musters, use any fraud, practice or deceit, whereby the
Muster-master General or his Deputies may be misled, mistaken or prevented of
the due understanding of the true state of that Company or Troop: upon pain of
loss of his place, and such other ignominious punishment as by a Marshal Court
shall be thought fit.

XII.

That every Officer and Soldier of the Army, and Officers, Ministers and
Artificers of the Train of Artillery, take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, or else not to be allowed on the Musters.

XIII.

That the Officers make no contract or agreement with any of the Soldiers of
the Army for less pay than is allowed them by His Majesty's Establishment, to
which end the Muster-master General and his Deputies are hereby strictly
required to use all means possible to inquire what Officers do make any such
contract, who being satisfied therein, are forthwith to inform Us of the same.
And such Officers and Soldiers so offending, shall forthwith be discharged the
Army, and suffer such other punishment as we shall think fit. And this Our
pleasure we require the Deputy Muster-masters to publish every Muster at the
head of each Troop and Company, to the end no Officer or Soldier may plead
ignorance herein.

XIV.

That no Soldier be suffered to pass muster upon a borrowed Horse, or with
borrowed Arms or Furniture, and that his Horse be serviceable, and not under
Fourteen Handfuls high.

XV.

That the Officers being supplied with convenient and necessary Arms and
Furniture belonging to their several Troops and Companies, the Muster-master
General and his Deputies are required to take special care at the musters taken
by them, that the Soldiers arms be well fixed, and that all the Fire-armes of
the Foot be of one bore. And if they shall find any Soldiers arms unfixt on
the muster-day, they shall mark the same on such Soldiers name in the muster
Roll, and the said Soldier shall be chequed for every such defective arms the
Cheques following, viz.

For a Sword every month two days pay;
The like for Pikes, Muskets, Bandaleers,
Pistols, Carbines and Holsters.
XVI. That no Soldier that is an Inhabitant of any Town or Garrison, and a
Tradesman being well able to live of himself, shall be suffered to pass muster,
unless he will reside constantly in his Garrison, and be fit and ready upon all
occasions for service, to be drawn into the field, and be well trained in the
exercise of his arms.

XVII.

That no Soldier in muster answer for another, or muster by a false name, upon
pain of death, and the Officer that ^^esents such Soldier to be cashiered.

XVIII. That the Deputy Muster master have a sufficient Convoy from Garrison to
Garrison when they are mustering.

XIX.

That no Officer or Soldier presume to taunt, revile, or pick a quarrel with
any of the Deputy Muster-masters, but shall quietly suffer him or them to
examine, demand or inquire any Soldiers name, the Country from whence he came,
and time of his being in this Kingdom, and to take any note or mark of the
Soldiers at his or their pleasure: And if any Officer or Soldier shall offend
herein, severe punishment shall be inflicted on him or them, as oppugners of His
Majesty's Authority, and breakers of our Orders and Instructions, as We shall
think fit.

XX.

That the Muster-master General do from time to time alter and change his
Deputies to muster in such Circuits and Precincts as he in his discretion shall
think fit; and not to permit them to muster in one and the same precinct
constantly.

XXI.

That if any of the Deputy Muster-masters shall at any time abuse the trust
committed to his care, by conniving with the Officers to make a false Muster,
or taking from any Officer or Soldier any bribe or present whatsoever upon
account of mustering, he shall forfeit his Employment, and suffer such further
punishment as We shall think fit.

XXII.

For the better putting in execution the aforesaid Orders and Instructions, The
Muster-master General and his several Deputies within this Kingdom, in
discharge of the great trust reposed in them, are required with all care and
diligence strictly to observe the same. And if any of the said Deputy
Muster-masters in any measure omit, or neglect to put in execution the Rules
and Directions before expressed, he shall be dismissed from his said Employment,
and suffer such other punishment as We shall think fit. And we require all the
Officers of the Guards, and other the Officers of the Army and Train of
Artillery in this His Majesty's Kingdom to take due notice hereof, and to yield
due obedience hereunto, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the first day of August, 1667. G. Lane

FINIS.

