AN INTIMATION OF THE DEPUTIES OF THE States General, In a Late Discourse with
Mr. SIDNEY, Extraordinary Envoy from His Majesty of Great BRITAIN.
THAT the States General did hear with extreme trouble, that the Affairs of His
Majesty and his Parliament, were not yet Composed to such an UNION, as they
could heartily desire, and such as the necessity of Christendom requires,

That they neither would, nor could concern themselves, to Judge the Occasions
of so great an Inconvenience, much less of the means that might be made use of,
to re-establish an UNION so necessary, and so much desired.

That they had waited (though with an extreme sorrow, yet with a respectful
silence) the end it should please God to put to this great unhappiness, and
that they should have acquiesced in those means, which His Majesty had thought
fit to use, (being fully persuaded, that a King so great, and so clear sighted,
would not have taken other measures, than such as His Majesty had thought the
most profitable, for the directing his Affairs; and the most proper for the
good of his Subjects:) But the danger in which they found themselves, obliged
them to speak. And that they neither could nor ought to address themselves any
where else, than to His Majesty,

That His Majesty was the most and best informed of any, of all the sufferings
which they have been obliged to endure, since the Conclusion of the Peace; and
also what earnest endeavors were used to engage them in such Ties as His
Majesty approved not of; and which he thought most contrary to the good of both
Nations. That he would be pleased to remember what had been said and threatened,
when they thought they could not be under Obligations, so disagreeable to his
Majesty, and so inconsistent with the public good; and that then His Majesty
assured them of his Protection, and that he would venture All to deliver them
from the Evils that threatened them.

That the STATES resting upon this Royal Promise, and His Majesty being pleased
for their greater security, to assure them he would call his Parliament, as
soon as be thought Affairs required it: They submitted themselves to this
Declaration and had waited for the Session of Parliament, (though with an
extreme impatience,) yet with as much resignation, as His Majesty could expect
from his own Subjects. But the misunderstanding which seems to grow more than
ever, between His Majesty and his People, makes them despair. Especially, since
the misunderstanding is founded upon an Affair of so great Importance, and so
Domestic, that they could not Discuss so Nice a Point.

That it was certain, and that His Majesty might be assured by the Relation of
Eyewitnesses, that those Foreign Powers, with whom His Majesty had no Tie, did
Arm and make extraordinary great preparations.

That they did with all Care, endeavor to repair the disorders, which the late
Sickness had occasioned in their Armies, when they had like to have been
destroyed about Strasburgh.

That all the extraordinary Embassies which they have sent to most of the
Princes of Europe, were to no other end than to inform them, and give them
assurance that all their proceedings had no other aim, than the public quiet
and tranquillity; though after the Conclusion of the Peace, they have seized
upon a greater number of Villages than the Agreement gave them.

That the apprehensions they had of His Majesty of Great Britain, have so far
favored these Countries, as that their intentions have not yet been effected.

That the disposition of Affairs, which may incline His Majesty to differ with
his People, would give them full opportunity to execute their designs; since
being perfectly acquainted with what they are to apprehend from His Majesty's
Power separate from his People; they think they may completely Execute their
designs before any Foreign force can oppose them: And that they could not fail
of their Ends, when once they should begin to Act.

That His Majesty knew the Arts they make use of in his Kingdom to bring their
designs about, and is also informed of the Methods the Court of Spain uses in
their own Affairs, by which the Spanish Netherlands are in danger to be
entirely ruined.

That the design of their ruin was already almost effected and that all the
Low Countries would be infallibly destroyed, in a short time, if a speedy and
vigorous course be not taken. The King of Spain not being able to put his
Country into a condition of defense or resistance, and the States having been
strangely exhausted by the Late Wars, and so disabled from making such a
powerful resistance, as they might wish to themselves.

That the Spanish Netherlands, and this State being lost, His Majesty would
endeavor in vain to apply the necessary remedies against a victorious King,
engaging all his Kingdoms, and extremely powerful, as well by Sea as Land.

That they saw no means to secure or save themselves, and could not hope for
any help from His Majesty, while he and his People are disagreed; nor could
they hope any thing from time it self, since all delays have only served to
animate foreign owers so strongly Armed, to execute their Projects, while His
Majesty at variance with his People cannot afford them the requisite and
necessary Remedies.

That His Majesty had found by experience, that the Dissolution and Prorogation
of Parliaments, have only served to disquiet the minds of his People, and that
at their first sittings; subsequent Parliaments have gone in the ways of the
former, and with greater Animosity.

That they cannot but lament their own unhappiness, that a business so
uncertain as is that of a future Succession (wherein time may make considerable
Alterations, and even Revolutions far different from what might be agreed to)
should occasion their entire Ruin: and that the Interests of Europe,
principally of all Protestant Princes, and of this State, should be sacrificed
for so uncertain a matter.

That His Majesty is too clear sighted, not to perceive that in England it
self, the Acts of Parliament, which have been made for excluding from the
Succession to the Kingdom, have had no success; those of the Queens, Mary and
Elizabeth, being too fresh in Men's Memories to be yet forgotten.

That it is much to be feared, that a Parliament Composed of Persons Wise, and
understanding in the Laws of the Nation, armed with considerable Examples, and
animated with the concurrence of the great Cities, and all the Nation will be
able to keep their ground, and by that means continue the disunion, and so this
affair (though it be uncertain that 'twill ever happen) will however be
destructive, though His Majesty should agree to the Sentiments of his
Parliament at last.

But that all Europe and principally the Neighboring Countries would be
inevitably Ruined, if this State should be so Unfortunate as to see the
continuance of this difference; and that no help could be expected even then,
when His Majesty shall comply with his People, and would apply the most
effectual Remedies.

That they did not pretend in the least to Offer any directions to the Will and
Pleasure of His Majesty: But that they submit themselves to what His Majesty
shall think most agreeable, only they desire, that if they be so Unfortunate
as, to see that His Majesty will Sacrifice his Kingdoms, His Royal Person, and
the Union of his People for so Uncertain a Matter, which perhaps may never
happen; and that it may not be hoped, That His Majesty can Engage himself in
the differences among Christian Princes when ever they shall happen: Since the
condition of his Kingdom will not permit it. That then at least His Majesty
would grant them this favor, to acquaint them, that they may endeavor to find
out some means to Save their Common Wealth and the poor People committed to
their care.

That they will always remember the good inclinations His Majesty has had for
them, but that they shall see with extreme displeasure and Tears of Blood, that
they who do so much affect His Majestyes good must become an Innocent
Sacrifice, for an Interest which it may be will never happen and which when it
does; will bring with it perhaps that loss and ruin to which they see
themselves exposed.

FINIS.

