THE INTRIGUES OF THE Court of Rome FOR THESE SEVEN or EIGHT YEARS past.

Written Originally in French, By a French Gentleman, who lived with a Public
Character several Years at that Court.

Now Rendered into English.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

MEMOIRES OF The Time, OR Discourses of the Intrigues OF THE Court of Rome.
CHAP. I. Touching the particular Reign of Clement X. Emilio Altieri, and the
Ministry of Cardinal Palazzi Altieri.
I Take not upon me in this place fully to Discuss the troubles and Perplexity
of the Conclave of 1670. which lasted above four months, and into which
Cardinal Emilio Altieri entered, with others of his Promotion, before he had
appeared in Purple, because he was raised to that Dignity few days before the
death of Clement IX.

It is however necessary to know by what Intrigue that good Old Man came to be
Pope, for the better understanding of what has succeeded since his exaltation,
wherein his share has been as small, as it was in the conduct of the whole
Government of his Reign.

Pope Clement IX. Julio Rospigliosi having not long survived the loss of
Candie, for the preservation of which place, the sole Bulwark of Europe against
the enterprises of the Turk he had labored jointly with France; the suddenness
of his death gave no time to the Cardinals to settle their Factions, and form
Parties for the Election of a Successor.

But, after the usual Ceremonies of Funeral, they entered the Conclave,
December the 20th. 1669: and that very night the Conclave was shut, rather to
observe the Formalities, than seriously to set to work about a new Election.

The Cardinals, that lived remote from Rome, were to be expected, especially
those of France and Spain, who were to bring with them the Sentiments of those
Crowns, concerning the Election of the Pope.

Insomuch, that for above the space of five weeks they did no more but look on
one another in the Conclave. After the arrival of the Duke of Chaunes, and the
Cardinals of Rets and Bouillon, the Spaniards, netled at the long delay made in
expectation of the French, without doing of any business industriously
protracted the coming of Cardinal Portocarrero, to let the world see, that the
same respect was had for the Spanish Nation, as had been showed for France.

All the Cardinals being at last met, did but slowly advance the dispatch of
Affairs, because Cardinal Chigi had framed a design of raising his Kinsman
Cardinal d'Elci to the Papacy; and had promised him rather to burst in the
Conclave, than to give his Vote to another.

The French Faction joined to those of the Rospigliosi and Barbarini, with many
others that feared to fall again under a Papacy like to that of Alexander VII.
(which would have happened, if d'Elci had been made Pope) vigorously opposed
the Project of Chigi. Nevertheless they would not openly give the Exclusion to
d'Elci, because in the speech that the Duke of Chaune made to the Cardinals,
when he appeared in the Conclave, he freely protested, that he had brought no
orders from France for the exclusion of any, and that the King his Master gave
full liberty to the Cardinals to choose whom they should think best; for he
took them all to be persons of so much Integrity and Virtue, that they would
take no resolution, but what was for the honor of the Holy See, and good of
the Church.

The Ambassador of Spain failed not to make the same Declaration in the name
of the King his Master, as he was obliged to do, though he had had contrary
Orders, that he might not render the Spanish Faction odious.

But, that Protestation on the part of the French was made more out of Policy,
than on any other ground: because, notwithstanding their exclusion, it had
sometimes happened, that he, to whom they had given it, had been for all that
elected; and the same thing might have happened in the case of Cardinal d'Elci,
whom they saw designed for the Papacy by Chigi, with the Spaniards and
Florentins united together.

For this reason they would not venture absolutely to exclude d'Elci from his
pretensions; and this encouraged Chigi still in his design, until Cardinal
d'Este, in his usual ingenuous manner, declared himself very civilly to Chigi.
Meeting him one day in the Conclave, he told him, "Well, my Lord Cardinal
Chigi, what do we do here? "Why don't you give us a Pope? Chigi answered him,
we have one ready, when you please, adding, that they could not do better, than
adhere to d'Elci: Cardinal d'Este made use of this opportunity to make Chigi
lay aside that thought, saying, Non diamo di grazia questo fastidio a quel buon
vecchio; that is, Let us not, I beseech you, give that good old man that
trouble: that was an exclusion express enough, couched in obscure terms, to
let Chigi and his party know, that their design of making d'Elci Pope would not
succeed, and that if he should be proposed without effect, it would be a means
to increase his distemper, seeing he was already ill, and had not come into the
Conclave, probably because of his indisposition; probably also that he might
avoid the sting of that usual Proverb, He that goes Pope into the Conclave,
comes out Cardinal; Chi entra Papa esce Cardinale.

What influence soever that Declaration of Cardinal d'Este ought to have had,
which was free enough, for so reserved a man as he; yet Cardinal Chigi was not
at all discouraged by it, and he never laid aside his thoughts of making d'Elci
Pope, until that good Cardinal was dead.

After his death, that Chigi might not obstinately persist to make one of his
own creatures Pope, Cardinal Vidoni, whom (as it was known) Chigi feared, was
brought upon the Stage, and was long proposed.

It was said, that the French bestirred themselves seriously in the matter; but
it is rather to be presumed, that being persuaded it would not succeed, they
proposed Vidoni, to tire out Chigi, and to put him in the wrong, and by the
same means to make his Party distrust him, by letting them see his repugnancy
to consent to the Exaltation of one of his own creatures.

However it be, there were many things that crossed the election of Vidoni: he
was taxed of being interested, and of an odd humor; that he was not affable,
not respectful toward the Nobility, and rude to the poorer sort of people.
Besides, it was his original sin, as to Chigi, that he was nominated to the
Cardinalship by the King of Poland: and though he was a creature of Alexander
VII. yet he had no other obligation to him for his Purple, but that of being
sent by him Nuncio into Poland. Upon the same consideration it was judged, that
the Spaniards would oppose his Promotion, because they had reason to apprehend,
that the King of Poland had got him created for his Interest; and the same King
being at that time retired into France, after he had laid down the Crown, the
French, by his means, would have had too much credit under his Papacy.

This Proposition of Vidoni continued long in debate, because neither Chigi nor
the Spaniards, durst openly give him the exclusion: which, at last, the
Spaniards did, though, out of fear, least time might bring that Project to take
effect, and Cardinal Chigi himself did dexterously engage the Spaniards to do so.

Some others were also proposed, rather to know one another thoughts, than out
of any design to have them elected Popes.

Nevertheless Cardinal Brancaccio was spoken of in good earnest; but the
Spaniards, who forgot nothing, and had fresh in mind what he had done at
Naples, in complaisance to Urban VIII. against the Ministers of Spain, formed a
Faction against him.

The French would have been cordially for him, though he was a Neopolitane; and
certainly it was a very good choice, to fill St. Peter's Chair with a worthy
Successor, as well because of his Learning, Virtue, and the inclination he had
for Scholars, as upon the account of the worth of his Kindred, who were by all
men acknowledged to be Gentlemen of credit and integrity.

So many Cardinals of all Factions having been thus proposed, all such as were
capable of being Popes, were afraid of nothing more than to be brought upon the
Stage, and to come in play, because it was a prejudice to their fortune; it
being almost impossible, that a Cardinal, who has been proposed in a Conclave,
can recover of the blow that is given him, or ever hope to raise himself again.
And, experience snews us, that most part of the Cardinals, who have been
proposed, and have had many voices, die under the Pontificate of him that has
been elected to their Exclusion.

Thus again above a Month they looked upon one another, without doing any
thing: until the season beginning to advance, and grow hot; and perceiving that
they could live no longer shut up, and that even many fell sick; they resolved
at last in good earnest to give a Pope to the Church. And because the heads of
the Factions found themselves disappointed of making such a Pope as they
desired, they bethought themselves to make one provisionally, and sequestrate
the Papacy into the hands of some old man, from whom no long Reign could be
expected, and who might only give them time to make their Factions better
against the time of a new Conclave.

In this resolution Barbarini and Chigi, who were wholly opposite, and who had
given one another to understand, that they would burst rather than yield, came
at length to a conference together: Barbarini declared in short, that he was
willing that Chigi should propose, whom he pleased, of the Creatures of
Rospigliosi, that is, of those of the new College.

Chigi desired time to think upon it, for he had no ground to dislike the
Proposition, seeing he had had the greatest share in the Reign of Clement IX.
and he found none that was more at his devotion, than Cardinal Emilio Altieri.

His age of fourscore years was fit for the Sequestration; his easy and
tractable humor, made him hope to have a great share in the management of
affairs: his kindred were in a degree so remote, that none of them were known,
except a Grandchild, who was lately married to the Sieur Gasparo Paluzzi,
Brother to the Cardinal of that name, who is at present Regnant.

Besides this, all the heads of Factions had reason enough to be satisfied with
Cardinal Altieri. Barbarini found in him an ancient creature of his Uncle Urban
VIII. who raised him to the Prelacy. The Florentins, who made the greatest part
of the Court of Rome, by reason of so many Popes, almost, successively of their
Nation, found in him a friend and old servant of the Great Duke their Prince.
The French, the Rospigliosi, and their adherents, had a Creature of Clement IX.
who promoted him to the Cardinalship, and to whom he owed his fortune. The
Spaniards did not so much regard his person, as that of Cardinal Paluzzi, who
was entirely at their Devotion, and who could not fail of being Cardinal
Regnant, because of Gasparo Paluzzi his Brother, who was the Grandchild of
Altieri. And this last consideration absolutely prevailed with Chigi, because
Cardinal Paluzzi was the Creature of his Uncle Alexander the VII. In a word,
all Christendom found in him a Pope, against whose manners none could take
exception; there were, none but the Squadron Volant, made up of a good number
of Cardinals, creatures of Innocent X. that judged the Promotion of Altieri to
the Papacy, to be contrary to their Interest, because he might resent the
persecution of Innocent X. that Faction was more to be feared than all the rest
together, not so much for the number of voices, as the quality of those that
composed it; the Cardinal Borromei, Pio, Imperiali, Azzolini and Ottoboni, the
greatest Cabalists of all the College, were the heads thereof.

Chigi being now resolved to consent to the election of Altieri, discoursed the
matter with Barbarini, who made a strong party of the French and the
Rospigliosi, as Chigi on the other hand of the Floventines and Spaniards: but
he foresaw some difficulty on the side of the Squadronists, and besides, could
hardly resolve to make a Pope, without acquainting them therewith.
Nevertheless, Barbarini did so effectually represent unto him, that he ought to
pass by that consideration, and that to discover the project to those of the
Squadron, would be the way to overthrow it; that Chigi consented, though with
great reluctance, to break his word which he had given them, not to make any
Pope, that they should dislike.

Matters being thus carried on with much secrecy, they agreed on all the
Articles of the Treaty, the most important for Chigi and the Spaniards; was to
make sure of the quality of Nephew in favor of Paluzzi: and though Barbarini
might have ground to except against that, yet he seemed to give his consent, as
believing he should be able to cross that Establishment, after the creation of
the Pope, by the credit that he promised himself with Altieri.

There remained now no more, but to declare Altieri Pope, they had more than
three Fourths of the voices, of which commonly two Thirds is sufficient; and,
except the Squadronists, all the parties followed Barbarini and Chigi;
nevertheless they durst not commit a matter of such importance to the ordinary
Scrutiny, least the Squadronists should discover the Intrigue, or lest those
whom they might suspect, should fail them; because in the Scrutiny, one may
give his voice for whom he pleases, and no man know it, and it happens daily,
that you have the Canons for you, and all the Chapter against you, so that they
took the course to declare him by way of inspiration, which was done April 29.
For after the usual Scrutiny, which was made every morning, and which was that
day performed in course; as every one was going out of the Chapel to return to
their Cells until dinner time, a voice was heard all over the Conclave, Altieri
Papa, Altieri Papa. This consert began by Barbarini, Chigi, Rospigliosi,
Medici, Este, and all the rest of their party seconded, Altieri Papa, Altieri
Papa. This was a clap of thunder for the Squadron Volant; but perceiving, that
all with one voice proclaimed Altieri Pope, that it was a laid design, and
that their repugnancy could not at all hinder it, they mingled their voices
with the rest, and altogether ran to the chamber of Altieri, where every one
strove to strip him of his clothes, that they might invest him in the
Pontifical Ornaments.

And thus was that good old man made Pope, who took the name of Clement, in
memory of his Predecessor, to whom he was indebted for his Promotion.

The first action the Pope did, before he went down to St. Peter's Church, was,
to declare Cardinal Paluzzi by Adoption, the Nephew of his Family, obliging him
to take the name of Altieri, and the Arms of the House, which are six Stars
Argent in a Field Azure, with a bordure Argent: to name for Datary Mons.
Carpegna a Roman, who was then Auditor of the Rota: and to make Mons. Frederick
Boromei a Milanese, Secretary of State. These are the three most considerable
places, which the Popes, upon their assumption to the Pontificate, bestow
commonly upon their greatest Confidents.

The choice that the Pope made of Cardinal Paluzzi, and his Adoption into the
Family of Altieri, gave all men occasion of discoursing, and of framing
different judgments of the Papacy, according as passion, or the opinion they
had of this Nephew, afforded them matter: some making reflection on the poverty
of his House, which had but small Rents, and great Debts, and was drained in
purchasing to him the Office of Auditor of the Chamber, and on the genius of
the Romans, naturally inclined to raise money by any way whatsoever, expected
no great matters under that Government, but rather all kinds of low, base
doings and Extorsions.

Others to flatter themselves with the hopes of better fortune, corrected that
presage by the consideration of the very condition of Paluzzi, who being
nothing at all related to the Pope in Blood, and his employment having no other
foundation, but the favor of an Adoption, would be oblig for preserving
himself in his place, to behave himself with great moderation, to content all
people, to make friends, or at least to make no enemies, and not to give men
cause of murmuring, who would bear less respect to him, than for the real
Nephew of a Pope; that he had a fresh example before his eyes of Cardinal
Astalli, whose Nepotisme being like his own, lasted not long under Innocent X.
who being displeased at his Conduct, as ignominiously removed him from his
Person, as he had gloriously called him to his Promotion.

Some again, considering the old age of the Pope, and his humor, easy to be
governed, thought they had more ground to say, that the Adoptive Nephew would
entertain no other thoughts, but to make his best of the short time that he
could expect under such a Pontificate, by using all endeavors to raise his
Family, and settle his Fortune; that he would find the less difficulty in it,
for that he had to do with a Pope easy to be governed, who was so aged, as to
have no other thoughts but to live in quietness, and to leave the management of
affairs to those that should be about him: that there was an instance of a like
Pontificate of Pope Ludovisio, named Gregory XV. under whom, in the space of
two years, his kindred had heaped up vast Treasures and Riches, built Palaces,
bought Lands and Principalities, by ways known to all men.

In a word, every one reasoned after their own manner, in a Court where men
more than in any other, pretend to dive into what is to come, and where for
that end, they often go as far as superstition, in consulting some, who report
things to come, either by Astrology, or by some other far less allowed, and
more dishonest Art.

It was not long before men came to be clearly informed of what they might
expect under that Pontificate, because at the very first, Cardinal Paluzzi
(whom we shall hereafter call Altieri) took his measures to dispose of all
things, without so much as acquainting the Pope, till after he had done what
seemed best to himself.

This is so true, that in the beginning of his Ministry some having presented
to the Pope, Petitions, for obtaining of Favors from his Holiness in the
Audiences which he gives all men, during the first days of his Exaltation, and
having obtained of his Holiness himself, a favorable Order: when the Will and
Pleasure of the Pope, was to be put in execution and fulfilled, Cardinal
Altieri gave the denial, said, That his Holiness had been surprised; and when
he was pressed, by replying to him, that his Holiness had been very well
informed of the matter of Fact, he stood not to say, to the great contempt of
the Pope, that his memory was bad, and that he remembered not that he was
already engaged to another; insomuch, that there were several persons to whom
the Pope had given Charges, Offices, or Benefices, who never came to enjoy
them, because Cardinal Altieri had given them away to others.

But because that began already to make some noise at Rome, and occasioned
scandal to the Church and dishonor to the Holy See; Cardinal Altieri to remedy
that, and at the same time better to secure his absolute power, gave express
Orders to the Master of his Holynesses Chamber, and to all others that were
about him, to let none have access to the Pope without his knowledge,
especially such as had any memorial to present unto him.

By this way of Conduct he kept the Pope besieged, under pretext of easing him
of the trouble of giving so many Audiences; and to spare, said he, the old age
of his Holiness, which could not bear up under so many troubles and cares.

In the mean time, they who were jealous of the fortune of Cardinal Altieri,
failed not to make advantage of his Conduct; they taxed his Government as
injurious to the Holy See, tyrannical toward the People, odious to the
Prelacy, and ignominious to the Pope himself: that he had brought his Holiness
to hear none but such as spoke by his mouth, that he might establish to himself
a Monopoly, and keep his Holiness from the knowledge of his actions; that he
abused the easiness and goodness of the Pope; that he intended to have a Pope
in Effigy, that had ears and heard not, and a mouth and spoke not; and to
render the matter more notorious, some took the boldness to write upon the
Popes chamber door, under his Holiness Picture this biting Pasguinade, Qui sto
per insegna. Which signified, that the Pope served only for a Sign.

There were but few that were not offended at the conduct of the Nephew
Regnant; virtuous men living at Rome, who applied themselves to honest courses,
in hopes of some reward, lost their courage, when they perceived, that no
Benefice, how inconsiderable soever, came to be vacant, but that Cardinal
Altieri snapt it up, even small Chapels of ten Crowns of Rent; the Prelates
saw the way of attaining Governments and other Charges blocked up against
merit, that it began to be open to Bribery, and that they were distributed
amongst those that offer*d most money; that for that purpose there were a kind
of men established in the Palace, who in that Court are called Senzali, and are
in plain English, Brokers, to treat under hand with those that presented
themselves, or might pretend to vacant Benefices.

The Popes true and natural kindred, discovered themselves in great number,
since his exaltation, whilst when he was but a simple and poor Prelate, he had
not so much as one kinsman: and he himself said, that he did not believe he had
had so many; that he had never found one in the time of his need; that in the
necessity to which Innocent X. had reduced him, no body had offered him
assistance; and that now in his grandeur he found almost as many Relations as
he had Townsmen: that great number of kindred complained no less than others,
of the adoptive Nephew, who allowed them no share, either in the Government or
other affairs, except some of the House of Massimi, whom he had preferred.

The College of Cardinals were divided, but hardly was any of them content to
depend on the Nephew, for that which they might pretend immediately of the
Pope, and though they could not be openly denied access to his Holiness, yet it
was rendered as difficult as might be, insomuch as to make them wait whole hours
in the Antichamber, or to put them off till another time: and whenever any
one was introduced to speak to his Holiness, he had Cardinal Altiri still by
his side, who left him not the freedom of speaking confidently, but by an
importune and troublesome civility kept always close by him: or if it happened,
that any one had Audience, and spoke freely to the Pope, his reception was
cold, and with indifferency.

But though all men were discontented, yet none durst break out: Cardinal
Altieri had the advantage, that there was no other public Minister at Rome,
but the Marquis of Astorga the Spanish Ambassador, who was more diligent in
making his Courtship to the Courtesans of the Town, than to the Courtiers of
the Pa^ace: beside, he might promise himself all things of the humor of Altieri
for the Spanish Nation. The French Ambassador, the Cardinals of Pets and
Bouillon were gone for France, immediately after the Conclave: the Cardinal of
Este, who used to make the Popes kindred tremble, tho they were protected under
the Throne, and secured by the Pontifical Scepter, was likewise retired into
his own Country. Cardinal Antonio lay languishing upon a sick bed, so that
there was none that in a general discontent, could support a vigorous
resolution. The Squadron Volant troubled not themselves, they let matters take
their ordinary course, contenting themselves to make parties, and form projects
for a future Pope, never imagining, that he, who Reigned, might have health
enough to bury them all, as he has done most of them.

There was none but Cardinal Barbarini, Dean of the Sacred College, that could
undertake any thing for worsting the great great power of Altieri. It is
needless to speak here of his credit, all men know it, for all he is so hidden
in his actions, and that he is the fittest man in the world to make parties
(which the Italians call Vipieghi) the most expert in managing of them, the
most dextrous in dissembling them, and the most reserved in setting them at
work; that none fights better in giving ground; none has more back doors to
escape at; and no man appears fresher after the engagement than he, without
troubling, or disturbing himself, without any show, unless it be in public and
conspicuous actions, wherein he is all fire and noise even to confusion; there
being nothing else to be found fault with in his manners, the integrity whereof
has always triumphed over the most crafty detraction, which is hardly to be
parallelled, yea, and almost impossible in a Court of Rome; unless it be a
little heat and passion with his servants, which tends nevertheless to their
advantage, because he has no sooner been rough with them, but that he instantly
rewards them; which makes men say, that it is more pleasure to be chid by
Cardinal Barbarini, than to be praised and caressed by him. He was not well
satisfied, as we have already said, about the end of the Conclave, at the
choice that was made of Cardinal Paluzzi, and he had not consented to it, but
upon thoughts of making the Pope change that sentiment, by the credit that he
promised himself upon his mind: but so soon, as from the very beginning, he
perceived himself very far wide of his project, that the Pope was wholly
governed by the new Nephew, that himself had much ado to get to speak to him
with all the dependence and grimaces, that it behoved him to make, and many
other submissions, that barred him from his pretended confidence: he applied
himself to the digging of a Mine (if I may say so) thereby to blow up the
Cardinal Regnant, and that he might undermine the foundation of his settlement,
he made use of Cardinal Gabrieli, to whom the fortune of Paluzzi, was more
insupportable, than to any other of the College.

This Cardinal was the Popes kinsman, and by consequence, might pretend to the
quality of Nephew, with better right than Paluzzi: the Pope would not have been
unwilling to have given him a good share in the Government; and if he had been
proposed in the Conclave, possibly he would have preferred him to any other:
but he was engaged for Paluzzi, upon the consideration of Chigi and the
Spaniards; and Paluzzi could not admit of a companion to share with him in the
Sovereign Authority.

Cardinal Barbarini in one of his first Audiences told the Pope, that he was as
much concerned in the glory of his Papacy, as he had been active in his
Election: that he approved the choice his Holiness had made of Cardinal
Paluzzi; but that that ought to be no prejudice to those, who by Blood were
more closely linked to his Family: that without being obliged to raise new
creatures, his Holiness had in the College Cardinal Gabrieli, capable of
Government, both by his age, and his consummated experience, and more inclined
to the interests of the house of Altieri, upon the account of Blood, than
others upon the consideration of Favor; that the same Cardinal being already
in pretty good condition by his management and good Husbandry, would have less
need to lavish the Revenues of the Church for maintaining of his rank, and
doing credit to the Holy See; that nevertheless all the principal Charges of
the Holy See and Palace, were already bestowed on others, and no share given to
him; that the Office of Datary, as well as that of Secretary of State were
given away; that the Cardinal had great cause to complain, but that his
moderation and respect made him stifle his grievances; that the whole Court
found fault with it, that it was not his mind to persuade his Holiness to
retract what he had already wisely done; that they who possessed the places
which he had conferred, worthily discharged them; but that in his opinion, his
Holiness had means still left of contenting Gabrieli, without injuring others,
to wit, by giving him a place near him in the Palace; that that appearance
would defend his Honor, which ran hazard by so disadvantageous an exclusion,
and a removal from all charges.

The Pope seemed not averse from the sentiments of Cardinal Barbarini; and as
to that, that he had as yet done nothing for Cardinal Gabrieli, he let him
know, that he should not want means and occasions, to make appear the esteem
which he had for his person; that it behoved him in the first place to mind
those, who were most pressed; that the Offices of Datary and Secretary of
State, were places of too much subjection and fatigue for one of his age, and
even in some manner below his merit; that as to the Ministry of Nephew, he
neither could, nor ought to have done otherwise, for reasons that were very
well known: that in a word, it behoved him so to demean himself, that he might
give no ground of Jealousy in his Family; and that he hoped his eminence would
not a little contribute to the preserving of peace therein.

After this Answer, which was general enough, Cardinal Barbarini acquainted
Gabrieli, that with a little assiduity in making his Court, he might obtain
what he would of the Pope; that it behoved him to appear and be seen in the
Palace, and that as being a Kinsman he should pass over the Formalities of
depending on those of the Chamber for access to his Holiness. In this manner he
carried himself for some days, and oftener than Cardinal Altieri desired; but
with much constraint, because hardly could he ever speak to the Pope alone,
being beset by Cardinal Altieri. He complained of this to Cardinal Barbarini,
who presently found out an expedient to free him of the presence of Altieri. He
agreed with Gabrieli, that for the future, both of them should go to the Palace
at the same hour: that being there, whilst Gabrieli should entertain the Pope,
he would desire audience of Cardinal Altieri, and propose business to him that
should keep them long enough in discourse together, that so Gabrieli might have
time to discover to the Pope all he intended to say, without being interrupted
or hindered by the jealousy of Altieri. This was practiced several times, not
without specious pretexts: and that Gabrieli might not perceive the Plot,
Barbarini and Gabrieli made use also of other Cardinals and Prelates, their
Friends, to carry on the same Intrigue on several occasions.

Gabrieli had already gained a great deal upon the Inclinations of the Pope,
who told him, that he would call him to the Palace to entrust him as well as
Altieri with the care of the Papacy.

It was enough for Barbarini, that Gabrieli had footing in the Palace: and that
being once granted him, like a new Archimedes, he would have moved the whole
Earth.

But Cardinal Altieri having discovered the Plot; whether that the Pope had
imparted to him his intentions for Gabrieli, or that he was Jealous of the
Conferences and frequent audiences that the Pope gave to that Competitor; he
could not but at length appear in his colors; and having, by many devices,
rendered the Audiences of Gabrieli less frequent, so as to have made him one
day wait some hours before he could be admitted; when Gabrieli complained of
it, he told him, that he did indiscreetly abuse the Popes goodness, that his
old age ought to be otherwise dealt with, especially by him, who should be
more concerned in that than any body else, as being his Kinsman and Friend;
that when his Holiness called for him, he should be the first to give him
notice of it, that he would do best to spare the Popes case and his own
trouble; with many other Declarations that sufficiently discovered his
Jealousy. Gabrieli found himself obliged by this, either to make a shameful
retreat, or downright to fall out with the Nephew Regnant: because the good
Pope was still of his old humor, to receive Impressions always from him that
discoursed him last, and in that Cardinal Altieri had always the advantage.

He represented to his Holiness, that if he brought Gabrieli into the Palace,
he would be no longer Master at home; that he must make his Accounts, that
Gabrieli having footing there, Barbarini would be the moving Wheel of all his
Actions; and that so in stead of one, he would have two Masters, which would
render his Pontificate doubly odious: Barbarini, by the aversion which Men of
Merit had toward him; and, Gabrieli, by his sordid avarice, even to the
smallest matters; that though both of them were Men of excellent parts, yet
these qualities had always kept them from being chosen Popes.

These, and such like suggestions, put the good old man into an indifferency
for his Kinsman; and withal, he considered, that if he conferred his Favors on
Gabrieli, he must lessen somewhat of those which he designed for Altieri; and
his Brother, who had taken the same Name and Arms, and whom, by consequent, he
was more obliged to advance; because with Gabrieli, who was already old, his
Liberalities would soon perish, when on the other hand they would continue long
in memory with Paluzzi.

After all, the adopted Nephew so won upon the Uncle, that he made known to
Gabrieli, that it was his intention he should let him live in repose; that
nevertheless, when occasion offered, he should not forget, by real and
satisfactory Marks, to let him know the esteem he had of his Friendship, and
Merit, and that he was mindful of the Relation that was betwixt them.

Gabrieli therefore is now in the Field, not with a purpose to retreat, but to
give his Enemy open Battle. He goes to the Palace, highly complains that
Promises are broken to him in a matter that tended to nothing else, but to
testify his zeal for the Person of the Pope; that Cardinal Paluzzi has no
right to render himself absolute Master of one to whom he has no relation; that
he himself will take the care of his preservation; that that man ought to be
distrusted, who has no other interest in his Holiness, but what is obtained by
a Foreign Cabal, and who both by Birth and Humor signifies but little: he
huffs, and storms, alarmes the whole Palace, and will needs speak to the Pope.

These were the effects of this first heat; In the mean time Cardinal Altieri
appeared not, but wisely gave him leisure to spit his fire. His Holiness gave
him audience, and after a short discourse dismissed him with these words, That
he should e're long be contented.

Upon this Gabrieli discoursed Barbarini, who demanded an extraordinary
Audience of the Pope, to make his last attempt upon him in favor of his
Friend. He told his Holiness, that he was troubled at the bad intelligence that
was between Gabrieli and Altieri, and at the grounds of dissatisfaction that
were given to the former; that he well foresaw, that by the small satisfaction
he received from Altieri, he would be necessitated to these resentments; that
if the content which he desired, of being received near his Holiness, as
himself had proposed, had been granted him, matters would not have been as they
were; that he was not come to beg any new thing of his Holiness, but rather
that he would think on some means to appease irritated minds, and to reconcile
them, as well for avoiding of public scandal, as for the quiet of his
Holiness, and the good of his Kindred; that to be short, it was dishonorable
for both parties, that Cardinal Gabrieli should quit his pretensions without
some advantageous pretext.

The Pope, naturally of a calm temper, prayed Cardinal Barbarini to advise him
how he might maintain Peace in his Family, and made him Umpire in that
Difference, with this Reservation only, that he would not think more of
establishing Gabrieli in the Palace, because it would be the way to bring in
continual Jealousies and Contentions between him and Altieri, under his very
Nose; that he would have been very willing to have had him near him, but that
it behoved him for a greater good to deprive himself of that satisfaction; and
that it was easy to be seen what might be feared from his settlement in the
Palace, seeing the Umbrage of some Conferences and Audiences that he had given
him, caused so many disorders and changes in Men's Minds; that it was impossible
to divide the Ministry betwixt two of so disunited Sentiments, who had broken
out in manifest ruptures; that in fine, it behoved him to think of some honest
means of uniting them, and that there was no man that could better compose the
matter than Cardinal Barbarini himself.

By this discourse of the Pope, Barbarini found himself indispensably obliged
to undertake a thing to which he had great reluctance, because the removing of
Gabrieli under never so specious a pretext, would be the cutting of the
principal Thread of the Plot, which himself had spun; he knew that he would
thereby lose all the part in Affairs, which he promised himself by the good
intelligence that was betwixt them; That Altieri would never put any confidence
in him, because he was obliged to Chigi for his fortune. On the other hand, it
was to no purpose to raise more broils, and that that would do no good, seeing
he had left the Pope in a resolution of removing Gabrieli upon some honest
pretext.

He set to work therefore in good earnest to order affairs to the satisfaction
of his Holiness and the Nephew Regnant, with as much advantage as he could for
his friend Gabrieli.

After many Propositions on either side, it was at length so brought about,
that Gabrieli was satisfied with the Legation of Romania, and a considerable
Pension, with other higher appointments than were usually given to the Legates
of that Province: Thus he yielded to the present necessity of submitting to the
stronger, and changed his Project of Reigning into that of an honorable
retreat; leaving Rome to Altieri, as the Emperors in the last Ages of the
Empire left it to the Popes, he chose Ravenna for the place of his Residence,
where the same Emperors had established the principal Seat of the Hexarchat.

This was the success of that Intrigue, which served only to fix Altieri more
firmly in the saddle, having removed from his eyes the only person that could
cross him in his designs; made manifest the Popes resolution to maintain him,
and taken from all others the hopes of making any attempt to his prejudice for
the future.

So that it may be said, that fortune, which commonly takes no great care of
its own works, changed its inclination in favor of Altieri; for had she
opposed to him any one that had had another support, another conduct, or other
qualities than Cardinal Gabrieli, he would have found himself not a little
hampered.

He had no other Protector but Cardinal Barbarini, and it was known at Court
that Barbarini backed him more for his own interest, that he might have a Man at
his devotion about the Pope, than for any consideration of his Merit. And,
seeing the Government of Barbarini was always dreaded, there was no great
interest at Court used for Gabrieli, who, besides that, had never in his
lifetime acquired many Friends or Creatures.

As to the conduct that he followed; either he should no^, as he did, have come
to an (...); or having once broken out, he should not have condescended to a
low (...) position; he ought to have read his (...) sincerely to his Holiness*
thanked him for the legation which (...) him, ^ound to his Lodgings, (...) of
the Cardinals to (...); and so, besides (...), it would have been un martelio
in (...) (...) in the side for Cardinal Al^^^^ the Pope, in progress of time,
would, of himself made reflection on a Kinsman, either from the tenderness of
blood, or by the suggestion of some third person; or he would at least have
attracted the universal compassion of the Court and People, and turned against
Altieri all the Shafts of public indignation. Thus he might have taken the
advantage of some conjuncture to mount the Throne, as probably might have
happened in the late differences of the College of Cardinals, and the
Ministers of Crowns with Altieri; whereas in quitting his pretensions, he lost
all, and brought himself into no esteem.

And in this it mae be said, that his qualities betrayed his fortune, and that
the point of honor, and desire of glory yielded to a base sneaking interest
and sordid avarice.

Let him go then to his Legation, and we will remain at Rome to be the
spectators of the curious things that have happened under that Pontificate, or
to say better, under the reign of Cardinal Altieri, who is now no more to be
stopped in the course of his fortune, but by some slight obstacles, which will
only serve to confirm him the more in his power.

CHAP. II. The Intrigues of Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri for the alliances of his
House with many Illustrious Families of Rome, and chiefly the Intrigue of the
Marriage of the Princess Cesarini.
CArdinal Altieri, as has been said in the preceding Discourse, was raised to
the quality of Nephew, and was more absolute than any that went before him in
the Sovereignty of Nepotisme. And, although the foundation of that fortune was
in some sort weaker than of that of other Nephews, yet the old age and temper
of the Pope rendered him more absolutely the Master to dispose of all things,
than any of those that had preceeded him in that quality.

The first Project he proposed to himself, was, to raise his family by
Alliances; and, in the flourishing state of so eminent grandeur, it was no hard
matter for him to find out very advantageous means of procuring them.

There are many noble and rich Families in Rome, who court the Alliances of the
Families of the Popes Regnant, since now they have no other way to maintain
their grandeur; and though the authority and command which they enjoy by such
Alliances be confined to the Popes Life, yet they have the comfort after his
death of the quality of Princes, which remains to them, with the other
advantages of Estates that they have purchased during the time of his Reign.

The house of the Prince of Carbognano was equally considerable in Nobility, as
being the chief branch of the family of Colonna, and in richness, being much
increased by the good husbandry of the Prince of that Name, who then lived.

There were but two Sons in that house, the elder called the Duke of
Bassanello; and the younger named D. Egidio Duke of Anticoli. The first was
Married to the Sister of the Constable Colonna, the fairest and handsomest
Princess in Rome; and possibly in all Italy; but without hopes of having
Children. So that the whole Estate that was to fall to the younger, made him be
looked upon as the richest Match in Rome. Cardinal Altieri cast his eyes upon
him, and caused a Match to be proposed to him with a Grand Niece of the Pope,
and all the advantages that he might thereby expect.

The Prince of Carbognano listened to the proposition, and was ready to give
his consent to it; but the elder, who perceived that by that Match, his younger
Brother would be advanced to a higher quality then himself, did all he could to
cross it; he employed his Brother-in-Law the Constable, and his other
Relations, to divert his Father and Brother from that Design. They represented
to them, that there was no great advantage to be expected from the Alliance of
an Aged Pope, such as Clement X. that they ought not to rely on a Nephew,
whose Fortune was in continual danger, being only founded on the favor of an
Old Man, capable of all sorts of Impressions. That there was little honor to
be gained with a Man of such a condition, and of a far baser humor, who
converted every thing into Bartering and Traffic: That it would be a fine
sight to see him to day on the Throne, and three days after grovelling in the
dust, either by the fall of the Nephew, or the death of the Uncle.

These Suggestions and Considerations did not at all shake the Prince of
Carbognano in his Design: his younger Son was already old enough to think of
Marrying; the Father was so old, as, in probability he ought not to expect
another Pontificat, to see Successors of his Name, his Family, and the great
Estate that he had acquired with so much care and frugality.

He treated with Cardinal Altieri, on condition that his Son might have the
Prerogatives of the Princes, which are called del Soglio, or of the Throne: he
would have engaged Cardinal Altieri to grant him the same honor for his eldest
Son, that so he might please him: but because that drew after it great
consequences, they gave him good words, with hopes of overcoming the
difficulties that at first appeared in that Proposition; that it behoved him
first to gain the Pope, by showing a readiness to embrace the occasion that
offered of matching with his Family, and that afterward he might promise
himself any thing of his goodness.

The business being brought to these terms, the Marriage was quickly
concluded, and the new Married persons were complemented by all the Court,
acknowledged and treated as the Popes Nephews. But, some time after, the
rejoicing of that Marriage was interrupted, by the disquiet of the Duke of
Bassanello.

He saw the Duke of Anticoli, his Brother, in great grandeur treated as the
Popes Nephew, with all the Privileges that are annexed to that quality. There
was no discourse of the Engagement of putting him in possession of the same
honors, by virtue of the marriage of his Holinesses Niece with his Brother. He
complained highly of it daily, and had no other satisfaction but ambiguous
answers, or the testimonies of good intentions, which produced a delay as bad
as a refusal.

So that being wearied by so many unprofitable pursuits, when he found there
was nothing for him to expect, and that he was told his pretension could not
succeed; that it could not be brought into practice, because there was no
example for it; that it would introduce a too insupportable abuse into the
Court, of calling to the degrees of the Throne, not only the Popes Kindred,
but also all those that were related to them; that so the Chapels and entire
Halls would not suffice to receive them: he quite fell out with Cardinal
Altieri, his Brother the Duke of Anticoli, and the Duchess his Sister in Law.

Having continued some time in an indifferency, which sufficiently spoke his
secret indignation, he bethought himself of means to revenge himself of the
pretended wrong that was done him.

The Italian Nation, in general, is very discreet, and not easy to give
offense, but is likewise very stiff, and almost inflexible to pardon an injury.
Being a Politic and wise People, they think, that the great readiness in
forgetting a wrong, makes way for receiving another, because Impunity makes men
bold: when on the other hand, say they, if any one think, that if he offend me,
I will never pardon him; he will have more care not to vex me.

But, it must be confessed also, that there is great difference in the ways of
revenge, which are taken in several Provinces of Italy. In Lombardie
resentments commonly break out to the highest excess; and there are few
offenses that are not followed by some Murder: And the worst of all is, that he
who has done the wrong, does all he can to dispatch him whom he thinks he has
offended, that so he may prevent him, being fully persuaded that he cannot
escape his resentment.

At Naples, Revenge is executed by Duels of all sorts, and they often fight on
horseback four against four, and so decide their controversies.

These two sorts of revenge cannot be practiced at Rome; the one, because of
the rigor of the Justice; the great Policy; and the numerous and strong Guards
in all the quarters of the Town: the other, because of the Ecclesiastic Laws,
and that it is a Republic, which may be as truly called populus sacerdotum, as
Florus named it populus vivorum, in the beginning of its establishment. There
are none there but Priests or Clerks, or men belonging to Priests, against
whom, by consequent, one cannot draw a Sword.

So that, saving some Placards and Pasquinades, all revenge at Rome consists in
Interest, either by ruining, or crossing the fortune of an Enemy with Law
Suites, or otherwise, wherein the People of that Country are very ingenious,
as well as in other places of the World.

The Duke of Bassanello had a means in his hands whereby to revenge himself of
Cardinal Altieri; he knew that his eminence had courted the alliance of his
house, by reason of the great estate that must one day fall to his Brothers
children, he himself being out of hopes of having any; he thought he could not
more sensibly touch Altieri after the Marriage of the Duke of Anticoli, than to
deprive him of his expectation as much as the Law would permit. And although
that could not be done without a troublesome blow to his own Family, by
disinheriting his only Brother the Duke of Anticoli, yet the pleasure he took
in revenge was so sweet, that it stifled all the considerations of his own
blood.

He had a good Estate that he could alienate, and especially the best part of
the inheritance of the late Prince of Gallicano, who left it him at his death,
and was worth about Two thousand five hundred pounds Sterling a year.
Nevertheless he would not have that Estate go out of the Family and Name of
Colonna's; he was not so blinded by passion as to do so. He cast therefore his
eyes upon the Duke of Sonnino, the younger Brother of the Constable, and of his
Lady, to whom he bequeathed all the Estate that he could dispose of, and which
was not entailed on the House of Carbognano.

This Donation made in prejudice of the Duke of Anticoli, and by consequent of
the alliance of Altieri, came quickly to the knowledge of the Cardinal Regnant,
and there was no secrecy affected in a matter that was purposely done to choke
him; which indeed gave him a mortal blow, and wounded him in the two most
sensible parts of a Man, Honor and Interest.

Cardinal Altieri is therefore offended, and, by the offense, obliged to a
resentment: He has the supreme power in his hands, and must think of the
means; but, against whom will he testify his resentments? He has no pretext
against the Duke of Bassanello, who is a Lord, that has always lived after
the Roman fashion, that is to say, who has always made it his business to
live, and let live, as they usually say, and has never been capable of
troubling the State; yea, one may presume of his genius, that if he has fallen
on such an extreme resolution, some body must have suggested to him the
thoughts.

Therefore Cardinal Altieri bends his designs against the House of the
Constable; and, without any noise, finds the means of giving him the exchange,
and of playing him as smart a trick as that which had been done to him.

And, because that gives occasion to the great and long Intrigue of the
Marriage of the Princess Cesarini, which is at length concluded with D.
Frederick Sforza; that I may not say to that Comedy, wherein all the Princes of
Rome, and even the Ministers of Crowned heads played some part, with so many
changes on the Scene; it is necessary to trace the matter a little higher, that
with less confusion we may follow the Series of the Story.

Prince Cesarini that died last, left a very considerable Estate to his Family,
and having no Male issue, bequeathed the succession to his Brother Mr.
Cesarini, then Clerk of the Apostolic Chamber. That Prelate made no difficulty
of leaving all the uncertain hopes of rising to a Cardinalship, that he might
embrace an inheritance so considerable, as well by the fair Manors and
Lordships, as by the lovely Houses and Palaces, and the Lands which amounted to
more than Fifty thousand Roman Crouns of yearly revenue, that make about
Fourteen thousand pound English.

But, that Lord, by the Debauchery of his youth, had so impaired his health,
that he could not hope to leave after him successors to the House of Cesarini.

This great Estate then was entailed upon the Children of the Daughters of Duke
Cesarini, with this condition, That they, whom they Married, should espouse the
Party of France; and adhere faithfully to the Interests of that Crown.

That clause of the Testament showed sufficiently the temper of the Father,
whom I knew to be so zealous for his most Christian Majesty, that he proposed
to me a little before his death, a design he had of exchanging his Mannours,
Lordships, and Lands in Italy, with a Lord whom I need not name; and had
appointed me to negotiate the affair, to the end that he might retire into
France: I owe this digression to the memory of a Prince, who had no other
fault, but his too much zeal for the French Nation.

He disposed therefore of his Estate in favor of the children of his eldest
daughter, after the death of his Brother, in case he died without Male issue:
he ordered likewise but a small Portion for the rest, to take them off from the
thoughts of Marriage, that so his Estate might not be divided amongst many
branches.

He had two at the age of Marrying, both living in a Convent with their Mother,
and equally considerable by the advantages of birth and beauty; but unlike as
to Portion and Estate, because the eldest was heiress presumptive General of
the Manors, Lordships, and Palaces of his Family.

The Duke of Sonino, the Constables Brother, who before was called the Abbot
Colonna, forsook the Ecclesiastic State, that he might Marry the younger
Sister; but on condition that the elder would become Nun, and renounce the
pretensions, and rights of her birthright, which was done with consent of the
Uncle. This elder Sister, either through the persuasions of her Uncle, or
because she was nor at that time in an humor of Marrying, had consented to all
that was agreed upon between the Duke Cesarini her Uncle, and the Prince of
Sonino her Brother-in-Law; but, no Articles were drawn upon that agreement; all
depended upon the faithfulness of a promise.

Cardinal Altieri, to play a trick to the House of Colonna, like to that which
the House of Colonna had played him, by the Donation of the Duke of Bassanello
to the Duke of Sonino, took his measures so well, that he deprived the Duke of
Sonino of the pretended inheritance of the house of Cesarini, by putting the
eldest Cesarini in the Head to Marry, notwithstanding her engagement in favors
of her younger Sister.

For that effect, he set many at work, to manage the young Lady, and gain upon
her Mind. It was no hard matter for Churchmen to break a young Maid off the
thoughts of a Cloister, and for Spiritual Superiors to make her change her
design, as well by the dependence on their Counsels, as to the kind of life
which she led, as by the tenderness of an age susceptible of all the
impressions that were made upon it.

When her mind was wrought upon in the Convent, where she had chosen her
retreat; Cardinal Altieri made known to her, that his Holiness would take her
into his Protection, and that he desired to Marry her with all the advantage
due unto her birth and merit.

But because she had not declared her self in favor of any, having had no
conversation with Man, she was showed Don Frederick Sforza, Nephew to the
Cardinal, and Son to Don Paolo Sforza, whose House is more remarkable, by the
Antiquity of its Nobility, than the greatness of estate. This young Man was
very handsome; and it was an easy matter for him to make a Conquest of a
heart, which was in the hands of those who had introduced him to her.

This Intrigue was not managed with so much secrecy, but that the Constable
had quickly notice of it; he complained to Duke Cesarini, that they discoursed
in the Palace of marrying his Niece; that he knew very well that such a thing
went against the promise made upon the marriage contracted between his younger
Niece, and the Duke of Sonino his Brother; which was not concluded, but upon
condition of the renunciation of the Elder. What injury would it be, both to
the Honor and Estate of his House! that the Duke of Sonino had three Sons that
would be miserable, if such a marriage took effect; that it behoved him to
apply himself in good earnest toward that blow: that it was in the power of an
Uncle, who was in place of a Father, to hinder his Necce from marrying, that as
to himself, he would rather perish with all his Family, than suffer that wrong
and prejudice.

Duke Cesarini promised the Constable, to do all he could to hinder it: that he
would never consent to it, but that he must assist him on his part to gain the
Lady, that they needed not despair to make her quite a design, which she had
only conceived at the solicitation of those of the Palace, who sought not so
much her good, as the occasion of revenge, even to the injuring of her
conscience, her repose, and the settlement of her Family; that moreover, he
ought to endeavor to make the Mother, who would have great influence upon her
mind, because she lived with her.

The Constable and Duke Cesarini having leagued with the Mother (who at first
they won to their side) used all possible endeavors to take off the young Lady
from the thoughts of marriage. But finding all their attempts unprofitable, and
that in vain they had successively used Remonstrances, Prayers, and
Threatenings, because she relied upon the Supreme Authority; they betook
themselves to other Artifices.

They thought that without further opposing her design of Marriage, it behoved
them to propose to her another Match, in appearance more advantageous, than D.
Frederick Sforza: that they must needs find out one, whom Cardinal Altieri
should dislike, to the end, that if she consented to it against the Will of his
Eminence, the marriage might break off, and so she remain without having either
the one or other; but that was not enough, the party must likewise be such,
that if the Marriage should succeed contrary to their intention, as it might
very well do, the house of Altieri might find a disadvantage thereby, as well
as that of the Constable, that so they might be even with him.

All these conditions concurred in the person of D. Celio Vrsini, Brother to
the Duke of Bracciano, and Cardinal Vrsini. And the better to rip up the
matter, we must here digress to an alliance, that Cardinal Altieri made with
the Family of Vrsini, so soon as he was adopted Nephew to the Pope.

The House of Vrsini, that disputes the precedence with all the Families of
Rome, Noble by its original, by its antiquity, by its alliances, and by its
dignities and charges, is divided into two branches, whereof the chief is at
Rome, and the head of it called Duke of Bracciano, the other is at Naples, the
head whereof takes the name of Duke of Gravina.

That of Rome consisted in the three persons whom we have named, to wit, the
Duke of Bracciano, the Cardinal Vrsini, and D. Lelio; and was almost extinct:
the Duke of Bracciano being aged, and without children; the second a Priest;
and the third of such a Devotion as did degenerate into a kind of weakness, and
all three of a sickly constitution.

Cardinal Altieri, whose care and industry of making his Family, is hardly to
be matched, no more than his fortune; perceiving that all the Estate of the
Roman Vrsini, was about to descend to those of the kingdom of Naples, applied
himself from the beginning of his Reign, to draw them into an alliance with his
Family: he caused a marriage of a Niece of the Pope, to be proposed to the Duke
of Gravina, with a vast sum of money in portion, and a Cardinals Hat for a
Brother of that Duke, who was then a Jacobin.

Gravina needed no great entreatie to consent to that Match, being allured to
it by the advantage of holding the rank of one of the Popes Nephews at Rome,
and by the hope of enjoying the inheritance of the Roman Vrsini himself, as
being much younger than all of them were: the marriage was concluded then to
the satisfaction of all that were concerned in it, and the married parties
tasted the joys of a calm Serenity, crowned with honors, amidst far greater
hopes.

But the Intrigue of the Constable, and Duke of Cesarini, who pitched upon D.
Lelio Vrsini, to be proposed in marriage to the elder Cesarini, troubled the
contentment of Gravina, as well as of Cardinal Altieri, and his Relations.

They saw that the expectation of the great Estates of the Vrsini was in danger
to be disappointed by that marriage; and although D. Lelio was already well
stricken in years, considering the age of the young Lady, yet he was not out of
hopes of having children; they had a near instance of it in the house of the
Mathei; the Duke of Acqua Sparta, at the age of Sixty nine years, having had a
Son by a very young Lady.

It was no difficult matter for the Constable and Duke Cesarini to gain the
Lady to consent to that match, and to leave the thoughts of D. Frederick
Sforza; by that alliance she found her self the sole Heiress of the Vrsini;
besides that, it agreed better with the inclination of her Mother and Uncle. It
was likewise represented to her, that one essential clause of the Testament of
the Duke of Cesarini her Father was, That in case his Daughters should marry,
those whom they chose for Husbands should be approved of by his most Christian
Majesty; that this condition was not to be found in the Family of the Sforza's,
seeing the Cardinal of that name, Uncle to D. Frederick, was of the Spanish
Faction: whereas the House of Vrsini had always been, time out of mind,
addicted to the French party, and that the Cardinal, the Brother of D. Lelio
was actually the Comprotector of the affairs of that Kingdom.

She condescended then to that proposition, waving the consideration of the age
of D. Lelio: but that innocent Victime perceived not that both parties designed
to sacrifice her to Interest and Revenge, the cruellest of Deities, which all
the blood in the world can neither content nor appease. The two parties played
their game with her, and she knew nothing of it: nevertheless she had taken the
better course, to have followed the propositions of Cardinal Altieri, whatever
his intentions were, than to embrace the party offered by the Constable;
because the first intended at last to give her a Husband, and make her the
Mistress of her own Estate, only that he might be revenged of the Constable and
his Family, and the other, by revenging himself on Cardinal Altieri, revenged
himself likewise on her, by proposing a marriage to her, which he judged could
not take effect, and of the success whereof himself was afraid, desiring no
other advantage of that proposition of D. Lelio Vrsini, than to set her at
variance with Cardinal Altieri, or to tire out his Eminence: seeing it was
equally hurtful to the Duke of Somino, whether she married Sforza or Vrsini;
and that he could pretend no other satisfaction by her marriage with the
latter, but to mortify the Duke of Gravina, and by consequence Altieri.

But the Lady Cesarini was not the only person that was imposed upon by this
Intrigue: D. Lelio himself was also abused: He set to work in good earnest to
marry a Wife; and the great Piety whereof he made profession, was not
inconsistent with the sentiments of an honest and virtuous love.

In this condition D. Lelio made his Courtship to the Lady Cesarini, as
punctually as it can be made to an Italian Lady, shut up in a Nunnery. D.
Frederick Sforza had not the same advantage, because the Mother, who was made
for D. Lelio, found means to keep the one at distance, and to admit the other.

When that affair came at first to the knowledge of Cardinal Altieri, he made
no great matter of it; he perceived very well, they intended to play him a
trick, but he could not be persuaded (as the truth indeed was) that the
Constable had a real design to bring that Marriage to effect, which was
equally fatal to his own House, as to the Family of Altieri.

He knew likewise, that they had persuaded the young Lady to change her mind,
but that put him at no variance with her, and he well perceived that to be
rather an effect of her complaisance and obedience, than of her inclination:
that it would be easy for him still to reclaim her; her new Gallant D. Lelio
being no such charming Blade, as that a young Maid would forsake all other
objects for him; and especially D. Frederick who was a far more suitable Match.

He failed not however still to tamper with the Lady; he talked before her, of
the proposition of D. Lelio as ridiculous, because of his qualities; adding,
that it was an odious proffer, seeing the Authors of it would only impose upon
her, it being the least in their thoughts to have her married. In the mean time
he advised her to dismble, but still to remain constant, seeing she was assured
of the Protection and good Intentions of the Holy Father.

When the Constable found that matters went not in the rode that he had
proposed; that the faculty of the Lady Cesarini, in listening to the Match of
D. Lelio, had put no misunderstanding betwixt her and Cardinal Altieri, who
persisted still to entertain her in the humor of Marrying, and that they
corresponded together as formerly: he grew apprehensive, and justly too, that
the proposed Marriage might be consummated when he should least expect; which
without any other formalities, might be done at every instant; because the Pope
is above all, and Cardinal Altieri had Force joined to the Sovereign Reason.

In effect, he must have given over at last; and the the thing had been
presently put in execution, if he had not started a difficulty, which stopped the
conclusion of the affair.

He brought upon the stage the Ambassador of France, with whom he lived in very
good intelligence, as he has always done with the Lords and Ambassadors of
that Nation, notwithstanding the reluctance of the Spaniards, with whom he is
obliged to observe his measures, because of his States and his quality, of
Constable of the Kingdom of Naples.

He easily engaged the Ambassador in his design, who then was the Duke
d'Estrees, already dissatisfied with Cardinal Altieri, as we shall see in the
Intrigue of the Cardinalship of the Bishop of Laon; they resolved to let
Altieri know, that the Lady Cesarini was under the protection of the King, by
order, even of the last Will of the late Duke her Father: that by the Testament
of the same Duke, his Daughters could not marry without the approbation of his
Majesty: that the Sforza's were addicted to the Spanish Interests, and that by
consequence, the King would never approve of that Match, that the marriage
proposed with D. Lelio, was liked of by his Majesty, because that House was
actually in his service, friendship, and under his protection: that therefore
he did oppose the Marriage proposed by Altieri, and that the match with D.
Lelio must be concluded.

Cardinal Altieri made answer to the Ambassador, that he would never fail, in
the respect due to his most Christain Majesty, which he did not think he
injured by maintaining the good intentions of the Pope, for the Lady Cesarini,
whose liberty was like to be oppressed by the injustice of the Family of
Colonna, who designed, by shutting her up, contrary to her inclinations, within
four Walls, to deprive her of her right to the Estate left by her Father to his
children. That when his Majesty should understand the good intentions of the
Holy Father, he would not only praise, but thank his Holiness for them, as well
upon the account of his great natural equity, as of the Friendship and good
Will that he had for the Lady.

That as to the difficulty that was started of the adherence of the House of
Sforza to the Crown of Spain: be sides that, Don. Paola Sforza, Father to D.
Frederick, had always observed a Neutrality, suspected rather to incline to
Franco, than any other Nation; it would be very easy to remove that
impediment, by making D. Fredrick declare for France, which was already
endeavored, and to which it was hoped they might obtain the approbation of his
Majesty; seeing it would engage a Noble Family to the French Faction, which in
all appearance might exted to Successors; whereas the Family of Vrsini being
already addicted to the Crown, no new conquest was made. That moreover, he had
no thoughts of doing any thing, without acquainting his Majesty; and that in
short, he would leave it to the free option of the Lady Cesarini, to make what
choice she pleased.

This Answer appeared most rational, but the Constable and his Brother the Duke
of Sonino, could not rest satisfied, because, which way soever the matter went,
it concluded in the marriage of the Lady Cesarini, that is to say, in the utter
ruin of the Duke of Sonino, and of his children; whereas by the opposition,
which he made to the marriage of D. Frederick, and the proposition of giving
her Duke Lelio, his design was to oblige Cardinal Altieri to let matters alone
as they were; to wit, the young Lady in the Nunnery, and the Duke of Sonino and
his Lady, in the hopes of enjoying the Estate.

However, they gained somewhat by the intervention of the Ambassador: they
might promise themselves that no more would be done in the affair, without
acquainting the French Minister; and that in the mean time they might have
leisure, either to persuade the Lady to becaome Nun; or in case, she would
needs marry, to make her resolve to accept of D. Lelio, which seemed to them
the less prejudice, because there was but small appearance that he could leave
any children after him of so unequal a marriage.

They made therefore the best use of their time for attaining their ends, by
prevailing with the French Ambassador to write to France, that he might obtain
favorable resolutions as to the party he had espoused, whilst they on their
side attacqued the Lady with all the Engines, which authority mingled with
Artifice could employ to gain her; but the Answers that came from France, were
but very general, because the S'forza's on their side, solicited at Court, and
were assisted by their friends, for obtaining the approbation of the King: and
besides, the Lady was still constant and immovable in her resolution of
marrying.

In so much that they could get no more of her, but an indifferency, at least
in words and appearance, for either of the two Matches, though if her heart had
been consulted, there would have been found there a formed Declartion in favor
of Don. Frederick. But she was willing to give her Mother and Uncle that
satisfaction, to free here self from their importunities as she told Cardinal
Altieri, expecting till time should bring a remedy to her troubles.

That indifferency signified but little to the Colonna's; but it was too much
for Cardinal Altieri; he feared that that step might be followed by another,
and he could not promise himself any thing of a Sex, that is as dissembling as
weak, which way soever that Maid bent her thoughts, having through the
persecutions of her Relations, forsaken D. Frederick, he found no satisfaction
therein: if she should embrace the Nunnery and a Religious life, his contrived
revenge would prove in vain: if she declared her self for D. Lelio, the
Inheritance of the Vrsini, was snatched from his Family.

In this disquiet of thoughts, he represented to the Lady Cesarini, that she
should have a special care of what she did; that she should distrust the
persuasions of her Relations, as being acted by mere Interest; whereas his
Holiness and himself, had no designs, but for her repose and advantage, that
if the Holy Father should come to know that she failed in a suitable
correspondence to his good intentions, as it seemed she had, by becoming more
slack in her good resolution, he would abandon her to the discretion of her
Relations. She could not at that time forbear to complain of the persecutions
of her Mother, Uncle, and of those of their party; she besought Cardinal
Altieri to assist her, and to think on means to rid her from the trouble
wherein she was; and from so many importunities wherewith she was overwhelmed:
that moreover she continued still in a firm resolution to depend absolutely on
his Holiness, and his Eminence, who could not want means to overcome all the
apparent difficulties that had been started by the Ministry of the French
Ambassador; that she well perceived it to be an Artifice of the Colonna's; and
which would take no effect, so soon as she should make her reasons known to the
King, with due submission both on the part of her self, and of him who was
designed for her Husband.

Altieri was exceedingly well satisfied with that sincere declaration; and that
he might comply with what she said, as well as to make sure of her Person; he
gave Orders in his Holinesses name, that none should be admitted to speak to
her in the Nunnery without express permission from him.

Th^s prohibition gave occasion to her Relations, and to those of the party of
the Colonna's to clamor, and complain openly, that it was contrary to the
promise which Altieri had given, of leaving the Lady at liberty to make what
choice she pleased; that they used violence toward her, and kept her shut up
without speaking to any body, that they might make her say whatever they
pleased; and draw from her a forced consent. This was not all, they engaged the
French Ambassador in the quarrel, with threats, that if the Lady Cesarini were
not left in the same liberty as formerly, they would be obliged to repel force
by force, and that they would carry her from the place where she was, and put
her into the hands of such as might be able to answer for her.

These complaints were not carried t the Palace, but they made noise enough to
come to the ears of Cardinal Altieri: He had no suspicion of the Nuns of the
Convent, nor of those that served them abroad; the Pope is too absolute over
such kind of persons, and especially at home, and under his Nose; but he was
afraid lest the Mother of the Lady, who was of the contrary party, might by the
intelligence of the Colonna's, and the assistance of the Ambassador, play him a
trick.

So that he caused the Lady to be removed from the Convent of St. Catherine of
Sienna, seated on the Hill of Wagnanopoli, in sight of the Palace of
Montecavallo, to the content of St. Aure, beyond the Tyber, where Don.
Frederick S'forza had an Aunt, and put guards upon her, with the same
prohibition, to let none speak with her without his express permission.

This action made great noise at Rome, though it was carried on with much
prudence and dexterity, and to the satisfactiof the Lady Cesarini. The Mother
complained that her Daughter was snatched away from her embraces; Duke Cesarini
that his Niece was stolen; the French Ambassador, that promise was not kept to
him; D. Lelio, that his Mistress was carried away; the Colonna's, that the most
illustrious Families of Rome, were used as slaves, and seeing the whole
Intrigue was devised against them, their share was likewise greatest in the
Catastrophe; they spared not to say, that they would all perish first, rather
than suffer, such an injury and affront.

The Sforza's wisely perceived that these menaces were directed to them; and
that they were unequally matched with the Colonna's; they took advice therefore
of Cardinal Altieri, what they had best do, to avoid these contests with honor.

Altieri advised D. Paolo Sforza, the Father of D. Frederick, and his Uncle the
Cardinal, to send D. Frederick abroad for some time under pretext of
traveling; and seeing the Italians begin their travels commonly by Germany,
that they should send him to Vienna, and give him Orders to remain there, until
new advice; that in the mean time they might have time to negotiate in France,
for obtaining the Kings positive approbation: that they should keep the affair
dormant, and that by the removal of D. Frederick, the Colonna's would have no
more cause of Umbrage, since they should thereby make show of mending the
matter no more.

This counsel was followed, and had very good success as to the Sforza's: they
give it out, that D. Frederick in a desperate fit of a Lover, who saw himself
frustrated of the hopes of enjoying the sole object of his his affections, was
gone to Germany, to follow the wars, that by a generous death he might put an
end to his torments and leave his Family in repose: they pretended to complain
of Cardinal Altieri, who had been the cause of the loss of that young
Gentleman, and who had only embarked him for his ruin.

On that side matters went very well; but still Cardinal Altieri stood in need
of a person faithful to his Interests, to make sure now more than ever of the
perseverance of the Lady Cesarini. D. Frederick was absent; and as the Italians
say, Lontano da glocchi, lontano dal cuore, Far from the eyes far from the
heart: The Pope could not refuse Duke Cesarini the liberty to send to see his
Niece, because he always kept his Chamber or Bed, lame and unable to move,
through the Gout and Catharres.

So that there was need of a faithful Trucheman, to entertain the
correspondence between Cardinal Altieri, and the Lady Cesarini.

No man was so fit for that, as Mr. Altoviti. Patriarch of Alexandria; he was a
Prelate of integrity and much experience in the Roman Court; he had the
direction and superintendence of the Convent of St. Anne, and of several others
in Rome, and was besides entirely at the disposal of those of the Palace, so
that neither could others doubt of his fidelity, nor the adversaries take
offense at his Negotiations, which were to pass for assistances of the Convent,
to which his charge engaged him.

And thus for a long time matters were carried on without noise; all things
seemed to be stifled, and that the marriage of the Lady Cesarini was one of
those very common Romances, which bring the Lover at length to seek for death
to cure his despair; and the Lady to shut her self up in a cloister, having
lost what she loved in the world.

But these appearances hushed not the passion of the Colonna's; on the contrary,
they grew very watchful to observe all that passed: they had intelligence
enough in France to know all that the Sforza's did there, for obtaining the
King's consent to the marriage of D. Frederick; and began already to perceive
their credit, because the French Ambassador seemed not so much concerned in the
matter, as he had formerly been, sticking only in the general proposition, that
the Lady Cesarini might be free in her choice of a Husband, that should please
his Majesty.

At Rome, (where one may say that Spies do Reign, as Men Reign by Spies,) there
wanted not some to discover the Intrigue of Mr. Altoviti, with the Sforza's and
Altieri; besides, that the frequent comings and goings, and the assiduities of
that Prelate, at the Convent of St. Anne, his interviews, and visits to the
Sforza's, were much suspected by them. They were even told that D. Frederick,
since his departure had been secretly introduced to the Lady Cesarini: some
went further, and said that there was no more wanting to the Marriage, but the
consummation, and that it had been performed by the Ministry of Mr. Altieri,
with all the necessary dispensations on the part of the Pope.

The Colonna's affected as much silence, as their adversaries; they testified
no resentment against Mr. Altoviti, they seemed insensible of all these
Intrigues; but the greatest calm is commonly followed by some furious storm.

There were but two persons, that with the Intelligence of Cardinal Altieri,
had the conduct of the affair; to wit the Aunt of D. Frederick, a Nun in the
Convent of St. Anne, and Mr. Altoviti, who was the Director of the same.
Nothing could be done to the Nun; and it seemed, that even Mr. Altoviti ought
to have been secured from any attempt by his character of Patriarch; his habit
of a Prelate, and many other qualities that rendered him venerable, not to speak
of the express Orders which he had from the Palace, for all that he did.

Nevertheless, one evening as that Prelate returning from St. Anne, passed over
the Ponte sixto, some men unknown discharged two Carabine shot at him through
the back of his Coach, with so much justness, that they retired, believing that
he could not but die before he went far; for he was indeed, shot behind in the
neck, and the bullet came out side-ways under his Shoulders, he called out for
help, and causing himself to be carried to the next house, which belonged to a
friend of his, called Falconieri, he prepared himself for death, but the shot
was not so dangerous; for in a few weeks he was cured.

There were few that did not regret the mischance of Mr. Altoviti, he received
in crowds, the testimonies thereof from the greatest part of the Court, and
even from those, who were most to be suspected for having a hand in that black
action.

A friend of mine at that time made a Latin Distick; which went through the
hands of all the Court: and thus was it.

Barbare! quid violas violento tingere tentas
Sanguine? quas tingi murice Roma dabat.
But the Authors of this crime were talked of with great reserve. Cardinal
Altieri himself, against whom this blow directly rebounded, seemed not very
eager in the search of the offenders: perhaps he expected that they should have
discovered themselves; and that fear, which betrays most part of criminals,
would make them take some resolution, from whence they might draw evidence: so
that spies were set to observe what countenance men had in the Palaces of the
Colonna's, if they were more upon their guard than usually; if there was no
talk of retiring under some pretext into the Country; and such like things,
which are signs of distrust, and by consequence of a guilty conscience.

Though the Constable, or his Brother, were upon better grounds suspected, than
any body else; and in manner the only persons that were believed capable of
such an enterprise, through the passion which with some reason did animate them
against those, who endeavored the ruin of the younger Brother, yet nothing
appeared of it; and next morning after the action was committed, the Constable
was seen at his windows beholding some young men, who after the usual manner,
were riding the great Horse in his Court.

Information was taken but very slowly for the discovery of the assassinats,
without attacquing those on whom fell the common suspicion: whence it was
easily concluded that Cardinal Altieri would not engage any deeper with them;
because it would have drawn upon him too many enemies to encounter, and have
occasioned too much noise; besides, it would have been in vain to have indicted
them criminally, having no evidence to prove the manner of the action, nor what
persons had committed it.

However, Cardinal Altieri triumphed in this, that his adversaries were blamed
and reproached by all men, for so unworthy an action, though no body durst
speak freely, especially, since it was known, that even in the Palace there was
no great appearance of resentment; yet people moved by compassion for a Prelate
of that merit, or by the horror of such an assassination, conceived an aversion
for the Colonna's, who were believed to be the Authors thereof.

On the other hand, the Colonna's were not vexed in their minds, that the
action was believed to proceed from them, because Cardinal Altieri not daring
to show any public resentment, it rendered them the more formidable, they were
not vexed that there adherents published through Rome, that the Colonna's were
powerful Lords, that they were able enough to hold the Basin to the Nephews
Beard (that is there way of speaking; tenere il bacile all a barba) that they
could arm such a number of men for their defense, and call them to Rome with a
whistle, that they had the protection of Crowns, and many other discourses of
Romish bravery.

Though such discourses were ridiculous with those that know what the power of
a Pope is in his States, and of Princes, who are reckoned upon but as his
Subjects, especially now adays: yet still they made some impressions on the
minds of the Roman people, who are alike inclinable to admire and to despise.

This made Cardinal Altieri send for several Troops of Horse to come to Rome,
under pretext of a Muster; to the end he might awe the People, by letting them
see, that the Pope, for all he is so peaceable a Prince, yet is never without
Armed Men ready to obey the least Signal. Some imagined, that they were called
to back some enterprise against the Collonna's; but it was more probable that
these men were assembled at Rome, to observe the countenance of the Collonna's,
and to be ready to take some advantage upon them, if they had armed, or gone
out of Town; since no new thing happening, some days after the Soldiers were
sent back to their Quarters.

And this was all the satisfaction that Mr. Altoviti had, for having sacrifised
himself to the Intrigues of the Palace; and all the consequence of an action of
so much noise. Some other Nephew of a Pope would not perhaps have stopped there;
but it was enough for Altieri to gain the chief end which he proposed to
himself; and he thought it would sufficiently humble the Colonna's, if he
succeeded in the Marriage of the Lady Cesarini.

The Colonna's and Sforza's labored to gain the French Ambassador, and the
Duke Cesarini, the one to hinder, and the others to get the Marriage concluded
in their favors; for D. Lelio appeared no more upon the Stage, and that point
Cardinal Altieri had already gained; but the Sforza's had this advantage
besides upon the Colonna's, that the young Lady had an inclination for D.
Frederick: that the French Ambassador gave them good words, and bid them make
friends at Court for obtaining the Kings approbation, and that he would not
oppose it. He did the same with the Colonna's which put Duke Cesarini to that
pass, that he knew not what to do: nor what side to take, being besides moved
by the sighs of a Niece, though by his promise engaged to the Colonna's.

As he was one day complaining of the importunities that were made to him upon
the account of that Marriage, and that it was an addition to the trouble he
suffered of being always sick a Bed; a person of merry humor that was present
told him: 'Ysaith, my Lord Duke, to make them all friends, I advise you to
Marry, and to take a Lady, that has wit and industry enough, to give you a
Child in Nine Months time. This he said familiarly and laughing, because Duke
Cesarini could not so much as stir himself.

In fine, the Colonna's perceiving that all their Engines were fruitless: that
Madamoisell Cesarini continued constant in her resolution, that the French
Ambassador stood neutral; that the King gave the Lady her liberty to take D.
Frederick upon the conditions mentioned in the Testament; that the Sforza's
were engaged in the French Faction: their last recourse was to the Canon Law.

Madamoisel Cesarini had made a Vow of Stability in the Convent where she was
bred. It must be decided if that Vow hindered her to marry, and if there was
need of a Dispensation. His Holiness, at the desire of the Colonna's, named
Commissioners to examine the quality of that Vow; who having consulted,
written, and deliberated thereupon, Judged, that kind of Bond was but a simple
Promise before God, which had not the force of a Solemn Vow, and from which,
her Confessor, Authorized by the Pope, might absolve her. So that there
remained no more to put an end to that perplexity, but to Join the two Parties
by the Bond of Marriage. D. Frederick was already recalled from Germany, and
had been some time at Rome, without appearing publicly, that he might not
expose himself to some insult of his Adversaries. The French Ambassador, and
Duke Cesarini consented to the Marriage; but, to pacify the Colonna's, and
comfort the Duke of Sonino, as Justice did require; having married the younger
Sister, upon the good faith and promise of the elder; it was agreed upon, that
under the protection of the King of France, the childen of the two Sisters,
should share amongst them the Estate of the Duke Cesarini their Uncle after
his Death, or whenever he should be pleased to resign it.

And thus ye have the Catastrophe of a Play that made so much show upon the
most illustrious Theater of Christendom; and though the Intrigue of a Marriage
made the Plot, yet Love had a far less share in it than Interest; and this is
not to be wondered at, seeing the Scene is laid in a Country, where galantry
yields commonly to policy.

Since the Marriage; the two Sisters and their Husbands are made good Friends
by the authority of the most Christian King, who has taken these two Houses
into his Protection, whereof he has given them an illustrious Mark, by the
blew Ribbon wherewith he has honored them, as a testimony that they are the
worthy inheritours of the Zeal, which the late Duke Cesarini had for the
Interests of the French Crown.

CHAP. III. The Intrigues of Cardinal Palazzi Altieri, in the Promotion of
several Cardinals.
IF Men reflected on the Dignity of the Cardinalship, methinks that other ways
should be thought on for attaining to it, than most part of those, who have
advanced to that dignity have followed.

Whatsoever People are pleased to say of that dignity, yet it is by it, that
one enters into a Society, out of which, for a long time have been chosen the
Popes, who, in the Language of the Court are the visible heads of the Church,
the Successors of St. Peter, and the Vicars of Jesus Christ.

So that there is none of those who constitute that Sacred College, that may
not pretend to the Papacy; and by consequent, that ought not to have such
qualities as are requisite for governing the whole Church: or if there be some
who seem naturally excluded from the Pontificate, by a practice brought into
custom, and which I blame not (because I ought to suppose it (I am told) to be
for the good of the Church) they have at least the Prerogative of choosing the
Pope; and consequently ought to be endowed with the zeal and knowledge
necessary, for discerning of him that best deserves the place.

I wave this, that the most important affairs of Christendom are decided by
them, in so many Congregations most wisely established: that their decrees in
controverted points, are held to give repose to other Churches, tranquillity to
Consciences; and in very many places, the measure to Civil Laws.

Nor do I pretend to inhaunce the esteem due to that dignity, by the antiquity
of its original, the greatness of its progress, and the sanctity of illustrious
men that have been raised to it; there are Books which treat of that at large.
It is enough, which some (with what reason I know not) tell us, that the
Cardinals are in place of the Seventy Disciples, and that they are represented
by the holy Elders that stood before the Throne.

It is matter then of astonishment that now a days that important place is no
otherwise considered, but as a Civil and Secular Dignity, and that most part
are called to it by maxims so remote from the Sanctity of its primary
Institution.

It is not my design however, to observe in this place the ways that are taken
to attain to it, that would be to engage in too particular a Scrutiny. I will
only tell ye by the by, that the way of merit is least followed by those, who
march toward the eminence whereof we speak; whether it be that it is the least
successful, or that it is the longest and most troublesome rode: hence it is,
that even at Rome, when any man, commendable for Virtue and Learning, comes to
be promoted to the Purple, they commonly say, that he is gone to St. Peter by
the Longara; that is, a long street that reaches from the Port Septimiana to
the Hospital of the Holy Ghost, and the longest way to go to the Vatican.

In effect, if we would well examine those who compose the Sacred College, we
should find, that excepting the Cardinals which are called National, and are
but few in number, it is filled, either by Genoeses that have got into it, by
buying the chief places of the Chamber, or by Florentines and Tuscans by the
Interest of Families, that have been allied to the Families of so many Popes,
who have been almost successively of the same Country: or by Romans or Romish,
who are introduced by base and fauning compliances with the Popes Nephews; or,
in a word, by some Milaneses, or Neapolitans, who have been advanced out of
mere Policy, that by their Faction they may obtain a Dominion in the States of
the King of Spain.

In prospect of this, Cardinal Altieri was no sooner made Nephew to Clement the
X. but he made it his whole business to raise himself Creatures.

There were three Cardinals places vacant in a short time. It was believed at
first, that in this promotion the Pope would call to mind the obligations that
he had to the House of Rospigliosi. Clement the IX. their Uncle preferred him
to be Master of his Chamber, and afterward made him Cardinal: besides, he had
not been elected Pope, but because he was his Creature, especially by the Votes
of the French Faction; insomuch, that being obliged to the House of Rospigliosi
for what he was, Men were persuaded with good ground that he would bestow one
of the vacant Hats on the same House, which was otherwise very recommendable to
the Holy See, by the conduct of the late Pope, and of his Kindred, during the
time of so glorious and honorable a Papacy.

But men were deceived of their expectation; for, it was not the Pope that made
Cardinals. Cardinal A^tieri would have Men of his own, and one of the
Rospigliosi would have been the Popes: so that these three Hats were given to
three Prelates who were at the disposal of the Regnant, to Carpegna, Borromei,
and Massini. The first was a Roman, Datary, and a Kinsman; the second a
Milanese, Secretary of State, and a Favorite; the third, a Roman, but by an
ancient habit, and secret engagement a Spaniard, and besides a Friend of
Altieri.

Some have said, that the Pope, absolutely against the will of his Nephew,
named Boromei; but besides that, the Holy Father was no fit person for
contesting about any thing; it is to be presumed that Cardinal Alteri was not
against it, because his office made him depend on him, and that he was of the
Spanish Faction, by the inclination of his Birth, and the Engagement of his
Family.

The Rospigliosi's are then excluded from this Promotion: and because that all
good men murmured at it, that the Pope was therefore taxed of ingratitude; that
the deceased Pope had done far more generously in respect of the Chigi's,
having moade D. Sigismond Chigi Cardinal in the first Promotion; that the
Rospigliosi's were men of sufficient Merit, though the Pope had had no
obligation to them; that granting the Rospigliosi's had nothing in them that
deserved consideration, but the qualities of the Uncle; yet a Hat was due to
the Memory of so holy a Man: but Cardinal Altieri used cunning to divert the
Public indignation, which by these rumors fell upon his Government.

He pretended, that Cardinal Rospigliosi himself opposed the good intentions
his Holiness had, of promoting one of his Brothers to be Cardinal.

This pretext had some color. Cardinal Rospigliosi had three Brothers, one who
married the daughter of Sieur Pallavicini, a rich Genoese, in consideration of
which Marriage, Mr. Pallavicini, Uncle to the Maid, was made Cardinal; another
called D. Vincent, Commander of Santa Euphemia, who had been General of the
Popes Galleys; and a third, D. Felix an Abbot. He had greater kindness for D.
Felix the youngest of the three, than for D. Vincent, with whom he had never
been well reconciled, since the Jealousies that set them at variance, during
the Pontificat of their Uncle. Some ill affected persons at Court had fomented
these Jealousies betwixt the two brothers, that by their Divisions they might
govern Pope Clement the IX. And because it was more easy for them to dispose
of Cardinal Rospigliosi, than of Vincent, they had always kept him as much as
they could from the knowledge of affairs; and for that end made use of the
occasion of the siege of Candie, to send him thither twice with the Popes
Galleys, whilst in the mean time they swayed the mind of the Cardinal at their
pleasures, entertaining him still in Umbrages with his Brother. Insomuch that
after the death of Clement the the IX. the aversion that Cardinal Rospigliosi
had for D. Vincent continued still.

This was favorable for Cardinal Altieri. If D. Vincent, by the voice of his
Friends, complained of the injustice done him, in forgetting him in the
promotion; it was answered, that His Holiness had the best intentions in the
World for the House of Rospigliosi; that he was troubled he could not give such
testimonies of it as he desired; that his hands were tied by the bad
understanding that was amongst the Brothers; that he could not give the Hat to
D. Vincent, without disobliging the Cardinal his Brother; that neither could he
declare himself for D. Felix without wronging D. Vincent. who was his elder
Brother; that it behoved the Cardinal at least to declare, on whom of the two
he would have him bestow it.

And the same reasons were thought sufficient to answer all that could be said
of the exclusion of the Rospigliosi's. But it was well known, that it was only
Cardinal Altieri his fault that the two Brothers were not reconciled together;
that the only way to unite them was to render them equal in dignity; that
Cardinal Rospigliosi was a man of too much reason not to live in good
intelligence with a Brother, whom he should see every day in the same Chapels,
the same Congregations, in the same habit, and in the Functions that are common
to the whole College, that was far from the thoughts of Altieri; he was well
satisfied to make his best use of that bad intelligence, and even fomented it
by some that had credit with Rospigliosi, because that whilst matters continued
in that state, he might delay the time, and not be engaged to give a Hat to
that House, and by consequent might dispose of the places that should fall
vacant in favors of his own Creatures. The better to cloak his design, when he
found that the antipathy which the Cardinal had foul D. Vincent was come to
that height, as that he should say, he had rather have no Cardinal in his
house, than to have D. Vincent one; he told him, that his Holiness gave him the
disposal of a place in the College, when any should be void; and that it
should be his own fault if it were not filled by one of his Brothers.

Cardinal Rospigliosi accepted it with Thanks, and with a testimony of his
inclination, for the Abbot Felix his youngest Brother. This stuck so in the
thoughts of D. Vincent, that being enraged, he lost both the health of his body
and mind; which obliged his Relations to send him out of Rome, to their
Country House of Zagaru^lo, and then to Pistoye, where, within a few days
after he died.

But, it was a long time before Abbot Felix Rospigliost came to his promotion;
nothing spoke for him but Merit, and that signified but little to the Regnant
humor: besides, Cardinal Altieri perceived, that by making of him Cardinal, he
ought, in decency, to give him wherewith to maintain that dignity; because the
Rospigliosi's, the Nephews of the late Pope, were so honest men, that in stead
of enriching themselves under the Pontificat of their Uncle, they had much
impaired the estate of their predecessors.

Another conjuncture besides happened, which delayed the promotion of the Abbot
Felix, and we are now insensibly engaged in another Intrigue of Promotions.

Monsieur d'Estrees Bishop of Laon, had for a long time aspired to a
Cardinalship: in the time of Clement IX. he had been proposed to that dignity
by the nomination of the King of Portugal; he had long entertained at the Court
of Rome the Abbot Bonfils, who was sent thither for the affairs of the house of
Vendome; and afterward Mr. Faucher, that he might double his offices; amongst
other things he represented to the Palace, the consideration which the Holy See
ought to have for the services which the House of Vendome actually rendered to
Christendom; that the Duke of Beaufort had sacrifised himself at Candie for the
common Cause; that the Cardinal of Vendome spared no means in seconding his
Holiness in his pious design of assisting the Republic of Venice; and because
both these Brothers died, the Agents pressed his Holiness more vigorously than
before, to comfort that afflicted House; showing him, that he could not do it
better, than by giving a Hat to the Bishop of Laon who was next of Kin, and the
honorary Guardian of the young Princes of the House of Vendome.

Yet they could not obtain that of Clement the IX. because probably he thought
he had done enough for the Crown of Portugal, that he admitted and owned the
Ambassador of that Nation, against all the Factions of the Spaniards; and that
he had declared null the Marriage contracted betwixt King Alphonso and
Mademoiselle of Nemours, giving her thereby liberty to marry D. Pedro: probably
also because of other engagements, to which by civility and decorum he was
obliged, seeing no fault could be ever found in his conduct; so that Clement
the X. succeeding to him, the Bishop of Laon renewed his Offices. The Cardinals
of Este, and Vrsini, the one as Protector of Portugal, received orders to
propose him to the new Pope, and the other as Protector of France, to join
thereto the recommendation of his most Christian Majesty: but, all that did but
little advance his affairs, and except some few good words, which they that
know the genius of the Court of Rome, ought to take for a civil denial, they
left him in his pretensions; they heard his instances, and showed a disposition
to his desires: for these are the mysterious maxims of the Palace, when they
have a mind to keep men in a long expectation, or at length to weary them out,
and make them take another course; which most people that have not full
experience of that Court, cannot well dive into, but with a great deal of time.

This made the Bishop of Laon, assisted by the Ministry of Monsieur de Lionne
(who understood Rome as well as any Minister that ever France had) find an
honest pretext of going to Rome, that he might in person negotiate his own
concern. He set upon his journey about the end of the Spring, in the year 1670.
with the character of Minister of the Crown Extraordinary, for the affairs of
the King. Having made a happy journey through Piedmont and Lombardie, where he
received the honors due to his Merit and Character, excepting some formalities
at Parma, whereat he showed some discontent: Having been treated at Turin in a
Royal manner as a kinsman; in a Ducal manner at Modena as a friend, at Bolonia,
and all the State of the Pope, in an Ecclesiastical way as a Prelate; he
arrived at Rome full of hopes of seeing himself quickly Cardinal.

But affairs were longer protracted than he expected, there were powerful men
in France, and of high credit at Court; who were not altogether glad of his
exaltation, either out of jealousy of his grandeur, or because it put by some
other that aspired to the same dignity; and they were so much the stronger that
Mr. de Lionne, who was the best support of the Bishop of Laon, died in the heat
of the affair. The Spaniards vigorously withstood his designs, and protested
they would never suffer him to be made Cardinal, unless they had one of their
Nation, by reason of the equality, as they said, that the Pope is obliged to
observe in regard of Crowns: The most Christian King thought it not fit to name
him, because he would thereby have lost the nomination of another, which is due
to him at present; he pretended that his recommendation joined to the
nomination of the King of Portugal, was enough to incline the Holy Father to
satisfy him. Cardinal Altieri was attacked on all hands: if the Bishop of Laon
pressed him to show the effects of his Holiness's promise; he had immediately
the Ministers of Spain on his top, who represented to him, that the Queen of
Spain had the same pretensions for making Father Nitard Cardinal at her
recommendation, as the King of France had for the Bishop of Laon.

We must know that Father Nitard a Jesuit, was he whom the Queen of Spain sent
to Rome, to satisfy Don John of Austria and his party; and because she had
with much reluctance thus dismissed him, being her Confessor, Confident, and
Counselor, she was willing to honor that kind of exile by all the real marks
of a constant friendship: After she had removed the Marquis of Astorgas from
his Ambassie at Rome, to the Vice-Royalty of Naples, she used violence upon the
retirement and modesty of that good Father, brought him out from among the
Jesuits, made him a Prelate, and gave him the chief charge of the affairs of
the Crown of Spain: but the good will of that Princess rested not there, she
would still crown her work by adorning him with Purple; and himself laid hold
on the conjuncture of the instances that the Bishop of Laon made at the Palace;
to advance at the same step with him to the Cardinalship.

Ye see then two Prelates of two Crowns in the same pretensions, and Cardinal
Altieri in a great puzzle, he cannot content the Bishop of Laon, without
displeasing Father Nitard; he cannot satisfy the demands of Portugal, and of
the King of France, without offending the Queen Regent of Spain, or one Hat
must cost him two; and if he make the Bishop of Laon Cardinal, he must at the
same time do as much for Father Nitard: or, in fine, if he make neither of the
two, he must incurr all their displeasure alike. Nevertheless, he makes his
advantage of these debates to gain time; and in the mean time, if the Bishop of
Laon press him, he tells him, that if he will find a way to satisfy Spain, he
shall immediately have what he desires: he follows the same course with Father
Nitard, but that Father does not much importune him, he perceives that the
Bishop of Laon does his business for him, and it is enough for him only to make
protestations, that he is in no haste for a Cardinalship; but that he hopes
they will not do that injustice to Spain, to give a Cardinal to France; and
Spain not to have the same favor from the Holy See.

The Bishop of Laon was not much concerned, provided he were Cardinal, though
Father Nitard had likewise a Hat; but perceiving, that in agenting his own
affairs, he labored for Nitard, whilst that Prelate did not at all solicit
Altieri; he believed that Altieri conspired with the Spaniards; that he himself
had solicited them to make that instance, that he might rid himself of him;
and that so it was but a colorable pretext of those of the Palace; that they
might shun the giving of satisfaction to the Crown of Portugal, to which they
durst not give an open refusal.

By this artifice matters were delayed, and the Bishop of Laon could not
forbear to testify his impatience. What Letters were not procured from France?
What Offices were not employed with the Pope, to beseech him, with his kinsmen
to gain them, with the Spaniards to make sure of them? It is enough to tell
you, that Mr. de Lionne managed the affair; he brought things so about, that
the Duke d'Estrees was sent Ambassador to Rome, who being entrusted with the
affairs of the Crown in that Court; it is to be presumed that there was not any
that touched him nearer, than that affair wherein the King interested himself
for his Brother, who had been made to spend there a year of noviciat for the
Cardinalship, though his merit raised him above many others, that met not with
the same difficulty.

Amongst the Instructions that the Duke d'Estrees brought from France, none
seemed of greater importance at that time, than the Proposition he was to make
to the Pope, for the restitution of the State of Castro, and Romciglione to the
Duke of Parma.

It is not my design to discuss that long affair in this place. It is enough
for my purpose, to say that that Estate having been engaged to the Apostolic
Chamber, and since incamerated, that is, annexed to the rest of the
Ecclesiastical State, by Pope Alexander the VII. The same Pope by the Treaty of
Pisa, and by the Articles of reconciliation betwixt his Holiness and the most
Christian King, obliged himself to restore it to the Duke of Parma, upon
payment of the sum of 1600000 Crowns and upwards, which the House of Parma was
indebted to the Apostolic Chamber, and for which it was mortgaged and
incamerated. The death of Alexander the VII. prevented the repayment, and
Clement the IX. easily waved the Treating of that affair, by the good
intelligence that he entertained with France.

So that his Pontificate having been but short, and being expired without any
instance made to him concerning the Treaty of Pisa, and the repayment of the
Money; to content the Duke of Parma, it behoved to be brought upon the Carpet
under Clement the X.

But the French Ambassador had a particular interest to urge that affair
briskly; for besides the satisfaction of the Duke of Parma, he had hopes
likewise to draw some advantage from it for the Cardinalship of his Brother,
and for all other things that he might pretend to from the Palace, and the
reason was this,

The restitution of Castro will be always an odious thing to the Popes, and a
prejudice to the Ecclesiastic State; because it will be a concession, that the
Popes may be deceived, the Estate of Castro having been incamerated and
dismcamerated by one and the same Pope, with advice of the same Cardinals,
which ushers in an infinite number of vexatious consequences to the Court of
Rome: besides, it would place a Sovereign Prince at the Gates of Rome, and
settle a Sanctuary for all the discontented; so that all Popes will as much as
possibly they can excuse themselves from restoring it, and will disown what
Alexander the VII. did, that they may not leave an offensive memory of their
Papacy to the Holy See.

That being so, the Duke d'Estrees might very well promise himself, that Pope
Clement the X. to avoid the restitution of Castro, would grant all that could
be desired of him in France: and indeed it was no sooner proposed, but that in
so quaint a Court, the design of it was presently smelt out; that to stifle
that proposition, there needed no more; but to give a Hat to the Bishop of
Laon; that it was not of so much consequence to the French King, whether Castro
returned to the Duke of Parma or not, but that he would let matters go with
mildness, provided, that in other things he were satisfied.

Nevertheless, the voices of the Cardinals and Prelates of the Court were
divided: some of them were of opinion, that it would be better for the Holy
See, to resolve once for all to restore Castro: that when the French should
have that demand no more to make, they would be more free at Rome in the
measures which ought to be taken with France; when otherwise it would always
prove a thorn in their foot, and whenever the French King had a mind to have
any thing granted him by the Court, he would presently set on foot the
proposition of Castro; so that the restitution would put an end to that plea,
and his Majesty would have no more opportunity of accompanying his Ambassies
with bravadoes.

Others were of the contrary opinion; that when the King of France should fail
of that means, he would find others; that if he had none else but what he
pretends from his predecessors, of having protected the Holy See, yet he would
not want pretexts to back his claims; that the state of Avignon alone, which in
some manner makes Rome depend on him, would give him opportunity enough,
whenever he had a mind to show his resentments; that the liberties and
immunities of his Kingdom, made him even powerful enough to pretend to more;
that moreover, he might from time to time have what he desired, without any
loss or expense to the Holy See. What did the Popes give away of the Revenues
of the Church, by granting Hats, Indulgences, and the like favors? when on the
other hand, the restitution of Castro would dismember the Ecclesiastic State,
besides the prejudices before mentioned.

The Palace inclined to this last advice, which was to satisfy the Ambassador
in the other points of his Instructions: but that the Pope might not be
troubled with the business of Castro, during his Reign; he resolved thereupon
to take the opinions of all the Cardinals, assembled in full consistory; which
he did, and put the suffrages into a box well sealed; causing them to be
carried to the Treasury in the Castle of St. Angelo, that he might have his
recourse to, and take his measures by them, when any new instance should be
made to him about that concern. This course was taken, that the voices might be
given with more freedom, and that it might not be said, they were carried by
private interest; so that the discovery of this mystery is to be expected at
some other conjuncture: for it has not been moved since, and my Lord
Ambassador seemed to urge it no more: whence it was concluded, that he had had
fair promises, as to what he was most concerned in.

The Bishop of Laon seems now sure of a Hat, but delays are dangerous: the Pope
is old, what if he die? what if the King of France remit his instances? If his
supports fail? If the King of Portugal change; he will find himself wide in his
measures. Cardinal Altieri must therefore be urged to declare himself, and to
promise to make him Cardinal at the first promotion: But Cardinal Altieri makes
use of shifts; he sees a necessity of giving three Hats, one to Rospiglinsi;
another to the Bishop of Laon, and a third to Father Nitard; and amongst all
these three Cardinals to be named, there is not one that depends on him; one is
for the faction of the late Pope, the other for France, and the last for Spain.
Besides, he perceives that these promotions are not upon the account of Crowns;
that they are but bare recommendations, and not nominations; that within a
little the Kings must be satisfied by a new promotion. He is nevertheless
engaged; he prays the Bishop of Laon to have patience; to find out some way to
ease his Holiness, who has so good inclinations for him; and who would have
certainly granted already all that he desires and deserves; if the Spaniards
had not crossed his good intentions; that he could not so much as yet acquit
himself of the obligations he had to the house of Rospigliosi: In a word, he
conjures him to think of some way himself of being made Cardinal at the first
promotion, without offending the Family of Rospigliosi, or the Spaniards, and
to propose the same to the Pope, which would do him a singular pleasure.

Some Biass must be then thought upon for the promotion of the Bishop of Laon
that may not give offense to the other competitors, and may take all further
excuse from Cardinal Altieri. It was thought that no better expedient could be
found out, than to demand for the Bishop of Laon, the Hat which was promised to
Cardinal Rospigliosi for one of his Brothers, and whereof of the Pope had
assured him at the first promotion: by this means the Spaniards had nothing to
object against the Pope; and the Rospigliosi's giving their consent, all men
ought to be satisfied. It was proposed to Cardinal Rospigliosi; and that
Cardinal who makes it his whole business to oblige, prevented the proposition,
and freely offered not only that, but if it were needful for the satisfaction
of the King, he was ready to resign his own; he goes to the Palace, proposes it
himself to Cardinal Altieri and the Pope; and sollicites for the Bishop of Laon
with as much zeal as can be expected from any man in his own concerns.

What shifts and excuses can now be found out in the Palace? yield they must:
yet Cardinal Altieri however thinks of entrenching; he informs Cardinal
Rospigliosi underhand, that he would do well to consider what engagement he
put himself into; that he should have a care not to do an injury to his Family,
by renouncing his pretensions; that he cannot justify himself to his Brother
when it comes to his turn to be made Cardinal, if he let slip the first
promotion; if his Holiness should die before he bestow a Hat on D. Felix
Rospigliosi, his hopes will be lost, because another Pope will not be obliged
to it; That so favorable a Declaration for a French Prelate, will put him in
bad intelligence with the Spaniards: In a word, he makes use of all the
arguments he can imagine, to shake or cool Cardinal Rospigliosi in his
resolutions; but perceiving no impression to be made thereby on his mind, it
behoved him, notwithstanding all imaginable reluctance, to promise to the
Bishop of Laon, that he should be Cardinal at the first Promotion.

The day of promotion is not known by many, unless sometimes the night before,
or the morning when it is performed; and many times no body knows anything of
it till after the consistory.

When it was made known, that the Pope had appointed a consistory to declare
Cardinals, and to fill the vacant places, then presently the Bishop of Laon was
talked on, as the first of those that were to be promoted, without staying till
he should be declared; he is waited upon, and complimented, and the great and
spacious Palace of Farneze is hardly big enough to receive all that come to him.

But some hours after the Scene is changed, the Pope makes Cardinals; some he
names, and reserves one in pectore. The Bishop of Laon is out of all patience,
to see so long an expectation disappointed, and so positive promises without
effect; He complains highly; but they endeavor to appease him, by assuring him
that he is Cardinal in pectore; that the Pope, upon certain considerations, was
hindered from declaring him, but that in time he will declare him: yet nothing
can pacify him; he writes to France and Portugal, and engages Cardinal
Rospigliosi to join with him in his grievances. The King and Cardinal
Rospigliosi have the same assurances given them, that the Bishop of Laon is
Cardinal from the day of the promotion; that the Pope has reserved him in
pectore; that he may be at quiet, and not doubt of it; but all this is not
sufficient to free the Bishop of Laon from a deep melancholy.

Who can see into the Popes heart? and though one might see there the name of
Caesar D'Estrees Cardinal, who can promise but Cardinal Altieri by the absolute
power he has over the Pope, will not efface the characters? or give it out,
that the Pope has a weak memory, as he has so often done already, that he may
at his pleasure dispose of all things? who is ignorant that these reservations
in pectore, are the ingines of the Court of Rome, to keep many Prelates in
expectation at the same time? Who can promise, but that they will keep the
Bishop of Laon still in hopes, until that either the death of the Pope, or some
other conjuncture may give the Nephew Regnant opportunity of leaving, both the
Bishop of Laon and Rospigliosi in the mire.

All these reflections concurring with the loss of Mr de Lionne, who was
shatched away by a very sudden death, were strong enough to overcome the
constancy of a more patient man than the Bishop of Laon, and to kindle a choler
less susceptible of slames than his.

Some were persuaded that he would retire from Rome with his Brother the
Ambassador, as has been practiced upon like rencounters; others thought, that
the restitution of Castro would be brought upon the stage again afresh: but
they judged it more convenient to continue their instances at Court, wherein
they ran no risque: whereas by taking the other course, besides that they would
have engaged the King; they ran hazard of losing all.

They therefore patiently expected the fulfilling of the promises and
assurances that were made to them, with so much the more encouragement, that
notwithstanding the death of Mr. de Lionne, and the effects of their enemies,
yet the King still supported them with his protection. But the promotion that
was made the following winter, almost quite dashed all their hopes. For the
better understanding of this matter, we must pass to another Intrigue,

Monsieur de Bonzi, Bishop of Beziers, being removed from the Ambassie of
Venice to that of Poland, in very troublesome times, performed so good services
to that Crown, that King Casimir named him to the Cardinalship under Alexander
the VII. But that Pope, who to the day of his death, had shunned all occasions
of showing kindness to France, dying, without granting any thing to Poland, in
the last promotion which he made for Crowns, that Prelate was disappointed of
his pretensions. Under Clement the IX. the successor of Alexander, he had his
nomination renewed by the King, and the Cardinals Vrsini and Este were by very
pressing Letters from his Polonian Majesty, charged with that affair: but that
great Pope having other engagements, that insensibly drew him another way, even
to the end of his Pontificate, which lasted not full two years and a half,
matters continued as they were.

He had not hitherto made any better progress under the present Pontificat, tho
King Michael Vignovieski upon his advancement to the Crown of Poland, confirmed
the nomination of King Casimir his predecessor.

He therefore nicked his time, thinking no opportunity more proper for
succeeding in his designs than the present. His hopes were backed with many
considerations: Cardinal Altieri was solicited by the King of Poland to do
Justice to that Crown, after so many exclusions in the Promotions that had been
made at the nomination of other Princes. The Emperor had the same right to
make his instances for the Empire, because neither the one nor other had had
any Cardinals under Clement the Ninth. But that which wrought most for Mr. de
Bonzi, was, that Cardinal Altieri, though he had no inclination to give a Hat
to the Bishop of Laon, yet he was unwilling to disoblige the King of France.
What course is then taken in favor of Mr. de Bonzi? they put Cardinal Altieri
in head, that by giving Mr. de Bonzi a Hat, he will satisfy Poland, and with the
same hand give contentment to the King of France, who will have no ground to
press so much for the Bishop of Laon, when his Majesty sees one of his
Subjects, and one of his Ministers raised to the Cardinalship; that being an
Italian, and Florentin by Nation, the Spaniards will have less cause of
complaining; and that so one single Hat will be worth him three, one, which,
soon or late he must give to Mr. Bonzi, another that he was engaged to bestow
on the Bishop of Laon, and a third which the Spaniards demanded for Father
Nitard.

Some have given out, that the Adversaries of the Bishop of Laon made use of
that artifice to bafle him, and that they incited Mr. de Bonzi to make his
proposition at the Palace, the more to stir up the Spaniards, who would not
suffer the elevation of two French Prelates, advanced by Foreign Princes to
their prejudice: so that if there was any ground in that conjecture, it was not
the way to advance the affairs of Mr. de Bonzi, but to entangle him as well as
the Bishop of Laon.

Others said, that the Cardinals Borromei and Carpegna conspiring with Altieri,
devised that clutter, to give the last blow to the pretensions of the Bishop of
Laon.

However the matter was, it is certain Mr. de Bonzi at that time took very good
measures, because without much negotiation, he with three others was declared
Cardinal, in the promotion whereof we have spoken, which was made in the month
of February; the Pope having still reserved in peciore him, whom he had not
named in the former promotion.

Many people were surprised when they saw Cardinals created, and no mention
made of the Bishop of Laon: no body could tell what to say of that Mystery;
but in general there were no great matters expected for that Prelate. His
greatest mortification was to be obliged to thank the Palace for the promotion
of the Cardinal Bonzi; and to testify his joy therefore, because it was an
advantage for the Crown: yet he performed it with much constancy, and made his
private discontent give place to a public rejoicing.

Cardinal Altieri in the mean time triumphed; he persuaded himself that he had
satisfied all parties: the Spaniards, in his opinion, had nothing to demand,
seeing the Bishop of Laon was not declared Cardinal: that the King of France
would remit his solicitations, having given him a Cardinal, by satisfying the
nomination of Poland. Thus he made his Accounts, but matters will not go so:
and after the long turnings and windings that he has made, the Bishop of Laons
Hat will cost him four, two, which he has already given to Poland and the
Empire, and two, which must be given in the next promotion to the Bishop of
Laon and Father Nitard, that is to Portugal and Spain; without reckoning
another which he will be still indebted to the Crown of France in compensation
of the promotion of Nitard, which his Majesty will pretend to be made at the
nomination of Spain.

Hardly had Cardinal Altieri received the Compliments, which were made him on
all hands, upon account of the last promotion, but that he was more vigorously
than ever solicited by Portugal and France; to oblige him to make his holiness
declare in favor of the Bishop of Laon, whom he had long reserved in peciore.
They represented to him, that it was too great an amusement for a Prelate of
his merit; that though no regard were had to the instances made on his behalf,
yet it was a thing due solely to the services of the house of Vendome done for
the Holy See: they added besides the weight that the recommendation of the King
of France ought to have, who was then about to begin a War so advantageous to
Religion and the Church, by the Liberty which he was about to restore to the
Catholics in Holland, and which, by consequent, would render the Pontificat of
Clement the X. glorious to Posterity. Why should there so much difficulty be
made to fill the Sacred College with men illustrious for piety, learning and
birth, presented to the Pope by Princes, when some were clothed in purple, who
very often had no other recommendation but that of a base and servile
compliance?

Cardinal Altieri could not disguise his aversion against so many promotions,
by which he made no Creatures: if the Pope should come to die, what interest
could he make in the Conclave without Electors at his devotion? What friendship
could he find in the Cardinals that were not at all obliged to him, because he
made them against his Will? What party should he take? What assistance expect
in time of need, being at Rome without a Faction; in bad intelligence in
France; and in Spain without advancement? the Cardinalship of the Bishop of
Laon begets him an enemy in the College, and that dignity for the future will
serve only to make his enemy more powerful. The Hat of Father Nitard, which he
cannot refuse to the Queen Regent of Spain, raises him as many enemies in that
Kingdom, as Father Nitard has envyers, that is to say, Don John of Austria, and
the most part of the Grandees at Court, who obliged the Queen to send him away.
These reflections strangely tossed the mind of Altieri: but he must at length
condescend; he is too far engaged; there are places void; and he is urged
without intermission.

In fine, after that the Bishop of Laon had languished in expectation almost
two years, he is at last made Cardinal; and to justify the good intentions of
his holiness, it is declared, that he is the person whom the Pope has had in
peciore almost a year; and so he is comforted by giving him the precedence
before those that were created since that time.

This is the upshot of that so perplexed Intrigue; and, should we tell the
thoughts of the most disinterested of the Court of Rome; we might acknowledge
with them, that the Nephew of a Pope might have come off with more satisfaction
to all parties, and less disadvantage to himself. He might, from the beginning,
by granting a Hat to the nomination of Portugal, have done somewhat for the
advantage of the Church with that Crown, and gotten from thence a considerable
sum of the Revenues of the Bishoprics, which had been put under Sequestration
during the long Vacation of that Country, to be employed in the necessities of
Christendom against the Turck, and the Spaniards could have found nothing to
blame in that conduct.

Next he might, upon the resignation that Cardinal Rospigliosi made, have given
that Hat to the Bishop of Laon, and all men would have applauded such an action.

In fine, in the promotion of the Bishop of Laon, when he came at length to
have him declared Cardinal, he might have shown some forwardness to make that
resolution seem more conspicuous and free, which from the beginning to the end
appeared all along forced and constrained.

But either his engagement with the Spaniards, to whom he owed his quality of
Nephew, more than to any other, or his own interest, to make himself creatures,
inclined him to do so: yet, in spite of his teeth, he saw four Hats go out of
his hands, for which no man was obliged to him.

The Cardinalship of the Bishop of Laon put off the promotion of D. Felix
Rospigliosi, who had generously made over his place to him, so that France was
obliged to solicit Cardinal Altieri, that so soon as he could he would have
respect to the House of Rospigliosi. And in soliciting of that Affair, the
Duke and Cardinal d'Estrees gave the Palace no time to breath.

Fortune, it seems, never favored the Nephew of a Pope, so much as Altieri;
there have not been observed in many Ages, so many places vacant in the sacred
College in so short a time, as have been in the Pontificat of Clement the X.
This has given occasion to many of the Court of Rome to say, That a Just
Judgment of Heaven was to be seen in the death of so many Cardinals, because
having chosen Clement the X. Pope, in the thoughts that he could not reign
long, it seemed that in a short time he should bury all those that had chosen
him.

In less than three years, more than Fifteen were already dead, so that since
the last promotion in a short time there were places to be filled. One was
demanded for the Abbot Felix Rospigliosi, and the merit of his family
concurring with the Instances of the King of France; and, the Obligations that
the Pope had to the memory of his Uncle, carried it at length over the conduct
of Altieri, who was wholly addicted to the making of his Family, and profiting
of the Benefices of the Cardinals that died, for the use of himself and his
Nephews, as he would have been willing to have disposed of their Hats to men at
his devotion, if he had been suffered to do so.

The Joy of the People, and of all honest men, upon the promotion of the Abbot
Rospigliosi, is unexpressible, by reason of his good qualities, and the
veneration wherein his Uncle Clement the Ninth was held: but they would not
endure that Cardinal Altieri should give him a Hat without a Hatband, to speak
in the Italian manner, that is to say, without crowning his merit with some
Office or Benefice, to maintain his Dignity. And especially when D. Vincent
Rospigliosi died, it was thought strange that he invested him not in the places
of his Brother, having given the commandery of Santa Euphemia, which D. Vincent
enjoyed, to a grand Nephew, son to Don Gasparo Altieri, who was but then in the
cradle.

These were the chief promotions of that Reign. However there are others not a
little curious; but, seeing to discourse of them it behoved me to give an
account of the Present State of the Court of Rome, it would carry me too far
beyond my design.

CHAP. IV. The Intrigues of Cardinal Paluzzi Altieri with Princes and their
Ministers.
SInce the Popes began to divide the cares of the Papacy with their Kinsmen;
these new Hercules's have found the weight of so sparkling a heaven very easy
and supportable: they were called but to give a hand, and they have thrust so
far in as to lend a shoulder for supporting the burden of that Great Machine.

The Popes, who are often elected in so great an age, or of so weak a
constitution, that they can have no other thoughts but to spend the rest of
their days in quiet, are easily inclined to leave the management of affairs to
those that are nearest them, in prospect that these employments make a
settlement for their families, and procure them alliances, not only with all
Ecclesiastic persons, but likewise with the Princes and Soverains of all
Christendom, whom they may oblige.

The charges of the Roman Court are divided amongst the Kindred of the Pope;
the Seculars commonly divide amongst them the Government of the Ecclesiastic
State; the nearest and dearest Relation will be made General of the Holy
Church; another, Governor of the Castle of St. Angelo; another, General of the
Galleys and of the Navy; and so charges are given according as they are more or
less considerable to those who are differently favored and esteemed.

But, the most important Office is that of Cardinal Nephew, or Cardinal
Regnant: he it is that makes the fortune of the other Relations; he is always
where the Pope is, if we had not rather say, that the Pope is always where the
Nephew is: he disposes of him absolutely: nothing moves in the Palace but by
his order, whether in regard of the Officers of the Palace, or of those that
are abroad: he is the head in all Counsels, present at all Congregations; he
regulates the days of the Consistories, of the Chapels, Visits, and
Audiences: and, in a word, it is on him that the Pope relies in all matters.

In so much that the Nephew of a Pope had need of a great sufficiency, wisely
to manage all Affairs.

But, there is nothing more essential to his conduct, than to be able to take
right measures with the Ministers of Crowns and Princes: it is that which makes
the glory of a Pontificat, all the honor of his Ministry, all the Grandeur
and Joy of Rome, and very often the repose of Christendom.

If we should reflect on the reign of several Popes in these last ages, we
would find the truth of this verified: we might observe some Pontificats full
of splendor and glory, and others buried in obscurity and lowness, some in an
amiable tranquillity, calm, and peace; others in troublesome broiles,
disturbances, and continual discontents: and if we inquire into the cause of
this, we shall find, that all depends on the genius of the Nephews Regnant, and
their particular conduct with Princes.

It is really difficult for a Popes Nephew to be able to observe always just
measures with so many Ministers of a different humor, who have such different
interests, who live at Rome in continual jealousies, and who labor always to
draw some advantage from the Holy See, by any way whatsoever, either in
rendering themselves useful, or in setting themselves off more than others.

There is no Catholic Prince but entertains at Rome, either an Ambassador,
Resident, or some Agent; and though their obedience and respect engaged them
not to maintain as much as may be, a good correspondence with the common
Father, yet they would in policy be obliged to do it, that they may in the
Court of Rome defend the interests of the Clergy and Monasteries, which make a
considerable part of their States, and support the affairs which daily happen
amongst their Subjects in matter of Conscience.

This is not the place to examine the interests of Sovereigns in that Court; or
to compare them together, that we may judge of the conduct of the Ministers
that are entrusted with them; that alone would make a Book big enough. I only
say, that of all that are employed for the affairs of Countries submitted to
the Holy See, there are none that make any considerable sigure, in respect of
the Ambassadors of France and Spain.

The Emperor commonly is satisfied with a Protector for the proposition of
Churches; and if he have any urgent matter to be proposed to his Holiness, he
does it either by the Ministry of a Cardinal, or by some Envoy Extraordinary.

Poland observes the same Maxim; and testifies either so much obedience, or so
much indifferency, as to all that passes at Rome; that the King does not so
much as name Cardinals of his Nation, though he might in his turn take the same
course as other Crowns do.

Portugal keeps there for the most part a Resident; and since the Pope was
necessitated to own the separation of that State from Spain, there have been
but two Ambassadors from Portugal, who vanished almost as soon as they appeared.

Amongst all the Princes of Italy, the Republic of Venice cultivates most the
intelligence of the Court of Rome, and next the great Duke of Tuscany; but more
because of the vicinity of their countries, than the importance of affairs that
they have there to manage.

So that, we may say, that the Kings of France and Spain, are the two only
crowned heads, who concern themselves in good earnest in the affairs of Rome.

But with this difference; that the most Christian King acts with Rome, as a
Friend, who has no other obligation on him but that of civility and
complaisance, by reason of the liberties and immunities of the Church of France.

When on the other hand his Cathololick Majesty carries it with Rome as an
interested Associate, because he is closely tied and engaged to it by the
Tribunal of the Inquisition, and by the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, which gives
absolute authority to the Nuncio's and Judges of the Church, throughout the
whole extent of his Dominions.

And that is the reason that the differences of France with Rome exceed not a
kind of dryness that often happens amongst Friends upon occasion of some
grudge, and which commonly yields to the pleasure of a reconciliation. On the
contrary, Spain either never breaks with Rome, or their ruptures are attended
with some great blow and noise, as happens betwixt persons interessed.

It may be said, that the Jealousies of these two Kings, has some Analogy with
that of Jacob and Esau: these two children endeavored who could most, to
attract all the Blessing of Isaac their Father, they made use of all kind of
artifice to supplant one another, and to make their condition better.

And the Pope is in no less perplexity than the good old man Isaac was, how to
content his two children. I will not enter upon the full application of the
comparison: it must not be said that this common Father is so dim-sighted as
Isaac was, that he cannot distinguish the Merit of these two Sons; that he
knows not him to whom God has designed the birthright; that he perceives not
for which of the two it is, that their Mother has greatest sympathy and
inclination; that is, whom the Church has cherished most, and to whom she has
always given the preference: the Pope needs not to feel the hands of Jacob,
that he may know him from Esau, he knows it sufficiently by many brave actions,
from which the holy See has drawn most considerable advantages: he knows very
well for whom he ought to declare himself, and to whom he ought to give the
greater share of his blessings. But the good Father fears to foment Jealousies,
and to put division betwixt his two sons by an open Declaration.

This is a figure of what daily happens at Rome; the Pope can do nothing in
favor or consideration of France, but that he is burdened with the complaints
of Spain: And seeing the Catholic King is stronger in Italy, than his most
Christian Majesty, by reason of the Kingdom of Naples, and Duchy of Milan; so
has he a better share of the blessings of the Earth, though with reluctance of
the Holy Father; that is to say, he carries it by politic interest, and the
Pope must of necessity be a Spaniard in appearance, though he be French in his
heart.

We might likewise add that Esau was more useful to Isaac than Jacob; that he
brought his Father daily some prey from Hunting; that he labored to satisfy
the appetite of the old man; whilst Jacob was wholly taken up about the affairs
of his Family, and looking after his Flocks, without withdrawing from the
bosom, or sight of his Mother: So the King of Spain daily obliges the Pope by
great sums of Money, which Rome draws out of his Dominions; whereas the French
King has no other aim but to please the Church, to assist her inclinations, to
extend and increase the number of her subjects, and in fine, to maintain the
Family that depends thereon.

Having cast an eye upon these reflections, it may be easily judged, in what
manner the Nephew of a Pope ought to order his Conduct with the Ministers of
Crowns.

He may lay down for maxims, that the intelligence of the Spaniards with Rome,
is founded on Interest and Fear, that they never ask any thing which is not to
be suspected; that they use endeavors to procure the same liberties as France
has; that they cannot attain to that, without shaking off the yoke of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which they have so often attempted; that most part
of their demands are hurtful enterprises; and that by consequence, nothing is
to be granted to them, unless it be first well considered, if any prejudice may
redound from it, to the authority of the Apostolic See.

That on the other hand, the correspondence of France with Rome, has no other
foundation than love and respect; that their liberties, immunities, and
privileges, put them in a condition of not having most times their recourse to
Rome, but purely out of deference and respect; that these liberties free their
demands from the suspicion of abuse or noveltie; and that if the King or his
Subjects make application to the Holy See; there is commonly more to be got, by
granting, than by refusing their demands, because, that in granting them, they
make matters pass for favors, which otherwise they pretend to have by justice,
when they come with any reluctance.

That other Princes in imitation of the Spaniards, do all they can to enlarge
their liberties, and especially the Princes of Italy, with whom closer measures
may be taken, because they are in greater dependence on the Holy See.

It would he no hard matter for me to show in the sequel of this History, that
these maxims are very essential for the conduct of affairs in the Court of
Rome; but I have confined my self to the affairs of the present Pontificat.

Let us see then what measures Cardinal Altieri has taken in his Ministry with
Princes.

He had great advantages for succeeding in it, he was become Nephew to a very
aged Pope, of a mild and commodious humor, easy to be governed: he had the
example of a glorious and wise Pontificat, under Clement the IX. who made it
questioned, whether he was more French or Spaniard; but who left no doubt but
that he was all to all: the private interest of his establishment busied him
not much, seeing the fairest Dignities showred down upon his head, and the best
bits fell into his mouth, as the Pamerlengat, and great Vicarship of Rome, with
many considerable benefices, by the death of the Cardinals Ginetti, and Antonio
Barbarini, besides the Archbishopric of Ravenna; wherewith the Pope provided
him, at the opening of the Conclave. There was none at Court able to give him
jealousy, or to thwart his projects; the death of Cardinal Antonio left him
quickly master of Rome; Cardinal Este, who alone could give the Popes Nephews
enough to do, was retired home to Modena, where in a short time he ended his
troubles with his days; Cardinal Gabrieli was removed, as we have said before;
the alliance of his House strengthened his authority; and none were in the
Palace but his own Creatures. There were no great affairs in agitation at Rome;
and the Ministry of the three principal Catholic crowned Heads was discharged
by Prelates, to wit, by the Cardinal Lantgrave of Hesse, the Bishop of Laon, and
Father Nitard: Christian Princes were in peace the two first years of his
Ministry, except the King of Poland, who was engaged in war with the Turk; and
if the King of France was then thinking of a War against the Hollanders, it was
the fairest conjuncture in the world for the Nephew of a Pope, to immortalize
the memory of the Pontificat, by rendering it advantageous to the Church, and
happy for Catholics: and he had occasion enough to please many men, by the
frequent vacancies of so many places in the sacred College.

Here was a fair field to reap in; who does not now expect honorable Legations
for Christian Leagues, and Croisado's?

But that is the least thing in the thoughts of Cardinal Altieri; he was
observed from the very beginning, to be very little addicted to affairs abroad,
which be remitted wholly almost to the cares of Cardinal Frederick Borromei,
then Secretary of State. He only applied himself to the building of a sumptuous
Palace in Isola, to procure rich Furniture for it, and to manage intelligences
at Rome for Marriages, Charges, and other small affairs that concerned either
the Palace, or the Ecclesiastic State.

Nothing that is great, was to be seen in his Projects, nothing high in his
Conduct.

Some were pleased to say, that he was but as yet a Novice in foreign affairs;
that he had no experience in the Courts, and interests of Princes; that he had
not advanced to the Sovereign power by Nunciatures and Legations; that he
became Cardinal, by buying the place of Auditor of the Chamber; that he was
made Nephew by a Caprice of fortune, and that so he could not acquire a perfect
knowledge of what is fit to be known, for entering into commerce with Crowns;
that it behoved him to wait till business formed him, and rendered him capable
of greater matters.

Others to excuse him, gave it out that Cardinal Borromei endeavored secretly
to discredit him with the Pope and Sovereigns, that so he might render himself
more necessary to the Church, and gain the good Will and Liking of foreign
Princes; that Borromei easily engaged the Pope in matters which he knew were
not agreeable to Altieri, to draw upon him the displeasure of Princes, by the
repugnancy that he would show, when the matter was of putting his Holiness
pleasure in execution; that he laid the blame of all the dissiculties which the
Ministers met with at the Palace, in prosecution of their Masters affairs upon
the Nephew; that Cardinal Altieri perceived it, but that he chose rather to be
a public sacrifice, than to displease the Pope, by open resentments against
Borromei, for whom his Holiness had esteem and friendship: and by such
discourses they excused his conduct.

Some there were, that would have had the indifferency of Cardinal Altieri,
pass for a politic Fetch: they said that Rome used first to be solicited,
before it meddled in the affairs of Princes; that Innocent the X. found the
benefit of following that maxim, (Che il mondo si governa da se;) that the
world should govern it self, and that the only way is to let it go as it goes;
what measures were to be taken with the Crown of Spain, under the Government of
a Regent, a Pupil, and several Ministers, who had not too good intelligence
among themselves? what was to be done with the most Christian King, unless it
were to attract the jealousy of all other Christian Princes, who could not
already endure his too great power? In a word, that the Court of Rome could
gain nothing with Potentates when they prevented them; that on the contrary
they would make their advantage with them by valuing dear their correspondence
to the desires of his Holiness; as they had many instances on several
occasions, where the Holy See had always remitted of its Rights and Authority,
by Indulgences, Favors, and privileges, which it had been obliged to grant to
several Princes.

So that he did very well not to meddle in the interests and affairs of Princes.

But to speak the truth, these reflections had but little force with knowing
men, to justify the honor of Altieri.

In the first place, though he had not passed through the employments which
prepare men for the management of foreign affairs, yet it is known that the
Italian Nation has naturally a great talent for Negotiation, and that they
wonderfully succeed in it, provided they apply themselves a little thereunto:
other Nephews have been known young enough, who left a glorious memory of their
Ministry, and who had with honor dispatched greatest affairs in most
troublesome times, as the Farnese's, the Borromei's, Aldobrandini's, Borgheses,
and the Barberini's.

As to what was said of Cardinal Borromei, Secretary of State; it is certain,
Altieri had no much liking to him, perhaps, because he was a man of too great
merit, that he alone clouded him with the Pope, and was the only person in whom
his Holiness put greatest confidence, as he had sufficiently testified, by
honoring him with the charge of Secretary of State, and shortly after with a
Cardinals Hat: but however Borromei was a Minister subordinate to the Nephew,
without whom, by consequence, he could do or act nothing; and matters abroad
going ill, the fault would be imputed to none but the chief mover; besides,
since the death of Borromei, matters are gone far worse than before.

As to the Romish maxim, of letting the world go as it goes, and the risque
that the Holy See runs, of losing rather than gaining, when that Court
entangles it self in the affairs of Princes, many things might be said, but it
is sufficient at present to averr openly, that that maxim is low and unworthy
of a Universal Bishop, who by that very name is obliged to take care of the
necessities of Christendom; that it is a pernicious maxim, introduced only by
those, or for those, who mind nothing in the Papacy, but that which flatters
Vanity, Avarice, and Sensuality: that it is profane, and for those only, of
whom the Royal Prophet speaks with disdain, in laboribus hominum non sunt; who
avoid taking a share in the labor and care, to which humane state is
obnoxious; that the Holy See never prospered so well, as with Emperors and
Kings, to whom it has had its recourse; whence came the Patrimony of St.
Peter? from whence the Hexarchat of Ravenna and Romania? from whence all the
Lands and Territories of the Ecclesiastic State? from whence, in a word, the
maintaining of the obedience, and homage rendered to the Church? if not from
their correspondence and good intelligence with Christian Princes? what have
the Popes ever given them of theirs? What have Monarchs ever demanded of them,
unless it be some indults for providing and presenting to the Benefices of
their Dominions? Some Tithes for the pressing necessities of Religion? Some
Indulgences for the edification of their people? But what Benefices are better
filled than those to which these Princes present? What Money better employed
than what has been granted them upon the Rents of the Church? And what
Spiritual Treasures better bestowed, than what has been given to people who
have so much respect and veneration for Holy things? so that all these shadows
disappearing, and these pretexts ceasing in the Nephew of a Pope, and
especially as to Cardinal Altieri, it was concluded that for great affairs his
Talent was not great; that all his ambition was confined to the making of his
Family by Romish Intrigues; and that he had no stomach as the Spaniards say,
Por digerir los boccones grandes, to digest great pieces.

In effect, if we impartially consider, either that he has let slip so many
fair opportunities of signalizing himself, or that he has brought upon himself
so many unlucky hits, without thinking on them; we may easily judge, that he
has been as indifferent for the one, as improvident against the others. Let us
see then both the chief opportunities of renoun, which he has failed to
embrace; and the occasions of disquiet and perplexity, into which he has
thrown himself, that we may make good a truth which will justify a great many,
without doing wrong to his conduct.

We must lay down for a ground then, the state of the affairs of Europe, at the
beginning of that Pontificat, to wit, France and Spain at peace together, the
enterprises of the Turk against Poland; and the preparations of France against
Holland.

What projects might Cardinal Altieri have had in that conjuncture? or rather
what might he not have undertaken? if the matter was to assist Poland against
the Turk; what means were wanting to him, Peace being between the Crowns of
France and Spain? or if that peace seemed overcast by some clouds of jealousies
and fears, there was no difficulty to confirm a serenity in all the climats of
Christendom, before these clouds gathered more, and grew thicker, and before
they broke out in thunder and lightning in many places of the world, as since
they have done.

What advances did he make for the assistance of Poland? what Legations for the
union of Christian Princes? what Negotiations to make them turn their Arms
against the Common Enemy? he made no other step, than the raising of vast sums
of Money of the Benefices of Italy, whereof he very slowly sent to the
Republic of Poland, Fifty thousand Crowns. A Cardinal of great virtue,
scandalized at the lukewarmness of Altieri, sent him a considerable sum of his
own Money to awaken him, and to excite him to make some brisk attempt, in
favor of a Kingdom exposed as a prey to Infidels; but that secret reproof of
backwardness, made no great impression on him. Caminitz was already carried by
the Turks, before the Poles were in any condition to make head against them;
and to complete their misfortunes, King Michael being dead, the Kingdom was
divided about the election of a successor to the Crown. Cardinal Altieri
bestirred himself a little, but at the instigation of the house of Austria, and
to the end he might back the designs of the Spaniards, who were for Prince
Charles of Lorrain his succeeding to the Crown, in hopes of making him marry
the Queen Dowager of Poland, Sister to the Emperor; He caused great offers to
be made of Money and assistance, that he might overcome the difficulty, which
the Poles might make, by reason of the lowness of Prince Charles, as to
fortune; who depended in a great measure on the Court of Vienna, and who was
not like to have means of supporting the Crown under the pressing Circumstances
i^ lay under. Monsieur Bonvizi the Nuncio, was the life of his designs in
Poland, as he had formerly been at Cologne: that Prelate who has been always
reputed to have a great Heart and small Head, was as succesless in the one
place, as he had been in the other; there was but little regard had for the
Packt-Offices of Rome: the Nuncio's proposition was laid aside, and John
Sobieski was chose a King, a man capable to maintain the Crown, both by his
consummated prudence, and Heroic courage.

So that the whole Intrigue was useless, and served only to disgrace the Holy
See, in the person of Altieri, to beget an aversion in several Princes
concerned in that Declaration, and to expose his Ministry to the compassion of
his friends, and to the derision and hatred of his adversaries.

In truth, if we should enlarge in our reflections upon that Conduct, his
measures would seem very obscure: what obliged him in an affair of that
consequence, to transgress the bounds of Neutrality, which renders the Pope
alike venerable to all parties; which makes him Umpire amongst all Christian
Princes; and which places him in the midst of Sovereigns, as the Sun is among
the Planets, to give impartially his light to all the celestial bodies,
according as they draw near, or are at distance from him, for the different
participation thereof?

Or if he had a mind to leave that neutrality to gain a Crowned Head, why did
he not assure himself well first of the success of his enterprise? it is true,
if it had succeeded, it would have been of great advantage to him; but he had
but few instances of free people, that have ever been willing to accept of a
King from the hands of Popes. If they have sometimes given Kings to the kingdom
of Naples, they had the Sovereign Dominion; but he had less reason to promise
himself that from the Republic of Poland, which professes a liberty so nice,
that it will not so much as accept of Cardinals of that Nation from Rome,
because that Dignity puts them on a dependence on foreign Princes.

Insomuch, that they who otherwise know the humor of Cardinal Altieri, not to
be very undertaking, and that he is more ready to Ward than make a Pass, could
find no other cause of that procedure, but an excessive compliance with the
Spaniards; wherein he may have this comfort, that he is not the only Minister
or Kinsman of a Pope, who has been out of his measures, in following too
implicitly the counsels of the Spaniards.

After the election of the King of Poland, one may imagine that that Prince had
but little obligation to the Court of Rome, and especially to Cardinal Altieri;
so that it was rationally to be believed, that this Nephew in good policy,
yea, even in civility and decorum, would take all ways to procure the good Will
of a Sovereign, who had some reason not to be well satisfied with him, because
his Faction was against him in the Diet,

His Majesty of Poland gave him a fair opportunity for this; by naming the
Bishop of Marseilles to a Cardinalship, who would not be persuaded that there
should immediately be dispatched a Gentleman of his Holiness's, or Cardinal
Altier's Chamber, to carry a Cardinals Hat to the King of Poland, or be
disposed of by him, as he thought best, that by such a courteous carriage he
might gain the favors of so generous a Prince, and so useful as the King of
Poland is, in a State where there are different opinions about matters of
Religion.

But Cardinal Altieri's eyes are still shut, he cannot but listen to the
Spaniards; they make him believe that the election of General Sobieski to be
King of Poland, cannot subsist; that it was not formal, that confusion and
precipitancy has more concurred to it, than mature deliberation; that it will
meet with opposition; that those of Lithuania have not given their consent
thereto: that that Prince is married, and that the Republic will have a Lord
that may marry the Queen Dowager of Poland; that the Poles are still doubtful
whether that election will stand good; that they are divided among themselves;
and that they may every minute change their resolution: these were the
amusements, whereof the Spaniards made use in general, to dissuade Cardinal
Altieri from complying with the new King of Poland: and as to the particular of
the nomination of the Bishop of Marseilles, they insinuate to him, that France
endeavors to get into the possession of having Cardinals at their devotion, by
the nomination of, foreign Crowns; that he is obliged in interest to oppose
such an abuse; that the Pope ought to observe an equality betwixt Spain and
France; that the Catholic King will have ground of being offended, if by such
ways French Cardinals be daily made at Rome; that Poland may be satisfied, that
the promotion of Cardinal Bonzi has been suffered to pass without obstruction;
that if the Bishop of Marseilles be made Cardinal, Spain will pretend to the
same Compensation as in the promotion of the Bishop of Laon; that is, that they
must likewise have a Cardinal; that nevertheless, to satisfy the King of
Poland, and not to reject his proposal, he might willingly accept the
nomination for any other person his Majesty pleased, excepting a Frenchman.

Cardinal Altieri easily embraced the Spaniards Counsel, he had a great
inclination for them; and though the Bishop of Marseilles in his journey into
Italy, (whither the King had sent him, to endeavor an accommodation betwixt the
great Duchess of Tuscany and the great Duke her Husband) made a progress to
Rome, and by his good qualities left favorable impressions for his fortune;
nevertheless he had the ill luck to have been named by a King for whom the
Spaniards had no liking; in a time when the Nephew Regnant was in very bad
correspondence with the Ministers of France, and in a conjuncture when Cardinal
Vrsini Protector of Poland, was not in too much credit at the Palace, because
he had engaged in the Intrigues of the Marriage of the Princess Cesarini.

Altieri then took the course the Spaniards had proposed to him; he wrote a
Letter to the King of Poland, sending therewith a Brief to his Holiness, in
which, having accepted of his nomination, he prayed him to afford his Holiness
the means of giving him content, as it was his purpose and desire to do,
without mentioning the cause that opposed the fulfilling of his demands, as to
the Bishop of Marseilles: to these Letters he added private Instructions to the
Nuncio, that he should acquaint the King, that the Jealousy of the Spaniards
was an impediment to the promotion of the Bishop of Marseilles; that his
Majesty would oblige his Holiness, if he would cast his eyes upon some Neutral
Person, with whom all parties might be satisfied; that that condescension would
still engage his Holiness to use endeavors for the ease of the Kingdom of
Poland from the pressures under which it lay.

The King was very ill pleased at the way how the Court of Rome used him: it
seemed strange to him how these men, who set always to work to advance another
to the Crown, should have still the Countenance to refuse him a Hat at the
instigation of those who were jealous of his greatness; that they had the
baseness to barter and truck with him by selfish propositions below the
greatness of his mind, as well as the dignity of the Apostolic See: that they
should take the liberty to contradict the choice he had made of one who was
very dear unto him upon many considerations, and who ought to be more so to the
Court of Rome by his merit and virtue. He reremained constant in the Nomination
of the Bishop of Marseilles; and Altieri to this present has forborne as much as
he could, to give him that reasonable satisfaction, by protracting the
promotion of Crowns.

There has been nothing conspicuous in all this conduct of Altieri with Poland,
but a passion to content the Spaniards, or at least a desire not to displease
them; and though that has some color in the eyes of those who endeavor to
excuse him, saying, It is impossible for a Popes Nephew to preserve the favor
of all parties; that it is sufficient to adhere to the chief branches of the
Tree, and to keep himself in good intelligence with Spain, who have more means
of offending, and less facility to forget and pardon: yet more quaint
Politicians could have given a counsel, whereby Altieri might have had the
advantage, of contenting his Majesty of Poland, without offending the
Spaniards; and that is, to have persuaded the Pope to have prevented the demand
of the King of Poland, upon his assumption to the Crown, by offering him a Hat,
to be disposed of in favors of whom he pleased: the Spaniards would have had
nothing to say against that engagement; and then if the King of Poland had
named the Bishop of Marseilles, their mouths would have been stopped, by
telling them, that the Pope could not excuse himself from fulfilling what he
had absolutely promised, not foreseeing that his Majesty of Poland would
nominate the Bishop of Marseilles.

But, at Rome, they want not skill to find out biasses, when they have a mind
to do things with good grace; nor excuses neither when they have any
reluctance: and as to what is said, touching the difficulty that the Nephew of
a Pope meets with, in giving content to all parties, I could make appear, that
there is nothing more easy for an impartial and unprejudiced Nephew, whereof
we have fresh instances in the Pontificat of Clement the Ninth, and in the
conduct of his Relations.

We shall leave it to the World to Judge of the whole piece by this Pattern,
and to time to discover the bad texture of it; that we may proceed to make
reflections on some other occasions, wherein that Cardinal Nephew might have
made appear his zeal and wisdom, and by illustrious actions, have raised the
glory of his Unckles Papacy, and the honor of his own Ministry.

There was no man but knew what great preparations the French King made for a
War against the Hollanders, that he might endeavor to reduce that Republic to
their natural duty, of acknowledging, that in part it holds of his Crown, both
the ground of its liberty, and the establishment of its fortune. It is likewise
known, that with the same hand the King would restore the liberty of the
Catholic Religion, in a Country where it is had in horror.

In fine, the effects of this was shortly seen, by a great many Churches
reconsecrated, both in the Towns and Country of four Provinces, conquered
within the space of a few weeks.

All Catholics triumphed at the progress of the most Christian Kings Arms; and
many gave public thanks to Heaven for the success.

What is it Cardinal Altieri will not do, to give marks of his Joy and
Acknowledgments? What honor will accrue to his Ministry, and his Unckles
Pontificat, when succeeding ages shall see in the Annalls, Holland reduced to
the obedience of the Holy See, or at least the liberty of Religion
reestablished under Pope Clement the X, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ so
sensibly enlarged under the reign of Altieri? What Festivals, What Public
Rejoycings, What Inscriptions, What Medals, to render such actions immortal? if
Pope Pius the Fifth left engraven on Medalls the Victory of Lepanto, which cost
so much to the Holy See and to all Christendom, without much fruit: What will
not Clement the X. do, for the swift course of so many Victories with so little
blood, attended with considerable advantages? If Clement the Eighth filled Rome
with Marbles, which carried the memory of the return of Henry the Fourth into
the bosom of the Church; What ought not Clement the Tenth to do for the
reduction of Holland? If Pope Barbarini abridged the Ocean into a Basin, in
form of a Bark, which he caused to be made at the foot of Mount Pincius, where
stands a Convent of French Minims, in memory of the taking of Rochel; What
Illustrious Monuments will not Pope Altieri leave to posterity, not for one
single Town, but for so many conquered Provinces? In fine, if Popes, in
conjunctures of less importance and glory, have contributed to their uttermost
for the maintaining of arms, whenever they thought Religion therein
concerned; either in furnishing of men and Money; or else by Legations, wherein
they employed Prelates of greatest worth: if their Nephews have abandoned their
own interests, if they have gone themselves in person; What efforts are there
not to be expected from Cardinal Altieri, for advancing the progress of Holland?

Let us observe his conduct. In the year 1671, the most Christian King sends
the Abbot Bardi-magalotti to the Princes of Italy, to treat with them about the
raising of an Italian Regiment, to be entertained by his most Christian Majesty
amongst his foreign Forces: I might say somewhat of the different dispositions
he found several Princes in, according as they stood variously affected toward
that proposition, led by the Maxims of a Country, where Sovereigns are
obliged to be cautious in their measures for preserving their liberty, without
offending of those who are more powerful than themselves.

But we shall handle that at length in a separate treaty. The Abbot Bardi
without doubt might expect any thing of Cardinal Altieri; he could not be
ignorant of the design these Forces were to be employed in; and what secrecy
soever was observed in the Kings Counsils, yet all Italy was already filled
with a rumor, that the cloud that was a gathering would break out upon
Holland. Nevertheless he had the greatest difficulty in the world to obtain
leave to leavie men in the Ecclesiastic State; nor was it granted but on most
disadvantageous conditions, because no Tradesman, Master, or Journey-man, could
be listed, nor were Drums to be beaten up. So that there remained none to be
listed but Vagabonds, who might safely run away, after they had taken the Kings
Money, the Authority of the King having no force there: the rest of the Princes
of Italy following the example of Rome; and having suffered the Levies to be
made within their States, upon the same and no other conditions, it is no
wonder if Italy was quickly full of deserters, and that they who remained, did
afterward so little honor to their Nation.

From that very time it was perceived, that with reluctance he concurred with
the designs of the King, so far from showing himself forward to second them;
and that the Jealousy of the Spaniards prevailed more on him, than all the
considerations of the glory and advantage of the Holy See. I wave the artifices
that were employed to dissuade many Gentlemen, who on such occasion would have
been willing to have served their apprentiship in the trade of War under such a
King; some of whom I know and could name.

But let us trace the Politics of Cardinal Altieri: perhaps he has done
nothing hitherto, because he knew not where all the preparations of the War
were to be employed; he is to be excused, the King conceales his projects, all
Sovereigns are in suspense expecting the issue. Who knows but these numerous
Forces may pass the Alps? if that Fleet may not bend its course toward Italy?

It may be he reserves himself to make some generous declaration, when he shall
see the King march against Holland; when he shall understand that he causes
Churches to be opened and consecrated in so many conquered places; when he
shall be informed that Ecclesiastic Princes are restored to their States,
which were usurped by a Protestant Republic: then some signal mark of
resentment is to be expected from the Court of Rome, and some great testimony
of correspondence with the actions of a Monarch, that labors more for the
Church than for himself.

In a small time they had the news at Rome of all that I have said of the
progress of the French Forces, but nothing of what might have been expected
from Cardinal Altieri appears: The French Ambassador daily carried him the
news of some Conquest, and he seemed insensible at the general good fortune of
all Catholics: he understood that the Waters made way to the Israelites; that
the Egyptians were buried in them; that the enemies fled before the face of the
God of Israel; and he was either deaf or dumb, as to Songs of Joy, and public
Thanksgivings.

He stops not there, he cannot disguise his secret reluctance to the advices he
receives of so many Victories; he lessens the glory of them as much as possibly
he can: and had he had power over the same that was published by all mouths, he
would have condemned it to perpetual silence.

These are no exaggerations; they are real truths, all the Court of Rome, and
all Italy it self knew what happened one day, when he was told of the passage
over the Rhine, and of the brave exploits that accompanied, and followed that
famous action, He threw it away as a Grecian Fable, and would not believe one
word of it: He said publicly that there was no such thing; and that he had
better intelligence how affairs went. The French Ambassador was offended at
this obstinacy: A Minister of that quality is obliged to make good what he
says: and seeing his steps are well observed, especially at Rome; so ought he
to take good heed how he walks: it would be a dishonor to his Character to
give out any thing that must be again retracted; though the Spaniards are not
so scrupulous in such matters, witness the news that Cardinal Nitard a few
Months ago brought to the Palace, of an imaginary Victory obtained by the
Spaniards in the Sicilian Sea.

It behoved then the Duke D'Estrees to know of Cardinal Altieri himself, from
whence he could have news contrary to what he had told. Altieri was in a puzle:
on the one side he was unwilling to discover a little commerce that he
entertained with Bonvisi, at that time Nuncio at Cologne: on the other side, he
must satisfy the Ambassador at France, who complained, that there was so
little esteem testified for actions that were so advantageous to Religion; and,
Who would have made appear his Resentments, if he had not had the satisfaction
which he justly pretended to have: In so much, that Altieri was obliged to show
him a Letter of the Nuncio Bonvisi, by which was discovered their Plot, and
little Intrigue, to lessen the Reputation of the Kings actions, and to put off
the public Rejoycings: that Letter came not into the hands of any man, but the
substance of it was known; it spoke not of the particular actions of the times,
but only bore, that all that was published of the Grandeurs of France, was not
to be believed; that his Conquests commonly would but prove a blaze of Straw,
and that there was not much to be built upon them; that all the Princes of
Germany began already to stir; that the King of England would withdraw; that
Spain and the whole Empire would unite, and that so all the progresses of the
most Christian King were like to turn to smoke. This Letter of Bonvisi made the
Sentiments of Altieri apparent enough, because a Minister at a distance from
his Master, makes it his whole study to second his thoughts, but that appeared
more clearly afterward; for Bonvisi finding himself charged by Altieri, was
constrained, for his own Justification, to say, that he did nothing but by his
order, and direction.

The truth is, the actions of the most Christian King, especially in the first
Campaign against Holland, will hardly be believed in future ages: but it will
be still more incredible that the Nephew of a Pope has been so insensible of
the great good that redounded therefrom to the Holy See, that he would receive
the news with indifference, nay even with reluctance; that he suffered it to be
said in Rome, that the Popes Palace was Dutchified, for that was the word all
the Town over; though it did not in the least move him, because he was
conscious to himself that he gave ground for such a report; that he was not
sensible of his own, nor of his Unckles honor; that he had sacrificed it to
the Spaniards who were Jealous of the greatness of France. Some excused him
upon the account of the bad intelligence that was betwixt him and the Duke
d'Estree, they said, that these two did what they could to serve one another
daily some trick, as a mark of their spite. But, What policy is there in that,
not to distinguish the private aversion that one has for a Minister, from the
obligation that is due to the Master whom he serves? Would he not have done far
better both for the Pope and himself, to have entertained an intelligence with
the most Christian King, notwithstanding all the discontents that he pretended
to receive from the Ambassador? Was not that a powerful means to have thrown
the wrong upthe Ambassador himself, which has succeeded with other Nephews,
when they had any variance with his Majesty's Ministers.

It must be acknowledged then, that Cardinal Altieri has shown but very little
conduct in drawing advantage from the War in Holland; and far less zeal for the
glory of the Pontificate, and of his own reign; of which no cause can be given
but a too great deference to the sentiments or Spain, and an entire dependency
of its Ministers, which have made him forget the part of the person he
represents, that he may act theirs, to the expense of his honor, and perhaps
of his repose.

This likewise has made him let slip another conjuncture, wherein he might
have signalized himself as much, as in the preceding.

It is known, that after the great advantages gained on Holland, it was an
easy matter to have hindered the fire from spreading, as it has done since
amongst most of Christian Princes: the King of France, though encouraged by so
much fortunate success, was still so much Master of himself, as to put a stop
to the carriere of his Victories: he had enough in his hands to do himself and
his Allies Justice, by bringing down those that had provoked him: the United
Provinces would have willingly consented to it, England had withdrawn; the
Princes of the Empire saw nothing to be got by a rupture, what Jealousy soever
they had of the neighborhood of the French Forces.

The Sovereigns stood looking at one another, there was time enough to have
brought them to an accommodation, the question was only to find a Mediator:
None durst be the first to break and declare; at Rome the Ministers of the
Emperor, the most Christian and Catholic Kings were observed to confer
together at the breaking up of Chapels, and other Assemblies where they were;
In the mean time it was publicly talked at the Palace, that the Treaty of
Munster was to be broken; that the Emperor, Princes of Germany, and Spain, were
ready to declare War: but that delayed a long time, and it seemed they expected
some Umpire to make them Friends.

How happy an occasion for the Nephew of a Pope to bestir himself for peace!
Were not Nuncio's extraordinary, or Legates to be expected then abroad? the
Aldobrandini and Barbarini, forsook their repose and interests for
Reconciliations of less consequence; they have been seen pass Seas and
Mountains for affairs less considerable to Christendom: not to speak of other
Nephews, and of Popes themselves, who have testified zeal for the Union of
Christian Princes. What advantage would it have been to have hindered that
rupture before it broke forth? the exercise of the Catholic Religion remained
free in Holland, at least in the Provinces where it was already restored; the
Arms of the French King would be turned against the Turks; Poland would be
secured from the Invasion of Infidels: In a word, all people would have enjoyed
the tranquillity which since they have lost.

Cardinal Altieri makes no reflection on all these things; all his Intrigues at
that time were confined to a second Marriage for his Family. He would once more
nave the Duke of Anticoli Marry a Maid of his Family, and all his care is taken
up in building of a Palace, whose Magnificence obscures one of the stateliest
Churches in Rome.

But a more powerful cause than this wrought upon his mind, to take him off
from the thoughts of endeavoring to proprocure peace, and of quenching the
fire that broke out snortly after. The Spaniards suggest to him, that that
peace will be of no advantage to Christendom; that the King of France having
done his business with the Hollanders, will turn his Arms against the Spanish
Netherlands, or against the Empire, or some other of his Neighbors; that the
King of England had already withdrawn himself; that the Emperor, and whole
Empire, stood for them; that they will force the most Christian King to restore
what he has taken from his neighbors; and that in a word, it was the common
interest of all Sovereign Princes, and of the Pope himself, to keep France in
play and cut out work for his Forces, which began equally to be suspected byall.

It was no hard matter for them to make impression on the mind of Altieri, who
had already fully espoused their party, and who could not disguise his secret
discontent for the bitter morsels the French Ambassador had made him swallow.
Insomuch, that with much indifferency he let slip a conjuncture, wherein he
might have gained so much esteem; by diverting the inconveniences of a War, the
commotions whereof are at present so fatal, both to the Interest of the Church,
and the repose of all Europe: and, as he had testified but little Joy for the
Conquests which the most Christian King had made for the Church in the United
Provinces, so he showed but little grief, either for the losses that followed,
when his Majesty united all his Forces to defend himself against his enemies.

And these are, in my opinion, the most considerable overtures, whereby
Cardinal Paluzzi-Altieri might have acquired glory and reputation.

But, all this has contributed, not only to make him lose so many fair
occasions, but likewise to draw upon himself troubles; which we shall presently
speak of.

When in the beginning of this Pontificat, men saw Cardinal Paluzzi, invested
in the name of Altieri, the quality of Nephew, and by consequence in the
authority that is annexed to it, they had ground to be persuaded, that if his
Ministry would not be very illustrious, it would at least prove peaceable and
quiet; it was pres^med that a Nephew by Favor, or Adoption, and not by Nature
or Blood, which exposed him for that reason to the envy of many, would so
behave himself, that no man might have cause to except against him; that
therefore he would make it his study to give content to allay, or at least to
avoid the occasions of misunderstanding with the Ministers of Princes. But
fortune has this inseparable property, that if she raise a man all of a
sudden, she makes him forget what he owes, both to himself, and the rest of
mankind.

Cardinal Altieri is without doubt, a man of Wit and Sense; but it is quickly
found, that setting aside his own Family, all other men were nothing to him.
Pride or Vanity did not raise in him sentiments of contempt; but his
forwardness to make his Family, made him forget the considerations of the rank
which he held; all that he looked upon in the Papacy, was the great age of the
Pope, and the means of making the best of his time for raising his Relations;
and because he was persuaded that his Reign would not last long, he resolved to
make the best use of it he could: that made him take short measures, to make
Hay whilst the Sun did shine; and upon that principle he wholly neglected
Foreign affairs, that he might apply himself to Domestic.

It is no wonder then, that he made it his business to delay the granting of
the demands that were made to him, that by the protracting of time, he might be
disingaged from his promise, if the Pope should die, whilst in the interim he
made use of the time for the advancement of his own interests.

For my part, this seems to me to have been the chief aim of his Conduct, which
is sufficiently to be discovered in his most remarkable actions: for what could
he expect, for instance; from the difficulties that he started upon the
promotion of the Bishop of Laon, from the delays he spun out in that of the
Abbot Rospigliosi, as he does still in the promotion of the Bishop of
Marseilles; yea, and in the nomination of Crowns? unless it be, that the Pope
who is old, happening to die, he may be exempted from giving them satisfaction,
whilst in the mean time he fills the vacant places with others, who are at his
Devotion.

This maxim of making Hay whilst the Sun shines, is very common in Italy and
Spain; where men trust much to time; and it often succeeds with Northern
Nations, whom the Italians entertain with good words, and amuse with trifles,
until they be tired out with the length of time and delays, which to them is
insupportable; that so they may either remit their pretensions, or that the
face of affairs being changed by time, there remains no more engagement on
either side.

Cardinal Altieri had found the benefit of that policy, if the Reign of Clement
the X. had lasted but two or three years, he had already in a short time made
both himself and his Family; he had obtained for himself a Revenue of an
hundred thousand Crowns a year, by Charges, Benefices, and Pensions: Dom.
Gasparo Altieri his Brother, had almost as much; he had strengthened his Family
by the alliances which we have mentioned before; and though he had not many
creatures in the sacred College, most of the Cardinals whom he had raised,
being but little obliged to him for their promotion; and none of those in whom
he could confide, being Papable; yet it might have been easy for him to make a
party in a Conclave, either by owning the Spanish Faction, or listing himself
among the Squadron Volant: if without the Ecclesiastic he had no good
correspondence with Princes, yet he had carried himself so cunningly, as not to
fall into open variance with them: So that if the Pope had died within that
time, Altieri was warm enough, without being entangled with Sovereigns; and he
was free from the reproach of having neglected the past conjunctures, because
the short continuance of the Pope, would have served him for an excuse.

But he forsaw not the consequences, which that conduct, which only looks to
the present, draws after it.

So that bad policy can only be attributed to so many troublesome affairs, that
many Ministers in diverse times, and in several states have drawn upon
themselves: and not to trouble our selves with other examples; we have a very
formal and fresh instance of this in the person of Cardinal Altieri, upon
occasion of the late contest he has had with the Ministers of Crowns, and
especially with the Ambassador of France.

It was no trouble to him on many occasions, to discontent the Sacred College,
by refusing several Cardinals, the Favors or Benefices that they demanded for
their Creatures, applying them all to himself; or having disposed of them, only
by the way of traffic that was settled in the Palace: yea, and in many
rencounters, it was but the least of his study to comply with the Spaniards;
and though he was wholly theirs, yet he has let them see, that interest alone
regulates his inclinations. But the Princes of Italy have but little cause to
be satisfied with him; and in a word, all Christendom stands amazed at his
indifferency and coldness in the most pressing necessities. On all occasions he
has showed himself against France; but particularly in the provision of the
Generalship of the Order of St. Lazarus.

That Dignity had been for some time vacant, and I pretend not to decide whose
right it was to present to it; it is enough that the most Christian King had a
design of uniting that Order, and of erecting it into a new one, according to
the Model that had been made to the King: so that his Majesty having already
given a head to the Order, Cardinal Altieri judging that to be an enterprise
against the Rights of the Roman Court, was in some trouble, on whom he should
confer that Dignity, tho Rome be full of poor Churchmen, that seek their
fortune; yet there are but few French there in respect of other Nations. The
good Order of the French Clergy joined to the privileges of the Gallican
Church, and the rights of Patronage, hinders them from wandering over the Alps;
and takes from them all hopes of making any advantage there, unless it be some
Bretons, who obtain Curacies in their Provinces, though with much trouble, and
most times without other success, than the carrying home with them provisions,
the seeds of everlasting Lawsuits: some Gascons are likewise there, though
with as bad fortune as the others.

Insomuch that there was no man that would accept of being Abbot and General of
St. Lazarus, for fear of falling into some inconveniences, by an action that
might displease the King: Cardinal Altieri made use of a Gascon Priest, who
went by the Title of Abbot de la Colombiere, for filling of that place: having
caused many fair offers of protection and support to be made to him, if he did
accept it; the good Churchman being but a Novice in the affairs of so quaint a
Court as that of Rome, and who besides had no Estate, sued for the Abbey, and
obtained it against the advice of all the wise men of the Court, except the
party of Altieri, who on the contrary, encouraged him, and puffed him up with
fair hopes.

The Duke d'Estrees exasperated against those who served as instruments to the
enterprises of Altieri, could not refrain showing his resentments: he sent for
the Scrivener that drew up the Petition, and having severely chid him, caused
him to be put in prison; La Colombiere met with no better usage, he was forced
to lay down his pretended Benefice. But Altieri remaining firm, and the Datary
refusing to admit of his demission; he retired to the Popes Palace, where he
stayed until his departure, subsisting by some assistance that he had from the
Apostolic Palace. Some days after that, Altieri by absolute authority, caused
the Scrivener to be relieved from prison, and complained highly of the liberty
the Ambassador had taken, as of an attempt against the authority of the
Sovereign, and against one, upon whom he had no jurisdiction. Since that time
La Colombiere, contrary to the counsel of his friends, returning into France,
whether he had found that they were weary at the Palace of furnishing him
expenses, or that he hoped to draw some Benefice from the Court, exposed
himself to the mortification of being shut up in the Bastile, where he
continues at present.

And thus was that little debate in the year 1672. carried on, wherein waving
the reflections that might be made on the conduct of the Ambassador, who had all
reason in the world to be offended; the boldness of these two little
inconsiderable persons of the Nation, which made them transgress the duty and
respect due unto such a Minister, cannot but be blamed; a Spaniard or Italian
would have been careful not to have done the like.

I thought it my duty to leave the whole matter to the consideration of
disinteressed persons, that they may observe the manner of Altieri's carriage,
who might have let that matter sleep without any prejudice to the Holy See, and
staytill he should be solicited from France; for the confirmation of the Kings
design concerning the order of St, Lazarus, at which time he might have come
off with more advantage, without increasing the discontents of the Duke d'
Estrees, yea, and of the King himself, who then bestowed himself so usefully
for Religion, by the great exploits of his first Campaign in Holland.

This harsh proceeding was quickly followed by what happened, upon occasion of
the Marriage of the Lady Cesarini, wherein the Ambassador concerned himself as
much for baffling Cardinal Altieri, and crossing his Intrigues, as for any
other consideration that he could have in that marriage, as has been mentioned
before.

Much about the same time, the Duke d' Estrees discovered the puny commerce
that was entertained between Altieri, and Bonvisi, the Nuncio at Cologne,
whereof we have likewise spoken. And shortly after Altieri made appear his
repugnancy, to the promotion of the Bishop of Marseilles, upon the nomination
of the King of Poland.

All these thwartings of Cardinal Altieri with the French Ambassador, and his
obstinacy toward that Crown, appeared to many people so strange, that they
believed, and even gave it out, that the Nephew Regnant would not have
proceeded to so many extremities, without the assistance of some one or other
at Court, who backed him in his resolutions against the Duke d' Estrees: they
could not comprenend how the humor of Altieri, so averse from engaging in any
difficult matter, that he even avoided coming to an open rupture with the
Colonna's, though the Popes Subjects, could resolve to stand it out so long
against the Minister of so powerful a Monarch, who makes the greatest show at
Rome, they concluded that he must needs have some body about his Majesty, with
whom he entertained secret intelligence: and they have been curious enough, to
confirm themselves in their thoughts, as to make an exact search of those who
might be ill-affected toward the Duke d' Estrees, and have drawn therefrom
such consequences as they pleased.

But all these imaginations are vain chimera's. The most Christian King is more
faithfully served by all, who have any hand in his affairs, than that any about
his Majesty can have the thoughts of exercising their private passion, to the
prejudice of the affairs of such a Master: and besides the small success of
other Negotiations, evinces that Cardinal Altieri complies as little with the
Ministers that are at the Court of France, as with those that are at the Court
of Rome, a sure mark that he takes no great care to engage them.

It must be then concluded, that his conduct, in regard of France, is indeed
somewhat strange; and that the reason of it must needs proceed from an old
habit, hereditary almost to the Court of Rome, where they have always promised
themselves anything from the facility of the French, in forgetting what is
past, or from a generosity that makes them think it below them to take
exceptions at things which they meet with in a Court made up of Churchmen.

And so much in respect of France. As for Spain, if that Nation has no great
cause to complain, so neither have they much to brag on, of Cardinal Altieri,
it is apparent what he did, to excuse himself from making Father Nitard
Cardinal, with the Cardinal d' Estrees; and the vast pensions wherewith he
charge the vacant Benefices in the Dominions of the Catholic King,
sufficiently prove, that his friendship is not without interest: it is
nevertheless to be acknowledged, that he has been always inclined to the house
of Austria, witness his readiness to engage in the matter of the election of
the King of Poland, and his willingness to follow the motions of the Ministers
of Spain, who dissuaded him from concerning himself in the cause of the Prince
of Fustemberg, though named to the Cardinalship by his most Christian Majesty,
and accepted by the Pope: In a word, he has in all conjunctures showed, at
least a fear of offending, if he had no desire to oblige them.

Other Sovereigns have found him reserved enough at first, when they presented
themselves to him, or intended to engage him to declare himself in matters that
were liable to controversy; but when they pressed him home, they obtained what
they demanded; and so carried their pretensions, without being obliged to him.
In this manner he carried himself with the Venetians, about the dispute of the
Bank of the River Po; with the Great Duke, concerning the affair of the valley
of Chiana; with the Genoese, in the matter of the Inquisitor of Genoa; with the
Duke of Savoy, touching the difficulty of the Nunciature of Monsieur Durazzi;
and even with the Colonna's, though the Popes Subjects, about the marriage of
the Lady Cesarini.

All these Lords have made appear, that he has no strength, but against those
who retreat at his first resistance; and that he easily yields, when he finds
himself in the least put to it, though the honor of his Ministry be somewhat
concerned in it, especially when he engages himself in matters that he cannot
maintain. So that, if the Court of France had thought fit to stand it out with
him; when he undertook to recall the Nuncio Bargellini, contrary to their
inclination, that Prelate being well beloved there, all that could have been
desired might have been obtained. If it had been thought convenient to have
pressed him, concerning the restitution of Castro, in favor of the Duke of
Parma, the affair had been ended.

And if he has condescended in all other occasions, wherein his most Christian
Majesty has been willing to testify a real concern, so it would be no hard
matter to have satisfaction from him in the present conjuncture of affairs.

He carried himself until the year 1674. in such a manner, that if he neglected
to make friends, yet he drew upon himself no open enemies; if he took no great
care to content people; provided his private concerns went well, because he had
no other prospect in a short lived Pontificat; so those that were discontented,
forbore to show their resentments, upon the same consideration, that matters
could not go long so. Moreover, he entertained one party with fair promises,
and supported the other with dissimulation; the conjuncture being likewise
favorable to him in a time of War and Rupture amongst Christian Princes, who
avoided the occasions of cutting themselves out work at Rome, or elsewhere,
having enough to do at home.

So that the Nephew Regnant might, according to the saying, godere il papato,
enjoy the Papacy at his ease; if he had not given a general provocation to all
to declare against him.

And this happened by an Edict which he caused to publish and post up,
concerning the Customs and Duties of all Commodities, Provisions, Victuals, or
other things that are paid at their entry into the Towns of Italy.

Cardinals, foreign Ministers and their Families or Domestics, are exempted
from that duty of Entry, for the things they stand in need of, and are sent
them in from abroad: but some there are who extend that privilege, farther
than it should reach, abusing it; by managing some little underhand traffic,
either by bringing in Goods under their names, or by giving Letters or Patents
which are called of Familiarity, by virtue whereof, they, who have them, enjoy
the privilege, as if they were the servants of such an Ambassador, or such a
Cardinal.

The Farmers of the Customs have often complained of these abuses, have
demanded abatements of their Farm, and have represented the prejudice that
arises to the Apostolic chamber, from the knavery practiced by several
Officers of Cardinals and Ambassadors in that matter. It has been often
considered, how that abuse might be remedied: but no means could be as yet
found out, which did not occasion complaints, quarrels, and very many times
violences against the Officers of the Custom-house of Rome, who have been badly
used, or threatened by the privileged.

About the end of the year 1674. Cardinal Altieri perceiving that the year
following, which was the Holy year; there would be great confluence of people
at Rome, who would flock thither from all parts, to gain the universal Jubilee;
and that by consequence, more Goods and Provisions than commonly, would be
brought thither; had a mind to make his advantage of the Customs, and
considerably, to raise the Farm of them: the chief Farmer offered him a good
sum of Money, with a considerable parcel of Wine, which in Italy is called
Paraguanto, if for that year he would revoke the privileges and exemptions,
granted to persons of all quality and conditions. Presently came abroad a very
ample Edict, conform to the intention of the former, and was posted up on the
usual places of the City, without acquainting those that are concerned therein.

The whole College of Cardinals, all the foreign Ministers with their
servants, who by the Edict were deprived of their privileges, are surprised at
such an innovation: they make presently great noise, enter into conferences,
and unite together; Cardinal Altieri takes no notice of any thing, but lets
them grumble and stir: he is told that Rome is in a general confusion; is
threatened with some dangerous revolution; and he makes answer, that the Pope
is Master at home: Messengers are sent to the Palace, to carry the grievances
directly to his Holiness, and under various pretexts, he hinders them from
having Audience.

The Ambassadors of the Emperor, the most Christian King, the Catholic King,
and of the Republic of Venice, finding him so insensible of their first
motions, agree to go with their Retinues, in company together, to an
extraordinary Audience of his Holiness, without dependence on the Cardinal
Nephew, and resolve to be heard at what rate soever: they set out at the same
time, go to the Palace of Montecavallo, and there present themselves; but,
Altieri, who was there, being informed of their March, causes the Gates to be
shut, and the Chains drawn cross the Streets: he complains of that new way of
coming to Audience, without acquainting either the Pope or himself; that it is
a surprise, an assault, a kind of violence, and of most dangerous consequence
to the respect that is due to the Popes person, and the august place that
contains so sacred a pledge.

The Ambassadors return full of indignation, have their meetings together, and
consult to attaque the Cardinal Nephew in the most sensible part of his
Nepotisme; they resolve to take no more notice of him in the Affairs of their
Ministry; to deprive him of the honor they do him, in communicating to him
the result of their ordinary Audiences; and, in fine, to look upon him no other
ways but as another private Cardinal of the College. With this Project they
intend to acquaint their Masters; and that it may not seem a thing affected to
gratify a private Passion, or to put a trick upon the Nephew, they all engage
to sign the Copy of the Relation which they should send to their several
Masters, with this formality, that the Relation which should go to France
should be signed by Cardinal Langrave, the Emperors Ambassador, Cardinal Nitard
the Spanish Ambassador, and the Ambassador of Venice; that that which was to be
sent to Spain, should be signed by the Duke d'Estrees, and the others; and, in
the same manner the rest that should be sent to Germany and Venice. That was an
expedient, to avoid the difficulty of Signing all the same Relation, which
could not be done, because the Ambassador of Spain would not have Signed under
the French Ambassador, who is in possession of the first place.

These things thus performed, and the Ministers being approved by their
Masters, as to what they had resolved: in the first Audience which they had at
the Palace, they represented to the Pope, the causes which they had of
discontent, the Actions of the Nephew in prejudice of their Privileges; the
abuses to which he engaged the authority as well as goodness of his Holiness:
the Injury done to their Character, and the resentment they were forced to
testify of it, without hurting their respect and duty toward the Holy See,
which their Masters knew well to distinguish from the bad Government of
Cardinal Altieri: they declared to his Holiness, that they pretended not to do
violence to his inclination, and to the affection he had for Cardinal Altieri,
but that they could do very well without depending on him, in the exercise of
their ministry, whereof he had evidenced so small esteem, by all his
proceedings, in what had already past.

The Pope labored as much as in him lay to pacify them; and to Justify the
Edict, he represented to them the great necessities of the Apostolic Chamber,
engaged in more than Eight and forty Millions of Gold at his coming to the
Pontificat; that the suspension of the Privileges and Exemptions, was only
for the Holy year, which engaged the Chamber still to more extraordinary
charges: and that moreover Cardinal Altieri and he, had shown their
Moderation, because that under his Reign the Ecclesiastic State had not been
charged with any new imposition, a thing which has not happened under many
Popes of these last Ages.

These, and such like Discourses of the Pope, which tended only to Justify
the Nephew, had not the effect which he could have wished. The Audiences being
ended, the Ambassadors returned home without going to the Apartment of the
Nephew, as the custom is; treated no more with him about any business; and took
from him the name of Altieri, calling him only Paluzzi in the Titles they gave
him, when occasion offered of speaking to him.

This continued for some time, but the Nephew fearing the consequences of an
affair of that nature, and finding that it drew upon him the contempt of all
the Roman Court, and even of the People, who, when they are discontented, many
times imitate the more powerful, that they may shake off their obedience; that
Potentates gave no more answers to his Letters, wherewith he accompanied the
Briefs of his Holiness; that, in fine, being no more respected of the great
Men, he became the object of the Peoples derision, or the compassion of his
Friends: he caused a Congregation to be established of unsuspected Cardinals,
to consider of the means of giving satisfaction to the Foreign Ministers, with
as much safety to his honor as possibly could be had.

I may say by the by, that they commonly refer to Congregations, affairs that
they would have prolonged, and I never saw any thing determined by them: they
are composed of Men that affect neutrality; but, who are however naturally more
inclined to those who have given them the Commission: if any of them absent
themselves, whole months pass over before they meet again, and if death, or
any accident carry any one of them off, time is required to agree upon another
to be put into the place of him that is gone; in a word, the Papacy commonly
expires before they conclude any thing, let the matter of their Deputation be
never so easy.

The Congregation that Altieri appointed for the satisfaction of the
Ambassadors, proposed several expedients, to which they agreed not; when the
revocation of the Edict was proposed, they said, that that would be reckoned no
satisfaction to them, seeing the Pope was obliged to do so in Justice, and that
though he would not revoke it, yet there were but few Officers of the Customs
that durst yenture to put it in execution against the Ministers.

In effect, whether the Customers had orders from the Palace, to desist from
executing it, or that they feared some harsh usage, they altered nothing in the
matter of exemptions: And, one day, some Packs and Boxes being sent to Cardinal
Sforza, and the Carriers being gone to discharge and put them into the
Custom-house; his Eminence was offended that they were not sent soon enough
home to him; he himself went to the Custom-house, and caused them to be carried
away, threatening the Popes Officers, without any notice taken thereof in the
Palace.

Whilst the Congregation was busy in managing some accommodation; the
Ambassadors contrived among themselves ways to highten more and more their
pretensions, and vex the Nephew; they not only forbore treating with him, but
also if they met him in the Town, they caused not their Coaches to stop, as the
custom is, but went on without compliment or ceremony. So that Cardinal Altieri
being one day gone abroad to make some visit, and perceiving the French
Ambassadors Coach coming at a distance, he caused the Tossels to be quickly
taken off his Horses, that he might pass incognito, and so avoid the shame of
seeing the Ambassador pass by without receiving the usual civility.

That which surprised him most, was, the stedfastness of all the Ministers
linked together to cross him, in a time when the Princes their Masters were so
hot in action against one another; he could not comprehend how the Ambassadors
of the Emperor and Spain continued so addicted to second the French Minister,
who was the most incensed of all, and who drove the matter farthest.

He let the debate rest some time, to see if they would give over, but
perceiving that he gained nothing by that course, he endeavored underhand to
draw off from the party the Cardinals of Hesse and Nitard; they desired time to
communicate the propositions that were made them, to Madrid and Vienna, that
they might thereupon have the opinions of their Princes, who had concerned
themselves in the difference. Nevertheless the matter coming into negotiation
on each side, they yielded all of a sudden, and condescended to the
accommodation which they had disputed, and wherein they found no other
advantage, at least that has been apparent, but a weak protestation of
Cardinal Nitard, that it was never in his thoughts to offend them, and that he
was displeased at what had passed, which he did in a visit that was rendered
him by the Ambassadors of the Emperor and Spain, where they owned him for the
Popes Nephew, and in that quality treated with him.

They proceeded not in that, without imparting their resolution to the
Ambassadors of France and Venice, and it was no difficult matter for them to
draw the latter into their party, who might very lawfully rest contented with
the satisfaction that pleased the other two: But, the Duke d'Estrees let them
take their course, and told them that his Master had other pretensions and
motives not to be content with the conduct of Altieri; that though the
satisfaction which they accepted were sufficient to repare what had happened
upon the account of the ^dict (which nevertheless he could hardly be persuaded
of) yet he would not admit of it, unless he had the other satisfactions which
the King pretended to be his due.

It is not known by what Maxim of policy the Ministers of Spain so suddenly
remitted their pretensions, seeing they have the esteem not to let go their
hold easily, and to be more firm and steadfast than the French, especially in
matter of resentment and revenge; the Politics of that change, after so
public and solemn declarations, cannot be observed. All that can be said of
it, is, that by so low a compliance they intended to make their Court, and
leave the Duke d'Estrees in the lurch.

Some, without any ground, have been pleased to say, that Cardinal Altieri
gained the Spaniards, by giving them hopes of assisting them underhand for the
recovery of Messina, or that at least they yielded easily to him, that by
gaining the Pope in condescending to Altieri, they believed they might hamper
the Duke d'Estrees, and put him in the wrong, giving out that the French Nation
is never content, that they are troublesome every where, and insupportable in
all places where they can have footing. This they put the Italians in head of;
but they are not now adays so apt to believe these suggestions; seeing it is a
Proverb with them, that Sono morti tutti i mutti francesi, e tutti i savy
spagnuoli: That all the French Fools are dead, and all the Wise Spaniards.

They have proofs of this by the reputation and wise conduct which the King
has held at Rome for some time, wherein that Court has perceived that there is
nothing now to be got of the French, by the Maxim heretofore observed, of
tiring them out by length of time, and so prevailing on their natural
impatience.

This has made Cardinal Altieri yield, and to use the recommendations and
intercessions of Friends with his Majesty, in the present affairs; from which,
good success may be expected, if the Pope live any time, and when he shall die,
it will give a great stroke for the satisfaction of his Majesty, in a Court
which is wholly governed by example, and in the most important deliberations
looks always back to what has been done in times past.

CHAP. VI. Of the Conduct of Cardinals, and Ministers, and on what foot they
stand in the Court of Rome.
IT was my desire to have continued my reflections on the Conduct of Cardinal
Altieri; but just, as I was thinking to trace his proceedings, the death of
Clement the X. which gives another face to the whole Court of Rome, has
likewise put that Cardinal and his affairs in a different posture from what
they were before: so that the first design which related to matters that are
not of this time, would be useless, and could not now be performed.

That obliges me to turn mine eyes on that, which, in my opinion, is most
remarkable at all times in the Court of Rome, and especially during the vacancy
of the Sea. This will be a diversion full of Instruction for those, who either
have not seen that Court, or who have spent some time there, without reflecting
on what occurs in it, as it is the case of many men.

That Court, as we have said, is composed of Cardinals and Ministers.

The Cardinals may be divided into a certain number of Parties, which have
their several Heads.

The Ministers are divided into Domestic, and Foreign.

A LIST of the CARDINALS, according to their Factions in the year 1676.
The First Division of Cardinals.
I. The Barbarini Faction, or the Faction of the Old College.
1. FRancis Barbarini, Nephew of Pope VRBIN VIII. a Florentine, Bishop of
Ostia, Vice Chancellor of the Holy Roman Church, Dean of the Sacred College,
promoted in the year 1623. 2. Vlderick Carpegna of Vrbin, Bishop of Porto, in
the year 1633. 3. Julius Gabrieli, a Roman; Bishop of Sabina, in the year 1641.
4. Caesar Fachinetti, a Bolonian, Bishop of Palestrina, in the year 1643. 5
Charles Rossetti of Ferara, Bishop of Faenza; First Priest Cardinal, 1643. 6.
Charles Barbarini, a Roman; of the Creation of Innocent the X. in the year
1653.
II. The Faction of Innocent X. called the Squadron Volant.
NIcholas Ludovisio, a Bolonian great Penitentiary, promoted in the year, 1645.
Alderan Cibo, of the Princes of Massa of Carrara, 1645. Bennet Odescalchi of
Coma, in the Duchy of Milan, 1645. Louis Homodei, a Milanese, 1652. Peter
Ottoboni, a Vonetian, 1652. Francis Albrizi of Catena in Romania, 1655. Decius
Azzolini, of Fermo in the Marque, 1654.
All these are of the Creation of Innocent the X.

III. The Faction, called the Faction of Chigi
FLavius Chigi a Sienese, Nephew of Alexander VII. the Head, 1657. Jerome
Bonvisi of Luca, 1657. Anthony Bichi, a Sienese, 1657. James Franzone a
Genoese, 1658. Peter Vidoni of Cremona, 1660. Gregory Barbrigo a Venetian,
Bishop of Padua. 1660. Jerome Boncampagni a Bolonian, Archbishop of Bolonia,
1664. Alfonsus Litta, a Milanese, Archbishop of Milan, 1664. Nerius Corsini, a
Florentine, 1664. Charles Bonelli a Roman, 1664. Celius Picolomini a Sienese,
Archbishop of Siena, 1664. Charles Caraffa a Neopolitan, 1664. John Nicolas
Conti a Roman, Bishop of Aucona, 1664. John Savelli a Roman, 1664. James Nini,
a Sienese, 1664. Julius Spinola, a Genoese, 1666. Innigo Caraccioli a
Neopolitan, Archbishop of Naples, 1666. John Delphini, a Venetian, Patriarch of
Aquilea, 1667. Sigismond Chigi, a Sienese, 1667.
They are all of the Creation of Alexander the VII. except Sigismond Chigi, who
was promoted by Clement IX.

IV. The Faction of the Rospigliosi's.
JAmes Rospigliosi of Pistria, Nephew to Clement the IX. Head of the Party,
1667. Charles Cerri a Roman, Bishop of Ferrara, 1669. Lazarus Palavicini, a
Genoese, 1669. Nicholas Acciaioli a Florentine, 1669. Bonacorso Bonacorsi of
Macerata in the Marque, 1669. Felix Rospigliosi of Pistoria, 1673.
They are of the Creation of Clement the IX. except Felix Rospigliosi, promoted
by Clement X.

V. The Faction of Altieri.
PAluzzo Paluzzi called Altieri, a Roman, Chamberlain, Adoptive Nephew of
Clement the X. Head of the Party, 1664. Camillus Massini, a Roman, 1670. Gaspar
Carpegna, a Roman, 1670. Vincent Marco Vrsini of Gravina, a Roman, 1672.
Frederick Colonna Waldes^hi, a Pirusin, 1673. Francis Nerli, a Florentine,
Archbishop of Florence, 1673. Jerome Castoldi, a Genoese, 1673. Jerome
Casanata, a Neapolitan, 1673. Peter Basadonna, a Venetian, 1673. Alexander
Crescentio, a Roman, 1675. Galeazzo Marescotti, a Bolonian, 1675. Bernardin
Rocci, a Roman, 1675. Marius Albritii, a Neapolitan, 1675. Febritius Spada, a
Roman, 1675. Philip Thomas Howard of Norfolk, an Englishman, 1675.
They are all of the Creation of Clement the X. except Paluzzi their Head, who
was promoted by Alexander VII.

VI. The French Faction.
VIrgiuius Vrsini a Roman, Comprotector of France, Protector of Poland and
Portugal, of the Creation of Vrbin VIII. 1641. Jerome Grimaldi, a Genoese,
Archbishop of Aix, of the same Creation, 1643. John Francis Paul of Goudi de
Rets, a Frenchman, of the Creation of Innocent the X. 1652. Francis Maldachini
of Viterba, of the Creation of Innocent the X. 1647. Emanuel Theodose of
Bouillon, a Frenchman, of the Creation of Clement the IX. 1669. Caesar d'Estree
a Frenchman, Bishop of Laon, of the Creation of Clement the X. 1671. Peter
Bonsi, a Florentin, Archbishop of Narbonne, of the Creation of Clement the X.
1672.
VII. The Spanish Faction.
LAurence Raggi a Genoese, of the Creation of Innocent the X. 1647. Charles
Pio, of Ferrara, of the Creation of Innocent the X. 1654. Frederick Landtgrave
of Hesse, of the same Creation, 1652. Paschal of Arragon Archbishop of Toledo,
a Spaniard, of the Creation of Alexander the Seventh. 1660. Louis of Porto
Carrero, a Spaniard, of the Creation of Clement IX. 1669. Bernard Gustavus of
Baden, a German, Abbot of Fulden, of the Creation of Clement the X. 1671. John
Everard Nitard, a German, Jesuit and Confessor to the Queen Regent of Spain,
1672.
These are Seven Factions, at present in the Sacred College, who have all
different interests, unless they unite upon some Politic Design, as it happens
pretty often in the Conclaves. An Eighth might be added to them, to wit the
Florentin, otherwise called the Tuscan Faction; but at present it has no head,
there being no Cardinal in the Family of Medicis, so that they divide
themselves amongst several Factions. They have been almost continually united
to the Spaniards, because the Protection of Spain was annexed to the Cardinals
of Medicis.

THE SECOND DIVISION OF CARDINALS.
THe Cardinals may be again divided into Papable and not Papable.

The Papable Cardinals are such as have all the qualities commonly requisite
for being Pope, and who have not those which exclude a Man from the Pontificat.

The qualities commonly requisite for being Pope, are good Manners, at least
the appearance of a pious and religious Life, a prudent and wise conduct, free
from passion and extravagancies.

2. An advanced Age, above Fifty years at least, or otherwise a constitution
that promises no long Reign, nor vigorous resolutions, for men are content that
a Pope give himself to a quiet life, or as the Italian say, Attenda a vivere e
Lasci vivere, Live and let live; and that it may not happen as in Alexander the
Sixth, and Julius the Second, who put all in a stir, and marched at the head of
Armies to carry on their enterprises by embroiling Princes.

3. Kindred of a mild and discreet temper, for avoiding the inconveniences of
the Pontificat of Alex^nder the VI, Paul the IV. and of several others; for the
Plots and Conspiracies of the Duke of Valentinois, the son of the first, and
the bad actions of the Caraffa's, the Nephews of the second, are very well
known. This is a very essential point now adays to render a man Papable, since
the Nephews have taken so much authority in governing and disposing of all
matters under the Pontificat of their Unckles. In so much, that when any one is
proposed to be made Pope, they cast their eyes immediately upon their Kindred,
and, if I may so say, examine more carefully their lives, than the life of the
Cardinal Proposed. That hindered Cardinal Bonvisi, a Man otherwise most
Papable, from mounting the Pontifical Throne, because it was feared that
Monsieur Bonvisi his Nephew might Reign, whose haughty, fierce, arrogant, and
unsociable humor, was had in aversion by all the Court. The number of the
Kindred is likewise considered, because many Relations about a Pope drain the
Treasure of the Apostolic chamber, and ruin the Ecclesiastic State (already
indebted in more than Fifty Millions of Roman Crowns) by building of Palaces,
buying Estates, and making themselves Princes.

The Qualities which exclude a man from the Papacy, are hereafter deduced, by
considering the Cardinals who are not Papable.

The Cardinals not Papable are such as have some quality which excludes them
from the Papacy.

These qualities are either essential or accidental.

The essential are linked either to their Person, or Character, as being born
Princes, or of a Sovereign House; this is a strong consideration; because it is
to be feared, that if a Cardinal Prince were made Pope, he would alienate the
Patrimony of St. Peter, and dismember it, that he might bestow the same on some
or other of his house; that he would transgress the Neutrality which a common
Father should observe with all Christian Princes, it being hardly probable that
a Pope born a Prince should want engagements, by the Tie of blood and the
Interests of his house: to this may be added, that the Cardinals and Prelates
have ground to apprehend, that a Pope, born a Prince, might treat them too
imperiously, and despise them.

Another quality which renders a Cardinal not Papable, is to have been promoted
at the nomination of some Crown, and especially of that of France, or Spain,
because, if he came to be Pope, he would in gratitude, be obliged to depend
much on the sentiments of him, to whom he owed his fortune.

The same may be said of a Cardinal, who is in the French or Spanish Faction,
or who is a Native of Spain or France; for that reason, excludes likewise from
the Pontificat. I give not all the instances that might more confirm the
verity of those maxims.

It is known of fresh date, that Vidoni was not Pope in the last Conclave,
because he was made Cardinal at the nomination of the King of Poland, John
Casimir, who was since retired into France, which by consequence gave Umbrage
to the Spaniards, and Chigi, though he was an Italian, and of the creation of
Alexander VII. the Uncle of Chigi.

This serves to make good the second maxim; and as to the First, it has been
seen, that the Family of the Roucre has been Sovereign in the Ecclesiastic
State, because there have been two Popes of that House: and the House of
Medicis is arisen to that powerful pitch, wherein it now is, by the support of
the Popes of that Family.

The accidental qualities which exclude from the Pontificat, are many in
number; but they are all almost reduceable to those which are contrary to the
qualities that render a man Papable, as, the Manners, Conduct, Age, and
Kindred. Cardinal Toschi missed of being Pope, because he was too free in his
Speech, and had almost always in his mouth a certain word, which did not suit
with a man of his character, though it be very common amongst the Italians, and
especially the Lombards.

As to Age, besides that that is much looked upon in Italy for all charges, it
is particularly eyed for the Pontificat; because of the consequences that
attend it; to wit, Gravity, Reverence, Veneration, Authority, and many other
considerations which are annexed to old Age.

As to the Kindred, we have the instance of the ill-instructed Children of Eli
the High Priest, who occasioned the scandal mentioned in Scripture, by their
gluttony and avarice, and brought down the Curse of God upon themselves and
their Father. I shall not instance the modern examples of Nephews, who behave
themselves in the same manner.

There are many other reflections that may be made on more remote qualities,
which very many times do no less exclude a Cardinal from the Papacy; for, at
Rome, every thing is ripped up, as if by his conduct he has offended the French
or Spaniards, or those who have most voices in the Election of the Pope, if he
be partial as to any one, and a thousand other considerations.

Having, in general considered the Cardinals according to their different
Factions, and the qualities that may give them hopes to aspire to the
Pontificat, or that exclude them from it: my design was to give the curious a
third division of the Cardinals, that at present constitute the Sacred
College, who may aspire to the triple Crown, or who may not; exposing to view
the particular qualities of every one of them, which render them worthy of, or
exclude them from that Supreme degree. But, some private considerations
concurring with the desires of many worthy people, whose instances I could not
reject, are the cause why I separate that work from this present Book,
promising to publish it with the first opportunity, together with the Intrigue
of the Ministers of Crowns.

FINIS.

