AN INSCRIPTION Intended to be set up for the E -- l of R -- r, WHEN By the
HAPPY EFFECTS of his MINISTRY, THE Chapel of St. STEPHEN's is become a Chapel
to the JESUITS.

Approved by the GENERAL, By Father L' Chaise, And the College at the Fleche.

TO The Eternal Memory OF L -- e E -- l of R -- r.

Printed in the Year, etc.

AN INSCRIPTION INTENDED To be set up for the E -- l of R -- r.
A Person formed by the Stars for daring Exploits. France in all Reigns,
Dunkirk ought not to be named with that of Three Kingdoms, Clarendon procured a
barren Queen, Gordian knot of Three leaves out of his Accounts. * Dalkeith for
England, Ormond for Ireland. Arran for Scotland. Or to attempt the same at
Dantzick, and the Cities of Prussia. Sent to Countermine Sir William Temple's
sincere designs. France what he intended for Spain. Dutch, the better to subdue
the English. Lewis the Great, English Constitution, Triumvirate, S -- d, G --
n, Lory, York, Chapter 2d. James the Just. Orange. Averse to all Endeavors for
enlarging Liberty: Or better securing the Protestant Religion. But above all,
and for the sake of all, William^ James. Jesuit. France to make his Grandson
Vice Roy of Spain. Dutch Heretics unresolved, English Heretics unprepared.

1701.
Translation of the L -- d H -- s Speech, now E. of R -- r, to the King of
Poland, 1677.
Most Illustrious Prince,
THE King my Master has commanded me to let your Majesty know, the Resolution
he has taken to concur in all points with the most Christian King, giving your
Majesty all possible assurance in the Establishing your Majesty's Title; in
such ways as your Majesty shall judge most Effectual to the securing your Crown
and Dignity, and the further honor and safety of the Queen and the Royal Issue.

The King my Master is truly sensible of the great misfortune of those Princes
whose power must be bounded, and Reason regulated by the Fantastic humors of
their Subjects. Till Princes come to be freed from these Inconveniences, the
King my Master sees no probable prospect of Establishing The most Holy
Apostolic Romans Cath. Religion.

In order to your Majesty's affairs, the King my Master has written to the
Kings of Sweden and Denmark, to the Elector of Brandenburgh, and other his
Majesty's Allies, in those Parts; that notwithstanding the Wars and differences
betwxt those Princes, they afford your Majesty all possible Assistance in your
Majesty's pretensions to Dantzick. He has also obliged the Prince of Orange to
divert the States of the united Provinces, from Interposing in that Affair,
either by dissuading your Majesty, or giving Assistance to the Rebellious
Inclinations of those Citizens of Dantzick.

The King my Master has commanded me to assure your Majesty, that as soon as he
can dispose of affairs; so as to Effect a General Peace (the speedy
acomplishment of which he doubts not of, the most Christian King having left
the whole affair in his hands) he dos not question, but by the Assistance and
Concurrence of the Kings and Princes concerned, to put an end to all the
frivolous and vain pretensions, not only of the Free and Hans Towns, but also
of the Dutch Republique, who have upon all occasions, not only threatened the
Prince of Orange, but also the Kings and Princes in these parts of the World;
their pretended Liberty having been of pernicious Consequence by their
Rebellious Example. And for the better Effecting those good ends that are
wished for and desired (the particulars of which I shall set down more
hereafter) I am Commanded by the King my Master, to join with the most
Christian Kings Ambassador in this Court, the Count de Bethune, to desire your
Majesty to give what Succors can be afforded from this Kingdom, in order to
the giving Life to the Male Contents in Hungary, the better to dispose the
Emperor and the Confederates to accept of such terms of Peace, as shall be
judged reasonable for your Majesty's Service and Interest, and the other good
ends before premised.

That you may no longer doubt of the truth of the Murder of King Chapter 2 d. I
send you here the plain story as it came from one of the Gent. who was daily
concerned in that Villainous Action; which take as follows, viz.* A few days
before King Charles the 2 d's Death, the then Lord Hallifax informed his
Majesty of some mismanagement in the Treasury; upon which the King went with
him to the Treasury (this was upon Thursday the 29 of January 1684/5.) and
examining some of the Books, found Three Leaves cut out of one of them, and
upon comparing that with some other Books, the Sum wanting, and which could not
be Accounted for, was found to be 80000 l. This put the King in such a heat,
that he declared the Parties concerned, should be punished with the utmost
severity the Law would allow; and the day after being Friday, he had some high
words with the D. of York in the privy Garden upon it, and was heard to say to
the D. that the next day he should go to Scotland; to which the D. replied By G
-- d he would not. The next day (being Saturday) Mr. Kingdon (who, with M.
Bridges and Mr. Patrick Trant, are said to have been concerned in the
Imbezlement of the 80000 l.) came to Dr. Hobbs, and told him there was going to
be an Inquisition made in some Accounts, which might perhaps be his ruin, he
therefore desired the Dr. to accept of a present of 4000 l. which he would
freely give him without Receipt, or any consideration whatsoever, and left it
to the Drs. Generosity, in case he should suffer by the said Inquisition, to be
kind to his Family. The Dr. for some reasons excused himself, but told him he
would procure him two of his Friends on whom he might entirely rely, who should
accept of the offer, and for whose Generosity he durst answer: To which Mr.
Kingdon agreed, the Friends were spoke to (who were Mr. Edmond Waller, and Mr.
William Clark; and they were appointed to be on the Monday following, at Eleven
of the Clock at Noon, in a Coach at a certain place, where 2000 l. a piece were
to be delivered to them without Receipt, or without knowing the Person who was
to give it them; it was only left to them to be kind to Kingdons Family if he
were brought into trouble: They (Mr. Waller, and Mr. Clark) went accordingly,
and stayed in the Coach from Eleven of the Clock till Three, but no Money came;
whereupon they went home, and the first news they heard was, that the King was
suddenly taken with a Fit of an Apoplexy; which we may suppose was the reason
the Money was not brought, according to agreement. The King continued ill, till
the Friday following, which was the Sixth of February 1684/5. and then Dyed,
which put a stop to the intended Inquisition. And may Kings never be used
better who Employ such Ministers.

FINIS.

