AN ACT For the better Regulating of MEASURES In and Throughout this Kingdom.



DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for the better Regulating of Measures in and throughout this Kingdom.
FOR Prevention of the many and Great Inconveniences and Discouragements to
Trade in this Kingdom, which proceed from the want of one Certain and Known
Measure for all sorts of Grain to be Measured and Sold by, in and throughout
this Kingdom.

Be it therefore Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That one and
the same Measure shall be Used in and throughout this Kingdom, and Every part
thereof: And that the Measure and Measures to be henceforth Used in this
Kingdom shall be and Contain as herein after is mentioned and Appointed, and no
otherwise (that is to say) The Measure Called the Peck shall be and Contain Two
Gallons, and no more. The Measure Called the Bushel shall be and Contain Eight
Gallons, and no more. The Measure Called the Half Barrel shall be and Contain
Sixteen Gallons, and no more. And the Barrel shall be and Contain Thirty Two
Gallons, and no more. The said Gallon to Contain Two Hundred Seaventy Two
Cubical Inches, and one fourth part of a Cubical Inch, according to the Gallon
mentioned and Appointed in and by one Act of Parliament, made and Enacted in
this Kingdom, in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of the Late Queen ELIZABETH, of
Blessed Memory.

And be it also Enacted, that there shall be forthwith provided, at His
Majesty's Charge, one Barrel, one half Barrel, one Bushel, one Peck, and one
Gallon, according to the above said Measure; which said Barrel, half Barrel,
Bushel, Peck and Gallon shall be the Standards for the Measures in and
throughout this Kingdom of IRELAND: And that the said Standards being marked
with the Crown, and Letters of His Majesty's Name, shall be placed, and safely
kept in His Majesty's Exchequer of this Kingdom, in the Custody of the Lord
Treasurer of this Realm, or of the Vice-Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies for
the time being.

And be it further Enacted, That in Every County, Town, City, Liberty,
Franchise, and Market Town within this Realm, shall be placed and Kept at the
proper Costs and Charges of Each County, City, Liberty, Franchize, and
Market Town, Respectively, in the Custody of the Sheriff of such County, and of
the Mayor, Bailiff, Sovereign, Seneschal, or Steward of any Liberty, or Manor,
or other Chief Magistrate Residing in such City, or Market Town, one Barrel,
one half Barrel, one Bushel, one Peck, and one Gallon, according to the above
Measures; which said Barrel, half Barrel, Bushel, Peck and Gallon shall be
first Measured by the said Standards in the Exchequer, and shall be severally
Sealed, Branded or Marked on the Edge or Brim, with the Crown and Letters of
His Majesty's Name, and with such other Mark as the Lord High Treasurer of this
Kingdom, or the Vice-Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies, for the time being,
shall think fit, and that for the Measuring, Branding and Marking of Each such
Measures the sum of Sixpence, and no more, shall be paid to the said Lord
High-Treasurer, or the Vice-Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies, for the time
being, by the Person or Persons who shall bring the said Measures to be
Measured, Branded or Marked; which said Barrels, half Barrels, Bushels, Pecks
and Gallons, in the Custody of the said Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Sovereigns,
Seneschals, or Stewards of any Liberty, or Manor, or other Head-Officers,
being Measured or Marked by the said Lord High Treasurer, or the
Vice-Treasurer, his Deputy or Deputies, for the time being, shall be and Remain
the Standards for such County, City, Liberty or Franchize, or Market Town,
Respectively.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Sovereigns, Seneschals, or Steward of any Liberty, or Manor, and other
Officers, in whose Custody such Standards are hereby Appointed to Remain, shall
have full power to Measure and Compare all such Barels, half Barrels, Bushels,
Pecks and Gallons, as shall be brought, or offered to them, or any of them to
be Measured or Marked; And if upon Measuring the same, they or any of them
shall find the said Measure so brought or offered, Respectively, to be
agreeable to, and to Contain Equal Qantities with the said Measures Marked by
the said Lord High-Treasurer, or Vice-Treasurer, his said Deputy or Deputies,
for the time being, That then the said Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Sovereigns,
Seneschal, Steward, or other Chief Officers, or any of them, shall Mark, or
Brand the said Measures so brought to them on the Rim or Edge of them,
Respectively, with the Crown and Letters of His Majesty's Name; and also with a
Mark or Brand to be appointed by each County, City, Liberty or Franchize, or
Market Town, Respectively: And that for the Measuring and Marking of Each such
Measure, shall be paid by the Person or Persons bringing or offering the said
Measure or Measures to be Sealed or Marked, the Sum of Sixpence, and no more.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Twenty Sixth Day of March, which will be in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand,
Six Hundred, Ninety Six, no Measures shall be Used for Measuring any sort of
Grain in this Kingdom, or in any part thereof, but such as shall be first
Measured and Compared by the said Standards in the Exchequer, or by one of the
said Standards Remaining in the Custody of such as hereby are Appointed to have
the Custody of them in the Respective Counties, Cities, Liberties, Franchizes,
and Market Towns within this Kingdom, and shall be Branded and Marked, as
aforesaid: And that whosoever after the said Twenty Sixth Day of March next,
shall Sell or Measure any sort of Grain, Corn, Malt, or Oat-Meal, in any place
or places whatsoever within this Kingdom, by any Measure or Measures Containing
any Greater or Lesser Quantity then as aforesaid, or by any Barrel, half
Barrel, Bushel, Peck or Gallon which has not been Measured by, and is not of
Equal Content with the said Standard in the Exchequer, or by, and with the said
Standards Remaining in the said Counties, Towns, Cities, Liberties, Franchizes,
or Market Towns, or some of them, or that has not been Marked, as aforesaid,
by some one in whose Custody the said Standards are by this Act Appointed to
Remain, shall Forfeit for Every such Offense the sum of Ten Pounds, whereof
the one Moiety shall be to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense is, or
shall be, Committed; and the other Moiety to the Informer, and that upon
Information given upon Oath, or otherwise, to any Justice of the Peace of any
County, Mayor, Bailiff, Sovereign, or other Chief Magistrate of any City,
Liberty, or Franchize, or Town Corporate, the said Seneschal, Justice of the
Peace, Franchise, Mayors, Bailiffs, Sovereign, Seneschal, aforesaid, or other
Chief Magistrate to whom such Information is Given, shall immediately Issue his
Warrant, Requiring the Party or Parties Complained of to appear before him; And
if upon Examination it shall appear by the Oath or Oaths of one or more
Credible Witnesses to the said Justice of Peace, Mayor, Bailiff, Sovereign,
Seneschal, aforesaid, or other Chief Magistrate; that the said Party so
Complained of, has Sold, Delivered, or Received any sort of Corn, Grain,
Malt, or Oat-Meal, by any Barrel, half Barrel, or other Measure not Marked,
Sealed, or Branded by the Sheriff, Mayor, Sovereign, Seneschal, or some other
Person who hereby have Power, and are Appointed to make Seal, or Brand the
same, That then the said Justice, Mayor, Bailiffs, Sovereign, or other Chief
Magistrate within his and their Respective Precincts, shall Issue a Warrant to
the Constable of the Parish where such Offender Resides, Requiring him to Levy
by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the Person so Offending the said sum of
Ten Pounds, whereof the one moiety shall be given to the Poor of the Parish, as
aforesaid, where such Offender does Reside, and the other moiety to the said
Informer.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person, who
hereby has power to Measure and Mark any Barrel, half Barrel, or other Measure
brought to him, shall Mark, Seal, Brand, or allow any Barrel, half Barrel, or
any other Measure which shall or does Contain more or less, Respectively, then
the said Standards Remaining in his Custody, the said Person so Doing shall
Forfeit for Every such Barrel, half Barrel, or other Measure so Sealed, Marked,
Branded or Allowed by him, the sum of Fifty Pounds; The one Moiety to the
King, and the other Moiety to the Use of him that will sue for the same, to be
Recovered by Action, Suite, Bill or Plaint, in any of His Majesty's Courts of
Record, at Dublin, wherein no Essoyne, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
Allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance.

And be it likewise Enacted, That Every Barrel, half Barrel, and other Measure
whatsoever of any sort of Corn, Grain, Malt, or Oat-Meal shall be Sold,
Delivered and Received, Stricked without Heaps, and without Pressing or shaking
Down: And not in any other manner, upon pain of the Forfeiture of Five Pounds
to him that will Sue for the same, to be Recovered by Action, Suite, Bill, or
Plaint, in any of His Majesty's Courts at Dublin, wherein no Essoyn,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be Allowed, or any more then one Imparlance.

FINIS.

