AN ACT FOR THE CONFIRMATION OF ARTICLES, Made at the SURRENDER OF THE City of
Limerick.



DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT for the Confirmation of Articles, made at the Surrender of the City of
Limerick. CHAP. XXVII.
WHEREAS diverse Doubts have arisen, on the Articles made at the Treaty for the
late Surrender of the City of Limerick, the Third Day of October, One thousand
Six hundred Ninety one, and concerning the true intent and meaning of several
Parts thereof.

And whereas Your Majesty has been Graciously pleased to Recommend to Your
Parliament, that the said Articles, or so much of them as may consist with the
Safety and Welfare of Your Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, may be Confirmed
by Authority of this present Parliament.

We the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, having due regard to Your Majesty's Honor, for Declaring
the true Sense and Meaning of the said Articles, and taking away all occasions
of Doubt for the time to come, do most humbly beseech Your Majesty, that it may
be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same; that the Second
Article in the aforesaid Articles mentioned, be, and is hereby Confirmed and
Ratified, in the Sense and Intendment following, and no otherwise (that is to
say) That all the Inhabitants, or Residents of Limerick, or any other Garrison
in the Possession of the Irish, at the time of making the said Articles; and
all Officers and Soldiers then in Arms, under any Commission of the late King
James, or those Authorized by him to Grant the same, in the several Counties of
Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork and Mayo, and all the Commissioned Officers in the
Quarters of His Majesty, that belonged to the Irish Regiments then in being,
that were Treated with, and who were not Prisoners of War, nor had at any time
before that time Enjoyed the Benefit of Protections for the Safety of
themselves, or their Goods and Families; which said Officers have in pursuance
of the said Articles, Returned to Their Obedience, and Submitted to His
Majesty, and to Her late Majesty Queen Mary: Such Inhabitants, or Residents of
Limerick, or any other Garrison, as aforesaid; such Officers and Soldiers
respectively, as aforesaid, and their, and every of their Heirs, shall Hold,
Possess and Enjoy, all and every their Estates of Freehold and Inheritance,
and all the Rights, Titles, and Interests, Privileges, and Immunities to the
said Estates of Freehold and Inheritance belonging, which they, and every, or
any of them Held, Enjoyed, or were Rightfully and Lawfully Entitled to, in the
Reign of King Charles the Second, or at any time since, by the Laws and
Statutes that were in Force in the said Reign of King Charles the Second, and
such Possession as was given the said Inhabitants, Officers and Soldiers, in
whose behalf the said Articles were, as aforesaid, made, of Lands then in His
Majesty's Hands, or in the Hands of His Tenants, by Order of the then
Government under His Majesty, is as to the Possession only, and no more,
Confirmed and Ratified by the Authority of this Act, against His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, and all such Estates of Freehold and Inheritance shall
be Freed and Discharged; and by the Authority of this present Act, are Declared
and Enacted, to be, and stand Freed and Discharged of, and from all Arrears of
Crown-Rents, Quit-Rents, and other Public Charges, Incurred, or become Due,
from, and after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, in the Year of our
Lord, One thousand Six hundred Eighty eight, to the Day of the Date of the said
Articles.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act,
or any thing therein contained, shall not Extend, or be Construed to Extend to
a Grant of any new Right to the aforesaid Persons, in whose behalf the
aforesaid Articles were made, or any of them; but that the same shall Extend,
and be Construed to Extend to the Restoring the said Persons, and every of
them, to their said Estates of Freehold and Inheritance, against His Majesty,
His Heirs and Successors, in as large and ample manner as they should have
Enjoyed the same, had they not been Guilty of the Rebellion, aforesaid, and not
otherwise, or in any other manner; neither shall this Act Extend, or be
construed to Extend, to alter or avoid the Possession of any such Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, as have been Recovered or Gained by any other of
His Majesty's Subjects, from, or against the said persons in whose behalf the
said Articles were made, or any of them, at any time since the Date of the said
Articles, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person, and persons Comprehended in the said Second Article, in the said
Articles mentioned, shall have, hold and enjoy, all his and their Goods, and
Chattels, Real and Personal, to them or any of them, at the time of making the
said Articles, belonging, and which then, or at that time remained either in
their own Hands, or in the Hands of any other person or persons whatsoever in
Trust for them, or for the Use of them, or any of them; and the said Goods and
Chattels, Real and Personal, as aforesaid, shall have, hold and enjoy against
His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors: And as for, and concerning all other the
Goods and Chattels, Real and Personal, which formerly did belong to, or were
the Propriety of any of the said persons Comprehended within the said Articles,
as aforesaid, at any time before the Date of the said Articles, which said
Goods and Chattels, Real and Personal, had been at any time since the Tenth day
of April, One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine, and before the Date of the said
Articles, Seized, Sequestered, or by any manner of way taken to the use of His
Majesty, and Her said late Majesty the Queen, by any Sheriff, Escheator,
Commissioner, Officer, Civil or Military, their Ministers or Servants, or any
other person or persons whatsoever; and all other the Goods and Chattels of the
said persons, which were not in their own possession, or in the possession of
any person or persons, as aforesaid, in Trust for them, at the Day of the
making the said Articles, the same by the Authority of this Act, shall be
Deemed, Vested and Adjudged to be in the actual and real possession of His
Majesty, without any Office or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be found or
taken.

Saving to all and every person and persons, Bodies-Politick and Corporate, and
to their Successors, Executors Administrators and Assigns, and to the
Successors, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns of every of them, other then
the said persons in whose behalf the said Articles were made, and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Claiming any thing in the said Goods and
Chattels, xeal and Personal or any part thereof, as Executors, Administrators,
or Assigns of the said persons, in whose behalf the said Articles were made, or
any of them, and all and every other person or persons Claiming, or having any
thing in the said Goods and Chattels, Real or Personal, as aforesaid, Seized,
Sequestered, or by any manner of way taken to the use of His Majesty, as
aforesaid, to the use of the Persons in whose behalf the said Articles were
made, or any of them, or to the use of any of their Executors and
Administrators; all such Right, Title, Interest, Possession. Use, Action and
Means to recover the same, whatsoever, which they or any of them had, or ought
to have, in the Premises, or any part thereof, against the said persons, in
whose behalf the said Articles were made, or any of them, in as large and ample
manner to all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been had or made,
or any thing herein contained to the contrary notwitstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to avoid any Grant or Grants at any time heretofore made by His Majesty,
and the late Queen (of blessed Memory) or by His Majesty of any such Goods and
Chattles, Real or Personal, hereby intended to be Vested in His Majesty, as
aforesaid, but that such Grant and Grants respectively shall be and remain in
such Force and Effect, as if this Act had not been made.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
or persons shall be construed, to be restored within the Intent and Meaning of
the said Articles, or of this Act, who at the time of their hearing their
respective Claims to the Benefit of the said Articles, shall neglect or refuse
to take the Oaths of Fidelity to His Majesty, mentioned in the said Articles;
nor to restore such who at the time of making of the said Articles, was, or
were out of the Kingdom of Ireland,

Except such persons as are Comprised in the Fourth Article of the said
Articles, made for the late Surrender of Limerick, which said persons, in the
said Fourth Article Comprised, shall have the Benefit of the said Second
Article, in such manner and form as in and by this Act is, as aforesaid,
Declared, and no otherwise.

Provided the said persons in the said Fourth Article, named, respectively did
return hither within the space of Eight Months, from the Date of the said
Articles, and have within that time Submitted to the Government of His Majesty,
and Her late Majesty the late Queen; and also within that time taken the Oath
of Allegiance to His Majesty, and Her late Majesty the Queen.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Merchants, or
reputed Merchants, Inhabitants of the Town of Limerick, or of any other Garrison
which at the time of making the said Articles, was possessed by the Irish, or
of any Town or Place in the Counties of Clare or Kerry, who were absent beyond
the Seas, and that have not been in Arms since the Declaration made by His
Majesty, and Her late Majesty Queen Mary, in February, One thousand Six hundred
Eighty eight, shall have the Benefit of the Second Article, in manner and form
aforesaid, Declared, in as large and ample manner, as if such Merchants, or
reputed Merchants, had been present at the making of the said Articles.

Provided such Merchants, or reputed Merchants, did repair into this Kingdom
within the space of Eight Mouths from the Date of the said Articles, and
submitted himself, or themselves to His Majesty, and Her late Majesty's
Government.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the
persons already Adjudged, or that shall hereafter be Adjudged to have been
Comprised within the Second and Third Articles, of the aforesaid Articles of
Limerick, shall from henceforth be deemed and taken to be, as to any
Prosecution, in the Name and Behalf of His Majesty, and of Her late Majesty, or
in the Name and Behalf of His Majesty, His Heirs and Suecessors, fully and
absolutely Pardoned by the Authority of this Act, of all Attainders or
Out-Lawries in this Kingdom, had or done, for all Treasons, Misprisions of
Treasons, Premunires, Felonies, Trespasses and other Crimes or Misdemeanors
whatsoever, by them, or any of them, committed or done since the beginning of
the Reign of the late King James, to the Third Day of October One thousand Six
hundred Ninety one.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Expiration of Two Years, to be computed from the First Day of September One
thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, no person or persons whatsoever, shall be
Adjudged, Deemed, or taken to be Entitled to, or have the Benefit of the said
Articles, who shall not be adjudged within that time to be Comprehended therein.

And whereas some Questions or Doubts have arisen, for, and concerning the time
of the beginning of the Rebellion, or War in this Kingdom, Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said Rebellion, or War, is hereby Declared to
have begun upon the Tenth Day of April, One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine,
the same being the Day limited to the said Rebels and Traitors by His
Majesty, and Her late Majesty's Declaration, in February One thousand Six
hundred Eighty eight for the said Rebels and Traitors laying down of their
Arms, and accepting of Their said Majesty's Grace and Mercy, on the Terms in
the said Declaration proposed.

And that no person or persons whatsoever, already adjudged, or that shall be
hereafter adjudged, to be Comprehended in the foregoing Articles, shall be
Sued, Molested, or Impleaded at to the Suit of any Party or Parties whatsoever,
for any Trespasses by the said persons, as aforesaid Comprised, committed or
done any time since the said Tenth of April One thousand Six hundred Eighty
nine, and before the Date of the said Articles, for any Arms, Horses, Money,
Goods, Chattels, Merchandises, or Provisions whatsoever, by them seized or
taken at any time after the said Tenth Day of April One thousand Six hundred
Eighty nine, and before the Date of the said Articles; and no person or persons
whatsoever, in the Second or Third Articles Comprised, shall be Sued,
Impleaded, or made accountable for the Rents or Mesne-rates of any Lands,
Tenements, or Houses by him or them received or enjoyed in this Kingdom, since
the said Tenth Day of April One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine, to the Day of
the Date of the said Articles, nor for any Waste or Trespass, by him or them
committed in any such Lands, Tenements or Houses, since the said Tenth Day of
April One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine, and before the Date of the said
Articles.

And whereas it is necessary that a time be limited for the bringing of the
said private Actions, for, or on account of such Wrongs, Injuries and
Trespasses, as aforesaid, committed or done by any person or persons
Comprehended, or Claiming the Benefit of the said Articles since the said Fifth
Day of November One thousand Six hundred Eighty eight, to the said Tenth Day of
April One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be Lawful, to,
and for such person and persons as have had any Wrongs, Injuries and Trespasses
committed upon them, by any of the persons aforesaid, since the said Fifth Day
of November One thousand Six hundred Eighty eight, and before the said Tenth
Day of April One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine, to commence his or their
Action or Actions against such Trespasser or Trespassers, Wrong-doer or
Wrong-doers, at any time within the space of One Year, to be accounted from the
said First Day of September One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, and at no
other time or times after the expiration of the said Year, any Law or Statute
to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

