INSTRUCTIONS FOR JURYMEN* ON THE Commission of Sewers; SHOWING

1. What they are to Surveigh and View. 2. What to Enquire and Present. 3. How.
DELIVERED In a Charge to 3. several-Juries, at a Session of Sewers, holden at
Spalding, in the County of Lincoln.

To which is added, Two other Charges; The One concerning Lovell's Works.

The Other touching the River of Glean, in the said County.

LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, for Tho. Johnson, at the Golden-Key in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1664

Licensed,

AUGUST the 1st. 1664. Roger L'Estrange.

Gentlemen, You of these several Juries,
When I look upon you, and consider the persons, 1. To whom I am to speak:
Some of you Men grown Gray in this employment, and that know as much what
belongs to it, as I can tell you: Or when I look upon others, 2. Before whom I
am to speak, Gentlemen much better able to do it than my self, I cannot but
think some such thing may befall Me, as did that Philosopher of Ephesus, who
most presumptuously undertook to instruct Hannibal in the Discipline of War: A
Self-conceited man, bred up another way, and in studies of another Nature; yet
out of 1. Arrogance, and 2. Ignorance, would give Hannibal a Discipline in his
own Art, wherein he was so famously eminent (I would spare it, without 1. Envy,
and 2. Offense, To the 1. Living, and the 2. Dead) That for Valor and Wisdom,
he was to be reckoned One, even amongst the Greatest Generals that ever
appeared in the Head of an Army: And what I have to speak to you here, may
prove as that he did there, not only Needless, but Absurd and ridiculous.

However, yet (under Favor of those that hear it) Give me leave, though not in
a way, To 1. Instruct you in your Duty, as if I thought you Ignorant: No, nor
yet To 2. Direct you, as if I thought you Unskilful, or Unexperienced; But only
To 3. Remind, or Remember you of it.

You are here three several Juries, of 1. Surveigh, and 2. Inquiry: And for
order and method I shall reduce all that I have to say to you, to Three general
heads. First, I shall declare to you What you are to View, in order to your
Surveigh. Secondly, What you are to Present in order to your Inquiry: And
Thirdly, How you are to Present, so as to perfect both. These three, I conceive
comprehend your whole Duty. The First tells you what you are to travel and ride
about, when you are gone from hence. The Second tells you what you are to do,
when you come hither again. The Third tells you in what manner you are to do
it; of these with as much clearness and shortness as I may.

1. Wha^ to View
For the First, what you are to View. I do take it, they are all such things as
are properly within the defense of the Laws of Sewers, and do concern, either
1. Navigation, or 2. Drayning, or 3. common Land-passage in such Maritime
Countries as this is.

Navigation.
First then, One great end of your View and Enquiry, is to preserve Navigation;
that is, according to the common use of the Word in matters of Sewers, all
manner of passage by water; and this does not only 1. employ the Merchant, and
many more under him, and make him to abound; but it also 2. enriches the Common
Treasury by Customs, and 3. upholds the general Trade and Traffic of the
whole Nation; and is in a special manner advantageous to such Countries as
this, that are adjacent to the Sea: for hereby, as you may Export many of your
home-growing Commodities, and sell them abroad at the dearest Rates, So such as
are Imported, and brought in 1. from foreign Countries, or 2. from other
Countries within your own, you buy them with the 1. first, and at the 2.
cheapest; and other Upland-places cannot have them, but 1. from you, or 2.
after you.

Now the Commission of Sewers, in a matter of such great import as this of
Navigation, is very exact and careful, 1. First, In respect of all kinds of
Navigation, 1. Whether it be with Vessels Of Ships, Boats, Ballingers.
of the greatest bulk, as Ships. 2. Or with Vessels of the smallest kind, as
Boats. 3. Or with Vessels of a middle nature, as Ballingers; which many take to
signify certain kinds of Vessels, immediately employed about the lading or
unloading of Ships; in some of the greatest Rivers of this Nation (as I am
informed) there be some of the greater sort of Vessels, of this very name, and
for this very use; and are fresh water Vessels, of the greatest bulk, framed
with Oars, and without Sails: I shall neither trouble my self, nor you, about
the Original of the Word: There be, would fetch it far enough, from an Hebrew
Radix; but if I should follow (...)
Minsius in this his Opinion, I should have a farther trouble to tell you who
brought it hither; therefore I shall only, and plainly tell you, in the
Commission, I take it to signify the same with your Naviculae Actuariae
amongst the Latins, such as be the Ballingers, or Balasters, properly so
called, we have already spoken of: As also your Barges, and your Keels, and all
other kinds of your greater fresh water Vessels, carrying Anchors in them; by
the one they are distinguished from Ships, by the other from Boats.

In Rivers, Streams, and other Floods.
2. Secondly, In this Point of Navigation the Commission is very exact, in
respect of all Waters that be in any manner Navigable; I mean in case they be
so 1. of common right, (which being once spoken, I would have it understood in
every part of my Discourse; for the Commission defends not any Navigation, nor
any watercourse, but the common watercourse, and the common Navigation only)
and then, whether it be in greater or in lesser Waters, in smoother or in
rougher Currents; that is, in 1. Rivers, 2. Streams, or 3. other Floods,
doubtless it is to be preserved; and the Commission does in specie, and in
particular, nominate every one of them.

Drayning.
The second sort of things you are to view, are such as concern Drayning, and
these be such as directly preserve your Country, and do immediately concern the
very Being, both 1. of the Country, and 2. of you in it. Now these are of two
sorts, First, such as preserve the Country from being Drowned, by keeping out
the Waters. Secondly, such as make the Country dry, by issuing out the Waters.

Those Defenses that preserve the Country from being Drowned, by keeping out
the Waters, the principal of them; and such as are expressly named Walls, and
Banks.
in the Commission, are 1. your Walls, and 2. your Banks* I shall not be
overcurious in the distinguishing of them: such as distinguish them in regard
of the Materials whereof they consist, and will have a Bank to be only of
Earth, and a Wall only of Stone, will hardly ^erive our English Wall, from the
Lain Vallum; for, that that was usually of Earth, is out of all question. For
my part, I conceive the difference to be ^ather in the manner of the Defense:
So that if they be main Defenses, both for height, and strength, and security;
if they do, Vallo munire, be of the like defense to the Country, that an
Intrenchment is to an Army; I do take them to be Walls, though made of Earth;
such as your Sea-walls are, both in Fact, and in Name. 2. And all smaller, and
weaker Defenses, I take to be Banks.

Now your Walls, or your Banks, (it matters not much by which of these Names
you usually call them, for they are both expressly in the Commission) are of
three several sorts, or kinds. 1. Rivers 2. Banks.
First, such as defend against the Rivers, and your other greater Sewers, and
the fresh-waters therein Descending; and these have a twofold benefit. 1. The
one, in that they make a stream, and inchanel the waters, which makes very much
to Navigation. 2. The other, in that they secure the Country, and preserve the
same from Inundation, which certainly makes as much to draining: and Gent. such
may be the violence of some of these Rivers, and that I may speak with relation
to our own particular concernments, that of Welland is known to be such, that
if it be not kept within Banks, and the Banks thereof strongly defended, some
parts of this Country will be in yearly danger of being drowned, either
Northernly, as far as Boston, or Southernly, as far as Sutton, or Easternly,
upon the Towns that suffered under it this last VVinter; even as the Winds
shall chance to drive the Waters, and the Fens. And therefore I would have you
take so far notice of your danger, as now, while you may, to prevent it; and,
by securing of these River-Banks, to secure your Country.

Fen-Banks.
2. Secondly, other Banks there be that are main Defenses against the Fens, and
that vast Body of waters, usually lying upon that Level: These you commonly
call your outring Banks, and they have always been esteemed as the main defense
and security of your several Townships: Some of you, of some of these Juries, I
am sure have reason to look upon them as such; and with what Eyes and Hearts
you lately beheld and felt your own danger and damage, and it might have been
your utter Destruction, even from hence, many of you cannot but remember now;
And this I am sure of, Wets and Winds may come again.

3. Thirdly, other Banks there be, that are main defenses against the Sea, that
raging Enemy: But because by the Sea-Banks.
imbanking of the Marshes, there is at present, a handsome anticipation as to
you in this Country, and other persons, and their Estates, lie between you and
the charge, and before you and the danger, so that the Sea cannot much hurt
you, before it destroy them: Therefore I shall not speak much to you about
these Banks, only I would have you see to them so far, that they be not 1.
weakened, or 2. demolished, nor for any private Man's pleasure, profit or command
whatsoever, 3. cut through, or 4. in any other manner made indefensable. These
Banks, you know, are the common known defense of the whole Country; and for the
upholdin of the other Marsh-Banks, there is ^ farther Obligation, than private
Interest, and the mere will of the Owne^ And truly considering what great
Batteries the Sea, of late years, has mad upon them, and what strong assaults
upon the Country, I would not have the common defense of the whole Country,
altogether neglected, and regardlesly lef upon other men's scores, only because
they are a little more immediately concerned in the danger, and are sure to be
drowned before us: And so I have done with such defenses as preserve the
Country from being drowned, by keeping out the waters.

Watercourse.
Secondly, Other things there be within the Defense of the Commission of
Sewars, that make the Country dry, by issuing out the waters; and these are
your VVater-gangs, or your common watercourse of all sorts, from the very
Gutter, to the River; To give you particular notice of such as are particularly
named in the Commission: There is,

Gutters.
1. First your Gutter, which is the mallest Chanel of water; And I have ^en in
some Up-land Towns, where Gutters, and a common Ditch, or in ohers, a Brook,
have been the only ewars, and where they alone have even sufficient to avoid the
whole mishief of that water: But where there ave been no other Sewars but
these, hey have seldom come under the diretion of a Commission, the Court Leets
ave been sufficient, and have served he turn to order them.

Ditches.
2. Secondly, Ditches, The Latins all them Fossae, a Fodiendo, as being made
with the Spade; For, Fossa est receptaculum Aquae manu facta, says Ul^ian, and
for any Grammarians pleasure ^ dare not alter it; but he has said so before
me, and I must crave leave to use his words, and say so after him.

And though these Ditches consist of larger channels than Gutters, yet I take
them to have the smallest current of waters: Hence the Learned Reader, upon the
Statute of Sewars, calls them a current of water, in infimo gradu, in the
lowest degree imaginable.

Your Ditches in this Country, are, or ought I know, of private use an charge,
and are not under the Direction of the Commission, further than, 1. A they may
relate to some general or common Good, or 2. may be the cause o some general or
common Mischief; bu in the Countries above us there are some ancient remains of
these common Ditches, though for the present they are most of them dry and
deserted; and considering the little use that now i made of them, I have heard
some wonder, to what purpose they were at first devised: For my own part, I
doubt not, but that in antienter times they have been of prime use, even in
this very respect of Drayning; but I take it since such Countries as this, that
lie between the Sea and them, have been gained, and made useful, they have
been left as useless; and so much concerning them. Other watercourse there
be, that have both considerable 1. Chanells, and 2. Currents, and are very
beneficious and useful to you in matter of Drayning, and they follow in the
Commission, where

Trenches
3. Thirdly, You have Trenches; which for distinction from the rest, I ache to
be currents of water, trenched eep, and sunk within soil; such as ave either 1.
no banks raised above oil, or 2. very small ones, and those ather raised by the
cleansing and purgng of them, to give a swifter and rea^ier passage to the
waters, than to de^end against them: These are those your Latins properly call
Incilia, passages for water cut deep into the ^oyl; and they are the petty
conveyances of any downfall of waters into your main Sewars.

Sewars.
4. Fourthly, Sewars; and they are to be accounted amongst your grand Issuers
of water; from whence I conceive they carry their name (Sewars, quasi Issuers.)
I shall take his opinion, who delivers them to be Currents of water, kept in on
both sides with banks; and in some sense, they may be called, a certain kind of
a little or small River. But as for the derivation of the word Sewar, from two
of our English words, Sea and Were, or as others will have it, Sea and Ward,
give me leave, now I have mentioned it, to leave it to your judgments. However
this word, Sewar, is very famous amongst us, both for giving the Title to the
Commission of Sewars it self, and for being the ordinary name of most of your
common Watercourse, for Drayning in the Country; and therefore I presume,
there are none of you, of these Juries, but both know 1. what your Sewars
signify, and also in particular 2. what they are; and of a thing so generally
known, and of such general use, I shall use no more words to you, but that you
have a special regard and care of them.

And thus much of your Watercourse, which relate only to Drayning, and have
no living Fountains from whence they are fed, but are only Drains, and serve to
discharge and carry off the surplusage of other waters; such other waters I
mean, as either 1. have their immediate downfall from the Heavens amongst us,
2. or descend from Upland Countries to us, 3. or are the Over-stowings of
Rivers and greater Streams upon us. Four kinds there are of them, as you have
heard; two of them of private and particular charge and benefit only, as your
1. Gutters, and 2. your Ditches: other two of common and general charge and
use, as 3. your Trenches, and 4. your Sewers. Now will you see, how they stand
in order, and relate one to another? Take it briefly thus. Your 1. Gulters,
they bring the waters from off your Grounds to your Ditches. 2. Your Ditches,
they bring the waters down to your Trenches. 3. Your Trenches, they carry them
out to your Sewers. And 4. your Sewers, they carry them away to the Sea. And of
them thus much.

The remaining Watercourse, mentioned in the Commission, are such as relate
both to Drayning, and also to Navigation, and that in an Eminent Manner: And
they are your Streams, and your Rivers.

Streams.
5. Fifthly, Streams, I do take for such Currents of water, as have both a 1
Certain, and a 2 Constant Source from whence they Flow. You may make two sorts
of them. First, such as do conveigh the water from the Fountain to the River:
some of these, which do descend from greater Springs, are Navigable from the
very head. As to give you an example of one that lies within the charge of one
of these Juries; and withal, to charge them, take special notice of it.
Burne-^i is such a Stream, and though this, as all other Streams of this
nature, be Navigable but with Boats, that is with Vessels of the smallest size
only, yet as I formerly told you, such Navigation is to be preserved. However
these Streams are a great advancement to all Navigation; whereupon, the Author
of the Readings upon the Statute of Sewars, no less truly than eloquently,
calls the Springs from whence they Flow, the very Vital Spirits of all the
Rivers in the Land. Secondly, other Streams there be, which have been devised
to make a Navigable passage from one great River to another, call them Leams or
Streams, it matters not much, as long as you signify the same thing with me;
and these very prudently have been devised, as helps to enlarge Navigation, and
so far only to be suffered, as they enlarge it, and better it: For where, 1.
they either make Navigation worse, by diverting the water, or 2. endanger the
Country, by overflowing the Level, they are, as I shall hereafter tell you,
within the power and view of the Commission of Sewars indeed, but as
impediments and annoyances, to be reformed, or removed, and n that case, are
rather to be esteemed, Waters out of Course, than Watercourse. And thus much
concerning Streams, which I take to be sufficiently distinguished from all the
former Waer-Courses, in that they have a cerain, and a constant Fountain or
Source, from whence they Flow, which the oher want.

Rivers.
6. The Sixth Watercourse named in he Commission, is a River, and this
properly is made up of Streams, and is no other thing than many Streams
incor^orate into one, and so becomes Naviable to the Sea. Besides, that Rivers
re greater waters than Streams, a River nd a Stream, differ also in Exitu, that
^, in their Outfall for the Outfall of a tream is commonly a River, but the
ommon Outfall of a River is the Sea. Many are the benefits and advantages of a
River, even such as be of private Concernment, wherein certainly, many
particular Persons may have good Right and Interest; and whereof, such as in
truth have so, further than as at some times they may cross the main end of the
Commission of Sewers, ought not to be debarred the Enjoyment, or limited in the
Use. But I shall say no more of these, a being not comprised within the
Commission; only I shall tell you, that suc there are, and that the Commission
o Sewers was not made, nor intended, t Destroy them, but only to Regulate them
so as that particular Convenienci^ might not become general Mischief But to
come home to the Commission from whence? and whither? Is it th your Ships sail?
but 1. From, and 2. T your Ports, and your Havens? and they a nothing else but
secure Harbors up^ your Rivers. 1. Your Havens, Harbors f security only. 2.
Your Ports* (as the woe is usually here taken amongst us in o English language)
besides that, places 1. Privilege, and 2. Defense too; wh^ is it, that your
Boats, and Barges, ^ Balingers, and other Vessels, have th common passage? Is
it not upon your Rivers? These two for Navigation; but give me leave to ask you
a third Question, What is it that does conduce so much to matter of Drayning,
as your Rivers do? Other Drayns you have, I confess; But your Rivers, 1. They
are the grand conveyers of the water from the Fountain to the Sea, which they
ought to bear down, 1. in their own Channels, 2. and other adjacent receptacles,
till they discharge it there: And so they carry away the mischief, 1. of
Springs wholly, and 2. of Land-waters also, as to the greatest part of it.

Again, 2. The Rivers they keep open a Chanel or vent into the Sea, and so give
an Outfall, both, 1. to their own waters, and 2. to all your other Drains too;
without which, your Drains all of them would be useless; For you had as good
have no Drain, as they to have no Outfall: So that I may well say, without
Rivers, there would be neither 1. Navigation, nor 2. Draining to any purpose.
Therefore, Gentlemen, It concerns you, to take special notice of your Rivers.
There are some, four as I take it, in the whole County, that be Navigable, and
two of them are now under your view, the one of Welland* the other of Gleane:
The one of these* namely that of Welland, it is said, must drown all Holland, Est
adhuc in Fatis, and I pray God we in this careless Age see it not in Facto: An
old saying it is, and loath I would be, that we in our days should conveigh
the sad remembrance of the Truth of it to following Generations.

Floods.
7. Besides Rivers, there is in the Commission mention made of Floods; which
doubtless, are 1. either Waters, 2. or Watercourse; and for my part, I take
them to be nothing else but your greater Rivers* Both Flood and River, as to
the words, have their derivation a Fluendo, the one in Greek, the other in
Latin; and till I be better instructed, I shall hold with the Civilians, That,
Flumen a Rivo discernendum est, vel Magnitudine, vel circum-colentium
existimatione, That is, Floods are nothing else but your greatest Rivers, or
those Rivers are Floods which have been accustomedly so called.

And falling here upon that thing we call common estimation, give me leave to
tell you, That it may be, some words that I have hitherto explaned, and some
others that I shall have occasion to speak hereafter, may not agree altogether
with that usual and accustomed ^ense you have of them; and no wonder, for I
have endeavored to diffe^ence words, as they are used in the Commission, and
not as they are used in ^our common Language. Certain it is, ^. That every word
is not thoroughly ^eighed before it be spoken, 2. Neiher are any words used in
full and exact Propriety, So that the same word must ^f necessity have
different significations; ometimes in a larger, sometimes in a ^ricter sense;
even accordingly, as it is sed. Now in this ambiguity of words, think I have
good reason to follow the Commission, and to conceive a rational ^nse and
difference of them: 1. as they ^e, or 2. in likelihood are there used, ^ther
than to follow common Lan^age, wherein I am sure there is no ord whatsoever,
but what is commonabused. And this is all I shall reply to any who shall have a
mind to play the Critic upon what I have spoken.

And thus I have done with your VVater-courses, and have brought down the
waters, 1. from the Springs, by your Sreams and your Rivers to the Sea, and 2.
from off your Lands, by your Drains to their Out-fall, where I find an Engine
1. of excellent, and 2. approved use in Draining, and finding it named in the
Commission, I cannot handsomely overpass it, without taking some notice of it,
and that is a Goat, or as you more commonly call it, a Sluice.

Goats.
Hitherto we have spoken of VVatercourses, and that is, of water, in decursu,
of water, in its descent, or current only: I have but one word more to speak of
the water now, and that is, of the water in exitu, in its Out-fall. Your Drains
they indeed bring the waters down, but your Goats they let them out; and are
Instruments of Draining, so Artificially devised, that during the Ebbing of the
Sea, they are always open to let out the Land-waters, and during the Flowing
thereof they are always shut, to keep out the Salt and the Sea-waters.

Floodgates.
Of like use, with your Goats, and uces, are your Floodgates; and as I
^nceive, so far as they are beneficial to ^u in matter of Draining, are to be
^teemed parts of them, or at most, and here they are sole, but imperfect moels
and parcels of them. For if they e impediments to Navigation, or ^raining, they
are then either to be eeemed as Locks, or in a more peculiar ^anner, belong to
the Water-Miller, f which more hereafter. And so I ave done with all those
things you are o view, which concerns, 1. either Naigation, 2. or Draining.

Land-passage.
A third sort of things you are to view oo, which are within the defense of he
Commission of Sewers, and they oncern common Land-passage, in such Maritime
Countries as this is: These are such as maintain a Way amongst us; and that, 1.
either upon the Land, as your Calsey, or 2. over the Waters, as your Bridges;
without both which this Country would be altogether unpassable, and would be a
place both Invius, and Avius, without any passage, 1. in it, or 2. to it; cut
off from the Up-land Countries above us, and cut in pieces amongst ou^selves.
And as your works of Sewars, 1. which relate to Draining, make the Country
habitable, 2. and Navigation makes you maintain a Traffic, o^ Trade, with
other Countries, 3. so your Bridges, and your Calseys, these make an
intercourse, and a way for Trade amongst your selves within your own Country
here at home.

But before I proceed further, give me leave to give you some account of the
Method I now proceed in; It may be thought, and for mine own part, I my self
have had thoughts that way; that although it be a thing altogether undeniable,
that the words Pontes and Calceta, that is, Bridges and Calseys, be expressly
contained in all the Commissions of Sewars that ever were yet in use, either at
Common Law, or by Statute Law; yet that the Commissioners of Sewars had no
further to meddle about them, than as things relating to Navigation, or
Draining: Well let this be granted, yet I take it to be a thing undeniable too,
that they do conduce to these ends; not only, 1. by defending against the
Waters, but also 2. by preserving a passage over the Waters; and so preveuting
Fords, and such like obstructive and inconvenient Passages within them: and
this benefit of common Land-Passage being the main end hese Works were
principally made and contrived for, I shall crave leave to propound them to you
accordingly. -- And yet further, in as ancient Escripts of Sewars as ever came
to my view, nd are at this hour preserved amongst ^he Records of this Court, I
do find, hat Calseys and Bridges have in the exe^ution of the Commission been
taken ^otice of as common Land-Passages: These ancient Inquisitions I have
seen, he one without Date, the other taken Nono Edwardi Secundi, and the third
Quarto Henrici Quinti. 1. Wherein oncerning Calseys I do find, that Garwick
Calsey, in the Parts of Keste^en, was presented upon Great Hale, Town there,
and the Abbot of Bardy to be repaired and sustained, pro Hominibus Peditibus,
and Equitibus, hat is, both for Foot-Passage, and for Horse-Passage. And I also
find, Brigge-Dike Calsey Presented, as Regia strata pro quibuscunque Legeis
Domini Regis de super transitur is de Kesteven usque ad parts de Hollande: And
the Decays thereo to be, in Magnum periculum plurimorum de Populo Domini Regis
super dictum calcetum transeuntium: And this I take to be full enough, and
sufficiently to prove, that as Calseys of themselves are common Land-Passages,
so that heretofore, the Commissioners of Sewers have taken Cognizance of them
as such. 2. And as for Bridges, I find them Presented in the said Inquisitions*
not only in respect of the 1. Passage of the Water, 2. or of Boats under them;
but also in respect 3. of Land-Passage over them. Thus Burton Bridge, cum
Calcetis, is Presented to be, Alta via, and Regia strata; and in such manner to
be repaired, it a quod Homines Pedites and Equites secure omni tempore possint
transire, so as to be a safe Passage for Horse and Foot. And other Bridges are
therein Presented, to be repaired, not only to such a breadth and depth, as 1.
shall not minuere Latitudinem Sewerarum, pro transitu aquae celerius habenda;
but also shall be 2. pro sufficienti transitis Carectarum and Quadrigarum, a
sufficient Passage for Horse, Wagon, and Cart. -- And all this was done by
virtue of the Commission of Sewers as it stood at the Common Law; and no man
can say, but that the Extent of the Commission is much larger, and the Power of
the Commissioners much greater now than then it was, as having received several
Additions and Enlargements: but no Restraint in any thing, saving only the
Commission is now to be executed by six Commissioners, when as then two would
have served; nay, which I more wonder at, in the ancient Inquisition, taken
Nono Edwardi secundi, I find, the want of a Ferry-Boat at Cathmouth, or rather
Wathmouth, Presented upon the Prior of Haverholme; and that, Debet invenire ad
ducendum Homines Pedites ultra aquam, tam nocti, quam diei. -- So then, certain
it is, that there are Presidents of Sewers, to warrant such Proceedings; the
only Question is, How far the Commission of Sewers will warrant such
Precedents; the Resolution whereof I shall willingly leave to others: For my
own part, I know not how to slight, much less out of any conceit of mine own,
to censure and condemn Precedents of such great Antiquity; And having spoken
this to clear the Method I am to proceed in, I now proceed on.

Calseys.
1. First then, concerning your Calseys, they are common Passage ways upon the
Land, made of Stone, Sand, or Gravel: and they have their Name A Calce; the
usual Stone it should seem, whereof most Calseys have formerly been made. --
These Calseys we find expressly within the Defense of the Commission of Sewers,
as now it is, and was Enacted in Henry the 8 ths time. But look above that, to
the First Statute Commission of Sewers in Henry the 6 ths time, and there you
find them likewise. Look higher above that, to to the Commission of Sewers as
it stood at the Common Law* and there you shall find them expressly named too.
Enough I think to prove that the Commissioners of Sewers have something to do
with some kind of Calseys; and that, as they are things different both om Walls
and Bridges. And was there ^ other Provision for the maintaining ^ Calseys
amongst us, and in such Mari^e, and Fenny, and Moorish Coun^es as this is,
devoid of Stone, and ch like Materials, more than the ornary Provision for the
maintaining of e Highways, (I mean than the ornary Statutes?) they, all of
them, you experimentally know it) would ever maintain any one Calsey amongst ^
-- But I will not now undertake, to ll you in particular, what Calseys are
^thin the warrantable Defense of the ommission of Sewers; but having re^ion to
what I have formerly spoken, all only tell you, that all such Cal^s as are
either 1. a Defense, or eer, or Boundary against the Waters any manner
whatsoever; 2. Or are ^ject to Decay by the continual Beat d Rage of the
Waters; 3. And have retofore been under the View of the ^mmission, and here
Presented, are t to be excluded your View and re.

Bridges.
2. Secondly, Bridges. And they ^ your common Passage-wayes over your Rivers,
and your other Drayns and Watercourse. And doubtless, (...) Bridges that have
constant Currents (...) Water under them, are within t^ reach of this
Commission, and may (...) virtue thereof be upheld and repaire^ 1. Not only
those Bridges that be (...) public use, and for common passag^ 2. but even
private and particular Me^ Bridges too, if they be of public B^nefit: In like
manner, as private Me^ Bridges may be pulled down, if the be fouud to be of
public Damage.

And thus I have done with the Fi^ Part of my Discourse, and have, a^cording to
my weak Abilities, told yo^ What those Things are you ought (...) View. -- And
to bring them all into (...) short Recapitulation, they concern (...) either
Land-Passage, 2. or VVat^ Passage, 3. or the Passage of the VV^ter it self. So
1. as it may be kept wit in the bounds allotted to it, 2. and t^ Country
defended against it.

But there is one thing more I (...) not so much to speak to you of it, as
speak against you for it. You are here so many of every Jury, and it may be for
show ride together a day or two upon your View, and so post it over; but your
main Information, whereupon you ground your Presentiments, you take it
altogether upon trust, from one or two such as be impannelled amongst you of
every Town; this is to praecipitate your business: and all Praecipitations are
commonly accompanied with Over-sights, and they cause Mistakes and Errors.
Shall I tell you the Mischief of this? I have observed it; 1. Every Town would
have their Assessment as small as might be, 2. and every Officer would have his
years work as easy as might be; and so, when these are the Men that give the
only Information to the Court, and are in a manner wholly entrusted with the
View, and with the Presentment, never any thing to Purpose has been, nor
likely ^s to be Presented: But because something needs must, yet that, but 1.
for Formality, and 2. Works of mere Necessity, and 3. as little as may be; so
that let the Commissioners 1. Offer, or 2. Design, what they 1. may, or 2. can;
yet Jurors will 1. do, and 2. find no more, than 1. what, and 2. as they list.
And no wonder, when Views and Presentiments have been so slenderly made, if that
good have not come to the Country, by the Commission, that some may have
expected. -- For a full Remedy, I could wish that others, (the Commissioners I
mean) who chiefly indeed ought to do it, would join with you in the View too*
and so make 1. the View chiefly their Acts, as properly it ought to be: and the
Enquiry yours. But because that perhaps might be a thing of two great a Charge
and Inconveniency, -- for the present, give me leave to tell you, it is your
Duty, all of each Jury, to make your View together; and upon your View, to take
full Information together, of what you shall think fit to Present, and not to
leave that which is the main End you View for, to one or two of a Town only,
and they likely enough to be partial in the business. And thus much 1. for what
you are to View, and 2. for you that are to View it, that is, all of you
together, that be of each several Jury.

2. What to Present.
And so I come to the Second Part of my Discourse, to tell you, What you are to
Present. And I do take it, they are all Transgressions against the Laws of
Sewers, of what kind soever they be. Now these, as all other Transgressions,
are either 1. Delicta, or 2. Commissa; I can English, nor distinguish them no
better, than in your usual terms, 1. Defaults, or 2. Offenses: 1. Defaults,
when that is not done that ought; 2. Offenses, when that is done that ought not.

Defaults, they are Amerceable only; and although a direct Act of the Will may
be upon a bare Omission, and a Man may make his Default wilful; yet because
Defaults may also be of bare Neglect, Sine Prava Dispositione, of Indisposition
only, without an evil Disposition, therefore they are left in Misericordia, to
be set in the Mercy of you that are Jurors.

Offenses, are most of them Fineable, as being always willingly done; nay,
many times, Vi, and Armis, with Force, and in full Contempt of the Authority
that should Regulate them; and therefore, as being Crimes, and of a higher
Nature, are subject to a higher Penalty, and to the Censure, and Discretion of
the Court.

And truly Gentlemen, all these Defaults and Offenses you are to View too,
otherwise, how can you truly Inform the Court what they are? -- But 1. such
things as be within the Defense of the Commission of Sewers, you are to View,
so as to have them Preserved and Maintained: 2. these Defaults and Offenses
that be within the Correction of the Commission of Sewers, you are to View, so
as to have them Remedied o^ Removed; so that the former are properly the
subject of your View, these of your Presentment.

Defaults
But to go forward. I have heretofore told you, What things you are to View;
now, without repeating any thing that I have formerly spoken, I am briefly to
tell you, What Defaults in them you are to Present.

In Goats, or Floodgates; in Calseys, and Bridges.
1. First, Your 1. Goats, or Sluices or Floodgates; and 2. your Calseys and 3.
your Bridges; they are to be 1 Upheld, and 2. Repaired: so that in case 1. they
be 1. Lacerate, or 2. Broken, and want 1. Repairing, 2. or be Dirupt, that is,
1. Decayed, or 2. Ruined, and require 2. making of new, you are to make
Presentment of them accordingly.

In Watercourse.
2. Secondly, Your Watercourse, all the sorts of them, whether they be for 1.
Navigation, 2. or Drayning, 3. or both, are, to pursue the words of the
Commission, to be 1. Cleansed, and 2. Purged; and their Channels maintained in
their ancient 1. Bredths, and 2. Depths: so that in case they, or any part of
them, 1. be Foul, and want 1. Roading, 2. Hooking, or 3. other Cleansing; 2. or
be Landed up and want 1. Ditching, or 2. Opening, you are to make your
Presentment accordingly.

In Walls, and Banks.
3. Thirdly, and Lastly, Your Walls, and your Banks, those main Works of
Sewers, that defend either 1. the whole Country, or 2. your several Townships,
they are to be of 1. Height, 2. Breadth, and 3. Strength sufficient to do it;
so that in case you find them 1. Broken, with Gools in them, 2. or otherwise,
weak and deficient, for want of 1. Flagging, 2. Piling, or 3. Skirting; 3. or
any ways insufficient, for want of 1. Heightening, or 2. Strengthening, you
are to make particular Presentment, according as the Default shall be. -- And
truly Gentlemen, In such Works as these, that are the immediate Defense of your
Country, and Townships, you are to be careful in your View and Enquiry; and to
see, First, Whether they be of their accustomed Height and Strength; and if
they be not, such Defaults to Present upon the Persons that ought to maintain
them so. Secondly, Whether they be of sufficient Height and Strength, for
suppose they be of their usual and accustomed Heights, and upon some great
Alterations, either in respect of the Sea it self, or of other great Rivers or
Streams, (whether they be 1. out of the Power, or 2. beyond the Authority of
the Commissioners of Sewers, to help or redress) this will not defend the
Country. I confess in this case there are no Persons in default, that you can
Present, unless some, that in some few particular places may have covenanted
for the Drayning of you: And such as these, if there be any such, are to do
their Covenant: for in respect of them, not the accustomed greatness of their
works, but the performance of the work they have undertaken, is to be looked
at. But suppose, as to most of your defensive Banks, there be none such; in
this case certainly, though there be no Default, yet a Defect there is, and you
ought to certify the Commissioners of it, and how much the said Banks ought of
New to be exalted, to make sufficient Defense: And in such a dangerous
Necessity, the Commissioners (as I conceive) ought not to sit still, and see
the Country Drowned: you would all say, they were in Default, if they should do
so; but they may, and ought to impose a new Charge for the doing of it upon the
Level; the Persons there I mean, that be concerned in the hurt or loss: It Is
clear, the Commissioners may Impose such a Charge by way of Reparations, for
the making up of a Bank wherein was no Default, post Damnum Acceptum, in case
of a sudden Breach; as upon Extraordinary Floods and Winds, such Breaches often
do happen; and if they might not Impose the like by way of Prevention, ad
Damnum Evitandum, the Commission would be deficient in its main End, and would
not sufficiently provide for the Preservation of the Country against the
Waters; which, though it be not the only, yet it is the chief thing the
Commission was made for; and by express words thereof, Power is given to make
Ordinances and Provisions, as well for safeguard and conservation, as for
redress. -- And so much in particular concerning the Defaults you are to
Present.

Offnces in things of
Besides those Defaults, Secondly, Offenses there be too, that you are to
Enquire of, and Present, and they particularly mentioned in the Commission. 1.
Some wbereof are in things of general use, and at least are to be Reformed; 2.
Others are in things of 1. general, or 2. particular abuse, and may be
Destroyed.

1. General Use, as,
1. First, To begin with those Offenses that be in things of general use, they
are either 1. in Bridges, or 2. in ^reams, or 3. in Goats. The things ^emselves
are of general use, and we ^ve spoken of them before, as they be ^ithin the
Defense of the Commission (...) Sewers; and certainly so they are all (...)
them, for the Country cannot want ^em: but we find them named over a^in in the
Commission, or in the Sta^te that gives Authority to the Com^ission, and
therein ranked and sorted ^ongst such things as be ad Nocumen^m, and may be
mischievous, and in ^at sense speak we of them now, but ery briefly.

Bridges.
1. First, Bridges. And I do take it, ^ey may be Annoyances in respect of ^e
undue contrivance of them; for in ^se you shall find any Bridges 1. so ^rait,
that they hinder and check the ^urrent of the Waters; 2. or so Nar^w, 3. or so
Low, that they 1. hin^r Navigation, or 2. make it danger^s, you are to make
Presentment of ^em, that they may be reformed and ^rrected: No reason you
should make ^e Passage more, or more easy by and, to make a Water-passage
less, or ^ss safe.

Streams.
2. Secondly, Streams. These we fi^ likewise mentioned over again among those
things that are to be reformed; an^ surely so they ought, in case you find any
made of new, that 1. either dive^ the Waters, to the destruction of Navigation;
2. or surcharge the Rivers, t^ the endangering of the Country.

Goats.
3. Thirdly, Goats. And these a^ the last of those things we find named over
again in the Commission, that m^ be ad Nocumentum. Mischief enoug may be done
by them, 1. in dry yea the Rivers destroyed, 2. in wet yea the Towns. -- The
Goats within t^ Defense of the Commission, 1. a^ Goats of general use for
Drayning, an let the Water out whither it should 2. There are Goats, most of
them f^ private men's benefit only, and take t^ Water out, and carry the Water,
from whence, and whither it should not And truly Gentlemen, I do not kno any
one thing of general or particul^ use in this Country, more of late abuse^ than
these Goats or Tunnells have bee^ in open Defiance as it were of the Commission
of Sewers it self, by a sort (...) eople, that more esteem the steeping f a
Glean of Hemp, than the 1. neces^ry supply, or 2. the general mischief ^f a
whole Town, or Country. There (...) not a Goat of them, 1. that were taken up,
to be laid down again, without express order from the Court, 2. Nor of them
that were untaken up, to ^un without License and Gage allotted ^y two
Commissioners; and therefore, ^n your Enquiry take special notice of ^ll such
as have been Offenders in this ^ind.

2. General Abuse, as,
2. Secondly, Other Offenses there ^e in things of general abuse; such I ^ean,
as always tend to some general ^ischief, and cannot be in an ordinary way
allowable; and these you are to Present, that without any more ado, they may
be restrained, or demolished; and they are 1. Locks, 2. Gores, and 3. Ponds.

Locks.
1. First, Locks. These I conceive to be upon the Channels of your Rivers, or
other Watercourse, and are Dams, thrown in of Earth, or otherwise devised of
art; and these are full stops to Navigation, and to Drayning, both to the
Passage of the Water, and to all Passage by Water too, the one is locked up the
other is locked out.

Gores.
2. Secondly, Gores. These, according to the vulgar use of the word I conceive
to be upon the Banks o your Rivers, or other Watercourse and are nothing else
but great Breaches or great Cuts, wilfully made there Thus a whole River in a
little time (...) dis-chanelled, and turned upon the Country; and by such
attempts as these are, you may soon have the Rivers dry and the Country
drowned: And thus according to the vulgar acception of the word, a Gore and a
Gool seem to be the same thing: But for my own part I am rather of Opinion,
that a Gor^ and a Gorce are the same thing, an^ that both of them are
corruptions of the Latin word, Gurges: Now this wor^ Gurges, is used in the
Commission o^ Sewers, as it was at the Common Law and a Man by the Law may have
a righ^ thereto, as appears by the Writ, D^ Gurgite Habendo; and these Gurgite
were expressly under the Defense of tha ancient Commission: As also, I conceive,
they were within the Defense (...) the Commission of Sewers in Henry ^^e 6 ths.
time, and seem therein to be ^nglished Wears. Certain it is, Places ^^ey were
in Drayns to take Fish in, ^^d in Drayns might be tolerated; ^^ough in the
ancient Statutes, for the ^eservation of the Rivers, such of ^em in Rivers as
were disturbances to Navigation, were ordered to be pul^ed down. But I may have
occasion at another time to speak more fully to this ^urpose, and for the
present shall take ^^em in the vulgar sense, because I ^ould not disorder the
Method I proeed in.

Ponds.
3. Thirdly, Ponds. These I con^eive to be Waters pent or bounded up (...) some
Receptacle distant from the Ri^er, 1. where they are kept in, when ^hey might
as well be Drayned out, and ^o mischief the Country; For, if I mitake not,
Ponds, Lakes, Pools, and Receptacles of Water, as to matter of Sewers, signify
all the same thing, and (...) rational, or a gradual difference is all that can
be imagined amongst them. 2. Or else they are Waters drawn from the Rivers, and
mischief the Rivers: so^ way or other, they are an Impedimen either 1. to
Navigation, or else 2. (...) Drayning. Neither would I once ha^ spoken of them,
had they not been f^ such expressly mentioned in the Commission. -- And because
some may agr^ in Opinion with the Reader upon t^ Statute of Sewers, and think
these Pon^ to be of small and inconsiderable Mischie I shall only acquaint you
with an Inqusition of Sewers, taken at Stamfor 6 to. Edwardi 6 ti. wherein
dive^ Ponds, or Pools, nigh the River (...) Welland, and over against Peakald,
an Cowbitt, were as then Presented, i that the Owners and Farmers thereof did
by Trenches and Gutters, take suc abundance of Waters into the sai Ponds, as 1.
both destroyed the Rive of Welland, and 2. drowned Deepin^ Fen. And so I have
done with a such Offenses as be in things 1. (...) general use, or 2. general
abuse amongst us.

3. Particular Abuse, from the*
3. A third sort of Offenses you ar^ to Present, that lie in things that are o
particular abuse, by some sort of Men at are of some particular Dealing or
^ployment only. -- Usual it is in the ^orld, every Man would manage his ^n
right to his greatest advantage, d so he may but get, he cares not 1. ^o, nor
2. how many loses by it; but is ought not so to be. -- 1. No, not ways in
things wherein a Man may ve an Exclusive Property against all ^hers; for even
in some of them, Sic ^ortet uti Suo, ut Alienum non Laedat, Man ought so to
make use of what is s own, as not to damnifie his Neighour. 2. But in such
things wherein a ^an has only a right at large with o^ers, (though their
rights be 1. in seeral respects, and may lie 2. in seve^l prendures) there
certainly it is not (...) the power of every one, or of any ^e, to exclude the
rest; who, though (...) another kind perhaps, yet have as ood a right as the
best. 3. Much less ^ay any particular Man do it, ad Pub^cum Nocumentum, to the
general ^ammage of the whole Country, or of he Commonwealth. -- And no less is
he Mischief, if either Drayning, or Navigation be hindered, for then Reipublicae
Interest, ne quis re sua, mal^utatur, the whole Commonwealth i concerned in
the wrong. And not onl^ 1. a general Good is to be preferred be for a
particular, but also 2. a genera Mischief always to be heeded before (...)
particular Good. -- Now two sorts o Men are dealing in the Waters, 1* your
Miller, and 2. your Fisher; an^ both of them more covetous of a particular
benefit they get, than sensible o any general harm they do there.

1. Miller, in his Mill, Milldam, and Floodgates.
1. First, The Miller, (the Water-Miller I mean) and he has his 1. Mill, his
2. Mill-dam, and his 3. Flood gates, things obstructive to 1. Navigation and to
2. Drayning, every one of them; and in case 1. new Ones be made where none was
before, 2. or the antien^ Ones be enhaunsed and enlarged abov^ what they were
before, 1. such Enhaunsements you are particularly to Present, and, by the
Power of thi^ Commission, they may be 1. abated 2. such new-erected ones you
are to Present, and, by the Power of this Commission, they may be 2. prostrated
and over-turned.

2. Fisher, in his Fishgarthes, Wears, Hebbingweares, Keddles, and Heckes.
2. Secondly, The Fisher. And abundance of Devices he brings along with him, as
1. Fish-garthes, 2. Wears, 3. Hebbing-weares, 4. Keddles, and 5. Heckes, all
of them Engines and Devices to catch Fish; and ^y stopping or straitning of the
Rivers, ^ll of them Impediments to Navigation, and for such particularly
reckoned up in ^he Commission; and in case any of ^hese Wears 1. have not been
warranted by sufficient 1. Prescription, or 2. Custom, but 3. have been erected
de Novo, 1. in, or 2. after the time of Edward the First, without Authority of
Parliament, they may be Presented ^ere, and demolished. Or in case 2. ^uch as
are warranted by sufficient pre^ription or authority, have any ways even
enlarged and exalted above their ^tient Assizes, that enlargement ought
articularly to be Presented, 1. wherein, nd 2. how much it is: and they ought
^o be corrected and reformed, that is, educed to what they were, and De ^ure
ought to be.

And so I have done with all such ofences as are Certi Nominis, and parti^larly
expressed in the Commission: All other Impediments, Lets, and Annoyances.
But besides these, what offense soeve^ shall be committed, that shall be, 1.
either Obstructive, 2. or Destructive, to, 1. Navigation, or, 2. Draining,
doubtless you are to Enquire of it, an^ Present it. All which, that you either
know, or can imagine: All of them, I say, are comprised in the Commission under
the general terms, of, 1. Impediments, 2. Lets, and 3. other Annoyances: So
that what things soever, shall in any manner or kind whatsoever, 1* either
impede and hinder, 2. or let and destroy, 1. Navigation, or 2 Draining, 3. or
shall in respect of either of them, be, Ad Nocumentum that is, be real
Annoyances, or general Mischiefs, you are to make particular Presentment of
them, and we her to take order, that they be reform and redressed. -- And so I
have don with the second part of my Discourse And have told you what you are to
present; wherein, as to your Duty, have endeavored to express my se fully and
plainly: And I have observe a Method upon the Commission, as t that end only,
which, I confess, ma admit of some just exceptions: And u^ on occasion
hereafter, I may endeavor either to Clear, or Alter: However, I hope it may be
excused, if it be considered, that I had not the least Vestigium of any man
before, so as to Direct me, and to Follow him in it.

3. How to Present.
One thing more remains, and that is, How you are to Present: And truly,
Gentlemen, I would have your Presentiments, both 1. Formal, 2. and Fair, 1. as
to the substance or matter of them, Fair, and Just, and Justifiable, however;
Fair.

Formal.


2. and as for the Form of them, I shall blame no Man for questioning and
insisting upon that too, as much as 1. the Nature of the Work, and 2. the End
of the Commission will permit. But I would have it well considered, that it is
not in works of this nature as in particular Causes, which other where are
between Person and Person only: In them dispute matter of Form as long as you
please, and if you miss one way, to it again another, there is but one Person
suffers by it all the while, and he may be relieved well enough at last too: --
But in works of this nature (in some of them at least, nay, in most of them)
the whole Country is concerned; And I hold it no great discretion to dispute
the Formalities and Necessities of a Presentment, while the whole Country may
be drowned: for in such a Case, who must make the Recompense? But to come home
to the business, all that I have to say to you, is, that your Presentiments
ought to be certain.

Certain in respect of* Person.
1. Certain. First, In respect of the Person, that it may be known who you
Present. Persons here in England have 1. Names, and Sir-names, distinguishing
them from such as be of other Names; and 2. they have places of abode, and
other additions, distinguishing them from such as be of the same Name; and as
many of these are to be expressed, as may sufficiently demonstrate the Person
you Present, that it may certainly be known who it is you mean.

Default.
2. Secondly, Your Presentment ought to be certain, in respect of the 1*
Default, or 2. Offense, that it man be known what you Present, and tha ought to
be as particular and certain a may be too, both in respect 1. of th thing,
what: 2. the place, where 3. the manner, how: and 4. the quantity, how much is
in Default: and in respect of Offenses, 5. the time, also when, would be some
ways ascertained too, though not so exactly as in some criminal Causes, the
very day and hour; yet so, as in your ordinary Actions of Trespass, so far I
say at least. -- And truly Gentlemen, nothing can carry the Form of a
Presentment, that has not these two Certainties, and that in all the respects
and degrees I have mentioned. Commendable, nay admirable has been the
diligence and care of former Ages in this kind, who have gone, not by guess,
and at random, but 1. to the Persons certainly, by their exact 1. Terrages, and
2. Aggistment Books: and 2. to the Default, by Admeasurements, and have
ascertained a Presentment to a Foot: thus it has been, but how is it now? -- I
have oberved in some of your Presentiments, 1. That for the Persons you would
Present, not so much as their Names are to be found in them, they being no
otherwise expressed than by supposition, as Owner of such Lands, or Heir, or
Assignee to one deceased, and these signify just nobody the Court can take
notice of, without another Jury to enquire who they be. 2. In others of them,
if you have Presented the Persons fully, yet they, upon perusal of your
Verdict, could not certainly know for what: so that having 1. many Works of the
same condition in several parcels, or 2. much Work contigiously adjacent in
one, they could not certainly know what thereof to amend, so as to amend what
was Presented; and all this, because you have not ascertained the 1. Default,
or if that, not 2. the just and proper Place of it. These are the common
Imperfections and Uncertainties of most of your Presentiments, and I tell you
plainly of them, that no more such may be offered to the Court.

Annoyance.
3. Thirdly, Your Presentiments ought to be certain in respect of the Annoyance
or Mischief, whether it be so, in respect of 1. Drayning, or 2. Navigation, or
3. common Land-passage; and therein to express 1. wherein, and 2. how much the
Country may be endammaged, or endangered, as to any, or all of them.

Charge.
4. Fourthly, and Lastly, Your Presentiments, in some particulat Cases, ought to
be certain too in respect of the Charge; and in them you ought particularly to
express what it is makes the Person you Present chargeable, that is, ^yable to
do the Work you Present him for: And this holds in all such Persons as are
chargeable to any Works of Sewers, by Prescription, Custom, Tenure, or Covenant.

I have observed, that amongst the Persons chargeable to these Works of Sewers,
1. Some of them are more principally concerned in the Benefit, than in the
Charge, much more by far, even almost beyond comparison how much: And yet, I
know not how it comes to pass, but some of these, I think I may speak it too
truly, have not had sufficient respect to the Commissioners, and their
Proceedings, though all for their necessary Defense and Preservation. 2. Others
imagine themselves to be equally, if not more concerned in the Charge, than in
the Benefit: Such I mean, as have had shares of Land, or other Recompense, for
doing of certain Works, and now would go away with the Profit of that, but
would leave borh Charge and Danger too upon the Country, if they might: So that
now it is come to that pass, that if you make not your Presentiments certain,
nay perfect and complete in all punctilioes imaginable: though to your
apprehensions they be never so slight and trivial, yet in Works of greatest
Importance and Necessity, such as wherein the safety and defense of the whole
Country may be concerned, nothing at all will be done by many Men, now a dryes,
unless it be by Certiorari to remove your Presentiments, and then to find some
fault or error in them, and so to avoid them.

And truly Gentlemen, considering that your Presentiments are the Basis and
Foundation of the Commissioners proceedings, and that an Error there is like a
Foundation-Errour, no mending of it, but all must down for it; it concerns you,
to be more careful in the Forming of them, than you have formerly been; you see
other Men of late have been more industrious than forme^ly in the questioning
of them.

For besides, that the uncertainty of ^our Presentiments are 1. a Delay to the
Execution of the Commission; they are also an 2, unhandsome Disparagement to
the Court it self, to admit that here, which, upon Examination, will not hold
good other-where. -- Therefore, shall advise you, not to trust too much to your
selves. and to your own plain meanings; No, nor to what I have told you
neither; for I am not of that Profession to instruct you fully herein: And what
I have spoken, I have spoken altogether under favor, and leave of such as are:
And seeing things this way far out, I have rather told you, 1. how your
Presentiments should not be, in respect of their common and ordinary
Imperfections, 2. than perfectly, how they should be: I shall therefore advise
you, I say. to have recourse to the Clerk of Sewers, and to consult and advise
with him about the Form of drawing your Presentiments, 1. the Matter of them,
that is, ^. What to Present, and 2. Who; God forbid, but that, in regard of the
Oath you have taken, should be left 1. wholly, and 2. only to your selves. But
as 2. for the Form of them, that is, 3. How to Present, what, and whom you
think needful; in that, I say, the Clerk of Sewers may be helpful to you, and
can be injurious to nobody.

And so I have given you a rude, and a slight draught of your whole Duty, 1.
What you are to do, 2. and How as to the substantial part of it. Some few
Motives I would add to excite you to the doing of it.

Motives from
There are but three honorable Motives I know of, that fall directly under the
notion, that your Moral Philosopher calls, Bonum Honestum, and they are 1.
Prudence, 2. Justice, and 3. Religion; to these three all other Notions of this
nature may easily be reduced. I am not ignorant, that some seem to make them
inclusive one of another, and so perhaps would make but one of all three; and
very true it is, that Religion is the highest part of Justice, and that
Religion and Justice are two of the highest parts of Prudence: but as to my
present purpose, I shall make three of them; and then 1. the first of Prudence,
concerns you as Men, endowed with Reason, and differing ^m the Beasts: 2. the
second of Juce, concerns you as Common-wealthsen, living under Government, and
^fering from people merely barrous: 3. the third of Religion, conrns you as
Christians, living under a ^ristian Government, and differing om all other
Nations and Men, that eier are 1. of no Religion, or 2. of a false ^e. Three
rational Motives they are, r above 1. the sordidness of Lucre, or the
brutishness of Pleasure. I will be ^t short, but something I shall speak om
every one of them, taken strictly, ^d in their proper Notions.

Prudence.
1. First then, From Prudence. In ^se there was no Law to compel, yet, ut of
common Prudence, Works of ^is nature (to say the least of them) ^e not to be
neglected. First, They nrich your Country; Hence the usual ^^le in such ancient
Inquisitions of ewers as I have seen, in some is, proommodo Patriae: In others,
pro Utiliate, or pro Ubertate Patriae: For the ommon 1. Benefit, and 2.
Fruitfulless, or the 3. common Wealth of the Country. Nay, Secondly, more: They
reserve your Country: Hence the ancient style of the Commission it se was, pro
Salvatione Patriae, ad Provdendum Salvationi Regni nostri: So '^ literally
expressed in the Form of t^ Commission, by the common Law: A^ for the Safety
and Preservation of t^ Commonwealth of England, the ve^ words of the
Commission, by virt^ whereof we now sit. -- You have thr^ great Enemies, 1. the
Sea on one sid^ 2. the Fen waters on another, and (...) the Rivers in the midst
of you; whic were they not, by the due and dilige^ Execution of this
Commission, all ke^ within their bounds, would soon swallow you up, 1. Stock,
2. Men, 3. Country, and 4. All.

Justice.
2. Secondly, From Justice. First Law it is: Et Fiat quod L^x Jubet we all say:
Laws are therefore mad that they may be executed. More, Secondly, It Is Lex
Loci, the grand an peculiar Law of the Place, as I may ca^ it; if other
Countries may want it, w^ in this cannot I am sure. And Thirdly It Is Lex
Personarum too. You of these Juries are now more immediately concerned in it,
and more to look after it than most other Men: The Commissioners are now to
View with your ^es, and to receive Information from ^ur mouths, you are the Men
that re^esent the several Wapontakes where^ you dwell; and it is now, in a
specil manner, become your particular ust and duty, truly to inform the ^ourt,
what, by virtue of this Com^ission, is 1. fit, or 2. needful to be one there:
and I hope you will be ^reful that you do discharge it.

Religion
3. Thirdly, From Religion. And ^at is an Oath you have here taken, ^at you
will discharge it. Shall I tell ou what an Oath is? It Is the very trongest Bond
in Religion, and some ay, Religion it self has its Name, a Ligando, as being
nothing else but a ^ond to Godward. -- Now an Oath is ^o less than a Bond upon
the Soul it self, Numb. 30. V. 3.) than an Obligation upon your Consciences, as
you are Christian Men. Deum invoco Testem in Animam meam: I call God for a
Record upon my Soul, says the blessed Apostle (2. Cor. C. 1. V. 23.) And, So
help me God, and his holy Gospells, that is, So help me God in Christ, say
every one of you: You 1. contest God, you 2. oppignorate your Salvation: it may
be both 1. a Soul-matter, and 2. a Salvation-matter, and therefore not lightly
to be esteemed. 1. God, he is the God of Truth, and is there any of you dare
deal falsely with him? and be 1. knowingly, yea 2. wilfully, and 3. stubbornly
Negligent? And 1. not endeavor, nay, which is worse, 2. obstinately, and 3.
absolutely refuse to discharge your Duty (as some very lately here before you
have done) wherein you are thus solemnly engaged? however, in truth, and
according to the best of your skill. 2. God, he is the God of Righteousness,
and is there any of you, in an unjust way, for 1. Malice, or 2. Favor, or 3.
Fear, or 4. Corruption, 1. dare not to do what you ought, or 2. dare to do what
you ought not? If you dare, let me tell you, 3. God, he is the God of Vengeance
too. Et qui fecit Testem caveat vindicem: He that has made God a Witness, let
him take heed he make him not a Revenger too; for he will not be a Witness in
vain: neither will he suffer any of you, or us, no, not the best of us all, to
take his Name in vain: -- But Notions of this kind you ought to hear from
another place, and therefore here I forbear them; only give me leave to tell
you, That an Oath is a thing so Sacred, that the very Whore in the Commedian,
she is at her Aliud si scirem Sanctius: There was nothing in the World she knew
of greater Religion, or Obligation. And it is a sad complaint, in this later Age
of the World, against Christian Perjury: Christianus Fecit, nil Mirum, nec
Novum: That we Christians should make no more account of it; the very Turks
upbraid us with it.

So Gentlemen, to conclude, here is a the threefold Obligation upon you in
this business; 1. the first, a Rational Obligation from Prudence: 2. the
second, a Civil Obligation from Justice: 3. and the third, a Sacred Obligation
from Religion: Let some of these, or all of them at least, make you both 1.
careful, and 2. conscientious to discharge it. And so I trouble you no further
with words, but leave you to your Work.

DIXI.
A Charge of Sewers: 1. As to Lovells Works, 2. And the Charge of them:
Occasioned upon his Assigns being Outed in Deeping Fen; and the Reentry of the
Owners and Commoners there, Anno Domini, 1657.
Gentlemen, You of this Jury,
TO give you some account upon what business you are called hither: It cannot
be unknown to you, that one Thomas Lovell Esquire, some years heretofore, by
virtue of certain Laws of Sewers, and of an Act of Parliament, became an
Undertaker for the Drayning of two great VVasts in this County: -- The one of
them called Deeping Fen, understanding by that name, as I shall do throughout
my whole Discourse, and as I have VVarrant for it from a Law of Sewers made ^o
that purpose, all the Fens in that Continent, between the two Rivers of Welland
and Glean. -- The other Thurlby Fen, and Burn South-Fen. Some of you seem to
be of those years, that I question not* but you did personally know the Man
himself; and might also know both 1. the Condition of the said Fens, and 2. the
Charge of all Works of Sewers relating thereto, before Lovells intermedling.

Lovells Undertaking a great Work, in respect of, 1. The Persons Interessed.
This Undertaking of his, I may well call a great Work, if mere Undertakings
make one: 1. Great, First. In respect of the Persons Interessed: For in the
said Wastes, besides Cowbitt, and Caswick, and the odd Houses in Gretford, and
Tofte; no fewer than twenty Towns in the parts of Kesteven and Holland, have
right of Common: three whereof are Market Towns, and they of as good trading
and traffic as most generally in the County. 2. Great, 2. The End Intended:
not in respect of,
Secondly, In respect of the End Intended, which was the great Benefit and
Profit, that upon the Drayning of the said Wastes was to ensue; not only to the
Commoners, and other persons, Owners therein; but also to the Commonwealth,
and Realm of England it self. -- And I would I could add, that it had been
great, Thirdly, In respect 3. The End Obtained.
of the End Executed too; that is, a great Work in the Performance, or a great
Work perfected: but this being wanting, I may with much truth, and propriety of
language say, it has proved no Work at all. This great defailance is the cause
of this present Meeting, and is the occasion of your present Enquiry: -- For
your better direction wherein, I shall propound three things: First, What the
Covenants or Contract on the part of Lovell was. Secondly, Lovell for the
present being legally Outed from his third part in those Fens, or in most of
them, what now is to be done, as to the Works he has left. And Thirdly, Where,
and how they are to be charged.

1. Lovells Undertaking.
Touching the First, the Covenants upon which Lovells Undertaking was grounded,
may be reduced to two Heads: First, What he was to Do. Secondly, What he was to
Have.

1. Lovells Works.
As to the First, what he was to Do: the principal Works, omitting those of
less concernment, as being not much material to our purpose, were these.

The Drayning, and keeping dry the Fens.
1. First, 1. The Drayning of the said Fens, and 2. the continuing of the same
for ever, firm, dry, and depasturable Grounds for Cattle at all times of the
year: a commendable Work doubtless, had he performed it. Antiquity has made
famous mention, and has given famous testimony to Works of this nature: the
very designation of them is recorded by Suetonius, to the fame and honor of
that great Emperor Julius Caesar: and that, inter Majora opera, amongst those
renowned and Imperial Works, or Designs of his, such as, to follow the
expression of that Author, were de ornanda Instruendaque urbe, de Tuendo
Ampliandoque Imperio: For the Magnificence, and the Enlargement of the City and
Empire, this very Work, Pomptinas paludis siccare, is reckoned for one. The
like testimony was once to have been found in Livy, and the Drayning of those
very Fens was recorded by him amongst the Consular Works of Cornelius Cethegus,
the only Work that made his Consulship famous: And lest after Ages should
altogether know nothing of it, Florus, who reduced the Books of Livy into an
Epitome, and contracted that larger Book of his, wherein mention was made,
amongst other things, of this particular Work, into Nineteen Lines; yet even
amongst them affords room for this Expression, in honor both of the Consul,
and of his Work: Pomptinae paludes a Cornelio Cethego Consule, cui ea Provincia
evenerat, Siccatae: Agerque ex iis Factus. Such a worthy Work was it, in the
esteem of Antiquity, of Fens to make Fields. But to digress no further, but to
come home to Lovell, and the Works he was to do, amongst these was,

The Maintaining the Fen-Banks.
2. Secondly, The repairing, maintaining, and keeping for ever, the Banks
encompassing the said Fens: which Banks, to avoid all future Ambiguities and
Scruples, are named in the said Laws, and therein particularly expressed: 1.
Some whereof are for the Preservation of the said Fens from the Rivers, 2.
Others of them are for the Preservation of some of the Towns concerned in the
Undertaking, from the said Fens.

The Rivers of VVelland and Glean.
3. Thirdly, The maintaining and keeping the two Rivers of Welland and Glean
for ever, with sufficient Diking, Roading, and Scouring: That is, the River of
Welland, so far as the County of Lincoln is charged therewith, from the
beginning of Deeping Bank at the Bar: And the River of Glean, from Basson
Spout, unto their Out-fall into the Sea, at or near the place where both the
said Rivers do meet.

All Fen-Draynes
4. Fourthly, The maintaining and keeping sufficiently Diked, Cleansed, and
Scoured for ever, all manner of Draynes, Sewers, and Passages for the Water,
and all other VVater-works, 1. which at the making of the said Laws were in use
for the Drayning of the said Fens, and should be to that use, 1. continued, or
2. enlarged by the said Lovell: As also 2. all such other Draynes, as should by
the said Lovell, or his Assigns, be devised, and made of new, at their
discretions, for that use and purpose. These four, I conceive, are the material
Points of Lovells Charge, what he was to do. And to prevent any weakness or
mistaking of mine own, I have pursued the very Letter of the said Laws, and
have given them to you in Charge here, as I find them there.

2. Lovells Recompense a third part of the Fens.

H^ld subject


As to the Second, What Lovell was to have: 'twas a full third part of all the
said Fens, amounting to 10885. Acres, as I account them: A Recompense as great,
and as full, as any Undertaker whatsoever in these parts, originally, and upon
the first Onset, either had, or desired. Look into the present Level of the
Earl of Bedford* Or into that sometime the Earl of Lindseyes: Or into that
heretofore of Sr. Anthony Thomas, and you shall find none of them had more than
a third Foot, some of them not so much, -- And this third part he was to have
in Fee-simple, to him, his Heirs, and Assigns for ever. Subject, First, To a
Condition To a Condition of Re-entry.
of Re-entry, on the behalf of the Owners and Commoners, upon such 1. Default,
and 2. Certificate: 1. in such manner, and 2. during such time, as in the said
Laws is expressed. And Secondly, Subject to a Charge of all To a Charge of
Works.
manner of Banks, Sewers, Rivers, Goats, Sluices, Draynes, and other Works
whatsoever, for the Inning, Drayning, or keeping dry of the said Fens.

And Gentlemen, This is all I have to say to you, concerning Lovell, and his
Undertaking: both 1. as to his Works, what he was to do: and 2. as to his
Recompense, what he was to have: which if any here shall think Extravagant or
Impertinent, and not pursuant to the present business, I shall crave his
pardon: For my own part, I did not know how to fall upon the following parts of
my Discourse, without speaking this, as a Foundation to it: nor how to break
into them, with that clearness and fullness I desire, without relating it.

2. The Jury to Present.
And so I come to the second part of my Discourse; Lovell for the present being
Outed from his third part in these Fens, or in most of them, (the Commoners
having lately made such a legal Re-entry upon them, and in such manner, as by
the said Laws is directed) what now is to be done as to the Works he has left.

And truly Gentlemen, To deal plainly with you, I must, in the first place,
confess my self not to be of that Profession, or Ability, as to give you
sufficient Instruction herein: only somewhat I would speak, out of a desire I
have to give you some Light in the business: and that not only 1. with
submission to all present on the Bench, in case of a better Judgment: but also
with a 2. desire, they would be pleased, to observe and correct my mistakings.
For my own part, (I speak it clearly) I am neither so contentious, nor
conceitedly ambitious, as to have any Error of mine maintained, and thereby to
lead you into a worse; and it may be such a one as may be destructive to the
whole business you are now about: But to go forward.

1. What Works Lovell had in Charge.
To speak your business in few words: It is to Enquire, and to Present in
particular, First, All such Works as Lovell, or his Assigns, had in use, and
were charged withal: 1. which either directly tended to the Drayning of the
said Fens, or 2. were put upon his Charge in order thereunto. And Secondly, 2.
What Defects are in such of them, as are to be continued.
What Defects in particular are in such of the same, as are 1. fit, and 2.
necessary to be continued. -- For I observe to you, and you are to take special
notice of it, that the Works in the Charge of Lovell, and his Assigns, are of
several kinds.

Lovells Works.
1. First, Some of them of ancient charge and use. Secondly, Others of them are
of Lovells, or his Assigns own 1. Some of his own devising: whereof,
devising, Works made by him, or them, de Novo, at their own pleasures and
discretions: For Lovell had power to continue what ancient Draynes he pleased;
and also, at his will and pleasure, to make new Draynes, either 1. within the
Fens, or 2. without toward the Sea, of what quantity, depth, or wideness,
should in his own discretion be best, and of most advantage for the perfecting
of the Work. Neither could this Power, in such manner as it was granted to
Lovell, be any ways 1. unreasonable, or 2. injurious. 1. Not unreasonable,
because these Works were to be made at his only charge, and as for the success
of them, that was likewise to be wholly upon his sole adventure and hazard. 2.
Nor injurious, for none could ever have had just cause of complaint, -- in case
1. the work of Drayning had, according to the Covenants of his undertaking.
been perfected in all the Fens: -- and 2. the particular Provisions under which
the said new Works and Draynes were to have been made, and to have run, or
been made use of, had been observed: to wit, 1. that they run not above soil,
2. or to the hurt of any person or persons, 3. or to the hurt or crossing of
any other Drayn. But Lovell neither 1. perfecting the one, 2. nor observing
these other, some of those Works that he had power to make, are now become, not
only injurious, but altogether intolerable: For amongst these new Works of
Lovells own devising,

Some Drayn one Fen, by Drowning the other: and are not to be continued.
1. First, Some of them are such, as Drayn one Fen, by turning the Waters
thereof into the other, and there leaving them: These I know not well whether
to call Works of Drayning, or Works of Drowning rather. I confess a new device
it was of Lovells, by such Works as these, to Drown well nigh thirty thousands
of Acres, for the Gaining or Drayning of three. And not to speak in the dark,
but to give you a plain instance: In case Thurlby Tunnel shall, upon your
Enquiry, appear to be a new Work, devised by Lovell for the Drayning of that
Fen; and shall appear mischievous to the 1. making, or 2. increasing the
surrounder of Deeping Fen, you are to give special notice of her in your
Presentment: and therein to express, 1. quo Jure, that is, by what Law or Right
she lies: and 2. ad quod Damnum, to what Damage or Mischief she runs. Lovells
proper Work was to have Drayned these Fens: And I deny not, but that the manner
of Drayning was wholly in his power and discretion: But this I say, Lovell had
not power to Drown, or to increase and double the surrounder of Waters in any
of them, and then to leave them, and to leave the mischief of such other
Waters upon them, as before never annoyed them. And give me leave, seeing it
falls directly to my purpose, to observe to you the present condition of
Deeping Fen.

On the one side of it, First, All the Waters of Thurlby, and Burn Fen, and
of that part of the Country descending into that Fen, are wholly issued into
it. Secondly, The Overflowings of the River of Glean, and the whole mischief
thereof, upon all Floods, and increase of Waters, is wholly avoided upon it;
and all this mischief falls directly upon the said Fen since Lovells time, and
by new Works of his devising: such as is, 1. the Tunnell aforesaid, and 2. the
Slakers on Basson Bank, and 3. the exalting the Banks for Defense on Thurlby
and Burn side, much above their ancient heighths: Works contrived on purpose
for the 1. turning the Waters in hither, and the 2. taking them off from
Thurlby and Burn Fen, which was formerly their ancient Receptacle: and, upon
that score only, heretofore esteemed one of the best Pike-Fens in the Country.
-- On the other side of it, besides the surrounder thereof by its own proper
Waters; such 1. as fall either immediately upon it, or 2. have their course
into it, 3. to look upon the River of Welland, that great River, and well to
consider the great violence thereof: one half of whose streams, not long since,
had their passage to the Sea another way, through Croyland; and yet even then,
a great part of its Over-flowings upon all Floods, received by South-Ea Lake,
and otherwhere into the great Level: Now I say, to consider the said great
River, 1. banked out on all hands securely from thence: 2. lost below in its
Out-fall to the Sea: and the violent streams and rage thereof, 3. thrust and
straightened into one Chanel above: and 4. turned wholly upon this one poor Fen:
This I say, being well considered; and this being the present condition of this
Fen, it concerns us all nearly, to look carefully to it, and to keep out all
such of these Waters, as legally may 1. either be kept out of it, 2. or kept
off from it: otherwise the truth is, this Fen will not be long able to contain
them, but must of necessity discharge them, to the unavoidable destruction of
such Towns as are seated below it toward the Sea.

And although I know many of an Opinion, that by the Commission, such Works of
Lovells as these may be totally removed, and destroyed, a Fundamento: yet it is
unquestionably certain, that the mischief of them may, and ought to be totally
removed: And to that purpose, 1. some of them may be abated, 2. others of them
are to be stopped up, and made useless: if otherwise, they cannot be made
harmless. But besides these,

Others tend directly to Drayning: and are to be continued.
2. Secondly, Other Works there ^e of Lovells devising, that have no ^ischief
in them, but directly tend to ^he work of Drayning, as 1. either to ^ll, 2. or
to some of the Fens by him ^ndertaken; and these you are also to ^ake notice
of, and particularly to Pre^ent: 1. what they are, and 2. how ^ecessary or
useful they may be. And ^o much concerning those Works that were wholly devised
of new by Lovell, or by some of his Assigns; and 1. how ^ar, and 2. to what
purpose you are to ache notice of them in your Enquiry and presentment.

2. Other Works of ancient use; whereof,
But, as I formerly told you, besides those Works of Lovells own devising, de
Novo, there were others upon his Charge too, that were of ancient charge and
use: Such I mean, as were in charge upon the Country, and in use, 1. for the
Drayning of the Fens, or 2. for the Preserving of the Towns against them, time
out of mind, before ever Lovell intermedled. Now these likewise will fall under
a twofold consideration.

Some continued on, without Alteration.
1. First, Such as were time out of mind ancient Draynes, or Banks, or other
Works, continued on by Lovell, or his Assigns, in their ancient way and
course, without any 1. exalting, or 2. enlargement, or any other 3. change or
alteration whatsoever, 4. or with such small or slight alteration, as in effect
is to be esteemed none at all. And such as these you are to take special notice
of in your Enquiry, and in your Verdict to Present them in particular, what
they are, and to distinguish them from the rest.

Others continued on, with great Alterations and Enlargements.
2. Secondly, Such other ancient Works as are continued on by Lovell, and his
Assigns, but not in their ancient way and proportion, but with much
alteration, from what time out of mind, I may say, from what time within mind;
they have been. Such Draynes I mean, as have for the greatest, or a great part
of them, 1. been altered in their Channels, and made of new: or if continued in
their old Channels, yet 2. therein much enlarged, beyond and above their former
1. Bredths, and 2. Depths, For Lovell, and his Assigns, had power, both 1. to
continue such ancient Draynes as he should think fit, in their old and
accustomed wideness and breadth: and also such other as he should think fit, 2.
to enlarge at his and their own will and pleasure. -- So Gentlemen, as I take
it, this will be one considerable Point in your Charge: and in your Enquiry you
are to take special and particular notice of all such Draynes and Works so
altered and enlarged: and in your Verdict particularly to express, 1. wherein,
and 2. how much that alteration is.

And so I have done with the second part of my Discourse, and have told you, 1.
what now is to be done, as to the Works Lovell has left; and 2. with what
differences and distinguishments you are to observe them, and Present them. 1.
Some of them, as I told you, are not to be continued, in such use as at present
is made of them at least, as those of his own devising, that are mischievous;
and of these you are to take no other notice in your Presentment, but that 1.
they, or 2. their mischief however, may be removed. 2. All the other of them
are to be continued, at least not to be destroyed; and under such distinctions
as I formerly observed them to you, you are to take notice of them, 1. in what
condition they are, and 2. how useful they may be, and 3. to Present the
defects there of, that where necessity is, they may be repaired and amended.

3. The Works to be charged, either upon
And so I come to the third part of my Discourse, to tell you, how these Works
are to be Charged, and who they be that ought to repair them; it would be
otherwise to small purpose to Present them.

In this case there are but three ways imaginable, where the Charge of them
should at present either 1. rest, or 2. be 1. The ancient Charge-bearers.
cast; and that is, either, First, Upon the ancient Charge-bearers, and those
that are now in their Right, according to their former Allotments and
Apportionments, before Lovells intermedling. 2. Or Lovell.

3. Or the Commoners in the Fens.


2. Or else, Secondly, Upon Lovell, his Heirs, or Assigns, in case he or they
be bound thereto. 3. Or Thirdly, in the last place, To use the Authority of the
present Commission of Sewers, and to lay the Charge of them, 1. upon the whole
Fens, and the Commoners therein, that receive the benefit of them, 2. or to
assign and decree some reasonable 1. part of the Fens, or the 2. profits of it,
as to that purpose -- And here give me leave to observe to you, that no new
Charge is to be imposed upon the Fens, or the Commoners, by virtue of the
Commission, (without the Owners and Commoners consent thereto) but 1. where the
ancient Charge is 1. unknown, or 2. extinguished: 2. and where Lovell, his
Heirs, and Assigns, are 1. acquitted, or 2. are not in a condition or
capacity, by the power of the Commission, to be compelled. This way of Charge I
mentioned to you in the last place, and it is only to be made use of in the
last place, when all other ways fail: and for 1. necessity, or 2. convenience
to supply their defects. And having observed this to you, I now proceed to
declare unto you, with as much wariness and cautiousness as I can, where the
Works, formerly in Charge of Lovell, according to the distinctions I observed
amongst them, are now to be charged.

1. And in the first place, we have already told you, that amongst the Works of
Lovells own devising, some 1. Such Works of Lovells devising, as are not to be
continued, are not to be charged.

2. Such as are to be continued, are to be charged.


of them are not to be continued, b reason of their mischief; and therefore, as
to these, you need not enquire who is chargeable: And of them I shall need say
no more, but, that if any Persons of their own accord, would offer to bear the
Charge of them, they are not to be admitted, because the Works themselves are
not to be suffered.

2. Secondly, As to the rest of the Draynes and Works devised by Lovell, or his
Assigns, that are of use and benefit, you are to consider well where to Charge
them; for, without apparent mischief and danger to the Country, they can
neither be 1. left, nor 2. lost. -- And as to these, I take But not by way of
ancient Charge: but upon
it to be clear, that no ancient Charge can be put upon them, because they
themselves are not ancient Works. They are Works, de Novo, of Lovells own
devising, and could not be in Charge before they were in Being: It Is true, that
some of them, if not all of them, do supply the use of such ancient Works as by
Lovell were deserted, and are now irrecoverably decayed and lost: But, as I
take it, though Lovell might at his pleasure transfer^ the Work; yet because
that was not the same Work, in Individuo, with the ancient one, but another,
and a new Work in lieu of it, he could not transferr the ancient Charge, and
affix that to a new Work of his own devising: but the ancient Work being
extinguished and lost, the ancient Charge is extinguished and lost with it, and
no Law I know of can remove it hither to these new ones. So then, the Charge of
these Works must be put 1. either upon Lovell: Or, The Fens.
Lovell, his Heirs, or Assigns, that first devised them: 2. Or else upon the
Fens, that receive the immediate and whole benefit of them.

3. Works of Lovells enlarging, to be continued, and their Enlargements to be
charged:
3. Thirdly, As to those other Draynes and Works that Lovell made not, but
only made use of; Works of ancient Charge, and continued on, but with great
Alterations and Enlargements. As to these, I conceive, 1. If they should be
reduced to their ancient Charge, that would be to little purpose, for that
would not maintain them in their present Enlargements. 2. Or if the Draynes and
Works themselves should be reduced to their ancient Proportions, that would be
of worse consequence; for as to most of them, they are in that manner
contrived, and fitted to their present Channels and Currents, that to reduce
them now to what formerly they were, would be little less than to spoil Not
upon the ancient Chargebearers: but upon
and destroy them. And I take it to be clear, 3. That the ancient Charge cannot
be enlarged in a proportion to the Enlargement of the Works; for the ancient
Charge, was a Charge fixed by the common Law, upon certain Persons, by reason
of their Tenure of certain Lands or Mannours, or for other certain
consideration: A known fixed Charge, and ascertained, and not to be stretched
no more than the Law it self Lovell: Or,
that fixed it. -- Now that Lovell might well charge himself, and his Heirs, and
Assigns, as to these Enlargements, I hold it agreeable both to Law and Reason,
because they were Works done 1. by his own will, 2. and upon his own
adventure: but that Lovell thereby, should at his own pleasure, and for his own
advantage, increase the Charge of another, and lay a new Encumbrance upon
another man's Lands and Estate, I, for my part, hold unreasonable, and
altogether improbable. -- So these Works likewise, have none to maintain them,
in the proportion they are now in, unless they, as to their particular
Enlargements, may be charged 1. upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, The Fens.
that enlarged them: 2. or upon the Fens that shall receive profit thereby.

4. Works of ancient Charge unaltered.
4. But Fourthly, and in the last place: To come to such ancient Works as
Lovell made use of in their ancient way and course, 1. without any alteration
at all, or 2. without any great one worth the taking notice of: And of these I
cannot speak my mind clearly to you, without distinguishing them, so as I may
make an 1. Equitable difference amongst them at least, even as they stand in
relation to Lovell, and his Assigns: and a 2. Legal difference amongst them,
as they stand in relation to the Fens, and the Commoners therein.

1. Such ^s Lovell had no considerat^on for: upon Lovells neglect and ab^yance,
1. First then, Some of these are such as Lovell charged himself withal,
without any reason or consideration, more than his bare will and pleasure: And
thus the River of Glean, so far as the Town of Surfleet was anciently charged
with the same, became Lovells Charge and Work: It Is true, they of Surfleet
have Lovells Covenant for their discharge, but that is no absolute Discharge,
but only a bare Covenant, such as it is, without Consideration too, to
discharge, or save harmless; which if he do, it is well, and no more can be
desired; Return to their ancient Charge.
but if he do not, they of Surfleet, as I take it, may be compelled by the
Commissioners of Sewers, to do their work in their ancient manner and charge:
and they have their remedy over at Law against Lovell, for not performing his
Covenant, where they Lovell could not Charge the Fen-Lands with them longer
than they were in his own hands.
may take it. -- However, this I think I may speak clearly to you, that although
Lovell might charge the third part of these Fens, wherein they of Surfleet
never had any interest, for the doing of this particular Work of theirs,
whilst the said third part was in his own possession and disposal: Yet, I take
it, such Charge is now become void, or suspended at least, upon the Re-entry of
the Commoners, and during their holding of it: Lovell could create a Charge
therein no further than 1. as for his own Estate, and 2. whilst it was in his
own hands: the Owners, and the Commoners, he could not, by any act of his,
damnifie. -- So Gentlemen, You are to make special Presentment of the River of
Glean, and to express how far they of Surfleet have been anciently, and of
right chargeable with the same. And you are also to make Enquiry 1. into the
ancient Charge of so much of the said River, and 2. into the present Defects
thereof; and to make particular Presentment of them, upon such Persons in
particular, 1. inhabiting, or 2. holding any Lands or Manours in the said Town,
as of right ought to amend them.

2. Such ancient Works as Lovell had Confideration for, in the first place, are
to be Charged upon his Heirs and Assigns.
2. Secondly, Other ancient Works there are, that Lovell continued on, in
their ancient course, without alteration, and took upon his Charge upon
reasonable consideration and recompense; 1. Such Works of this nature as you
shall find, as I take it, the Charge of them, in the first place, even for the
present, is to be laid upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, and not
other-where, but upon their neglect and default. 2. And if the Charge of these
1. ancient Works that were made before Lovell* time, then much more, and a
Fortiori, As also, all such other Works, as were of Lovells 1. devising, or 2.
enlarging.
the Charge of all such other Works also, as were of Lovells own 2. devising,
3. or enlarging: for they in a more peculiar manner relate unto him, and carry,
as it should seem, his special mark and stamp upon them. -- And to clear this
to you, as to all these very Works in particular, (all which, that they were
expressedly in the Charge of Lovell, I declared unto you at large in the first
part of my Discourse, wherein I told you, what Lovell was to do) as A double
Charge upon Lovell.

1. By way of Covenant.


to all of them, I say, there is, by the Law, a double Charge upon Lovell.

1. First, A Charge upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, and every of them, by
way of Covenant, at their own proper costs and charges, for all times for ever
hereafter, to repair, maintain, and keep them; and thereof, (to bring it home
to my present purpose) for ever to discharge, exonerate, acquit, or save
harmless, as well the Queens Majesty that then was, her Heirs, and Successors,
as all other Persons, their Heirs, and Assigns, of and for their repairing and
amending their several parts or allotments of the same. -- So Gentlemen, Take
notice of it; here is an 1. absolute Charge upon Lovell, his Heirs, and
Assigns for ever: and 2. a Discharge, by way of Covenant, as to all other
persons. And a Covenant, we all know, is a good ground of Charge, in Cases of
Sewers; and is binding to the Heir, 1. in case case he be named therein, as in
this he is: 2. and has Assetts descended. So that in case you shall find
Lovell to have an Heir, who holds Lands in descent from him; though the Lands
lie out of the Country, and the View of the Commission: yet the Heir, by reason
of them, is chargeable to these very Works: I say not, that such Lands are
chargeable, but that such Lands are Assetts in the hands of the Heir, making
him chargeable.

2. By way of Tenure.
2. Secondly, There is a Charge upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, by way of
Tenure: he or they had cer^ain Lands, that is, 1. the third part of these Fens,
2. or some of them being part of the said undertaking, made, and ^o be held
subject to this Charge, by ^he Act of Parliament thereupon. The continual
maintaining of these Works; and thereby the keeping dry of these Fens, is the
expressed Consideration Lovell had these Lands for: And, as I conceive, the
Charge of these Works shall go along with these Lands, and with every part of
them, in cujuscunque manus devenerint, be Owners of them who will, under
Lovells title. -- So Gentlemen, I conceive it will be one very considerable
Point in your Charge, to Present 1. how much of the said Lands is in the
present possession of Lovell, his Heirs, or Assigns: 2. where the said Lands
lie: 3. and who are the present Owners and Tenants thereof.

The-Commoners Re-entry neither a Suspension nor Extinguishment of Lovells Duty.
As for the late Re-entry of the Owners and Commoners upon part of them, I for
my own part conceive, that by the Intendment of these Laws, such Re-entry was
never conditioned for an acquittal on the behalf of Lovell: but was therein
inserted altogether in favor, and for the benefit of the Commoners and Owners;
and, as I take it, is nothing else but a mere penalty upon Lovell for his
default; and during it, a suspension of his right: but is neither a suspension,
nor extinguishment of his duty.

If Lovells Heirs be without Assetts, and his Assigns out of Possession, then
in their neglect and abeyance,
So then, 1. Lovells Heirs are chargeable to these Works, but so far only as
they have Assetts descended: 2. and Lovells Assigns are chargeable also, but
so far only, and so long as they are Owners, Et Dum Tenent Terras, and are
Terre-Tenants, and hold the Lands, or any of them, upon which this Charge is
fixed. -- But put the case, 1. Lovell have no Heir with Assetts in his hands to
charge him, 2. and that the Assigns of Lovell should be Outed the Fens, in
Toto, and should stand at abeyance, that is, 1. neither do these Works
themselves, nor 2. yet part with their right to these Lands, so as that others
therewith may be procured to do them; nor so much as look after them, or us,
but at their own time, and when they shall please. For certain 1. Ancient Works
unaltered will return to their ancient Charge.
it is, 1. a right of Re-entry they have upon us, when ever they shall do their
Works: and 2. it is a very great question, whether we have any compulsory power
at all upon them, during their dis-possession: or 3. that being Outed in part,
should be Acquitted in part; and as to these particular Fens and Works; and
should stand at like abeyance, as to us, and them. -- In this case, when ever
it shall be or happen, during the Acquital, or other Dismission, 2. New Works
are to be charged upon the Fens.
or Intermission of Lovells Assigns; and supposing the Inability, or Incapacity
of his Heir: 1. These ancient Works unaltered, will return to their ancient
Charge: And all the rest of the Works, such as were of Lovells own 2. devising,
or 3. enlarging, as to their 3. Ancient Works altered and enlarged, are to be
charged, both upon the 1. ancient Charge-Bearers, as to their ancient
Proportions: and 2. upon the Fens, as to their Enlargements.
particular Enlargements only; and are so to be continued on by the
Commissioners, for the common good, may by them, and by virtue of this their
present Commission, be charged upon the Fens, and the Commoners that receive
the immediate benefit of them. -- And in case of such Failer on the part of
Lovells Heirs, and Assigns, can, according to what I have formerly told you,
no where else be charged.

And to avoid all difficulties, as to the defraying of the Charge of these
Works wherein the Commoners in these Fens shall be any ways concerned, I shall
propound this to you, as a way of the greatest ease, and of the greatest
equity: That the third part of these Fens, formerly held by Lovell, may still
be held on in severalty: and that Lovells third part still to be held in
severalty; and with the Commoners consent, that way employed and decreed.
with the consent of the Owners and Commoners, the profits of it may be disposed
of, for the discharge of them. And if they shall think good to desire it, a
Decree of Sewers may be drawn up to that purpose.

And thus far we have pursued Lovell, and his Works: But what if other Works,
1. that were never in the Charge of Lovell: 2. nor in the Charge of any other
Person, appear to be of The Outfall of VVelland.
necessity, and of such great necessity, as that without them, the maintaining
or perfecting these Works in the Charge of Lovell would be to little use or
purpose: Such as I conceive, may be the opening of the Sands, and the making of
a new Current or Channel in the River of Welland, for some Miles together
further toward the Sea than ever heretofore the said River was in charge. I
shall leave the 1. Necessity of this Work wholly to your considerations; and
withal to consider well, and to inform the Court, 2. what is the true cause of
the present decay or loss of the River of Welland in its ancient Outfall; that
in case of a new Charge, it may be imposed 1. upon them that occasioned it, and
2. upon such Lands as are gained by it.

All other Defaults and Offenses.
And thus I have altogether done with the grand Business of your Charge and
Enquiry. But besides this, 1. what other Works of Sewers you shall find in
Default, or 2. what Offenses you shall find committed, contrary to the Laws of
Sewers, 1. either upon your own View and Knowledge, 2. or upon sufficient
Information from others, in your Enquiry, you are to take special notice of
them; And such Works in Default, you are to Present 1. upon the Persons that
ought to repair them: and such Offenses you are to Present 2. upon the Persons
that committed them.

And now Gentlemen, I have spoken my mind to you 1. freely, and 2. plainly; And
in any thing I have spoken wherein 1. you are not satisfied, you may consult
the Court: and in any thing wherein 2. the Court is not satisfied, I do humbly
desire it, they would be pleased better to inform you.

DIXI.
A Charge of Sewers: As to the Charge of the River of Glean, from Newbury,
through the Town of Surfleet, to the Sea; 1. That it was the ancient Charge of
the Town of Surfleet: And 2. That during the Outer of Lovell, his Heirs, and
Assigns, and their Failer and Neglect, they of Surfleet are for the present
bound to Maintain it,
Gentlemen, You of this Jury,
YOU have heard a Petition, and the Order of the Court thereupon, read here;
and they give you a short account upon what Business you are called hither:
It Is to set out some 1. speedy, and 2. effectual Course, for the Ditching of
the River of Glean, from a place called Newbury, through the Town of Surfleet,
to its Outfall. This is the present work, both of us here, that be of the
Court; and of you, that be of the Jury: And upon the whole matter, I shall
propound three things to your Considerations: 1. The first shall be concerning
the Necessity of the Work. 2. The second concerning the Persons upon whom the
Work at present is to be Charged. 3. And the third concerning the Manner of
that Charge.

1. The Necessity of the Work.

1. It Is for the Preservation of Navigation.


As to the First: Though the Petition in its own words be full, and requires no
Commentator; yet out of it I shall instance in these particulars.

1. First, It Is for the Preservation of Navigation: The loss of this 1.
deprives many particular Men (that way ^red and subsisting) of their
Employments and Lively-hoods, 2. it deprives the Country it self of many rich
Commodities and Advantages; and as to these parts, 3. it destroys and blocks
up that general Trade and Commerce they have formerly had by this River with
the other parts of this Nation. So Gentlemen, You are to Enquire, 1. Whether
Boats, Barges, and other Navigable Vessels, can have such 1. full, and 2. clear
Passage upon this River, as of right they ought, and have been accustomed to
have: And if not, 2. You are to certify the Court of it, and the Cause why
they cannot have it. The Law of this Land is, and always has been very
careful of Navigation, and will admit nothing that shall be to the 1.
Deterioration, much less to the 2. Destruction of it. And the Preservation
thereof is one of the main Ends the Commission of Sewers it self was made for.

2. It Is for the Preservation of a great part of the Country.
2. Secondly, It Is for the Preservation of a very great and considerable part
of the Country. This River is the only Outfall (that can lawfully be claimed)
for the Drayning of the whole Township of Pinchbeck, and for the Drayning of a
great part of the Township of Spalding; and upon the loss of this River, would
unavoidably follow the loss and destruction of one of these Townships at the
least. But besides these two, many other Towns, Fields, Meadows, and Fens, in
the adjacent parts of Kesteven, have, of ancient Right and Custom, issued their
Waters by this River to the Sea; and they all, of necessity, must sustain great
and inestimable Damages in the loss of it: A loss too great, not only to the
particular Persons having Interest; but also to the Body of the Commonwealth,
in losing such a part of it self; and no ways by the Commissioners of Sewers
to be suffered or endured. For, Gentlemen, I would have you take notice of it,
that the Preservation of Towns and Grounds, heretofore through politic wisdom
won, and made profitable for the benefit of the Commonwealth, is the chief
thing within the charge and care of this Commission.

The Seacoasts upon this Country (you all very well know) is a flat, and a
loose Sand; and would soon silt, and stop up the Outfalls of the whole Country,
was it not for the Rivers, and the constant Streams of Water issuing down their
Chanells. And I observe, that it has been the prudence and providence of our
Predecessors, and such others as have been employed for the Preservation of
this Country, to preserve the Out-falls of the Rivers in their full deepness;
and to lay what force of Water they could upon them, either by Fynnes, or such
other Devices, for the scouring out of the Sand. -- Now this River of Glean, as
to this very part of it from Newbury, that you now have in charge, 1. it being
the Out-fall to the whole River, and 2. it being at present so greatly
obstructed, that by reason thereof, this River cannot discharge its own Waters
into the Sea: Look a little back upon the mischief of it: First, Those Waters
rebound upon the Fens, and cause a great surrounder there; From whence,
Secondly, Upon all winds and storms, they rage against the Defensive Banks of
the Towns, and cause a daily danger and fear there. And Thirdly, They obstruct
the Out-falls of all your other Draynes: -- So that for the present, what
violence of Waters soever shall come upon the said Townships, either by
downfall, or otherwise, (such is their sad condition) they must receive all of
it in, and can issue little or none of it out. -- And thus this River of Glean,
and that other of Welland, heretofore the two principal Ornaments of this
Country, and the chief riches and delights of the Towns through which they had
their Currents, are now, 1. for want of maintainting, and 2. by reason of other
abusings, become the greatest Mischiefs: And those Towns, heretofore the
principal in the Country, are now become little better than mere Ponds and
Pools, nay very Seas, as in truth, whoever at present will look upon them,
shall find them such.

3. It Is for the Preservation of many other Works of Sewers.
3. Thirdly, It Is for the Preservation of many very great and considerable
Works of Sewers, lately repaired for the good of the Country: As 1. Blew Goat,
2. Burtons Goat, 3. the several Drayns leading to each of them; all which
depend wholly upon the gaining of the Out-fall of this River; which if once
effectually Ditched, these very Works would preserve: and if not, 1. the
Works themselves will be altogether useless, and 2. great sums of Money
expended about them, will be utterly lost.

And so I have done with the first part of my Discourse, and, I hope, have
therein sufficiently intimated to you, the Necessity of the Work, and that the
Necessity of it is so great, that, without unsufferable damage and danger to
the Country, it can admit of no delay. In majoribus Causis, major adhibenda est
Cura: The greater import and necessity the business is of, the greater also
ought to be the care of such as are trusted in the management of it. The
Commissioners you see have sufficiently testified theirs, 1. in giving it a
particular Consideration, and 2. directing you, as a particular Jury for
Enquiry in this mighty Business: And I doubt not, but that you will all of you
endeavor to manifest your care and diligence in doing of your parts; as the
Commissioners have in doing theirs.

2. The Persons Chargeable.
And so I come to the second part of my discourse, to declare unto you, the
Persons upon whom this Work for the present is to be charged.

The Charge upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, by Laws of Sewers 41. and
42. Eliz. by Act of Parliament 1. Jacobi.
Clear it is, that the Charge thereof for many years last past, ever since the
41 st. and 42 d. of Queen Elizabeth, by certain Laws of Sewers then made: or
at least ever since the First of King James, by Act of Parliament, in
Confirmation of those Laws, has been upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns;
The words are, That Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, at his and their own
proper costs and Charges, (amongst many other things) shall also for ever
maintain and keep the Rivers of Glean and Welland with sufficient* Diking,
Roading, and Scouring: to wit, (the River of Welland, as is therein expressed)
and this of Glean, from a place called Basson Spout, unto its Out-fall into the
Sea. (So that this part of Glean, from Newbury, through Surfleet, to its
Out-fall, was undoubtedly included in Lovells Charge, and was a part of his
Work.) And also shall thereof discharge, exonerate, acquit, or save harmless,
as well the Queens Majesty (that then was) her Heirs, and Successors, as all
other person and persons, their Heirs, and Assigns, of and for the repairing
and amending of their several Parts and Allotments in either of the said Rivers.

These words are all, that any person, formerly liable to the maintaining of
these Rivers, can allege, 1. either to charge Lovell, 2. or to discharge
himself. -- And I shall consider how far these words may operate: First, As to
the Charge upon Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns. And Seconly, As to the
discharge of such other Persons as were formerly liable thereto.

1. How far the Charge imposed extends upon 1. Lovell.
1. For the First: As to the Charge imposed upon 1. Lovell, his 2. Heirs, and
3. Assigns, how far it shall extend upon them; that I may proceed therein with
the greater clearness, I shall take them severally. And,

1. First, As to Lovell, the Person that bound himself to the doing of these
Works, I take it to be a full Charge upon him, both as to his 1. Person, and 2.
as to his Estate. -- But he many years since is dead and gone, and so 1. no
help from him for the present at all, 2. much less any present and speedy help,
such as the Necessity of this Work requires.

2. His Heirs.
2. Secondly, As to his Heirs, they being herein expressly mentioned, I take it
to be a Charge to them likewise, so far as Heirs by the Law are chargeable;
that is, 1. so long, and 2. so far as they have Assetts descended. The Laws of
this Nation (give me leave to speak it) are not so hard in this Point, as those
sometimes of the Kingdom of Israel, where the Children might be made
Bondslaves to satisfy the Fathers Creditor: No, they burden not the Heir,
where the Heir has no benefit. And as to any Estate 1. of his own industrious
Acquest, 2. or of Gift, 3. or Right from others; they burden not that neither:
And 1. no farther, nor 2. no longer is the Heir liable, than so far, and so
long as he has Assetts in descent. Now in case you make Enquiry after Lovells
Heirs as to this particular, I doubt it will be to little purpose: Lovell
confesses himself to have spent his whole Estate in these Works, and very
unlikely are his Heirs to hold Lands from him otherwhere, who never enjoyed
from him one Foot of these in the Fens. So then, Enquire you 1. may, and 2.
ought after them; but if no Assetts be in their hands, no Relief will be had
from them in this business.

3. His Assigns
3. Thirdly, As to his Assigns, they are Persons, I confess, of great Estates,
and Honor too; but I conceive, can de Facto, no longer be forced to the Charge
of these Works, than de Facto, they are Terre-Tenants, and hold the Lands
whereupon the Charge of them is fixed: So that for the present, they being
Outed from the Benefit of the One, (the Commoners having lately made their
Re-entry there) they cannot, during such Re-entry, and the Commoners holding,
be compelled to the Charge of the Other. No Assignee is further chargeable by
the Law, than he is Terre-Tenant: The Assignee of himself is no privy, but an
extraneous Person: And present Possession, and an actual Estate, 1. in these
particular Lands, is it must make him liable, as Assetts 2. in general do the
Heir. -- But I would not herein be mistaken, for I take it, that Lovells
Assigns have at present a Right in these Lands, though they have no
Possession, and that in case they ever hereafter make use of this Right, they
are the rightful Persons, that de Jure, ought to bear the Charge of these
Works: And I could heartily wish it, that they would either undertake the One,
or else wholly disclaim the Other. But this I say, that during their Outer from
the Possession of these Lands, they are no ways under the Power of the
Commission, so as to be enforced to this Charge: -- For their Right to these
Lands, is no other, than what they may 1. waive, and 2. disclaim. And it is
only a conditional Right, depending upon the performance of such Works as are
altogether in their choice, either 1. to do, or 2. to desert* If they do
Recover, they may Re-enter; and then all that can be said of them, is, that if
they do Re-enter upon their former Estate, they must also Re-imburse, and
Recompense what has been done, and laid out by others in their Default.

But because some may imagine perhaps, that the Fen-Lands formerly in 4. The
Fen-Lands.
Lovells Possession, may be as yet liable to the Charge of these Works. 4. I
will therefore in the Fourth place, say something as to them. -- And I shall
confess, that these Lands whilst they were in the Possession of 1. Lovell, 2.
his Heirs, or 3. Assigns, were chargeable; and that by express words in the
Act of Parliament, he and they did hold the same subject to this Charge.

But these Lands being before Lovells intermedling, 1. clear, and un-lyable,
and 2. such as wherein the Persons chargeable to this particular Work under
your Enquiry never had any Interest; Lovell neither 1. did, nor 2. could create
a Charge thereupon, further than 1. as to his own Estate, and 2. whilst it was
in his own Possession: His own Estate therein make subject he 1. might, and 2.
did; but the Owners, and the Commoners, and their Rights therein, (as I have
formerly spoken it upon another occasion from hence) he neither 1. did, nor 2.
could, by any Act of his, damnifie. -- And therefore, you may observe it, the
words in the Act of Parliament are, That Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, shall
hold the said Lands subject to the Charge of these Works. Expressly signifying,
that the said Lands were made subject to this Charge, whilst they were in 1.
his, or 2. their holding, and no longer.

And to clear this above all exception: Upon such neglect and default of
Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, as in the said Laws is expressed, and
accordingly certified, the Owners and Commoners may Re-enter upon these Lands,
and them have and hold: Now I ask, How? The very words of the Law in this Point
are clear and full; namely, as in their former Right, and as in their former
Estate: But they, in their former Estate, were never chargeable to this Work;
'twas only Lovell undertook it: Nor now shall be upon their Re-entry, in case
Lovell desert or neglect it: 'Twas Lovells Charge 1. originally, and 2. only;
none of theirs.

But to put this Point a little higher: First, Suppose that Lovells Assigns 1.
should wholly 1. waive their Right, and 2. desert these Works; and should never
hereafter 1. Recover, or 2. Reenter: certainly in this case the Lords and
Commoners of these Lands shall not be charged with other Works than of their
own proper maintenance, and shall not at all be charged with foreign Works,
that belong to other Towns, only because Lovell (who had sometimes an Estate
under limitation in these Lands, and that subject to Forfeiture too) of his own
accord undertook them. Or Secondly, Suppose Lovells Assigns, during this their
Outer, 1. should wholly disclaim their Right, or 2. that their Right should
other-wayes be dis-annulled; and a new Composition should by the Lords, Owners,
and Commoners of these Lands, be made with a new Undertaker; doubtless they
might do it with respect to their own Interest only, and are no ways bound to
treat Covenants therein, for the benefit of others, because Lovell admitted
them.

And now Gentlemen, To make some short Recapitulation of what I have hitherto
spoken to this Point: Clear it is, First, That the Fen-Lands sometimes Lovells,
while they are in the Commoners Possession, are not liable to this Charge.
Clear it is, Secondly, That Lovell is dead and gone, and so norelief from him.
Clear it is, Thirdly, That Lovells Heirs for want of Assetts are not in Law
responsable. Clear it is, Fourthly, That Lovells Assigns are, during their
Outer from the Possession of these Lands, not compellable. Now this Work being
of such present and urgent Necessity, what further is to be done in it? and
where is it for the present to be charged?

Doubtless such Persons as were formerly charged with this work before Lovells
time, are now, during his neglect and failer, to perform it: And there is the
more Equity as to this particular Work; for that Lovell did freely, and of his
own accord undertake this Work, without any Consideration whatsoever for it;
and they upon whom this Work is chargeable, may in this respect only, well give
Lovell, and his Assigns thanks, for freeing them so long from it for nothing.
And for the better clearing of this, I shall, according to the Method I
formerly propounded,

2. How far other Persons, formerly liable, are discharged. Not absolutely:
2. In the second place, declare unto you, How far this Charge upon Lovell, his
Heirs, and Assigns, shall operate, as to the Discharge of the Persons formerly
liable: And I take it to be clear,

That, as to the Persons formerly liable, there is 1. no absolute Discharge, 2.
nor other Discharge at all, further But, ex re Facta, if Lovell do the Works.
than Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, ex re Facta, by doing of the Work on
their behalfs, shall make the Discharge; that is, (to speak plainly) there is
to them no Discharge at all, only a Covenant to them there is, on Lovells part,
that he will discharge them: There are no such words, either in the Laws of
Sewers, or in the Act of Parliament; nor no such sense can be put upon them, as
that the Persons formerly liable, shall be discharged the Works: but only, that
Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, shall do the Works; and that Lovell, his
Heirs, and Assigns shall them thereof discharge, acquit, exonerate, and save
harmless: 1. which if he do, it is well; and it is his Covenant that he shall
do it: 2. but if he do not, the Persons formerly liable, may and ought, by the
Court, upon his Upon Lovells neglect and failer, they may again be charged with
them.
neglect and failer, be charged therewith; and they have their remedy
other-where against Lovell, for not doing what he undertook to do. -- And I
take this to be very clear, if ever the case be as now it is; that is, 1. if
the Work be a Work of 1. ancient, and 2. known Charge, as this is: and 2. if
that Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns, be none of them in a condition to be
compelled thereunto; as we have formerly proved, that for the present they are
not. -- For certain it is, the Commissioners must not neglect these Works,
because Lovell neglects them; neither must they suffer the Country to be lost
and ruined for want of them, because Lovell, and his Heirs, are lost, and gone,
and ruined in their Estates, and cannot do them; nor his Assigns compelled to
do them.

So Gentlemen, Out of my Discourse hitherto, I hope I have sufficiently
demonstrated three things to you: The first is, that this Work is of present
necessity, and must be done. The second is, that Lovell, his Heirs, and
Assigns, are none of them in a condition; so as de Facto, to be compelled to
do it. The third is, that during this their Failer, the Work is to be done, and
for the present is to be done by such Persons as were formerly chargeable
thereto. Who the Persons formerly liable to this particular Work are.
Now that I may close up this second part of my Discourse: 4. A fourth thing
remains for you to Enquire of, that is, Who these Persons are that were
formerly chargeable? This indeed is properly your work, but I shall crave
leave, out of the ancient Records of this Court, to inform you something about
it.

I do find, by three ancient Inquisitions, remaining here amongst the Records
of this Court: 1. the one without date, 2. the other Nono Edwardi Secundi, 3.
the third Quarto Henrici Quinti, that the Charge of this River, from the
beginning of Surfleet, (which has been always accounted from Newbury) and so
downwards to the Sea, 1. The Town of Surfleet.
has, and 2. ought to be born by the Town of Surfleet. These three ancient
Inquisitions, in express words, speak this Charge full and directly. 4. And the
same Charge I find partly intimated likewise in a parcel of an old
Inquisition, taken 17. Edwardi 2 di. here also preserved. 5. The same Charge I
find again full and direct, in an Inquisition, taken 6 to. Edwardi 6 ti. 6. And
Lastly, By Laws and Orders of Sewers, Octavo Elizabethae, (the very Age Lovell
begun his Work in) I do find, that consentient and pursuant to all the former
Inquisitions, the same in like manner was again charged and ordered upon the
Lords, Owners, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of Surfleet, as has been
accustomed. And lest there should be any quarrel or question about the ancient
bound of the Sea, I do therein find the said River in express words (and I
would have you take special notice of them) charged upon them of Surfleet, from
Newbury, through Surfleet: to the Out-fall of the Water of Glean into the River
of Welland; nothing can be more full or plain. -- But because I would clear my
self, so as to deal truly with you in this Point, and would not be suspected of
partiality, or interest, I shall desire, that the Clerk of Sewers may read the
Records themselves to you, here in open Court; and you, upon his reading, may
examine these Copies of them, for your use and direction.

Here the Clerk of Sewers read the Records, and the Foreman of the Jury
examined the Copies of them then delivered.

So Gentlemen, I hope you are all fully satisfied, as to the ancient Charge of
this River, both 1. before, and 2. to Lovells time: You have had all the
ancient Records that I know preserved in this Court, as concerning this
particular, produced in the case; and they all sufficiently attest it, and they
all agree in their testimony.

Let not the several and different Names of this River trouble you. -- Besides
such Names 1. as it borrows from the Towns through which it runs, as being
sometimes called Pinchbeck River, sometimes Surfleet River, sometimes Basson
River, or Basson-Ea, two other famous names it has, and as I have been
informed, from two great Springs from whence it arises; the one of Burn, from
whence it is called Burne-Ea, and Burne-old-Ea: the other (which I shall no
ways affirm, but as I have been by some told so only) of Glean, from whence it
is called the River of Glean. -- You see ancient Inquisitions have often the
name of 1. Basson-Ea, a Town not far distant from us, nigh which it runs;
and of 2. Burne-old-Ea, as being the Spring nighest us in these parts, from
whence a great branch of it arises, and so to us best known: But in Lovells
Law, it has only the name of the 3. River of Glean, under which name
accordingly we give it to you in Charge; and which Name, for that very cause, I
would desire you to use in your Verdict and Presentment. But certain it is,
call it the River of Glean, Basson-Ea, Burne-Ea, or what other Name you please,
that from the In-fall of Burn Water, (nigh the place where St. Nicholas his
Cross, and Captain Lovells own House heretofore stood) and so downwards to the
Sea, it is all but one and the same Channel; so that this difference of Names
need not trouble you; for as to this part of the River under your Enquiry, they
are all of them but several Names of the same River, imposed in respect 1. of
the several Fountains from whence it arises, or 2. in respect of the several
Towns through which it passes; and in some Records one Name is used, in some
another. -- And having spoken this for the better understanding of the Records,
I have altogether done with the second part of my Discourse, concerning the
Persons upon whom this Work is to be charged.

3. The Manner of the Charge.
And so I come to the third part of my Discourse, concerning the manner of this
Charge, to wit, How it is 1. to be Imposed, 2. and Born.

In the foregoing part of my Discourse, I have told you, that this River, from
Newbury, to its Out-fall, is to be charged for the present upon the ancient
Charge-bearers: But so,

1. No more to be Imposed, but the ancient Charge of
1. First, As you lay no more but the ancient Charge upon them; For in case
Lovell, or his Assigns, have any ways enlarged this River, they are not bound
to maintain those Enlargements, but only its ancient Chanel; and to ascertain
this, you are to Enquire into the ancient proportion of this River; and what
was formerly, and before Lovells time, its ancient depth and breadth: And to use
few words, it is to 6. Foot deep, 40. Foot wide, if the old Banks permit.
be 1. six Foot deep at the least, as appears by the Inquisition 6. Edwardi 6
ti. and to be 2. forty* Foot wide, from Cate-Bridge, (a place near Basson)
downwards to the Sea, if the old Banks will so permit; as appears by the Orders
of Sewers 8. Elizabethae: And in the ancient Inquisition 17. Edwardi 2 di. a
particular Reason is rendered, why it should be of this wideness, from the House
as then of one Richard Cheyle, (probably standing either 1. about, or 2. above
Newbury) downwards: Quia conveniens est, quod cursus Aquae in suo exitu sit
largior quam in suo introitu.

2. And Secondly, The Owners and Inhabitants of the Town of Surfleet, out of my
precedent Discourse, sufficiently appear to have been the ancient
Charge-bearers, and upon whom the Work at present is to be charged: But the
Records express no more, than in 2. The Manner how that Charge was born to be
Enquired after, whether by 1. Acridge or 2. Frontage, or 3. Agistment, or 4.
Commonage.
general words, 1. a Charge only upon the Town of Surfleet, or a Charge 2. upon
the Lords, Owners, Freeholders, or Inhabitants of Surfleet. Now I would have
you Enquire into the ancient Manner of that Charge, and how it was formerly
born, whether 1. by Acridge, 2. or by Frontage, 3. or by Agistment, 4. or by
common Men-Works; doubtless, by one, or some of these ways it was born: And
you are to inform the Court, 1. by which, and 2. how much of the same; by any
of which in particular: so that the same ancient Charge may be imposed in the
same manner it anciently was, and in no other. And so much concerning the grand
Business of your Charge and Enquiry.

Now if any of you ask, why no more Why no more of this River, but this part of
it only put upon Enquiry,
of this River is put upon your Enquiry, than this part of it from Newbury to
the Sea? I shall answer: First, That this part is in the greatest Decay.
Secondly, That this part being in Decay, is of the greatest Mischief, and is
the sole cause of most of the Mischiefs aforesaid. And Thirdly, That this part
of it must first be repaired, as being the Out-fall to the rest; here the Work
must of necessity be begun: And when this shall be effected, I doubt not, but,
as some recompense of your labors, you shall see Glean, with very small
repairs above, 1. an useful, 2. a commodious, 3. and a pleasant River again.

And as it is your main Business to observe this River, and to Enquire into 1.
the Defects of it, and 2. the Charge of it; so that 1. the Waters, 2. and
Boats, may have a clear, and a free, and an interrupted Current and Passage in
it again: So I would have you also take some notice of the great Bridge
Surfleet Bridge.
that is over it at Surfleet; to two ends would I have you observe this Bridge:
First, To cause the Water to pass under it again, as anciently it has done,
and as of right it ought. And Secondly, To cause safe Land-Passage over it
again; and to that end to take notice of the 1. Ruins, or 2. other Decays
thereof, and to Present them upon such Persons as ought to Repair them.

The particular Inconveniences upon Holland, and therein upon the two Towns of
Pinchbeck and Spalding.
I have observed, that in all great Works and Undertakings, both 1. the
Contrivance of the Works themselves, and 2. the Mischiefs upon the Failer, have
always fallen heavy upon this Country of Holland; and in a special manner upon
the two Towns of Pinchbeck and Spalding. I may truly say, we have always been,
In Part Deteriori. 1. Whose Pastures have been cut asunder, mangled and
spoiled, by the making of their Draynes, but ours? 2. Whose Grounds have been
socked, by the running of their Draynes, but ours? 3. Whose Towns have been,
yea at present are, over-flowed and drawned, by the breaking of their Banks, or
by the miscarriage of their other Works, but ours? And upon Failer, 1. they of
Kesteven can suffer no more than in the loss of their Commons; 2. it is we in
Holland that do suffer in the loss of our Towns: They may suffer in their Fens,
it is we that suffer in our Estates and Habitations. -- So that both 1. the Work
of Drayning, 2. and the Neglect of Drayning, though in different degrees, yet
if in any thing, or any where mischievous, it is so to us here in Holland: And
if any where in Holland, it is so to these two Towns of Spalding and Pinchbeck:
For besides 1. the particular mischief, which always falls 1. first, and 2.
heaviest upon these two Towns; and is now fallen upon them, to the utter ruin
and undoing of many particular Persons and Families; and it may be, to the very
desertion and desolation of the Towns themselves; three Parts of one of them is
at this very instant depopulate and forsaken; both 1. Man, and 2. Beast, are
fled and gone. 2. They must, I say, besides their suffering under it. be at all
the Charge too for the remedy of it, or else it must rest upon them. Other
Towns as rightfully concerned in Works of Sewers, for the removing of it as
they, without a compelling Power, will do just nothing. -- And doubtless, had
other Towns (as rightfully concerned in the Charge as these) 1. born their
equal share to such Works as have been done, 2. and had done such other Works
as they ought to have done, these Towns had not been such a sad spectacle as
now they are; nor in a such a sad, woeful, drowned condition, as now they are
in.

To conclude: 1. The great Mischief that now at present is upon these two
Towns, and a great part of it 1. caused, or 2. continued at least, by reason of
this Obstruction of the River of Glean in its Out-fall: 2. And the Persons at
whose Charge it ought for the present to be removed, you have heard declared
unto you at large; it is now put upon your Enquiry, what you will find. I doubt
not, but you will well consider, 1. both the miserable and calamitous Condition
of these Towns, 2. and the urgent Necessity of the Work; and that you will
Present it upon such Persons, 1. as may be compelled to do it, and 2. during
the failer and neglect of Lovell, of right ought to do it: No more is required
of you, and I hope you will do no less.

DIXI.
The Petition occasioning the foregoing Charge of Sewers.
To the Right Worshipful, the Commissioners of Sewers, for the County of
Lincoln, and therein for these parts of Holland: The humble Petition of the
Surveighour, Dikereenes, and other the Inhabitants of the Town of Pinchbeck, in
the County and Parts aforesaid.
SHOWS,
THat whereas your Petitioners, and other the Inhabitants and Land-Owners
within the Town of Pinchbeck, have for some years last past, been at
extraordinary Charges and Expenses, in and about the Repairing of a certain
Sea-Goat, called Blew-Goat, and in Opening and Ditching diverse Draynes, and
other Works of Sewers, for the necessary Defense and Preservation of the said
Towns: Yet so it is, 1. that all the said Works are, and will continue useless;
2. and great sums of Money there-about expended, will be altogether lost; 3.
and your Petitioners, and their Estates, and the whole Township of Pinchbeck,
in daily danger of being destroyed and drowned; unless some speedy course be
taken for the Ditching of the River of Glean, from Newbury, through the
Township of Surfleet, to its Out-fall: for which whole space, it being within
the County of Lincoln aforesaid, the said main River is so landed and silted
up, that 1. your Petitioners can have no Out-fall thereby for their Draynes and
Waters into the Sea, 2. nor Boats, and Navigable Vessels, their usual passage
thereupon, as of right they ought, and have been acustomed to have; to the
great and inestimable Damages 1. of your Petitioners, and 2. of the
Commonwealth.

In Consideration of the Premises, your Petitioners humbly pray, That this
Court would be pleased to set some 1. speedy, and 2. effectual Order and
Course, for the Ditching and Opening of so much of the said River.

And forasmuch as the Heirs and Assigns of Lovell, Persons heretofore upon
their Covenant liable to the Ditching of the said River, 1. have for many years
last past refused, and neglected to perform the same: 2. and for the present
have not any thing in Possession, whereby they may be compelled thereunto: 3.
and forasmuch as the speedy effecting of the said Work is of great Import and
Necessity: 4. and the Fen-Lands heretofore in the Possession of Lovell, his
Heirs, and Assigns, sometimes liable to the Charge thereof, are, since the
Re-entry of the Commoners, and other Owners thereinto, become, and during their
holding of them, stand discharged of Lovells Covenant:

Your Petitioners further pray,

That 1. during this Intermission of Lovell, his Heirs, and Assigns; and 2.
their Outer from the said Lands, the Court would be pleased to settle the
Charge of so much of the said River upon such Persons, as anciently, before
Lovells undertaking thereof, were, and of right are liable thereto: And to that
purpose would be pleased to cause a Jury to Enquire thereof, and to do all such
other and further Acts as shall be conducing thereunto.

And your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall Pray, etc.

FINIS.

