AN ACT For prevention of FRAUDS and PERJURIES.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for Granting unto His Majesty, An Aid or Additional Custom on the
Several Goods and Merchandises therein mentioned.
WE your Majesty's Most Loyal Subjects the Commons of Ireland, in Parliament
Assembled, being Convinced that the Supplies already Granted unto Your Majesty
this Session of Parliament, are not Sufficient to Answer Your Majesty's
Occasions; And desiring to show the sense we have of the great benefit we daily
reap under your Most happy Government, which we Resolve always to support with
such Necessary Supplies of Money as your Majesty's Affairs Require, and the
Condition of the Kingdom will bear, Have Given and Granted unto Your Excellent
Majesty, An Aid or Additional Duty to be Raised and Levied upon the Goods and
Merchandises following (That is to say) On Tobacco, Old-Drapery, New-Drapery,
Muslin, Callicoes; all sorts of Linen, Scotch-Cloth, and Wine that shall be
Imported into this Kingdom, according to such Rates, and during such time, and
in such Manner and Form as is herein after mentioned and Expressed. And We
humbly beseech Your Majesty that it may be Enacted.

And be it Enacted, by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the* Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all
Tobacco, Old-Drapery and New-Drapery (Except such Old and New-Drapery that
shall be of the Manufacture of England, and Imported thence) Muslin, Callicoes;
All sorts of Linen, Scotch-Cloth, and Wines (Except Wines of the Growth of
Spain, and of the Dominions thereunto belonging) that shall be Imported into
this Kingdom at any time from and after the Day of the Royal Assent given to
this Act, unto the Twenty Fifth Day of December, which will be in the Year of
Our Lord God, One Thousand, Sir Hundred, Ninety and Nine, and no longer, shall
Answer and Pay unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, over and above all
Rates and Duties Due or Payable for, or out of the same, by Virtue of any
former Law or Laws in Force at the Making of this Act, the Rates and Duties
hereafter mentioned (that is to say) For every pound weight of Tobacco,
Imported within the time aforesaid, one penny half penny, sterling. And for every
Yard of Old-Drapery Imported within the time aforesaid, Except as before
Excepted, Twelve-pence, sterling. And for every Yard of New-Drapery Imported
within the time aforesaid, Except as before Excepted, Four-pence, sterling. And
for every Ell of Muslin, Callico, and of all and of every other sorts of Linen
Imported, within the time aforesaid (Scotch-Cloth Excepted) Sixpence, sterling.
And for every yard of Scotch-Cloth Imported, within the time aforesaid,
Sixpence, sterling. And for every Tun of Wine (Except Wines of the Growth of
Spain, and of the Dominions thereunto belonging) Imported within the time
aforesaid, Three Pounds, sterling. And so proportionably for a Greater or Lesser
Quantity.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid* That the said several
Duties shall be Raised, Collected, Levied and paid unto Your Majesty, Your
Heirs and Successors, during the time aforesaid, at the same times, and in the
same manner and Places, and by such Rules, Means and Ways, and under such
Penalties and Forfeitures as are mentioned and Expressed in one Act of
Parliament made in a Session of Parliament which began the Eighth day of May,
in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of the Late King Charles the Second,
Entitled, An Act for Settling the Excise, or New Impose, upon the said Late
King Charles the Second, His Heirs and Successors; the same to be paid upon
Merchandises Imported and Exported into or out of the Kingdom of Ireland,
according to the Book of Rates to the said Act Annexed.

And whereas some Doubt has lately Arisen, whether Tobacco Imported into this
Kingdom ought to Pay, or is Chargeable with, unto His Majesty any Greater Duty
upon any Account whatsoever then two pence halfpenny for every Pound Weight,
by Virtue of any Law or Laws in Force before the Making of this Act. For the
Settling whereof, and for prevention of all Controversy for the Future touching
the same.

^e it Enacted and Declared, by the Authority aforesaid, That no more then
Twopence halfpenny for Every Pound Weight of Tobacco Imported into this
Kingdom, was, or is Payable, or Do, or Did of Right belong unto His Majesty, or
any of his Predecessors, by Virtue aforesaid. That any Person or Persons wh^
shall before any Person or Persons Empowered, by Virtue of this Act, as
aforesaid, to take Bail or Bails, Represent or Personate any other Person or
Persons, whereby the Person or Persons so Represented and Personated, may be
liable to the Payment of any Sum or Sums of Money, for Debt or Damages; to be
Recovered in the same Suit or Action wherein such Person or Persons are
Represented and Personated, as if they had Really Acknowledged and Entered into
the same, being Lawfully Convicted thereof, shall be Adjudged, Esteemed, and
Taken to be Felons, and suffer the Pains of Death; And Incurr such Forfeitures
and Penalties as Felons, in other Cases Convicted or Attainted, do by the Law
of this Realm Lose and Forfeit.

FINIS.

