AN ACT For taking Special Bails in the Country, upon Actions and Suits
Depending in the Courts of KING'S BENCH, COMMONPLEAS, and EXCHEQUER at DUBLIN.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for taking Special Bails in the Country upon Actions and Suits
Depending in the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, at
Dublin. CHAP. XVIII.
FOR the Greater Ease and Benefit of all Persons whatsoever, in taking the
Recognizances of Special Bail, upon all Actions and Suits Depending, or to be
Depending, in any the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, or Exchequer at
Dublin.

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Chief Justice,
and other the Justices of the Court of King's Bench, for the time being, or any
two of them, whereof the Chief Justice, for the time being, To be one for the
said Court of King's Bench, and the Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas;
and other the Justices there, for the time being, or any two of them, whereof
the Chief Justice of the same Court to be one for the said Court of
Common Pleas; and also the Chief Baron and Barons of the Court of Exchequer,
for the time being, or any two of them, whereof the Chief Baron, for the time
being, to be one for the said Court of Exchequer, may, and are Required, by one
or more Commission or Commissions, according to the Largeness of the several
Counties, under the several Seals of the said Respective Courts, from time to
time, as need shall Require, Empower such, and so many Persons, other then
common Attorneys and Sollicitors, as shall be fit and Necessary in all and
Every the several Counties within the Kingdom of IRELAND, to take and Receive
all and Every such Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail or Bails, as any
person or persons shall be Willing or Desirous to Acknowledge, or make before
any of the persons so Empowered, in any Action or Suit Depending, or hereafter
to be Depending, in the said Respective Courts, or any of them, in such manner
and Form, and by such Bail Piece as the Justices and Barons of the said
Respective Courts have used to take the same; For Each of which Commissions
there shall be paid Thirteen Shillings and four-pence, and no more: Which said
Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail, or Bail Piece so taken, as aforesaid,
shall be Transmitted to some, or one of the Justices or Barons of the said
Respective Courts where such Action or Suit shall be Depending: And upon
Affidavit made of the Due taking of the Recognizance of such Bail Piece, by
some Credible Person present at the taking thereof, such Chief Justice or Chief
Baron, Justice or Baron shall receive the same upon Payment of such Fees as
have been Usually Received for the Taking of Special Bails by the Justices and
Barons Clerks, and other the Officers of the said Respective Courts: Which
Recognizance of Bail, or Bail Piece so taken and Transmitted shall be of the
like Effect, as if the same were taken, de been Esse, before any of the said
Justices and Barons. For the taking of Every which Recognizance or
Recognizances of Bail, or Bail Piece, the person or persons so Empowered shall
Receive only the Sum or Fee of Two Shillings, and no more.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices and
Barons Respectively, in the several Courts, shall make such Rules and Orders
for the Justifying of such Bails, and making the same Absolute, as to them
shall seem meet; so as the Cognizor or Cognizors of such Bail or Bails be not
Compelled to Appear in person in any of the said Courts to Justify him or
themselves; but the same may, and is hereby Directed to be Determined by
Affidavit or Affidavits Duly taken before the said Commissioners, who are
hereby Empowered and Required to take the same: And also to Examine the
Sureties upon Oath touching the Value of their Respective Estates, unless the
Cognizor or Cognizors of such Bail do Live within the City of Dublin, or within
Ten Miles thereof.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That any Judge of
Assize in his Circuit, shall, and may Take and Receive all and Every such
Recognizance and Recognizances of Bail or Bails, as any person shall be Willing
and Destrous to make and Acknowledge before him; which being Transmitted in
like manner, as aforesaid, shall without Oath be Received in manner, as
aforesaid, upon Payment of the Usual Fees.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid. That any Person or
Persons who shall before any Person or Persons Empowered, by Virtue of this
Act, as aforesaid, to take Bail or Bails, Represent or Personate any other
Person or Persons, whereby the Person or Persons so Represented and Personated,
may be liable to the Payment of any Sum or Sums of Money, for Debt or
Damages; to be Recovered in the same Suit or Action wherein such Person or
Persons are Represented and Personated, as if they had Really Acknowledged and
Entered into the same, being Lawfully Convicted thereof, shall be Adjudged,
Esteemed, and Taken to be Felons, and suffer the Pains of Death; And Incurr
such Forfeitures and Penalties as Felons, in other Cases Convicted or
Attainted, do by the Law of this Realm Lose and Forfeit.

FINIS.

