Inquest after Blood.

BEING A RELATION Of the several INQUISITIONS OF ALL That have Died by any
violent Death IN THE City of LONDON, AND Borough of SOVTHWARK.

Commencing from Jan. 1. 1669, to the Conclusion of the last Sessions holden at
the Old Baily, Feb. 21. And the Assizes for Surrey, March 1.

With some remarkable Observations.

Also a brief account of those that were there found Guilty, with mention of
their Crimes and Punishments.

Published for the Satisfaction of some, and to prevent the Mistakes of others.

London, Printed, 1670.

A Relation of the several Inquisitions in the City of London and Borough of
Southwark, commencing from Jan. 1. 1670. To the conclusion of the last
Sessions, holden at the Old Bailey, Febr. 21. And the Assizes for Surrey, March
1.
THe first Inquisition taken this year, began with the year (viz.) Ian. 1.
which was upon view of the Body of Richard Sandford, Servant and Apprentice to
Randal Hawley, late of Stepney, in the County of Middlesex, Bricklayer, who was
killed by his said Master Randal Hawly, after the manner following. This
Richard Sanford was a sickly Lad, and on the 25th day of December last, going
with his Master, in Little Britain, he took an occasion to quarrel with his
Servant; even for no just offense given, as ever did appear, and violently
thrust this weak Lad in the Channel, striking him on the hinder part of his
Head and Shoulders with a Broom-stick, which for that purpose, he had soon
before procured. Furor arma Ministrat. The Lad returned ill to his Brothers
house, and taking his Bed, died of the blow December. 31. following in the Parish
of S. Buttolph Aldersgate. It seemed at first doubtful to the Jury, whether the
blow might be mortal, or no; but when as the Coroner had employed an able
Chyrurgion to take off the Cranium, there did appear the infallible marks of
his mortal strokes: The Jurors then gave in a Verdict of Murder.

Hawly upon the first tidings of his servants death, deserts his habitation,
and is not yet heard of, fearing to put himself upon trial. Not many days,
before this, Hawly and his servant going over Stepney-Fields, in the extremity
of the late Frost and Cold, he stripped this young man his servant, bound him
neck and heels together, and most barbarously beat him with a Ropes end; which
fact he afterward confessed to some, that had reason to examine him upon the
Lads complaining thereof.

Jan. 12. Inquisition was made of the Death of Henry Cooper, late of the Parish
of S. Saviors Southwark, in the County of Surrey, Victualer, who hanged
himself in his own Bedchamber; but upon a Cloud of Witnesses to prove his
Lunacy, the Jury after an Adjournment, found that he was Non compos mentis, and
not of a sound mind and memory at the time, when he hanged himself; he was (as
did appear by all that knew him) always a man of an outrageous and unruly
passion; and that he had formerly at sundry times attempted to drown himself.

Jan. 18. Inquisition was had of the Death of one Ralph --, Servant to Richard
Lovel of Hatten-Garden, Painter; who received him into his service a day or two
before, in commiseration toward him: For as much as at that time he was
distitute of any employment, and ready to beg, he fell off a Scaffold two
stories and a half high, fixed to a Building of Pawlet St. John's Esquire in
Cheapside, he standing upon the end of a Board, not sufficiently fastened. The
Jury found it to be a casual Death, and he was returned by the name of Ralph
Painter, for none, nay not his Master, knew his surname.

Jan. 25. Inquisition was taken of the death of Roger Harrison, late of S.
Buttolph Bishopsgate, Porter, who hanged himself at the top of the stairs of
his house. This Harrison was a miserable poor fellow: The occasion of this
violence used to himself, was, for that his Landlord had ejected him out of his
house, for non-payment of his Rent, he forcibly makes a re-entry, striking the
Padlock off the door; and whilst he had locked himself in, his wife going to
capitulate with the Landlord, to whom (by the way I noted) was due only 1 l. 8
s. he took this lamentable way of ending his fears add troubles with his life
together. His Burial was ordered to be in or near the Kings Highway.

Jan. 28. A Jury was impannell'd to enquire of the death of Francis Ware, and
William Dew, Carpenters, who were found to be accidentally and by misfortune
killed by the fall of two houses almost finished on Fish-street-hill in St.
Magnes Parish. The one of these was making stairs in one house the other laying
a floor in the house adjoining. These Buildings were Captain Nic. Coleburns, a
Vintner in London; which were undertook to be erected by contract by two
Carpenters of some note. I shall not assume to give the Reader an exact account
of the reason of this sudden downfall, so as to impute the neglect to either
Carpenters or Bricklayer; I will only relate what was delivered as to this part
of the evidence. One Thomas Clark and his Wife were then in the Shop of one of
the houses, who were happily preserved by the advantageous fall of some Timber
over them: He the next day appeared as a Witness, who upon oath taken, said
that the Vault over which he stood sunck sensibly first under him: the
Carpenters acknowledged that the Centers thereof were struck the day before:
yet this of all hands was not thought to be the immediate cause of their fall,
but rather supposed the defect to be in the Party wall. The Bricklayer however
did averr upon oath that the Wall was three brick thick in the Cellar, two
bricks in the first Story, in the rest a brick and a half; but on it was a
great Stack of Chimneys, the weight whereof is verily conjectured to be too
heavy for so slender supportance. But this I leave to the Surveyors, who herein
are more judicious.

Jan. 31. There was Inquisition taken of the death of Elizabeth Cook, an
Infant, aged two years and a quarter, the Daughter of Thomas and Mary Cook of
Cloth-Fair in the Parish of Great St. Bartholomews, who was found to be
murdered by her own Mother Mary Cook aforesaid; she the day before, being
Sunday, going up stairs, asked the Infant lying in bed, whether she was willing
to have her Breakfast, the innocent Child merrily answered, yes; whereupon this
cruel Mother took her out of the bed, and carrying her toward the Chimney, most
inhumanely cut the throat of her Child with a Penknife, and then stamped with
her foot to let her Husband be a sorrowful Witness of this horrid Tragedy: When
she was carried before a Magistrate, she undauntedly confessed the Fact, giving
little reason for the same, more than that her Husband and Kindred were unkind
to her. Though it was said by others, and acknowledged by her self, that she
loved this Child more than the rest, yet there appeared not the least lunacy or
distraction in her responsals made since to diverse that visited her in Newgate.
Nothing certainly but rage and exorbitant passion, which by continuance is
tunr'd to malice, and this fostered by Satan's temptations, can be thought to
have guided this bloody hand.

At the Sessions and General Jail-delivery holden for London and Middlesex,
Febr. 22.
These following received Sentence to die.
MAry Cook before mentioned, she pleaded little for her self, but her Husband
being present, endeavored by two Witnesses to prove her mad; but it did not so
appear, for being demanded whether she did manage the business of the house as
at other times, it was answered yes; besides her Examination before the Justice
of Peace, which was there read, gave a clear testimony of her methodical and
rational responsals made to those interrogatories that were proposed to her.
After judgment her Execution was suspended by the mercy of the Court till March
2d. and then she was hanged in Smithfield over against Cloth-fair, where she
dwelt.

Susan Emery for Murdering her Bastard-Childe, in S. Martins Westminster, which
Child she first choked, and then hid in a Wall of her Lodging-Chamber, near
the Chimney. She pleaded at her trial, that the Child was dead born, but
before her Execution, she confessed the fact, and appeared penitent till the
time of her Execution, which was at Tyburn, the Friday following, Feb. 25.

Robert Hilliard, and Richard Wild, who were Convict for several Robberies and
Felonies. They were Foot-Pads, both of them dangerous and desperate Fellows.
The former at first refused to plead, but upon better consideration he pleaded
to his Indictment, and found guilty; the other behaved himself with much
boldness, and pleaded guilty to one Indictment. They were hanged with Susan
Emery abovenamed.

There suffered also the same day Elizabeth Miller, one convicted for Felony
sometime before. She was a notorious old Theif, formerly transported, who after
her escape, and return into England, she followed her old vicious practices.
She was wife to that Miller that was hanged in Chains, lately in Essex, for
Robbery and Murder, by him and others, committed in Eppin Forest.

Five received Sentence to be burnt in the hand, having the benefit of Clergy,
Convict of Felony.

Two had the like Sentence for Manslaughter.

Seven were Sentenced to be whipped, for as much as their Crimes were under
Felony.

At the Assizes holden for the County of Surrey.
THree persons were Convicted for Robbery in the Highway; but in as much as
the Evidence of Two Butchers for the King, seemed somewhat to contradict that
on the behalf of the prisoners, by persons of quality there present, the King
was graciously pleased to supersede the Judgment of Death; which otherwise was
to be pronounced against them.

Six Convicted for Felony, begged Transportation.

One Woman burnt in the hand.

One awarded to be whipped for Pettilarceny.

There was a Woman indicted for a Witch, but nothing appeared sufficient to
convict her of Witchcraft, the Judge commanded the Ordinary to hear her repeat
the Lords Prayer; which accordingly he did, and reported, that she concluded at
the last Petition therein, Deliver us from evil, leaving out the Doxology, For
thine is the Kingdom, etc. But at last she said that also, together with part
of the Creed, wherein she omitted (as the Ordnary acquainted the Court) to say,
He descended into Hell. But at last she acknowledged the whole belief, and that
she expected Salvation no otherwise, than by the Merits of Jesus Christ.

A young Fellow was there Indicted for a Rape, but found not guilty; but
however for his leudness practiced on an innocent Girl, and that in the Church
too: The Court ordered him to be sent to the House of Correction.

FINIS.

