AN ACT For the more Effectual Suppressing of Profane Cursing and Swearing.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key. 1695.

An Act for the more Effectual Suppressing of Profane Cursing and Swearing.
CHAP. IX.
WHereas it is found by Experience that An Act of Parliament made in the Tenth
and Eleventh Years of the Reign of King CHARLES the First, Entitled, An Act to
prevent and Reform profane Swearing and Cursing, has proved Ineffectual to
the Suppressing of those Detestable Sins, by Reason of some Deficiency in the
said A^^.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That if any Person
or Persons shall after the Fifth Day of November, in this present Year of our
Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Five, Profanely Swear and Curse in
the presence or hearing of any Justice of Peace of the County, Division, or of
the Mayor, or other Head Officer or Justice of Peace for any City or Town
Corporate where such Offense is or shall be Committed, or that shall be thereof
Convicted by the Oath of one Witness, or by the Confession of the Party
Offending before any Justice of the Peace of the County, or Mayor, or Bailiff
or other Chief Officer or Justice of the Peace of such City or Town Corporate
where the said Offense shall be Committed, That then for every such Offense the
Party so Offending shall Forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish
where such Offense or Offenses shall be Committed the Respective Sums herein
after mentioned, that is to say, Every Servant, Day Labourer, Common Soldier
and Common Seaman One Shilling, and every other Person Two Shillings; And in
Case any of the Persons aforesaid shall after Conviction Offend a second time,
such Persons shall Forfeit and pay Double; and if a third time Treble the Sum
Respectively by him or her to be paid for the first Offense.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That upon Neglect or Refusal of Payment of
the said Forfeiture, any Justice of Peace of the County, or Mayor, or other
Head Officer, or Justice of Peace of any City or Town Corporate where the said
Offense shall be Committed, shall and are hereby Authorized and Required to
Direct and send his Warrant to the Constable, Tything-Man, Churchwarden or
Overseer of the Poor of the Parish where the Offense shall be Committed, or
where the Offender shall Inhabit, thereby Commanding them, or some one or more
of them, to Levy by Distress, and Sale of the Goods of the Offender, the Sum
so Forfeited for the use of the Poor of the Parish, as aforesaid; And in Case
no such Distress can be had, then every such Offender being above the Age of
Sixteen Years shall by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the said Justice of
Peace, or other Officer, as aforesaid, be Publicly set in the Stocks for the
space of One Hour for every single Offense, and for any Number of Offenses
whereof he shall be Convicted at one and the same time then Two Hours; And if
the Party Offending be under the Age of Sixteen Years, and shall not forthwith
pay the said Forfeitures, then he or she shall by Warrant, as aforesaid, be
Whipped by the Constable, or by the Parent, Guardian or Master of such Offender,
in the presence of the Constable.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Justice of the Peace or Chief
Magistrate shall wilfully and willingly omit the performance of his Duty in
the Execution of this Act he shall Forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds; the one
Moiety to the use of the Informer, to be Recovered by Action, Suit, Bill or
Plaint, in any of His Majesty's Courts, wherein no Essoyn, Protection or Wager
of Law shall be allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance granted.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That if any Action or Suit shall be
Commenced or brought against any Justice of Peace, Constable, or other Officer
or Person whatsoever for Doing, or Causing to be Done any thing in pursuance of
this Act concerning the said Offenses, the Defendant in such Action may plead
the General Issue, and give the Special Matter in Evidence; And if upon such
Action Verdict be given for the Defendant, or the Plantiff become Nonsuit, or
Discontinue his Action, then the Defendant shall have treble Costs.

Provided always, And it is hereby Enacted, That no Person shall be Prosecuted
or Troubled for any Offense against this Statute unless the same be proved or
prosecuted within Ten Days next after the Offense Committed.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act shall be
Publicly Read Four Times in the Year in all Parish Churches and all Public
Chapels, by the Parson, Vicar or Curate of the Respective Parishes or Chapels
immediately after Morning Prayers on four several Sundays, that is to say, The
Sunday next after the Fifth Day of November, in this present Year of Our Lord,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Five; The Fifth Day of February following; The
Fifth Day of May, which will be in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety Six; And the Fifth Day of August following, under the pain of
Twenty Shillings for every such Omission or Neglect.

And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of Peace,
Mayor, or other Head Officer shall Register in a Book to be kept for that
purpose all the Convictions made before him upon this Act, and the Time of
Making thereof, and for what Offense; And shall Certify the same to the next
General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace for the said County, or place where the
Offenses are Committed, to be there kept upon Record by the Respective Clerks
of the Peace, to be seen without Fee or Rewards.

FINIS.

