THE INTRIGUES OF THE CONCLAVE, At the Choosing of a POPE; AS ALSO A particular
Relation of what past at the Election of SIXTUS V. and CLEMENT VIII.

To which is added An Historical Essay, To Demonstrate, That, according to the
Principles of the Church of Rome, there has not been, nor can be, any True and
Lawful POPE since the Election of SIXTVS V.

Written by a Gentleman of Rome.

LICENSED

J. F.
March 4. 1690/1.


LONDON, Printed for Largley (...), at Sir Edmonbury Godfrey's Head, near
(...)-Bridge.

MDCXCI.

THE INTRIGUES OF THE Conclave, etc.
THE Doctrine of the Pope's Infallibility, upon which hang almost all the
Articles of the Romish Religion, is a Banter of that Nature, that I think the
Assertors of it, who are generally well enough acquainted with the Court of
Rome, are much more to be wondered at, than the Soothsayers were by Cato, if
they hold their Countenance when they look upon one another, I am sure nothing
can equal their Impudence who pretend to be serious in maintaining such a
Cause, but the Impertinence of those who by Dint of solid Argumenrs endeavor to
confute them, since there is no considering Person but must know that it is
impossible that they themselves should believe what they would fain Put upon
the rest of Mankind.

When we shall here take a View of the CONCLAVE where this Infallible Pope is
Forged, and behold what scandalous Qualifications generally recommend Persons
to St. Peter's Chair as they call it. What base and detestable Practices are
used by the Managers of the several Parties and Factions, to promote those whom
they think likely to prove subservient to their private, and commonly wicked
and abominable Designs, I am sure none will imagine that they who are concerned
herein, though their Blasphemous Cant is all the while of nothing but Divine
Inspiration, can think their Proceedings to be influenced by the Holy Ghost, or
indeed desire they should.

For the better understanding of the following Relation, and for the Reader's
satisfaction, I shall, before we go any further, give a short Account of the
Manner of the Election of Popes in former Ages, together with a more particular
Description of the Proceedings of the Conclave in our Times. But, by the way, I
cannot forbear taking notice of a very Formal Story that is told us in the Book
of the Sacred Ceremonies now used by the Church of Rome, which says that St.
Peter, whilst Bishop of that See, instituted a College of Four and twenty
Senators, who afterward, in the time of Pope Sylvester, were named Cardinals,
that is Princes of the Church. These, and no other were to have a Vote or
Suffrage in the Election of their Bishop, and if any other usurped that Right,
it was by Intrusion or Violence. Now I would fain know whether all those Popes,
which by the Confession of the said Book itself were chosen either by the
Clergy and People in general, or nominated by the Emperors for so many Ages
together, are to be accounted more duly Elected, than they that are styled
Schismatics and Antipopes? If not, what will become of that uninterrupted
Succession which of late Years has been so much boasted of?

It is certain that for the first Five Centuries the Bishops of Rome were
Chosen by the joint consent of the Clergy and People, to whom they were
accountable for their Administration, and so far were they from arrogating that
unlimited Authority over the Church which the Popes of the later Ages have
pretended to, that they were subject in matters of Faith to the Censures of the
Clergy of their own Diocese, by whom Eugenius the First was interdicted from
Celebrating Divine Service until he had renounced the Heresy of the
Monothelites. After the Death of Simplicius Odoacer King of the Heruli makes a
Law, under pretense of remedying the Disorders that often happened at the
Elections of Popes, by which he forbad both People and Clergy to proceed to the
Choice of any until they first knew his pleasure concerning the Person that was
to be Elected. This Law was Twenty Years afterward abolished at the Fourth
Council of Rome by the consent of Theodorick King of the Goths.

But this Arrian Prince toward the later Years of his Reign was so far from
preserving those Privileges which he had restored to the Romans, that he took
upon him to Create the Popes himself. Felix the Fourth deriving his Authority
wholly from his Nomination. The Gothish Kings that succeeded him followed his
Example herein, only sometimes they were content to approve of the Person whom
the Clergy recommended to them. When Justinian had driven the Goths out of
Italy, he retained the same Power over the Popes that they before had assumed,
both he and his Successors obliging the New Elect to come and demand a
Confirmation from them, for which they were to pay a round Sum of Money before
they could exercise even their Spiritual Function.

And because of the Distance between Constantinople, the then Seat of the
Empire, and Rome, the Exarch of Ravenna had often power delegated to him, to
enquire into the Merits of the Person Nominated, and if he found nothing
Objected against him, he was to approve of his Election. Thus Isacius the
Exarch made a Journey on purpose to Confirm Severinm. This Custom continued
until Constantine the Emperor, Surnamed Pogonatus out of the great Veneration
he had for the Sanctity of Benedict the second, sent him a Decree wherein it
was established, That he whom the People and Clergy of Rome should Choose,
should for the time to come be forthwith acknowledged for St. Peter's
Successor, without expecting the Authority of the Emperor, or his Exarchs. But
this Decree was never, as I can find, much regarded by that Emperor's
Successors, for the Popes were never Consecrated without their Consent and
Approbation.

When the Empire of the West fell into the hands of Charles the Great, he
retained the same right still, and transferred it to those of his Race. The
German Emperors kept it as long as they could, but when they grew weak and
feeble, the Popes instead of submitting to their Approbation, pretended that
they had a Right to dispose of even the Empire it self, so that at last, though
not without a great deal of Squabling, it was carried, and Decreed, by Nicholas
the Second, That the Election of the Popes should entirely remain in the power
of the Cardinals. This Canon was afterward confirmed by several Popes and
Councils. Alexander the Third ordained, That he only should be esteemed
Canonically Elected, that had the Votes of at least Two Thirds of the College
of Cardinals; and this is that way of Election that has obtained ever since,
and which we are now going to describe.

After the Funeral Rites of the Deceased Pope are Celebrated, the Cardinals
enter the Conclave, which is held for the most part in the Vatican, where in a
long Gallery are erected small Apartments, called Cells, hung with Purple
Cloth, for the reception of every Cardinal. When they are shut up they are
allowd but two Servants a piece, or Conclavists, as they call them, who are
generally the Craftiest Fellows that can be met with. During the time that the
Conclave lasts, the City Militia are always upon Duty without Doors, and the
Masters of the Ceremouies continually walking about the Gallery within, to
prevent any private Correspondence, or Underhand dealing, insomuch that the
very Dishes that are sent in to their Eminencies are searched, lest there
should be any Letters concealed in them. Commonly before they proceed to any
Election, there are certain Articles drawn up, relating either to the better
Government of the Church, or Reformation of Abuses, and presented to the Sacred
College in General, which every one subscribes, and swears that if he shall be
Chosen Pope, he will Religiously Observe; but this Oath, though taken in the most
solemn manner, is seldom or never kept, the new Pope generally handselling the
plenitude of his power in Absolving himself.

There are three different ways of Election now made use of in the Conclave,
Scrutiny, Access, and Adoration, there was a Fourth formerly used, but now
quite left off, called Compromise, which was when the Cardinals found it
impossible for them to agree, amongst themselves, consented to Choose out of
their own number three, or five, giving them power to Elect whom they pleased.
This Election was performed somewhat after the manner of our Auctions, by Inch
of Candle, for it was to be concluded and determined during the time in which a
Taper, lightedby common consent, continued Burning, but if they could not agree
before it went out, the Commission expired with it.

The SCRVTINT is performed after this manner, Every Cardinal has ready prepared
for him a Scroll of paper folded in to five pages, on the first of which the
Conclavist writes the name of the person for whom his Master gives his Vote,
with these words, Ego Eligo in Summum Pontificem Dominum meum Cardinalem. --
The Cardinal never writes this himself, unless he counterfeits another hand,
for fear lest his Character should be known; on this fold two others are
doubled down, and all three fastened together with some Wax, and marked with two
different Seals made for that purpose. On the Fourth page the Cardinal writes
his own Name, which he covers after the like manner with the Fifth. At the time
appointed for the Scrutiny all the Cardinals take their places in their Order,
in the Paotina Chapel, with the Scrolls they have prepared in their hands.
Then every one in his turn goes up to the Altar, before which is placed a Table
covered with a Purple Carpet, and upon it a Chalice with a Patina, or Plate set
thereon, on each side of which sit the first Cardinal Bishop, and the first
Cardinal Deacon. Here every one kneeling, makes a short Prayer, and then puts
his Scroll into the Chalice, which done, the senior Cardinals of every Title,
that is, Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, go to the Chambers of them that are sick,
and gather their Votes, which are prepared with the like Care and
Circumspection as the rest, when all the Scrolls are put into the Chalice, the
Cardinal Bishop turns them all out upon the Patina, and takes the first that
comes to his hand, and gives it to the Cardinal Deacon, which he reads with an
audible Voice, the Cardinals noting with their Pens how many Votes each person
has. If it happens that any one has two Thirds, he is made Pope, without
proceeding any further, and then all the Billets are opened, and every one's
Name that consented to the Election read publicly. But this happens so rarely,
that it was accounted a miraculous thing that Adrian, Charles the Fifth's
Tutor, was chosen at the first Scrutiny: But if this happens not, then the
Master of the Ceremonies comes in with a Pan of Coals, and turns all the Papers
out, so that no Man is known for what person he has given his Vote.

When the Election cannot be determined by Scrutiny, then it is tried by
Access, which is thus performed: Each Cardinal rising from his Seat, goes and
makes a profound Reverence to him whom he would have Elected, saying, Ego
accedo ad Reverendissimum Dominum meum. -- The rest in the mean time writing
down the Names of those both to whom the Access is made, and who make it. This
has some resemblance to the ancient manner of giving Votes in the Roman Senate,
when they that concurred in the matter proposed went from their places to the
person who made the first motion, from whence came the Saying, In sententiam
ire, which is not unlike the Custom of our Parliaments, when the House divides
itself into Yea's and No's.

But that which makes the greatest Noise and Bustle in the Conclave, is the way
of Adoration. which is seldom put in practice but when some young and hot
headed Cardinals resolve to become Masters of the Election, and when they see
they cannot accomplish their Design in a peaceable manner, endeavor to do it by
plain Force, these being generally the Nephews of the deceased Popes, and
consequently at the Head of all those promoted by them, who are obliged in
Honor (nay, some make it Conscience) not to bauk at any thing wherein they may
serve their young Masters, they having first laid their Plot amongst
themselves, watch their opportunity, when the rest of the Cardinals are in a
hurry and confusion, to fall down on their Knees before the person whom they
design to choose, and adore him as Pope. Those that have not been made
acquainted with the Contrivance, either fearing lest the Adorers should have a
sufficient Number to compass their Ends, or suspecting the Courage and
Constancy of one another, are often forced to do the like, by which means every
one being unwilling by his standing out to incur the displeasure of him who he
thinks will be Elected without him, strives to seem as forward as he can, and
thereby oftentimes becomes the main occasion of the promotion of One for whom
perhaps he has the greatest Aversion. This is the manner of Election by way of
Adoration, which, tho sufficient of itself, is still confirmed by Scrutiny; yet
the Managers thereof take care that it shall receive no prejudice thereby.

There was another way frequently practiced in former Ages, which was called by
Inspiration or Designation of the Holy Ghost. That is, when the Cardinals were
assembled in the Chapel, the first Bishop arose, and in a short Speech
exhorted the Fathers to make Choice of one, who for his Piety and Wisdom was
worthy of so great a Dignity; then he Demanded by which way they thought fit to
proceed by Compromise, or Scrutiny, telling them withal, that if his Opinion
might prevail, he thought -- was the fittest Person. If all present, or two
Thirds of them concurred in the person Nominated, he was without any Scrutiny
pronounced Canonically Elected.

The Pope that is Chosen after any of these Methods, is conducted into the
Sacristia, and is there Clothed with the Pontifical Robes, from thence he is
brought, with a Rich Mitre on his Head, into the Chapel, and seated on the
Altar, where the Cardinals perform the Ceremony of Adoration to him, every one
in his order Kissing his Feet, Hands and Mouth. This done, the Doors of the
Conclave are opened, the Pope shows himself to the People, and Blesses them.
Then the first Cardinal Deacon proclaims with a Loud Voice these Words,
Annuntio vobis Gaudium Magnum, Papam habemus, Reverendissimus Dominus
Cardinalis -- Electus est in summum Pontificem and elegit sibi nomen. -- Then
his Holiness goes to St. Peter's Church, the Cardinals leading the way, with a
Cross carried before them; when he comes to the Altar, he there takes off his
Mitre, and Kneeling down gives thanks to God, and the Apostles, and then
Arising sits upon the Altar. Here first Bishop Kneels and Sings the Te Deum,
then the Adoration is again performed after the same manner as it was in the
Conclave, which with a short Office concludes that Days solemnity. These are
the outward Formalities of the Conclave. But how the private Designs and
Intrigues of the several Factions are carried on, we shall see in the two
following Relations. But he that desires a true Specimen of all the little Arts
and Tricks, whereby the Candidates themselves procure the Votes of others, will
without doubt be fully satisfied with the Behavior of Montalto, known
afterward by the Name of Sixtus the Fifth, an account of which take as sollows,

It is certain that never any person more craftily concealed a proud and
aspiring Mind, with a profound Dissimulation, than this Cardinal did: For tho
he had in his Youth played all those Pranks in little, which after his
Advancement to the Holy Chair, made some of the greatest Princes in Christendom
to tremble, and had, upon all occasions, expressed a most haughty and turbulent
spirit. Yet he was no sooner promoted to the Purple, and had begun to cast his
eyes upon that mark to which all the desires and hopes of the Sacred College
are continually directed; But instead of the fiery and arrogant Peretti, he was
presently transformed into the meek and humble Montalto. Before nothing could
make him more proud, than to see himself admired and envied by all Mankind; now
the very height of his Ambition was to become the most despicable Object of
Contempt and Scorn to all the Cardinals. He so smothered that vivacity of
Spirit which was always used to sparkle in his Discourse and Actions, that now
he was become Famous for an Example of a dull and blockish stupidity. He was
naturally of a strong and vigorous Constitution, yet he now counterfeited so
many Diseases and Infirmities of old Age, tho he had scarce past Threescore,
that he never appeared in public, but he seemed as if he were just stooping
into his Grave. These little Arts of his had that happy Succefs, that to his
great Joy he soon found that the best Titles his Brethren could give him, were
those of A Lazar, and the Ass of La Marca. Perhaps one born under our dull and
Northern Climat, may think these strange Qualifications, to recommend one to
the Sovereign Pontificat, yet we shall find that they only were the cause of
Montalto's Exaltation.

Upon the Death of Gregory the Thirteenth, before the Cardinals entered into
the Conclave, Montalto makes a Visit to Farnese, Dean of the College, one who
had always expressed the greatest Contempt imaginable of him. To him he makes a
most Lamentable Complaint of the Infirmities of his Age, and desires the favor
of him, that he would dispense with his Appearance at the Conclave, if he
thought it would last long, for the time of his Dissolution drawing near, he
could not expect to live to see a new Pope Chosen. Farnese advises him not to
abandon the Interest of the Church, upon an occasion of so great a concern; to
which he replies, That if there were any hopes that his Suffrage would be in
the least Service able to Holy Church, he would resolve to meet Death in the
Conclave. As he was going on in the same Cant,

Farnese takes him up somewhat sharply, saying, My Lord, I would have you take
a little care of your own Concerns too, for I cannot believe but you have as
great an Affection to the Holy Chair as another.

Montalto something surprised at this Reparty, calmly replies, That the
Cardinals must necessarily be quite blind, if to so great a person as his
Lordship they would go to prefer one who had neither Merit nor Experience, nor
any thing good in him, besides an ardent desire of serving his good Friends and
Patrons.

The same Discourse he used to all the rest of the Cardinals, especially to the
Heads of Factions, and those that had any pretentions to the Papacy; telling
every one in particular, That it would be a great prejudice to the Church if
the Government was committed to any other Hands, and that if he had a Hundred
Votes they should all be at his Lordships Service.

The Forty Two Cardinals that composed this Conclave were divided into Five
Factions; Cardinal Farnese appeared at the Head of the First; the Second was
led by Este; the Third by Alessandrino; the Fourth was directed by Altemps; and
the Fifth, which equaled them all in Number, was that of Buon Compagno, Nephew
of Gregory the Thirteenth, whose Creatures they were. The pretenders were
Fourteen; Farnese and Savelli of Paul the Thirds Creation; Santa Croce
Paleotto, St. George, and Sirlet, of Pius the Fourths; Montalto Cesis, St.
Sevarina, and Albano, of the promotion of Pius the Fifth; Fachinetti commonly
called Santi Quatri; Della Torre, Mondovi, and Castagna, Creatures of Gregory
the Thirteenths.

Altemps Medici, and Alessandrino, upon the first entrance into the Conclave
had plotted together to make Cesis Pope, and thus they managed their design.
After the Bulls are read, all the Cardinals have liberty to go out of the
Conclave, upon condition, That they return again before Night. This they
thought the fittest time to put their project in execution, for as soon as the
Cardinals, who as they suspected would exclude Cesis, were gone out, they
intended to carry him into the Paolina, and there proceed to a Scrutiny, and
Elect, and Adore him without any opposition. But this was not kept so secret,
but the Cardinal Di San Sisto, who had always declared against Cesis, was
informed of it at his going out of the Conclave, he thereupon immediately
returns, and sends for the rest that were engaged in the same Interest. This
unlucky Accident quite broke the measures of Cesis Party, for it made so many
declare against him, that his Favorers durst never so much as mention his Name
again in the Conclave.

After him Serlet was proposed, Altemps Medici, and all the Creatures of Pius
the Fourth appeared zealously in his behalf, and had certainly succeeded, had
not Farnese, Este, and Storza, as stiffly opposed them; their reason for
excluding Sirlet was, because he had been excluded once before, for they were
resolved never to trust one whom they had offended. Another cause of his
Misfortune was, his Familiarity with Cardinal Como, who had formerly disobliged
most of the Sacred College, whilst he was Secretary of State to Pius and
Gregory, they therefore now thought fit to take their Revenge upon his Friend.
Besides, Farnese humbly conceived himself to be far the better Man of the two,
and therefore knew no reason why Sirlet should be preferred before him.
Castagna's turn came next, but the old Cardinals thought their Honor was
concerned, not to let one of the last Promotion get the start of them, and so
they excluded him, though for his Virtue, Learning and Moderation, he was counted
a Person as Worthy as any to fill the Holy Chair.

The Person next mentioned was Savelli, who for his Virtue was esteemed not
much inferior to the former; but the prodigious number of his Bastards was
feared would be a Charge and Scandal to the Holy See. But Medici supported him
as far as he could with his Credit, until Colonna and Cesis, Savelli's declared
Enemies, told him plainly, that they would abandon his Interest, and go over to
Farnese, if he persisted; Medici thereupon thought it more convenient to
forsake his Friend; then cause a Rebellion amongst his Creatures, and thereby
give Farnese, for whom he had no great Affection, an occasion of becoming
Master of the Election.

By this time several Intrigues were on foot in behalf of Della Torre, who was
then absent from Rome. But Farnese and San Sisto, who expected him every Hour,
did what they could to protract the time till he came; they had laid a Design,
that when he entered the Conclave, they and their whole Party should meet and
receive him at the Door, and Crying out, Long Live the Pope, carry him to the
Chapel, and there fall to Adoration. Thinking, not without reason, that it was
impossible for any Cardinal to have the Courage to oppose them.

Medici being informed of their contrivance, was not a little disquieted
thereat, for he saw plainly, that should Della Torre be chosen Pope, Farnese
having so much Influence over him, must necessarily engross all the power to
himself, and consequently would cause such a Number of Cardinals to be made,
who being wholly at his Devotion, should Elect him if he survived the Pope, as
in all probability he would, he being the Younger, and more Healthy of the Two.

These Considerations set Medici's Wits at work, but not being able to find
amongst his own Friends a sufficient number to form an Exclusion, he began to
grow desperate, till at last he perceived, that Aleslandrino and Este were
practicing underhand in Montalto's Favor; the former, because he was a
Creature of Pius the Fifth, his Uncle; the other, engaged thereto by
Rusticucci, who had great Influence over him. To these Medici, to rid himself
of the fear of Farnese, makes secret proposals of a Union; offering his own and
Friends Votes for Montalto. This Motion was readily received, and agreed to.
Medici had Credit in the Court of Spain, and was sure of the Spanish Faction.
Alessandrino had many Friends amongst them, and Este was Chief of the French
Faction; so that now both Crowns agreed in the Choice of one Person.

Montalto all this while kept himself close in his Chamber, insomuch that there
was so little Notice taken of him, that he seemd to be abandond and forgotten
by all Mankind. He seldom came out, except it were to Mass, or into the
Paolina, to assist at the Scrutinies, but he seemd so little concernd at the
Intrigues there, that he was thought not so much as to mind what he was doing.
But he knew very well that nothing could better advance his own Affairs, than
this seeming neglect of them; nor indeed was he less Industrious than those who
make the greatest noise and stir, when ever he met with any of Buon Compagno's
Party, he would say, That the Cardinals ought to make choice of one that was
agreeable to him, the Sacred College owing that Deference to the memory of his
Uncle, who had governed the Church with so much Zeal and Charity. When he had
any occasion to speak to a Friend of Farnese, he Launched out in his praise,
saying withal, That he was Astonished, and could not comprehend the meaning of
People that he was not yet Chosen. To those that depend upon Medici, he spoke
of him, As one of the greatest Deserts in the whole College. In short, he
always took an occasion to speak well of every Body, but would never want a
Panegyric for those whom he thought either his Enemies, or to have any Credit
or Authority in the Conclave.

Alessandrino, Medici and Este, having made the League we have spoken of
amongst themselves, came privately to Montalto's Chamber to inform him thereof.
Alessandrino speaking in the name of the rest, Bids him be of good Courage, for
they were come to bring him the good News of their Resolution to make him Pope;
which he no sooner heard, but he fell a Coughing, as if he were ready to give
up the Ghost; as soon as he found himself able to speak, he told them, That if
that were their Intention, God knows his Reign could be but short, since Life
it self was a Burden to him; and consequently the Cares of the Church would be
much too heavy for him to bear, without a great deal of Succors and Assistance.
The Cardinals told him, That God without doubt would give him Force sufficient
to Govern his Church. But he continuing his Discourse, told them, That he was
resolved never to accept of the Papacy, of which his want of Experience renderd
him Unworthy, unless they would promise him before hand to take upon them the
Government Conjointly with him, for he could not in Conscience undertake it
alone. Medici told him, That they would take care that he should not want
Assistance. Ay, says he, (after some time spent in spitting and spawling,) if
you make me Pope, you will do the same as if you placed your selves in the
Chair, we shall divide the Pontificat bewixt us; I will have the Name and
Title; I will be Pope in appearance, and you shall have the Power and Authority.

Nothing could give greater Encouragement to these young Cardinals to prosecute
the Enterprise they had undertaken, than the sly Old Man's Discourse, who now
thought they had gotten a Pope after their own Heart. And as soon as they had
parted from him, began to reckon amongst themselves the great Advantages they
should make of a silly Old Coxcomb, that had neither Sense nor Understanding;
who had, as they vainly imagined to themselves, so fully discovered the great
weakness both of his Body and Mind. They promised to themselves nothing less
than an Absolute Power both in Church and State, For how can he, say they,
undertake to concern himself in any Business of Moment when Pope, who whilst a
Cardinal was content to be led by the Nose by others; and to whom should he
commit the Government of himself, and the Care of all things, but to them who
had raised him? as for his Nephews they were born and bred rather to manage the
Plow, than State Affairs.

They so far pleased themselves with this Fancy, that they were resolved no
Obstacles should retard their design. Medici neglected the Honor of his
Family, which upon some private Disgusts was engaged against Montalto:
Alessandrino deserted his Old Friend Albano, who besides his Personal Merits
had obliged him by all the ties of Gratitude to his Interest, and was
particularly recommended to him by his Uncle on his Deathbed. But he put them
them off who spoke in his behalf upon the account of his Merits, by telling
them, That he was too Wise a Man for the Papal Chair, since the Spaniards would
never consent to the Election of one who was no^ of a far more Moderate
Understanding. But they were both now content to Sacrifice their Honor to
their Ambition, yet they repented of what they had done, before they went out
of the Conclave.

But at present they thought every hour, before they had accomplished their
Design, a year of their Reign lost, Montalto was therefore recommended by them
in all haste to the rest of the Cardinals, as one of a quiet, peaceable, and
obliging Temper, of a good and easy Nature, and one who had a Kindness for all
the World, and would give disturbance to no Body. And, in short, that had all
the good Qualities that were requisite in such a Pope as they desired. I shall
not stay to recount all the little Arts which they used to gain over to their
Party every one in particular, their chief Intrigues being levelled at the Heads
of Factions. San Sisto had the whole Creation of Gregory V. under him, and had
already engaged himself to Farnese. In the first place they thought it most
convenient to debauch some of his Followers, in which having succeeded, by
letting them know how their Interest lay that way, they began to make their
attempt upon him. But the greatest Obstacle was, Gregory San Sisto's Uncle had
disobliged Montalto, by taking away the Pension that had been assigned to the
poor Cardinals, of which number he was one, notwithstanding that a little
before he had dedicated his Commentaries upon St. Ambrose to him, upon which
account San Sisto had expressed some fear of Montalto's Resentment. To remove
which difficulty they made use of his Confident Cardinal Riario, who being sick
of the Gout at that time, ordered himself to be carried to San Sisto's Chamber,
to whom, with a great deal of seeming Concern, he said, That the Faction of
Montalto was grown so powerful, and his Election so far advanced, that he would
Infallibly be Chosen; so that it was but Time lost to endeavor to retard a
thing which would succeed, to the Confusion of all those that oppos^d it.
Wherefore he advised and conjured him not to lose the Honor and Reward of
being assistant to that Election, since it was not in his power to hinder it.

It was not a small Surprise to San Sisto to hear this Discourse, but his
Astonishment was much increased, when Riario had scarce taken his Leave, but in
comes Guastavillano, another of his Creatures, (the Business having been before
concerted between them) upon the same Errand, telling him withal, That he
wondered that a Man of his prudence and (...) was not come over before this
time, since if he persisted on the longer in ^is obstinacy, his Ruin was
inevitable.

During all these Intrigues, Montalto continued still quiet in his Cell,
without discovering that he had the least thoughts of the Papacy* When those
that managed for him came to give him an account how things past, his general
Answer was, That if the Difficulties in the Conclave seemed great, what were
they to expect in the Vatican? He conjured them therefore never to entertain
any Thoughts of choosing him except they would first promise him to take upon
themselves the whole Government of the Church. Had this been spoken by any
other person, the Cheat must certainly have been discovered, but he acted his
part so well, his words exactly corresponding with his actions, that what would
create a suspicion of Affectation in others, only served to increase the
Opinion every one had of his pure and natural simplicity.

But tho he seemed thus retired from all the World, yet as he would never let
slip any opportunity of cringing to, and fawning upon all the Chiefs of the
Factions, he would ever be telling of the great Obligations he had to Cardinal
Alessandrino, and say, That if he were Lord of many Worlds, he should never be
able to repay the Favors he had received from his Uncle Pope Pius V. When he
made his Court to those of the Spanish Faction, he would be sure to look and
talk as sillily as he could possibly, and this gained the very Hearts and Souls
of them: For they knew very well that their Master hated nothing more, than to
see a Man of Sense placed in St. Peter's Chair, for fear lest he should prove a
bad Neighbor to his Dominions in Italy: But as for Montalto, they took care to
publish that he had the greatest respect imaginable for him.

One day Montalto making a Visit to Cardinal Altemps, told him, That he was so
much obliged to him, and the Marquis his Son, that he was resolved entirely to
devote himself to their service, and should be proud of having an occasion to
acknowledge his Lordship as his only Benefactor and Maker of his Fortunes.

Altemps was so tickled with the Compliment, that he presently answered, That
if it lay in his power, he might assure himself of being Pope.

Montalto, upon this, calls God to witness, That he had no Ambition of so
eminent a Dignity of which he knew himself both incapable and unworthy: But if
he should be upon any account induced to desire it, it was only that it might
be in his power to give a Testimony to the World of the profound Respect and
Esteem he had for his Friends, but more particularly for his most Illustrious
Lordship.

The same Discourse he used to Madruzzo, who had his Catholic Majesty's
Instructions at this Conclave, and indeed to every one whom he thought any way
able to be serviceable to him.

The time being come when they were to proceed to the Scrutiny, and all the
Cardinals having taken their places in the Paolina for that purpose, whilst the
Bulls of Cardinal di Vercelli were a reading, he being newly come into the
Conclave, Alessandrino, upon a Sign given him by Este, taking San Sisto aside
out of the Chapel, My Lord, says he, Altemps and Medici have resolved that
Montalto shall be chosen immediately, our Friends have generally concurred with
them, so that the business is as good as done already, only we have forborne to
put the last hand to it, out of the respect we bear to you. We have left it in
your power to choose whether you will oblige the new Pope ever to acknowledge
you the Author of his Greatness, or have the displeasure of seeing one made
against your Will and Consent.

San Sisto considering this Discourse, and recollecting what had been before
told him by Riario and Guastavillano, began to forget his Engagements with
Farnese, and promise he had made never to give his Vote for any one without his
advice and concurrence; whereupon he sends for all his Creatures, to consult
with them what was best to be done upon this occasion. A great part of them had
already engaged themselves for Montalto, who were not now wanting to recommend
him to their Patron as the fittest person to fill St. Peter's Chair, the rest
seeing his party so powerful, durst not so much as open their lips against him.

Every one wondered that Farnese the Dean of the College, one of a working Head,
and great Experience in the Intrigues of the Conclave, did not more vigorously
oppose one whom he had hitherto declared against, and had always treated with
the greatest contempt and scorn; but he relied upon San Sisto's promise, who,
if he had continued firm, had certainly together with him excluded Montalto. It
was from this security of his that the adverse party made their greatest
advantage. Besides, the mean opinion he always entertained of Montalto, made
him the more negligent in opposing him; he thought it impossible for one of
such a cadaverous Look, should trouble him many days: And that his simplicity
was such, that there was no fear of his Resentments, it seemed indifferent
therefore to him whether such a stupid and wretched Creature was made Pope, or
continued Cardinal. Wherefore when he asked San Sisto, Why he consented to this
Election? and was told by him, that it was because the person was of a calm and
easy Nature, under whom they should enjoy all the Liberty they desired. He
returned Answer, That he was much in the right on it, for Montalto was one that
had not Wit enough to do any Mischief, nor Understanding to do any Good.

San Sisto having felt the pulse of his Creatures, thought it now his best
policy to agree to their Sentiments, and seem as forward as he could in
declaring for Montalto, putting himself therefore at the head of them, he
enters the Chapels, where whilst some were proposing a Scrutiny, he, to
enhance his Merits, joining himself with Alessandrino, goes immediately to
Montalto, whom these both Compliment, by crying out, The Pope, The Pope. The
greatest part of the College applauded what they had done, and approved of it,
by imitating their Example. But the Dean Farnese not liking this Tumultuary
Proceeding, ordered them all to their places again in order, to proceed in a
regular manner to the Scrutiny.

Montalto hereupon slisly whispers San Sisto, desiring him to see that it may
be done without prejudice to the Adoration already performed, which made both
him and Alessandrino cry out twice, Without prejudice to the Adoration.

As soon as Montalto perceived that above half the Votes were for him, without
staying till the Scrutiny was ended, leaps out of his Seat, throws away his
Staff, that had hitherto supported him instead of a Crutch, into the middle of
the place, and begins to stretch out himself, insomuch that he soon appeared
half as big again as he was before: But that which was most surprising, he
fetches such a lusty Hem, that a young Man of Thirty could scarce reach. We may
well think that the Cardinals were startled at this sudden Alteration. The old
Dean began immediately to see Repentance in the Countenances of Alessandrino
and San Sisto, faid aloud, Let us not go too fast, there is an Error in the
Scrutiny. But Montalto knowing that the time was now come wherein he might
speak for himself, resolutely told him, That the Scrutiny was good, and
according to Form. And a little after, he that within an hour or two had scarce
strength sufficient to enable him to Cough, Roared out the Te Deum with such a
thundering Voice, that the Roof of the Chapel began to shake.

As he was kneeling before the Altar, according to the Custom to make a small
Ejaculation, the Master of the Ceremonies observing the usual Formalities,
asked, If he accepted of the Papal Dignity? He putting on a Grave and Majestic
Countenance, answered, That he had received one Popedom already, which
consequently he could not accept of again: But if they had another to give him,
he was ready for it; for, Thanks be to God, his shoulders were strong enough to
bear double the weight of what was yet put upon them.

Farnese, as well as the rest of the Cardinals hearing these words, turned to
Santa Sevarina, and said, They thought they had placed an Idiot in St. Peter 's
Chair, but now I perceive we have gotten a Pope who will make Fools and Asses
of us. Santa Sevarina shrugged his shoulders, but could return no other Answer,
than the Lord have mercy upon us.

As the Masters of the Ceremonies were putting on his Pontifical Robes, he, as
if he were weary of that formal and decrepid posture which he had so long kept
himself in, stretched out his Limbs with that Vigor as astonished all the
Beholders. Rusticucci hereupon presuming upon his former Familiarity, said to
him, Holy Father, I perceive the Holy Chair contains a Sovereign Remedy for all
Distempers, since it restores Health, and Youth to Old and Infirm Cardinals. To
which he screwing up his Face as formerly as he could, replied, I Feel it. When
Medici told him, That he seemd now to have different Mine and Air from what he
had whilst a Cardinal. I was looking then, says he, for the Keys of Paradise,
and therefore held down my Head, but now I have found them I lift up my Eyes to
Heaven, having nothing else to seek for on Earth.

It was no unpleasant sight to Farnese, when he beheld Este, Medici, and
Alessandrino, instead of expressing their Joy for having a Pope of their own
Creation, look very Melancholy upon it, wherefore he said to Sforza, as he was
going out of the Conclave, That Charles the Fifth having Abdicated the Empire
in the Morning, repented of what he had done before Night, which I believe
continues he, those Three Cardinals are not to begin to do now. I shall count
them happy, replys Sforza, if their Repentance last no longer than that
Emperor's did.

As soon as Sisto Quinto, for so Montalto had styled himself, was Conducted to
the Lodgings prepared for him as Pope, he could not rest till he had found an
opportunity of letting those that had Advanced him know how he was resolved to
bank their Expectations, he therefore Commands, That the Cardinals,
Alessandrino, Medici, Rusticucci, Este, San Sisto, AItemps, be invited to Sup
with him. But here I cannot Omit a Story that they tell of him, to make us the
better acquainted with the Change that was made in him, His Maestro di Camera,
according to his constant custom, while he was Cardinal, came and Asked him,
What he would be pleased to have to Supper. He putting on such a Stern
Countenance as seemd to reprove the Fellows Impudence, replied, Is this a
Question to be asked a Sovereign Prince? Go, continues he, and provide me a
Magnificent and Royal Entertainment, out of which I shall choose what pleases me
best.

The Cardinals that were Invited being all come, except Este, who suspecting
the Entertainment they were like to have, excused himself, Alessandrino seeing
the Pope stirring about busily, began to wonder that he had not taken any
Repose after that Days Fatigue. But he told him, That Business was his chief
Repose. But Your Holiness, replys Alessandrino something too familiarly, did
not seem to have so much strength Yesterday, nor the Day before. He smartly
taking him up, Answered, Yesterday and the Day before I was not Pope, but now I
am. Rusticucci seeing some of his Robes not sit as they should, began to put
them in Order, but he told them, That it did not become him to be so Familiar
with the Pope. But these Two Cardinals who had promised themselves so much
Authority, could not yet contain from meddling. But as they were giving Orders
for what they thought convenient about the Popes Apartment, His Holiness, very
seriously, desired them not to put themselves to so much trouble, for he being
Master there, would take care to Command things to be done according to his own
pleasure.

When they were sat down to the Table, he presently began in a long Discourse
to Preach to them concerning the Power that Christ had given to St. Peter, in
making him his Vicar upon Earth, He often repeating, Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I Build my Church; upon which words he would say, How profound
are the Judgments of God! Jesus Christ has left upon Earth but one Peter, one
Sovereign Pontife, one Only Vicar, one Head; To him only has he entrusted the
Care of his Flock; Thou art Peter, that is, Thou only art the High Priest, to
Thee will I give the Keys of Heaven. Which is as much as to say, Thou shall
have an Absolute Power over all things, without Exception, to Bind and to
Loose. It is to Thee only, to Thee alone, that have given Power and Authority
to Govern my Church; to Thee that art my Vicar, and not unto others that are
thy Inferiors and Servants.

It was no hard matter for the Cardinals to comprehend the meaning of all this.
They plainly saw that his Discourse was only leveld at those Castles in the Air
which they had been so long Building; but that which Mortified them the most,
they were forced to let him, run on without daring to give him the least
Interruption; for if any did but offer to Mutter, he was sure to give him a
severe Reprimand, and put him in mind of his Distance. At last Rusticucci,
something bolder than the rest, ventured to say, It is a great surprise to me,
Most Holy Father, when I consider, that you often used to say in the Conclave,
That it was impossible for you to Govern the Church without Assistance, but now
your Discourse tends the quite contrary way. You say true, (Answers Sisto very
gravely,) but I said it then, because I believed so; but to Day God has endued
me with so much strength, that I believe no such thing. With this Compliment he
dismissed them. And now I shall take my leave of him, being afraid that I have
straid too far from my Subject, my Title Page informing me, that I have no
business at present out of the Conclave, I shall therefore now give the Reader
an Account of what passed in it at the Election of Clement the Eighth.

The Sacred College was at that time divided into Three Principal Factions. The
First of which was the Spanish, whereof Madruzzo was the Leader. His Catholic
Majesty had Nominated Five to them, out of which they were to procure the
Election of one, Viz. Colonna, Como, Paliotto, Santa Sevarina, and Madruzzo
himself. Santa Sevarina was the Man who in outward appearance stood the fairest
in the Opinion of this Party, though it was not doubted but many of them had
By-Ends of their own, which subdivided them into many petty Factions, one
whereof favored Madruzzo, who secretly aspired to the Papal Dignity himself.

The Second Faction was of those who were Creatures of Sisto Quinto, and
consequently were obliged, by what they call Honor and Gratitude at Rome,
blindly to submit themselves to the Conduct of Montalto his Nephew, who, though
he had in a former Conclave Vigorously opposed the Exaltation of Santa
Sevarina, yet now contrary to the Maxims of his Nation, he appeared as stoutly
in his behalf, and joined Forces with the Spaniards, Venetians, and
Florentines. It is uncertain whether he did this the better to make his Court
to the King of Spain, and the Great Duke, who though of different Interests, yet
both appeared Zealously in the behalf of Santa Sevarina, or else to ingratiate
himself with the Spanish Faction; so that if the Person they had pitched upon
failed, one of his Creatures might serve.

The Third Party was that of the Creatures of Gregory the Fourteenth, who though
at first despicable, upon the account of their inconsiderable Number, being no
more than Fifteen against Thirty Seven, yet by their Courage and Conduct, and
firm Adherence to one another, we shall find them perform Miracles in the
Conclave. It is requisite, for the better understanding of the subsequent
Relation, that I here give the Reader a List of the Names of these Persons who
have so far signalized themselves. They were Arragona, Old Colonna, Paleotto,
Como, Altemps, Canano, Mondovi, Lancidotto, Ascoli, Sforza, Sfondrati,
Pallavicino, Boromeo, Aquaviva, and Platta. But here we must take notice that
young Colonna, who was of the Adverse Party, had promised his Uncle, that at
any time when he could invest him in, or deprive him of the Papacy, he would
decline his Vote for Santa Sevarina.

This little Party being Exasperated at the Bravado of their Adversaries, who
publicly gave out, that they had the Papacy in their Hands, bound themselves
under a solemn Oath to use their utmost endeavors to work the Exclusion of
Santa Severina. This Enterprise seemed to every Body else almost impossible to
succeed, but they resolved that nothing should discourage them in their
Resolution; and in order to effect their design, they were not wanting to
inform the Cardinals of the great Severity of Santa Severina's Life, a Topic
which they, not without reason, thought would Create an extreme Aversion to him
in the Minds of the Sacred College. They likewise did what they could to raise
Jealousies betwixt him and Montalto, and the Spaniards and Florentines. They
thought to take off Montalto by telling him how he would advance his Glory and
Interest, by the Exaltation of one of his own Creatures. The same Arguments
were used to Debauch Madruzzo. They told the other Competitors how easy a
matter it was to attain their Desires by their Assistance, which should never
be wanting to them. We may well imagine by what follows, that these
Insinuations were swallowed by most of them, though for the present every one was
afraid to let his Sentiments be known, lest he should be found singular.

Thus were the Minds of the Cardinals disposed when they entered the Conclave,
after the Preliminary Ceremonies were performed, it was the Opinion of
Montalto, and the Wisest of Santa Severina's Party, that they should attempt
his Adoration the first Night, without giving time to those of their own side
to cool, or their Adversaries to work upon them. If this Advice had been
followed, the business had certainly been done that Night, considering the
Heat, Confusion, and Darkness, they were then in, whilst every one Jealous of
his Neighbor, would think, should he refuse to comply, that he thereby marked
out himself as the only Object of the future Popes Indignation. But this was an
Enterprise too hastily laid for the more Staid and Politic Spanish Ambassador,
who by staying in the Conclave till 'twas late in the Night, taking his Wise
and Impertinent Measures with the Graver sort of Cardinals of his Party, let so
fair an opportunity slip.

The Night was employed by Madruzzo, Spinola and Montalto, in encouraging and
confirming their several Adherents. Early in the Morning they Muster up all
their Forces and March to Santa Severina's Cell, at the Head of them; whom they
Salute and Honor as Pope, from hence they Conduct him to the Chapel Paolina
to perform the Ceremony of Adoration. Here it was no unpleasant sight to see
what a Bustle and Clutter their Eminencies made, in striving who should appear
most Officious at his Exaltation. Young Ascanio Colonna showed himself as
Industrions as any Man. Old Gresualdi the Dean, who could not run as fast as
the others, coming last into the Chapel, was sain to make the most wretched
Grimaces, that a little Joy might appear in his Countenance.

We may well imagine the sad Condition the poor Excludents were in at this
time. But nothing could quite cast down their Courage, they resolving to bestir
themselves to the last. Time would not permit them to make any Congregation
among themselves, lest whilst they were consulting, their Adversaries should
make the Pope; all that they could now do, was to Order, that none of their
Party should go into the Paolina, lest he should be tempted to comply, or
unadvisedly do something that might be interpreted a Consent, but that all
should do their utmost amongst their Friends and Relations to gain one Vote
only, or, at least, to prevail that it might be suspended for that Morning.

Arragona Colonna, and Altemps, though sick of the Gout, Orderd themselves to be
carried into the Hall, hoping by their presence to prevail with some one
person. Here they had the Mortification, to behold all things carried according
to the desire of their Enemies. Altemps was presently Assaulted by the Cardinal
Del Monti, who with a Gay Countenance told him, That by the direction of the
Holy Ghost they were going to Adore Santa Sevarina, and desired his
Concurrence, that the Honor and Merit of so great an Action might be
attributed wholly to him. Altemps who before was in a very surly Humor, now in
great Rage and Fury told him, That he scorned his Advice, and bid him go
Worship the Devils, Pope himself, if he pleased.

In the mean time Ssorza, Sfondrato, Boromeo, and Aquaviva, were not idle, but
were continually tampering with as many as they could lay hold on, but all to
no purpose; Sfondrato and Boromeo at last fastened on La Rovere, who as yet
continued in his Chamber. Him they thought to gain over to their side, by
putting him in hopes of the Papacy for himself; but Montalto and Mattei soon
got him out of their hands, and carried him in Triumph with them through the Hall
to the Paolina. This Sight put poor Altemps out of all patience, insomuch that
he could not forbear treating the Reverend Old Man with the most spiteful and
virulent Language.

The Cardinals in the Chapel were now all ready to proceed to the Adoration,
their Antagonists, to leave nothing unattempted, stood before the Door,
endeavoring to disturb and distract their Minds, by raising what Confusion
they could amongst them. Their Malice had its desired success, for as the
others were just going to worship Santa Severina, Sforza and Aquaviva began to
bawl out, That they neither ought, nor could proceed any further without a
Scrutiny, saying, They were not sure they had a competent Number to complete
the Adoration; And that if they came to an Election contrary to the accustomed
manner, they were resolved to protest against it.

Hereupon there was such a Hubbub and Tumult raised in the Chapel, that
nothing could be seen in it but Confusion and Disorder. Some cried there was no
Notice to be taken of any such Protestation, some were for, others against, the
coming to a Scrutiny. Some said that the Votes were not to be gathered before
the Adoration, others that it was altogether needless. But the Dean, to prevent
all Objections, endeavors to appease the raging of this giddy-headed Rabble,
and sets about the gathering of the Votes himself. This he attempted several
times, but never could reckon above Four, but some impertinent Cardinal or
other would be always interrupting and confounding him.

They within perceiving at last that all this Stupefaction proceeded from the
Excludents, who stood at the Chapel door, doing all the mischief they could,
ordered the door to be shut, which was opposed by Sforza and Aquaviva;
whereupon they had like to have fallen together by the Ears. At last, the
Secretaries of the College, and Masters of the Ceremonies were ordered to
number the Voices, but such was the Disorder amongst them, that they bungled
more at it than the Old Dean did; hereupon several Cardinals undertook this
difficult Task, and by their meddling with it, made it ten times more intricate
than ever. It is a strange thing that these profound Masters of the most
refined Politics in the World, should be thus brought to their Wits end, they
knew not how nor for what. We see here poor Santa Severina failed of becoming
St. Peter's Infallible Successor, because they that were to make him so, were
not able to count Thirty six. Heretics will take this for an odd sort of a
Reason, why Holy Church should continue for some considerable time without Her
so much boasted of Supreme and Unerring Judge. Had the Conclave been made up of
our Goathamitish Sages, the Business had been by this time effected: For
allowing any one of them not to count himself, yet there remained Thirty five
still, which made up two Thirds of the Cardinals, and consequently was a
sufficient Number to make a Pope.

But that which was still more strange, the Excludents well knowing how many
were in the Paolina, and most of them beginning now to think of yielding, and
to curry Favor with the New Elected Pope, as they thought Santa Sevarina must
necessarily be; Aquaviva still resolute tho in a defperate Cause, sends his
Conclavist into the Paolina, to number the Cardinals that were there, who, as
if it were Fatal to all persons to blunder that day, brought him word that
there were but Thirty four, tho nothing is more certain than that there were
Thirty six present.

Aquaviva suspecting some mistake, sends him again on the same Errand, and he
returns with the same Answer. This News put new Life into the Excludents, who
began to assault the rest afresh, but all to no purpose, till old Colonna
bethought himself of the promise his Nephew had made, who sends a Note to him
by his Conclavist, to put him in mind of it, charging him withal to come out,
lest by his stay there he should be the Ruin and Confusion of his whole
Family, and best Friends.

Ascanio took some time to consider of this Message, but at last finding it was
in his power to make Santa Sevarina Pope, or hinder him from it, resolves to go
out; what pulling and haling there was at the door by each Party to keep him
in, and get him out, was to be seen by his Robes, which were torn in pieces.

How agreeable his Desertion was to the Excludents, soon appeard in Old
Colonna's Face, who could not choose but Weep for Joy at the sight of him; but
this lasted not long, for those in the Chapel, now grown more Cautious, Orderd
the Door to be shut, intending to proceed immediately in a more regular manner
to the Scrutiny; for which they had Votes enough still left, for the Person
concerned may give his Vote for himself, though he cannot Adore. But Altemps
beginning to take heart again, and turning to the Young Cardinals, Exhorts them
to make a Vigorous Assault upon the Door. Whereupon Sforza, Aquaviva, Boromeo,
and Sfondrato, began to storm with so great a Noise and Clamor, that they
forced it to be opened. They within desire a Parley, and send Gresualdi and
Madruzzo to Treat with the Excludents, but it was impossible for them to come
to any agreement, for both Parties pretended to an equal share of Inspiration
from the Holy Ghost, only it is thought that the Trustees had some
under-hand-dealing with the Excludents in their own behalf.

But they returning without effecting any thing, they were sent about the
Includents, after a long Debate, resolved to proceed to the Scrutiny, Mass was
Ordered to be Celebrated, and the Cardinals to prepare to receive the Communion
according to Custom, the Dissenting Party were sent to, and desired to join
with them, which they fearing some Trap might be laid for them, refused, and
received the Eucharist by themselves in the Chapel of Sisto from the Hands of
Sfondrato, which being performed on both sides, Sforza and Aquaviva were
deputed by the Excludents to go into the Paolina to Observe how things were
managed at the Scrutiny. In the mean time Gaetano goes to Canano's Chamber,
where he found him sick of the Gout, or at least pretending himself so, Gaetano
uses all the Arguments he can to allure him to his Party, by telling him, What
a Meritorious and Heroical Act it would be for him to make Santa Sevarina Pope.
But he having some small pretentions for himself refused to go, or be carried
out, upon pretense of the great pain that was in one of his Toes, though it was
evident that it lay more in his Head, than in his Feet. Santa Sevarina's
Conclavist something more subtle than the rest, came a little while after to
him, and with a seeming Joy told him, That his Master was Elected Pope, and
desired to see him. But the Crafty Old Fox was not to be caught with a Banter,
but told the Conclavist, That he would take time to consider of it.

But notwithstanding his, and his Associates refusal to comply, Santa Sevarina
had still a sufficient Number of Votes to complete his Election, of which he
seemd so secure, that he began to declare how he would forgive all those that
had opposed him; and in Testimony thereof, he gave out, That it was his design
to take upon him the Name of Clement.

All things were now ready for the Scrutiny, and since the followers of Santa
Sevarina had already given their Votes for him, by saluting him Pope, and
carrying him from his Cell to the Paolina to Adore him, it was thought fit that
the Votes should be given publicly; for thereby it was supposed, that none
durst refuse his consent which he had given for so many Hours together. This
put Sforza and Aquaviva to their last Shifts, who now plainly saw, that without
some Bold and Desperate Resolution their Ruin was unavoidable. They therefose
very Impudently affirmed, That this way of proceeding was contrary to all the
ancient Customs and Liberties of the Sacred College; and that if the Scrutiny
was not made secretly, they would protest against the Election, commanding the
Masters of the Ceremonies to take Notice of this their Protestation.

One may well wonder at their Confidence, in putting such a Sham upon the
Sacred College, there never having been any Bull which forbids the Scrutiny to
be done in public. But the Folly of the rest is inexpressible, who suffered
themselves to be* led by the Nose by their professed Enemies, but it was San
Sevarina's Fate to be chouz'd of the Papacy, and his Parties yielding this
Point to their Adversaries, was the only means to bring it about: For it being
carried that a secret Scrutiny should be made, whereby it was in the power of
any person to withdraw his Vote without being known, there were found but 30
for him, Four having privately deserted; which, together with his own, would
have completed his Election.

It is not in my power to express the Joy the Excludents made appear upon this
occasion, much less the confusion of the contrary Faction, when they found
themselves so shamefully cheated. But to give Santa Sevarina his due, he bore
his adverse Fortune with the same Magnanimity as he did his Prosperity, when he
went into the Chapel attended by so great a number of Cardinals, and continued
there as Pope for some hours. This imaginary Advancement works no alteration in
him, nor did he appear in the least dejected when he came out, no more than an
ordinary Cardinal. Returning alone to his Cell, he found it plundered by the
Conclavists, as the Custom is, when any one is declared Pope. The sight of
which, notwithstanding his former Philosophical Humor, was observed to force
some few Tears from the good old Man.

But Montalto was resolved not to be discouraged for all this, but without
pulling off his Robes, whilst the rest went to Dinner, he calls all his
Creatures together about him in the Paolina, and with a long Harangue, which I
don't think worth my while to write down, exhorts them all to Unity and
Perseverance in the same Cause. Old la Rovere begans to be somewhat resty
hereat, and let us Montalto know, That this violent Zeal for Santa Sevarina
looked, as if he thought none of his own Creatures fit for the Papacy, amongst
whom there was a great Number of very worthy Men, wherefore he thought fit to
tell him, that if he would nominate one of them, he should command his Vote;
which in point of Honor and Gratitude to his Uncle Sisto, was wholly at his
Service, otherwise he would make bold to follow the Dictates of his Conscience.

But I should grow tedious if I went to relate the last Efforts and Struglings
of Santa Sevarina's dying Party, his Opponents following their Blow so closely,
that it was impossible for him to recover any strength, or rally again his
scattered Forces. The endeavors of Madruzzo and Montalto proving ineffectual,
their Zeal began to cool, especially the formers, since the other Faction, the
better to draw him off, had persuaded him to set up for himself. But this had
like to have raised Civil Dissentions betwixt them two, and a Mutiny amongst
Montalto's Creatures, who openly declared against Madruzzo; which made him
peaceably lay aside his Pretensions, rather than lose his Credit by vainly
persuing them: And this he was the rather induced to do, for fear lest by
breaking with Montalto, he should thereby incite him to set up one who might
espouse contrary Interests to those of his Catholic Majesty.

After him Como and Paleotto were named, as persons recommended by the King of
Spain; but Montalto having had some Clashings with them in former Conclaves,
was resolved not to trust them with the Sovereign Power. Next to these old
Colonna began to conceive some small hopes of himself, he expecting the
Excludents to side with him because he was of their Party, the Spanish Votes
because he was one of the persons nominated by that King, and Montalto's by
reason of the Affinity between their Families: But he finding his Friends begin
to forsake him at a dead lift, imitated Madruzzo's prudence, and retreated,
whilst his Honor was safe. Some were of opinion that Rusticucci's old Age, and
the expectation of his approaching death might somewhat recommend him, but his
hopes, as well as his Brethrens, soon vanished into smoke:

There were several other little Pretenders not worth the naming, whose
business was soon done, because they were none of Montalto's Creatures, whose
Intrigues had that success, as that now he found it absolutely in his power
alone to make whom he pleased, the greatest part of the College continually
importuning him to name the person that should be Pope. Hereupon he at last
discovers his Design which he had long kept secret, and proposes Aldobrandine;
his Choice was immediately confirmed with almost an universal Consent of the
Cardinals, only Madruzzo stood out for some small time, alleging, That
derogated from his Master's Honor, to have one chosen who was not recommonded
by him; and that Aldobrandino not having yet declared himself for any Faction,
it was to be suspected that instead of favoring Spain, he would rather stand
Neuter. But the true Reason was, that which in Italy is generally the cause of
an irreconcilable Enmity, he thought that he had formerly injured him, when in
the Conclave of Urban VII. he was the only person that worked his Exclusion:
But finding now that it was not in his power to serve him such a Trick again,
he thought it most conducive to his own and Master's Interest, by a ready
Compliance, to expiate his former Offense. His affected Forwardness in seeming
to promote what he could not hinder at last put an End to this tedious
Intriguing and Turbulent Conclave.

AN ESSAY To Prove, that according to the Undeniable Principles Of the Present
Church of Rome, There has not been a True and Lawful POPE ever since SIXTVS the
Fifth.
I Suppose, that from a bare Relation of these Two Conclaves, any Man of Sense
may perceive by what Spirit the Elections of Popes are generally influenced.
But if Roman Catholics would be guided by the Dictates of Right Reason, I
don't know of any Controversy depending betwixt them and us that had not been
long since determined. To comply therefore with their Humor, I shall here
endeavor to prove from such Maxims which cannot be questioned, without denying
all the Authority that ever they pretended to be in their Church, that there
has been no Pope duly Elected, and consequently had any lawful Jurisdiction,
ever since the Election of Sixtus the Fifth; whereby I hope to make it evident,
that either there never was any such thing as Infallibility in Pope, or
Councils, or both together; or if there was, it serves now only to demonstrate,
that it is at this present totally extinquished.

There are none I am sure can deny, but that Simony is Decreed by the Universal
Consent of Innumerable Popes, Canons, and Councils, to contain Heresy in it;
so that he that is guilty of the former, must also be a Heretic; and that if
any Person gets into the Pontifical Chair by Simony, he becomes thereby
Heretical, his Election is Null and Void; and he is not only not Head of the
Church, but Inferior to all other Christians. Julius the Second in his Bull to
this Purpose Decrees, That whosoever procures the Suffrage of any Cardinal by
any Promise, Obligation, or Compact, made by himself, or others, though his
ELECTION be accomplished by the Unanimous Consent of the whole College of
Cardinals, and Confirmed by Adoration, it is yet Void, and of no Effect; and
the Person so infected with Simoniacal Heresy, is to be accounted by all Men
as no Pope, or Bishop of Rome, but an Apostate and Arch-Heretick, and Incapable
of all manner of Jurisdiction and Authority in Matters both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal; and from that time forward deprived, (even without any Declaration,)
of his Cardinalship, and all other Benefices, or Dignities whatsoever; nor can
any subsequent Acts of Obedience done to him by the Cardinals, Inthronisation,
or continuance of Time, make good his Unlawful Assumption to the Pontifical
Chair.

Now from these Principles which are founded upon the greatest Authority in the
Romish Church, I suppose it easy to show, That there has scarce a Pope been
Chosen for several Hundreds of Years, whose Election has not been Tainted with
Simony, which if made out upon any one, is sufficient to Prove an Interruption
in the Succession; and then all those Prerogatives which by it the Popes
pretend to derive from St. Peter fall to the ground.

We have already seen in the Conclave of Sixtus Compacts, Promises, and
Obligations, with a Witness, but I have reserved one passage for this place,
which to take away all Contradiction, will clearly Evidence that his Election
was carried directly contrary to the Bull of Julius. Cardinal d' Este before he
would engage himself and Followers to Espouse Montalto's Interest, Bargained
with him, That if he were Pope he would never raise to the Purple. Hieronymo
Matthei, a Roman Bishop, whom Este Mortally Hated, which Montalto not only
promised him, but in a formal Instrument drawn up for that Purpose, gave him
his Hand and Seal upon it. But when he came to be Sixtus the Fifth, he made it
his Chief Care and Study to Mortify those that had Ad anced him. Matthei was
made a Cardinal amongst the first that he promoted.

Este finding himself deceived in this, as well as his other Expectations, was
so Netled thereat, that to be Revenged of the Pope, he sent the Original
Contract made between them to Philip the Second King of Spain. His Catholic
Majesty was so far concerned at the Scandal that must necessarily arise from
hence to Holy Church, that in the Year 1589 he sent the Duke of Sessa his
Ambassador to Sixtus to intimate to him the necessity of a General Council
concerning his Simoniacal Election, and to require the Cardinals Created by his
Predecessors to appear at the said Council, which he designed to hold at Sevil.
But upon the Duke of Sessa's coming to Rome the Pope Dies, so the design of
this Council for a New Election came to nothing.

Sixtus his Simoniacal Entrance into the Chair being thus Notorious to all the
World, it necessarily follows, that all the pretended Cardinals of his Creation
had no lawful Authority to Act as such. Yet we find after his Death that of
Fifty Three Cardinals that made up the Conclave, Twenty Five of his making bore
the greatest sway therein, who under the Conduct of Montalto, Nephew to Sixtus,
were the Authors of Urban the Seventh's Election. A few Days after they did the
like for Gregory the Fourteenth; and next to him, for Innocent the Ninth. But
let any unprejudiced Romanift in the World Judge of the Validity of their
Election.

We have already seen how powerful that Party was in the Conclave of Clement
the Eighth, who was himself one of Sixtus his Creatures, and owed his
Advancement wholly to the rest, so that he was under a double Incapacity of
being Chosen. The Spaniards, though they above all other Roman Catholics, are
the most Devoted to the Holy See, were sensible enough of the Unlawfulness of
Clement's Election, especially when he began to Act contrary to their Interest;
for when he Absolved Henry the Fourth, and thereby acknowledged him King of
France, They did not stick in several Books written by them to that purpose,
publicly to Aver, That he had no Authority to admit that Prince into the
Communion of the Church, he having nothing to do therein himself; for if
Sixtus, say they, was guilty of Simony, then by the (...) of Julius the Second,
he was no true and lawful Pope, and consequently could not make Cardinals, nor
they who derived their Power from him Elect a Pope.

Now I might carry down the same Argument to prove the Invalidity of the
Election of all the succeeding Popes, but left it should be worn Threadbare,
the Conclave of this Clement has furnished us with a fresh one; but in the
first place it will be covenient to premise, that according to the Canons, He
that has the Suffrages of Two Parts in Three of the Cardinals, ought from that
very Moment to be accounted duly Elected; and he that is set up during his
Life, is no other than an Antipope. As for the Ceremonies of Inthronisation,
Adoration, or Kissing the Foot, they are no more than the Effects and
Consequences of a true Election, and no way Essential to it, which as the
Canon, [In Nomine Domini,] does allow, may be omitted if opposed, either by
Force or Cunning of any that Dissent from the rest.

This we have seen to have been exactly the Case of San Sevarina, he was taken
from his Cell by above Two Thirds of the Cardinals, and carried by them into
the Chapel, and there placed in the Pontifical Chair, and publicly
Acknowledged and Adored as Pope; and ought certainly to have continued so,
notwithstanding his being Cheated of his Right by the Infidelity of his
Followers, and the Tricks of his Adversaries, who made shift to cause
Aldobrandino to Jostle him out of the Holy Chair. But though He kept possession
of it, yet was his Title very much questioned and disputed at Rome, as well as
in Spain; nor can I see any Reason in the World why he ought not to be counted
an (...) and Antipope.

I^ I thought it worth the while, I might proceed to make out, that none of the
succeeding Popes had any better Title: But I think there is enough said, not
only to prove a Failure in the Succession, but to Unchurch the whole Communion,
^o as it is impossible for it to be ever restored. For allowing the
abovementioned Persons to have been Intruders into the Holy Chair, neither the
Cardinals of their Creation, nor those whom they Elect, can have any other
Authority than what they received from them. And the Holy See and Sacred
College being thus become Heretical and Schismatic, this Contagion of
necessity must diffuse itself into the whole Communion: For the Fountain Head
being once poisoned, it is impossible for the streams that flow from it to be
uncorrupted. So that according to the present Constitutions of that Church, it
is not in the power even of a General Council to Reform it.

I shall conclude with my Advice to our Romish Friends, that they would
henceforward cease to cavil at some pretended Irregularities which they would
fain make us believe they have espied in the Conduct of our Reformers, since
our Church is not at all founded upon the sandy Foundation of Human Authority;
And though we have the greatest Veneration imaginable for those great Men, yet we
still acknowledge them to have been Men, and consequently not exempt from a
possibility of Erring.

FINIS.

