IDEM ITERVM: OR, The History of Q. Mary's Big-belly. FROM Mr. Fox's Acts and
Monuments and Dr. Heylin's Hist. Ref.
The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done,
is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the Sun. Eccles.
1. 9.
UPon Wednesday, being the 28. of November. there was a general Procession in
Paul's for joy that the Queen was conceived and quick with Child, as it was
declared in a Letter sent from the Council to the Bishop of London.

The same day were present at this Procession ten Bishops, with all the
Prebenda^^es of Paul's, and also the Lord Major with the Aldermen, and a great
number of Commons of the City in their best Array. The Copy of the Council's
Letter here follows, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.

A Copy of a Letter sent from the Council unto Edmund Bonner, Bishop of London,
concerning Queen Mary's conceiving with Child.
AFter our hearty Commendations unto your good Lordship; Whereas it has
pleased Almighty God amongst other his infinite benefits of late most
graciously poured upon us and this whole Realm, to extend his Benediction upon
the Queens Majesty in such sort, as she is conceived and quick of Child,
whereby her Majesty (being our natural Liege Lady, Queen, and undoubted
Inheritor of this Imperial Crown) good hope of certain Succession in the Crown
is given unto us, and consequently the great Calamities (which for want of such
Succession might otherwise have fallen upon us and our Posterity) shall by
God's Grace be well avoided, if we thankfully acknowledge this benefit of
Almighty God, endeavoring our selves with earnest Repentance to thank, honor,
and serve him, as we be most bounden: ^hese be not only to advertise you of
these good news, to be by you published in all places within your Diocese, but
also to pray and require you, that both your self do give God Thanks with us
for this his special Grace, and also give order that Thanks may be openly given
by singing of Te Deum in all the Churches within your said Dio^^ss; and that
likewise all Priests and other Ecclesiastical Ministers, in their Masses, and
other Divine Services, may continually pray to Almighty God so to extend his
holy hand over her Majesty, the King's Highness, and this whole Realm, as that
^^is thing, being by his Omnipotent Power graciously thus begun, may by the
same well continued and brought to good effect, to the Glory of his Name.
Whereunto, ^^it we doubt not, ye would of your self have had special regard
without these our Letters (...) diligently continued, we have also written
these our Letters, to put you in remembrance; and so bid your Lordship most
heartily well to fare.

From Westminst. Nov. 27. 1554 Your assured loving Friends, S. Winton, Cancel.
Arundel. F. Shrewsbury. Edward Darby. Henry Sussex. John Barton. R. Rich.
Thomas Watthom. John Huddilstone. R. Southwell.



Ye heard a little before the Councils Letter sent to Bishop Boner, signifying
the good News of Q. Mary to be not only conceived, but also quick with Child,
which was in the Month of November. the 28 day. Of this Child great talk began at
this time to rise in every man's mouth, with busy preparation and much ado,
especially amongst such as seemed in England to carry Spanish Hearts in English
Bodies. In number of whom here is not to be forgotten nor defrauded of his
condign Commendation for his worthy Affection toward his Prince and her Issue,
one Sir Richard Southwell, who being the same time in the Parliament House,
whereas the Lords were occupied in other Affairs and matters of Importance,
suddenly starting up, for fullness of joy burst out into these words following:
Tush my Masters, quoth he, what talk ye of these matters? I would have you take
some order for our Master that is now coming into the World apace, lest he find
us unprovided, etc. By the which words both of him, and also by the aforesaid
Letters of the Council, and the common talk abroad, it may appear what an
assured Opinion was then conceived in men's Heads of Q. Mary to be conceived and
quick with Child: insomuch that at the same time, and in the same Parliament,
there was eftsoons a Bill exhibited, and an Act made upon the same, the words
whereof, for the more evidence, I thought good here to exemplify, as follows:

The Words of the Act.
ALbeit we the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, have firm hope and confidence in the goodness of Almighty
God, that like as he has hitherto miraculously preserved the Queens Majesty
from many great imminent Perils and Dangers, even so he will of his infinite
Goodness give her Highness strength, the rather by our continual Prayers, to
pass well the danger of deliverance of Child, wherewith it has pleased him (to
all our great comforts) to bless her: yet forasmuch as all things of this World
be uncertain, and having before our eyes the dolorous experience of this
inconstant Government, during the time of the Reign of the late King Edward VI.
do plainly see the manifold Inconveniences, great Dangers and Perils that may
ensue this whole Realm if foresight be not used to prevent all evil chances, if
they should happen: for the eschewing hereof, we the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, for and in
consideration of a most special trust and confidence that we have and repose in
the King's Majesty, for and concerning the Politic Government, Order and
Administration of this Realm in the time of the young years of the Issue or
Issues of her Majesty's Body to be born, if it should please God to call the
Queens Highness out of this present life during the tender years of such Issue
or Issues (which God forbid) according to such order and manner as hereafter in
this present Act his Highness's most gracious Pleasure is, should be declared
(...) it has pleased his Highness not only to declare, That like as for the
most part his Majesty ^erily trusts that Almighty God (who has hitherto
preserved the Queens Majesty, to give this Realm so good an hope of certain
Succession in the Blood Royal of the same Realm) will assist her Highness with
his Graces and Benedictions, to see the Fruit of her Body well brought forth,
live and able to govern (whereof neither all this Realm, nay all the World
besides, should or could receive more comfort than his Majesty should and
would,) yet if such chance should happen, his Majesty, at our humble desires,
is pleased and contented not only to accept and take upon him the care and
charge of the Education, Rule, Order and Government of such Issues as of this
most happy Marriage shall be born between the Queens Highness and him; but
also, during the time of such Government, would by all ways and means study,
travel, and employ himself to advance the Weal, both Public and Private, of
this Realm and Dominion thereunto belonging, according to the said Trust in his
Majesty reposed, with no less good will and affection than if his Highness had
been naturally born amongst us. In consideration whereof, be it enacted by the
King and the Queens most excellent Majesty's, by the Assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, etc. As it is to be seen in the Act more at
large ratified and confirmed at the same Parliament, to the same intent and
purpose.

Thus much out of the Act and Statute I thought fit to rehearse, to the intent
the Reader may understand not so much how Parliaments may sometimes be deceived
(as by this Child of Q. Mary may appear) as rather what cause we Englishmen
have to render most earnest thanks unto Almighty God, who so mercifully,
against the Opinion, Expectation, and working of our Adversaries, has helped
and delivered us in this case, which otherwise might have opened such a window
to the Spaniards, to have entered and replenished this Land, that peradventure
by this time Englishmen should have enjoyed no great quiet in their own
Country: The Lord therefore make us perpetually mindful of his benefits. Amen.

Thus we see then how man does purpose, but God disposes as pleases him. For
all this great Labor, Provision and Order taken in the Parliament House for
their young Master long looked for, coming so surely into the World, in the end
appeared neither young Master nor young Mistress that any man yet to this day
can hear of. Furthermore, as the labor of the Lay-sort was herein deluded, so
no less ridiculous it was to behold what little effect the Prayers of the
Pope's Church men had with Almighty God, who traveled no less with their
Processions, Masses and Collects, for the happy deliverance of this young
Master to come, as here follows to be seen.

A PRAYER made by Dr. Weston Dean of Westminster, daily to be said for the
Queen's Deliverance.
O Most righteous Lord God, which for the offense of the first Woman, have
threatened unto all Women a common, sharp, and inevitable Malediction, and have
enjoined them that they should conceive in sin, and being conceived, should be
subject to many and grievous torments, and finally, be delivered with the
danger and jeopardy of their Lives; We beseech thee for thine exceeding great
goodness and bottomless mercy, to mitigate the strictness of that Law: assuage
thine Anger for a while, and cherish in the bosom of thy favor and mercy our
(...) (...)ting the trouble, may with joy, laud and praise the bountifulness of
thy Mercy, and together with us, praise and bless both thee and thy holy Name
world without end. This, O Lord, we desire thee, we beseech thee, and most
heartily crave of thee. Hear us, O Lord, and grant us our Petition: Let not the
Enemies of thy Faith, and of thy Church, say, Where is their God?

A solemn PRAYER made for K. Philip and Q. Mary's Child, that it may be a
Male-child, Well-favoured and Witty, etc.
O Most mighty Lord God, which regardest the Prayer of the humble, and
despisest not their request; bow down from thine high habitation of the Heavens
the eyes of thy mercy unto us wretched Sinners, bowing the knees of our Hearts,
and with many and deep sighs bewailing our sins and offenses, humbly, with eyes
intent and hands displayed, praying and beseeching thee, with the shield of thy
Protection, to defend Mary thy Servant and our Queen, who has none other
helper but thee, and whom, through thy Grace, thou have willed to be conceived
with Child; and at the time of her Travel graciously with the help of thy right
hand deliver her, and from all danger, with the Child in her conceived,
mercifully preserve.

It has seemed good in thy sight, merciful Father, by thy Servant Mary, to
work these Wonders; that is to say, in her hands to vanquish and overthrow the
stout Enemy, and to deliver us, thy People, out of the hands of Heretics,
Infidels, Enemies to thee, and to the Cross of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ,
that of thy Servant thou might speak in far Countries. Therefore for these
wonderful Works which thou do to thy Servants, thou art magnified Lord God
for ever, and we thy People bless thee the God of Heaven, which has wrought
upon us this great Mercy, and have excluded from us the Heretic, the Enemy of
Truth, the Persecutor of thy Church. We know, we know, that we have grievously
(Lord) sinned, that we have been deceived by Vanity, and that we have forsaken
thee our God. Our Iniquities be multiplied on our head, and our sins be
increased up to Heaven, and we our selves having offended, and our Princes and
our Priests, for these our sins, have deserved an Hypocrite to our Prince, our
sins have deserved a Tyrant to our Governor, that should bring our life to
bitterness. We be not worthy to have so gentle and merciful a Queen, so godly a
Ruler, and finally, so virtuous a Prince; at the very beginning of whose Reign,
a new Light as it were of Gods Religion seemed to us for to spring and rise.
The Jews did bless the Widow Judith with one voice, saying, Thou art the Glory
of Jerusalem, thou art the Joy of Israel, thou art the Honor of our People,
for that thou have loved Chastity, and thou shall be blessed for ever.

And we the English People with one agreeable consent do cry, Thou Mary art the
Glory of England, our Joy, the Honor of thy People, for that thou have
embraced Chastity, thine heart is strengthened, for the hand of our Lord has
comforted thee, and therefore thou shall be blessed for ever. But bow down, O
most merciful Father, thine ear, and open thine eyes, and behold our
Affliction, and our humble Confession. Thou know, Lord, that against Philip,
not by humane, but by thy Ordinance our King, and against thy Servant Mary, by
thy Providence our Queen, the Restorers and Maintainers of thy Testament of the
Faith, and most constant Defenders of thy Church; thou know, I say, that
against these our two Governors, (...) By the Power of their hands they would
change thy Promises, and destroy thine Inheritance, and stop and shut up the
mouths of them that praise thee, and extinguish the glory of thy Catholic
Church and Altar.

It is manifest and plain how many Contentions, how many Conspiracies and
Seditions, how great Wars, what Tumults, how many and how great troublesome
Vexations, how many Heresies and Schisms (for these be the most ready Devices
and evident tokens of Heretics) for our sins do hang over us, if thy Servant
be taken from this life; for we acknowledge that our Lord is omnipotent, who
has pitched his dewlling place in the midst of his People, to the intent to
deliver us out of the hands of our Enemies. Turn therefore thy countenance unto
us, show unto us, O Lord, thy face; punish us for our sins according to thy
Will and Pleasure, only now deliver us. We bowing the knees of our Heart,
beseech thee, that thou will not reserve unto us Punishment for ever, and we
shall praise thee all the days of our life. Hear our cry, and the Prayer of thy
People, and open to them the treasure of thy mercy, thy gracious favor, the
spring of lively Water. Thou that have begun, make in the hand of thy Servant a
perfect work: suffer not, we pray thee, the faithless Rebels to say of thy
Servant and her Counselors, that they have devised matters which they cannot
perform: and grant unto thy Servant an happy and an easy Travel; for it is not
impossible to thy Power, nor indecent to thy Justice, nor unwonted to thy Mercy.

It is well known unto us how marvellously thou did work in Sarah of the Age
of 90 Years, and in Elizabeth the barren, and also far stricken in Age; for thy
Counsel is not in the power of Men. Thou Lord that art the searcher of Hearts
and Thoughts, thou know that thy Servant never lusted after Man, never gave
her self to wanton Company, nor made her self partaker with them that walk in
lightness; but she consented to take an Husband with thy Fear, and not with her
Lust. Thou know that thy Servant took an Husband, not for carnal Pleasure,
but only for the desire and love of Posterity, wherein thy name might be
blessed for ever and ever. Give therefore unto thy Servants, Philip our King,
and Mary our Queen, a Male Issue, which may sit in the Seat of thy Kingdom.
Give unto our Queen, thy Servant, a little Infant, in fashion and body comely
and beautiful, in pregnant Wit notable and excellent.

Grant the same to be in Obedience like Abraham, in Hospitality like Lot, in
Chastity and Brotherly-love like Joseph, in Meekness and Mildness like Moses,
in Strength and Valor like Sampson; let him be found faithful as David after
thy heart; let him be wise among Kings as the most wise Solomon: let him be
like Job, a simple and an upright man, fearing God and eschewing evil: let him
finally be garnished with the comeliness of all virtuous Conditions, and in the
same let him wax old and live, that he may see his Childrens Children to the
third and fourth Generation: and give unto our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King
Philip and Queen Mary, thy Blessings, and long life upon Earth; and grant that
of them may come Kings and Queens which may steadfastly continue in Faith, Love
and Holiness: and blessed be their Seed of our God, that all Nations may know
thou art only God in all the Earth, which art blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

Another (...)
O Almighty Father, which did sanctify the Blessed Virgin and Mother Mary in
her Conception, and in the Birth of Christ our Savior thine only Son; also by
thine omnipotent Power did safely deliver the Prophet Jonas out of the
Whale's Belly; defend, O Lord, we beseech thee, thy Servant Mary our Queen,
with Child conceived, and so visit her in and with thy godly gift of Health,
that not only the Child thy Creature, within her contained, may joyfully come
from her into this World, and receive the blessed Sacraments of Baptism and
Confirmation, enjoying therewith daily increase of all Princely and gracious
gifts both of Body and Soul; but that also she the Mother, through thy special
Grace and Mercy, may in time of her Travel avoid all excessive dolor and pain,
and abide perfect and sure from all peril and danger of Death, with long and
prosperous Life, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

It follows now further in process of this Story, That upon the Tuesday,
being the 10th of January, nineteen of the Lower House of the Parliament, with
the Speaker, came to Whitehall to the King, and offered him the Government of
the Realm and of the Issue, if the Queen should fail, which was confirmed by
Act of Parliament within ten days after.

Concerning the Childbed of Queen Mary, as it was rumoured among the People.
LOng persuasion had been in England, with great expectation, for the space of
half a year or more, that the Queen was conceived with Child. This Report was
made by the Queen's Physicians, and others nigh about the Court; so that diverse
were punished for saying the contrary: and commandment was given, That in all
Churches Supplication and Prayer should be made for the Queen's good Delivery;
the Certificate whereof ye may read before in the Letter of the Council sent to
Boner; and also the same moreover may appear by Provision made before in Act of
Parliament for the Child.

And now forasmuch as in the beginning of this month of June, about
Whitsontide, the time was thought to be nigh that this young Master should come
into the World, and that Midwives, Rockers, Nurses, with the Cradle and all,
were prepared and in a readiness; suddenly, upon what cause or occasion it is
uncertain, a certain vain Rumor was blown in London of the prosperous
Deliverance of the Queen, and the Birth of the Child; insomuch that the Bells
were rung, Bonfires and Processions made, not only in the City of London, and
in most other parts of the Realm, but also in the Town of Antwerp Guns were
shot off upon the River by the English Ships, and the Mariners thereof rewarded
with an hundred Pistolets or Italian Crowns, by the Lady Regent, who was the
Queen of Hungary. Such great rejoicing and triumph was for the Queens Delivery,
and that there was a Prince born: yea, diverse Preachers, namely, one the Parson
of St. Anne within Aldersgate, after Procession and Te Deum sung, took upon him
to describe the proportion of the Child, how fair, how beautiful, and great a
Prince it was, as the like had not been seen.

In the midst of this great ado, there was a simple man (this I speak but upon
information) dwelling within four Miles of Berwick, that never had been before
half (...) Child, Here is a joyful Triumph, but at length all will not prove
worth a Mess of Pottage, as indeed it came to pass; For in the end all proved
clean contrary, and the joy and expectations of men were much deceived. For the
People were certified, that the Queen neither was as then delivered, nor after
was in hope to have any Child.

At this time many talked diversely. Some said this Rumor of the Queens
Conception was spread for a policy; some other affirmed, that she was deceived
by a Tympany or some other like Disease, to think her self with Child, and was
not; some thought she was with Child, and that it did by some chance miscarry,
or else that she was bewitched; but what was the truth thereof the Lord
knows, to whom nothing is secret. One thing of mine own hearing and seeing I
cannot pass over unwitnessed.

There came to me whom I did both hear and see, one Isabel Matl, a Woman
dwelling in Aldersgate-stree in Horn-Ally, not far from the House where this
present Book was printed, who before witness made this Declaration unto us,
That she being delivered of a Man-Child upon Whitsunday in the morning, which
was the 11th. day of June, 1555. there came to her the Lord North, and another
Lord to her unknown, dwelling then about Old-Fishstreet, demanding of her if
she would part with her Child, and would swear that she never knew nor had any
such Child. Which, if she would, her Son (they said) should be well provided
for, she should take no care for it, with many fair Offers if she would part
with the Child.

After that came other Women also, of whom, one they said should have been the
Rocker; but she in no wise would let go her Son, who at the writing hereof
being alive, and called Timothy Malt, was of the age of Thirteen years and
upward.

Thus much, I say, I heard of the Woman herself. What credit is to be given to
her relation, I deal not withal, but leave it to the liberty of the Reader, to
believe it they that list; to them that list not, I have no further warrant to
assure them.

Among many other great preparations made for the Queens deliverance of Child,
there was a Cradle very sumptuously and gorgeously trimmed, upon the which
Cradle for the Child appointed, these Verses were written both in Latin and
English.

Quam Maria sobolem, Deus optime, sum dedisti,
Anglis incolumem read, tuere, Rege. The Child which thou to Mary, O Lord of
Might have send,
To England's Joy, in health preserve, keep and defend.


Out of Dr. Heylyn's History of the Reformation. Page 216.
THE Queen about three months after her Marriage began to find strong hopes,
that not only she had conceived, but also that she was far gone with Child.
Notice whereof was sent by Letters to Bonner from the Lords of the Council, by
which he was required to cause Te Deum to be sung in all the Churches of his
Dioscess, with continual Prayers to be made for the Queens safe delivery. And
for example to the rest, these Commands were executed first on the 28th. of
November, Dr. Chads^y one of the Prebends of Paul's preaching at the Cross in
the presence of the Bishop of London, and nine other Bishops, the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen attending in their Scarlet (...) Opinion gathering greater
strength with the Queen, and (...) it was Enacted by the Lords and Commons then
sitting in Parliament, That as it should happen to the Queen otherwise than
well in the time of her travel that then the King should have the politic
Government, Order and Administration of this Realm, during the tender years of
her Majesty's Issue, together with the Rule, Order, Education and Government of
the said Issue. Which charge as he was pleased to undergo at their humble suit,
so they were altogether as forward to confer it on him; not doubting but that
during the time of such Government he would by all ways and means study,
travel, and employ himself to advance the weal (both public and private) of
this Realm, and Dominions thereunto belonging, according to the trust reposed
in him, with no less good will and affection than if his Highness had been
naturally born amongst us. Set Forms of Prayer were also made for her safe
delivery, and on particularly by Weston, the Prolocutor of the first
Convocation; in which it was prayed, That she might in due season bring forth a
Child in body beautiful and comely, in mind noble and valiant: So that she
forgetting the trouble, might with joy, land and praise, etc. Great
preparations were also made of all things necessary against the time of her
Delivery, which was supposed would fall about Whitsontide in the month of June,
even to the providing of Midwives, Nurses, Rockers, and the Cradle too. And so
far the hopes thereof were entertained, that on a sudden a rumor of her being
delivered the Bells were rung, and Bonfires made in most parts of London. The
like Solemnities were used at Antwerp, by discharging all the Ordnance in the
English Ships; for which the Mariners were gratified by the Queen Regent with
100 Pistolets. In which, as all them seemed to have a spice of madness in them,
so none was altogether so wild as the Curate of S. Anns near Aidersgate, who
took upon him after the end of the Procession to describe the proportion of the
Child, how fair, how beautiful, and great a Prince it was, the like whereof had
never been seen.

FINIS.

