An Act for the better Suppressing Tories, Robbers and Rapparees; and for
preventing Robberies, Burglaries, and other heinous Crimes. CHAP. XXI.
FOrasmuch as by the late Rebellion in this Kingdom, a great part thereof has
been left Waste and Desolate; and the frequent Robberies, Murders, and other
Notorious Felonies Committed by Robbers, Rapparees and Tories, upon their
Keeping, has greatly Discouraged the Re-planting of this Kingdom, the Papist
Inhabitants thereof, choosing rather to suffer Strangers to be Robbed and
Despoiled of their Goods, then to Apprehend or Convict the Offenders, of whom
the greatest part are people of the same Country; and Countenanced, Harbored,
and Concealed by the Inhabitants thereof. For the Remedy of which Mischiefs,
and for the better Encouragement of Strangers to Plant and Inhabit this Your
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, and for the general Preservation of Peace and
Property of Your Majesty's Good Subjects therein.

May it please Your Majesty that it may be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the
King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the Inhabitants of every Barony or County, within
this Kingdom, shall make full satisfaction and amends for all Robberies,
Burglaries, Burning of Houses, or Haggards of Corn, Killing or Maiming of
Cattle, which shall be Committed or Done by Robbers, Rapparees, or Tories,
within such Barony or County, from and after the Royal Assent given to this
Bill, in manner and form following (That is to say) where all or any of the
Facts shall be Committed or Done by Rapparees, Robbers or Tories, as aforesaid,
that are, or shall be Papists, or Reputed of the Popish Religion, the Popish
Inhabitants of the Barony or County wherein all or any of the said Facts shall
be Committed, shall make satisfaction and amends for the same: And where all or
any of the said Facts shall be Committed or Done by Robbers, Rapparees or
Tories, as aforesaid, that are, or shall be Protestants, or Reputed to be of
the Protestant Religion, the Protestant Inhabitants of the Barony or County,
wherein all, or any of the said Facts shall be Committed, shall make
satisfaction and amends for the same. And if it shall happen, that all, or any
of the said Facts be Committed or Done by Popish and Protestant Robbers,
Rapparees or Tories, as aforesaid, then, and in such Case, the Popish and
Protestant Inhabitants of the Barony or County wherein such Facts shall be
Committed or Done, shall make satisfaction and amends for the same; and in such
proportion, and according to the Number of such Papists and Protestants as
shall Commit the same (that is to say) if two Papists and one Protestant, the
Papist Inhabitants to pay two shares, and the Protestants the remaining third
part of the said Damages; And so pro rata, in Case of a greater or lesser
Number. And if all, or any of the said Facts be Committed or Done in the
Division, or Mearing of two Baronies, or two Counties, so as it shall be
uncertain in which County or Barony the Fact or Facts were Committed; then, and
in such Case, the Inhabitants of the both Baronies; or both Counties, shall
make satisfaction and amends for the same, in such manner, and under such
Distinction as is hereby Declared.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Cases where
the Damages do not Exceed the Sum of Ten pounds, Sterling, the Inhabitants of
the Barony and Franchizes within the Precincts thereof, wherein all, or any of
the said Facts shall be Committed, and not the County at Large, shall make
satisfaction and amends for the same, in such manner, and with such
Distinction, as aforesaid; And in all Cases where the Damages do exceed the
Sum of Ten pounds, sterling. the Inhabitants of the County, wherein all or any of
the said Facts shall be Committed, shall make satisfaction and amends for the
same, in the manner, and with the Distinction aforesaid: And that the Jury that
shall Try any Action Committed or Prosecuted on this Act, shall in their
Verdict Ascertain the person and persons that commit such Robbery, Burning of
Houses, or Haggards of Corn, Killing, or Maming of Cattle, whether they were
Papist or Protestants, and the Number of the one, and the other, as also the
Damages, according to the Evidence that shall be on the Trial offered to them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person and
persons, so as aforesaid, Robbed or Damnified, may be hereby Enabled to Sue for
and Recover his or their Damages against any Inhabitant of the said County or
Barony, who by this Act shall be made liable to answer any part thereof; and
that immediately after such Recovery and Execution against the said
Inhabitants, all other the Inhabitants of the said Barony or County, who by
this Act shall be made liable to all or any part of the said Damages, shall be
Ratably and proportionably Taxed, for, and toward an Equal Contribution for
the Relief of such Inhabitant against whom the said Recovery and Execution is
had; which Tax, shall be Made, Levied and Raised by such Ways and Means, and in
such Manner and Form as is prescribed and mentioned in a former Statute,
Entitled, An Act for the following of Hue and Cry, made in the Tenth and
Eleventh Years of the Reign of King Charles the First, in this Kingdom.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall Recover any Damages by Virtue of this Act, unless he or they by
themselves, or by their Servants within twenty four hours after such Robbery or
Injury done him or them, by any Robbers, Tories or Rapparees, or within
reasonable time after he shall be at Liberty, shall give Notice of such Robbery
or Mischiefs done and Committed, unto some of the Inhabitants of some Town,
Village, or Hamlet, near unto the place where any such Fact shall be Committed,
and shall within four Days after such Notice, give in his, her, or their
Examination upon Oath, or of their Servant or Servants that were in his, or
their House, or that had the Care of his Corn, Stock or Goods, before some
Justice of the Peace of the County where such Fact shall be Committed,
Inhabiting within the Barony where the said Fact shall hereafter happen to be
Committed, or near unto the same, whether he or they do know the Person or
Persons that Committed such Fact, or any of them, and if upon such Examination
it be Confessed that he or they do know the person or persons that Committed
the said Fact, or any of them, that then he or they so Confessing, shall be
bound by Recognizances to prosecute such Offender or Offenders, by Indictment,
or otherwise, according to the Laws of this Kingdom.

And moreover, be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That before any Action
shall be Commenced or Prosecuted on this Act, for recovery of Damages for any
Losses sustained, by reason of any Robbery, Burning of Houses, or Corn, or
Destruction of Cattle, Contrary to the Tenor of this Act, the Person or
Persons so Injured, shall obtain or procure a Presentment to be made at the
next Assizes or Quarter Sessions, to be held after such Robbery, Injury, or
Fact Committed, by the Grand Jury of the County where such Fact shall be
Committed, wherein Notice shall be taken of such Robbery, or other Injuries or
Mischiefs, and of the Losses Sustained, the Number of the Offenders, and how
many of them are Papists, or Reputed such, and how many Protestants or Reputed
such; As also of the Barony or Baronies and County where such Fact was
Committed; with the Names of the Offenders: But in Case where the Person or
Persons Robbed, Burnt, or Injured, or their Servant or Servants do not know the
Names of all or any of the Offenders, and shall Declare so on their Oath openly
in Court, being Examined to the said particulars, the said Grand Jury in such
Presentment to give the best Description they can on the Evidence produced
before them of such Malefactors, to the End they may be brought the speedier to
Justice: which Presentment shall be given in Evidence by the Person and Persons
that shall obtain the same, on any Trial for Damages for his Losses Sustained,
according to the purport of this Act.

And for the better Suppressing Robbers, Tories and Rapparees, that have so
much of late Disturbed the Peace and Settlement of this Kingdom,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons shall
be at any time hereafter presented at the Assizes or Quarter Sessions by the
Grand-Iury, as a Tory, Rapparee or Robber, out on his Keeping, and such
Presentment being returned to the Clerk of the Council, the person and persons
in such Presentment named, shall by Proclamation from the Lord Deputy, or other
Chief Governor or Governors and Council of this Kingdom be Proclaimed; and in
case such person or persons so Proclaimed; do not within the time to be
limited by such Proclamation, render him or themselves to some one or more
Justices of the Peace of the County, where such Presentment shall be made, he
and they so Presented and Proclaimed, shall from thenceforth be convict of
High Treason and suffer accordingly. And that all and every person and persons
Concealing, Aiding, Abetting and Succouring such person and persons, so
Presented and Proclaimed, knowingly, from and after the time so limited by
such Proclamation, shall be guilty of Felony without Clergy, and Suffer as
Felons convict of Felony without Clergy. And for the better Encouragement of
such persons as shall Take and convict, or Kill any Robber, Rapparee or Tory in
Arms, and upon his Keeping, Indicted, Proclaimed or Presented, as aforesaid,
the Justices of Assize in their Circuit, and the Justices of Peace in their
Quarter Sessions, Respectively, with the Assent of the Grand-Iury, shall have
power and Authority to Tax and Sess every Inhabitant in any County, Barony,
City, Borough, Town or Parish within the Limits of their Commissions and
Authorities, to such Reasonable Aid or Sum of Money as they shall think fit in
their Discretion, Convenient and Sufficient for Encouraging and Rewarding such
Person or Persons, as shall take and Convict, or Kill any Robber, Rapparee or
Tory in Arms, and upon his Keeping.

Provided such Sums do not Exceed Twenty pounds for any one Tory, which said
sum or sums of Money, so to be Raised, shall be Applotted and Apportioned by
the said Grand-Iury, and Levied by such Collectors as they shall appoint, who
shall have Power and Authority to Receive the said Sums of Money, and to
Distrain every such Inhabitant as shall be Taxed and refuse payment thereof;
and to Sell such Distress, and deliver the Money Taxed to such Person or
Persons as shall take or Kill such Robber, Rapparee or Tory; and the Residue,
if the Distress be better, to deliver to the Owner thereof. This Act to
Continue and be of Force for three Years from the Royal Assent being given
thereto; and to the End of the first Session of the next Parliament after the
said three Years, and no longer.

FINIS.

