AN ACT To Hinder the REVERSAL OF SEVERAL Outlawries and Attainders; And to
Prevent the Return of Subjects of this Kingdom, who have gone into the
Dominions of the French King in EVROPE.

royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEINTIENDRAI

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT to hinder the Reversal of several Outlawries and Attainders, and to
Prevent the Return of Subjects of this Kingdom, who have gone into the
Dominions of the French King in Europe.
CHAP. XXX.
FORASMUCH as by the Laws of this Kingdom, the Kings and Queens of England are
by Undoubted Right, Kings and Queens of this Realm, and ought to Enjoy the
Title, Majesty, Power, and Authority of Kings and Queens of the same: Yet
nevertheless, Richard late Earl of Tyrconnel, formerly Lord Deputy, and Chief
Governor of this Kingdom, by Virtue of a Commission from the late King James,
Donogh late Earl of Clancarty, William late Earl of Limerick, Ulick late Lord
Viscount Gallway, Pierce late Lord Viscount Galmoy, Sir Valentine Brown,
Garrott Dillon, Esquire, late Prime Sergeant to the late King James, Sir
Richard Nagle, late Attorney General to the said King James, and diverse other
Wicked and Indisposed Papists, contrary to their Allegiance and Duty, did
utterly Refuse to Submit to Your Majesty's Government. He the said late Earl of
Tyrconnel, after Your Majesty's Happy Accession to the Imperial Crown of
England, continuing to act as Lord Deputy, and Chief Governor of this Kingdom,
in Derrogation to Your Majesty's Royal Authority, and in Opposition thereunto;
and with the Advice and Assistance of them the said Donogh late Earl of
Clancarty, William late Earl of Limerick, Ulick late Lord Viscount Gallway,
Pierce late Lord Viscount Galmoy, Sir Valentine Brown, Garrott Dillon,
Esquire, Sir Richard Nagle, and others, as aforesaid, Raising Forces to Oppose
Your Majesty and Your Government; and they with many other Irish Papists, who
were in Arms, utterly refused to accept of the Grace, and Favor, extended to
them, by Your Majesty's Royal Proclamation, bearing Date the Two and twentieth
day of February, in the First Year of the Reign of Your Majesty, and Your Royal
Consort, the late Queen of blessed Memory; but on the contrary, Countenanced
and Encouraged the late King James, to Summons several of the Inhabitants of
this Kingdom, to Meet and Assemble in this Your Majesty's City of Dublin, as a
Parliament; and they with others, made several pretended Acts and Ordinances,
which they Termed Acts of Parliament, under the Authority of the late King
James, in the Month of May, One thousand Six hundred Eighty Nine; and thereby
Attainted many Thousands of His Majesty's good Protestant Subjects of this
Kingdom of High Treason, for Adhering to Your Majesty, and Her late Majesty;
and several other pretended Acts and Ordinances, in Derogation to Your
Majesty's Undoubted Right; and Encouraged many of Your Majesty's Subjects, to
Rise in Arms, and Levy War against Your Majesty; brought into this Kingdom,
great numbers of the French King's Subjects, Your Majesty's open Enemies, to
their Assistance; Murdered and Destroyed several Thousands of Your Majesty's
good Protestants Subjects of this Kingdom, for no other reason but for their
being of the Protestant Religion, and adhering to Your Majesty, and Her late
Majesty, Your Royal Consort, and Encouraged an unnatural Rebellion throughout
this Kingdom, which by the goodness of Almighty God by the Great Expense of the
Treasure of England, and the Blood of England, and this Kingdom, and the
Extreem Hazard of Your Majesty's Sacred Person, is reduced to Your Majesty's
Obedience, and this Your Kingdom settled in perfect Peace, notwithstanding
which many of Your Majesty's Irish Papist Subjects, have Engaged with Your
Majesty's Enemies, and several Thousands of them are actually in the French
Kings Service, against Your Majesty. May it please Your Majesty that it may be
Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice
and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, that all and every the
Convictions, Outlawries, and Attainders in this Kingdom, of any Person or
Persons whatsoever, for High Treason, or Rebellion by him or them Committed, or
done not Reversed or Pardoned, before the Twenty Seventh Day of July, One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, other then the Convictions, Outlawries, and
Attainders of Persons already adjudged, to be Comprehended within the Articles
of Limerick or Gallway, or either of them, who have not yet Reversed their
Outlawries, and Attainders, and other then the Outlawries, and Attainders of
such, who within the space of Two Years, to be accounted from the First Day of
September, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, shall be Adjudged to be
Comprehended, within the said Articles, or any of them, shall be, and remain
sufficient and effectual in Law for ever, to all intents, constructions and
purposes, any Error insufficiency, or other defect in form, or matter in them,
or any of them, to the contrary notwithstanding, and that no Judgment upon any
Writ of Error, or Plea, nor any Pardon from His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, shall anywise operate to the prejudice, or to the invalidating of
such Conviction, Outlawry, and Attainders, Except such as are herein before
Excepted, any Law, Usage, or Custom to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Papist and Papists, or reputed Papist or Papists, that have been Guilty of the
said Rebellion in this Kingdom against His Majesty, and Her late Majesty, the
Queen, and who by any Inquisition already taken, by the Oaths of Twelve good
and lawful Men, and Returned, or that shall be taken by the Oaths of Twelve
good and lawful Men, and returned within the space of Two Years, from the First
Day of September, One thousand Six hundred Ninety Seven, has, have, or shall
be found to have Dyed, or been Slain, in their said Actual Rebellion, before
the Third Day of October, One thousand Six hundred Ninety One, shall by
Authority of this Act, be Convicted, and Attainted of High Treason, and shall
incur the Penalties and Forfeitures that Traitors Attainted by the Ordinary
Course of Proceedings, in Cases of High Treason, by the Laws of this Realm, now
in Being, ought to suffer and undergo.

And be it further Declared and Enacted, That wheresoever any suth Papist or
Papists, heretofore have been found to have been Slain, or to have Died in the
said Rebellion, against His Majesty, and Her late Majesty, the Queen, before
the Third Day of October, One thousand Six hundred and Ninety one, by
Inquisition taken upon the Oaths of Twelve, or more good and lawful Men of the
County, where such Papist, or Papists have committed such Rebellion and
Treason; that the said Papist, or Papists, or reputed Papist, or Papists, so
found to have been Slain, or to have Died in Rebellion against His Majesty, and
Her late Majesty, the Queen, shall at all times hereafter be adjudged and
Deemed, and is, and are hereby Declared to be Traitors Attainted, to all
intents and purposes; and to have incurred all such Penalties and Forfeitures
of Estate Real and Personal, from the Time he or they shall by such Inquisition
be found to have committed, or been guilty of the said Rebellion and Treason,
as if he or they had been Attainted of any such Rebellion and Treason, by
Judgment upon Verdict, or Outlawry.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained, as for, and concerning
the Forfeiture of such Papist, or Papists, or reputed Papist, or Papists, That
Died, or were Slain in Actual Rebellion, before the Third day of October, One
thousand Six hundred and Ninety one, shall extend, or be Construed to extend to
the Prejudice of any person or persons being of the Protestant Religion, or
professing to be of the Protestant Religion, the Tenth day of April, in the
Year of Our Lord God, One thousand Six hundred and Eighty Nine who has
continued so from that time hitherto, or till the time of his or their Death,
claming, or deriving any Titles of Honor, by immediate Descent from such
Papist, or Papists, as aforesaid, or who have, or had any Estates, Real, or
Personal, by Descent, or Purchase, Bona fide, made, or who have any Real
Encumbrances on such Papist, or Papists Estates, for Valuable Considerations,
from, or by such Papist, or Papists, as aforesaid Dead, or Slain, in Rebellion;
or from his, or their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at any time
since the Treason committed and done, and before the Sixth day of June, in the
Year of Our Lord God, One thousand Six hundred and Ninety Seven; but that such
person or persons, being of the Protestant Religion, in manner as aforesaid,
shall, and may have, hold, and enjoy all and every his and their Title and
Titles of Honor come to them, respectively, by the Death of such Papist, or
Papists, as aforesaid, Dead, or Killed in the said Rebellion; as also all and
every the Rights, Titles, and Interests by Descent, Purchase, or Real
Encumbrance, from, or by such Papist, or Papists, or reputed Papist, or Papists
so Dead, or Killed in Rebellion, or from his and their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, or any of them, at any time since the said
Rebellion committed and done, and before the Sixth day of June, aforesaid, any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it
shall, and may be Lawful, to, and for the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or
Commissioners of the Great Seal of this Kingdom, for the time being, at any
time within Two years, to be Accounted from the First Day of September, One
thousand Six hundred and Ninety seven, to Issue one or more Commission or
Commissions, into all, or any of the Counties of this Kingdom, to be Directed
to the Escheator or Escheators, of such County or Counties, or to his, or their
Deputy, or Deputies, Lawfully Authorized; or to such other Good and Lawful Men,
as it shall seem meet to Appoint Commissioners; whereof one of the Judges of
the King's Bench, or Common Pleas, or one of the Barons of His Majesty's Court
of Exchequer, shall be always one; to Enquire by the Oaths of Twelve, or more
Good and Lawful men of the said County, or Counties, what person or persons of
the Popish Religion have Dyed, or were Slain in the said Rebellion against His
Majesty, and Her late Majesty the Queen, before the said Third Day of October,
One thousand Six hundred and Ninety one; and what Estate or Estates, Real or
Personal, such person or persons of the Popish Religion, as aforesaid, so
Dying, or so Killed, was, or were Seized, or Possessed of, in Use, Trust,
Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, in such County where such Enquiry shall be
made, and such Commission Executed at the time of the Committal of such
Rebellion, or Treason, or at any time after the same. In every of which
Commissions, there shall be a Clause Inserted, Requiring the said Commissioners
to give public Notice in the Chief Town of each County, of the time and place
appointed for the Execution of such Commission, Twenty Days at least, before
the same shall be Executed.

Provided always, That it shall, and may be Lawful, to, and for any person or
persons Claiming as Heir General, or as Heir, or Issue-Tail, or as Executor,
Administrator, or Assignee, to whom respectively the Title, or Titles of
Honor, or the Estate Real or Personal, of the person so found to have Dyed, or
to have been Killed in Rebellion, could have come, but for the Inquisition
aforesaid, found, or to be found; and to, and for any other person or persons,
Bodies-politick, or Corporate, who shall be Agrieved by such Inquisition, to
put in his or their Traverse, or Traverses, denying that such person or persons
Dyed; or was, or were Slain in Rebellion; or to put in any other, his, or their
Traverse or Traverses, to any matter or thing contained in such Inquisition,
within one year next after the said First Day of December, One thousand Six
hundred and Ninety seven, or within one year next after the Returning and
Filing of Record of such Inquisition, as aforesaid, at the Election of the
person Agrieved; and if the Traverse so to be Entered and Taken, shall be Tried,
and the Jury that shall Try the same, shall find contrary to the said
Inquisition, then and in such Case, such Inquisition shall become Void, and of
none Effect in Law; and the said Traverser and Traversers, shall enjoy such
his, or their Title or Titles or Honor, and be restored and put into
Possession of such Estate, Real or Personal, as would to him, or them have
descended, remained or come by course of Law, in the same Manner, as if no such
Inquisition had been found, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And if Verdict shall be given against the Traverser, upon any Plea of
Traverse, as aforesaid, or if Judgment shall pass against such Traverser, for
Insufficiency of such his Traverse, or if he shall fail to proceed to try the
said Issue of Traverse, within one Year next after such Traverse shall be
Filed, the said Inquisition and Finding, shall at all times hereafter, stand,
be, and remain firm, and valid, and be no way Impeached, annulled, or set
aside, any Law, Custom or Statute to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Saving and Excepting hereout, Women Covert de Baron, persons within the Age of
Twenty one Years, persons in Prisons, persons out of this Realm, elsewhere then
in the Dominions of the French King in Europe; and also all persons of Non sane
Memory, all, and singular which said persons, by the Authority aforesaid. shall
have their, and every of their Right and Title reserved and saved to them, and
their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators respectively, unto the time that
they be and come of their full Age of One and twenty Years, out of Prison
within this Land, Uncovert, and of Whole Mind.

And the same Traverse, or Traversers may take, and pursue within One Year
after their coming of full Age, of Twenty one Years, out of Prison within this
Land, Uncovert, of Whole Mind.

And also, be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such persons as
be Covert de Baron, and every person within the Age of Twenty one Years, in
Prison, or out of this Land, or of Non sane Memory, at the time of taking of
the said Inquisition, and by this Act, as aforesaid, excepted, that they, or
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, according to their
respective Rights and Interest, may take his or their Traverse, or Traverses
within One Year next after they respectively come and be of the Age of Twenty
one Years, out of Prison, Uncovert, within this Land, and of Sane Mind.

And if they do not take their Traverse, or Traverses within the said Year, and
according to the Limitation, Method, and Direction of this Act, as aforesaid,
that then they, and every of them, and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, according to their respective Rights, and Interests, are, and
shall be concluded by the said Inquisition and Finding, any thing in this Act
to the contrary notwithstanding. And for the preservation of the Peace and
Quiet of this Kingdom,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons, being
His Majesty's Subject, or Subjects, who have gone out of this Kingdom at any
time since the Tenth day of April, One thousand Six hundred and Eighty nine,
During the late War with France, into France, or any of the French King's
Dominions in Europe, other then such as have gone thither by His Majesty's
particular License or Command, shall from and after the Twenty third day of
October One thousand Six hundred and Ninety seven, voluntarily come, or return
from France, or any of the French King's Dominions, in Europe, into this
Kingdom, without His Majesty's, His Heirs, or Successors, License, or Leave,
under the Great Seal of this Kingdom, and that also, Subject to the
Restrictions and Limitations herein after mentioned and expressed, for that
purpose, had and obtained, and be thereof Convicted by due course of Law: Every
person so Offending, shall be Taken, Deemed, and Adjudged to be Guilty of
High Treason, and shall suffer such Penalties, as in Cases of High Treason, and
shall, and may be Indicted, and Tried for the same, in such County of this
Realm, as His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, by His, or Their Commission,
under the Great Seal of this Kingdom shall appoint.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That no License, as aforesaid, shall
be good, and vali'd to any such person or persons, wherein the true Name, and
Surname, and place of Abode, of such person or persons, where he, or they
Resided, or Dwelt in Ireland, when he or they Dwelt, or Resided in this
Kingdom, is not mentioned and expressed.

And that no License, as aforesaid, shall be vali'd, or effectual to any more
persons therein contained, then the Three first named, in Case there shall be
more then Three named in one License.

And that before any such License shall pass the Great Seal of this Kingdom,
the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of
this Kingdom, for the time being, are respectively hereby Directed, Required,
and Empowered, to take sufficient Security by Recognizance, for any Sum, not
under One hundred pounds, to be forthwith Filed of Record in the High-Court of
Chancery in this Kingdom. That each party so to be Licenced, as aforesaid,
shall anually pay during his Residence, and Abode in this Kingdom, to the
Bishop of the Diocese where such person shall Reside, whilst in this Kingdom,
the Sum of Forty Shillings for the Benefit, and Advantage of such School, or
Schools, as the said Bishop shall think most in want of Support and
Maintenance, in the said Bishop's Diocese: Upon Failure and Payment whereof, it
shall, and may be Lawful, to and for the Bishop of the said Diocese, to
Prosecute and Recover the said Sum, in the said Recognizance mentioned, and
the same to lay out, and Dispose of, with the Approbation of the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Keeper, or Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of this
Kingdom, for the time being, for the Benefit and Advantage of such School or
Schools in the said Diocese.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
His Majesty's Subjects, who at any time since the Third day of October, One
thousand Six hundred and Ninety one, has, or have returned out of France, or
out of any of the French King's Dominions in Europe, into this Kingdom, shall
on, or before the First Day of May, One thousand Six hundred Ninety eight,
Surrender him, or themselves, to some One of the Judges of His Majesty's Court
of King's Bench, or Common Pleas, or to some One of the Barons of His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, and being of the Age of Sixteen Years, take the Oath of
Allegiance, mentioned in an Act made in England, in the Third Year of His
present Majesty, and the late Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act for the Abrogating
the Oath of Supremacy in Ireland, and Appointing other Oaths. And enter into
Recognizance with Sufficient Sureties, for his or their Good Behavior, for One
Year thence to come; which said several Recognizances, shall be returned into
His Majesty's Court of King's Bench, within Three Months next after they shall
be taken, or shall enter into such Security, as the said Judges, or Barons
respect^vely shall think fit to require, that he, she, or they unless Licenced
in manner and form aforesaid, by His Majesty to continue here shall within
Twenty days Depart this Kingdom, and not return into the same, without such
Licenses aforesaid.

And in Case, any of His Majesty's said Subjects, shall neglect or refuse to
surrender him, her, or themselves, and to take the said Oaths, and to give such
Security for their Good Behavior, or that shall not depart this Kingdom
accordingly; every person so neglecting, or refusing, shall incur the Danger
and Penalty of Praemunire; and every person so returning without such License,
as aforesaid, shall incur the Danger and Penalty of High Treason, and shall
suffer such Pains and Penalties as in Case of High Treason, and shall, and may
be Indicted, and Tried for the same, in such County of this Kingdom, as His
Majesty by His Commission under the Great Seal, of this Kingdom, shall appoint.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and every the Estates, Rights, Titles, and Interests, either in Law or Equity,
in, or to any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, of any person or persons
being of the Protestant Religion, or professing to be of the Protestant
Religion, on, or before the Twenty Seventh day of July, One thousand Six
hundred Ninety Seven, and has continued so from that time hitherto, or till
the time of his or their Death, shall be, and remain of such force and effect
in Law or Equity, respectively, and no other then if this Act had not been
made, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted and Declared, at the Humble and
Earnest Request of James Earl of Tyrone, That nothing in this Act contained,
shall extend, or be construed to extend, to Confirm the Outlawry, or Outlawries
of the said James Earl of Tyrone, by the Name of James Power, of Curraghmore,
in the County of Waterford, Esquire, but that the same shall be subject and
liable to such Order and Directions for Reversal thereof, as His Majesty shall
please to Declare, touching and concerning the same, as if this Act had never
been made, any Clause, matter, or thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas, Thomas Lord Baron of Kerry, and John Lord Baron of Kingston, have
both of them been in France since the said Third day of October, One thousand
Six hundred Ninety one, and have also since that time returned into this
Kingdom, and submitted themselves to His Majesty's Obedience and Government.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforsaid, at the Humble and Earnest Request of
the said Thomas Lord Kerry, and the said John Lord Kingston, That nothing in
this Act contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to their, or any
of their Prejudice, or Prejudices, but that they, and each of them, are hereby
Declared to be Excepted out of this Act, any thing therein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That nothing herein contained shall extend, or be construed,
taken, or expounded to extend, to Attaint Matthew Plunkett, Esquire commonly called
Lord Lowth, who Died during the late Rebellion in this Kingdom, before the
Third day of October, One thousand Six hundred Ninety one, any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Declared and Enacted, That nothing in this
Act contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to Confirm the Outlawry
or Attainder of Edmond Keating, of Narramore, in the County of Kildare,
Esquire, nor to abridge, or restrain His Majesty's Power of Pardoning him, the
said Edmond Keating, both as to Life and Estate any thing contained in this Act
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That nothing in
this Act contained, shall Extend, or be Construed to Extend, to Confirm the
Outlawry or Outlawries, Attainder or Attainders, of Sir John Bellew, Knight,
late Lord Bellew Baron Duleeke, Father of Richard Bellew, Esquire; Charles Lord
Baltimore, and Robert Feilding, Esquire, or either of them, for any Crime, or
Crimes, Committed, or Done by them, or either of them, since the Fifth Day of
November, one thousand Six hundred Eighty eight; but that the same shall be
Subject, and Liable to such Orders and Directions, for Reversal thereof, as His
Majesty shall please to Declare, touching and concerning the same, as if this
Act had not been made, any Clause, Matter, or Thing, therein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, that nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend, or be Construed to
Extend, to Attaint, or Convict of High Treason, Nicholas late Earl of
Carlingford, or his Brother John Taafe, Esquire; or to Vest in, or Forfeit to
Your Majesty, Your Heirs, or Successors, any Estate, Right, Title, or Interest
in Law, or Equity, whatsoever; which they the said Nicholas late, Earl of
Carlingford, or the said John Taafe, had, or ought to have had, any thing in
this Act, contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend, or be
Construed to Extend, to Confirm the Outlawry or Outlawries, Attainder or
Attainders, of Nicholas French of Abbart, in the County of Gallway, Esquire,
for any Crime Committed, or Done by him, since the Fifth Day of November, One
thousand Six hundred Eighty eight, but that the same shall be Subject and
Liable, to such Orders and Directions, for Reversal thereof, as His Majesty
shall please to Declare, touching and concerning the same, as if this Act had
not been made, any Clause, Matter, or Thing therein contained to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding.

Provided also, that nothing herein contained, shall Extend, or be Construed to
Extend, to Confirm the several Outlawries, and Attainders, of Edward Lord Baron
of Athenree; and Lieutenant Colonel John Kelly, or either of them, for any
Crime, or Crimes Committed, or Done by them, or either of them, since the Fifth
Day of November, One thousand Six hundred Eighty eight; but that the same shall
be Subject, and Liable to such Order and Directions, for Reversal thereof, as
His Majesty shall please to Declare, touching and concerning the same, as if
this Act had not been made, any Clause, Matter, or Thing therein contained, to
the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always, that nothing herein contained, shall Extend or be Construed,
Taken or Expounded, to Extend, to Attaint Richard late Earl of Tyrone; Theobald
late Lord Viscount Dillon, and Nicholas late Lord Viscount Nettervil, who Dyed
during the late Rebellion in this Kingdom, before the Third Day of October, One
thousand Six hundred Ninety one, or any of them, any thing in this Act
contained, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend, or be
Construed to Extend any ways, to Confirm the Attainders, or Outlawry, of Edward
Geoghegan of Castletown, Kindaleene, in the County of Westmeath, Esquire or to
Obstruct, or Hinder his Majesty's Gracious Intentions for the Reversal of the
same.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend to Abridge,
or Restrain His Majesty's Power of Pardoning any Person Attainted of
High Treason, by Outlawrie, or otherwise, so as to save the Lives only of such
person or persons.

And whereas Patrick Sarsfield the Elder, late of Lucan, Esquire Deceased, stands
Indicted, and Outlawed for High Treason, Committed against His present Majesty,
and Her late Majesty Queen Mary.

Be it Enacted, that nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend, or be
Construed to Extend in any wise, to Confirm the said Outlawry, or Attainder, of
the said Patrick Sarsfield the Elder; but that the said Attainder, or Outlawry,
may be capable of being Reversed in the same Manner, as if this Act had never
been made.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend, or be
Construed to Extend in any wise, to Confirm the Outlawry or Attainder, or
Outlawries or Attainders, of Henry Crofton of Longford, in the County of
Sligoe; but that the said Outlawry or Attainder, or Outlawries or Attainders,
may be capable of being Reversed in the same manner, as if this Act had never
been made.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall Extend, or be
Construed to Extend to Confirm the Outlawries or Attainders, of Barnaby late
Baron of Upper-Ossery; but that the same may be capable of being Reversed in
the same manner, as if this Act had never been made.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained, shall extend, to confirm
the Outlawry, or Outlawries, Attainder or Attainders, of Thomas Nugent, of
Streamestown, in the County of Westmeath, Gent. alias, Thomas Nugent, of
London, Merchant, alias, Thomas Nugent, of Montserrat, in America, Merchant,
but that the said Thomas Nugent, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
shall, and may, have such, and the like Remedy, Benefit, and Advantage, to all
intents and purposes, for reversing such Outlawry, or Outlawries, Attainder, or
Attainders, as if this Act had never been made, any Clause, Article, or Matter,
herein contained to the contrary, in any wise, notwithstanding.

FINIS.

