AN ENQUIRY into the VISION OF THE Slaying and Rising OF THE WITNESSES, And
Falling of The Tenth Part of the CITY: WITH A POSTSCRIPT Concerning The
Controversy about the Duty of Allegiance, occasioned by our Late Revolution.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, MDCXCII.

The Preface.
THE Attempts hitherto to Expound the Vision of the slaying and rising of the
WITNESSES, have proved so unsuccessful, as may well heighten the general
Prejudice against Prophecies, to be peculiar against the Expounding that
Vision. Yet I having fixed the Time of the expiring of the 1260 days on such
Reasons as seem to me very cogent, and which make the slaying and rising of the
Witnesses at the end of those Prophetic days, peculiarly to concern this
Nation, and the falling thereon of the Tenth Part of the City, to respect our
present Times, and so to be of great import to us to be rightly understood, I
cannot excuse my self from making my Exposition public, though I am sensible of
a greater Prejudice against it than that mentioned.

For to make the Restoration here in the Year 1660 to be the slaying the
Witnesses, and thereby the Party that was then prevailed against, and have
since continued Dissenters to be the Witnesses, must surely be very surprising
to the Church of England Party, who reckon her the Chief of the Reformed
Churches. But the Discourse it self does, I hope, yield sufficient Reason for
my so doing, and to lessen the Prejudice against it, I shall here add, That all
of the Dissenting Party are not therefore to be reputed Witnesses, nor all of
the Opposite Party are therefore to be excluded from being Witnesses. For many
may upon various motives and occasions be fallen in with that Party which is
the Witnesses, and yet not be of the Spirit of Truth, so as to be really of
them. And likewise many, whilst involved with the Opposite Party, may keep
their hearts so aright with God, in promoting the Truth, so far as the state
and circumstances they are in do admit thereof, as in some measure to act the
part of Witnesses, and against the politic Interests of that Party, which they
cannot, or are not yet required of God to free themselves from Communion with.
Men therefore are not so much to be judged of by the Party they hold Communion
with, as by the part they act in so doing. For they may so have the Kingdom of
Heaven within them, as indeed to perform the duty of Witnesses, whilst, as to
Outer Communion they continue of the opposite Party. And it seems by that
saying, Come out of her my PEOPLE, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins, and
that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18. that the People of God may upon a
worse Account continue in Outer Communion with the Babylonian or Antichristian
Party, but then it appears also, how perilous is their so doing.

The Usefulness of my Exposition will be a further lessening the prejudice
against it. For it appearing thereby that the Restoration was the slaying the
Witnesses, we see then, That the Zealous Party of the late Times had more cause
to excite their Zeal, than their Adversaries were aware of, and also that the
same Party continuing since Dissenters, had the like for their Separation,
being that in both they have but done the Duty of Witnesses; which will much
lessen the great prejudice against them, and Jealousies of them, and the
Divisions and Troubles occasioned thereby; and also will make us sensible how
needful it is, to have all Causes of Enmity abolished, all Partition-walls
broken down, that the Sheep of the good Shepherd may unite into one true
Christian Fold under Him, by observing all those Things which he has
commanded, (without corrupting the Truth with the Doctrines and Precepts of
Men) and so may find Him always with them to the end of the World. Whereby the
risen Witnesses having now attained to the Philadelphian State of having an
open Door set before them which no man can shut, may further advance that State
among us, by becoming united in Brotherly-kindness and Christian Communion,
with those with whom they have been hitherto at variance, and so the falling of
the Tenth Part of the City, and the settling us in that State, may be together
fulfilled with us.

And it appearing by my Exposition, that our late Revolution was in order to
the introducing so happy a Change, as that signified by the Fall of the Tenth
Part of the City, it gives us a prospect of a happy Issue out of our present
Troubles, however they be yet prolonged; and also gives us to understand, that
we are accessory to their continuance whilst we are reluctant against that
Change, or are wanting of a due furthering and promoting the same. And being
that my Discourse tends only to undeceive us, in our too highly prizing our
state hitherto, in order to the preparing us for a much happier state
approaching, such as must needs be desirable to every good Christian, and
surely should not be unwelcome to others also, considering that our present
Distractions have so little Prospect of Settlement otherways, I hope it is a
sufficient Apology for the freedom I have taken, in making out the Truth of my
Exposition.

I have added a Postscript concerning the great Controversy about the Duty of
Allegiance, occasioned by our late Revolution, Which being a wonderful Work of
Providence, designed for the great end I have mentioned, I have endeavored to
clear it from that ill Imputation which some blemish it with, who by contesting
the Rightfulness and Legality of it, raise the said Controversy. Enough has
been said to vindicate the Legality of it, according to the Constitution of the
Government, though that be needless for justifying it, when it appears to be a
work of Providence proceeding from Gods Will and Concurrence to it. And if all
Changes of Government are thus wrought by Him, as will appear by my Postscript,
than much rather so are such Changes as this, which is of so good tendency as
disproves its proceeding from the Evil One. But some have so little Belief of
God's Providence in governing the World, that they will not admit of it but
with such limitation as it next to the excluding it. His changing Times and
Seasons, and removing Kings and setting up Kings, they will not allow of,
otherwise than in a legal course, unless by express Nomination or Revelation;
and so, manifold great Changes which God makes in the Governments of the World,
to the end that Men may know that the most High Rules in the Kingdom of Men
and gives it to whom he will; being that, Because they have no Changes,
therefore they fear not God, are excluded by such Men from being the Works of
Providence, though they are more peculiarly so than those they allow to be so,
and more serve God's end in making such Changes.

But the so limitting the Providence of God in his working Changes in the
Governments of the World, proceeds not only from a slow Belief of what
Scripture does teach thereof, but also signifies little Insight into the State
of the opposite Kingdoms of Christ and the Devil in the World; the conflict
between which, and the decree of God to put the Powers of the one under the
Feet of the other, are the main occasions of his making such Changes, by which
he pursues the fulfilling his decree, as well as awakens in men a fear of him.
I have therefore given some brief Account of the Rise and State of those
Kingdoms in the World, driving on to that happy Issue of the great conflict
between them; whereby the great works of Providence for accomplishing the same,
may be contemplated with better Judgment, than blindly to be censured as dismal
works of darkness.

AN Enquiry into the Vision OF THE Slaying and Rising OF THE WITNESSES, etc.
THe time of the Prophesying of the Witnesses being certain, viz. 1260
Prophetic days, which are so many years; If we can find out the beginning of
their Prophesying, it will discover also the time of their finishing the same,
and of the Slaying and Rising of them thereon. But I must first note a mistake
in Expositors in making the 1260 days of their Prophesying, and the Woman's
abode in the Wilderness, to be Synchronal with the 42 Months of the continuance
of the Ten-horned-beast, and the Treading down of the Outer-Court; whenas the
Commencement of the former does precede the latter. Those times being of equal
extent does make it easy to fall into that mistake, especially when they cannot
much differ in the time of their commencing, but that they differ therein is
evident.

First, From the continuance of the Ten-horned beast after the Witnesses
finishing their prophesying. For when they have finished the same, the beast
ascending out of the bottomless-pit (which is the Ten-horned-beast) makes war
against them and overcomes them, etc. Also the same Beast is to continue till
the abolishing of the Antichristian Powers, by the battle of the great day of
God Almighty at the seventh Trumpet, and the seventh Vial, when the Beast and
the false Prophet are to be cast into the Lake of Fire. Rev. 19.20. Therefore
the 42 Months being the same extent of time with the 1260 days, and continuing
after their Expiring, must also Commence after them.

Secondly, From the Persecution, which the old Serpent being cast into the
Earth, Rev. 12. did raise against the Woman fled into the Wilderness, before
the Rise of the Ten-horned-beast. For after his being so cast down, he casts
out water like a Flood after her to carry her away. And after he has so spent
his wrath against her, he proceeds to make war with the Remnant of her Seed, by
the Ten-horned-beast, c. 13. Now the Woman's abode in the Wilderness being 1260
days (the same with the Prophesying of the Witnesses) and there suffering this
Persecution preceding to the Rise of the Ten-horned-beast, its plain that the
42 Months of his continuance must commence after the 1260 days.

It appearing therefore, that the 1260 days and 42 Months are not wholly
Synchronal, I proceed to the commencement of the first, being the time of the
Witnesses Prophesying, and the Woman's abode in the Wilderness. Thither she fled
from the Persecution of the Devil, for her bringing forth the Man-child who was
caught up unto Gods Throne, and thereby the Devil cast out into the Earth. So
that her abode there does commence from the time of his being so cast down;
which befell him about the end of Theodosius Magnus his Reign, when the Heathen
worship became abolished by his shutting up the Heathen Temples, and depriving
the Priests of their Revenues. Whereby the devil fell from his Heavenly Station
of being worshipped as the God of this World, as also from the Power which
upheld that worship. Which further appears from the commencement of the
Trumpets, which (according to Mr. Mede and others) was by the Incursion of the
Barbarous Nations, which immediately succeeded the said Theodosius his death.
For their sounding being the subject of the seventh seal, the devils being cast
down must immediately precede the same being that befell him by the Revolution
in the Heathen Government which is the subject of the Sixth Seal. His fall from
Heaven appears therefore, both from the abolishing of the Heathen Worship, and
the immediate succeeding of the Trumpets, to be about the end of the said
Theodosius his Reign; which Mr. Mede makes to end in the year 395, and also
makes the devils fall from Heaven by the said Revolution in the Sixth Seal, to
be then completed or fulfilled.

But the Persecution thereon which drives the Woman into the Wilderness, having
no notable Transaction whereto to fix its beginning, and being not to be
supposed so immediately to succeed the devils being cast out, as not to have
some small space of time for the raising it, and the 1260 days of her abode in
the Wilderness being a Computation by Centuries with an odd sixty, its most
Congruous to make them Commence with the fifth Century which so soon succeeds
the said Theodosius his death ( viz. begins five years after it) and so the odd
sixty years to succeed a Century. And thus making the beginning of the fifth
Century to be the Epoch of the 1260 days of the Woman's abode in the
Wilderness, its clear when they must end, viz. in the year 1660, and
consequently the 1260 days of the Prophesying of the Witnesses, which I think
none doubt but that its during the same time, must do the same. And as the thus
fixing the Epoch of those years or Prophetic days appears so reasonable, so
the truth thereof will be much confirmed, when we come to apply the same to
History, that is, when we find, that at the end of those days, the slaying and
rising of the Witnesses, etc. became fulfilled, which we find not how
otherways to make out, so as to agree with the Vision.

That the time and times and half, etc. is synchronal, or signifies the same
time with the 1260 days, appears from both being the measure of the Woman's
abode in the Wildernss, cap. 12. But the 42 months of the Ten-horned beast
cannot commence till the Empire became divided into ten Kingdoms by the
barbarous Nations that overran it; which was not till after the middle of the
fifth Century. Mr. Mede makes it to be soon after the taking Rome by Gensericus
the Vandal, which, he says, was A.D. 455. and that the year following or soon
after, the whole Empire became divided into Ten Kingdoms. But the reviving of
the Ten-horned-beast cannot well be reckoned till the expiring of the Western
Empire in Augustulus A.D. 476. For the Emperors being the sixth Head, under
which the Beast received its deadly wound by a sword, that ought to be expired
before its reviving under a new Head. Also, the Man of Sin was not to be
revealed, till, He that did let (viz. the sixth Head or Roman Emperors) was
taken out of the way. And though those Emperors, from the taking Rome by
Gensericus to Augustulus, were so incon^ble, as to make some reckon the Western
Empire to end with Valentinian the third, yet it did really continue, though in
a languishing condition, till it expired in Augustulus, a Name suitable to the
state it was then dwindled into. And whenas its expiring is described in the
third Trumpet, by a great star falling from Heaven, its Name being called
Wormwood, the miserable condition of the Empire under those petty Emperors,
and their perplexed troubles do best suit with that Character. And the not
reviving of the Ten-horned-beast till then, does well enough agree with the ten
Horns, or ten Kings receiving Power as Kings one hour with the Beast; for that
signifies no more than that they received such Power about the same time with
the reviving of the Beast. And by the latitude of Mr. Medes's words before
cited, it might be very nigh the said expiring of the Western Empire, before
the Empire became divided into ten Kingdoms.

And as the not reviving of the Ten-horned-beast till the said A.D. 476 does so
well agree with those Kings receiving Power as Kings one hour with the Beast,
so it better suits with the Power and Corruptions of Antichrist being then more
advanced, to sit him for reviving and heading the Ten-horned-beast. And whereas
he is represented by a Two-horned-beast, signifying the twofold Power he
claims, viz. Ecclesiastical and Civil, answering to his Authority of Priest and
King, whose Vicegerent he assumes to be, (and therefore he is said to wear the
Horns of the Lamb) he begins to head the Ten-horned-beast, by exercising only
the first of these Powers, till by his Pseudo-prophetick deceits, he has so
advanced himself and deluded the World, as to make way for his claiming the
other Power also. In the mean time steps in the other King, who was to continue
but a short space, and was no Roman but a Foreign Head. And this was Odoacer
King of the Herculi with the succeeding Ostrogoths. So that, Odoacer
extinguishing the Western Empire, by vanquishing Augustulus the eighth Head,
which is the seventh Roman-head, does, as to one of his Powers which he
exercises, begin to head the Beast at the same time with the rise of the
foreign Head, which was to continue but a short space, viz. both at the
expiring of the sixth Head, the Roman Emperors. But he is not reputed the
eighth Head till his exercising the other Power also. The first Power fulfils
the revealing of the Man of Sin at the expiring of the sixth Head, and the
other being civil, makes him agree with the other Heads, and so become the
eighth Head which one of the seven, or the seventh Roman Head.

My making the Commencement of the 1260 days to precede the 42 months, is
further made good out of Daniel. For it is said of the little Horn there, cap.
7. which is the Antichristian-head of the Ten-horned-beast, That the Saints of
the Most High shall be given into his hands, for a Time and Times, and the
dividing of a Time, and then Judgment shall sit to take away his dominion, and
to consume it unto the end. Now the said time and times, etc. being the same as
before showed, with the 1260 days, and at the end thereof Judgment beginning to
sit to take away the dominion of the said Horn, or Ten-horned-beast under that
Head, he is therefore to continue after the 1260 days till his dominion be
taken away and consumed, which how long it is, seems concludible from Daniel,
cap. 12. Where we find again the said time and times and half, etc. during
which, the scattering of the power of the Holy People should be, (which is the
same with the said giving the Saints into the hands of the said Beast) and then
on Daniel's enquiring, What shall be the end of those Wonders there spoken of?
He is denied an Answer, as enquiring into things, that are closed and sealed up
till the time of the end; yet is told of two periods of time which will make
great discovery of what he enquires after, viz. From the taking away the daily
sacrifice, and setting up the Abomination that makes desolate, there shall be
1290 days: Blessed is he that waits and comes to the 1335 days. Which
Numbers, though they respect the Profanation of the Temple by Antiochus
Epiphanes, yet as he is generally agreed to be a Type of Antichrist, so they in
a Typical sense respect his Reign, and so must have the same Epoch with the
preceding time and times, etc. there, which they relate to. And then the time
and times, etc. or 1260 days ending, as before showed, in the year 1660, the
1290 days must end in 1690, and the 1335 days in 1735. So that, whereas at the
expiring of time and times, etc. or 1260 days, Judgment begins to sit to take
away the dominion of the Beast (on the rising of the Witnesses after the
slaying them at the end of those days) the 1290 days denote a time, the year
1690, at which some very remarkable advance will be made therein, or some
notable Transactions or Revolutions will fall out in order thereunto. But the
1335 days denote a time, the year 1735, at which the taking away his dominion
or destroying him will be so completed, as to make them Blessed or peculiarly
happy that reach thereunto.

Now as to the falling out of such an event in the year 1690, as I have spoken
of, we have seen what great Transactions and Changes, of such tendency, both at
home and abroad, that with the preceding and following year has produced, and
what further we are in continual expectation of. And as to the event to fall
out in the year 1735, I take it to be the sounding of the seventh Trumpet. For
on the slaying and rising of the Witnesses, and their ascending in a Cloud, and
the falling thereon of the Tenth Part of the City, it is said, The second Woe is
past and the third Woe comes quickly. Which Fall of the Tenth Part of the
City, (of which after) I take to be a chief part of the event signified to fall
out or commence in the year 1690. And we see how the state of the Turkish
Empire, the second Woe-Trumpet, does agree with the seventh Trumpet its being
the other event. Which has received such a deadly Wound, as to make it Which
is further confirmed from the time for which the Euphratean Horsemen or Turks,
are loosed, Re. 9.5. to execute the second Woe-Trumpet on the Empire: For the
Day, Month and Year, being Prophetic Days, make 396 years, the Epoch of
which, being about the beginning of the Fourteenth Century, when the Turks
began their Eruption from Euphrates on the Empire, they must be now near
expiring, and therewith end that Trumpet, or the Empire that inflicted that
Plague. At least so far as to make it cease from continuing the Plague of a
Woe-Trumpet; but the absolute breaking of that Empire, seems not to be till the
sixth Vial, and then it will fulfill The drying up the River Euphrates to make
way for the Kings of the East.
unlikely to last long, and at present even to cease from continuing the Plague
of a Woe-Trumpet. And being at the time when the second Woe-Trumpet is past,
and the tenth part of the City is fallen, (both which are now about being
fulfilled) it is said, The third Woe comes quickly, it can hardly be at a
greater distance than the said year 1735; and therefore the great event
signified then to fall out, must in all likelihood be it. Which is much
confirmed by the 42 months of the continuance of the Beast so agreeing
therewith. For his time beginning in the year 476, and ending at the seventh
Trumpet, as before showed, the 42 months from the said Epoch end in the year
1736 the year after the said 1735.

But it may be objected, That the said Numbers of Daniel, in ^e typical sense
mentioned, should rather commence with the (...) months of the Antichristian
Reign, which in their typical sense ^ey respect, than with the 1260 days which
have an higher E^ha. To which I say, that the taking away the daily Sacri^ etc.
may in a typical sense, be well applied to the Epoch (...) the 1260 days, both
in respect of the persecution by which (...) Devil caused the Woman to fly into
the Wilderness, and ^o in respect of the Advance Antichrist had then made in
cor^ing the World with the Mysteries of Iniquity. And there^e, though his Reign
cannot be said to commence till he be^e a new Head of the Ten-horned-beast,
succeeding the sixth ^ead which expired A.D. 476. yet those Numbers, in their
ty^al sense, may well respect him before the proper commence^nt of his Reign.
And they being there introduced in reference (...) the preceding time and
times, etc. as aforesaid, they are to ^ve the same Epoch, and so notify
signal times of the advance^g and accomplishing the deliverance of the People
of God, ^ch commenceth at the end of time and times, etc. or 1260 ^ys, by the
rising of the Witnesses after the slaying them, and (...) the Judgment that
then begins to sit, as aforesaid, to take ^ay the dominion of the Beast, etc.

Having thus discovered the time of the expiring of the 1260 ^ys, and so of the
slaying and rising of the Witnesses thereon, ^e are next to enquire, How
History Answers the same, or ^ere and how the same has been fulfilled? The
year 1660, ^ing, as before showed, the time of the expiring of the 1260 ^ys,
nothing then fell out that appears capable of Answering ^e description of the
slaying and rising of the Witnesses, unless (...) great Revolution by the
Restoration. The slaying them is ^ed chiefly to one of the ten Kingdoms the
Empire was divi^d into, by the falling of the Tenth Part of the City (that
(...) one of those ten Kingdoms) on their rising and ascending (...) Cloud. And
what Kingdom can this be but ENGLAND? ^deed the French Persecution, and also
the Hungarian did be^ about the same time, both the French and the Imperial
Court ^ing Encouragement thereunto from our KING's Restaura^n (as well they
might, considering what he as well as his Bro^er proved to be) on which, and
the preceding Pyrenean Peace, (...) Design was set on foot for Ruining the
Reformed Religion. So that it is a very remarkable time for the slaying of the
Witnesses to commence at, which considered, together with the Reasons* I have
given for the 1260 days ending then, seems to make it unquestionable to be the
true time thereof. But nothing then or since fell out in France or elsewhere
but in England, that can answer the Vision of the slaying them, etc. For it is
said thereon, They that dwell on the Earth shall rejoice and make merry, and
send Gists one to another, because that those two Prophets tormented them that
dwell on the Earth. But no such rejoicing has been at those foreign
Persecutions, they being not so much approved of as to cause such solemn
rejoycings, but on the contrary, those that have been deeply concerned in
promoting the French Persecution, have been ashamed to own the same; it being
so inhumane and barbarous as to move pity and favor from Papists themselves;
whereas it is well known, what great and solemn rejoycings there was both at
home and abroad, for the King's Restoration, by reason that the dwellers on
earth had been tormented by that Party which was then prevailed against, and
which thereon was retaliated with those severe punishments and sufferings,
which they have since undergone.

But then, How was the Witnesses, lying dead three days and a half, (that is
three years and a half) fulfilled in England? To which I say, That there may be
such a symbolical meaning of their lying dead, as to make the fulfilling
thereof according to the Prophetic time needless. For it may refer to
Antiochu^ Epiphanes his Profaning the Temple, and to the time of Elyah's
mournful prophesying, when he caused great Famine by shutting up Heaven, etc.
(both which were for the same time) and so signisie, that their lying dead
shall be alike short time of Trial, and have the like happy Issue. Yet, a
fulfilling thereof according to the prophetic time may be aptly enough
assigned. For reckoning the slaying the Witnesses here, chiefly to respec^ the
excluding so many Nonconforming Ministers by the Bartholomew-Act (yet
including also those who were shut out of Civil Employment by the
Corporation-Act, or otherways, for favoring that Cause that was then so run
down) from Bartholomew-day 1662, the three years and half will end in Februar^
1665. About which time the dreadful Plague had so finishe^ its slaughter, as to
make the Citizens flock fast to London again* And the Non conforming Ministers,
having, during the Plague, (...) the Risque of that danger which the
Parish-Ministers sled (...), and supplied their Pulpits which they deserted,
did there^ gain that Reputation with the City, as was a beginning of ^e
Entrance of the spirit of Life into them to set them on their (...). For the
People were so affected with that dreadful Judg^ent, and the Zeal and
Faithfulness to their Duty which the ^on-conforming Ministers did manifest
thereon, as much to ^ntenance their Meetings which they were then encouraged
(...) set up, and were so born out therein, that the Oxford-Act ^de during the
Plague, could take little effect to drive them ^om the City. On which see Mr.
Baxter's Non-conformists ^ea for Peace, p. 236, 237, 238, 239. and he has
these remark^le Words thereon, [Thus the dreadful Plague, began that which
(...) so much offends as a dangerous Schism.] Also the next dis^l Judgment
which laid the City in Ashes, (and so gave more ^untenance to the
Non-conformists Meetings, by reason of the ^ish-Churches being destroyed) and
the Unsuccessfulness of ^e Dutch War (wherewith it was expected to ruin that
Na^) were, together with the preceding Plague, such astonish^g Providence, as
must needs strike the evil World with some ^ead of that Divine Power, so
wonderfully manifested in its ^dgments. But the Contemplation thereof was such
reviving ^d animating of the Witnesses, (which might be with a due ^passion of
the evils inslicted by those Judgments) and an ^ancing of their Repute and
Interest, as to complete the set^g them on their feet from their slain
condition.

Which begat in their Adversaries such fear of them, (fulfill^g what is said of
the Witnesses raised again on their feet, That ^t fear fell on them that saw
them) as brought the Penal Laws (...) them to suppress, and has since begotten
many politic Arts (...) keep them under, and hinder their ascending in a Cloud
to (...) Heaven of Power, whether the great Voice, ver. 12. does (...) them.
Notwithstanding which they have continued still e^ging in the World, and will
do so till that Voice be ful^ed. And as our late Revolution has gained them
that Li^ty, which is like to be so holding as to prove an open Door ^em which
no man can shut, so it seems designed also for the ^illing that Voice, and
thereby accomplishing the Fall of the ^th Part of the City, though the same be
hitherto much ob^cted, by continuance still of the former Enmity against them,
and Jealousies of them, notwithstanding the great detriment the Public
receives thereby. Though this Vision thus concerns our Nation, as it chiefly
respects one of the ten Kingdoms the Empire was divided into, (as before noted)
yet it has also a concurrent fulfilling in other Countries, where the before
mentioned design against the Reformed Religion, on the Restoration, etc. has
been pursued to the utmost; whereby, as the slaying of the Witnesles has been
fulfilled with them, so there has and will be a fulfilling of their
Resurrection, by the aforesaid Judgment that now sits, at the end of time and
times, etc. To take away the dominion of the Beast, and to consume it unto the
end.

This Account of the slaying and rising of the Witnesses, as respecting one of
the ten Kingdoms, etc. is further confirmed from the Persecution here which
succeeded the Restoration, its better agreeing with the slaying of the
Witnesses, than those Persecutions which then and since have fallen out
elsewhere, coming short of their barbarous Inhumanity, though so severe and
heavy as to prove ruinous to many; and so, better answering to the slaying the
Witnesses, which is different from the former Antichristian Persecutions, both
as being peculiar to the Witnesses (the Worshippers in the Inner-Court or
Temple and Altar) whereas the former extends also to the Outer-Court trodden
down, and as being not so much designed to destroy, as to silence and subdue;
importing a political and a spiritual Death, ( viz. as to their exercising
their Function of Prophesying) from whence they are raised by the Spirit of
LIFE entering into them, etc. Also the Persecution here is more likely than any
elsewhere to be the slaying the Witnesses, because the Sufferers under it were
such as espoused the Cause they were engaged in upon their own Judgment and
Choice, and much contrary to their worldly Interest, both in respect of their
excluding themselves thereby from Preferments, and also exposing themselves to
manifold evils, from Punishment of Laws, and Enmity of their prevailing
Adversaries. Whereas the Persecution in France and elsewhere, being against a
Religion so long established by Law, that the Professors of it received it by
Education, it was therefore like a National Religion which involves all
Professors true or false, and so had multitudes in its Communion, not so much
from Principles of Conscience, as the Influence of Education, whereby the Truth
was not so rooted in their hearts, as to enable them to abide those Trials that
came upon them.

But this Account of the slaying and rising of the Witnesses, though enforced
with so strong Reasons, will not be easily digested by those who so highly
esteem the Reformation, as to make the breaking then with Rome, to be a
dismembring us from the Tenhorned-beast, or a separating this Kingdom from
continuing one of the Horns thereof. Which cannot be, if the slaying the
Witnesses was fulfilled according to my Account thereof. For they being slain
by the Beast that ascends out of the Bottomless-pit, (that is the
Ten-horned-beast, which cap. 13. is said to arise out of the Sea, and cap. 17.
to ascend out of the Bottomless-pit) this Kingdom must continue a Member of
that Beast, or one of the Horns thereof at the time of the slaying them. Which
that it did so, seems so clear from other Reasons also, as to make it hardly
conceivable to be otherways. For the Reformation made no Alteration in the
Civil Government, and therefore could not make any as to this Kingdoms
continuing a Part or Member of the Ten-horned-beast, which is a representation
of the Politic or Civil State of the Empire. Nor did it make any in the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (so called) the same Hierarchy continuing here,
with rejection of the foreign Jurisdiction usurpt by the Pope. And though the
Reformation made in Religion was much Praiseworthy, as a good beginning, yet it
fell much short of obeying that Voice, Come out of her my People, etc. Rev. 18.
And yet instead of making further progress it proved retrograde, and
backsliding, became so prevalent, as to beget dismal apprehensions of our
relapsing to what we had reformed from, and thereby involved us in the
calamities of the Civil War. Yet so far were we from being warned thereby, that
the Restoration proved a reviving of the same designs which before had
produced such sad effects, and which now became more eagerly driven on, both
out of enmity to that Party which were God's Scourge for the former pursuing
the same, and also to prevent the like sufferings from them again, by a total
suppressing them.

It appears therefore, that the Antichristian Spirit of the World has been the
prevailing or predominant Spirit in the Nation since the Reformation, and how
can it then not continue us of the same Antichristian-body (the
Ten-horned-beast) as formerly, whatever Variance we have had since with Rome?
And being refined in Profession by the Reformation, whilst the same
Antichristian Spirit and worldly Power continues to bear sway, does rather make
us more complete Members of that Beast, than make us cease from continuing
Members thereof, the Mystery of Iniquity consisting in warring against Christ
under a Christian Profession, or having Horns like a Lamb, yet speaking as a
Dragon. And such Reformation in such enlightened times, is indeed serviceable
for the prolonging of worldly Power in opposition to the coming of Christ's
Kingdom, whilst Satan being transformed into an Angel of Light, and his
Ministers into Ministers of Righteousness, become thereby enabled the longer to
vye with the true Children of Light. Also the 1260 days of the Witnesses
Prophesying and the Woman's abode in the Wilderness ending, as before showed,
but in the year 1660, (and by some not so soon) the Reformation could make no
Visible Christian Church, whilst the Woman (the true Church) continues so long
after in her secret hid condition from the face of the Serpent. Besides, the
National Church since the Reformation, continuing a politic Body as before,
the Ligament of whose Union being humane Laws supported by worldly Power, and
thereby comprehending all but those who separate from her for Conscience sake,
even the most wicked hypocritical Professors as well as true Christians (like
Tares and Wheat growing together) how can this Church (so called) pretend to be
a real Christian Church, or Member of the Church of Christ which is his Body?
The Union of which is by that Spiritual Ligament, which knits each Member to
other, and the whole to Christ its Head, whence it has Nourishment ministered
for its Spiritual growth and edifying. So that, it seems evident, that the
Reformation could make no such Change, as to make the Nation cease from
continuing a worldly Politick-body, and Member of the Apocalyptick-beast as
before.

The slaying the Witnesses proving therefore fulfilled by the said
Restoration, it must moderate the severe Censures which that Party that was
then prevailed against has been since blackned with. Their Actions in the late
times did so transcend the measures of human worldly Affairs, as must needs
make them seem very unaccountable to those who can judge of them only by their
outer appearance, and so may well incur severe Censures from them. But those,
who, by the Light of Prophecies, can contemplate the transactions of those
times, as an extraordinary work of Providence for the advancing of Christ's
Kingdom, and quelling all opposition to it, must surely judge otherways. That
War may well be reckoned the Conclusion of the third Vial. That Vial contains
those many bloody wars which succeeded the Reformation (which was the second
Vial) and were occasioned by it, viz. that between us and the Spaniards on
their Invasion, and that between them and the Dutch on their Revolt, and the
Hugonet Wars in France, and the long dismal German War, etc. and ended with our
Civil War. After which the Treaty at Munster in the year 1648, concluded that
bloody Vial, by the Peace it gave to Christendom. And that year proved so
disastrous to Crowned Heads, as makes it remarkable for commencing the fourth
Vial poured on the Sun, as well as for ending the third Vial. The most signal
instance whereof, was the hard Fate that befell CHARLES the First. Who being
swayed to such Excesses in Government as were perilous and Ruinous to True
Religion, and the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, and therein
obstructive to the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, it brought the same Plague
of the third Vial on this Nation, which had befallen other Nations for the like
doings. Wherein his own part of suffering seems severe, after he had yielded so
far in giving satisfaction for that Maladministration of Government which he
had been seduced into. But his Concessions were with such Reserve, as did not
yield security from the like Evils befalling the Nation again; or however,
would not comport with the Progress that was then to be made in furthering the
coming of Christ's Kingdom, by finishing the Prophesying of the Witnesses, in
order to their slaying and rising again, etc. and therefore the Zealots for
promoting the Interest of that Kingdom, could sind no satisfaction in such
concessions, how plausible and satisfactory soever they appeared to others to
be; and thereon presumed, in a transcendent Instance, to become Ministers of
the wrath of God declared against all worldly Power that does not submit to the
Scepter of Christ Jesus. But their Zeal herein exceeding their Acting according
the Righteous Judgments of Truth, they failed of becoming established in their
success, and were so prevailed against by their Adversaries, as to receive from
them the same measure which they had meted. Yet this does not exclude their
being such Ministers of God as I have mentioned, and they approved themselves
to be such who underwent the utmost Trial of Sufferings, dying as men at peace
with God, and not condemned of him though judged of man. And its some exeuse for
them, that they appear to have been influenced by the Jesuits in that great
Transaction, [see Dr. du Moulin's Vindication of the Protest. Relig. etc. page
59.] whose subtle Instigations found their Zeal a sit Subject to work on. And
the prosperity of that Cause was such till it had finished its Course, as must
surely make God's owning and espousing the same discernable to all, unless
such, as when his hand is lifted up will not see. And the Adherents to it had
the privilege, by their prosperous success, to finish the mournful Prophesying
of the Witnesses in this Nation, and then by their being so prevailed against,
to accomplish the slaying them, in order to their rising again, and ascending
to a triumphant state over their former sufferings. Which we see now in a good
measure fulfilled, and are like to see the Accomplishing thereof, by the fall
of the tenth part of the City, which succeeds the rising of the Witnesses, and
their ascending in a Cloud, etc.

And what is meant by that Fall is our next Enquiry, so far as we can search
into what is not yet fulfilled. It plainly imports such a Change as will make
the Nation cease from continuing a Part or Member of the Ten-horned-beast,
which, as appears, it did not by the Reformation, and that since (save the
Interruption by the Civil War) we have been rather backsliding, than making
further progress out of Babylon, till our late Revolution, which has freed us
from such danger of relapsing, and seems designed to complete our coming out
from thence, (though we hitherto make but slow Progress therein) by
accomplishing the fall of the tenth part of the City. By which seems to be
meant, the expiring of all the Power which the Devil gave to the Ten-horned
beast, cap. 13. wherewith To war with the Saints and overcome them; which,
however it be diminished, so continues as to hinder the Witnesses Ascent to
that station, whether the Great Voice does call them, that is, to exclude them
from such employment in the Government, as would most conduce to God's Glory
and the Weal-publick, and so promote the Interest of Christ's Kingdom in the
Nation. And whilst the Enmity against them does so continue, as thus to
suppress them and keep them under, and thereby to obstruct the Advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, its a continuing of the said War against the Saints, and so
makes the Nation not yet cease from continuing one of the Horns of the Ten
horned-beast. So that, till the Judgment that now sits to take away the
dominion of the Beast, has so prevailed against all such Antichristian Power,
as to reduce the Government, as to the exercising thereof, to a like impotent
State with those Beasts, Dan. 7.12. Whose dominion is taken away though their
Lives be prolonged, the fall of the tenth part of the City seems not
accomplished.

But there is reason to reckon the fulfilling thereof near, both from the light
of this Vision, and also from our seeing that Power so declining and
languishing, that all politic bands, and subtle workings of the deceiver for
upholding and prolonging it, prove like the loosed tacklings that cannot
strengthen their Masts, nor spread their Sails, whereby the Nation, as to the
worldly politic state of it, is in alike unhinged, and crazy tottering
condition, as in Esaias 24.19,20. is described to precede the glorious state of
Christ's Kingdom. And the Conflict that does spring from this declension of
worldly Power, and the emerging of the Witnesses ascending in a Cloud, is the
cause of our present Troubles and Distractions. Nor can we well hope for
settlement and prosperity, till the Judgment that sits has ended this
Conflict, by so taking away the dominion or power of the Beast, as to fulfill
the Fall of the tenth part of the City, and the great Voice that calls the
Witnesses up to Heaven. This will give new Life and Vigor to the Government,
By the Lord being exalted among us to fill us with Judgment and Righteousness,
and make wisdom and knowledge the stability of our Times, and strength of
Salvation. It will be a laying the Foundation of that City whose Builder and
Maker is God, whereby we shall find Him carrying on that Spiritual Building,
till he has raised us up to the glorious state of the New Jerusalem. And it
will be such a preludious commencing of Christ's Kingdom in the Nation, as will
occasion great Changes throughout Christendom; and so be a preparative making
way for the great Revolution at the seventh Trumpet, which settles Him in his
Kingdom on Earth; and therein be a great transaction of the fifth Vial, which
fills the Kingdom of the Beast with darkness. And indeed, that Vial seems to
commence from our late great Revolution; and so the Exit of King James did
conclude the fourth Vial poured on the Sun, as we have before noted his Fathers
Fate to be a signal Transaction of its beginning. But then, whereas the present
Consederacy against France is the result of that Revolution, which seems not
well established till the Confederates have so succeeded against that Sun,
which has shined with much scorching heat to the great annoyance of
Christendom, as to make him set in a Cloud; when this befalls him, (which seems
very hopeful as well as desirable) it may well be reckoned a Transaction
belonging to the fourth Vial, as being so connext with King James's Exit, that
the Fall of the one did involve the others Fall.

Since therefore so great Consequences are like to attend our late Revolution,
they are much in the dark, who are so much concerned for our settling upon our
old bottom or worldly state, acquiescing in the Deliverance received, as if it
rendered us as happy as is to be desired, or however to be expected; like those
who reject all speculations of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, telling us, that he
came not to interest himself in, or give disturbance to the Rights of Princes
or Civil Governments, his Kingdom being not of this world, showing themselves
of like spirit with those who said, We will not have this Man reign over us.
But though his Kingdom be from above, as He himself was, and not from beneath, of
this world, or according to the course thereof, yet its in this world, where He
must reign till he has put down all Authority and Power, all Enemies under his
feet, and so make the Kingdoms of the World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and
his Christ, etc. And the Laws and Liberties which we so Joy in, are owing to
the advancement of his Kingdom on Earth. But the world being unable so to
consider them, claims them as the Rights of Freeborn People, and which our
Rulers are bound to observe by Original Contract with the People, etc. Whenas
indeed, what Change there is in the Government of the Christian world, from the
absolute dominion of Heathen Princes, proceeds from the Victory gained over the
powers of the world, by the Man-child being caught up unto God's Throne to
rule, and the Dragon being cast out into the Earth, Rev. 12. which caused the
great Revolution in the Empire described in the sixth Seal.

And what Liberty or Freedom can any pretend to, who are the Servants of Sin
and Satan, who having the Power of Death, through fear of it, makes them all
their Liver-time subject to Bondage. Which Bondage of Corruption all Mankind
are subject to, so far as Redemption, through Christ Jesus has not freed them
from it. And they being thus the Children of wrath, under the Thraldom of the
Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that works in the Children of
Disobedience, what Rights or Privileges could they obtain? Or what Assurance
could they have of them when granted, by absolute Heathen Rulers under the
Prince of darkness? Whose Power did set them above the need of making such
Grants, and could easily frustrate them when made. So that, the Grants and
Concessions whereby the Princes of Christendom have obliged themselves to their
Subjects, and thereby enfranchised them from Heathen Thraldom, are owing to the
downfall of the Devils power by his being cast out of Heaven, whereby they being
unable to continue that absolute dominion, were driven to comply with their
Subjects by such Concessions. And though his power has been so restored by the
Impostures of the false Prophet, and other his subtle Arts to corrupt the
Nations of Christendom, as in some Countries almost to frustrate the benefit of
that Victory over him, yet in others it continues to be enjoyed, and with that
firmness in our Country, as to make both former and latter Attempts to deprive
us of it fatal to the Undertakers. And the late Revolution seems not only
designed to confirm to us that Benefit when there appeared so much danger of
losing it, but also much to enlarge the same, by that advancemene of Christ's
Kingdom, which is signified by the Fall of the tenth part of the City.

But we seem insensible thereof, and as little disposed to, and prepared for so
great a Blessing, as Lot and his Family were to depart out of Sodom, to escape
destruction. It Is too high a Blessing for the world to like, though it be well
pleased with than already received, of being freed from Heathen Thraldom. It
can like such Blessings that free it from the evils and miseries that attend
its lapsed state, lying in wickedness, but is not pleased with such Blessings
that tend to recover it out of that state by Reforming its Corruptions. Which
Indisposition to higher Blessings designed us, makes the world so little
sensible to whom to ascribe what we already enjoy, and so to fail of rendering
Him due Praise and Thanks for the same, to whom all Judgment is committed, that
all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father. Men of the world can
gladly embrace Christ as a Mediator to reconcile them to God, and so to become
their Savior in the next world, and as such do him much Honor, yet they
cannot like of his being their King to Rule and Govern them in this world, and
therefore little own him as such; though surely they cannot well hope to find him
the one to them who are averse to his being the other.

But whatever opposition the coming of his Kingdom does meet with from the
Enmity of the world, yet God will set his King upon his holy Hill of Sion, and
out of Sion will send forth the Rod of his strength to make him rule in the
midst of his Enemies. But He can have no Enemies, but those who are so to Truth
and Righteousness, the bringing of which on Earth is the end of his Kingdom,
whereunto He will consume the Man of Sin with the breath of his mouth, and
destroy him with the brightness of his coming. Which has already so
enlightened the world, as to make great discovery of, and thereby much to
advance the destruction of that Son of Perdition; and which will further so
enlighten it, as to disperse all the Clouds of darkness wherewith the Deceiver
has overwhelmed the deluded world, destroy the face of covering cast over all
People, and the vail spread over all Nations, whereby the Holy Mountain on
which the Lord sits King, shall be established in the Top of the Mountains,
and be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, and so the
Moon shall be confounded and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall
reign in Mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients glori^sly. The
accomplishing whereof is now hastening, by the Judgment that sits to take away
the dominion of the Beast, on the Witnesses being risen; and to bless us with a
preludious fulfilling thereof by the Fall of the tenth part of the City, seems
to be the present work of Providence in this Nation.

To make us sensible whereof, and thereby to prepare us for compliance
therewith, and furtherance thereof, seems to be the meaning of the great Change
of Affairs that succeeded our late wonderful prosperous Revolution, viz. of the
great Troubles that have since exercised and perplexed us, and brought us into
great danger of confusion and ruin. Wherein God's displeasure with us is
evident, yet accompanied with signal Instances of his good Providence over us,
which show the evils that have befaln us, not to be the Judgments of his Wrath,
but admonishing Chastisements, Whom I love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous
therefore and repent. And we shall not be at a loss to find out the Cause of
his Displeasure, if we consider how the cross Influence of carnal Interest and
worldly Wisdom, does obstruct the improving our late great Deliverance to its
designed end; as if we were as afraid of advancing further in Reformation, as
we were lately of backsliding into Popery; but were minded to fix in a
lukewarm Laodicean-state, flattering our selves with that Church, till we
incur the Judgment threatened to her. Of God's displeasure at such unrighteous
doings we have felt the effects, and are like further to do so, till we become
instructed thereby, to improve the great Blessing received to a furthering that
greater designed us; whereby, so to raise up in us the love of Truth and power
of Godliness, as to make all sinister Counsels of worldly Wisdom, and all
lifeless Formalities of Pharisaical Righteousness to vanish, and the
Worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth, and the serving Him in righteousness
and holiness, to become the prevailing Spirit in the Nation, and so to
influence all administration of Affairs for the most advantageous promoting the
same. And as there is so little prospect of our becoming otherways settled, so
the various wonderful Providence, which in this Age have befallen this Nation,
have in a good measure prepared us for such a Change, When thy Judgments are in
the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness; though the same
be much obscured by the spirit of the World continuing yet predominant, but
will be manifest, when the end of those Providence become discovered, by their
issuing in that happy Change which will transform us into a true Christian
Dominion, and so, make us Rejoice with the joy of Gods People, and glory with
his Inheritance, being freed from Other Lords besides Him having Dominion over
us; that is, from the Thraldom of Worldly Power, or the Spirit of the World
continuing predominant.

The great Earthquake at the same hour, may signify the affright and terror
of the evil World at so happy a Change, and perhaps also, great Commotions
raised thereon to avoid it, and also may further signify the astonishment of
others at it, though no Adversaries to it; and likewise the concussion it will
make in the Body-politick or worldly Fabric of the Government; which seems
also signified by there being slain in the Earthquake 7000 Names of Men,
(according to the True T^ (...) which some rightly understand Dignities,
Offices, and Orders of Men officiating in the Government; and then the slaying
them will signify their political death, as to their so officiating or
exercising worldly power as before; and the number 7000 symbolically denotes
how completely this will be fulfilled; that is, what an absolute dissolution
will be of their politick-state, and reducing them to a lifeless Condition, as
to their exercising such Power. For as the rising of the Sun does dispel the
darkness of the Night, so will all power of darkness or worldly power vanish,
at the rising of the Sun of Righteousness upon us, by the Witnesses being
exalted to that Heaven of power whereto they are called, etc. But though the
Devils power becomes hereby so superseded and determined, as to put an end to
his War against the Saints, and his exercising any Authority against the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, yet being not then bound from deceiving the
Nations, we are still like to find a continuance of his ill Influence as a
deceiver, so as much to obstruct the progress of the Witnesses in their
promoting the Interest of that Kingdom, and so to make this preludious
commencing of it with us to fall much short of its Luster that will succeed his
being bound after the seventh Trumpet: So that, the falling of the tenth part
of the City seems to consist in the spirit of Truth gaining the Ascendent of
the Spirit of the World, by the Ascent of the Witnesses to Heaven, and so
transforming us from a Worldly into a Christian state, putting us in a Course
of managing all Affairs, for the most advantageous promoting of Truth and
Righteousness, and so advancing of Christ's Kingdom on Earth.

We having ground from this Vision suddenly to expect so happy a Change, as I
hope appears from my Exposition of it, we ought not to be doubtful of it, by
reason of the so little tendency of Affairs yet toward it, through the cross
Influence of carnal Interest and worldly Wisdom being so prevalent to obstruct
it: For when such awakening Providence as God has visited us with, do so
little avail to open Men's eyes and turn their hearts to become enlightened with
the Wisdom which is from above, and is revealed by Faith in Him, in whom are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, but that they continue still not
to know, nor will they understand, but walk on in darkness, it betokens such a
Change to be nearer at hand, when it becomes so apparent, that God's Work can
make no further Advance in the World, than its carried on by his Heavenly
Power. And therefore, whenas the present distracted State of the Nation does so
much need such a Change for its happy settlement; and also, that it is so
prepared for it as before is noted, only the Spirit of the World continuing
predominant, does obstruct it, and will do so whilst it prevails, How should we
doubt but that God will complete the Ascent of his Risen Witnesses to the
Heaven of Power, whether they are called? Whereby to give that Turn to the
Current of Affairs, as to accomplish that happy Change which we so much need,
and are taught by this Vision so soon to expect.

A Postscript.
THE Late Revolution which the foregoing Discourse makes to be in order to the
fulfilling the Fall of the Tenth Part of the City, has occasioned a great
Contest about the Duty of Allegiance, viz. Whether it be due to him only who
has the legal Right to the Throne, though dispossessed of it, or to the
Government or present Ruling Power? The great Concern of the Controversy has
made it strenuously managed on both sides, with much Learning and subtle
Reasoning, yet with little success in giving satisfaction, for want of a due
examining the nature and rise of the Government, which is the Subject of the
Controversy; which doing, is the only way to put an end to it: For if
Monarchical Government is derived from, and does consist in Power, having no
Right but what Power gives, (as will appear by examining the Rise of it) and
this Power being of God, no Prince can be divested of it, but by the
Concurrence as well as Permission of God, who invested him with it, then all
Right to the Throne does determine with being outed of the dominion or power of
Ruling, and every King de facto, is so far also King de jure, and so may be
obeyed as such.

The confounding the Patriarchical with the Monarchical Government, and making
Adam to be the first Monarch, is so groundless a Conceit, that it looks more
like a politic Imposture than a serious Opinion or Judgment; the one having no
foundation in Nature as the other, and they differing as much as the Relation
of Father and Son does from that of Master and Servant. And therefore Dr.
Sherlock (the chief Champion on the one side in this Controversy) says, That
it is evident that there is no natural Authority but the Faternal and
Patriarchical Authority, and that Mo^rchies are erected upon the Ruins or
great Diminution of it; and ^hether this was by Consent, (or as is most
probable) by violent Usurpations, of which Nimrod seems to have been the first
Exam^e, it is equally unjust; for no Authority is so sacred as that which (...)
natural, which no Man had Authority to give away or usurp: ^ut by this way God
erected Monarchies, and gave his Authority (...) them who had none of their
own, Cas. of Alleg. p. 23. Where^ he rightly makes the rise of Monarchy to be
on the ruins of ^e Patriarchical Authority; but then, that this rise was by
vio^ent Usurpations, and if by consent yet equally unjust; and yet, ^at by such
means God erected Monarchies, and gave his Au^hority, etc. seems difficult to
make out the truth and consisten^y thereof. And the Dr's way of making such
Usurpations to ^e Gods Authority, is such as has given great Advantages
against himself: For he makes the Usurper to be Gods Autho^ity, as set up by
his Providence, who removes Kings and set^eth up Kings, etc. yet makes no
legal Right to be altered there^, and so makes two concurrent Rights, etc.
whereby he arms ^s Antagonists with such potent Arguments as are not to be
^ithstood.

The Scruplers Case considered, in order to the giving an Account ^f Regal
Government, does examine the Original of the two opposite Kingdoms of Christ
and the Devil in the World: where^ he takes a right course, if he could but as
rightly have proceed^d in it. He supposes Adam and his Posterity to have been
set^ed under a Theocracy, and that Man was so governed before ^e Flood; and
that all despotick or tyrannical human Govern^ents are not founded on any
divine Authority, but are the U^rpt Empire of the devil, on his tempting Man to
fall from his Allegiance to God. And that this Government being begun in ^ain,
and those who revolted with him, etc. was after the Flood ^evived in Nimrod,
continued so by his Successors to Nebuchad^zzar, and then by the four great
Monarchies begun in him, etc. And for destroying this Empire of the devil, he
makes the Kingdom of Christ to be instituted by that Promise on Adams Fall, The
seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head; and that thereby Christ was
then vested in the Authority of the Theocracy, and has exercised the same both
before and since his assuming our Nature, by human Governments reformed by
Righteous Laws; Whereby those Governments which had so mischievous a rise,
destructive of Mankind, the goodness of God turned to a Blessing, condescending
therein to our lapsed state, which could not bear the awful Sovereignty of the
Theocracy united to our innocent state. And such reformed humane Governments,
by which Christ exercises the said Authority of the Theocracy, he makes only
to be irresistible, as having the divine Authority, etc. Which Account does
Right, neither to the Kingdom of the devil nor of Christ, detracting from the
Authority of the one, and the Spirituality of the other.

That the Kingdom of the devil is the Authority of God, cannot be gainsaid,
without doing much Violence to Scripture: His claim to the Kingdoms of the
World, as delivered to him to give to whom he will, Luke 4.6. our Savior does
not gainsay, and does often own him as Prince of this World, by giving him that
Title, and speaking of his Kingdom as Prince thereof. Which surely he would not
have done, if the devil were not Prince thereof by Authority, but only by
Usurpation. And to imagine that the devil could advance himself to that
station, without God's authorizing him thereunto by his concurrence, savours of
that Epicurean Spirit which excludes Gods Providence from governing the World.
For if the devil exercises so great dominion by Usurpation, and not under God,
by his Authority, his Government is so far excluded as the devil's does extend.
But God does rule in all the powers of darkness, and they exercise no power but
by Him, as our Savior tells Pilate, Thou could have no power against me
except it was given thee from above. For though they yield no voluntary
obedience by observing his Laws, yet they are under his Government and
Restraint, in the exercise of that power wherewith they pursue their wicked
Inclinations. Whereby he makes them Instruments of fulfilling his will when
they rebel against Him. And the Heavenly station of power which the devil
possessed in the Heathen Empire of Rome described, Rev. 12. by a great red Dragon
in Heaven, having seven Heads and ten Horns, and seven Crowns on his Heads,
etc. does show his dominion to be by Authority, and not by Usurpation; as also
does the reviving of his Kingdom in the Ten-horned-beast, cap. 13. To whom he
gave his Power and Seat and great Authority. And though the dominion of the
despotick Rulers under him, is by this Author but his usurpt Empire: yet by the
Scripture it is the Authority of God, as appears by what is said of Cyrus, Esa.
45. and by Nebuchadnezzar being told by Daniel, That God had given him a
Kingdom, Power, Strength and Glory, cap. 2.37. and by his being called God's
Servant, into whose hands he gave the Nations etc. Jer. 27.6. So that, though
this Author will allow such Rulers to reign but by God's permission, yet they
are authorized thereunto by his concurrence to their advancement, as will after
more fully appear.

But it seems to this Author a Reflection on the divine Justice and Goodness, to
make such destructive Rulers God's Authority; but it will not appear so, if we
look on them as Ministers of his wrath, whom he has ordained for Judgment and
established for Correction. And therefore it is strange that this Author should
allow a destructive power to be of God's appointment for punishment, and that
therefore, though it is not irresistible upon the account of divine Authority,
yet it is to be born with till God accomplish his pleasure on those he scourges
with it, p. 29. and yet, that he should not allow such power to be God's
Authority, though so appointed by Him for the exercising that power (given by him
to that end) on those who by following their own ways, become meet to reap
such fruit of their doings. For whenas the Wickedness of the old World was so
great as to make God repent that he made Man ^n the Earth, and therefore to
destroy that World; and instead of Reformation, the new World became immersed
deeper in corruption, (God desisting from further striving by his Spirit with
sinful Flesh, as he had done with the old World, Genesis 6.3.) though He would not
destroy it again as before, by reason of the ^ppy end he designed to put to the
wicked and miserable state of it, by his coming, Who should make Reconciliation
for Iniquity, and bring in everlasting Righteousness; yet till then, as the
World ^as become more liable to death (which is the Wages of Sin) ^an the old
World, so it was subjected to him Who has the ^r of death committed to him,
through fear of which he makes men (...) their life time subject to bondage,
under such destructive powers (...) govern only by serpentine wisdom or
worldly policy, for sa^fying their Ambition and other boundless Lusts. Hence
the ^ur Beasts signifying the four great Monarchies, Dan. 7. do arise ^t of the
Sea, as also does the Ten-horned-beast, Rev. 13. and in ^p. 17.8. and cap.
11.7. he ascends out of the Bottomless-pit, (...) also do the Locusts
signifying the Saracen Empire come thence, ^p. 9. Which Sea and Bottomless-pit
denote the Spirit of domination in worldly Rulers, acted by the Spirit of the
world under the Prince thereof, and the Abyss of insatiable Lusts they are sunk
into, whereby they overflow and overwhelm the world in Thraldom under the
bondage of Corruption; being upheld in such domination by those Floods of
ungodly Men, who are the power of Hell, or of that Spirit which works in the
Children of Disobedience, and thereby become the Waters that make great, and
the deep that sets on high, those Rulers in their despotick dominion. Hence he,
under whom they thus rule, is called Leviathan the piercing crooked Serpent,
and the Dragon that is in the Sea, Esa. 27.1. and the destroying his dominion
is signified by, There shall be no more Sea, Rev. 21.1.

Since therefore Man by Apostasy became subject to Apostate Angels, those
Principalities and Powers, and Rulers of the darkness of this World, etc. who
gave rise to the unnatural despotick dominion, whereby to establish the Kingdom
of darkness in the World, it is evident that worldly Rulers under those powers,
can have no Authority or Right to rule, but what is founded on their Power,
that is, their Right is their Power which they gain over lapsed Mankind, which
by falling from God's Rule over them, or deserting their Obedience to Him,
become so deserted of him, and given over to the Ministers of his wrath, whose
Power is not usurpt by God's permission, (which, as showed before, does clash
with his providence as Governor of the World) but is given to them by Him, for
fulfilling his Righteous Will on those, who by revolting from Him, become meet
to be subjected to such Rulers. For how wicked soever are the inclinations of
such Rulers, yet they continue so under the rule of God's power, when fallen from
his moral rule over them, as not to be able to commit any evil without his
concurrence, by giving way or letting them loose thereunto, whereby he is the
Author of the deed done, though not of the evil committed in the doing it. As
when wild Beasts let loose by their Keepers commit destruction, though it be
wholly their deed, yet the Keeper by reason of his letting them loose is an
Author thereof.

But God does further concur in the Advancing of worldly Rulers to dominion, by
aiding them with His Power, and withdrawing if from them outed by them. Whence
he is said to gird and loose the Loins of Princes, when he does invest them
with Power, and divest them thereof. Thus did He gird Cyrus though he had not
known him; and having invested him thus with Power (by reason of which he is
called Gods Anointed to subdue Nations, etc.) He loosed the Loins of Kings
before him, Esa. 45.5.1. And when he divested Nebuchadnezzar of his Power, it is
said to him from Heaven, Thy Kingdom is departed from thee; and when he
re-invested him with it, Nebuchadnezzar says not only, My reason returned to
me, but also, For the glory of my Kingdom, my Honor and Brightness returned to
me, and my Counselors and Lords sought unto me, and I was established in my
Kingdom, and excellent Majesty was added to me, Dan. 4. And of God's investing
Princes thus with Power, and again devesting them thereof, speaks Job, cap. 12.
ver. 18, 19. etc. And whereas rightful legal Princes are agreed to be the Power
of God, how could they be outed by those who are called Usurpers, if they were
not of God also? Unless that Power which is not of God can prevail against that
which is of him. And therefore, though Baash did conspire against his rightful
Prince and slay him, and reign in his stead, yet it is said, That God did exalt
him out of the dust, and make him Prince over his People, 1 Kings, cap. 15.
ver. 27. 28. cap. 16. ver. 1. 2. And the same must be agreed to in the Case of
Athaliah, etc. So that, though legal Right or Title be so much insisted on, to
make a Prince the Authority of God, or a rightful Ruler, yet indeed it does not
give right, and so make the Prince that has it, the Authority of God, but
helps to preserve and defend him in that Power and Authority which God gives,
as men's natural rights are not given, but preserved and defended by Law.

For as the abounding of Fraud and Violence, did make politic Laws needful for
securing men's Rights and Properties, so Worldly Rulers, through their
oppressive dominion, and maleadministration of Government, do make themselves
so uneasy to their Subjects, as to find it needful to betake themselves to
what security human policy can yield. Hence proceeds Oaths of Allegiance, and
Declarations, and Confirmations of their Rights and Titles by public Acts of
state, etc. which, though they may be of some use for their more quiet
settlement whilst it pleases God to continue them in their dominion, yet
confer no Right which can continue, after their being stripped of the power that
did exalt them to the Throne. To which they could not have ascended, but by the
Concurrence and Aid of God, as aforesaid, which is as full a manifestion of his
Will, as an express declaration of it could be; and therefore, as effectual to
give right to him that is advanced, and determine his right that is outed
thereby.

It may be Objected, That Monarchs by election do thereby receive a right from
the People to rule, whereby their dominion does not consist only in power, but
is founded also on right. To which I say, That such Monarchs receive their
power or authority from the People by their Election, no more than the chief
Magistrate of a Corporation receives his from those who elect him; but as he
derives the same from the supreme power of the Nation, whose Minister he is,
though elected by the Corporation, so such elective Monarchs derive their power
and authority from, and are Ministers of the supreme ruling powers of the
World, viz. of the devil, as Prince thereof, and of God, as superintending the
administration of that power committed to him. So that, there can be no
devesting such Monarchs of their power, without that concurrence of providence,
as will also determine their right to rule; and the use of such Elections is
not to give Authority to rule, but to make a more happy Government, by a good
harmony between Rulers and People, which is like to proceed from such consent
and choice. Besides, Elective Monarchy is improperly reputed Monarchical
Government, that properly importing such absolute dominion as prevailed in the
Heathen World, and does still so in Heathen and Mohammedan Kingdoms. But in the
Infancy of it, before the Corruptions of the World and the Delusions of the
devil, advanced it to such a height, it retained some mixture of the
Patriarchical Government, on the ruins of which it was founded, whereby the
People retained some freedom and interest in the Government by choice of their
Rulers, which they were after deprived of by the prevailing power of the devil;
and which they have in some measure regained, by that declension of his power
which Christianity has introduced; of which I have spoken in the preceding
discourse, and which is signified by the Feet and Toes of the great Image, Dan.
2. being partly iron and partly clay, typifying the Roman Empire its becoming
divided into ten Kingdoms, (as it was soon after its becoming Christian) and
becoming then partly strong and partly broken, or brittle. Which broken power
of the devil is at length absolutely to be destroyed, by that Kingdom which the
God of Heaven shall set up, and which shall never be destroyed, but shall break
in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and shall stand for ever, ver. 44.

Also the Objections which are strongly urged against Dr. Sherlock, become
invalid from what I have said: For first, there can be no want of legal Title
to him that has all the right that such Title can give, viz. That has the
power of God which gave rise to such Title; and therefore that Title will
little avail the outed Prince, to whom the Dr. leaves it unaltered by a
rightful King set up by Providence, and so makes two concurrent rights, as
before noted. Nor Secondly, can the possessing of a Throne thus by Providence,
be paralleled with a Thief or Robber's possessing a Purse by providence, etc.
For there is not the like concurrence of providence in the latter case as in the
former, where God withdraws his power from him who is dispossessed, and aids him
with it who is advanced, as before showed, without which he could not have so
prevailed. And yet there is that concurrence of providence in the latter case,
by giving way to those Thieves and Robbers, and letting them loose, as
aforesaid, to pursue their wicked Inclinations, as may suffee to make one the
Authority of God, who is advanced to rule by such concurrence of providence; it
appearing thereby, that God does not only permit, but also will the event or
success, though not the wicked means used for the obtaining it. And Thirdly,
that Inference from the Dr's. Assertion (which he knows not how to yield to,
nor well to quit himself of it, viz.) that Cromwell and the other powers that
prevailed in those times, will then be God's Authority, etc. must from what
has been said, be yielded to without scruple. And indeed, they were more
properly the Authority of God, than the legal power they prevailed against. For
that was but mediately his Authority as coming to rule according to the course
of the governments of the World under the Prince thereof; but those powers that
prevailed against it, were set up by the immediate interposition of providence,
for preserving and promoting the interest of Christ's Kingdom, against those
Antichristian designs driven on, which involved the Nation in war, as appears
by the preceding discourse. And if those powers were not thus set up of God,
but were wicked Usurpations, they must be of the devil; and for ^im to
interrupt and subvert his ordinary course of government, by such changes as
tend to the advancing of Christ's Kingdom, and so to the lessening his own
power, would be like Satan's casting out Satan, and how then can his Kingdom
stand?

Its wonder therefore that Dr. Sherlock, who tells us, That the increase and
destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist is to be accomplished by great Changes
and Revolutions in human governments, p. 22. should so severely censure the
transactions of those Civil Wars, and not look upon them to be alike Works of
Providence for promoting the ruin of Antichrist, whenas they gave so great a
check to the Antichristian designs then driven on, and such advance to the
interest of Christ's Kingdom, as that when, by the turn of affairs, those
designs were more eagerly than ever pursued, and that with greater advantage
than ever, both from abroad and at home, to make the same successful, yet all
has proved like the Rain descending, and the Floods coming, and the Winds
blowing and beating on a House sounded on a Rick, his Kingdom having so emerged
above all opposition, as to be now near a triumphant state in this Nation. But
it appearing by the Dr's Preface, that the Liberty of Thoughts he has taken,
proceeds from the Authority of Bishop Overals Convocation book, which freed him
from the apprehensions of Singularity and Novelty which he was cramp't with, he
could hardly take greater freedom than the Authority of that Book gave;
especially, in Affairs, wherein he is also crampt with a great prejudice, which
occasioned his so crippling the Truth he asserts, in not giving it its due
scope or extent, and thereby giving such advantage against himself as before
noted.

But whereas on Profanation of the Temple by Antiochus Epiphanes, it is said
Dan. 11.32. The People that know their God shall be strong and do Exploits,
meaning the Resistance made by the Maccabees, may not those Exploits (which are
there spoken of with approbation) be liable to be censured, as the Dr. does the
Actions of the late Times, by the same measure wherewith he judges them? For
the one was a resisting Authority as much as the other, yea and more, as being
begun by private Subjects, whereas the other was a Conflict of Authority with
it self, or of one part of the Legislative power with the other, and that upon
urgent occasion given, though it be called by the Dr. A barefaced Rebellion,
p. 46 And may not those called chosen and faithful, wherewith the Lamb
overcomes the Kings of the Earth that war with him, Rev. 14. and those Armies
on White Horses in Heaven, following him that is faithful and true, and in
righteous^ess does judge and make War, cap. 19.11. I say, may, or shall ^ot
these Powers of Christ to settle him in his Kingdom on Earth, be liable, by the
same measure, to the like Censures with those of the Dr.? For they will not
have the Authority of worldly powers to bear them out, for those they are to
war against, as withstanding the settling of Christ in his Kingdom; and
therefore must act upon his Authority, to whose service, through faith and
knowledge of Him, they have devoted themselves. And so not being authorized by
the visible worldly powers, will be liable to be censured, as the Dr. does
those of the late Times, by the blind world, that judges only according to
outer Appearance. It Is evident therefore, that through Knowledge of God and
Faith in Him, there may be such a disobedience and resistance of worldly Rulers
by their Subjects, as is righteous in his sight, and acceptable service to Him,
however condemned of Men. So that, as the whole project of Antichrist is, under
the guise of a Christian Profession to subvert Christianity, so the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, as it has been managed by many, is a playing the like game;
that is, under the Color of teaching the pure Christian Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, to deter Men from being concerned in the great works of Providence
against the powers of the World, for the advanceing of Christ's Kingdom
therein, and so, as much as may be, to obstruct the coming thereof.

Since therefore the despotick dominion of worldly Rulers, is but the Empire of
the devil, which be gave rise to by tempting Man to fall, and which Christ came
to destroy by destroying the works of the devil, those bands of corruption
which linkt sinful Man to the Thraldom of his power, it appears how incapable
Men are of, and unmeet for Liberty, whilst they continue the Servants of sin,
and that there is no true Freedom but that wherewith Christ does make them free;
no Laws (though they be so much consided in) being any security for Men's Rights
and Liberties, whilst the dominion of sin in them, does make them the Vassals
of Satan, taken captive by him at his will. And therefore those forms of
Government which make a Nation reputed a Free People, do little avail thereto,
further than they preserve them from being so deeply immersed in corruptions as
other Nations, and so make them retain some vigor and strength to maintain
their Rights and Liberties. Hence it has been a policy of despotick Rulers, to
corrupt their People by licentious Liberty, whereby to make them more firmly
their slaves; they being thereby disperited to struggle for Freedom, and are
made in love with Thraldom. As the Cappadocians being a more vicious Nation
than any other, did refuse the liberty of being made a Free People when offered
it by the Romans; no liberty being regarded by such People, but that of serving
their Lusts that reign in them; whereby that Government is most pleasing to
them, that does most indulge them in the being Servants of Sin and free from
Righteousness, the bands of which they would break and cast away the cords
thereof from them. And when Men by Apostasy from God, become so degenerated
into Enmity against Him, that is, against Truth and Righteousness, they are fit
Sbujects for the domination of such Powers, as will have as little regard to
the same in ruling over them, but deal with them according the brutish state
they are sunk into.

The proper end indeed of all worldly powers, is become the Ministers of God
for good, by being a terror to evil and not to good works; and in some measure
they usually prove so, human policy or worldly wisdom moving them to restrain
great Excesses in wickednesses. But when such heroical Princes are advanced to
rule, as most pursue the due ends of Government, yet all that they can effect
is but like palliating Cures. The inside is first to be cleansed, that the
outside may be clean also; whilst the Corruptions of sinful Flesh remain
unpurg'd, they will have their course of evil Operations: Till men have found
the strait paths of Life, they will be straggling in the broad ways of
destruction; and whilst they are thus held with the cords of their sins,
there is no freeing them from the Thraldom of Satan: There Is no recovering them
from that bondage of Corruption, but by that redemption which saves them from
their sins, and makes them free by the Truth, and so delivers them from the
power of darkness, and translates them into the Kingdom of our Lord. The power
of the devil must be destroyed, by destroying his works that gave rise to it.
This therefore being the end of Christ's Kingdom coming on Earth, How
desirable are all Advancements of it in the world! And how delightful ought to
be such Tokens of its approaching, as our Savior speaks of, When these things
begin to come to pass, look up and lift up your heads, for your Redemption
draws near, and when you see these things come to pass, the Kingdom of God is
nigh at hand, Luke 21. ver. 28. 31. Wherefore, my preceding Exposition giving
an Account of a preludious commencing of that Kingdom in this Nation being at
hand, to end our present Troubles and Distractions, in a state of Christian
Peace and Liberty, by dissolution of all opposite power thereto; it must surely
be a welcome discovery to all who are so much Friends to the Truth, as to
desire that it may prove true; for they, I hope, will see sufficient reason to
persuade them of the Truth of it.

Whereas I said, that the Author of the Scruplers Case considered, does detract
from the Spirituality of Christ's Kingdom, as well as from the Authority of the
devils Kingdom, I shall now give some brief Account of it, though it not much
concerns the purpose of my Postscript. His supposing Adam and his Posterity to
have been settled under a Theocracy, and that Man was so governed before the
Flood, may be allowed, meaning thereby, that he was not governed then by any
human Government set up by politic Laws, but by the Law of Nature, or Law of
God written in Man's Heart; by which Law the Paternal or Patriarchical Authority
was exercised. But he is much out in further supposing, that the putting the
Government into the hands of one of our own nature, by the aforesaid promise on
Adams Fall, was a Condescension to our lapsed state, which could not bear the
awful Sovereignty of a Theocracy annexed to our innocent state, as if Christ's
Kingdom was inferior to the Theocracy annexed to that state, whenas indeed it is
much superior to the same. For Adam in innocence was but in a natural carnal
state; he was a natural Adam, or living Soul, of the Earth earthly; but the
second Adam, the Lord from Heaven being a quickening Spirit, came to bring that
spiritual Theocracy, or dispensation of divine Life, which is the coming of the
Kingdom of Heaven on Earth; whereby Christ does rule in believers, and is by
them to rule the world, and which was not known to the world, till revealed by
the Prince of Life, who brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel: It
was before the hidden wisdom of God, ordained before the World unto our Glory,
ehe Mysteries hid from Ages and Generations, but now made manifest to the
Saints, Col. 1.26. hid from the Prophets that prophesied of it, and the Angels
that desired to look into it, 1 Pet. Chap. 1.

Whereas therefore this Author, makes not only Christ's Kingdom to be
instituted by the aforesaid promise on Adams Fall, but also him thereby to be
vested in his Authority, and to have exercised the same in human Governments,
reformed by righteous Laws, etc. both before and since his assuming our Nature;
and also does ascribe so much Virtue to Faith in Him, before his coming, as
that it was sufficient to free Men from that Corruption of Nature wherein the
spiritual dominion of the Devil did consist, and to reunite them by a holy
Nature to the Father of Spirits, p. 22. He seems to have little Knowledge of
that spiritual dispensation, which the coming of Christ did introduce, and
thereby commence the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth. For Believers in Christ before
his coming, dyed in Faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen
them afar off, and were persuaded of them and embraced them, etc. So that, though
they might joy in the persuasion of so happy a State to come, yet they did it
without knowing what it would be, as Men joy in belief of a happy State in the
other Life, without knowing what it will be; and therefore surely could not
find such happy effects from Belief of it, till revealed by his coming. For
whenas we beholding as in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same Image from Glory to Glory, etc. So that, the Righteousness of God revealed
in us from Faith to Faith in Him, is wrought in us by contemplating the
manifestation of God in Him, How could this be till he was made known to the
world, or became God manifested in the Flesh? There was therefore before, no
such Virtue of Faith in Him for renewing our Nature, and freeing Men from the
Corruption of it, as this Author imagines; nor any Reformation by righteous
Laws, but what is competent to politic worldly Governments, where the Spirit
of the world will prevail in the modalizing them, and so make the Reformation
by such Laws amount to no more than his Government, who when he finds it for
the Interest of his Kingdom, can transform himself into an Angel of Light, and
his Ministers into Ministers of Righteousness.

And there were some Heathen Emperors, who must be granted to be worldly
Powers under the Prince of this world, that yet will put in for Rulers, by whom
Christ did exercise his Authority of the Theocracy, according to this Authors
Account thereof. But no Reformation by righteous Laws can amount to the
Theocracy of Christ's Kingdom, without the concurrence of that Spiritual Power
which is the Life of all such Laws, and wherein the dominion of Christ's
Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Heaven which he brought on Earth, does consist; we
being thereby enabled to act according to the Judgments of Truth contrary to
the Spirit of the World, and so, to overcome the World, and advance the Kingdom
of Heaven on Earth. And yet this Author seems scarce to have higher conceptions
of the State of that Kingdom in its perfection, than what he imagines of it
before and since Christ's coming. For he calls the Millennium, Those happy
times, when by means of Christ's visible Ministers the World shall be restored
to so peaceable a condition, as will be proper for putting down all other Rule
and Authority but his own, and subjecting all things immediately to himself, p.
23. but no mention of that spiritual dominion wherewith he shall then reign. So
that, by those happy times he seems only to understand a Christian
Commonwealth, wherein the former worldly state of Government shall be put
down, and the Saints shall rule only by Christ's Laws, but he seems not aware
of that dispensation which only can enable to fulfill his Laws, and which is
signified by The Tabernacle of God being with men, and his dwelling with them,
and the New Jerusalem not needing the Sun or Moon to shine into it, having the
Glory of God and the Lamb to be the light thereof, and the Throne of God and
the Lamb in it, and by their eating of the Tree of Life, and drinking of the
Waters of Life freely, etc. And it is Christ's reducing the World to an
immediate subjection to himself, that must introduce that peaceable state which
this Author imagines the World shall be restored to, to prepare it for his
immediate Rule; and those visible Ministers by whom he supposes such
preparation to be made, must be his Ministers in human Governments, and so are
more likely to oppose than make preparation for his immediate Rule, by which
they shall be put down.

This Author therefore, by ascribing so much Virtue to Faith in Christ before
his coming, both for bettering human Nature and human Governments, and by
making such Governments reformed by righteous Laws, to be the Theocracy of
Christ's Kingdom, he does in effect reduce the spiritual dispensation of that
Kingdom into a state of legal Righteousness, of living according to the
Precepts of the Gospel, without the aid of that Power which only can enable us
to do it, and so, with many Christian Professors, does stumble at the
Righteousness of God by Faith, in like manner as the Israelites are described
to have done, Romans 9.32.33. cap. 10.2.3. And his conceits of Christ's and the
devils Kingdom in the other World, are as odd as those of their state in this
World.

For he makes the usurped Authority of the devil, to be spiritual in the other
World over the Souls of men, as well as temporal in this, etc. and makes the
Fighting of Michael and his Angels, and the Devil and his Angels, Rev. 12. to
signify the perpetual War in the other World, between the opposite Powers of
Christ and the devil, for the dominion over Souls, p. 21. whenas doubtless it
signifies, the War that ensued between the Christian and Pagan Emperors, and
other Champions for Paganism, on the former professing Christianity, which
produced the great Revolution described in the sixth Seal, spoken of in the
preceding discourse. And it appears not that the devil has any concern with
Souls, further than to corrupt them with his deceits and allurements of this
Life, whereby to secure them under his Thraldom, and so to strengthen his
Kingdom in the World. And Christ does withstand and oppose the same, by the
counter-working of his Spirit, by which he destroys the works of the devil, and
is at length to subdue all things to himself: And to imagine any such War for
dominion over Souls, distinct from what is transacted between those opposite
powers in this Life, by the Conflict between Flesh and Spirit, is an
unaccountable Conceit.

But this Author, in thus attempting to give an Account of Rise of the Kingdom
of Christ and the devil in the World, has hit upon the properest course for
ending our great Controversies about the Duty of Allegiance to Worldly Powers.
For when it appears, That their Power or Authority has no foundation in
Nature, and so cannot be considered as those Properties that are founded on
natural Right, but is derived from, and exercised under him, who by seducing
man into like Apostate State with himself, at length obtained the dominion over
him; and that as God did give him that Power for correcting and disciplining by
Thraldom, those who would not be kept in Obedience to Him whose Service is
perfect Freedom; so he does enlarge and straiten it, and otherways govern and
control him in the exercise of it, as best serves the ends for which he gave
it: So that, no Changes or weighty Affairs of Government can be transacted
without his Concurrence who thus superintends the administration of that Power
he gives, These Considerations will remove all doubt concerning the Right to
the Duty of Allegiance, when it is apparent where the Ruling Power resides;
especially, in case of such Changes as are for the ease and relief of People
from their oppressive Thraldom; for they must proceed from the interposing
Providence of God, as surely as the devil will have no hand in the lessening
his own Power. And therefore, How can we doubt of our late great Revolution
proceeding thence, having already found such happy effects of it, and having
such grounds of hopes of much greater, from that fulfilling the Fall of the
Tenth Part of the City, which the preceding Exposition gives an Account of?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 32. line 17, for, is become, read is to become. Page 4. lin. 39. for --
Ius the, read -- lus; The


