An ENQUIRY; or, a Discourse between a Yeoman of Kent, and a Knight of a Shire,
upon the Prorogation of the Parliament to the second of May, 1693.
Yeoman. SIR, your humble Servant, I am happy to meet you at this Friend's
House, where I did not expect you -- Pray, Sir, is the News true, that the King
has prorogued the Parliament to day?


Knight. It Is very true, we are prorogued to the second of May next.


Yeom. Were all your Bills passed that were agreed on by both Houses?


Knight. I wish I could tell you they were.


Yeom. I hope, Sir, the King has not refused any Public Bills.


Knight. Which are those you call Public?


Yeom. Truly, Sir, those two wherein the Country reckoned themselves most
concerned are, That for securing the Foundations of the Civil Government, by
such a constant Succession of new chosen Parliaments, that their Deputies by
their long continuance in that Trust, may not be in danger to be corrupted, by
Offices, or private Interests; and, That for preserving our Property in our
Lands and Mines, against the Pretenses of a Royal Prerogative, to take away our
Mines and Oar, tho with have spent most of our Estates to discover the Mines in
our Lands.


Knight. I am sorry to tell you, that those are the two only Bills to which his
Majesty would not assent.


Yeom. Are those Bills then to be utterly lost, after that both Houses have
spent so much Time and Care to compose them? May they not be offered to the
King again as soon as the Parliament meets?


Knight. You seem not to know the Force of a Prorogation of Parliament, which (as
our Lawyers have of late resolved) makes void all Bills of that Session, not
enacted, and all other Matters depending, as if they had never been: These are
no more to be accounted Bills of Parliament; but if any thing contained in
either of them be desired to be hereafter enacted, it must begin anew, as if it
had never been before either House of Parliament.


Yeom. Sir, if all the Care and Pains of our Deputies in Parliament may be thus
neglected, or blown away with one Breath, what Hopes have we then from the
Consultations of Parliament, of the promised and long-expected Settlement of
Liberty and Property?


Knight. I know no Remedy, until the King shall please to cause a new Session of
Parliament.


Yeom. And is such a Session to be absolutely at the King's Will, whether it
shall be six Months hence, or a Year, or seven Years?


Knight. You know it was so designed, and in part practiced in the late Reigns; and
the Judges then were so corrupted, that they declared (notwithstanding the Laws
for Annual Parliaments) Vid. The minutes of the Judges Opinions in the
King's Bench, upon the Arguments about bailing the Earl of Danby out of the
Tower.
That the holding of Parliaments depended entirely upon the King's Pleasure.

But it is most manifest, besides the positive Laws for Yearly Parliaments, that
Inter Laeges Edgari, cap. 5.
by the ancient Constitution of our Government, they did meet of course at
least twice every Year.

Afterward in the Reigns of the Saxon Kings, it was made a perpetual Law, that
a Parliament should be holden every Year once at London, and the same Law was
incorporated into the Laws of Edward the Confessor; and from thence all the
successive Kings of England to this day, have been sworn to the Observance of
it.

I must confess to you nothing prevailed with me more to concur with our King
in his Pretentions to restore our Parliaments, and the Laws to their due
Authority, than my own Knowledge, that the late Civil Wars in this Kingdom, and
the Subversion of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, were principally occasioned
by the Powers usurped in several late Reigns, to refuse the calling of
successive Parliaments, and to continue the same Parliament for many Years, to
form them into a Compliance with their Designs of Despotick Power.

When I read the solemn and repeated Assurances his Majesty gave us, That his
Design in coming into England, was to remove from the Administration of the
Government those evil Ministers that had promoted the Murders and Treasons
committed, in attempting to set up an Arbitrary Power over the People and their
Parliaments: And also heard him desire the Parliament to make such an effectual
Provision for their Fundamental Laws and Liberties, that they might never
hereafter be in danger to be again invaded; I thought the Ancient, Legal Course
of annually chosen Parliaments would have been immediately restored, and the
strongest Fence made for that Constitution, that the Wisdom of the Kingdom
could have invented: but I must tell you, to my Sorrow, that we are left as
much to the King's Will for a Session of Parliament, as evil Ministers in the
late Reigns designed we should be.


Yeom. If this be our case, it is no wonder that Men's Minds are so unquiet; we
are in daily imminent hazard of Confusion, whilst the Government remains wholly
unsettled in its Fundamentals. It seems to be apparent, that after the Expense
of twenty Millions, besides the vast Effusion of Blood, we are no more secured
against the Slavery we feared by subverting our Constitution, than we were
before the Convention of the People for a Settlement, when King James had just
abdicated the Kingdom.


Knight. You take it rightly. If no Bill should pass to secure the certain Legal
Succession of Parliaments, and we should connive at the Usurpations made by the
late Kings therein, and seemingly approve the Turkish Doctrine of the then
Judges, That the holding and continuance of Parliaments depended absolutely
upon the Wills of our Kings; then the Supreme Power, vested by the Constitution
in Parliaments, to maintain the Laws and Statutes, and preserve Justice and
good Government, must be acknowledged not to be the Kingdom's Right, but to
arise from the Gracious Will and Pleasure of their Kings; and the People must
not dare to claim Liberty and Property as their due.

If this Point of our Constitution should remain thus unsettled, and an ill
King succeed his present Majesty, then the free Counsels of the whole Kingdom
for its Defense and Welfare appointed by our Laws to be in Parliament, may (by
the pretense of his Prerogative) be utterly rejected and despised; and his
Flatterers, and Designers to make him absolute Master of our Laws, Liberties
and Lives, may be exempted by him from the danger of Punishment, certain
Justice being to be done upon such Offenders, only upon the Peoples Complaints,
and Impeachment of them in Parliament.

If the due Succession of Parliaments be not established, so as the Kings
cannot by any Artifices avoid their meeting, an ill King may, in effect,
authorize whom he pleases to subvert and destroy our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, by renewing Pardons of all such Crimes as often as they can commit
them. I am sorry to say it, but our present case is such, that all the Security
we have for our Religion, our Laws, our Liberties, our Lives, depends wholly
upon the uncertain and hazardous Life of our present King, to make good his
Declarations and Promises to the Kingdom.


Yeom. Sir, you make me afraid that our Country must run a desperate hazard, to
have their Government and all their highest Concerns remain still unsettled for
at least another half Year. The King I hear is going for Flanders, not to
return till toward Winter; and who can be secure of his Life, or the Events of
War? and what dreadful Consequences may ensue in an unsettled Kingdom? Pray,
Sir, can you tell me the Reasons why his Majesty has deserr'd to make this
Settlement of Parliaments? What shall I say to my Neighbors in this Point?


Knight. Do you expect, my good Neighbor, that I should show you good Reason for
the King's rejecting of the Bill? If I had known any such Reasons, or either
House of Parliament; we ought not, as his great Council, to have advised him to
pass it. We concluded, upon solemn Debates, that he was highly concerned to
have this Bill enacted, to justify the Design of his coming with Force and Arms
to deliver us from Arbitrary Power, and to settle our Laws and Liberties. We
thought that the Reputation of his Concurrence with the Advice of the great
Council of his Kingdom, obliged him to a free Consent to that Bill, the
Expectations of all Europe being so exceeding great from the Results of this
Parliament's Counsels, and his Union with them. We believed his Desire to
secure to his Subjects their Government by Laws, would have made him glad of
the opportunity of this Bill, lest any Accident should befall him in this War,
and he should lose the Glory of his Design, by leaving them unsettled. We
thought it was for his Interest to pass this Bill, to induce the People to pay
their great Taxes freely, and to advance them to as great Sums as the Acts of
Parliament would allow: It being the ancient Course in Parliaments, that the
Kings always passed some Bills for the Peoples Advantage, when they had great
Sums of Money from them. And we thought his Majesty had the less Reason to deny
his Assent to this Bill, in regard it deprived the Crown of no Legal
Prerogative, but only revived and confirmed the ancient Laws of the Realm, than
which nothing is more frequent, when wholesome and necessary Laws grow into
disuse. We also conceived that his Majesty was bound in Honor to make good the
Matter of his Declarations, and his solemn Promises to the People in them, to
settle their Legal Government beyond all dangers of being subverted by ill
Princes or evil Ministers. It seemed to us that his Majesty's Desire of being
as great and potent as any King that ever possessed the English Crown, would
have pressed him to a Conjunction with the Parliament in this Bill, since
English Kings can be great only by the wise and affectionate Counsels and
Assistance of their Parliaments, who have the absolute Command of the Wealth of
the whole Kingdom.


Yeom. Sir, you have been extremely kind in showing me your Opinion of the
Importance and Necessity of this Bill: but you have not informed me of any one
Objection made against the King's passing it. I would gladly know what was
alleged against the Settlement of this Fundamental of our Government.


Knight. It would be useless to tell you the sallacious Arguments that were
brought, to show there was no Necessity of passing such a Bill in this King's
Reign; but all that was said was in substance no more than, That the Bill took
away an undoubted Prerogative of the King's, to call, continue, and dissolve
Parliaments at his Pleasure; that the Power of the Regal Office would be
lessened thereby; and, that it was not fit to show Jealousy of this King's
denying our Legal Rights, whilst he so continually hazards his Person for our
sakes.


Yeom. Pray, Sir, let me be so hold as to ask you how these Objections against
the Bill were answered: I know it is not hard to delude the unlearned
Countrymen in Matters of this nature; yet they are not ignorant that it has
been the common Practice of those that have designed our Slavery, to cry up the
King's Prerogative, to suppress the Subjects Claims of their Rights and
Liberties. Be pleased to favor me with a short account of what was said upon
this occasion.


Knight. As to the first Pretense, That the Bill destroyed the Prerogative of the
Crown, to call, prorogue and dissolve Parliaments at their Will and Pleasure
only, it was plainly said, That there neither is, nor ever was, any such
Prerogative, and that there needs no other Evidence of that Truth, than the
very Nature and Essence of our Constitution. It Is a Repugnancy in it self, and
downright Contradiction, to say, that by our Constitution, the Subjects are to
be governed only by Laws of their own choosing, and that their Deputies to that
purpose are to be appointed from time to time by the Subjects, as the Laws
shall direct, as they respectively shall attain to Age, and as the Estates
descend, alter and change, (all which is known by our common Laws, and fully
declared in several Vid. 25. H. 8. 1o J. 1.
Statutes, and acknowledged by all that know our Laws) and then to say that our
Kings have a rightful Power and Prerogative, either to keep them from meeting,
to advise about, and choose their Laws, or to prevent the successive
Generations to choose their Deputies for that purpose, by continuing such as
are once chosen so long as he or they live.


Yeom. Sir, I thank you for opening of this Point. I see it manifestly
inconsistent, that the Subjects should have a Right to be governed only by the
Laws of their own choosing in their successive Parliaments, and that it should
be at the Pleasure of their Kings, whether Parliaments should ever be holden,
or successively chosen.


Knight. I must tell you, that it was further said, that such a Pretense of
Prerogative appeared more vain by the continual Practice of all Ages,
concurring with our Constitution. The Duty of the Regal Office was so
notoriously known, that whenever our Kings neglected to hold Parliaments to
maintain the Government, or dissolved them before due Provisions made for the
Kingdom, it was so far from being esteemed an Exercise of their rightful Power,
or Prerogative, that it was always adjudged Misgovernment in them: and it
appears by our Histories, that fatal Consequences have thereupon ensued.


Yeom. Sir, our Country is bound to pray for all those Gentlemen that have thus
maintained this first Foundation of all our Rights and Liberties, and made it
thus plain, that it does not entrench upon the Rights of the King. Yet I must
tell you, Sir, there are a sort of People make great Noise of the Right of the
Kings, by their Prerogative, to call and dissolve Parliaments, and that all
Kings have constantly done it. Pray, Sir, help us to understand what is the
Royal Prerogative in this case.


Knight. You ought to know that it is the King's undoubted Prerogative to issue out
all legal Writs in the Administration of the whole Government: and Writs for
calling Parliaments being established by Law, all Kings, by their Prerogative,
called the Parliaments; tho it was not in their Power to change a Word or
Syllable in the form of those Writs, yet the times of sending out such Writs,
and of their Returns, within the Limits of the Law, and the Place of the
Parliament's meeting, were at the King's Discretion; from whence it might be
said to be their Prerogative alone to call them.

I must further tell you that it ought to be remembered, that by our English
Constitution, Parliaments are, and always were to be holden within the compass
of certain times, being the Foundation and Essence of the Government; and that
it is not in the Power of the Royal Prerogative to refuse the calling these
Parliaments successively as the Constitution intends. The being or not being of
such Parliaments is not trusted to the Crown; but the Direction only of some
Circumstances about holding them, is left to the Royal Prerogative. But there
is also a general Trust placed in the Crown, by our Constitution, to call
Parliaments upon Occasions and Emergencies, when the Safety and Welfare of the
Kingdom require it; and for that reason, when a positive Statute enacted, that
a Parliament should be holden once every Year, at least, these words were
therein added, And oftener if need be.

Now the calling and dissolving such occasional Parliaments is trusted wholly
by our Laws to the Royal Prerogative, the Kings are the only Judges of the
necessity of holding such Parliaments, subject always to the Oath of the Crown,
to preserve the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

The Prerogative of the Kings is so absolute about the calling such occasional
Parliaments, that it were highly injurious both to the King and Kingdom to
attempt to take it away, or diminish it by any Act of Parliament: it is as
necessary to the common Good and Safety, to maintain this Prerogative of the
Crown about Occasional Parliaments, entire, as it is to prevent the extending
the like Prerogative to Parliaments in general; and a certain prevention of
that Mischief was the only Aim, and honest Intention of the Promoters of the
late Bill.


Yeom. Sir, you so well distinguish the Powers and Prerogatives of the Crown,
that I cannot imagine what could be said to show that this Bill encroached upon
any of them. I have found, by Experience, that those who clamoured most against
it, for taking away the King's Prerogative, could say very little when they
were pressed to speak particularly. I my self, after my Country-manner, asked
one of them the other day, whom I heard clamouring, What Royal Prerogative the
Bill took away? Tell me, said I, what Act of Royal Power, possible to do any
good to the Crown or Kingdom, was proposed by the Bill to be restrained? Is it
a Royal Prerogative, to have the very Being of Parliaments, the Use of their
Authorities, and the Constitution it self, absolutely at the King's Will,
against which alone the Bill provides? That the People should never consult, or
provide for the Safety of their Estates. Liberties and Lives, unless their
Kings please? Hereupon the Gentleman grew angry, and said I talked like a base
Commonwealths-man. Truly, Sir, it appears to me, that some amongst us hate our
Laws and Liberties; but not daring to say so, they cover their Malice with
Pretenses of advancing the Power of the Crown. These Men are better at railing
than reasoning, and talk only in Generals, as if they were the only Friends to
King William, tho they have another Person in their Hearts and Intentions, when
they seem so careful for the Power of the Crown, and cry out, that this Bill
lessens the Power and Dignity of the Regal Office. Pray, Sir, what was said to
show the Falsehood of that Suggestion?


Knight. This Suggestion against the Bill appeared to be so far from Truth, that
those who objected it, could neither give an Instance of any Power belonging to
the Regal Office which the Bill restrained, nor of any one Act proposed by it
to be done by the Kings, unto which they are not obliged by Law, and the Duty
of their Office without any such bill. It Is a wonder that any secret Enemies of
our Laws and Liberties, should have the Confidence to insinuate, that the Regal
Office would be lessened, by a constant successive electing and holding of
Parliaments in a legal Course, not to be interrupted by evil Ministers, or ill
Princes; the contrary being indeed manifest, that the Honor, Greatness and
Glory of the Crown can never be in any other manner supported, much less
advanced and augmented. It cannot but be clear to every Man, that by such a
certain Succession of Parliaments, the Greatest and Wisest of the Kingdom
should constantly hold their Consultations to advance the King's and his
Kingdom's Interest, Honor and Greatness, and be enabled to discover all
Unfaithfulness, Failures and Defects in the Administration of the Government,
which may any way derogate from the Security, Potency, and Honor of the King.

In like manner all the Forces of the Kingdom, which are some hundreds of
thousands, may be applied to the King's Service, and every Man of them
employed, as shall most conduce to the Kingdom's Safety and Honor: And, to
complete the Prince's Glory, all the Treasure and Wealth, which these Islands
have gathered in many Ages, from both the Indies, and all the Peoples Lands,
Goods and Interests, would be subject to be charged; as the Wisdom of such
great Councils should think fit. for the Maintenance and Prosecution of any
Just and Glorious Design.

But it is notorious that none of these high Powers and Authorities can be
exercised by the English Kings, in any other manner, than by such a constant
Succession of Parliaments as the Laws intend; and therefore it is evident, that
this Bill proposed the highest Advancement of the Regal Office, by making
Provision for the certain holding of such successive Parliaments, within the
times limited by Law.

Pray, Countryman, let me advise you to read your Chronicles at home of our
Kings, and you shall find, that all those Princes were most Great and Glorious,
who governed by the Counsels of legal successive Parliaments; and that those
who declined it, lost the Honor and Power of the Nation, and rendered
themselves and their People unhappy.


Yeom. These things being so clear, pray, Sir, let me be so bold as to ask you,
what has made so many Favorites of our Princes dissuade them from observing
the Laws for constant successive Parliaments, and how came our Princes so
readily to follow those Counsels?


Knight. I could easily tell you, if it were fit to speak plain; but in short, the
Favorites Power with their Princes is restrained and lessened by a due course
of Parliaments, their Corruptions would be liable to be examined, and their
high ambitious Designs defeated. And for the Princes, they are deceived by
their Flatterers, with a false Notion of Power: they are made believe, that
their Power is lessened, when they are bound by Laws to do themselves and their
People good, tho they were bound to it before by the Laws of God in Nature, and
the Laws of the Realm, by which they hold their Royal Offices, and which, at
their several Coronations, they solemnly swear to observe.

It Is hard to persuade some of them, that it is the Glory and Perfection of the
Royal Office, to be disabled by Laws to hurt their People: but if they be truly
God's Vicegerents, they ought to remember in their most towering ambitious
Thoughts, that it is the highest Perfection of God Almighty, that he is
incapable of doing ill.


Yeom. Sir, you have said enough to satisfy me, that this Bill was not only
just in it self, but highly necessary for the Settlement of the Government, and
the Security and Welfare of the Kingdom: but it seems such as had a mind to
avoid it, urged it to be unseasonable at this Time; they pretended their Fears,
that it might weaken the Reputation of the Union between the King and his
Parliament, and occasion Rumors, that the Parliament is jealous of our King's
Compliance with them in securing our Liberties. When they could not resist the
Reasons for the Bill, they offered at the old Trick in such Cases, to delay the
passing it till a better Season. Do you think, Sir, there was any thing of
Weight in these Pretenses, or were they mere Shams?


Knight. If I might without Breach of Privilege tell you the Discourse in our House
of Commons upon this Occasion, you would conclude that those who objected the
Unseasonableness of the Bill, did not believe themselves; whatever they said to
delay the Bill, for fear of a Disgust between the King and Parliament: That
being in truth (after so many in both Houses had appeared for it) a Reason for
present passing it, that the whole World might have been out of doubt of their
perfect Union.

But I may freely tell you some of the private Discourses amongst the Members;
and in those some of us were bold to ask, whence came the Rumors that the Bill
would displease the King? and whether any Body had Authority to insinuate to
the Members, that the King would have the Bill delayed, as unseasonable? But I
could hear of none that would own more than their Doubts and Conjectures, which
made me suspect that there were some secret Designs to dissuade the King from
agreeing to the Bill, on purpose to weaken abroad the Reputation of the King
and Parliament's perfect Agreement.


Yeom. What you have observed makes it appear, that the secret Enemies of the
Government are still designing Mischief to disturb the Agreement between the
King and his People: but might not this Bill give Occasion to the King to
think, that the Parliament had some Jealously of him, that he would not govern
by a due Course of successive Parliaments, according to the Nature and Intent
of our Constitution?


Knight. Sir, I can readily answer you, that if the Time and Manner of offering the
bill be only considered, with other Circumstances, there could be no Reason for
the King to harbor such a Thought. Is there any Reason for a Prince to think
his People jealous of him, because they provide good Laws for the securing
their Rights and Liberties? Every good Prince ought to be pleased to see his
People careful therein, not only that he might not have it in his Power to
wrong them, but that it might not be in any other Prince's Power who may
succeed him. Every Prince should be ambitious to have Laws of that kind made in
his Time, to be lasting Monuments of his Glory, as having given such Securities
of Peace and Rest to his People. It ought to be remembered that our King had
invited his People to invent and provide Laws so to secure their Parliaments,
which is their Constitution, and all their Rights and Liberties, that they
might never be in Danger to be again invaded; therefore he could not think
their Obedience to his own Commands should arise from a Jealousy or Distrust of
him. It must also be considered that our King has had large Experience of the
Confidence of his People in him: they have, by several Acts, more absolutely
trusted their Persons, Liberties and Estates in his Power, than was ever done
to any former Princes, by our Ancestors, in any Age.

It ought to be esteemed the greatest of all Trusts, that they have patiently
born, for above four Years, the dangerous Unsettlement of their Government in a
legal Course of successive Parliaments: And had his Majesty unhappily fallen in
the Wars, or otherwise, we had been left to the Will of succeeding Princes, to
contest that our Fundamental Liberty; though it is manifest that all the late
Miseries, Confusions and Blood that have been in England, were occasioned by
the want of that Settlement. Now when the Parliament has thus highly trusted
his Majesty, can he take it amiss that they are unwilling to run the Hazard any
longer, of the like Trusts devolving upon Successors, that cannot be known who
they are, or what they will be?

That which was mentioned of his hazarding his Life in the War for our sakes,
is so far from showing this Bill to be unseasonable, that it is the strongest
Argument possible to have it finished forthwith, while he enjoys the Crown, who
has personally renewed the Original Contract with the People, and is under
greater Obligations to settle and secure the Government, than can be expected
to meet in any other Prince.


Yeom. Sir, I can never thank you enough for the Information you have given me
in this Matter, that so nearly concerns our whole Country; yet after all, I
know not what to say to my Neighbors when I come home, if they shall ask me,
as I must expect they will, why the King did not pass this Bill? Many of them
are as ignorant as I was, and I could have stopped their Mouths, by saying,
that the Bill took away part of his Prerogative; but now I am otherwise
convinced, I cannot speak against my Conscience, nor cozen my Neighbors,
though I should be very loath to drop a Word that might lessen the Countries
Esteem for his Majesty. Let me beg your Advice what to say to them.


Knight. My good Neighbor, I want Advice as much as you, how to satisfy those that
sent me to Parliament, about the King's Refusal of the Bill; yet one thing
vexes me worse, that having been zealous for the Revolution, I know not how to
restrain, nor yet well to bear the Scoffs of some of our Enemies at my Folly.
They call to mind that I (simple Man as I was) confidently said, that the
Government should be reformed, and our Laws and Liberties fully secured. They
now ask me, whether I find by Experience a King of our own making more ready to
do the People Right, than the old ones that claimed by Lineal Descent? Some of
them laughed, and told me, that I gaped for a new Jerusalem to drop from
Heaven, wherein there would be nothing but Righteousness; and that the
Government should be administered by none but Men of Virtue and known Fidelity
to their Country. They have upbraided me with what I said, that God had sent us
a Prince that would deny his People nothing, but pressed and conjured them to
provide most effectual Ways and Means for securing their Religion, Laws and
Liberties.


Yeom. Sir, I suppose the Gentlemen that talk to you in this manner, have a
Mind to disgrace the honest Principles that led the People justly to reject
King James, and make you believe that they were cozened in thinking that the
Security of Religion, Laws and Liberties, or the Reformation of the Government
were ever intended in the Revolution. They would have you believe that there
was nothing but Ambition and Avarice in the bottom of the Design, and that
whatever was pretended, the Crown and its Powers were the only things in the
Eyes of King William and his Followers. They would persuade you and the People,
to think, that our Religion and Liberties might be secured by a Treaty for
bringing back King James, and that an End may be put to the War thereby, and
the People acquitted from the heavy Taxes and Burdens they now lie under. They
would impose upon you to believe, if possible, that he, who so basely cast the
People of England at the Feet of the Pope, by an English Ambassador, and ran
the utmost Hazards to subvert the Protestant Religion established, should
desire to secure our Religion, without pretending to be converted, and be fit
to be trusted to defend our Faith; and that he, who is known to the whole World
to have occasioned so vast an Effusion of Christian Blood, to enslave us to his
Arbitrary Power, and make himself our absolute Master, should be fit to receive
Royal Powers and Authorities for the Defense of the English Laws and Liberties.


Knight. Neighbor you are in the right; but this sort of Gentlemen dare not, upon
these Occasions, argue plainly for King James; and I hope that neither the
Parliament nor the Country are in much Danger by them.

But there are another sort of Men who enjoy the Powers and the Profits of the
late Revolution, and highly pretend to maintain it, that upon the Occasion of
this Bill, do so pervert the Meaning and Construction of our Laws, and assert
such dangerous Notions, as really tend to introduce Arbitrary Power and
Slavery, if they do not unhappily throw the People upon King James. These Men
make a specious Show of their Love to the Advancement of the Honor and
Greatness of the Crown, as if they were their Majesty's principal Friends,
though in truth they are daily undermining their Majesty's Legal Title to the
Crown, by the pernicious Notions of the late Reigns, which are contrary to the
Fundamental Maxims of our Government. They commend and applaud the King's
Refusal of the late Bill, and some of them have been so bold as to say,
(whether in love to K. William or K. James I will not determine) that what the
King did therein, was the chief thing that he has done like a King. He has
showed, say they, that the Being and Sitting of Parliaments, are only Acts of
Grace from the Crown; that the People have no other but a precarious Right to
them, to have them only at such Times, in such Manner, and for so long as the
Crown pleases. These Gentlemen pretend to great Moderation, and privately
whisper to such as they hope to lead, that the Principles of our Government
were too strictly and severely laid down in the late Revolution. They say, that
the original Contract between the King and the People, should not have been set
forth as an equal Contract, on equal Terms, whereby the Kings were as strictly
bound on their Part as the People on theirs, as if each Party had no Right to
claim a share in the Legislative Power in Parliament, or any other
Administration of the Sovereign Authority, save only by Force of the Contract.
No doubt, say they, his Majesty is now advised, that the Original of the
Legislative and Executive Sovereign Power ought to be wrapped in Clouds, and
not exposed to vulgar Eves. It Is an Indecency to have it commonly said of so
Great and almost Divine Persons as Kings, that they receive all that Majesty
and Glory only from their People. It Is below, say they, the high Regal Office,
to have it said by all the People, that their Majesty's must, within appointed
times, call the Parliaments, and let them redress the Peoples Grievances, as
the Laws direct. They praise the Wisdom of his Majesty's Counsels, to refuse
the Bill, and to avoid any further Obligations to the People, than were upon
his Predecessors. It Is fit the Kingdom should as much depend upon his Grace and
Clemency for their Parliaments, as upon any others that have sat in the Throne;
and if he had condescended to this Bill, the Insolence of the People, in their
Demands of their Liberties, might have been insupportable.


Yeom. Sir, you have taken infinite Pains to instruct me; yet I was such a
Blockhead, that 'till this last Discourse of yours, I did not apprehend why the
King refused the Bill: it was hard for me to believe that there is so great a
Party, as now I suspect, that prosecute the same Designs that were in the late
Reigns to enslave us. I thought that such as enjoyed great Preferments, Honors
and Profits, by K. William's Election into the Throne, would never have thought
to revive the former Designs of enslaving us, by setting up Pretenses of a
Power in English Kings above Parliaments, by Divine Right, antecedent to the
Contract between King and People. Though I am convinced there are some Men, who
have so far lost all Sense of Honor and Conscience, that they may be still
engaged in the former pernicious enslaving Designs; yet before this your
Discourse, I did not think, that any number of Englishmen were so corrupted or
infatuated, as to think, that our whole Constitution, our Government by Laws,
and all our Estates, Liberties and Lives, are holden by the mere Grace and
Favor of our Kings. I must confess, you have mentioned several of those
Gentlemen's seeming Reasons against passing the Bill, that are spun too sine for
our Country Heads. We should have thought that nothing of our Rights could have
been too plainly set down, when we were to declare, as was done in the
Revolution, what are, and have been the Rights of us and our Ancestors,
reserved in the very Constitution, from all Ages. But I perceive that what
cannot be denied to be the Peoples legal Rights about Parliaments, is desired
by that sort of Men to be concealed. They would not have a new Law pass about
holding Parliaments, lest this King should have more Obligations upon him to
hold Parliaments, than some of his Predecessors. The true meaning whereof can
be no more than to say, that the King and the People ought not to be put in
mind, how many Laws have been made and renewed in all Ages, for the same thing;
since every body knows, that the new Law has no greater obligatory Power than
any of the former, which his Majesty and all his Predecessors have sworn to
keep and observe.


Knight. You do well to observe that the secret Enemies of our Legal Government do
always avoid the renewing and reinforcing of our ancient Laws. They would have
them forgotten, or negligently disused, and brought by Degrees to be esteemed
obsolete and unnecessary. Their evil Practice has been of old to slip over the
Calling of Parliaments, according to Law, pretending there was no great need of
troubling the People; and then the Omission of one was made a Precedent of
doing the like again and again, not only in the same King's Reign, but in those
of their Successors; and thereby the constant Course of successive Parliaments
came to be so broken and disused, that the People scarce dared to demand them,
as their Right, but rather moved for them, as Acts of the King's Grace, crying
up those for the best Kings, that used them most. But, my good Neighbor, you
ought to take notice that the true English Patriots always thought it necessary
to reinforce expressly, and by name, the principal Statutes that concerned the
Foundations of our Government: and for that Reason usually made, in the
Beginning of Parliaments, Confirmations of the most material Laws enacted in
the former, though not one Word was added or diminished.

They have caused Magna Charta it self to be confirmed near forty times, not
that they thought the Confirmations gave more Force to those Laws, but that the
Contracts, Powers, Obligations and Duties of their Princes, and the whole Form
of the legal Government might be kept in perpetual Remembrance: And to that
purpose they also ordained, that the same great Charter should be publicly
read in full County several times every Year. If we would do like our
Ancestors, there is abundant Cause to insist upon this Bill for successive
Parliaments, especially upon this Revolution, wherein we have engaged to God
and Man, to re-establish our ancient Constitution, with all our Rights and
Liberties.


Yeom. Sir, I am ashamed to detain you longer, yet your rational Discourse upon
this Subject does so disquiet my Mind, that I can scarce forbear being further
troublesome to you. You have made it apparent that many of those who pretend to
settle and secure the Kingdom, are contriving how to keep it unsettled: they
are seeking to bring us into that negligent, loose, uncertain, arbitrary Course
of Governing, that was in the late Reigns, and had almost ruined the Kingdom.
For that purpose they endeavor to avoid the Change of Things or Persons in the
Administration, and to leave every thing doubtful about the Peoples Rights,
which those Reigns seemed to call in question. They have avoided the raising
and vacating all false Judgments and Opinions against the Peoples Rights,
except the Cases of very few Persons, wherein the Parliament has taken care by
special Acts. They imitate the Proceedings in the late Reigns, as if they would
make K. William's Government as grievous as K. James's. I cannot but conclude
that it is for this Reason they show their Fears of making a clear and plain
Settlement of the Foundations of our Government, in the Course of successive
Parliaments, to be holden unavoidably; all the Designers to enslave us having
always dreaded such a Settlement for several Ages.


Knight. I wish our Countrymen were generally as well informed as you are,
concerning the Party that are secret Enemies to our present Government, who are
striving either to keep the way open for K. James's Return, or at least to set
up his way of governing, or something so like it, that the one may not be known
from the other.


Yeom. Sir, many of our Countrymen know well enough this sort of false-hearted
Men, but they for their base Compliances, getting up to be our Masters under K.
Charles and K. James, grievously oppressed us then, and have now again got such
Powers and Preferments, as if they had brought about the late Revolution, and
are so able to plague, vex and crush us, as they did formerly, that the Country
dare not speak their Minds of them or their Proceedings. But pray, Sir, help me
to show my Neighbors how this sort of Men, in their Designs of Arbitrary
Power, always sought to prevent an absolute Settlement of the Legal Course of
successive Parliaments.


Knight. It would require greater Abilities than I have, to show what you desire,
by Reflections upon our whole History of the Contests with the Kings for our
Liberties; but I will tell you the Practice in our times, and those just before
us. This sort of Men under James the First, made him afraid of the sitting of
Parliaments, as an Eclipse of his Power; and insinuated to him, that the
calling, adjourning, proroguing and dissolving of Parliaments, ought to be
absolutely at his Will. They also raised Disputes whether Parliaments were, of
Right, Masters of the Methods of their own Proceedings, or were bound first to
consider and resolve upon what the King propounded for Money, or otherwise. By
those Means they made the sitting of Parliament uneasy to him, so that he was
always glad to be rid of them, before the necessary Business of the Kingdom was
done.

But that sort of Men appeared more boldly upon the Accession of Charles the
First to the Crown. They attempted then to invade the great Fundamental of all
Liberties and Property, the Power of the People of England alone to impose
Money upon themselves. They had the Confidence to maintain a Power in the Kings
to take Tonnage and Poundage, and other Moneys without Act of Parliament. They
cannot deny that these were their traitorous Practices and Designs, so long as
the great Petition of Right remains upon Record.

Neither ought it to be forgotten how Parliaments were then brow-beaten, and
their Authorities questioned and slighted, and the Method of their Proceedings
controuled, contrary to their Fundamental Rights and Privileges, nor how they
were tossed up and down, by sudden Adjournments, Prorogations and Dissolutions.
The Houses, Studies, and Pockets of diverse of their Members were searched,
their Persons, against the express Laws, imprisoned, and the free Debates in
Parliament made subject to the restraining Power and Censure of inferior
Courts and Judges. The King's special Command and Pleasure were declared Cause
sufficient to detain some of them in Prison 'till Death, without Trial, or
being legally accused of any Offense. Yet this sort of Men thought all these
Practices could not secure them, till they brought that King to resolve to have
no more Parliaments, and to forbid the People, by Proclamation, to make mention
of Parliaments.

We ought to call to mind, that for ten or twelve Years after, all the Counsels
of those Designers against our Legal Government, were employed to invent Ways
to make the Constitution of Parliaments useless, and the Crown wholly
independent upon the People in Parliaments for Supplies and Aids. Such were the
Inventions of Loan-Money, Privy-Seal-Money, Knightcod-Money, Coat and
Conduct-Money, Arbitrary Fines without Juries for Encroachments upon the King's
Wastes, Ship Money, Billet-Money, oppressing Monopolies, and illegal Patents
upon Trades, almost without number. Such also was the Commission passed the
Great Seal, to impose, by pretense of Royal Authority, an Excise, tho the
Illegality and Oppression of it were so manifest, that a sufficient number of
Persons could not be suddenly found to put it in Execution. All Projects were
embraced that had but an appearance of supplying the Crown, that they might
avoid the necessary Settlement of successive Parliaments.

The last most dangerous and desperate of their Designs of that kind was upon
some pretense from Ireland or Scotland, to get an Army, and settle Martial Law,
that might raise such Money as a Council should think fit, and make
Proclamations and Orders of State to be as binding to the Subject as Acts of
Parliament. Yet even that was embraced, as appears by the Journals of the
Commons in Parliament: Monsieur Burlemach there openly confessing, that he had
received thirty thousand Pounds which was sent over Seas, to hire German Horse
to be the Foundation of the Standing Army here.

I could tell you, Neighbor, that during all these Transactions, which lasted
diverse Years, their Counsels and Endeavors were to divert the King from
admitting the Legal Course of Parliaments. The Petitions and Cries of the
Subjects to restore them, could not be heard, and Agreements were made between
the King and several Persons of greatest Abilities and Influence, in order to
the arriving at absolute Power, that there should there should be no more
Parliaments during his Life. Nevertheless about the Year 1639. the King's Wants
of Money being extremely pressing, they resolved to make use of a Parliament
for Supply, but without a Thought of doing the Kingdom Right, in restoring the
due Succession of Parliaments, and the Exercise of their Legal Authorities: and
therefore as sooon as they were met, they procured the King to demand of them
their giving up their Legal Fundamental Privilege, of considering in the first
Place, and redressing the Peoples Grievances; and the King so positively
insisted in denying them their Right and Privilege therein, that within twenty
days they were dissolved, contrary to the known Intentions and Ends of our
Constitution.

The Failure of the Peoples Expectation at that time, and the long Interruption
of the legal course of Parliaments, raised great Discontents, and loud and
general Cries of the People for Parliaments; the Consequences whereof were
such, as I dread and abhor to remember: yet it was universally agreed, That the
want of the Legal Course of successive Parliaments, and the Designs of
interrupting and preventing their meeting and sitting, were the great occasions
of all the Confusion, Blood and Mischief, that afterward happened. And no
doubt but the Parliament then took the only wise and necessary course to
prevent all the impending Mischiefs and Dangers, both to the King and People,
when they labored, with the help of the best Lawyers of England, to declare
and secure the Observance of the ancient Laws for annual successive
Parliaments; and to provide for their certain meeting, and holding them,
notwithstanding all possible Designs and Contrivances against them: Which was
done to the great Satisfaction of the People, by that notable Act of the 16th
of Char. I.


Yeom. Sir, let me be so bold as to ask you, whether that Act for ascertaining
Parliaments, did not occasion, or some way promote the Tumults and Wars that
ensued?


Knight. You may easily be satisfied from what was written in those times, of the
Falsehood of such Suggestions, and that the King, Lords and Commons passed that
Act with great Unanimity; and that King often gloried in having passed that Act
for the Security of his People: but I believe you confound the Act for
Triennial Parliaments, with another Act for making the Parliament then in
being, in a manner perpetual; for they were not to be dissolved or prorogued,
but by their own Consent, declared by Act of Parliament. That Act did in truth
derogate from the King's Prerogative in dissolving Parliaments, and whatsoever
Mischiefs might, or did thereupon ensue, ought to be imputed to the Alteration
made thereby, of our Constitution, or Monarchy, not to the just and strict
Observance of our Laws and Statutes, for which the Act for Triennial
Parliaments made Provision.


Yeom. Sir, I know there is a common Mistake about those Acts of Parliament,
and that occasion is taken by some from the Confusions in Government that soon
after happened, to impose upon the People false Notions about the Authority of
Parliaments, and to frighten them from demanding, and insisting upon their
constant successive Elections, as the Laws appoint. It Is notorious, that those
who design Arbitrary Power are always busy in such Matters, and in unworthy
Reflections upon Parliaments. But pray, Sir, let us pass by that dark time of
the Civil War, and see what the same sort of Men have done about Parliaments,
after the Return of K. Charles II.


Knight. They pursued the same Designs of subverting our Constitution as to
Parliaments, but took Measures quite different from those before used to effect
it. They remembered the ill Success of all Projects and Monopolies, and
Pretenses of Prerogative to supply the Government with Money. They had found
and felt by Experience, that a free Parliament could not be awed, and that the
People in the Intervals of Parliament would not be forced to pay Taxes, that
were not legally imposed upon them: yet there was an absolute necessity for the
Crown to be supplied with Aids from the People, without which it could not
subsist, great part of the Crown Lands being wasted and squandered awny in the
two preceding Reigns. 'Twas therefore resolved to attempt that by Fraud, which
they could not compass by Force; and in order thereunto they took the Advantage
of the present Temper of the People, which carried them, without considering
what the Consequences might be, to every thing that was agreeable to the Court.
They recommended such to be chosen Members of the House of Commons, whose
Fortunes had been most impaired in the late Wars, and whose Dependence upon the
Court might incline them to a Compliance with whatever should be demanded of
them; and these good-natured Loyal Gentlemen repealed the Act of the 16th of K.
Charles I. for Triennial Parliaments, whilst a few worthy Patriots labored in
vain to defend it. It Is true, they pretended in the Act, by which this Statute
was repealed, to ascertain the frequent holding of Parliaments; yet it left the
King at liberty to continue the same Parliament as long as he pleased, and that
King did accordingly continue that same Parliament near eighteen Years: which
time they could not be said truly to represent the People of England, many of
those who chose them being dead, and others were either grown up, or had
purchased Estates, whose Opinions both of Persons and things might be much
changed from what the Sense of the Nation was when that Parliament was first
called. But having got a considerable Party in the House of Commons, they
labored to confirm and increase it. Places and Pensions were liberally
bestowed on all that could be brought over to them: and it is no wonder they
gave such prodigious Sums of Money out of the poor Peoples Purses, when a great
part was again to be refunded into their own. This scandalous Proceeding was
manifest, and confirmed by the open Confession of a Gentleman (through whose
Hands much public Money then passed) in the House of Commons the next
succeeding Parliament, who there acknowledged his paying annually many and
great Pensions to Members of Parliament.

Besides thus corrupting those already in the House, there was neither Pains
nor Money spared to get their Friends chosen where any Vacancy happened,
insomuch that the Court spent 14000 l. at one Election of a Burgess for
Northampton.


Yeom. Sir, you have fully satisfied me that the Ministers in that Reign were
as bitter Enemies to the English Constitution about Parliaments, as those in
the two former that went before it; but their Measures are more dangerous and
likely to succeed; and it was God's great Mercy that these Hirelings did not
enslave us, as it were by our own Consent, and by color of the Authority we
had given them for our Preservation.

But pray, Sir, what was the meaning of the great Bustle all over England about
Charters? What made the Court so mightily labor to persuade all Corporations
to surrender their old Charters, and take new ones from the King? Was not that
done with a design to influence the Elections of Members to Parliament?


Knight. Yes most certainly, and this was a more pernicious and dangerous Design
than any put in Practice in the former Reigns. This struck at the very Root of
all the Liberties of England, that the People should never again have a free
Parliament chosen according to the Constitution; but such Men imposed upon
them, as would servilely comply with the Court in all their Measures to enslave
us. They corrupted some in every Corporation to persuade the rest to surrender
their Charters; and where they could not prevail by Entreaties, these wicked
Instruments in several Towns, broke open the Trunks wherein their Charters were
kept, and stole them away to deliver them up. Where this could not be done,
they brought Quo Warranto's against the Charters of almost every Town in
England, that has a Right to lend Members to Parliament; and by means of
corrupt Judges, declared them void, upon some Pretense or other, that the
present Magistrates had acted be yond, or contrary to the Powers granted in
them, and thereby forfeited all their Rights and Privileges. New Magistrates
were placed thereupon in those Towns, such as they could most confide in, and
such Clauses were inserted into their new Charters, as put the Choice of their
Representatives in Parliament absolutely for the future into the Power of the
Court.


Yeom. Sir, I am infinitely obliged to you for your Pains and Kindness, in
showing these things to me; but I stand amazed to think, that there could be so
many Englishmen found in every Reign, to join in carrying on this continued
Design to subvert our Constitution, and enslave us. What present Advantage
could delude and tempt them? they themselves, and their own Posterity must be
involved in the same Misery and Ruin they endeavored to bring upon others.

Sir, I have trespassed too long upon your Patience, and shall not therefore
trouble you further about their Designs under the late King James (those being
most excellently laid down and made manifest in his Majesty's Declarations,
when Prince of Orange, published upon his coming into England) but upon the
whole it is most plain, That neither we nor our Posterity can be safe in our
Religion, Laws and Liberties, till we obtain and absolute Settlement of the
Legal Course of successive Parliament.


Knight. I will only tell you one thing more, Neighbor, before we part, that these
Kings, who endeavored to subvert the Constitution as to Parliaments, were
always embroiled with their People about Rights and Privileges; and that when
once the People had discovered these Designs in them, tho they called many
Parliaments, yet the same Jealousies continued, and they never after came to a
good Understanding, or had a mutual Confidence in one another.

Our Histories declare the Truth of this Observation in many former Princes
Reigns, so that I hope the King will avoid a Rock that has been fatal to all
who have struck upon it; and I am confident that his Majesty will do all that a
good King and honest Man can do, to restore to us our Constitution, having in
his Declaration called God and Man to witness, That was the Design of his
coming hither.


FINIS.

