AN ACT Declaring which Days in the Year shall be Observed as Holy Days.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act Declaring which Days in the Year shall be Observed as Holy Days. CHAP.
XIV.
WHEREAS many Idle Persons refuse to Work at their Lawful Calling and Labor on
several Days in the Year, on pretense that the same is Dedicated to some Saint,
or pretended Saint, Patron, or pretended Patron, for whom they have, or pretend
to have, Reverence or Respect: And choose rather to spend such Days in Idleness,
Drunkenness, and Vice, to the Scandal of Religion, rather then following and
Working in their Lawful Calling and Usual Employment, which has been found by
Experience to tend very much to the Impoverishing and hindering the Improvement
of this Kingdom. For Remedy whereof,

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Common
Labourer, being Hired, or other Servant retained, shall Refuse to Work upon any
other Day then the several Days hereafter mentioned, being thereunto Required,
upon the Usual and Accustomed Wages, (That is to say) All Sundays in the Year.
The Day of the Feast of the Circumcision of Our Lord JESUS Christ. Of the
Epiphany. Of the Conversion of Saint Paul. Of the Purification of the Blessed
Virgin. Of Saint Mathias the Apostle. Of the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin. Of Saint Mark the Evangelist. Of Saint Phillip and Jacob the Apostles.
Of Saint Barnabas the Apostle. Of the Ascension of Our Lord JESUS Christ. Of
the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist. Of Saint Peter the Apostle. Of Saint
James the Apostle. Of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle. Of Saint Matthew the
Apostle. Of Saint Michael the Arch-Angell. Of Saint Luke the Evangelist. Of
Saint Simon and Saint Jude the Apostles. Of All Saints. Of Saint Andrew the
Apostle. Of Saint Thomas the Apostle. Of the Nativity of Our Lord. Of Saint
Stephen the Martyr. Of Saint John the Evangelist. Of the Holy-Innocents. Monday
and Tuesday in Easter Week. Monday and Tuesday in Whitson Week. The Twenty
Third of October. Fifth of November. The Thirtieth Day of January, and Twenty
Nineth Day of May, Yearly. And that no other Day, Except the Days aforesaid,
and such other Days as on some Extraordinary Occasions shall hereafter be set
apart, by Order of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or the Chief
Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, for the tune being, shall be kept, or
Commanded to be kept Holy, or to Abstain from Lawful Bodily Labor. Every such
Person or Persons so Refusing, being thereof Lawfully Convicted by his, or
their own Confession, or by the Testimony of one, or more, sufficient Witness,
or Witnesses, upon Oath, before any Justice of the Peace, in any County, Mayor,
or other Chief Officer of any City, Borough, Town or Corporation, who shall
have power by Virtue of this Statute to minister such Oaths where the Offense
shall be Committed, or the Party Offending Apprehended, shall Forfeit the Sum
of Two Shillings, to be paid at such time, or to such Person as by the said
Justice of the Peace, or other Chief Officer aforesaid, shall be appointed, to
be Disposed of to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be Committed.
And if such Offender or Offenders shall Neglect or Refuse to pay the said Sums
to be Assessed or Appointed, as aforesaid, then the said Justice of the Peace,
or other Head-Officer, aforesaid, shall Commit all and every such Offender and
Offenders to some Constable, or other Inferior Officer of the County, City,
Town, or Corporation, where the said Offense shall be Committed, or the Party
Apprehended, to be Publicly Whipped; which Punishment shall be Publicly
Inflicted and Executed upon such Offenders, within the space of Twenty Four
Hours after such Order made.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Constable or
Inferior Officer, aforesaid, Do Refuse, or Do not at the Commandment of any
Justice of the Peace, or other Chief Officer of any County, City, Town, or
Corporation, Execute by himself, or by some other, to be by him procured, the
Punishment aforesaid, upon all such Offenders; That in that Case it shall and
may be Lawful for the said Justice of the Peace, and all and Every other
Justice or Justices of the Peace, or Chief Officer of any such County, City,
Town, or Corporation, upon sufficient Information thereof, to bind over such
Constable, or Inferior Town-Officer, to the next General-Quarter-Sessions of
the Peace, or General Assizes, or Jail-delivery, which shall first happen
there, to be proceeded against for such his Contempt: And in Case he shall be
found Guilty thereof, upon Examination of One or more Witness or Witnesses, he
shall be Fined at the Discretion of the Court, so as such Fine for Every such
Offense Do not Exceed the Sum of Twenty Shillings.

Provided always, That no Justice of the Peace, or Head-Officer of any Town or
Corporation, Do Execute this Statute for any Offense Done unto himself, or
whereof Complaint was not made within Ten Days after such Refusal to Work, as
aforesaid: And all Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery are hereby Required to
give this Act in Charge at Every Assize or Jail-delivery within the several
Counties of their Circuits; and to Enquire of, Hear and Determine the Neglect
of all Justices of the Peace, and others in the Due Execution of this Statute.

FINIS.

