AN ACT To Prevent FRAUDS BY Clandestine Mortgages.

AN ACT For the more EASY OBTAINING Partitions of Lands. IN Coparcenary
Joyn-tenancy, and Tenancy in Common, and Bounding and Mearing of Lands.



DUBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley, 1697.

An ACT to Prevent Frauds, by Clandestine Mortgages. CHAP. XXXVI.
WHEREAS great Frauds and Deceits, are too often Practiced by Necessitous and
Evil disposed persons, in Borrowing of Money, and giving Judgments, Statutes,
and Recognizances privately, for securing the Re-payment of the said Money; and
the same persons do afterward Borrow Money, upon Security of their Lands, of
other persons, and do not acquaint the latter Lender thereof with the same,
whereby such latter Lender is very often in danger to lose his whole Money, or
forced to pay off the Debts secured by the said Judgments, Statutes, and
Recognizances, before they can have any Benefit of the said Mortgages.

And whereas diverse persons do many times Mortgage their Lands more then once,
without giving Notice of their first Mortgage, whereby Lenders of Money, upon
Second, or after Mortgages, do often lose their Money, and are put to great
Charges in Suits, and otherwise.

For Remedy whereof, and Preventing the same, as much as may be for the Future,
May it please Your Sacred Majesty, that it may be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any
person or persons, from, and after the First Day of April, which shall be in
the Year of Our Lord God, One thousand Six hundred and Ninety eight, shall
Borrow any money, or for any other Valuable consideration, for the payment
thereof, voluntarily Give, Acknowledge, Permit, or Sufer to be Entered against
him or them, One or more Judgment or Judgments, Statute or Statutes,
Recognizance or Recognizances, to any Person or Persons, Creditor or Creditors;
and if the same Borrower or Borrowers, Debtor or Debtors, shall afterward Take
up, or Borrow any other Sum or Sums of money, of any other person or persons,
or for other Valuable consideration, become Indebted to such person or persons;
And for Securing the Re-payment, and Discharge thereof, shall Mortgage his,
her, or their Lands or Tenements, or any part thereof, to the said Second, or
other Lender, or Lenders of the said money, Creditor or Creditors, or to any
other person or persons in Trust, for, or to the Use of such Second, or other
Lender or Lenders, Creditor or Creditors, and shall not give Notice to the said
Mortgage or Mortgagees, of the said Judgment or Judgments, Statute or Statutes,
Recognizance or Recognizances in Writing, under his, her, or their Hand or
Hands, before the Execution of the said Mortgage or Mortgages, unless such
Mortgager or Mortgagers, his, her, or their Heirs, upon Notice to him, her, or
them, given by the Mortgagee, or Mortgagees of the said Lands and Tenements,
his, her, or their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns in Writing, under his,
her, or their Hands and Seals, Attested by Two or more sufficient Witnesses, of
any such former Judgment or Judgments, Statute or Statutes, Recognizance, or
Recognizances, shall within Six Months after such notice given, pay off, and
Discharge the said Judgment or Judgments, Statute or Statutes, Recognizance or
Recognizances, and all Interest, and Charges, due thereupon, and cause, or
procure the same to be Vacated, or Discharged by Record. that then the
Mortgager or Mortgagers, of the said Lands and Tenements, his, her, or their
Heirs, Executors Administrators, or Assigns, shall have no Benifit, or Remedy
against the said Mortgagee, or Mortgagees, his, her, or their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them in Equity, or elsewhere, for
Redemption of the said Lands and Tenements, or any part thereof; but the said
Mortgagee and Mortgagees, his, her, or their Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, shall, and may hold, and enjoy the said Lands and Tenements, for
such Estate, and Term therein as were or was Granted and Settled, to the said
Mortgagee or Mortgagees, against the said Mortgager, or Mortgagers, and all
person and persons, lawfully Claming, from, by or under him, her or them, Freed
from Equity of Redemption, and as fully to all Intents and Purposes,
whatsoever, as if the same had been purchaced absolutely, and without any
Power, or Liberty of Redemption.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, who have, or has once Mortgaged, or from, and after the said First
Day of April, shall Mortgage any Lands or Tenements, to any person or persons
for Security of Money Lent, or otherwise Accrued, or become Due, or for other
Valuable Considerations; and if the said Mortgager or Mortgagers, shall again
Mortgage the same Lands or Tenements, or any part thereof, to any other person
or persons, for Valuable Considerations; the said former Mortgage being in
Force, and not Discharged, and shall not discover to the said Second, or other
Mortgagee or Mortgagees, or some, or one of them, the former Mortgage or
Mortgages, in Writing under his or their Hands; that then, and in those Cases
also, the said Mortgager or Mortgagers, his, her, or their Heirs, Executors
Administrators, or Assigns, shall have no Relief, or Equity of Redemption
against the said Second, or after Mortgagee, or Mortgagees, his, her, or their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, upon the said after Mortgage, or
Mortgages, but that such Mortgagee or Mortgagees, his, her, or their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall, and may Hold and Enjoy such,
more then once Mortgaged Lands and Tenements, for such Estate and Term therein,
as were, or was Granted, and conveyed by the said Mortgager or Mortgagers,
against him, her, or them, his, her, or their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators respectively, Freed from Equity of Redemption, and as fully to
all Intents and Purposes, as if the same had been an absolute purchase, and
without any Power, or Liberty of Redemption.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid That
nevertheless, if it so happen, that there be more then one Mortgage, at the
same time made by any person or persons, to any person, or persons, of the same
Lands and Tenements, the several late, or under Mortgagees, his, her, or their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall have Power to Redeem any
former Mortgage or Mortgages, upon payment of the Principal Debt, Interest, and
Costs of Suit, to the Prior Mortgagee or Mortgagees, his, her, or their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, any thing herein contained to the
contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall be Construed,
Deemed, or Extended, to Bar any Widow of any Mortgager of Lands or Tenements,
from her Dower and Right, in, or to the said Lands, who did not Legally Ioyn
with her Husband in such Mortgage, or otherwise lawfully Bar, or Exclude her
self, from such her Dower or Right.

An ACT for the more Easy obtaining Partitions of Lands in Caparce nary
Joynt-tenancy, and Tenancy in Common, and Bounding, and Mearing of Lands. CHAP.
XXXVII.
WHereas the Proceedings upon Writs of Partition, between Coparceners, by the
Common Law, or Custom, Ioynt-Tenants, or Tenants in Common, are found by
Experience, to be Tedious Chargable, and oftentimes Ineffectual, by Reason of
the difficulty of Discovering the persons and Estates of the Tenants of the
several Manours, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, to be Divided,
and the Defective and Dilatory Executing and Returning of the Process, of
Summons, Attachment and Distress, and other Dificulties and Impediments in
Making and Establishing of Partitions; by Reason of which, diverse persons
having Vn-divided Parts, or Pur-parts, are greatly Prejudiced and Oppressed,
and the Premise are frequently Wasted, or lie Vncultivated, or not Improved,
and the Profits of the same thereby Totally are in a greater measure Lost. For
Remedy thereof:

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from the Sixth Day of
November, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, and after Process of Summons,
or Attachment upon any Writ of Partition Returned, and Affidavit made thereupon
by any Sufficient and Credible person, that due Notice in Writing is, or has
been given of the said Writ of Partition, to the Tenant or Tenants, to the said
Writ or Action, and a Copy thereof left with the Occupyer, or Tenant or
Tenants, in Possession of the said Lands; or if they, or any of them cannot be
found, then to the Wife, Son or Daughter, being of the Age of One and Twenty
Years, or upwards, of such Tenant or Tenants, to the said Writ or Action, or
Tenant in actual Possession, as aforesaid, by Virtue of any Estate of Freehold
for Years, or to at Will, or any uncertain Interest, of, or in the said
Manours, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said Partition is so
Demanded, unless the said Tenant in Actual Possession, be Demandant in the said
Action, at the least Forty Days before the Day of the Return of the said
Summons or Attachment; if in such Case the Tenant or Tenants to such Writ, or
Tenant in Possession to the Manours, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as
aforesaid, or any of them, shall not within the Term after Return of such Writ
of Summons or Attachment, or the Term following the same, cause an Appearance
to be Entered in such Court, where such Writ of Summons or Attachment shall be
Returnable, then, and in Default of such Appearance, the Demandant having Filed
his Declaration, the Court may, and shall proceed to Examine the Title of the
said Demandant, set forth in his Declaration, and the Content, or Quantity of
his Part, or Pur-part of the said Lands and Premises, and according as they
shall find his right Part and Pur-part to be, they shall for so much, cause
Judgment by Default, to be Entered for the said Demandant, and thereupon Order
and Award a Writ, to make Partition, whereby such Proportion, Part and
Pur-part, may be set out to him in Severalty; of which said Writ of Execution,
Notice shall be given to the Occupier, Tenant or Tenants, of the said Manours,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, at least Six Days before the Execution
thereof; and the same being after such Notice duly Executed and Returned, and
Final Judgment thereupon Entered, the same shall be good, Binding, and
Conclusive to all persons whatsoever, and to the several Rights, Titles, and
Interests, which they, or any of them have, or shall at any time Claim, or
pretend to have in any of the said Manours, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, mentioned in the said Judgment and Writ of Partition so Awarded,
as aforesaid, although all persons concerned, are not Named in the Proceedings
thereupon, nor the Title of the Tenants to the said Writ truly set forth.

Provided always, Lhat if such Tenant or Tenants, or person concerned, or any
of them, against whom, or their Right or Title, such Judgment by Default is
given, shall within the space of One Year, after the First Judgment Entered, or
in Case of Infancy, Coverture, Non sane Memory, or Adsence out of the Kingdom,
then within One Year after his, her, or their Return, or the Determination of
such Inability, apply themselves by Motion to the Court, where such Judgments
are Entered, and show good, and probable matter in Bar of such Partition, or
that the Demandant has not Title to so much as he has so Recovered; then, and
in such Case, the Court may Suspend, or Set aside such Judgment, and admit the
Tenant or Tenants to appear and Plead, and the Cause shall Proceed according to
Due Course of Law, as if no such Judgment had been given: And if the Court upon
Hearing thereof, shall Adjudge for the First Demandant, then the said First
Judgment shall stand Confirmed, and be good against all persons whatsoever,
Except such other persons as shall be Absent, or Disabled, as aforesaid, and
the person or persons, so Appealing, shall be Awarded thereupon, to pay Costs,
or if within such time or times, aforesaid, the Tenants or persons Concerned,
Admitting the Demandant's Title, Parts or Purparts, shall yet show to the Court
any Inequality in the Partition, the Court may Award a new Partition to be
made, in presence of all parties Concerned, and if they will appear,
notwithstanding the Return, and Filing upon Record of the former; which said
Second Partition Returned and Filed, shall be Good, Valid, and Firm for ever,
against all persons whatsoever, except, as before Excepted.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Plea in Abatement shall
be admitted, or received in any Suit for Partition, nor shall the same be
Abated by reason of the Death of any Tenant or Tenants thereunto.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the
High Sheriff, by reason of Distance, Infirmity, or any other Hindrance, cannot
conveniently be present at the Execution of any Judgment in Partition, in such
Case, the Undersheriff, in presence of Two Iustiecs of the Peace of the
County, where the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments to be Divided, do lie,
shall, and may proceed to Execution of any Writ of Partition, by Inquisition,
in due Form of Law, as if the High Sheriff were then personally present; and
the High Sheriff thereupon, shall, and is hereby Enabled and Required to make
the same Return as if he were personally present at such Execution. And in Case
such Partition be Made, Returned, and Filed, he or they that were Tenant or
Tenants of any of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or
any Part or Pur-part thereof, before they were so Divided, shall continue, and
be Tenant or Tenants, for such Parts Set out severally to the respective
Landlords, or Owners thereof, by, and under the same Conditions, Rents,
Covenants, and Reservations, where they are, or shall be so Divided, and the
Landlords and Owners of the several Parts and Pur-parts so Divided, and
Allotted, as aforesaid, shall Warrant and make good unto their respective
Tenants, the said several Parts severally after such Partition, as they are or
were Bound to do by any Copy, Lease, or Grant of their respective Parts before
any Partition made; and in Case any Demandant be Tenant, in Actual Possession
to the Tenant, to the Writ or Action, for his Part and Proportion, or any Part
thereof in the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments to be Divided, by
Virtue of a Writ of Partition, as aforesaid, for any Term of Life, Lives, or
Years, or uncertain Interest, the said Tenants shall stand and be Possessed of
the said Pur-parts, and Proportions, for the like Term and under the same
Conditions and Covenants, when it is set out in severalty, in pursuance of
this, or any other Act, Statute, or Law, to that purpose.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Sheriffs, their Undersheriffs, and Deputies; and in Case of Sickness, or
Disability in the High Sheriff, all Justices of the Peace within their
respective Divisions, shall after convenient Notice, give Due Attendance to the
Executing such Writ of Partition, unless reasonable Cause be shown to the Court
upon Oath, and then Allowed of, or otherwise be liable every of them to pay
unto the Demandant such Costs and Damages, as shall be Awarded by the Court,
not exceeding Five pounds, for which the Demandant, or Plantiff, may bring his
Action in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at Dublin, wherein no Essoyn,
Protection, Privilege, or Wager of Law shall be Allowed, or more then One
Imparlance. And in Case the Demandant do not Agree to pay unto the Sheriff or
Undersheriff, Justices and Jurors, such Fees as they shall respectively Demand
for their pains and Attendance in the Execution of the same, and Returning
thereof; then the Court shall Award what each person shall Receive, having
respect to the Distance of the place, from their Respective Habitations, and
the time they must necessarily spend about the same, for which they may
severally bring their Actions as aforesaid.

Provided, that this Act shall continue in force for Seven Years, and from
thence to the end of the next Session of the next Parliament, and no longer.

And whereas many Inconveniences, and Law-Sutes, have heretofore Arisen, and
may hereafter Arise, by Reason the Bounds of the several Proprieties of Lands
within this Kingdom, are not sufficiently Distinguished, by certain and known
Mears.

For prevention whereof, and for the better carrying off the Water, and
Draining the Bogs, and wet Lands, and Improving the same.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where the Mears of Lands,
between Propriety and Propriety, have, or shall hereafter be set out, or
Assertained by a Writ of Partition, Perambulation, or otherwise, the same shall
at Equal Charge of the Proprietors thereof, or their Tenants, be Enclosed with
good Ditches, where Earth sufficient may be had to make the same, and therein
one or two Rows of Quick-sets shall be Planted; and where Earth shall be
wanting, such other Fences shall be made, as the nature of the Soil shall
permit. And where Lands are Leased for a long term, it may seem Unequal to lay
the Charge of such Ditches and Fences on the Landlords.

Be it therefore Enacted, that where Lands are Held in Fee-farm, or for Lives
Renewable for ever, or for a Term of Sixty Years, to run from the Sixth Day of
November, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, there the Charge of making
the Mears, or Fences, as aforesaid, shall be entirely born by the Tenant; and
where Lands are Leased for Lives, wherein Three Lives shall be Current, or for
Years, where Twenty One Years shall be Vnexpired, at, or upon the said Sixth
day of November, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, there the said Mears
shall be Enclosed at the Equal Charge of Landlord and Tenant; and where Lands
are Leased for any lesser time, or Term, the Bounds shall be Enclosed at the
Sole Charge of the Landlord.

Provided, That nothing in this Act Contained, shall be Taken, or Construed to
be Taken, to make Void any Covenants heretofore made between Landlord and
Tenant, Relating to the Enclosing of Mears.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whatsoever person
or persons, Chargeable by this Act, with the Fencing and Closing of their
Bounds, as aforesaid, who shall not have Actually done the same within Six
Months after such Partition made, shall Forfeit for his, or their neglect. One
Year's Value of the said Land, One Moiety thereof, to the use of the Poor of
the Parish, where such Lands shall lie, and the other Moiety to him, or them,
that will Sue for the same: And if the person or persons, Chargeable with the
Enclosing his Mears, as aforesaid, shall further neglect to do the same within
One Year, he, or they, so Offending against this Act, shall Forfeit Two Years
Value of the said Lands, to be Paid and Recovered in manner aforesaid.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Mearing,
Fences Ditches and Drains, made, or hereafter to be made, be, and shall from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, at the Equal Charge of the Tenants,
and Occupiers of the said Lands, be kept open Scoured and Cleansed, that the
Water may not stand, but pass away, and that whatsoever person or persons shall
refuse or neglect to do the same, shall Forfeit for such refusal and neglect,
One Year's Value of the said Land, to be Recovered in such manner, and to such
Uses, as is herein before Expressed.

FINIS.

