AN ACT For the Preventing FRIVOLOUS, AND VEXATIOUS Law-Sutes; AND Giving
Remedy to the Parties Grieved, to Recover their Costs at Law, in certain Cases,
where heretofore no Costs were given.

royal blazon or coat of arms

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT for the Preventing Frivolous, and Vexatious Law-Sutes, and giving
Remedy to the Parties Grieved, to Recover their Costs at Law, in certain Cases,
where heretofore no Costs were given. CHAP. XXXV.
WHEREAS it is found by daily Experience, in the Courts at Law, that diverse
Malicious, and Evil Disposed persons, on purpose, without any just Cause of
Suit, do make several Innocent persons, Defendants, jointly with others,
against whom they conceive they have good Cause of Action; and so, though such
Innocent person or persons, so joined in the said Action, shall be found (not
Guilty) and Acquitted of the said Action; Yet if any of the other Joint
Defendants shall be found Guilty, and a Verdict pass against them, by the
Common Laws of this Realm; such Defendant, or Defendants so Acquitted, after
all his, or their Trouble and Expense, in Defending such Action, is without
Remedy to recover any Costs of Suit against such Plantiffs, for such his, or
their unjust Vexation, contrary to all Reason and Justice. For Remedy whereof:

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty; by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from, and after the
First Day of May, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord God, One thousand Six
hundred and Ninety eight; if any person or persons, shall be made Defendant, or
Defendants with others, in any Action, Suit, or Plaint, in Trespass Quare
Clausum fregit, or Trespass of Assault and Battery, and such person or persons,
so joined in such Action, shall upon Trial of the same, be Acquitted by
Verdict, although the other Defendant, or Defendants, in such Action, shall be
found Guilty, and a Verdict pass against him, or them therein, every such
person and persons so Acquitted, shall have, and Recover his, and their Costs
of Suit, for such his, and their unjust Vexation, as if a Verdict had been
given against such Plantiff, or Plantiffs, or a Verdict had been given for all
the Defendants in such Action, unless the Judge or Judges, before whom such
Cause shall be Tried, shall immediately after the Trial thereof, in open Court,
Certify upon the Record under his Hand, that there was a reasonable Cause, for
the making such person or persons, Defendant or Defendants to such Action or
Plaint.

And whereas by the Law, as it now stands, no Costs of Suit can be awarded, or
given to any person or persons, in any Action that shall happen to recover, or
have any Judgment given for him upon any Demurrer in Law, by reason whereof
many contentious persons, make use of such manner of Delays, on purpose to keep
others from their Just Right, or otherwise intending thereby, to weary them
into some small Composition, for what is really due unto them.

For Remedy whereof, be it further Enacted, That if it at any time from, and
after the said First Day of May, any person or persons, who shall Commence, or
Prosecute any Action, or Plaint, in any Court of Record, whereupon any
Demurrer, or Demurrers shall be joined, by any Plantiff, or Defendant,
Demandant, or Tennant, in any suth Suit or Suits, he or they, for whom Judgment
or Judgments shall be given, upon any such Demurrer or Demurrers, shall have,
and recover, his and their Costs of Suit, to be awarded by the Court in such
like manner, as if such Judgment or Judgments had been given, or recovery had
by such party or parties, upon Action tried by Jury, and Verdict passed for
such party therein; and that if any person or persons, from, and after the
First Day of May, as aforesaid, shall obtain such, or any other Judgment or
Judgments, in any His Majesty's Courts of Record in this Kingdom, or any the
Courts of the County Palatine of Tipperary, and the person or persons against
whom such Judgment or Judgments shall be so given, shall in delay of Execution
thereupon, and with intent to annul such Judgment or Judgments, Sue forth any
Writ or Writs of Error; and afterward the said Judgment or Judgments, shall be
Affirmed, or the said Writ or Writs of Error Discontinued, or the Plantiff or
Plantiffs therein, become Non-sute; that then, and in every such Case, the
party or parties against whom such Writ or Writs shall be so brought, shall
recover his and their Costs and Damages, at the discretion of the Justices
before whom such Writ or Writs shall be so Sued, and to have Execution for such
his or their Damages or Costs, so recovered by Writs of Capias ad
Satisfaciendum, Fieri Facias, or Elegit, or any of them, at the Election of
such Party or Parties for whom such Damages and Costs shall be so awarded.

And whereas by the Laws of this Realm, no Costs of Suit are Recoverable in any
Action of Waste, or Debt, to be brought upon the Statute, for not setting forth
of Tiths, nor in any Writ of Scire Facias, or Prohibition, which has been
found very Mischievous and Prejudicial to the Suitors in such Actions, and to
such Persons, as for the recovering their just Rights have been Forced to Sue
forth the same. For Reformation whereof, for the future.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from, and after the
First day of May, aforesaid, if any person or persons bring any Action of
Waste, or Action of Debt, upon the Statute, for not setting forth of Tyths, in
which said several Actions, the Single Value, or Damage Found by the Jury, or
Iuries, in any such Action, shall not exceed the Sum of Three pounds, the
Plantiff or Plantiffs recovering, either by Judgment upon Verdict, or Demurrer
in such Action or Actions, shall likewise have and recover his and their Costs
of Suit, at the like Discretion of the Justices before whom such Writ or Writs
shall be brought, and Judgment or Judgments therein given, as also if any
person or persons shall after the time aforesaid, Sue forth any Writ or Writs
of Scire Facias, or Commence any Suit or Suits in prohibition, and recover, and
have Judgment in the same, either by Verdict or upon Demurrer, every such
Plantiff or Plantiffs so recovering, shall likewise have, and recover his and
their Costs of Suit in such Action or Actions, at the Discretion of the
Justices, before whom such Recovery shall be so had; and if it shall happen in
any the Suits aforesaid, that the Plantiff or Plantiffs in such Action or
Actions, shall become Non-Sute, or Verdict, or Verdicts pass against him or
them, in such Suit or Action, or he, or they shall discontinue such his or
their Suit or Action: Then (in all such Cases) the Defendant, or Defendants, in
such Action or Actions, shall have and recover his and their Costs of Suit in
such manner as such Plantiff or Plantiffs should have done, if he or they had
Recovered, and had Judgment given for them in such Action or Actions, as
aforesaid, any Law, Custom, Practice, or Usage to the contrary thereof, in
any-wise notwithstanding.

And that in all the Actions aforesaid, where any of the party or parties to
the same, shall so recover their Costs of Suit, it shall, and may be Lawful to,
and for them, or any of them to Sue forth Execution for such his or their Costs
by Writs of Capias ad Satisfaciendum, Fieri Facias, or Elegit, as aforesaid.

And for the preventing Willful and Malicious Trespasses, to be brought for the
future.

Be it further Enacted, that from and after the First day of May aforesaid, in
all Actions of Trespass to be Commenced and Prosecuted in any of His Majesty's
Courts of Record at Dublin; wherein at the Trial of the Cause it shall appear,
and be Certified by the Judge, or Judges, before whom such Cause shall be Tried
under his or their Hands, on the back of the Record, that the Trespass upon
which any Defendant shall be found Guilty, was Wilfully and Maliciously
committed; In every such Case, the Plantiff shall not only recover his Damages,
assessed by the Jury, but his full Costs of Suit, to be Taxed for him by the
Direction of the Court, where such Action shall be Tried.

Provided nevertheless, That no Alteration of the same shall be made in any the
Cases aforesaid, where any Executor or Administrator shall be Defendant, in any
the Actions, or Suits aforesaid, so at any time hereafter to be brought against
them; but that in all such Cases, they shall not be liable, or subject to
payment of any Costs of Suit, otherwise, or in any other manner then as the
Law, now requires.

And for the preventing the Abatement and Discontinuance of Process for the
future, in certain Cases, and the helping the Law in the particulars following.

Be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Actions to be
Commenced, or brought in any Court of Record within this Kingdom, from, and
after the First day of May aforesaid, if it shall happen that any person or
persons, being Plantiff or Plantiffs in such Action or Actions, shall die after
he or they shall have obtained any Interlocutary Judgment, or Judgments, in
such Action or Actions, and before a full and final Judgment or Judgments given
therein, the Death of such Plantiff or Plantiffs, shall not abate such Action
or Actions or hinder the further proceedings of such Cause, but that
notwithstanding such dying of such Plantiff or Plantiffs, his or their
Executors, or Administrators, may proceed to Final Judgment against the
Defendant or Defendants, in such Action or Actions, as is hereafter set forth.
(If such Action or Actions, shall happen to be such, as by Law may, or might
have been Commenced, or Maintained Originally by any Executor or Administrator)
as such Plantiff or Plantiffs aforesaid, might have done, if alive. And if it
shall happen, that in any such Action or Actions, the Defendant or Defendants
in the same, shall die after such Interlocutary, and before such Final Judgment
or Judgments obtained, as aforesaid, such dying shall not abate such Action or
Actions, but that then, notwithstanding the Death of such Defendant or
Defendants, it shall and may be Lawful to, and for such Plantiff or Plantiffs,
in such Action or Actions, it Living, and if Dead, his Executor or
Administrator, to Prosecute such their Action or Actions against the Executors
or Administrators of such Defendant or Defendants, and proceed against them to
Final Judgment therein, as is likewise hereafter in that behalf set forth and
provided, as if the said Defendant or Defendants, themselves, had been Living;
if such Action or Actions be such as may, or might by Law be Originally brought
and prosecuted against an Executor or Administrator.

And that in Case of the Death of such Plantiff or Plantiffs, as aforesaid, it
shall, and may be Lawful to, and for his, and their Executors, or
Administrators, or any of them, to Sue forth, and Prosecute one, or more Writ
or Writs of Scire facias, against the Defendant or Defendants, in such Action
or Actions, if then Living, or if Dead, against the Executors, or
Administrators of such Defendant or Defendants, for Reviving and Continuing
such Suit, or Suits, till Judgment final shall be given therein; and in Case of
the Death of such Defendant, or Defendants, as aforesaid, it shall and may be
lawful, to, and for such Plantiff or Plantiffs (if living) and if Dead, his or
their Executors, or Administrators, or any of them, in like manner to Sue
forth, and Prosecute one, or more Writ, or Writs of Scire Facias against the
Executors, or Administrators of such Defendant, or Defendants, for Reviving and
Continuing such Suit or Suits, till Judgment final shall be given therein, as
aforesaid; the Effect of which said Writ, or Writs of Scire Facias, shall be
for the party or parties against whom the same shall be Awarded, to show cause,
why notwithstanding, such the Death of any the parties to such Suit or Suits,
aforesaid; The Plantiff, or Plantiffs in the said Writ or Writs, of Scire
Facias, his, or their Executors, or Administrators, should not proceed to
Judgment final therein, for the Recovery of such Debt or Damage, for which such
Action or Actions, was at first brought. And if at the Return of such Writ or
Writs, of Scire facias, the Defendant or Defendants, named therein, shall
appear, but not show sufficient Cause to stay, or Arrest the Judgment final, or
in default of such Appearance, it shall be Returned, that such Defendant or
Defendants were duly Warned, or after Two such Writs of Scire Facias returned;
it be returned that the said Defendant, or Defendants could not be found in the
Bailiwick where such Summons Issued, or that they had nothing in the said
Bailiwick, by which they, or any of them could be Summoned, that then, in every
such Case, One or more Writ, or Writs of Inquiry of Damage, shall be Awarded
for the Plantiff or Plantiffs, in such Writ, or Writs of Scire Facias, against
such Defendant, or Defendants therein named; upon return of which said Writ, or
Writs of Inquiry, duly Executed, Judgment final shall be given for every such
Plantiff or Plantiffs, against every such Defendant or Defendants, in such
Writ, or Writs of Scire Facias, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, for the Purposes aforesaid, That if at any time
after the time Limited, as aforesaid, Two or more persons shall be Jointly
Plantiffs in any Action or Actions, against Two or more persons, likewise
Jointly named Defendants therein, the Death or Deaths, of One or more of such
Plantiff or Plantiffs, or such Defendant or Defendants, shall not abate such
Writ or Writs, in such Action or Actions, but that the same being suggested
upon the Roll, or Record, of such Action or Actions, it shall, and may be
lawful to, and for the Surviving Plantiff or Plantiffs, in such Action or
Actions, to proceed to Judgment against the Surviving Defendant or Defendants,
in the same, as if such Death had not been.

And whereas by the Law, as it now stands, if any Action or Suit be Commenced,
or brought upon any Bond, or other penal Sum, for performance of Covenants, or
other Agreements, in any Deed or Indenture; The party that brings the same, can
Assign only One Breach of Covenant, although there are in Truth several Breaches
Committed, of which the party Plantiff in such Action, can have no Benefit, or
Reparation, notwithstanding, that he is really Damnified by Reason thereof. For
Remedy whereof.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all Actions, which
from, and after the said First Day of May, shall be Commenced, or Prosecuted in
any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, in this Kingdom, or any the Courts of
the County Palatine of Tipperary, upon any Bond or Bonds, or on any Penal Sum,
for Nonperformance of any Covenants, or Agreements, in any Indenture, Deed, of
Writing contained, the Plantiff or Plantiffs, may Assign as many Breaches of
the said Covenants, or Agreements, as he, or they shall think fit: And
thereupon, it shall and may be Lawful, for the Jury, upon such Trial of such
Action or Actions, not only to Assess such Damages, and Costs of Suit as have
been heretofore usully done in such Cases; but also to give Damage for such of
the said Breaches, so to be Assigned, as such Plantiff or Plantiffs, upon such
Trial of the Issues taken therein, shall prove to have been Broken, and that
the like Judgment or Judgments shall be Entered on every such Verdict or
Verdicts, as heretofore have been usually done in such like Cases. And if it
shall happen, that such Defendant or Defendants, shall not Plead to the Issue,
but Judgment shall be given against him or them for such Plantiff or Plantiffs,
upon Demurrer, or by Nihil dicit, Non sum Informatus, Cognovit Action. or the
like; then, and in such Case, it shall and may be Lawful, to, and for such
Plantiff or Plantiffs, to suggest upon the Roll of Record, in such Action or
Actions, such, and as many Breaches or the said Covenants and Agreements, as he
or they shall think fit upon which said Suggestion, one, or more Writ, or
Writs, shall Issue, directed to the Sheriff of that County, where such Action
or Actions shall be brought, to Summon a Jury to appear before the Justice, or
Justices of Assize, or Nisi prius, at their next coming into that County, to
enquire of the Truth of every one of those Breaches, and such Jury, to Assess
the said Damages severally, which the said Plantiff or Plantiffs shall have
sustained, for every of the said Breaches so Assigned, as aforesaid; in which
said Writ, it shall be likewise Commanded to the said Justice, or Justices of
Assize, or Nisi prius, before whom such Damages shall be so given, that he, or
they shall make a full and certain Return of the said Writ or Writs, and the
due Execution thereof to the Court from which the same shall so Issue,
according to the Exigency thereof, and the time therein mentioned; which said
Writ or Writs so returned, shall be Filed, and thereupon Judgment or Judgments,
shall be Entered in the said Court, on such Return, as in Cases of Writs of
Enquiry of Damages, of the like nature. And in Case the Defendant or
Defendants, after such Judgment Entered, and before Execution Executed, shall
pay into the Court, where the said Action shall be brought, to the use of the
Plantiff or Plantiffs, his or their Executors, or Administrators, such Damages
so Assessed by the Jury, by reason of all, or any the Breaches of such
Covenants, together with the Costs of Suit, that then a Stay of Execution shall
be Entered upon the Record of the said Judgment, and made accordingly for that
time, as also, whenever it shall happen, that by reason of any Execution Sued
forth, and Executed upon such Judgment, the Plantiff or Plantiffs, his or their
Executors, or Administrators, shall be fully Satisfied or Paid, all his or
their Debt or Damages so Assessed, or the Penalty of such Bond, or Bill penal,
at the Election of the Defendant, together with his or their Costs of Suit, and
all reasonable Charges and Expenses for Executing the said Execution; that
then, and from thenceforth, the Body, Goods, and Lands of such Defendant, shall
be discharged from such Execution, which said Discharge, shall likewise be
Entered upon the Record of the Roll of the said Judgment. Yet it is hereby
declared, That notwithstanding such Discharges, or Stay of such Executions, and
the Entry or Entries of either, or any of them, as aforesaid, upon Record,
where such Damages do not amount to the Penalty of such Bond or Bill Penal,
such Judgment or Judgments, shall still remain, continue, and be in full Force,
Vigor, and Effect to the purposes hereafter mentioned (That is to say) As a
further Security to answer to such Plantiff or Plantiffs, and his, or their
Executors, or Administrators; all such Damages as shall, or may be at any time
afterward sustained, for, or by reason of any further Breach of any the
Covenant or Covenants in such Indenture, Deed, or Writing contained, if any
such shall happen to be, and no Satisfaction be made for the same, as
aforesaid, as far as the Remainder of such Penalty, after the payment of the
Damage formerly Recovered out of the same, will reach; upon which said Breach
or Breaches, such Plantiff, or Plantiffs may have, and shall be at Liberty to
Sue forth a Writ of Scire facias upon the said Judgment against such Defendant
or Defendants, his, or their Executors, or Administrators, or against his
Heirs, or Ter-tenants, Grounded upon Suggestion of other Breach or Breaches of
the said Covenants or Agreements, upon the Roll of the said Judgment, as
aforesaid; and thereupon to Summon him or them respectively to show Cause why
Execution should not be had or awarded upon the said Judgment; upon which,
there shall be the like proceedings as was in the Original Action of Debt,
brought upon the said Bond or Obligation, for Assessing of Damages, upon Trial
of Issues, Joined upon such Breaches; or in Case of Default upon a Writ of
Inquiry thereof, to be awarded in manner as aforesaid.

Provided always, That upon Payment, or Satisfaction to be made of all such
future Damages, Costs and Charges, in manner as aforesaid, or of so much of
such future Damages as the Remaining Sum of the Penalty of such Bond or Bill
Penal, after Payment and Satisfaction for the Damages formerly recovered will
extend unto, together with Costs of Suit, all further proceedings, or the said
Judgment shall again be stayed, and so Toties quoties (as Occasion shall
Require) upon every new Breach, the said Judgment to be made use of as far as
aforesaid, and no further, and upon Satisfaction made in manner aforesaid, the
Defendant his Body or Goods and Lands to be again Freed and Discharged out of
Execution, as aforesaid.

FINIS.

