THE Institutions OF THE CONGREGATION OF THE ORATORY, At St. MARY'S in
Vallicella, WITHIN THE City of ROME.

Founded by St. PHILIP NERIUS.

Printed at OXFORD, 1687.

The Institution of the Congregation of the ORATORY in the City
THE Congregation of the Oratory instituted by Saint Philip Nerius, enured
rather by practice, than bound by laws, had no peculiar rule according to the
custom of Religious persons, by which to direct their consultations in
managing affairs. For, the pious Father using with a paternal affection to
govern the designs of all suitably to their inclinations, thought it enough to
see his, altogether inflamed toward piety, to be very fervent in the contempt
of all worldly things for the love of Christ; and then to approve and confirm
as by the Spirit of the Lord those things which by long experience he had found
both well to content them, and daily to advance them in the attaining virtue,
and pleasing God. This way therefore he was worthily held fit to discover to
Secular Priests, tho differing from the rules of the Religious, who often
professed, the Congregation was not instituted by him as its Founder, but by
Almighty mighty God, as the author and perfecter thereof. Those things
therefore, either which he took care after this manner to be decreed, or which
have been, from his first institution, by those of our Congregation customarily
observed, and ever since retained, that they may be known in short, are here
summarily collected.

Of the Oratory, and the Prayer there. Of the Church, and the Divine Offices.
Of the profitable use of the familiar Sermons. Of the standing rules of the
Congregation of the Oratory. Of the election, and office of the President, and
four Priests Deputies. Of those that are to be admitted into, or expelled out
of, the Congregation. Of the breeding of Novices. Of the chief practices of the
Congregation. Of their apparel, and usual converse. Of the Refectory, and
manner of their Diet together.
CHAP. I. Of the Oratory, and the Prayers.
WE truly term it the Oratory, being a place appropriated to Prayer: (for the
familiar handling the word of God, hereafter to be spoken of, which was begun
in it, but afterward more perfected, and translated into the Church, did not so
fitly give it that name.) In this place as well strangers, as our own, every
evening after mental prayer (as we call it) say the usual Litanies; or also
besides three times in the week (which is an arbitrary castigation of the body)
discipline themselves with whips. On Holy Days likewise, from the first of
November to the Feast of our Lord's Resurrection, they are here not only by the
usual Prayers, but also by a familiar Exhortation, and a consort of Music,
excited to the contemplation of celestial things. From Easter again to the
first of November, after Vespers sung in our Church, and a Sermon heard, they
repair to some appointed place of the Suburbs, or (in case hot weather hinders)
to some Church within the City, there to perform the same Spiritual exercises.
Besides, every Sunday, unless there be some preaching in our Church, the
Litanies being said here in the morning, and a seasonable Sermon made after a
plain familiar way, chiefly from some observations drawn out of the Gospels,
those of the Brethren resorting thither are named, that are to visit the seven
principal Churches of the City, and the three public Hospitals of the Sick at
certain times that week. The care of all this belongs to the Prefect of the
Oratory, one appointed out of our Priests: or to his Assistant: either of which
are to see to the keeping of these Orders, and provide for the spiritual
benefit of those Strangers that come in, whom likewise they are to instruct on
Holy Days in their personal attendance on the offices of piety to be performed
to sick persons in the Hospitals; and also to choose out of the Brethren some
one fit for some services of the Oratory, and especially a Rector; and to be
careful, that in no wise these infringe that Constitution, which the
Congregation thought good to deliver in these words.

Let the Prefect of the Oratory by no means suffer the Brethren, who are chosen
Officers therein, to intermeddle in any matter, or business belonging any way
either to the place it self, or the Constitutions thereof, which he has not
appointed them: for such authority or power they may not have. And furthermore,
that nothing may be innovated hitherto observed there, especially concerning
all weighty matters belonging to the Oratory, let the Prefect consult the
President of the Congregation, who has the same power to dispose of the
affairs of the Oratory, as of the Congregation.

Enough of this now, to show, after what way the many strangers, that more
frequent the Oratory, are to be furthered in contemplation, and the love of
heavenly things. But our own, more dedicated to such a purpose, are especially
to observe that which the Fathers, instructed by St. Philip have to this end
thus decreed.

Let every one have his set hours for meditation, wherein let him daily make
greater progress, affecting and aspiring after God and things celestial; of
which the Superiors, according to their Charity and prudence, ought often to
admonish every one, and mind them of the benefit reaped from these exercises.

Thus those of the Congregation have their set times wherein to sequester
themselves for Prayer, and meditation. And besides the President to exhort
them, whom they are to hear, they have the Priest also that is appointed to
take the Confessions of our Order; who is wont according to his discretion
either to quicken unto these exercises any that is too flow, or, when it is
requisite, moderate any too eager.

But, by reason of the many other employments beneficial to themselves and
their neighbors, they have no other time or space either of the morning, or
day, appointed or prescribed them for prayer, but what every one at his own
choice piously and religiously shall alot for such meditations, and holy
devotions. But, at evening, as has been said, they are duly to meet in the
public Oratory, then open for all, even Strangers, and inviting them to
Prayer, whence it took its name. But concerning the order, and custom of the
using Prayer, and discipline in the Oratory, and concerning the other pious
Offices of the Fraternity, we shall treat below in the Appendix of this Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the Church, and the Divine Service.
THE Priests of the Congregation, as being Ministers in Divine things, are much
in the Church, especially on Holy Days. Some give the divine mysteries to them
that come; others, busied in hearing Confessions, quit not their feats from
daybreak till dinner time, unless forced by necessity. All the Priests say
Mass every day, and the rest serve, especially those in Orders; who when Mass
is to be celebrated more solemnly, and with Music, betimes in the morning
descending into the Vestry, with a devout diligence apparel the Priests with
the sacred vestments; and, present at the solemn Sacrifice, and performing
several other duties, never depart from the custody of the holy things, nor
from the Church, till all Divine Service be finished. As touching the things
belonging to the Church, the laws prescribed to ours are these.

In our Church there shall be no Statues of the deceased, either of Marble,
Brass, Plaster, or any other matter.

On Holy Days both Mass and Vespers shall be always said in solemn manner.
There shall likewise be solemn Vespers on the Vigils of Corpus Christi, on the
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and the Consecration of our Church on the
twenty third of May; upon the Octave of which the same Office is repeated; and
within it is renewed unto us the joyful memory of the departure of our Father
St. Philip, viz. on the twenty sixth of May. Besides, within the Octave of
Corpus Christi the Vespers every day are to be sung.

Likewise every year on the twenty ninth of January is solemnly celebrated the
Festival of the Holy Martyrs Papias and Maurus; and on the morning of that holy
day Mass is said with a Deacon and Subdeacon attending. The Vespers are sung
with Music both on the Vigil, and on the day it self. Also on the Vigil the
next days Matins and Lauds are to be said before Supper by our own Priests and
Clergy; that the due honor be paid to the Patrons of our Church and
Congregation.

But, on their Translation, which falls on the eleventh of February, tho the
same be observed, Mass and Vespers are not solemnly sung.

The Feast likewise of St. Gregory, Pope, and Patron of our Church, on the
twelfth of March is solemnly kept by us, both in the first Vespers, and at Mass.

We also particularly honor in our solemn Church Service those other Saints,
with whose sacred Relics, or some more eminent things belonging to them, we
have been enriched.

For we honor with a Double Office, on the twelfth of May, the holy Martyrs
Nereus, Achilleus, and Domitilla.

On the ninth of July Patermuihius, Copres, and Alexander, Martyrs, who have an
Altar dedicated to them, with a Semi-double.

On the first of August the Martyr Pantaleon with a Semi-double.

On the twenty first of October St. Vrsula, and her Fellow-virgins, Martyrs,
with a Semi-double.

On the fourteenth of December Spiridion Bishop, and Confessor, with a
Semi-double.

Now although ours in saying the Ecclesiastical Offices, except only the Vespers
on Festival days, do not frequent the Church; yet they are wont to meet in
Quire there, when any eminent Anniversary is kept; as on the day of the
Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, for Candles; on Ash Wednesday, the
Principal Fast, for Ashes; on Palm Sunday, for Palms; on the usual days in the
Week before Easter at Matins, Mass, and the other solemn Ceremonies of that
time. Also on the Feast of All Saints at Vespers; besides those used likewise
for the Dead, and at the Matins too; as in the morning at Mass. Last of all on
the night of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, at Matins, and Mass.

After these Festivals, now to speak of Funerals.

When any one of our Congregation dies, every Priest is to say three Masses for
the party deceased: those, who are not Priests, shall repeat their Beads nine
time; and in the place where the dead body lies shall be said the Office of the
Dead: and if it be in the morning, a solemn Mass; if not, it shall be said the
next day, a Deacon and Subdeacon attending with six Candles lighted on the
Altar, and four Torches about the Corpse. The Office ended, let two of those
lights continue by it till the burial of it. But, if he died in absence from
the house, the Night-Office for the Dead shall be said by the Priests
privately: but Mass solemnly, as before. Every year likewise within the Octave
of All Saints a solemn Mass shall be said for all those of our Congregation
that are deceased.

Without the consent of the President and Deputies Mass shall not be said
solemnly (that is with a deacon and Subdeacon attending) for any strangers
deceased; neither shall they ordinarily grant it, except he that died were a
Prelate; or of eminent rank and quality among the Laity; or else very well
deserving from our Congregation.

No Legacy shall be received by the Congregation for saying Mass for every;
unless perhaps there be some extraordinary reason, and be the full consent of
the Fathers of ten years standing.

As touching the things which seem fit to be here set down concerning
Confessions, we have these Orders.

That every week day one of the Priests chosen for this work is to tarry in the
Church to hear Confessions: but on Wednesday and Friday from morning till
dinner time all are to attend there, and likewise on Holy days.

Yet is none admitted to take Confessions, without the consent of those
Fathers, that have lived ten years in the Congregation.

CHAP. III. Of the exceeding great benefit of the familiar Sermons, as well in
the Church, as in the Oratory.
IN our Church, every day, except Saturday, kept vacant, four of our Priests
(unless it be a Holy Day, on which some one only preaches) who are chosen out
for this employment, each in his turn, fitting their expressions to the
capacity principally of the vulgar, and pretending to no pomp at all, or vain
popularity, recreate the minds of their auditors with a very beneficial kind of
discourse, confirming their matter especially with examples, and approved
histories of the Saints. For they are to avoid all difficult questions, arguing
of opinions, and whatever better becomes the Schools than the Oratory. Now, he,
who is to take care of this business, is wont at the appointed time to go down
into the Church, and, among other things that are to be prepared, to set an
Hourglass by the Preachers Seat, and, when he sees eight or ten auditors
assembled, to read some Book of wholesome precepts, or else composed of the
sayings, and lives of the Saints; and, when fifteen, or twenty at the most are
present, to give notice with a Bell at the usual hour, upon the hearing
whereof, he that is first to preach hastens to the place, and, after he has
heard him that reads a while, goes up into a wooden Seat, some six or eight
steps high, turns the half-hour-glass, which allots him his time, and, making
no Preface, begins his discourse upon that subject principally, which was read
out of the Book. In the midst of his discourse the Keeper rises up to give
notice again with the same Bell tolled louder; which done, another, who is to
speak in the second place, hies him thither, and waits so long as till the
first have finished his discourse. In the same manner just the third succeeds
the second, and the fourth the third. Neither is any one of these allowed above
half an hour; but, when need is, they are put in mind of making an end not only
by a glass, but by a little bell.

The Sermons being done, a Sacred Hymn is sung with Music; after which he that
spoke last invites them to say three Pater Noster's, and three Ave Maria's to
themselves, and so the assembly is dismissed. But, on Sundays, and other
Holy Days, one of them, who have such days allotted them to preach on, after
Vespers sung, makes a Sermon in the Church; who has power to exceed the
half-hour something, but not their established rules of discoursing already
mentioned. On the same days from the first of November to the solemn Festival
of our Lord's Resurrection, as also on Sundays in the morning, one of ours all
the year makes a Sermon in the Oratory. But of this elsewhere; it suffices now
to relate our Constitutions belonging hereto.

None of ours may be admitted to make a Sermon in the Oratory, without the
consent of the Fathers that have lived ten years in the Congregation.

No Stranger is to be invited to preach in the Oratory, or Church, but by leave
from the President, and the four Deputies.

CHAP. IV. Of the constant form of Government of the Congregation of the
Oratory.
NOW we will lay down the State, and Form of our Congregation, that is never to
be changed, as it is expressed in two decrees. The first of which is comprised
in these words.

Whereas heretofore our Congregation was by divine inspiration so instituted by
the Holy Father Philip Nerius, as to be united only with the bond of mutual
charity, not bound with any obligations of vows, oaths, or such like promises,
as this always was, and, is his, and all the Fathers of the Congregation their
unanimous meaning, that it should so continue; it is ordered, that, if at any
time any of ours intend to quit this course, and to bind the Fathers and
Brethren in any bonds of vows, oaths, or promises, although these should prove
the greater part, it may be in their choice, to go into what order they please,
but that the other part, though in number far inferior, do enjoy all the goods
of the Congregation in what place soever situate, so long as they shall
continue in their first condition, and that they shall not be tied to give any
thing of what is, or shall be, possessed, to that other part, that would change
it. For so shall this Congregation be ever preserved in the Church of God, that
is circumamicta varietate. Thus far the words of the Decree; that from thence
it may appear, that our Reverend Father in Christ could not be persuaded to
lead his Sons any other way, who yet out of his Christian charity so extremely
honored Religious persons, and out of his singular prudence knew that the holy
institutions of so many Orders, as have been already founded, were abundantly
sufficient to such as desired to tie up themselves by the bonds of vows for
attaining the greatest excellency of Christian Discipline.

The other Decree is. Lest, any, under color of enlarging the Congregation,
should destroy it, and that such confusion, and trouble may be avoided, which a
multitude is wont to cause, and that those of the Congregation may be amongst
themselves more strictly cemented together in the bands of love, which daily
conversation begets and nourishes; that also every ones inclinations may be
more exactly discovered, and that all may more reverence those persons, whose
worth has been long known to them; it is ordered, that this Congregation shall
not accept of any place elsewhere, nor undertake the charge of governing any
other Congregation abroad: and, if any Colleges and Societies in other places
shall procure our Rules, and desire to observe them, let them not be annexed to
ours, nor their Priests accounted of the Congregation of the Roman Oratory. But
let every House, or Body following our form, govern, and manage it self by it
self, apart from others.

CHAP. V. Of the Election, and Office of the President, and the four Priests
Deputies.
FOR the governing of the Congregation, and taking care of the things belonging
to it, first a President is chosen, whom we style The Father: next four Priests
are made Deputies. Of the choice, and offices of all whom the Congregation thus
determines.

None shall be elected President, who has not

continued in the Congregation fifteen years, in the which time he has
discharged the office of Deputy or Minister; and who is not at least forty
years of age.

The choice of the President shall belong to all the Priests of the
Congregation; who, after their tenth year past, shall be admitted to giving
their votes: but the Laics are to know, that they have no power to elect the
President, Deputies, and Prefects, but only to perform the duties appointed
them by the Rule.

As well the President, as the Deputies, and other Officers may be chosen in
their absence.

That Priest, that amongst ours holds the first place next to the President in
the Congregation, ought to preside as Superior in the Election, and absence of
the President.

Now the Election of the President shall be after this manner. He that is
Secretary shall give every Elector Tickets, in which are written, or printed
the names of those that are eligible, to put one of them, which they please,
into a Box; two, appointed to that end, looking on. Then, as every one is drawn
out in the sight of those two, he shall be named aloud by the Secretary; and he
shall be chosen President, in whole Election more than half the number of the
Electors do jointly agree. This way of electing, till they thus agree, they may
reiterate ten times; but, after the tenth Scrutiny, if still a greater part
than half light not on one, let there be a com-promise, namely, that only five
of the Electors choose a President only out of those two, who in any of the
trials formerly made have had the most voices. Which is shown by an instance:
For, if two, or more have an eighth part of voices; or one, or more an eighth,
and others a seventh; then, refusing all the rest, the Electors are to choose
out of these only. But the Electors themselves, the five Com-promisers, who
have the power of choosing a President, are only to be elected by a major part
of voices of the Congregation, not required that each have more of the Electors
voices than the half: and let them be taken out of those, that were not in
nomination at the first election. For these two at that time have no right at
all to any such election, but are deprived of both active, and passive voice,
as it is called.

If at length, when the papers are drawn, the Com-promisers be even, let him be
chosen President, who by his place in the Congregation precedes the rest of his
Competitors.

The office of President is to last three years; and may, at the pleasure of
the Congregation, be confirmed every third year. He shall come and sit down at
the same table with the rest, unless sickness hinder.

He is to have nothing singular, either, in the Church, at Table, in Bed, at
home, or abroad; except the chief place, and a Laick of our own appointed him
by the Deputies, to perform any service he commands.

As for the estate, and goods of the Congregation, he is to menage them
carefully, and to provide things necessary for diet, and apparel for ours. To
the poor or others, who are not of our Congregation, he may give the value of
one Crown every month. For any greater sum, as often as there shall be occasion
of such disbursements, he shall ask the consent of the four Deputies: and (if
it happen to exceed ten Crowns) of the whole Congregation. The same let him
observe in other extraordinary charges of any work, or other business, and in
all things no way belonging to the provision, or daily use of our House.

The chief power of governing the whole Congregation, and taking care of all
things that concern it, is to be in the President; for to him only shall belong
the assembling, when need is, the Congregation; the proposing things to be
debated; the seeing good orders executed; the taking an account also of things
done, or to be done, by any of ours, to whom any office, or charge in what
manner, or place soever, is committed, and the looking that all things be duly
performed. To this end he shall call the Congregation of the four Deputies at
least once every week; without whose consent he shall do nothing that relates
to the public governing of the house, and the choosing, or removing Officers.
For, all the other Officers, and servants, who are to continue for three years,
shall be chosen by the President; and the four Deputies, except the Confessor,
to be chosen by a major part of the Electors in the Congregation immediately
after the President, and Deputies being elected: for none of these may
undertake that charge.

The Prefects over the several employments of the House, whom we term Officers,
known sufficiently by their titles, are these that follow.

The Priest for Confessions.

The Corrector: one of the Seniors, who privately reprehends the faulty.

The Minister; who, looks to the managing the household business according to
the appointment, and direction of the President.

The Prefect of the Vestry, to whose paternal care those assigned to the
service of the Vestry are committed, as all the other Laics are to the
Minister.

The Keeper of the Vestry.

The Prefect of the Oratory, and his Assistant.

The Prefect of the Preachers in the Church.

The Prefect of Ceremonies.

The Prefect of the Music.

The two Entertainers of Guests.

The Monitor of the Prayers that are to be made for those recommended at the
Table every evening.

The Prefect of the Novices.

The Keeper of the Stock-mony.

The Procurator of the household affairs, and his Assistants.

The Library Keeper, and his Assistant, who are not to permit books to be taken
out of the public Library.

The Attendant of the Sick, and his Assistants.

The Prefect of the buildings, and his Assistant.

Two Prefects, for correcting the errors of those that read at the Table.

The Prefect of the Apothecary's shop, and the Apothecary.

The Receiver, and Dispenser of moneys.

The Keeper of the household goods.

The Keeper of the Pantry.

The Keeper of the Wine-cellar.

The Keeper of the Refectory.

The Porters.

All these the Congregation particularly admonishes by this constitution.

Let none refuse any Office imposed by the Congregation, or the President, and
Deputies, but accept it with all submission of mind. And, if he conceive he
ought for some reason to refuse, after he has with befitting modesty declared
his opinion once, or twice, and the President, and Deputies approve it not, he
shall without any further excuse undertake the office enjoined him.

But, as touching the Deputies to be chosen at the same time with the
President, thus it is.

After the Election of the President, shall be chosen assistants to him four of
the Priests that have lived in the Congregation ten years since they were
admitted to their first probation; and they have power of choosing out of the
whole Congregation; by whose consent, as was said, the President shall do all
things, which he thinks concern the public government of the Congregation.

By the same Priests then (all of ten years standing) in the same manner as
above, but proceeding to a third scrutiny only, shall four Deputies be chosen;
each apart, in the same Congregation: but, after a third scrutiny, without any
com-promising, let those two be chosen, upon whom the most voices in these
three votings shall light. But if more than two, as having equal votes, happen
to be thus eligible; only two, the rest rejected, can be elected: namely those,
who of course precede the others in the Congregation. For example; If, after
the third scrutiny, one have an eighth number of voices, and another a seventh,
the rest not so many; we say, these two are to be preferred to the office of
Deputies by scrutiny, the rest being utterly uneligible. And, if many have a
seventh number; he likewise shall by scrutiny be chosen out of them, excluding
others, who takes place in the Congregation. If the votes for the two to be
elected be equal again, let him in like manner be taken for Deputy, who of
course is wont to go first amongst us.

One of the four Deputies of the three years past, (for every ones office lasts
three years) or, if it be thought fit, two, may be confirmed for three years
more; but after can be confirmed no longer.

Out of the Deputies also one shall be chosen Secretary by consent of the
Deputies themselves; who shall write down in a Book made for that purpose all
the things decreed by the General Congregation, or by the President, and four
Deputies, and write Letters abroad upon occasions. But all letters, that
contain business, are to be transcribed into another Book.

Besides; when a President dies, or goes out of his office, the Deputies are to
admonish the foresaid Senior, who in the mean time executes his place, to
summon those that are to be called to the election of a President. And, if he
neglect to do it, they shall do it themselves.

If, no man dissenting, the Deputies shall think fit to grant unto, or impose
upon, the President, for some just cause, a cessation from his office; four of
the Priests of ten years standing shall be called in. And, if they also approve
of it, let them call a Congregation, by which let him be deposed, and a new
President chosen after the manner aforesaid; yet still keeping the same course
in deposing a President, as is appointed to be observed in ejecting others.

Every year in January one of the Deputies, with another that is no Deputy,
shall take a particular account of all the expenses of the whole year, and,
being cast up, shall rehearse it in a public Congregation; that the
disbursements of the former year may appear to all, and every one may see,
whether any debt be contracted, and what the Stock and goods of the
Congregation amount to.

CHAP. VI. Of admitting Persons into, and ejecting them out of, the
Congregation.
THE Fathers of the Congregation, following the practice of their excellent
Founder, the Blessed Philip, would have none received for members of their
Body, but persons of good life, very fit and as it were naturally disposed for
their Rule: the Decrees running thus.

Let none younger than eighteen, or older than five and forty, be admitted to
their first probation; nor such as the Canons except from Orders, unless they
mean to continue altogether amongst the Laity; none sickly; nor such as have
been of any Religious Order; none, but persons well reported of by all; who
have been frequent auditors at the Oratory, and present at the Prayers, and
often wont to confess to some of our Priests, and who have made trial of our
Rule. Yet, in all these, if the Fathers, that have lived ten years in the
Congregation, so please, there may be a dispensation.

Two Priests shall be chosen by the Congregation, who are to be very careful
concerning those that are to be admitted into the Congregation, that, before
their admission, their life, and manners be strictly looked into. To this end
they shall often confer with them, converse with them; and, not herewith
content, inform themselves likewise from their Country men, amongst whom they
have formerly lived. And the two, that are chosen, are to report the
information, that they have touching them, to the Congregation being assembled
again, if it any way concern them to know it, before they privately pass their
votes.

Besides the two Fathers, who (we said) were to be chosen for that work, other
Fathers likewise shall diligently inquire into the things before spoken of; and
examine, whether they come disposed to continue constantly to their lives end
in the Congregation, on no other ground, but the serving God, and observing the
rules, and constitutions of the Congregation, which therefore the Fathers,
before their admission, shall offer them to be read, to the end they may the
more advisedly deliberate on the whole business.

But, how those that are to be admitted should dispose of their estates, and
domestic affairs, is shown in the eighth Chapter. For, before they be admitted
to private suffrages, they must be in a readiness to live and dwell with us,
lest, being so admitted, they live out of the Congregation, except for some few
days, at the most fifteen.

Those admitted to the first probation shall not presently be reckoned among
the Novices, but live a month in our House as guests, in that space the better
to learn our customs, and deliberate more maturely; and on the other side to
try them, whether they be ready to obey in all things, even in the meanest and
most difficult: whether of themselves they be inclined to the exercises of holy
meditation, and of the Sacraments; not contentious, not obstinate, not proud,
and refractary in any matter against their Superiors, or Inferiors.

If they make a good proof, after a month their names shall be set down in a
Book appointed for that purpose, and from thence shall their first year of
probation commence; in which years space, if their conversation be virtuous,
and laudable, they shall continue two years in a second probation; otherwise
they shall be dismissed by the President, and Deputies, whose office it is to
admit to the first, and second, probation. And at three years end, if in like
manner they still retain the esteem of having lived virtuously in common, they
shall be voted worthy to be members of the Congregation. To this therefore by
private suffrages they shall be associated, and may afterward be chosen into
all offices, except that of President, and Deputy. But power of choosing others
they shall only have at ten years end; unless, by consent of the Deputies, the
President upon some grounds think fit to defer it

And if any of them, upon no other cause intervening, but forgetfulness, or
modesty, require not at the due time, what he might easily obtain from the
Congregation, when he shall be registered in the Catalogue among ours, let him
be reckoned as incorporated from that time, wherein the usual three years, or
ten years, shall be expired.

The admitting into the Congregation, and to all the offices above mentioned,
shall belong to the Priests of ten years standing, and shall go by the major
part of voices: but the admitting to the first and second probation, as has
been said, belongs to the President, and Deputies.

None can be expelled the Congregation, unless first all the Priests that have
lived ten years therein (reckoning from the day wherein they were admitted to
their first probation) meet together, and every one give his vote, and that two
parts of three determine it to be done. And, if the Priests cannot equally be
distributed into three parts, then the proportion shall be observed that is of
eight to thirteen, or to fourteen: so that, for example, whether the Priests be
thirteen, or fourteen, two thirds thereof shall be eight.

None may be expelled the Congregation, but for a reiterated, and criminal
obstinacy; or some heinous offense; but, what are so, it shall be stood to the
judgment of two parts of three, accounting them as before.

CHAP. VII. Of the breeding up of the Novices.
THose that are admitted to the first probation, whether inferior Clergy, or
Priests, are committed to his care, who manageth that office in the
Congregation, till, the three years being expired, they are reckoned amongst
ours. He directing all unto the good of Souls, besides that special quest after
virtue, which ours principally ought to possess, takes care to propose certain
other things, which have hitherto been constantly observed: as namely.

That they serve every day at Mass.

That, at the appointment of the Superior, they abstain from the study of
Sciences; which studies are to be moderated in the first place, that, endued
with heavenly wisdom, they may learn to love, as to these, to be nothing
accounted of.

That they come immediately to the Refectory upon the Bell giving notice, and
there, according to order, perform the office of Servitor, or Reader.

That all of them serve, or read, daily, or weekly, both at the first and
second hour of dinner, or supper: but they, who are Priests, use only to attend
at the first hour in the morning.

That in like manner they read in the Church before the Sermons, as every ones
appointed week falls out: that they be present at them, and likewise take care
that nothing usually observed be at such time omitted. And this custom of
attending, and reading, let those also, who are associated, still observe, till
they be of ten years standing, or thereabouts, as the Superiors, viz. the
President, and Deputies, shall think fit.

When the Sermons are done (two of which, or at least one, every day they are
to hear) that they may also something attend their health, let them recreate
themselves with a walk.

At Evening let them come to Prayer in the Oratory.

After dinner and supper, for recreation, let all of them for an hour accompany
together in the same place with the rest; and there laying aside all severity
with a pleasant behavior, yet modestly, so demean themselves, as that none,
tho but in jest, touch his fellow.

If the Porter brings any of them word, that one inquires for him, let him
repair presently to the gate, there dispatch his business in few words,
bringing in no stranger into his chamber, or at all into our house, without
acquainting the Superior.

Let them neither go out of the house, nor go forth alone at any time, but by
his leave also.

Let them manage or undertake no business of Strangers, or any other, which are
forbidden to those that live in the Congregation, either by custom, or
statute, without the President's permission.

Let them on Holy Days scarcely upon urgent necessity quit their attendance on
holy things, or leave the Vestry.

The Altar, which any one has the charge of, according to the change of the
Church-Solemnity let him dress up, as suites best with the time.

Thrice a week let them confess their sins to the Confessor appointed, and
those, who are no Priests receive the Blessed Sacrament, as he shall direct.

Let them take care, if in any thing they err, on their own accord to submit
themselves to correction.

As touching the Congregation, before which they are to appear, and declare
their faults, the constitution is this.

The Congregation for the faults of the Novices, that is, those, who have not
yet lived three years in the Congregation, whether they be Priests, or inferior
Clerks, shall assemble, if it may be, every week, namely that they appear
before the meeting for general Confession: but, if some week there happen no
such meeting, let all the Novices assemble themselves privately before him, to
whose care they are committed.

Sometimes also, instead of the forementioned accusation, they are wont, met
together, to use the reading of some approved author, by which, through discourse,
and conference about Spiritual matters, they may as it were by turns be
seasoned with most profitable instructions.

CHAP. VIII. Of the principal Customs amongst us.
FOR the cultivating her Childrens minds with a more heavenly discipline, and
the better conforming them to true Christian Piety, the Congregation chiefly
lays down these Decrees.

Thrice a week let every one confess his sins to the Priest chosen for that
purpose (unless one be upon good grounds sometimes permitted by him to do
otherwise.) Yet the Fathers, so instituted by St. Philip, do much approve, and
commend this custom as very beneficial to eternal salvation. In like manner
let him so often prepare himself to receive the Eucharist; and, if his
Confessor think fit, receive it.

The Congregation for faults (as they call it) meet once a fortnight, at which
not only Priests, but all of the Congregation, Clergy and Laity, shall be
present; where from the lowest to the highest every one accuses himself upon
his knees of some offense, tho it be a small one, committed by him in common
conversation; and, whatsoever he has displeased another in, asks pardon of
him. Yet, in this public accusation, no mention is made of such secret faults
as are meet only to be confessed privately to the Priest.

No Priest, who has not been full ten years a Priest in the Congregation, may
be the corrector of others.

So, on the day appointed all being met together, the President, as the custom
is, first by solemn Prayers invocating the Holy Spirit, that Priest, who in his
turn is to correct the rest (for in this office they use to take their turns)
called forth sits down in a seat at the Presidents right hand, and making a
short speech before, for the better enflaming their minds toward God, in the
spirit of meekness performs the duty of Corrector: and, whilst he corrects
those of the Clergy, and Priests, he remains uncovered; which he uses not to
be, when he reproves the Laity. He stands bareheaded likewise in his
admonishing, and correcting, the President.

The Laity, and inferior Clerks, when they have accused themselves of their
faults, after correction, and a very short admonition from the President
concerning some vicious custom to be amended, or commendable to be retained,
presently depart. Next all the Priests, who are as yet Probationers, accuse
themselves: these likewise going away, the rest of the Priests take their turn,
who, having accused themselves, and received correction, the President returns
thanks to God in the accustomed Prayers.

There is to be prescribed a Form of Penances, as it is termed, which, in the
enjoining them, it shall not be lawful to exceed. And these written in tickets
the same day, that the faults are acknowledged, at evening in the Refectory at
the end of supper let them be distributed to every one out of a bag.

After this distribution, as it falls out, let every one in order, and openly
before all, read his own penance.

Besides this; as is said before, one of the Seniors shall be chosen to perform
the continual office of Corrector. Who is privately to correct every one of the
Congregation, even the Deputies, and President: which duty notwithstanding he
shall discharge with all meekness, and lenity of mind, considering himself (as
the Apostle says) lest he also be tempted; so that he seem to endeavor more
to reform himself, and his own life, that by this means he may reduce his
brethen to a better course.

Last of all, the care of the discipline of the house requires, that that week,
wherein there is no public acknowledgment of faults, all the Lay-persons of
the Congregation do meet before the Minister to whose charge they are assigned,
to be by him instructed, and gently directed in observing the way of eternal
salvation.

Furthermore, to the end ours be none of them infected with covetousness, or
corrupted with ambition, and that by degrees they neither cast off modesty, nor
rashly usurp authority, provision is in some kind made by these following
Constitutions.

To the end, all who are admitted into the Congregation may more disengaged
give up themselves to God and divine matters, they are in the first place to
look chiefly, that by no means there be any difference about the estates they
enjoy; and they are to know, that their yearly profits are to be laid out in
such pious uses as they think fit, and nothing to be hoarded up; that so none
of the Congregation may set his mind upon getting of riches; nay every one
according to his ability is to contribute liberally out of his estate, to the
common use, and benefit of the Congregation. Which thing has hitherto been so
carefully observed by our Fathers, that, if any one through poverty has omitted
the paying of the rate appointed, as soon as he is any way more enabled he has
not neglected to supply and make it up; so fitting and reasonable has it
always seemed to them to war every one at his own charge; and to abstain from
the means of the Congregation, as from another man's estate, wherewith she is
especially to maintain those of hers who have nothing to live on. Nor may the
Congregation therefore be thought to use a command over any ones money, whilst
she requires only the set proportion for every ones diet from a cheerful giver;
and this too only where their estate will bear it.

The President and Deputies may likewise remit part of the means allotted by any
one, or all of it; if upon any ground they think fit so to do.

Those of the Congregation are forbidden to meddle with all secular business;
unless when some upon a necessary cause is appointed them by the President, and
four Deputies.

None of ours may (tho requested) profess under any Congregation or Society out
of the house, or undertake any charge whatever without leave of the
Congregation.

Whereas there are many in the Church of God, who either do, or conveniently
may, employ themselves in taking the confessions of Nuns; therefore, that none
be drawn away from the particular design of the Congregation, it is decreed,
that none of ours oblige, or apply himself to the hearing the confessions,
reforming the manners, and managing the business of such. The same we say of
Seminaries, Colleges, Congregations, Societies, or Universities, and the
intermeddling any way in their affairs.

No Bishop, Prelate, nor person admitted to any dignity whatsoever, may be
received into the house of the Congregation to tarry, and dwell there with
ours, tho but for a certain time.

In no wise at any time may they sue for, or accept, any Ecclesiastical
Benefices: but may keep those they had formerly, if they do not require their
personal residence.

None may take any dignities, but upon the Popes command.

None without the Presidents, and the four Deputies consent may frequent
Courts, nor seek after offices, or livings for himself, or others.

None may have a servant of his own; if any one be in necessity, he shall
acquaint the President therewith, who together with the four Deputies shall
provide them what is necessary.

None shall suffer boys to come into his Chamber, unless they be brought in by
others, who are present as witnesses; others let them very sparingly admit, but
rather being called let them go down to them.

None may be admitted to any Ecclesiastical Orders without the consent of the
Priests that have lived ten years in the Congregation. The same holds for
preaching publicly, or hearing confessions, as elsewhere is said.

None may put a Book to the Press without the Presidents, and Deputies leave.

No Statute shall be proposed to be confirmed by the Pope, except the Priests
of ten years standing first consent thereunto.

When any universal Law is to be made, let all the Priests of three years
standing be present, and have their votes in the consultation; but in the
decision only those of ten years standing.

When any thing is proposed to be done, let the Fathers beforehand have a
public, and free consultation about it; then after some days their private
votes shall pass concerning it; unless perhaps the necessity, benefit, or
sometimes also the meanness of the matter require, that it be dispatched
presently after consultation by their private suffrages. But, as has been
said, tho all the Priests of three years standing be admitted, and have a vote
in the consult; yet those only have votes in the decree, who are past their
tenth year.

CHAP. IX. Of their apparel, and familiar converse.
MOreover, for the external modest behavior of ours, we exhibit these Rules,
and Observations. Let not them be wanting to apply them also for obtaining
internal virtues.

Let none of the Brethren, or Fathers in their apparel wear any silk, except a
short close Cap upon their Crowns, for keeping their head warm, and a lining to
be sewed to the inside of their hat.

Also the fashion of clothes used by the Secular Clergy shall always be
observed.

The Laics shall wear a Cassock down to their knees, and a Cloak somewhat
longer.

Those that are clothed at the House's charge, as often as need is, are to go to
the Minister, or, in his absence, to the President, and acquaint him what they
want; and let them, when appointed to relieve them, with all charitable
affection satisfy their requests.

In all their apparel, gate, discourse, actions, and gestures let them observe
a decorum, and every one behave himself with all modesty; but let none of ours
show himself in any action of his singular (as it is called) from the ordinary
sort; or in his carriage differ from the common course of honest, and plain
persons.

And, tho it be a peculiar custom with us, that (in honor preferring each
other, and obeying one another) every one desires (for abasing their minds) to
take the lowest place; yet, lest the order of precedence, and ages, especially
in sitting, and going together publicly, and other such like actions, should
be confounded; those Priests, who are the Seniors, shall precede: yet so, that,
if any of the inferior Clergy of three years standing be promoted to
Priesthood, he be preferred before the Novice-Priests, namely those, who have
not lived full three years in the Congregation. And the Laics must always come
after the Clergy.

After Dinner and Supper all persons of the Congregation are to stay together
in a place appointed, for the space of an hour, after which let all depart to
their Chambers.

The Senior Priests shall take their choice of the Chambers that are void;
unless the President and Deputies shall appoint otherwise.

None under ten years standing in the Congregation may go out of the house
without the Presidents leave: for after three years standing to that time the
President either himself, or by some other, is wont to take the particular care
of these (especially such as are not yet Priests) for their progress in virtue.

None invited out of the house to dinner, or supper may go, without the
Presidents consent.

No Stranger, without the acquainting the Superior, may be invited to dinner,
or supper; much less to lodge in the house, but by the joint consent of both
the President, and Deputies.

None of the Fathers, or Brothers may invite any Stranger to any of the country
Farms belonging to the Congregation, nor entertain him, to continue there with
him, but by consent of the President of the Congregation.

None shall have leave from the President to be absent from the Congregation
above a month, whether he go into his Country, or elsewhere; except the
Deputies likewise consent thereto.

None of the Congregations shall be Sponsors for any either in Baptism, or any
other Sacrament.

To these may fitly, and pertinently be added likewise some things, which being
by long continued custom received, and allowed, are strictly observed among us.

As: At Evening in their several weeks all the Priests say Litanies in the
Oratory.

At the Sacrifice of the Holy Mass not only all the inferior Clergy, and Laity
daily serve, but many Priests (to be commended for it) use to be attendants.

At table, besides the Laity and inferior Clerks, who constantly serve by
turns, all the Priests likewise, on their several days at the evening, do
attend.

Some of ours also often repair to the Hospitals of the sick, there by their
labor to help the infirm.

If any fall sick in the house, all often visit, assist, comfort, attend on,
and confirm him very carefully.

When any one is near his end, upon notice given, all come together both
Priests and others, unanimously to implore the divine mercy for the dying
person.

If at any time one offends another in word; when the matter is decided, at
evening in supper-time he kneels down in the midst of the Refectory, and,
accusing himself as guilty, he craves pardon of him whom he offended; then the
other rising up, and doing so likewise; at least takes the fault to himself, as
giving the occasion thereof: But he that did the wrong is enjoined by the
President due penance, which is sometimes a slight one, sometimes none at all.

The Penances usually imposed on the faults confessed twice a month in the
Congregation are commonly such as these. Kissing the feet of the three first,
or last Priests at table: Saying in the midd^e of the Refectory in a low voice,
with their arms extended, the Psalm De profundis, or the Psalm Miserere,
joining their hands: taking the lowest place at table: eating their meat
sitting upon the ground: begging on their knees the auxiliary Prayers of those
that come into the Refectory: or begging them for the expiating their sins at
least by repentance before their death: the craving of every one, as they sit
at supper, something as an alms, before their own sitting down at table:
serving at the second table; or performing at it the Readers office: saying
their Beads for the Pope, or the Benefactors of the Congregation, or for those
of it that are dead: visiting the sick in Hospitals, and the like.

CHAP. X. Of the Refectory, and their Dieting together.
IN the last place the ordering of the Table in the Refectory, and fitting it
for pious converse, comes to be insisted on; where all ours have both the same
quality, and same portion of meat, and drink: It is read sometimes at supper in
Italian, by the President's or Ministers appointment, set down much what after
this manner.

As soon as notice is given of dinner or supper-time, every one giving over his
employment, and work, repairs to the Refectory. He is silent as he goes to, and
also as he comes from, the table to the place where ours are to meet for
recreating their minds.

At his first entrance bowing his head, he does reverence to the sacred Image
before him; then with the wonted expression of respect saluting the company;
every one modestly, and silently stands in his place near the table, neither
out of curiosity looking on the dishes served up, nor on others coming in.

The President, or he that in his absence supplies his place, after he has
tarried a while till all may come from their chambers, with a plain and
distinct voice blesses the table in the form prescribed by the Holy Roman
Church; and the President sits in the first place; then the rest, as every ones
order is in the Congregation. If any one come late, yet so, as before the
Latin lection be ended, standing near the door, he says Grace to himself, and
making his reverence to the President sits down last after all the rest: for
out of honor, and respect, the President has his place in his absence kept
empty on purpose at the table, but none else. But, after the Latin lection at
table, he may not come in, till the cloth being laid again, they be called by
the wonted signal to the second Table; that thus all may be present both at
benediction, and giving of thanks. Yet Confessors are excepted, who on Holy
days have leave to come to dinner, after the reading at the table is ended. At
the beginning of the meal none touches any thing on the table, till the
President prepare himself to eat (who, before he begins, hears about two verses
of the reading.) Likewise care is taken, that there be not much noise made at
the beginning.

They are all to be content with what is set before them at table, asking for
nothing more, nor of themselves bringing ought without the Presidents, or
Ministers leave; who shall freely bestow, and provide what they judge
necessary, and fitting for every one. If any one want some of those things
usually brought, and served up to the table, he himself may ask the Servitors
for it, tho this better befits him that fits next to him.

At table silence is always observed, unless some exception hinders: for
liberty of speaking is allowed to him, that propounds, or those that answer,
for explicating a doubt.

Allowed also to him, who after supper mentions those that are to be
recommended to the Prayers of the Congregation: last of all to the President,
and Minister, when any thing falls out which may neither be committed to the
Reader, nor ought to be deferred: else the law of silence is to be observed,
whereto even the President himself is obliged.

None may read Letters at the table, nor may the Porter bring any, or carry
word thereof to any, whilst eating. If there be any urgent necessity, the
^orter, acquainting first the ^resident, or Vice President with it, by his
permission dispatcheth it. The same he is to observe till they come from the
Refectory to the place where, for recreating their minds, all are to meet
together.

After meals the cloth taken away, as soon as the President rises, all rise
and going forth stand near the table, so that, if it may with convenience be
done, those who sat lowest stand in the midst, and those who sat in the
middle, stand lowest, all standing in their due order. Only the President for
dignity's sake is a little further distant from the rest. This is the posture,
and order, wherein they use to give thanks; which done, they go by couples out
of the Refectory; so that he who at table sat next to the* President goes out
with him, and afterward the rest, in the same order.

None may tarry at all in the Refectory, or the Porch adjoining, any longer
than whilst they wash their hands.

The Reader, and Reading at the Table.
Not the body only, but the mind too is to be furnished at table with its
proper food. Therefore, before other books, the Holy Bible is there read; then
some kind of pious Commentaries, or piece of Antiquity; last of all, at the
Superiors pleasure, another Book, wherein either the approved histories of the
Saints, or some profitable instructions in Italian, are contained. The Reader,
before dinner or supper, makes himself and the books ready for reading on the
desk; where he stands bareheaded, whilst prayers are said at the table and
having pronounced the verse, Jube Domine benedicere, and tarried till all be
set, sitting down himself with his head covered, and held upright, he reads
aloud, distinctly, and plainly. The whole reading being discreetly distributed
into its parts, he cease not reading of the last till commanded by the
President; nor does he command him till above half dinner, or supper be past.
The rest of the time at table is spent in putting a question, as the manner is,
and clearing it by answers. The Reader is not only at table to read the
forementioned Books, but to invite them to the putting of some doubt: likewise
every week once at least to rehearse the names of our Benefactors; lastly to
publish whatsoever he shall be enjoined, either in word, or writing, by the
President, or Minister. For, he may neither read, nor pronounce any thing more,
than what is by them imposed upon him. The Reader, when corrected, is to repeat
the Correctors words with the same pronunciation of the syllables as he gives
them: and the Corrector chosen for this purpose is to word mistaken, without
the interposing any other words.

When he hears the President say, Etreliqua, the Reader gives over. Then saying
the verse, Tu autem Domine miserere nobis, and giving notice aloud to the
Priest, who, in his turn, is to propose some doubt, he goes down, and making an
obeisance to the President sits down to meat.

Doubts to be proposed at Table.
After reading presently some one of the Priests (for all of three years
standing in the Congregation are wont to do the same) every day, morning, and
evening, propounds something out of the Scriptures, or Morality, or
instructions for right informing the mind, and conscience, that may be
questioned, or disputed: but avoids the putting any thing difficult, obscure,
or too curious, to which all are not able to speak. Yet if at any time one make
no other answer, save that he stands to the common judgment of the rest, it is
rather to be imputed to modesty, than ignorance. And he that is to do that
office, when his day comes, proposes the question of himself, tho the Reader,
according to the custom, do not advertise him: yet, if any stranger invited be
at the table, not without the command of the President, or his Substitute, for
then, the Reader is not, as at other times, to put him in mind. If the
Proponent be absent, he is to succeed him, who uses to sit next him at table.
If any be long e're he propose the case, either through forgetfulness, or neglect,
coming unprovided, the President is either to demand it aloud of him, or to
mind him thereof by the whisper of some one that sits near him. The difficult
questions proposed at Table are usually two: every one speaks to one, or other
thereof; but the proponent in the last place, to remove all doubt, makes a
premeditated answer to both. The first Answerer is to be he that sits next
below the Proponent at table; then the other Priests of full three years
standing in the Congregation in like order. Let the answers (which are to be
very short) have nothing of flourish, and ostentation: for the doubt is
proposed as it were in the name of the whole company, to have it explained;
that every one, even the proposer himself, may answer to it, as a Scholar,
examined by his Master.

An Appendix.
Lastly; Concerning the Constitutions themselves it is ordered thus.

If there be any thing dou^^ful in our Constitutions, the President, and
Deputies shall clear it: yet by no means may they change, or impair them, nor
in any wise innovate, or make new ones.

An Appendix to the first Chapter purposely set by its self.
In the Oratory everyday at evening, upon tolling a Bell, a lamp and candles
being lighted, and an hourglass set upon the Altar before the Image of our
Blessed Lady, from the solemn Feast of our Lord's Resurrection, till the first
of September, the hour before Sunset, and from the first of September to the
Feast of Easter the first hour after Sunset, is appointed for Prayer: but on
Holy days, from the first of November, the second hour too; for then there is
both a Sermon, and Music.

Now the manner of the Prayers is this; after they have spent half an hour
silent in mental Prayer, as it is called, the Sacristan lighting the rest of
the candles upon the Altar, and giving notice, the Priest, whose week it is to
officiate, begins the Litanies, alternately with him recited by the company
assernbled, excepting the following prayers pronounced by him alone: Who, when
he comes to the Prayer for Peace, which begins, Deus a quo sancta desideria
etc. prefently two of the Brothers, or Ministers of the Oratory, taking from
off the Altar two little ^ictures of our Blessed Savior first give them to the
Priest kneeling to kiss: he kissing them both, and saying on the one side, and
the other, Pax tecum, they bowing their heads answer, Et cum spiritu tuo: and
afterward offer them to be kissed by all that are in the Oratory, with the like
salutation [ Pax tecum] as the Priest used. The rest of the prayers in the mean
while being ended, he desires them all aloud to pray to God for per-severing
constantly in his worship and service, saying to themselves five times the
Lord's Prayer, and the Angelical Salutation: his words are, Petamus quaeso,
nobis in divinis perseverantiam, recitantes etc. Let us I beseech you, beg
perseverance in things spiritual, rehearsing etc. These Prayers ended, he again
desires them to repeat them both again twice for the Pope, Cardinals, and other
more eminent Priests; for the concord of Christian Princes, propogation of
Faith, extirpation of Heresies, and for obtaining the conversion of wicked
livers; Then again to recite them once more for the Brethren of the Oratory
that are deceased, begging for them eternal rest. Afterward saying the verse,
Dominus det nobis suam pacem, he repeats an Antiphon of our Blessed Lady,
either Salve Regina, or some other best suting to the time. At last they, who
with these sacred Images have saluted first the assembly, and then mutually
themselves with the kiss of peace, relate to the Priest what things they have
received from them to be at that time recommended to their prayers; who
thereupon entreats all that they would be pleased to say one Pater, and Ave,
for those particulars, and five times invoke the most Holy Name of Jesus. Which
done, so soon as he has pronounced the verse Divinum auxilium maneat semper
nobiscum, and all have bowed themselves even to the kissing the very ground,
the Assembly is dissolved.

This is the constant order of the Prayers, excepting Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays, and the whole week before Easter: for on these days, in memory of the
scourging wherewith our most innocent Lord Christ Jesus for our sakes was
punished, they all whip themselves in the Oratory. And the custom, and manner
is (unless these days be Holy days, of fall in Easter week) that after half an
hours mental prayer (as they call it) made secretly, straight some of the
Keepers, or Officers of the Oratory distribute whips made of small cords, full
of knots, put forth the children (if there be any) and carefully shut the doors
and windows, and extinguishing the other lights, except only a small candle so
placed in a dark lantern upon the altar that the Crucifix may appear clear
and visible, but not reflecting any light, thus make all the room dark. Then
the Priest in a loud and doleful tone pronounces the verse Jube Domine
benedicere.

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ be ever in our hearts.

Remember, Dear Brethren, that our Lord Jesus Christ was for us sold, betrayed
with a kiss, led first to Annas, then to Caiphas the High Priest, and at last
to Pilate into the Judgment Hall, where he was bound to a Pillar, and scourged;
crowned with a crown of thorns, and clothed with a purple vesture; buffeted,
and spit on, and delivered to the Jews to be crucified; brought to Mount
Calvary, and crucified, and with him two thieves, one on the right hand, the
other on the left; and when he said I thirst, they reached him vinegar, which
having taken he said It is finished, and bowing down the head gave up the
ghost. [ Here every one with his fist beats his breast] Afterward one of the
Soldiers with a spear peirced his side, and straightway issued out blood, and
water; and being taken down from the Cross, he was buried in a new tomb; and
the third day rose from the dead. Tu autem Domine miserere nobis. They answer;
Deo gratias. Then follows: Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto him with
trembling: Apprehendite disciplinam etc.

At which words taking their whips they scourge their naked bodies during the
time that the fiftieth Psalm Miserere with the Gloria Patri, etc. and the 129.
De profundis (at the end of which is said, Requiem aeternam etc) be devoutly by
turns recited: Likewise during the prayers, Fidelium Deus omnium conditor, and
redemptor etc; and, Deus qui culpa offenderis etc; at the conclusion of which,
upon a sign given, they end their whipping. Then the Priest requests them to
repeat the Lord's Prayer and Angelical Salutation five times: after that, twice
for the Pope etc; and once for the faithful departed etc; so as they are wont
to do on other days, when they use no disciplining. Meanwhile in this space
they all put on their clothes in the dark, and in silence. After this they say
by turns the Song of Simeon, Nunc dimittis servum tuum Domine. In the mean time
the Keeper of the Oratory makes him ready against he hears those words, Lumen
ad revelationem gentium etc; when opening his lantern he lights the candles
anew. The Priest who officiates goes on praying, Da pacem Domine etc; and, that
Prayer being ended, Deus a quo sancta desideria etc. the holy Pictures are
presented to be kissed in token of peace, after the same manner, as on other
Feria's. Meanwhile the other prayers following being added, he that prays
says, Dominus det nobis suam pacem: to which they answer, and vitam aeternam
Amen. In the last place they salute the Holy Virgin Mother of God with an usual
Antiphon, such as befits the particular season of the year: and so the rest, as
in other Feria's, wherein they use no whippings at all.

The Exercises wherein they are employed on Sundays.
On Sundays the Sacristan, or some of the Keepers, betimes in the morning opens
the Oratory doors; the Reader prepares to read in some book of some good
subject and profitable discourse, till, the company increasing, the Prefect, or
his Assistant, all kneeling down, proposes something for their pious
meditation: after this he goes on with the Litanies, and other prayers, as is
every day the custom there at Evening to do. These ended, some one of the
Priests, that are not then appointed to hear confessions, making a Sermon upon
the Gospel for the day in a plain style, and not above half an hour long,
exhorts his auditors to the avoiding sin, the keeping up good customs, and in
fine to the conserving all piety. The Sermon ended, and the Lord's Prayer and
Angelical Salutation rehearsed, the Prefect asks, whether any of the company
knows any of the Brethren sick, that he may presently dispatch such as are
appointed, or as he likes best, to visit, and comfort the party languishing,
relieve his sadness or want, exhort him to the confessing of his sins, and the
bearing his pain patiently and cheerfully. The sick Brothers name, and dwelling
is writ down in a table, that the offices of visiting and praying for him be
not omitted. Then seven of the Brothers are sent to the seven Churches of the
City famous all the world over for devotion and the several Indulgences of
Popes; and three to the three public Hospitals of the sick; that so each of
them may once a week visit either the Church, or Hospital, that falls to his
lot: for on Holy days almost all attend on these offices of Piety. And in these
exercises they spend about an hour and a half. Also on the last Sunday of every
month they are put in mind to prepare themselves for the Communion, to receive
the Holy Eucharist: for every first Sunday in the month they arm themselves
with this Sacrament; and in the afternoon [i. e. at Vespers] either certain
brief instructions written in tickets, or paper pictures of some Saints are
distributed in the Oratory, for every one to take one, and learn by that which
is written underneath what he is to request of our Lord by means of that Saint
whose picture is fallen to him.

The Afternoon Exercises both for Sundays and Holy Days.
On all Holy days after Vespers sung in the Church, and a Sermon made, many of
ours, Priests, and Laics, with the Brethren of the Oratory and diverse others,
meet in an appointed place in the Suburbs, where, sitting down on the grass,
first those that are skilful sing some pious or sacred hymn; then some one says
by heart a Sermon adorned no less with Piety, than elegancy, given him in
writing by the Prefect of the Oratory: which done, they sing again. After this
the Prefect of the Oratory rises up, or some other thereto appointed by the
Fathers, who, proposing very briefly a subject concerning living virtuously and
christianly, invites a second to discourse thereon; then a third; and, if the
time permit it, a fourth: who all of them speak to the matter propounded with
equal brevity, and piety, to the benefit of both themselves, and their
auditors. When it is time to conclude their discourse, a hymn is sung, and so
all return home, or to the Oratory. And, when they cannot go to such places for
extreme heat in Summer, they repair in some Church to those their exercises.
But in Winter, from the first of November to Easter, on Holy days at evening,
when the Ave-Mary-Bell rings, they go into the Oratory. Half an hour mental
prayer lasts; Litanies are said or sung with music; our Lord's Prayer and the
Angels Salutation repeated according to the usual number (but, when there is
music, rehearsed only thrice;) then the Antiphon of the Blessed Virgin, which
is changed according to the season; and lastly some pious song set to the
music is sung. After this one of our Priests, as it happens to be his turn to
preach, with as much profit and plainness as may be, dispenses to the people
present the word of God for half an hour: after that the music again: then
they pray to God in the usual form thrice; salute the Virgin Mother; and so the
Assembly is dismissed.

The employments of the Strangers in the Oratory.
Out of the Strangers, who are Brethren of the Oratory, first the Prefect
chooses a Rector to oversee the offices of the rest; two or four Sacristans,
or Keepers, to sweep the Oratory, light the Lamps, and Candles, take care of
the disciplines, Clock, and dressing the Altar. Likewise two or four tenders of
the sick, who are to visit the Brothers that are ill; some are also chosen,
faithfully and carefully to dispose of the money voluntarily offered either for
the benefit of the sick Brothers, or of the Hospitals, or of the Oratory; and
they are by no means to receive any, unless they know it be freely offered;
observing that of the Apostle Non vestra, sed vos: Not yours, but You. One
likewise is chosen Secretary, to register all things to be debated-of. A Reader
also, who on Holy days reads some pious lessons before the Prayers. Besides,
every Holy day they carry to the sick in the Infirmaries things conducing to
their recovery approved-of by the Physician.

Every month, or oftener, if they please, they are to report the sum of their
disbursements, according to the orders given them, to the Rector, and Prefect
of the Oratory; for these Strangers, and Lay-Brethren have no authority or
power in disposing the things belonging to the Oratory, but only in the
dispensing them by the direction of the Prefect.

The Order in electing these Lay-officers.
Every four months the Brethren, that are Strangers, are chosen to these
Offices in this manner. After rehearsing the Lord's Prayer and Angelical
Salutation, the Prefect is wont in this form to implore the Divine assistance:
Veni Creator Spiritus, reple etc. Answer is made: Et tui amoris etc. V. Emitte
Spiri^um tuum, and creabuntur. R. Et renovabis faciem terrae. The Prayer, Deus,
qui cordafidelium etc. Actiones nostras etc. As soon as they are declared, and
published, Te Deum is said; an Antiphon of our Blessed Lady; the Prayer,
Gratiam tuam etc. the Antiphon, Da pacem etc: the Prayer, Deus, a quo sancta
defideria etc. And the Prayer of that particular Sunday, or of the Saint, whose
Festival is is then kept. Then some pious directions or instructions are
briefly read to the persons elected.

An Advertisement concerning the Constitutions of the Congregation.
Seeing that the Congregation has power to eject, and expel out of the society
and house, all enormous offenders or disturbers of its orders; and seeing that
it is likewise very probable, that whoever neglects his own salvation will
hardly continue long there, where is to be both a daily advancement in virtue,
and a pious emulation of the most perfect, the Holy Founder has declared his
intent, that these constitutions should not oblige any one under sin. God the
great Arbiter, who will bestow on every one eternal rewards according to their
piety, in his great mercy be propitious unto us. Amen.

Here end the Rules of the Congrgation of the blessed Philip, or of the Roman
Oratory of St. Mary's in Vallicella, composed, revised, and confirmed by the
authority of the Holy See Apostolic.
Prayers used before a Congregation.
Come Holy Ghost replenish the hearts of thy faithful; and kindle in them the
fire of thy love.

V. Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created.


R. And thou shall renew the face of the earth.


V. Remember thy Congregation.


R. Which thou have possessed from the beginning


V. O Lord hear my Prayer.


R. And let my cry come unto thee.


V. The Lord be with you.


R. And with thy Spirit.


Let us pray.

God, that have taught the hearts of the faithful by the illumination of the
Holy Ghost: grant us in the same Spirit to understand the things that are
right, and always to joy in his consolation.

Prevent our actions, O Lord we beseech thee, by thy favor, and further them
by thy help: that every Prayer, and work of ours may begin always from thee,
and begun may end in thee, Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayers after a Congregation.
V. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us.


R. Thanks be unto God.


Let us pray.

O God, whose property is always to have mercy, and to spare, receive our
petition; that, if in this Congregation we have committed any error, the
clemency of thy piety may pardon it, Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father etc.

V. And lead us not etc.


R. But deliver us etc.


V. From the gate of hell.


R. Deliver them O Lord.


V. Let them rest in peace.


R. Amen.


V. O Lord hear my Prayer.


R. And let my cry come unto thee.


V. The Lord be with you.


R. And with thy Spirit.


Let us pray.

O God, the bestower of mercy, and lover of man's salvation, we humbly beseech
thy clemency, grant, that the brethren, relatives, and benefactors of our
Congregation, who are departed out of this world, may by the intercession of
the blessed and perpetual Virgin Mary, and of all thy Saints, attain to the
fruition of eternal felicity, Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Let the souls of the faithful through the mercy of God rest in peace. Amen.

Glory be to God.

Memorable Sayings and Advices of St. PHILIP NERI Translated out of an Italian
Copy.
1. THE Devil, who is a most proud Spirit, and a lover of darkness, is no way
better conquered than by humility of heart, and by manifesting simply and
clearly without any concealment all one's sins and temptations to their
Confessor.

2. According to the rules of the Fathers and ancient Monks, he, that will make
advancement in Religion, must dis-esteem the world, must esteem all others in
it, not value himself; not value that he is not valued.

3. God evermore searches into the hearts of men for the spirit of humility,
and a mean esteem of ones self; nor is there any thing more displeasing to him,
than a swollen conceit of ones own worth.

4. When one commits a sin, or falls into some oversight; he ought presently to
imagine, God permitted this his fall because of his pride. And surely to excuse
such a defect, is a thing very dangerous; therefore who thus falls ought so
often to say; Had I been humble I had not fallen.

5. When one is reprehended for some fault committed, he ought with all
cheerfulness and humility to entertain such reproof, and not to become sullen
and discontent upon it; because such a pettish discontent, which out of a
certain pride thinks much to be corrected, is more mischiefous than the fault
it self.

6. We ought not to demand of God to visit us with afflictions and temptations
out of a presumption of our own ability to conquer them; but well may we
request of him, with an humble and confident affection, grace and strength with
cheerfulness to undergo whatsoever he shall please to inflict.

7. When a man is afflicted by any infirmity or indisposition of Body, he ought
to bethink himself seriously and say; God has laid this weakness on me,
because of something he would have to be done by, or amended in, me. Therefore
I resolve to change my course of life (but this by his assistance) and become a
better man.

8. Fasting, using of disciplines and such like other penances, ought to be
done by advice of one's Confessor. For whosoever do them of their own head, may
either wrong their complexion, or may by doing them become proud, thinking
themselves to have done some great matter. We must seek after knowledge, but
without curiosity or anxiety; and that which we learn ought to be kept secret,
making no ostentation of it, but using it to better our life.

9. A man's heart is arrived to great perfection, when it is discreet and
passes not the limits of what is convenient Therefore many (especially of
those who begin to serve God) for want of this discretion apply themselves
suddenly to a most austere life, and undertake most tiresome penances; by
rigorous fastings, putting on the roughest sackcloth, lying on boards, watching
and praying whole nights, when such things are disproportional to, and much
exceeding, their strength; so that in some time they remain confounded, and
indisposed both in respect of body and mind.

10. We may not so apply our selves wholly to the means, as to forget the end
for which the means were used. Therefore they err exceedingly who are only
intent on mortifying the body with abstinences, whippings, pilgrimages, hair
cloth, or such like, and there stay, imagining now they have done all; And know
not that all this is nothing if these means do not promote us to fear God, to
keep, with a love to them, his Commandments, and to humble us, and to wean us
wholly from the world, that with our whole heart we may serve him.

11. Some there be who by little and little much over-charge themselves,
tasking themselves to say every day their Beads, several times the hours of the
blessed Virgin, the office of the Dead, and diverse Prayers some for one man,
some for another, and the like, all which may happily be good, but altogether are
too much; and straining themselves to perform them, in the end through
tediousness they give them over. Besides that so many things to be done hinder
mental prayer. Therefore it is best to choose some good course of devotion, and
so continue to practice it, and not afterward to leave it off.

12. We must not do all things in a moment, nor become Saints in three or four
days; but by little and little and from one degree to another.

13. There is more difficulty to remedy those who will do too much, than to
incite others who do too little.

14. It is very profitable to intermit sometimes one's usual devotions, when
his Confessor advises it. If it so fall out that his Confessor advises him
not to communicate on his accustomed days, but defer it to another time, and
the person thus advised will not obey, but is resolute still to communicate,
and is displeased with what is commanded him; this is not devotion but a sign
of hard-heartedness, of little mortification, and of pride, by which he is
rendered most unworthy of that Sacrament.

15. When one knows how to countermand his own will, and to deny to his soul
its own desires, he is in a good degree of virtue. But not to know and not to
study to do this, is to carry about one the seminary of a thousand temptations;
and such a one will be apt to take offense, and to break friendship, and will
seldom be cheerful, but for the most part Melancholy and troubled for the
things that will befall him.

16. External devotion is no certain sign that one is truly devout, neither are
tears themselves always a true sign of devotion; because ill women easily weep,
yet are no Saints for it.

17. If from any person one receives a repulse, he ought by no means to take it
ill, or show sign of discontent, but continue toward them the same cheerful
countenance, as formerly, and to take from them all suspicion of his small
satisfaction.

18. When it is needful to admonish any person of quality of some notable
defect, the best way is to let the reprehension fall on some third person, for
so they will more easily and gently take it to themselves; and not be angry
that one should dare to play the Master over them.

19. Who would be much obeyed, let him not command too much.

20. Then the obedience is good when one obeys without arguing, and holds it
for a rule, that what is commanded is fittest to be done. And whosoever enters into
a Society ought to be most ready to obey; and to leave all private, for the
common, affairs.

21 It is not enough only to honor our Superiors, but we ought also to honor
our equals and our inferiors, and to strive to be the first in giving honor.

22. It is a thing appertaining to virtue to fly all manner of singularity, and
not to make show to be, or to do, any thing more than others.

23. Raptures, Ecstasies, and tears in public, and in the sight of people, are
suspicious; because Grace loves the recess and privacy of the heart, except so
far as it is necessary to manifest it for the good of our neighbor; and Nature
seeks her own, and loves to make an outward show and appearance.

24. We ought not to delay to do well, for death delays not to approach; and
happy is the young man to whom God gives time to be able to do good.

25. Idleness is a pestilence to a Christian; and therefore must we always be
doing something, especially when alone in our chamber: either reading some book
of Devotion, or the lives of Saints, or the H. Scripture; or saying our
Prayers, or ordering our books, or making our bed, or some such thing, that the
Devil never find us idle.

26. To go on in the way of virtue it is a good motive to consider, that in
this world there is no Purgatory for us, but either Paradise, or ^ell; because
he who serves God as he ought all labor and infirmity turns to his
consolation, and he has within himself a Paradise; but he who does the
contrary, and gives himself to sensuality, has Hell in this world, and in the
next.

27. The frequent Confession of sins brings great good to our soul; for it
purifies, and heals, and confirms it in Gods service. Therefore our set time to
perform it must not be deferred for any business whatsoever which may then
occur: but first we ought to go to confession, and afterward about our affairs,
in which we may hope for the better success by this help.

28. Melancholy and trouble of mind brings great hurt to the spirit, whereas
chearfulnes fortifies the heart, and makes one persevere the better in a good
life. Therefore the servant of God ought always to be cheerful.

29. Scruples, because they disquiet the mind and make it melancholic, ought
to be greatly shunned.

30. We must not ask of God temporal blessings, as health, riches, prosperity,
and the like, absolutely, but conditionally; if it please God, and if they be
expedient.

31. When God bestows on us any internal grace we ought not to diclose it
except to our spiritual Father, otherwise we loose it.

32. Who goes to serve the sick, or do other charities, must imagine such a
sick person to be Christ, and all he does to him to be done to Christ himself;
for so it is done with more love and benefit.

33. When any man does a good work, and another ascribes it to himself, and
assumes the glory of it, he who did it ought exceedingly to rejoice, and
acknowledge it a great favor from God, that others take that from him before
men, because he shall recover it with greater reward before God.

34. He does ill who has confidence of himself; and he who puts himself on the
occasion of a sin, saying, I shall not fall, commonly does fall with greater
damage of his own soul: who would not fall let him not trust to himself, nor
presume on his own strength; but say to God, Lord, trust not to me, nor expe^t
any thing else of me but evil; and I shall assuredly fall if thou help me not.

35. To keep far off all danger of impurity young men ought to fly carefully
whatsoever (even the smallest) occasion of this sin. Therefore this H. man
forbad his spiritual children to touch one another not so much as by the hands,
although but in jesting.

36. When the soul resigns it self into the hands of God, and is contented with
the divine good pleasure, it remains in good hands, and is very secure that it
will go well with it: and it belongs especially to a sick man to resign over
himself, and to say to God, Lord, if thou will have me, behold here I am; tho I
have done no good at all, do with me what seems good unto thee.

37. Who wills any thing but Christ, knows not what he would have; who
asks any thing but Christ, knows not what he asks; who works and not
for Christ, knows not what he does.

38. We must not be fastened to any thing in this world, be it never so small a
matter: but we must be humbly affected amongst the creatures, and desire to
have so low a condition as to stand in need of Sixpence, and, begging for it,
to be denied it.

39. Who would have riches shall never have the Spirit.

40. The soul who gives it self to God must be wholly God's; and what love is
bestowed on Parents and kindred, or on studies, or on it self, of so much love
is God deprived.

41. The man who loves God with true love, and prizeth him above all things,
sometimes in his prayers meets with an overflowing of tears, and a concours of
graces, or feelings of the Spirit, in such abundance that he is forced to beg
an abatement.

42. One ought to reserve for himself neither place, nor time, when there is
need to help his neighbor; and ought to quit his Spiritual gusts and his
prayers for his neighbor, and leave Christ for Christ. And this is a great
perfection, and few know how to do it.

43. When God's servant has no troubles, nor any to persecute him, and treat
him injuriously; if he would find the Spirit, let him imagine that some wicked
man comes to affront him, and says much villainy against him, and to injurious
words adds as uncivil deeds, beats him with a cudgel, or wounds him with a
sword, and with his fist makes his face black and blew; and being thus abused,
then with great servency of love in imitation of Christ let him incline his
heart to pardon the wrong that is done him, and overcoming all angry motions
that may arise, and not willing for the love of God to take any revenge let him
with great love forgive him, as if he had truly received such an injury; that
by the frequent practice of such imaginations the heart may accustom it self to
pardon a real injury; as the soldier, who learns to play at foils, by
accustoming himself to handle his arms afterward makes use of his art to
fight in good earnest.

44. Suffering Penance is still necessary to the servant of God; and when
straightned with any affliction, then let him expect a consolation: for God
never sends an affliction, but that he sends after it a consolation: and in
sum, the whole life of him, who serves God is nothing else but first a
consolation, and then another trouble.

45. When God visits any man with an affliction, and he has not patience to
bear it, it may be well said unto him; Thou art not worthy of God's visitation,
nor deservest so great a benefit.

46. When there come against us tribulations, infirmities, and things much
contrary to us, we are not timorously to fly them, but valiantly to overcome
them; because, if thou fly from any of them, another worse will come upon thee:
who flies from a hoar-frost will be covered with snow; who flies from a Bear
meets with a Lion.

47. When God's servant goes to receive in the Sacrament the glorious Body of
Christ, in which are all the delights of heaven, he ought to stand in fear, and
prepare himself more than ordinarily for future temptations; because the
marvelous Graces, which are conferred in that divine Sacrament, God will not
have to lie idle; for Grace more abhors idleness, than Nature does vacuities.

48. When any one feels within his heart a new and extraordinary spirit, for
the reason before mentioned let him stand prepared for some temptation and
tribulation: and whilst one feels in him this ardor of the Spirit, let him ask
of God strength to be able to endure whatsoever from heaven he shall be
ordained to suffer, and that the temptation induce him not to any sins, great,
or little.

4^. If any should ask, what is the greatest tribulation a true servant of God
can have? It may be answered him, Not to have any tribulation at all.

50. Let young men beware of the sin of the flesh, and old men of the sin of
avarice; the first is overcome by flying, the second by resisting.

51. A man must always stand in fear, and not trust to himself, because the
Devil makes his assault unexpected, and darkens the understanding; and who
stands not in fear is overcome, because self-confident he is destitute of the
help of God.

521. In the temptations which the lasciviousnes of the flesh suggests to us
let the tempted have recourse instantly to God, and make thrice on his heart
the sign of the H. Cross, and say; Christ, thou Son of God, have mercy on me;
or the verse of the Psalm, O God make speed to save me, O Lord make have to
help me; or this, Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit
within me; and let him kiss the earth, and say to the tempter, I will accuse
thee to my spiritual Father if thou temptest me any more.

522. Obedience against our inclinations is to be practiced in small matters,
and which seem of no consequence; because thus we attain a facility to yield it
in greater.

523. The mortification of the will and understanding in matter of obedience to
Superiors is much more beneficial, and attains sooner to perfection, than great
corporal Penances.

524. It is not sufficient to consider, if God will have such good done as is
attempted, but if he will have it done by our means, in such a manner, at such
a time: which appearing not to be God's will, we ought contentedly to desist
from any such enterprise.

53. There is nothing better for man than Prayer, and without it he cannot
endure long in the way of the Spirit; therefore every moment must he have
recourse to this most powerful means of Salvation.

54. The enemy of our salvation fears nothing more, nothing makes him sadder,
nothing he seeks more to hinder, than Prayer.

5^. When one is praying, let not his bodily eyes be so fixed on an Image that
he never removes them from it, for this will hurt the Head; but let him make
use of an Image for the help of his memory: as, for example, to reduce into his
mind the benefit of the Incarnation of Christ, or his Nativity, or his death on
the Cross; or if it be the Image of a holy man, or a holy woman, let him make
use of it to put him in mind of their virtues, that he may imitate them, and
pray them to intercede to God for him.

56. To know how to pray well, it is a very great help to read the Lives of
Saints, and when the Spirit inclines him then to meditate on them; and so when
it inclines to think on the passion of Christ then to follow that attraction;
and not to pray or meditate differently from that to which the Spirit moves.

57. Fancies, which intervene, are a great disturbance to prayer; and many
troubled with such by-thoughts give it over: but they do not well; for,
notwithstanding any such fancies, one ought to persevere still, as much as may
be, in prayer; and God often gives in a moment that which could not be obtained
in a long time.

58. Amongst other things, we are to ask of God, a chief is perseverance in
well-doing, and well-serving of God; because if any has patience and
perseverance in well doing in a good life after once begun, he will acquire an
exceeding great measure of Spirit.

59. In the beginning of the conversion of a soul to God the Spirit uses to
come sometimes strongly upon him; but afterward it seems as it were to go away,
and the Lord shows thereby as if he had forsaken him; but stand he firm, and it
will return again

60. God uses almost never to send death to one who much serves him, but that
he first notifies it to him by some sign, or by giving him the Spirit
extraordinarily.

61. There are three degrees in a Spiritual life: the first is called an animal
life; the second, the life of a man; the third, the life of an Angel; that is
to say, the Lord uses in the beginning, for the drawing of souls to himself,
to entice them with sweetness, and with a certain spirit and gusts
extraordinary, and then afterward he makes a show to go far from them,
witholding his most holy hand from these sweet treatments, to see if they stand
firm in the Spirit, leaving them to fight it out for a little time; and then
when they have made resistance for a while, and have overcome those
tribulations and temptations, he restores afterward their heavenly gusts and
consolations doubled; and this is a life Angelical, void of all pain or offense.

621. It is no pride to desire to exceed in sancity any Saint whatsoever;
because to desire to be Saint is to desire we may have the will to love and to
honor God above all things: and this desire, if it were possible, ought to be
extended to infinity, because God is worthy of infinite love, and because his
greatness is infinite.

622. No man ever ought to trust his own prudence, but in all things to ask
counsel of God, consult his Confessor, and beg the prayers of others.

63. To maintain our selves in a good life, and the holy service of God,
frequent Confession and the holy Communion are most necessary; for the right
practicing of these is a very great help.

64. For Graces obtained by the way of prayer, we must continue so long our
prayer till the grace be perfected; and if prayer be intermitted God does
sometimes suspend the grace. Therefore if a sick man, for whom prayer is made,
begin to mend upon the prayers made for him, these then must not be ceased; but
as such recovery was begun by prayer, even so by the strength of prayer must it
be perfected.

65. When he, who prays, feels in the continuation of his prayer great
quietness of spirit, it is a good sign, that God either has or will grant the
grace he sues for.

66. Many feeling within themselves carnal temptations, or the like, doubt
sometimes whether they have consented or no; but if the person tempted feel in
himself still a love toward that virtue against which he was tempted, and an
hatred against that vice; it is a sign he has not consented. Likewise if he
would not swear that he has consented, it is a sign that he has not
consented; because when there is a deliberate consent, the soul easily
perceives it.

67. After the temptation past we must not reason if we have consented, or not;
for such reasonings cause a return of carnal temptations.

68. Carnal temptations ought to be feared and fled even in sickness, and in
old age it self, so long as we are able to shut and open our eyes; for the
spirit of fornication spares neither time nor person.

69. The servant of God, if with more security he will walk amongst so many
snares spread abroad in all places, let him have for an intercessor for him to
her Son the Bl. Virgin.

70. Church-goods must be employed sparingly, and not be spent but upon
necessity, because they are goods which belong to God.

71. Cheerfulness and mirth is good in him who serves God, but he must file
dissolutenes, and be careful not to fall into a spirit of jesting; for they who
delight in jesting render themselves incapable of ever receiving the Spirit of
God, and if they have any thing that is good in them, they lose it suddenly.

72. When the Priest visits the sick let him not play the Prophet, saying, that
the sick person will not recover; because sometimes having prophesied death, if
the sick become well again he is displeased that he has erred in his prophecy.

73. A Confessor is to be chosen with serious deliberation, for it is a great
advantage to have a good guide in so difficult a way; but having chosen one he
is not easily to be changed, but to be believed and conferred-with about our
occurrences, because God will never permit that a Confessor should err in a
thing that might be a hinderance to the soul of a Penitent.

74. To profit by reading the lives of Saints, or other Spiritual books, we
must not read them with curiosity, or in have, but by little and little; and
when any feels himself touched, or that some devotion arises in him, he must
go no further, but shut the book and there stop, and hearken to the Spirit; and
when it fails, return to his Reading.

75. To pray well the soul must first bring it self into a most profound
humility, and know it self unworthy to stand before so great a Majesty, and to
show to God its necessities and its weakness, and being humbled cast it self on
God, that he may teach it to pray.

76. When any man remains listless and all-discontented, or feels his sensual
appetite troublesome and frequent, he must not lose courage: because when God
will bestow any virtue, he permits a temptation of the contrary vice; that by
fighting and resisting a man may make himself capable of that virtue, against
which he was assaulted.

77. It is not fitting to leave off doing any good work because one feels some
rising of vainglory; because as often as Vainglory is not the Mistress but a
companion of the work, it takes not away the worth of the work, tho perfection
is in this that it be a servant.

78. Whosoever desires to live in a strict way of Religion, let him first learn
to subdue his will in some things wherein he finds greatest opposition, because
thus with more facility he shall persevere.

79. When any one of his own accord would fast, use discipline, wear
sackcloth; or the like, and his Confessor does not like it; the Confessor
ought not to be violently urged to give any such license.

80. Let a man stay in his own house, i. e. within himself, and not become a
Syndick, or Judge of the actions and lives of others; if he desires not to make
rash judgments, nor to murmur at, nor to despise, his neighbor.

81. A young Convert is not to seek to convert others, but to be careful to
confirm himself, and to make himself strong against temptations, and to be
humble, and not to think he has done any great matter, but rather to esteem
himself to have done nothing, that he fall not into pride.

82. Scrupulous persons are in all things whatsoever to depend upon their
spiritual Father, and not trust their own judgment; otherwise they will never
be able to deliver themselves; they may well find a truce, but not a peace.

83. A man, who serves God, must remain resigned to feel the gusts of the
things of God, and to want them; to entertain cheerfulness and sadness.

84. It is a thing very dangerous to spiritual persons to desire to see
visions; and many, who have followed after such a spirit, have fallen into
great ruin.

85. To cure any one, who has fallen into some sin after a virtuous life led
for a long time, there is no greater means to reduce him to his first
condition, than to make him do some eminent mortification: that is to make him
discover his fault to some others of a singular good life, with whom he has
some intimacy, in whom he may confide; because by such humility God will raise
him up to his former estate again.

86. All men are much concerned in the quiet of their own conscience; therefore
if any would make some particular vow, the Holy Man thought it good for the
most part that it should be made conditional; as thus, If I can; If I remember,
or in some such manner.

87. In every thing and for every thing we ought to throw our selves into the
hands of our Lord: for if God will have us to do nothing more than we do, yet
he will make us good in that which we do.

88. A Religious man, who is in an Order fallen away from its ancient
discipline, and finds in himself great gifts of the spirit, ought not to
leave his own Order, to enter into another, but to abide therein: for God will
make use of him toward the reforming of his Order by his good Example.

89. We must not be swift in advising our brother concerning his defects and
wants; but first we are to consider our selves, afterward others; and to do it
with much prudence.

90. Every man ought so live to holily every day, and to frame all his actions
in such a manner, as if that should be his last day.

91. If thou love all men with true love, thou can never bear hatred to any
man; neither for words spoken against thee, nor for dis-curtesies received; for
in a heart, where there is not love to our neighbor whomever, there God is not.

92. Who perceives some discontentedness in himself ought not to be troubled at
it; for it will quickly pass over; but in the meanwhile to overcome such an
ill passion he must say his prayers, or sing some spiritual Hymn of praise.

93. We must be ready to obey the will of our Superiors, and to do rather the
will of another than our own.

94. Whosoever desires that Christ should give him the first place in heaven,
let him be well pleased to stand always in the last place here on earth; and
when any one perceives himself despised let him thank God for it, hoping that
honor is reserved for him in heaven.

95. Let all things be taken in good part, and judge not other men's actions;
but learn to have compassion on our neighbors defects; thinking with our
selves, that if God did not hold his hand upon our head we should do worse: and
he who has any good parts let him not be proud, but give thanks to God, from
whom comes every good.

96. We must seek Christ where he is not, i. e. in Crosses, and Tribulations,
where now our Redeemer, who is crowned with glory, is not to be found; and when
any falls into Tribulations, he must not complain; because they are sent from
God our most loving Father and most merciful Lord, to procure us the greater
crown in heaven

97. Every day for some short time read some spiritual book, and be careful to
retain in memory some particular point which may be profitable to your soul.

98. When there is occasion to buy any thing none ought to be moved with
affection to it, but with the need or want of it; and the holy Man used on such
occasions to say; I buy not affections.

99. At the time of receiving the Holy Communion we should beg a remedy against
that vice we find our selves most inclined to.

100. When any one visits the Altars let him ask from the Saints of these
Altars a spiritual Alms; this being a good way to acquire the Spirit and
Devotion.

Concerning the INSTITUTION of the Society of JESUS.
THey have three years in all of Novitiatship; two before entering on their
Studies; one after these are finished.

In their Novice-ship much accustomed to Mental Prayer; Examens of their
Meditations, and of Conscience; being obliged to manifest all their good as
well as evil thoughts and suggestions to their Superiors, that these may be
able to make a perfecter judgment of them, and more aptly guide them. Much
practiced in all mean employments; as, serving in Hospitals, tending on the
sick, begging alms from door to door. In the house doing all under-offices,
helping in the Kitchen, sweeping rooms, carrying wood, serving the table etc.
Having no extraordinary fasts or other mortifications appointed them; but in
all these directed as the Master of the Novices thinks fit.

After the two years of their Novice-ship seven years are to be spent in their
studies, after having first learnt the languages: three in Philosophy and
Mathematics, four in School Divinity.

During their study of Divinity often practiced in domestic preaching, that
they may so acquire a facility therein.

After the four years spent in School Divinity they are allowed two years for
private study in Theology; and for giving account of their former Studies in
performing of public disputations and exercises. Then they pass through a
third year of Novice-ship or Probation; and after this again are allowed one
year more (if they be designed for preaching) for the study of the Holy
Scriptures, and of the Fathers, and for Meditation: Or two years for this, if
allowed none before for reviewing their former studies. One reason given for
this in Instruct. 2. of the 7th Congreg. pro Concionat. is, -- Vnde (say they)
illud etiam commodum sequetur, quod tantopere aliorum concionibus describendis
non inhiabunt. Vid. Reg. Provincial. 52. Instruct. 7. Congreg. pro
Concionantibus.

Their chief employments after their studies finished, and a third year of
Novitiat-ship passed through, are.

1. Teaching the Christian Doctrine to Children and common people, especially
on Holy days, when they are more easily assembled. The Fathers-professed and
more ancient doing this office, as well as others. Ignatius did it when General.

2. Teaching to children and students the languages, Rhetoric, and Humanity;
then Philosophy and Mathematics; and lastly Divinity. In which obliged never
to be singular in their opinions, nor broach any new, not formerly taught by
approved authors.

3. Preaching. For which the chief preparations, they are directed to, are,
Reg. Concion. 4. Lectioni sacrae Scripturae ac Patrum praecipue, incumbere.
Videre peculiari studio Evangelia toto anno occurrentia, and in eis ea quae
usui esse possunt adnotare; itemque compendium facere explicationis rerum ad
fidem and christianam vitam necessariarum [this chiefly for their teaching the
Doctrina Christiana]: atque in communes locos redigere omnia, quae ad virtutum
commendationem and vitiorum detestationem pertinent. Or as in the Constit. 4.
p. 8. c.. 3. Praevidere quod in vitiorum detestationem inducit, and remedia
eisdem applicanda: sicut e contrario, quae ad praecepta, ad virtutes, ad bona
opera pertinent: tum ea, quae movere possunt ad illa amanda; and media etiam ad
eadem consequenda: and haec in compendium, si fieri potest, redacta utiliora
esse, ne tam multis libris opus sit. Likewise for to render them the more fit
for their employment they are directed often to hear good preachers, and to
peruse the treatises of such de modo concionandi: and all the Society are
practiced early to make probation Sermons in their Colleges, at meals, in the
Refectory, and at other times, whilst yet Students in Divinity, and before they
be in sacred Orders; another giving them their subject, and directing them to
matter. See Constit. 3. p. 1. c. 2 and 5. So in the fifth rule Concionat. they
are enjoined in concionibus domi, vel in aliiis locis minus frequentibus, se
exercere. Again. In their Sermons they are required ( Reg. ib. 9.) Iis
praecipue insistere, quae ad christianans institutionem, atque ad extirpanda
vitia and virtutes inserendas valent. Commendare populo Confessionis and
Eucharistiae frequentem usum, in bonis operibus profectum and perseverantiam;
ecclesiasticarum caeremoniarum observationem; obedientiam Principibus and
Praelatis, qui Dei in terris vices gerunt: Commendare etiam illis peculiari
ratione poenitentiae and misericordiae opera; sanctarum precum and aliarum
piarum devotionum exercitia; uttlium librorum lectionem; filiorum bonam
educationem. Reg. 10. they are instructed modum concionandi a Scholastico
diversum esse debere, and ita ad docendum comparatum, ut ad animorum motum
praecipue dirigatur; non ita exact proponere argumenta, quibus contraria pars
confirmatur; sed tamen eo pacto rem exponere, ut audirtores ex data
explicatione solutionem eorum quae sibi in mentem venerint, aut ab aliis
audiverint, facile colligant. Epist. Generalium 16.. 10, 11. And Indust. 5.
they are required Aliquid sibi certo constituere, quod persuadeant, and
rations afferre, quibus id confirment, amplificent, exaggerent, and moveant
audientes. Instare persuaden do and inculcando etc; and non multa cursim dicere
ad copiam ostendendam, ne concionator jejunus appareat. Quasi vero insistere
singulis [mutatis rationibus and stimulis] prolatis exemplis and rationibus a
similibus and dissimilibus, and argumentis a majori, and e contra, ab
utilitate, delectatione, ^acilitate etc, tum etiam loco and tempore scripturis
expendendis etc non arguat copiam. They are warned Ibid. ad vit andam
ostentationem, ejusve suspicionem, not to criticize too much on the
signification of words, or infer other science little to their purpose. Warned
( Reg. Concionat. 9) a rerum subtilium curiosa tractatione abstinere. Warned
(Reg. 20.) Non esse affectatos, aut verborum lenocinia sectari, nec
studio-politioris sermonis etc saeculare aliquid redolere. (Reg. 21.) In
laudibus and reprehensionibus, animique exaggerationibus abstinere: vocem, ubi
non est opus, non praeter modum extollere, aut deprimere. (Reg. 16.) Cavere, ne
facetiis aut inutilium rerum narratione concionem contemptibilem faciant. (Reg.
12, 13.) to forbear in their Sermons reprehensions of great persons
(Magistrates, or Prelates) other Religious Orders, or their own, or any private
person; but to reprehend vice in a general manner, and so as the vice may not
be particularly fastened upon any. ( Ep Genesis 16. Indust. 7.) Not to write their
whole Sermon and then verbatim get it by heart. Nam, (says Aquaviva)
(praeterquam quod ut populus probe intellig at ac percipiat quod dicitur,
versandum est, quod agitur, multimoda ratione dicendi; quod in potestate non
habent, qui praeparata and ad verbum memoriter retenta pronunciant) certum est,
dici efficaciter eo modo and penitus inseri vix quidquam posse Id vero si
animadvertat Auditor (quod proclive est) tum certe illud tanquam serium, aut ex
animo dictum non habet, nec magni facit. Add quod oration artificiose contexta
and claborata seipsam prodit; semperque veretur Concionator, ne, si vel una
periodus aut etiam particula memoria excidat, totus ruat orationis contextus.
Quaeres quantopere dicendi vim retardet credi vix potest. Lastly such, as teach
others, are required in their own life to be singularly exemplary.

4. Confessing people, and administering the Sacraments. For Confessions certain
Priests are appointed, at certain hours, every day, or those more solemn, to
sit in the Church to hear them. The Confessors are required Reg. Sacerdot. 11.
In casibus conscientiae iisque praesertim, qui ad censuras, casus reservatos,
restitutiones, pertinent, sese diligenter exercere; earumque rerum compendia,
and brevem interrogandi methodum [for helping the penitents to discover their
sins] ac, contra singulorum peccatorum species, exempla and dicta Sanctorum,
atque alia salutaria remedia studere comparare. Inter seipsos conformes esse,
and aliorum Confessariorum existimationi unumquemque consutere. To carry
themselves equally, in receiving Confessions, to all Conditions. For women, to
show themselves to them rather severe than familiar; and to render their
Confessions as short as may be, by cutting off impertiuencies; not to take
again their General Confessions, if formerly made. To avoid looking upon the
Confessed, their hand being interposed, where nothing else* Forbidden, to
advise their Penitents to the taking of Religious Vows, or to enter into one
Order of Religious, rather than other; or to communicate more frequently than
once in eight days. See these things in Reg. Sacerd. and in the Instruct
Congreg. 7. pro Confessariis. Several instructions are drawn up ( Ordinat.
General. 11. c.) for the Confessors of Princes, which these Confessors are
obliged to observe: which instructions are also showed to the Prince, and such
obligation declared to him.

5. Giving the Spiritual Exercises to any persons whatsoever desiring to
perform them: but all or only some part of them according to the condition and
capacity of the person: They having in every House and College a chamber, one
of the most solitary and retired, fitted for it. These Exercises are a Body of
select Meditations, Directions, and Rules so ordered and administered to the
Meditant as that each of them may have a right place for a more effectual
operation upon the Soul fitly prepared by the former. All together tending to
the effecting of its speedy Conversion from a bad life to a good: or from a
good to one yet better and more perfect: As also to the present election of a
better State or Condition of life than its former has been; or, (where no
reason, or at least liberty, to change this) to a better management or
improvement of it. To all which the Meditant is chiefly excited by the perfect
example and pattern of the life of our Lord frequently proposed to him in these
spiritual exercises The Meditant, for the space of a month, or fortnight, or
less time, as other affairs permit, retires to a private room, sequestring
himself from all company, save one that at certain times brings him his diet
and other necessaries, and his Director in the exercises; in this retirement
also meddling with no other employment or Books, tho pious, save only the
Exercises; nor pre-occupating any thing in these, or doing in any other order,
than is from time to time prescribed. His Director visits him once a day, or
(if need require) oftener: and from time to time gives him in writing the
matter of his present Meditations; after he has first delivered him some
General Rules and Method how to perform them. And he again is to return to his
Director a punctual account of all that passes in his Soul whether consolatory
or desolatory in them; which gives his Director light in what way best to
proceed with him for the future; who detains him for a longer or shorter time
in exercises of the same king (tho varyed always in some particulars) or also
changes them, according to his different proficiency. In general practicing
him also in some parts only of the Exercises, and wholly omitting others,
according to the condition, present capacity, knowledge, advancement in virtue
and piety of the person exercised. Five hours of Meditation are designed every
day, or (where some debility) four. The first at mid night, he rising then to
perform it. The second early in the morning. The third not long before dinner.
The fourth in the Afternoon. The fifth toward the Evening. Every Meditation is
to be concluded with a reverend Colloquy to God, or our Lord Christ etc, as a
Criminal with his Judge, or a Servant with his Lord, or a Son with his Father,
or also a Friend with his Friend, complaining before him of his present faults
or infirmities, requesting some Grace, asking his counsel, craving his help.
After every Meditation a quarter of an hour is aloted for recollecting the
chief passages of it; as also two of the five daily Meditations are only
Repetitions of the former, for fixing them more in his thoughts, and also
enlarging these on the things therein, which most affected him. The Meditant
also in this retirement, after sufficiently prepared, makes a general
Confession of the sins of his former life, but this thought fit to be heard by
some other Priest rather than his Director.

6. Assisting Hospitals, the Sick, the Imprisoned; both for their spiritual and
coporal necessities.

7. Missions to plant Christian Religion, or repair and augment, wherever their
Superiors shall send them. The manner of the Mission this, Some chosen Fathers
professed, after the manner of Apostles, two together, and on foot, if
necessity require not the contrary, without much luggage (See Ep. Genesis 7.. 4.)
are sent forth into such places, as are thought to have much need of
Instruction, of which places they have a Catalogue given them to stay in each,
as they discern its profiting by them (especially to go in vicos and castella
minori hominium frequentia habitata, and proinde opis illius magis indiga,
says Aquaviva Ibid.) Leave is first obtained from the Ordinary. Their expense
is discharge by the Society, (that no offense from hence be taken) save only
lodging, which they are to take up rather in some Hospital, if such convenience
be, or else, where the Parson of that place shall appoint; only it to be remote
from women. Their employments (after first having applied themselves to the
Clergy of that place to obtain their good will and aid; and after having first
discoursed to the people being assembled, of the necessity of the Christian
Doctrine, and of the great evils that accompany the state of mortal sin,
whereby may be apprehended the necessity of Confession) are these. In the
morning to hear Confessions; having also several Privileges and Indulgences
granted to them by the Pope. In the Afternoon to teach the Christian Doctrine
to women and children, requiring also from the children an account thereof;
after Sunset for an hour explaining the same Christian Doctrine (the doctrine
of the Trinity, the Apostles Creed etc) to men, supposed then most at leisure,
only all women are excluded; besides these employments, to reconcile
differences and quarrels: To promote Confraternities Sanctissimi Sacramenti,
Rosarii, Doctrinae Christianae etc. To give the spiritual Exercises to Clergy
or others desiring them; and in other things also to direct the Clergy,
Schools, etc, so far as they shall desire, accept, or suffer it. See Instruct.
7. Congreg General. pro Missioniqus. 5.10.

No Stipends to be received for any of these functions, or for any other
service of the Society either in Divinity, or humane Sciences; nor yet Alms, if
given with relation to, and as a recompense of, such Service; See Constit. 6.
p. 2. c. 1.. and in the first Canon of the fifth General Congregation this
Constitution is made undispensable. It is ordered likewise that no College may
admit of any alms or gift in any respect, when they can once live on their own
rents, unless such gift or alms be for the increasing of the number of
Students, or Praeceptors. But first if alms be declared to be given them
without any such respect to their service (in which the Donor may soon declare
himself) the House of Fathers Professed may accept it, for this House lives
wholly on Alms. Secondly, For Colleges also when endowed in 3. Cong. Genesis Can.
7. it is conceded to the General to dispense with them, also to accept such alms
and gifts, when not given as a recompense: and, accordingly, we find the
General dispensing with them in Ord. Genera. 1. c.. 14. by Claud. Aquaviva.
Collegia quae possunt alere 12 scholares nullas eleemosynas admittere possunt,
nisi levis momenti, raro, and ab iis quorum timeatur offensio si non
admittantur. Reliqua [Collegia] possunt. Sed si ab iis mittantur, quorum filli
scholas nostras fequentant, and conjectura sit (sumpto judicio ex
circumstantiis personarum, ac modo dandi and loquendi) mitti pro compensatione,
vel intuitu ministerii, admitti non debent, donec plane intelligant accipi non
posse, nisi nomine eleemosynae secluso omni alio respectu, atque hoc eodem modo
ipsi quoque largiantur [few Donors, that upon such advertisment will withdraw
their gift, and not profess rather the admittable intention.] Idemque est
judicium de eleemosynis, quae postquam nostri alicubi concionati sunt, ad domos
vel Collegia interdum mittuntur a Praelatis, vel a civitatius, aut aliis. He
that confesses any is enjoined also Reg. Sacerd.. 22. non accipere quidquam
sive ab iis quorum confessiones audiverit, sive ab aliis, quod vel in pauperes
distribuat, vel alteri satisfactionis nomine restituat, nisi superior, cum opus
esset, secus faciendum judicaverit. All gifts etc sent to any particular person
may only be applied to the common use, Reg. 60. Rector. Also to avoid all show
of Avarice they may retain in their Churches no Alms-Chest or Box, whether for
themselves or others. Constable. 6. p. 2. c, 8..

In times of Infection, for peforming to such persons all necessary duties, the
Superior proposes the matter to his Society, and out of those who offer
themselves chooses those whom he thinks fittest.

None ordinarily made Priest till ten years experience had of him: that is till
two or three years after he has finished the course of his Studies. None
Professed and taking the fourth vow of obedience to the Popes Mission, till
(ordinarily) seventeen or eighteen years standing; and then his ability first
approved by some sworn examiners for teaching Philosophy and Divinity with
applause.

To the three Vows taken by other Orders many qualifications and restrictions
are added by the Founders of this Society.

First concerning them in general. These Vows are taken with a reservation,
that the General may release them, whereby persons unfit or scandalous may at
any time be removed, or also the malcontent, if they can obtain the Generals
consent, released.

2. For Poverty: First, as none may have any thing of his own, so of what they
have in common, all fare alike; the Seniors and the General himself, as the
Servants; for clothes, lodging, and employments, even in performing the meanest
offices, all alike; none exempted, not the General himself, but that they are
sometimes in the year to perform them for mortification and example sake,
Constit: 3. p. 1. c. 19.. No difference made in secular privileges, save the
civil respect amongst them, which is due to Age and Superiors. The General is
regulated, in iis quae ad sumptus and ad curam corporis ejus attinent, by the
Constitutions of his four consulters or assistants, whose order herein he is
obliged to obey. Constit. 9. p. 5. c. 2.. 4. c. 3.. 2. They are prohibited to
seek any preferments, either without or within the Society: or to admit of any
offered, unless by the express command of those Superiors whom they are obliged
to obey: and are bound to disclose any other person whom they know to seek
them. Which thing, as it cures ambition, and makes them wholly intend the
common good of the Society, wherein their staff is for ever set up, so it
preserves the worthiest persons still for the employment, the service, and the
government of the Society, who otherwise would be continually called out of it.
It casts them much upon writing, having noecclesiastical, necessary,
employments; nor being permitted to take any where any set curam animarum, or
office in Church or Commonwealth ( Constable. 4. p. 2. c. 4.. 6. p. 3. c 5..) the
reason, that so they may have more freedom first for their studies; and
secondly for more general services of God and the Church. And lastly it renders
them more acceptable to, and more credited by, Princes and great men, because
they know, that these follow not any interests of their own; and renders also
these persons more free in their advice. 3. They are obliged not to meddle or
entangle themselves in any secular affairs either of private persons, or of
Princes; or to side with any Prince more than other, in their secular
differences or quarrels ( Summar. Constable. Reg. 43.) that so having the good will
of all men, as not meddling in worldly matters, as likewise having their own
thoughts the more free from these, they may proceed more prosperously in divine
matters. See Canon. Congregationum Generalium. Can 12, 13. of the fifth Cong.
And 7. Cong. Can 13.^4. All offices in the Society are bestowed not by a major
part of Votes (save only the election of the General) but by single persons:
the higher by the General, the lower by the Provincial; the Society joining
some Consulters or Assistants always to them, whose advice they are bound to
hear, but not to follow: which prevents all discord and factions, and more
preserves obedience to Superiors.

3. For Obedience; They are more left to the arbitrary power of their Superiors
than any other Order: to which Superiors they are tied frequently to open all
their mind and conscience, and make known the good things thereof as well as
the evil, and to be wholly at their arbitrary disposal for their employments
etc. Only, in much doubt of any thing unlawful commanded, they may repair
(first) to other judgments, who have the power to determine this unto them. See
Constit. 6. part. 1. c. 1. n. -- 3. part. 1. c. 23.. -- 8 p. 1. c. D. and see
Ignatius his Life, 5. l. 4. c. And also in all other matters they may freely
acquaint their Superiors with their wants, inconveniences, or necessities, with
their desires and inclinations, as also with the reasons inducing them thereto;
provided, that they have used prayer first about such business. But, after such
proposal, they are to acquiesce in silence to what their Superior commands,
unless he perhaps demand some further account from them of their own judgment
or affections. See touching this Constit. 3. part. 2. c. 1.. 6. part. 3. c. 1.

4. For the preserving of unity of opinion amongst them, and so more peace and
charity, they are enjoined, in general, to conform to the doctrine of S.
Thomas, (tho(...) with the same liberty as others, called Thomists, have, as
the 56. decree of the 5th. Genesis Cong. expounds the Constitution; 2 in Divinity,
not Philosophy; 3 nor in every thing for Divinity, [ In quaestionibus mere
Philosophicis, aut etiam in iis quae ad Scripturas and Canones pertinent,
licebit sequi etiam alios, qui eas facultates ex professo tractaverunt. Thus
the 5th. Genesis Congr.]) because nullius hoc tempore doctrina occurrit, quae sit
ea solidior, aut securior: and to conform to the common tenants of the
Church-Doctors, avoiding new opinions. For which cause also one and the same
person ( viz. the General) is appointed to license all their printed Books. V.
Constit. 4. p. 6. c. 17.. Again every one, in any difference from common
opinion, is obliged to submit his judgment to the definition of the Society, i.
e. in such points as remain undefined by the Church. See Constit. 3. part. 1.
c. 18.. required also where the Doctors of the Church are contrary one to
another, yet the Society therein also to endeavor a conformity of opinion
amongst themselves; nay further, required to acquiesce in the judgment (tho
contrary to theirs) of two or three, to whom they shall have first proposed
their reasons, For thus runs the 6th. Rule dictated by Ignatius, ( Vid. S.
Ignatii vit. per Ribadeneiram, 5. l. 4 c.) after his writing of his Epistle of
Obedience. Si quando tempus inciderit (says he) quo mihi videatur a Superiore
meo quid praecipi, quod contra conscientiam meam sit, Superiori vero aliud
videatur; illi potius quam mihi credam, si quidem aperta ratio non repugnat.
Quod si hoc in animum inducere non possum, at certe meum judicium sensumque
relinquam, and ad unius aut duorum triumve judicium rem totam rejiciam, ut quod
ab illis judicatum sit, id sequar: hoc si recuso, longissime a perfectione
absum etc. Again, the Professors and Readers required not to handle all
questions, nor urge, or confute all objections; nor infer all arguments and
reasons; but in all these to omit those unconsiderable or unprofitable; also
required (to give it in their own words) ut receptas jam, quamvis congruentes
tantum, rations, quibus Fidei res probari solent, non refellant, nec temere
novas excogitent, nisi ex constantibus solidisque principiis. So likewise not
to teach or defend opinions, which may give great offense to the Catholics of
that place. Their words are: Quae opiniones, cujuscunque authoris sint, in
aliqua Provincia aut Academia Catholicos graviter offendere scirentur, eas ibi
non doceat aut defendat [Professor]. Vbi enim nec Fidei doctrina, nec morum
integritas in discrimen adducitur, prudens charitas exigit, ut nostri se illis
accomodent, cum quibus versantur. See for these things Ratio Studiorum, Regulae
communes, and Reg. Professorum Schol. Theol. They are required also ibid. ut de
Conceptione B. Mariae, ac de solemnitate Votorum sequantur sententiam quae
magis hoc tempore communis sit, magisque recepta apud Theologos. Lastly, in
Summar. Constit. Reg. 42. They are required also judiciorum de rebus agendis
diversitatem (quae matter esse solet discordiae and inimica unionis voluntatum)
quantum fieri potest evitare. Likewise the Popes Supremacy over Princes being
so stated by some Doctors, as has given much offense; the 8th Congregation
General (after the former Prohibitions of the Generals Aquaviva and Vitelleschi
to the Society to speak or write any thing at all on this subject) has made
this decree touching it: Ordinamus in virtute Sanctae Obedientiae, ne quis in
posterum materiam de potestate Summi Pontificis super Principes, eos deponendi
etc tractet, aut libris editis aut scriptis quibuscunque, nec public disputet
aut doceat in Scholis, ut occasiones omnes offensionis and querelarum
praecidantur.

5. For growing to perfection in their manners, and acquiring of all virtuous
habits, as also for conserving humility, they give their consent, at their
entrance into the Society, that any one (except only he that receives them in
Confession) may inform their Superior of their faults, errors, and defects, or
any other thing notable in them: To which purpose every one is asked in his
first General Examination; An contentus sit futurus, ut omnes errores and
defectus ipsius, and res quaecunque, quae notatae in eo and observatae fuerint,
Superioribus per quemvis, qui extra confessionem eas acceperit, manifestentur.
As likewise all are required so far to take care of one another as to disclose
them, when they think it necessary: which known, the Superior may use his
endeavor toward that person for the rectifying thereof; but may not divulge
the Informer, nor the fault, especially if great. Meanwhile none may reprehend
another, unless the Superior, or one licensed by him; of which thus the 31.
Reg. Communis. Nemo praeter eos, quibus per Superiorem licet, quidquam aliis
jubeat, aliosve reprehendat. Only they are required in Exam. 4. c. 8.. boni
consulere ab aliis corrigi, and ad aliorum correctionem juvare, and paratos
esse sese invicem manifestare debito cum amore and charitate ad majorem
Spiritus profectum, praesertim ubi a Superiore, qui illorum curam gerit, fuerit
iis praescriptum.

Likewise besides weekly Confession, and the informations of others concerning
their defects and faults, they are obliged, at least once in six months, to
render an account of their conscience to their Superior, wherein they
communicate to him ( sub Sigillo, if they please) not only their faults, but
the whole state of their souls, their contentednes in their condition, their
proficiency in prayer, in the Spirit, in virtues; their temptations,
impediments, anxieties, fears; their desires, consolations, joys, etc, which
may give their Superior more light how to proceed with them for the future, how
to cure their infirmities, and advance them toward perfection. See Summar.
Constit. R. 40. and Reg. Mag. Nov. Obliged also, once in the year, for renewing
of the Spirit, every one of how great employment soever, to retire himself for
certain weeks or days, and repeat the Spiritual Exercises.

For Corporal Mortifications and Penances they have no set Rule, prescribing
these alike to all, as many other Orders, but are left to the arbitrament and
direction of their Superior; who occasionally appoints these to several persons
both for the kind and degree, differently, as he thinks fit. Which matter is
thus ordered; because the necessary employments imposed for the service of
their neighbor do require, as to many, especially Seniors, the remission of
these corporal afflictions, and some indulgence one way, to enable them for
fatigues in another; wherein they meet with far greater mortifications of the
Spirit, in foregoing some other contents and satisfactions of our nature, than
those of the flesh amount to. For which employment to fit them the better, the
Juniors of the Society are prepared first with the Spiritual Exercises, retired
from all humane conversation, with strictest Examens of Conscience, General
Confessions, many hours in the day Meditations; after this, the more to abase
and humble them, with a constant service for two or more months in the most
vile and abject offices of the House: Next, with being sent to an Hospital for
a month or longer times attendance of the sick, enquiry also being made after
their behavior. Hence, sent abroad on a pilgrimage, without money or other
humane aid for their subsistence, that lodging with the poor in Hospitals they
may learn to forego the respects and honors of the world; and; begging their
daily victuals, they may learn to wait and rest wholly on the Divine
Providence, and receive thankfully whatever good or bad treatment he affords
them; and lose all affection to the support and supplies of their kindred, and
not fear the extremest necessities of the lowest secular condition. The
subduing of our will in such Spiritual appetites being both to all more
beneficial, and to many much more difficult, than the subduing of it in the
carnal.

Frequent Letters, yearly, monthly, weekly, (as Rectors to the Provincials) to
be sent to Superiors, giving account of all special occurrents within and
without the Society, and concerning all persons in the Society, as well their
Superiors as inferiors, (in which that all freedom may be used, their Letters
are not to be opened), that so all may be kept in perfect obedience and
co-intelligence; and all things being discovered, things amiss may sooner be
rectified, good beginnings improved, etc.

6. For Solitude; They are prohibited to go to one another chambers, or to the
gate to speak with strangers, without leave; as also enjoined to keep silence
when meeting one another, and when at table, ( exceptis usitatis
salutationibus. Reg. Communes 27. -- Nisi obiter and perpaucis, aut de rebus
necessariis. Reg. 26. -- Sive, in quibus loqui necesse sit. Reg. Magist. Novit.
79.) etc, save at those times of the day wherein conference is allowed, viz.
the two hours of recreation after dinner and supper.

7. For Chastity; They are enjoined not to touch one another at all, tho but in
jest; not to contract any particular familiarity or friendship with one more
than other: not to go abroad without a companion and witness of their
conversation: not to speak with a woman, but that the other be present in the
same room to see what they do, tho standing out of distance to heart what they
say: lastly, to confess and communicate every week.

Because no rules so perfect, that they fit best all times and persons,
therefore most of the Constitutions of this Society left dispensable by the
General, or his certain delegates, or also by the Provincials, as extraodinary
occasions require.

For the due execution of all the Constitutions and Rules of the Order, a
Provincial is appointed to visit once every year every House in his Province,
residing in each for what time he sees fit. And besides this, in every
particular House there is appointed a Consultation of the Governor and his
Assistants in the beginning of every month concerning this matter; at which
time is a Compendium or Memorial of them, and of other Ordinances of the
Provincial or other Superiors read over, to see the better what is neglected:
See for this Instructio 18. pro Executione urgenda.

To the Governors of the Society are always joined a certain number of persons
for Consulters; with whom the Governor is to advise in all matters of moment,
but having heard them, to determine and execute what himself pleases. One of
which Consulters is appointed to be his Admonitor (but praemissa oratione)
concerning any thing which he thinks belongs to his duty and office, or which
is neglected by him; yet chiefly concerning those things which the Consulters
think meet to be told him; which Admonitor is faithfully to conceal his
admonitions, yet, in much neglect of these by the Governor, he is obliged to
acquaint the higher Superiors therewith. Letters directed to the Admonitors may
not be opened by the Superiors. These Consulters are not elected by the
Governor whom they assist, but by the next Superior, and those of the General
by the General Congregation. See Regul. Consultorum and Admonitoris. And
Constit. 9. p. 4. c. 4..

The dangers incident to this most prudent and holy Order, upon their omitting
solemn divine service, seem to be these; their much converse in and with the
world; their being much tempted with gifts, by reason of their good services to
be public; their liberty of dispensations and arbitrary government; their
intentiveness to studies and humane Sciences; their not having much prescribed
mortification; the being entangled too much with secular affairs; the omission
of devotions and mortifications; the diminishing of the Spirit by prosecution
of knowledge; the use of knowledge to too much curiosity and hindrance of
edification; the loss of humility by the inflation of science; the trespassing
against poverty in acquiring of wealth: tho it cannot be denied, that both by
the fundamental Rules of the Society, and those, since, both of the Generals,
and the General Congregations of this Order, all cautions are used for
preventing these things, and for preserving the primitive Spirit of the
Society, that Christian prudence can easily suggest, so that the Original
designs of the Society be not laid aside.

The Ordering of the Novices of the Jesuits.
IN the first Novice-ship their employments are thus ordered. They rise every
day at four of the clock in the morning (except on Saturdays, when they rise at
five) and have half an hour to dress themselves and to make their beds, and to
read over the subject of their following Meditation or Prayer.

At half hour after four they betake themselves to their Meditation or Prayer
for one whole hour.

The next half hour till six they ruminate and take notes of their precedent
Prayer.

At six they go to Mass all together (except those who are to serve at Mass at
some other time) which lasts half an hour.

The next half hour they betake themselves again to their Chambers, and read
some spiritual book till seven. And then they go to Breakfast. Or else for one
hour next after Mass they are to be present at some Sermon, or some spiritual
Conference; and thence they go to Breakfast.

At eight they do the work of the House, i e Some carry wood, some sweep the
Chambers, some help the Cook in the Kitchen, some make clean the dining room,
and lay the cloth, napkins, knives, and all necessaries for dinner: and these
works they share amongst them.

At nine they betake themselves all to their Chamber till a quarter past ten,
to read spiritual Books.

At a quarter past ten they learn something without book for one half hour. At
three quarters they make an Examen of their conscience till eleven.

At eleven they go all to dinner (except those that wait, who dine when the
rest have done.) From dinner they go all either into the Garden in Summer, or
into some large Hall in the Winter, to discourse together, and refresh
themselves after their Morning Recollection, till a quarter before one, and
then for that quarter they hear the Saints Litanies.

At one they betake themselves all to their chambers to read till three, if
there be no Exposition of Catechism or Sermon at two.

At three they do the same works that they do in the morning at eight, or such
like.

At four they prepare themselves for mental Prayer, which begins at the half
hour after, and is continued till five.

At five they ruminate, and take notes of their Prayer, till the half hour.

At the half hour they go into the Church to pray and vist the Bl. Sacrament of
the Altar for one quarter; and thence they go into a great Hall, and walking
recite their Rosary till half hour after six.

Then they go to supper, and thence into the Garden or Hall, to refresh
themselves after their afternoons Recollection till eight.

At eight they betake themselves to their Chambers, and read for half an hour:
the next quarter examination of conscience is to be made, and the last quarter
they are to be all in bed by nine.

On Sundays and Holy days at six of the clock after the first Mass they all
communicate; and then hear another Mass in lieu of the Sermon or Conference on
other days.

FINIS.

