AN ACT For the more Easy Discharging of Sheriffs upon their Accounts; And from
being Justices of the Peace.

W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI

DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695:

An Act for the more Easy Discharging of Sheriffs upon their Accounts: And from
being Justices of the Peace. CHAP. XIII.
WHEREAS Diverse Sheriffs of Counties within this Kingdom of IRELAND, have been
often Troubled and Vexed long time after they have Respectively passed their
Accounts, and obtained their Quietus est; and Charged anew with Arrearages,
Debts, and Sums of Money pretended to have been by them Levied or Received, and
not by them formerly Accounted for, to the great Discouragement of others to
take upon them the said Office. His Most Excellent Majesty is therefore
Graciously pleased that it may be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all and every Sheriff
or Sheriffs who already have passed their Accounts, and obtained their Quietus:
And all and every Sheriff or Sheriffs who hereafter shall pass his or their
Accounts, and have his or their Quietus est, that then and from thenceforth the
said Sheriff and Sheriffs, his and their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattles are, and shall be Absolutely Discharged of
and from all manner of Sum and Sums of Money which he or they shall have so
Levied or Received, and pretended not to be Accounted for within the said
Account whereupon he or they had his or their Quietus est, unless such Sheriff
or Sheriffs, their Executors or Administrators have been or shall be called in
Question for such Sum or Sums of Money to be Levied or Received, and not
Accounted for within the space of Four Years after the time of such Account
passed, and Quietus est obtained.

And that Every Officer or Minister that shall send out, or Cause to be sent
out, any Writ or Process, or by whose Default any Writ or Process shall be sent
out, Contrary to the Tenor of this Act, shall for Every such Offense Forfeit
and Pay to the Party Grieved, by such Writ or Process, the Sum of Forty Pounds,
with his Costs and Damages the said Sum of Forty Pounds: And the said Costs and
Damages to be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any
of His Majesty's Courts of Record at Dublin at the Election of the Plantiffs or
Prosecutors, wherein no Privilege, Protection, Essoyn, or Wager of Law shall
be allowed to the Defendant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such Offender
being three Times Lawfully Convicted of any such Offense or Offenses, Contrary
to the True Meaning of this Act, shall from and after such their said
Conviction be utterly Disabled to hold or Execute by himself, his Deputy or
Deputies any Office or Employment in any Court of Justice whatsoever.

And whereas Diverse Persons being in Commission of the Peace have been made
Sheriffs or Sub-Sheriffs of the same County where they were in such Commission,
or being Sheriffs or Sub-Sheriffs, have been after put into the Commission of
the Peace in the County where they were Sheriff or Sub-Sheriffs; and have
Exercised both the said Offices at once in the same County, which is found to
be Inconvenient. For Remedy whereof,

Be it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons, Having,
Using or Exercising the Office of Sheriff or Sub-Sheriff, of or in any County
or Counties, shall Use or Exercise the Office of Justice of the Peace in the
same County or Counties where he or they shall be Sheriff or Sub-Sheriff,
during the time that he or they shall Use or Exercise the said Office of
Sheriff or Sub-Sheriff: And that all and Every Act and Acts to be Done, from
and after the End of this present Sessions of Parliament, as a Justice of the
Peace by any such Sheriff or Sub-Sheriff, during the time of his being Sheriff
or Sub-Sheriff, shall be Void and of none Effect, and shall Lose and Forfeit
for Every such Offense the sum of Twenty Pounds, one Moiety thereof to be to
the Use of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; the other Moiety to him who
shall sue for and Recover the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at Dublin, wherein no
Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be Allowed.

FINIS.

