AN ACT To Prevent PROTESTANTS Inter-Marrying WITH PAPISTS.

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT to Prevent Protestants Inter-Marrying with Papists.
CAAP. XXVIII.
WHEREAS many Protestant Maidens and Women, as well such as be Heirs Apparent
to their Ancestors, as others, having left unto them by their Father, or other
Ancestor or Friends, Manours, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, or other
great Substances in Goods or Chattels, Real or Personal, for their Advancement
in Marriage; or having had considerable Estates for Life, by Dower or Iointure,
or having had the Tuition or Guardianship of Protestant Children Entitled to
such Estates, or Interests, as aforesaid, by Flattery and other Crafty
Insinuations of Popish Persons, have been Seduced and Prevailed upon, to
Contract Matrimony with, and take to Husband, Papists or Popish Persons; which
Marriages have not only Tended to the Ruin and Destruction of such Estates and
Interests, and to the great Loss and Damage of many Protestants Persons, to
whom the same might Descend or Come, but as well to the Currupting and
Perverting such Protestants so Marrying, and the Protestant Persons in their
Tuition and Guardianship, as aforesaid, that they forsake their Religion, and
become Papists, to the great Dishonor of Almighty God, the great Prejudice of
the Protestant Interest, and the heavy Sorrow and Displeasure of all their
Protestant Friends. For remedy whereof,

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same; That if any
Protestant Maid, or Woman Unmarried being Heir Apparent to her Ancestor, or
having a Sole or Joint Estate, or Interest in Fee-Simple, or in Fee-Tail, or
being Seized in Fee-Simple, or in Coparcenary, or in Common, or being Seized of
an Estate for Life or Lives, by way of Iointure, Dower, or otherwise; or being
Possessed of, or Entitled unto any Beneficial Interest, or Term for Years, of,
or in any Manours, Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments, in Possession,
Revertion, or Remainder, or being Possessed of, or Entitled to any Personal
Estate, either in Money, Stock, Plate, Jewels, or other Goods and Chattels in
Law or Equity, to the Value of Five hundred Pounds Sterling, or more, shall at
any time after the First Day of January next, Marry, or take to Husband any
Person whatsoever, without having first obtained a Certificate in Writing under
the Hand of the Minister of the Parish, Bishop of the Diocese, and some Justice
of the Peace Living near the Place, or any two of them, where such Person shall
be Resident at the time of such Marriage, that he is a known Protestant; which
Certificate shall also be Attested under the Hands of Two or more Credible
Witnesses, and shall be Granted without Fee or Reward, that then and from the
time of such Marriage, such Protestant person so Marrying, and the person she
shall so Marry, shall be for ever afterward Disabled and Rendered Incapable of
Having, Holding, or Enjoying, all, or any of the aforesaid Estates or
Interests, which such Protestant Person so Marrying, shall, may, or ought to
have, at the time of such Marriage; and that by such Marriage, as aforesaid,
all, and every of the said Estates and Interests belonging to such Protestant
person or persons so Marrying, as aforesaid, shall go to, and be Vested in, and
in Law Deemed and Esteemed to be the Right, Title, Estate and Interest of the
next Protestant of the Kin, to whom such Estate, or Interest would Descend, or
come to by Law, were such Protestant Maid or Woman, and all other Intervening
Popish Heirs, Executors, or Administrators really Dead and Intestate at the
time of such Marriage; and that from the time of such Marriage, such next
Protestant of the Kin, as aforesaid, to whom all, or any of the said Estates or
Interests, shall come by such Marriage, as aforesaid, shall Have, Hold, Possess
and Enjoy, all, and every such Estates and Interests, in as Large, Ample, and
Beneficial Manner, to all intents and purposes, as such Protestant Maid or
Woman might Have, Held, Possessed, or Enjoyed the same, in Case this Act had
never been made; and that at any time after such Protestant Maid or Woman,
shall Marry without such Certificate, as aforesaid, it shall, and may be
Lawful, to, and for such Protestant person or persons, to whom all, or any of
the said Estates or Interests, shall come by such Marriage, as aforesaid, by
any Action at Law, or other Legal means whatsoever, to Sue for, and Recover
all, or any of the said Estates or Interests, as if such Protestant person or
persons so Marrying, as aforesaid, and all other Intervening Popish Heirs,
Executors, or Administrators, were really Dead, and Intestate, as aforesaid,
and as if such person or persons, who shall so Sue for, and Recover all, or any
of such Estates or Interests, were Rightfully and Legally Entitled thereto, as
Heir, Executor, or Administrator to such Protestant Maid or Woman Marrying, as
aforesaid; such Maid or Woman, being by such Marriage to be Deemed and Esteemed
Dead in Law, to the aforesaid Intents, Constructions and Purposes.

And if any such Protestant Maid or Woman, as aforesaid, shall at any time
after the First Day of January One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, Marry
any such person without such Certificate, as aforesaid, that then, and from
thenceforth, such Protestant persons, and such Husband as she shall so Marry,
as aforesaid, shall for ever be Incapable of being Heir, Executor,
Administrator, or Guardian, of, or to any Protestant or Protestants whatsoever;
and in case any Protestant Woman, as aforesaid, is now Married to a Popish
person, and has now by Law a Title, or is chosen or appointed to be Guardian
to any Protestant person or persons, having all or any of the said Estates or
Interests, aforesaid, that in such Case, from and after the said First Day of
January, such Guardian shall be utterly Incapable of being any longer so
Guardian, or to Receive any the Rents, Issues or Profits, of the said Estates
or Interests of such person or persons in Guardianship, as aforesaid; and the
Right and Title of such Guardianship, shall devolve on, and come to the next
Protestant, or Protestants of the Kin, to whom the Estate of such person or
persons in Guardianship, as aforesaid cannot descend, unless such person shall
be Incapable in Law, or shall be Adjudged unfit for such Guardianship by the
Court of Chancery in this Kingdom: In either of which Cases, such Right of
Guardianship shall go to the next Protestant of Kin, who shall be Capable and
Fit for the Discharge of such Trust, who shall take into his, her, or their
Care and Tuition such person and persons in Guardianship, as aforesaid, and
Receive the Rents, Issues and Profits of such Estates and Interests belonging
to such person or persons, so in Guardianship.

And that in Case any Protestant Minister, or Popish Priest, or other person
whatsoever, shall after the said First Day of January, Ioyn in Marriage any
Protestant Maid or Woman, having any of the said Estates or Interests,
aforesaid, to any person whatsoever, without having such Certificate in
Writing, as aforesaid, then every such Protestant Minister, Popish Priest, or
other person whatsoever, Joining in Marriage, as aforesaid, such Protestant
Maid or Woman to any person without such Certificate, as aforesaid, for every
such Offense, he or they shall so Commit, being Convicted thereof by his or
their Confession, or by the Verdict of a Jury of Twelve Men of the County
wherein such Offense shall be Committed, shall suffer One Year's Imprisonment,
without Bail or Mainprize, and Forfeit the Sum of Twenty pounds Sterling, the
one Moiety thereof to Our Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, His Heirs and
Successors, and the other Moiety to the party or parties that will Sue for the
same, by any Bill, Plaint, Action, Suit or Information, wherein no Essoyn,
Wager of Law, or Protection shall be allowed.

And whereas the Marriages of Protestant persons, to, and with Popish Maidens
and Women, have, proved Pernicious to the Protestant Interest, it commonly
happening such Protestant persons and their Issues, being influenced by such
Popish Wives, are Reconciled to Popery, and become Papists: For Remedy whereof,
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in Case any Protestant
person or persons, shall after the said First day of January next, Marry any
Maiden or Woman, without having obtained a Certificate in writing, under the
Hand of the Minister of the Parish, Bishop of the Diocese, and some Justice of
the Peace, living near the place where such Maid or Woman shall be Resident at
the time of such Marriage, or any Two of them, of her being a known Protestant;
which Certificate shall be Attested by Two Credible Witnesses, as aforesaid,
and shall be Granted without Fee or Reward; such person or persons so Marrying
any Maiden or Woman, shall from and after such Marriage, be in Law, deemed and
esteemed to all intents, constructions and purposes, to be a Papist, or Popish
Recusant, and shall for ever afterward, be Disabled and Rendered Incapable of,
and from being Heir, Executor, Administrator, or Guardian to any person or
persons whatsoever, as also be Disabled to Sit in either House of Parliament,
and Rendered Incapable of, and from having, bearing, or Exercising, any Civil
or Military Office or Employment whatsoever, unless such person so Marrying,
shall within One Year after such Marriage, procure such Wife to be Converted to
the Protestant Religion, and shall obtain a Certificate under the Hand and Seal
of the Bishop of the Dioces, or Archbishop of the Province, or Chancellor, of
this Kingdom, that she has renounced the Popish Religion, and is become a
Protestant, and shall procure the said Certificate to be Enrolled in the Court
of Chancery in this Kingdom.

And whereas several Popish Priests have of late endeavored to withdraw
several of the Soldiers Inlisted in His Majesty's Army, from His Majesty's
Service, by Marrying them to Popish Wives.

Be it therefore further Enacted, That any Popish Priest, or Protestant
Minister, or other person whatsoever, that shall Marry any Soldier Inlisted in
His Majesty's Army in this Kingdom, to any Wife without such Certificate as
aforesaid, shall Forfeit the Sum of Twenty pounds for every such offense, to
be Levied by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace, in any County in this
Kingdom where such offense shall be Committed of the Goods and Chattels of the
Offender, or in default thereof, the party so Offending to be Committed to the
County Goal there to remain without Bail of Mainprize, until he shall pay the
said Sum, one Moiety thereof to such person or persons that shall give
Information and make out such Offense before any Justice of the Peace, and the
other Moiety to the Tresurer of the County, to be applied to the use of the
County, and that every Justice of the Peace shall give an account of his
proceedings to the next Quarter Sessions.

Provided always, That any person that shall think himself Agrieved, by the
Judgment of any Justice of the Peace, may have Liberty to Appeal to the next
Quarter Sessions, where the said Matter shall be Examined, and such Relief
therein given, as to the Justices at the Quarter Sessions shall seem reasonable.

Provided always, And be it Enacted, That in all Cases where a Certificate is
required by this Act, that the person Marrying is a known Protestant, if any
Marriage shall be Made without such Certificate, and it can afterward be made
appear by Proof, that such person was a known Protestant, that in such Case,
they shall not be Liable to any Forfeitures or Penalties in this Act.

An ACT for Granting an Additional Duty on Tobacco; and for continuing unto His
Majesty an Aid, or Additonal Custom on several Goods and Merchandises. And
also, for continuing the Additional Duty on Beer and Ale, and other Liquors,
till the Twenty fifth Day of December, One thousand Seven hundred and Two

CHAP. XXIX.


