The INNOCENT COUNTREY-MAN'S REFLECTIONS, Upon some Emergent DIFFERENCES Of
Late; and his Seasonable ADVICE TO A DIVIDED PEOPLE, In time of Imminent Danger.

Silver and Gold have I none to buy the Medicines, but my Advice I tender humbly
without either of the two.

Diabolus plerumque vult nocere, and non potest, quia potestas illa sub
potestate; nam si tantum noceret Diabolus quantum vult, aliquis justorum non
remaneret. August. Super. Psalm. Deus eum (sc. Diabolum) potentiae suae fraeno
vinctum constrictumque tenet: ut ea modo exequatur quae ei Divinitus mandata
aut concessa fuerint. Piscator exages: Aphor: 14. page 133. Divines Explain,
not without good ground, that by the Devil is not only understood in Holy Writ,
these fallen Angels, which are chained up till God's permission, from
Afflicting the Just; But also his evil Instruments, who stand up, not only to
Accuse the Righteous, but also to Oppress and Persecute them, in their* Fame,
Life, and Estate, and Retard all good Works and Endeavors, as Satan stood up
against Joshua, the high Priest, etc. in Zechariah, cap. 3. Licensed, May 1st.
1690.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, 1690.

The Country Man's Seasonable Advice to a Divided People, etc.
THese that trace the Reconcilers Paths, (were they at Variance never so near
in Relation, Profession, or Religion) ordinarily meet with Moses's Treatment,
Exodus cap. 2, verse. 13, 14, 15.
yet the Imbecility, or Ingratitude of Men, ought not to be of any force, to
drive the Rational Man from his Duty; though it occasioned offense to the
Peevish; as Augustine said, Si de veritate scandalum sumitur, Aug. lib. de
libero arbitrio.
utilius permittitur nasci scandalum quam veritas relinquatur.

Seeing Sacred Writ pronounces a Bless to the Peacemaker: and one of the Moral
Philosophers could say, Optimum est quod in praesentia occurrit been agere. Yea
most of the Moral Philosophers, did not only suggest, but inculcat these Divine
Principles of Union and Concord to their Scholars, Alexander in Pythag: Commen:
Principium quidem omnium unitas est, ex qua indefinitam dualitatem, veluti
materiam autori unitate subjecisse.

So that the Heathen Maxims and Aphorisms, yea, their practices may make
Christians ashamed, when they reflect upon theirs; much more may those who
profess the Protestant Reformed Religion be ashamed, who sell their noblest
Passions of Love, to that of Prejudice and Hatred; Peace and Union, to that of
Discord and Malice, for a mess of pottage; This is no Sacred Hunger, but rather
resembles the Dog in the Fables, Who lost a sweet Morsel to piccaroun a Shadow;
and are such, who neglect the greater matters of the Law, to catch Flies; Or
who Gallio like, are too indifferent, or look more to the Letter of the Law,
than Fundamentals: Thus destroying that sweet Union, Communion and Concord
ought to be among them of the same Religion and Profession, not seriously
considering, that Violence can never accomplish the true, or right ends of
agreeable things desired, or to be hoped. And it could be wished, that by these
Methods (to our sad experience, if we believe Presidents of undoubted Truth,
might quadrat with our case) we give not too much advantage to the common
Enemy, if not the Enemy of Mankind it self (composed of Popish Emissaries, and
lax or wavering Protestants) who inverting the Divine Maxim, make gain their
godliness, and design downright to divide honest, well-meaning men in their
Sentiments, by improving Matchiavils Maxim, Divide and impera.

But though linked together for bad designs, yet being of different complexions
and conditions, may meet with disappointments, when they come to a Point they
must of necessity differ in, if the one party proposes any good end, the other
does not, and caveant ne inter loquendum secreta pronuncient.

All good men, though of different Sentiments and Opinions, (were their
conditions the same) will be ready to say (whether true or false, none can be
Judge, but each particular man of his own Intentions and Actions, when not done
in the face of the Sun) that they have the right end of the Staff, that they
would entertain none in their Society but good men, such as are for the common
Good, Public Peace and Safety, Settling the Government in unquestionable
Hands, and are for the King's true Service, and the welfare of the Country in
general, so be it: And I know this is indeed Lully's Aurum potabile vulgi, sed
veritas non latet angulis, neque conjunctione maledicis, anguinis aut maleficis.

But to make these Assertions clear by Evidences, seeing the Tree is known by
the Fruit, banish Peevishness, and let private Interest, which is too obvious,
be laid aside; for as there is no agreement betwixt God and Mammon, nor
communion betwixt Light and Darkness; well-meaning men, and evil designing men,
(where nimia familiaritas demum parit contemptum) so well-meaning men will
drive to the likliest and safest Harbor of the two, since the Ship must
inevitably perish, if it drive into the one, and shun the other; for we have a
very Pathetick Scots Aphorism, tho it may seem Rustic, Such man as thou would
be, draw thee to such company.

And whether it be safer to drive the Ship, (tossed by violent Storms in the
unmerciful Surges, granting all that is alleged) on a Sandy Shore, or upon a
destructive Rock, when either must be, let rational men Judge, cum melius
inquirendum.

Yet in these particulars, when men are their own Judges, the best are apt to
indulge their Senses and Fancies, and without Examination, decide in their own
favors; when upon a reference to indifferent Judges, the Question might decide
more equally, to the satisfaction of both parties; If men permit not their
Reasons to be imposed upon, with their ignobler Passions and Frailties, leaning
too much thitherwards, as Sulla did, by resigning the absolute power of his
Dictatorship, which he took upon him for a longer time than his Life, of whom
Julius Caesar said Ironice, quia nesciverit dictare (intelligitur ambignus) quod
munus est Grammatici, meaning, that Grammarians had a kind of an absolute power
to indict Precepts to their Scholars, unde videtur dictator; and no doubt, men
endowed with Sense and Reason, and pretending to Honor, ought to give Precepts
(as Seneca and Socrates did) the restraining of all their Lusts, Passions, and
Infirmities, for the common public Interest and Peace's sake, and when men are
masters of their Reasons, as well as their Infirmities (though differing in
Sentiments, and reflecting but a little seriously) they would readily admit of
indifferent Judges, by which the common Law, and Reason would become Rules to
both. And if the Question, or Controversy were fairly and calmly stated,
whether to be adequated to, or judged by the Precepts of the Law of Nature,
positive Laws of God (revealed,) or positive Laws of Men, (as adapted to both
the former, and enacted, agreeable to the Constitutions of respective
Societies, and Commonwealths of rational men) every Point might have a
definitive Sentence, to satisfy all unbyassed parties. And as the Learned
Physicians of any experience, will not allow an Epoche in any Disease but
Death. So our Nation, (which has its Era's of all agreeable things inferior to
no other) must not be banter'd with the reflection of having educat of late,
but one, or few or more Parmenis's, (whose Counsels would have the esteem of
Oracles) to heal all our Breaches their own way only.

But some men will say, granting all this, yet that such and such particular
persons, who have been destructive to the very Laudable Constitutions of the
Commonwealth, or mischievous, or evil Instruments in the former Governments,
ought not to be trusted (after a happy Revolution) in a Healing and Good
Government. To this I agree, but at the same time Consider well, and mark these
that embrace them, neque id consider andum quod dixerit, sed utrum vere dicatur
necne; Plato.
so that I am not to be Judged by any biased man, more than he is to be by me;
and at least there ought to be a fair Trial in the case, unless we be too
unequally stated; for though I be innocent, and my neighbors seem to be
guilty, without a fair Trial and Proof, the Balance betwixt us is not cleared,
non peccantes modo, verum and peccare gestientes punito.

So still Reason and Law must decide the Controversy: These that pretend
innocence; if innocent, no doubt are more to be trusted than the faulty,
especially when the former are of equal capacity; Yet in our present
Accusations (abstracting from attrocious Crimes, and persons guilty of them,
who are not vindicated) we may interpose our Savior's answer to the Pharisees,
concerning the Woman taken in Adultery, that he who is not a sinner should
throw the first stone; In which case, I doubt much who would have the
confidence to make the first attempt. If we make a scrutiny into the Aphorisms
of Moralists, in reference to all Supreme Governments, and inflicting of
punishments for Crimes, (laying aside Threedbare Reflections), we would find
very moderat Prescripts, and Presidents: For Periander could say, qui tuto
regnare vellent, summa open nitendum, ut benevolentia non armis stiparentur.

And Pittacus (which may meet with our Case very appositely) said, Maximum
imperium est victorias sine sanguine acquiri. And we find in Sacred ^rit, that
the best had not only their faults and failings, but were likewise guilty of
the grossest Enormities; Moses offended in his passion, for which he was
deprived of entering into the promised Land, yet a Saint, and a Type of our
Savior's Humane Person: David a great Sinner yea, a Transgressor, in acting
contrair to the known Laws of the Land, indicted by the Spirit of God,
particularly in eating the shewbread, and numbering of the people, for which
they suffered, yet he declared to be a man according to God's own heart:
Hezekiah sinned, in exposing his Wealth and Treasure, (out of Oftentation to
the Uncircumcised) yet Repenting, sound Mercy, and obtained his desire:
Manasseh Sinned much more, but upon his Repentance obtained pardon: Peter and
the Thief upon the Cross, are notorious examples of their sins, and mercies
upon their Repentance.

By all which we may perceive, that God does not in time Destroy, or eternally
Damn men for every particular failing, and sin, provided they Repent; But he
executes his Wrath for a continued tract of sin, unrepented of; a wilful
denial, or abjuring of the Truth, and breaking of his express Command, where he
declares his unalterable just Judgment for the breach thereof, or lying to the
Holy Ghost.

Such were the Cases of Balaam, Achan, Judas, Annanias, and Saphira, whose Sins
being extraordinary, met with the like Punishment; And in all Civil
Commonwealths and Societies of Men, the rigor of the Law is never put in
execution for each persons Offense therein, but are mitigated; one Reason
thereof is very obvious, because Laws are made magis ad terrorem quam
executionem; for if Men's Natures were not so much depraved, the Precepts of the
Law of Nature, and the Dictates of Men's own Consciences might be Rules of
Humane Actions and Manners: But by reason of our pravitie, Positive Laws are
made to keep us in awe, and to put us in mind of our Duty in relation to God,
our Neighbors and our selves, Superiors, Inferiors and Equals, to chastise
Men as a Penalty for Disobedience, and not to destroy them for Failings of
every kind; and the more we imitate God, in reference to his Justice and Mercy,
the better: for the extremity of Mercy is more safe, than the extremity of
Justice, or the rigor of the Law: Not that I think it is the prudence of
safety of any Society or Commonwealth, to let all Transgressors pass
unpunished, provided that Men that would inflict the Punishment be not guilty
of the same, the like, or greater Faults or Crimes, Nam optime and justissime
vivere est, si quae in aliis reprehendimus ipsi non faciamus. Thales, Milesius.
And it is confessed that the letting all Transgressors go free would be a ready
way to shake the very Foundations and Constitutions of a Government, yea the
very ends of their linking together in a body Politic: But so (as in an happy
Revolution) these having the Legislative or Executive Power, would put the Law
moderatly in execution, without Passion, Personal Prejudice, By ass or any evil
Design; yea that upon a general Jealousy of Men, these whose inclinations or
endeavors have been or may be prejudicial, or destructive to the
Commonwealth, may be made incapable to temporize, or act any thing tending to
the overthrow of the Government; and that persons guilty of attrocious Crimes,
might be animadverted upon by way of moderat Justice: for as the best blood
makes the best temperament of Humane Bodies; so in a Body Politic, the best
Humors and Conditions of Men makes the best Temperament of Government, for
Vengeance is mine, (says the Lord) and I will repay it. And God forbid, this
good Government should be tainted with the same Inhumane, Unchristian-Cruelties
and Oppressions toward persons of different Sentiments and Professions the
later Governments were guilty of, for which they do ly under an heavy Charge;
so let us never run to the same Extravagances we complained of in other Men.

But some will say, That that Government is but in a tottering condition, when
in such a critical Juncture, such as are not only guilty of attrocious Crimes,
but even these who labor generally under a bad Suspicion, and are obnoxious to
the People, should not only be sheltered under the Government, but be also
introduced into places of greatest Trust, and that the People should not be rid
of all those creeping Evils, as Julius Caesar put away his Wife, because he
thought that all these of his House ought to be clear of all Suspicions as well
as Crimes: And as Octavius Caesar uti Pater Patriae, obtained a Decree of the
Senate, to compel every Gentleman [who served with the Cities Horse] to render
an account of his Life; granting all this, yet at the same time Octavius made a
distinction of Crimes and Punishments; for such as were blameable, and could
not approve their Actions, some he Punished, others he noted with Shame and
Ignominy, but the most part of them with Admonitions, and tendering of the
Tables in open places, where all their Faults were written: And it could be
wished that these or such like were our Methods of Healing the Distempers of
the State, for it were hard [in a gentle, well governed State] to prostitute
Authority to every private man's opinion, thereby to unhinge the Bands thereof:
This were to make a Government, like that fine piece of Painting, which the
Painter thereof exposed to every Passengers view, and tho every Spectator
applauded it to be the finest done Picture in the World, yet all found some
particular Fault to it, and the Painter by pleasing every man's Fancy in
mending it, the Picture at last looked like a Monster of Nature; and a wise,
good and Politic Governor could say, Nam sponte and invitum cedere aeque
periculosum est; and in the twelve Roman Tables, none was to lose his place, or
to be condemned to die, but upon full Proof by the Sentence of the General
Assembly; and in the Romans Proceedings, after Healing of the Cause with great
Deliberation, the Judge delivered the Tabella, where was written, C, A, N, L,
signifying, Condemnation, Absolution, and Non Liquets, Indicating that the
Cause of any Man was to be Heard over and over again, and not rashly to be
Condemned, placing Probatioplena to be the ground of a just Sentence, and not
Fama clamosae; nam facile est reprehendere and maledicere: And the Grecians had
Letters also to express their Sentences, TH T A, which were to the same
purpose: And the Romans had different Punishments, viz. mulctam supremam,
mulctam minimam, as well as capitis diminutionem; and these had their
Subdistinctions also, but were always tender of the Patrician Order or Degree,
yea Criminal Judges have White in their Robes as well as Red for a Badge of
Mercy as well as Justice. Wisdom wont to be painted as a beautiful Woman, with
four Ears and four Hands, but with one Tongue, and no Arms of Cruelty. The
Dolphin obtained the Honor to signify the King or Emperor of the Seas,
because it is said to be kind, gentle and grateful; and shall not Men, endowed
with Sense and Reason, and Professing Christianity, yea Protestants, take
example of the Heathens; Pagans, or the Bruits, but rather resemble the
Salamander, who by reason of its unkindly moist Constitution, labors in the
Fire, but when out of it, leaves some impression upon the very Fruits of the
Earth of its cold and poisonous nature; or like the Hydra, the Hyrogliphick of
envious Souls. Let us rather resemble the Sun and its beautiful Beams,
representing the Unity, Wisdom, Concord and Love ought to be amongst those
linked together in a Common wealth or Society, and demean toward one another,
as the kindly and naturally affectioned Dragon, who cured his fellow Creatures
Malady, by tendering him an Herb, which taught the learned Polyidus by the same
Cure to raise Glaucus from death to his Fathers joy.

But not to consume too much time on that which God and Nature must work upon
persons who are inexorable, [or who are in Paroxisms, if I may speak so with
grief,] more than Examples, Presidents, Precepts or Counsels, though all were
Oracles, [which brings me in remembrance of that ancient Maxim, mentioned by
Valerius, in relation to Men's greatest Difficulties, Lib. 7.
Ipsum noscere difficile.] I come to particulars, of which I will treat but
very briefly, and in more general terms, that no honest man of what Party,
Opinion or Sentiment whatsoever shall have reason to take exception. Then,

When the Regal Power was devolved upon their present Majesty's, [whom the
Heavens were pleased, with the Counsel and Assistance of some honest
Countrymen, to make glorious Instruments to relieve us from Arbitrary and
Despotick Power, Popery and Slavery, and our fears of more Mischief,] the three
Estates did then give so much deference to, and put so much confidence in their
Majesty's [of which I am hopeful we need never to repent] That the three
Estates of the Nation then Convocat, did cheerfully and unanimously devolve the
same, and offered the Crown with an Instrument of Government, and a Petition,
with a Claim of Right, for Redress of Grievances: All, as was then judged, [if
there were no omissions medio tempore; nam humanum est tam omittere quam
errare] bounded within the compass of so many Articles, which their Majesty's
promised to perform, provided that some of these Articles did not bind them up
so, as to force them to be persecuters of men for their Religion, or Opinion,
in matters of Conscience only; which was an express Salvo. And what was further
understood then by some men, but what was materially Concerted in Form by these
Articles, if Literal, is a Riddle; For certainly, by their Literal Sense, the
King and His Advisers can easily be exonered from any unreasonable Reflections
can be put upon them, for any alteration appears as yet; And if there be more
meant than is expressed in these Articles, and Claim, as formed, there is no
rational good man will charge His Majesty with an Obligation of performing such
things he knew not were desired and understood, yet not expressed; For it must be
a Divine Being must know men's thoughts, frail men know only the Actions and
Expressions of Men: And it is looked upon to be one of the most firm Maxims
amongst School men, that Immateriale non agit in materiale, nisi eminenter, ut
Deus: So that Divinity must only have Prescience.

And, as God forbid we should be guilty of mistrusting such a Wise, Just, and
Courageous Prince, who did so much for us; so it is hoped we will never offer to
impose more upon him, than what tends to our ease, securing of our Civil and
Religious Rights, tending to the common Safety, Peace and Tranquillity of the
Nation in general; in which no doubt all honest Country men will be equally
concerned. And I am persuaded, no Subject of any Degree will be more ready to
contribute to the accomplishment of these happy ends, than our Great and
Gracious King, who was never known to have belyed his word, and who most
frequently discoursing upon this Common Head, expressed himself thus, I desire
not to retain, or ask any thing from my People, but what may enable me in the
Government, which they have devolved upon me, to secure their Religious and
Civil Rights, and to protect them against theirs and my enemies.

Which gracious condescensions of His Majesty's, makes me imagine, ere whiles I
hear him in his Solitude express himself thus with the great Octavius Caesar
Augustus, who had the Epithet, of Pater Patriae, Sweton. de vita Octavii Caes.
Aug.
Oh that I might establish the Commonwealth safe and sound upon their own
proper Piedstal (or Basis) and thereof reap that fruit which I desire, even
that I may be reported the Author of an excellent Estate, and carry with me
when I die this hope, that the Groundwork of the Foundations of the
Commonwealth which I shall lay, may continue and abide steadfast in their place
for ever after me.

And what Prince in the World lived more happily and splendidly than His
Majesty, when Prince of Orange; was he not the Darling of the Dutch, the
desirable Friendship of all his good Neighboring Princes, a Patron of Virtue,
Piety and Frugality, a Protector of all distressed and persecuted People, (of
which many of our Contrymen are notorious evidences) the terror of all
designing men of evil Principles, and the dread of the French Tyrant, whose
Activity and Prowess he was more afraid of than all the Antichristian Bulls and
Excommunications, and yet never too much lifted up, nor dejected, sed semper
inter secundas res moderatus, inter adver sas prudens.

God forbid then we should make his precious life uneasy to him, (whom we
invited to come, and who came over for our relief) by our ingratitude,
divisions, and murmurings: For it is well known, that his method is to try ere
he trust, and where he finds capacity and honesty, he never forsakes; which
verifies that sage Precept of Solon's in him, Be not hasty making thy friend,
and keep him when ye gain him; which two Rules Propertius elegantly comprehends
in one Verse,

amare. Nec cito desisto, nec temere incipie. Now if His Majesty has made, or
will make such Concessions, by the grant of His Royal Assent to such Acts to be
past in Parliament (without our running to heats, Jehu-like, to be guilty of
cruelty by pretense of a Divine Call, by violence to destroy one another) as
may answer our expectations, in relation to those Articles for redress of
Grievances; on whom shall we lay the heavy charge of not redressing other
Grievances (were then but Embrio's at best) not mentioned in the Claim of
Right: For I am persuaded, if we had desired more, as conditions at the
devolving of the Government upon Their Majesty's, (before it had been done, if
reasonable) they had been granted. Sure I am we cannot blame Him or His
Ministers, for not giving Instructions concerning these things he knew not then
to be Grievances; and if we run to the ignorant Mobile's sense of things, we'll
find that they are like Melancholy persons fancies, who fear things not to be
feared, and to feign quae nec picta usquam, nec scripta; like that Plebeian,
who imagined that his Nose was grown so great, that he durst not go abroad, for
fear it should be hurt, etc. Or like the famous Poet at Amsterdame believed
that his Buttocks were of Glass, etc. Thomas Bartholinus, Cent. Leg. 1.79. page
117.
Fred. 3d King of Denmark's Physician, so many people are abused by Dreams,
Fancies and Tradition, and Hearsay, as I think Witchcraft and Popery go by
Tradition or Relation. Have we not a clear demonstration of His Majesty's
Goodness and Condescendence in His Instructions (where beside the redressing of
those Grievances, digested into so many Articles) by which he desired to be
acquainted from time to time with any motion should be made in Parliament,
tending to the welfare of the Country and People, and he should give his
Instructions accordingly. Which Instruction seemed to Strangers, who were not
versant in our Forms, Customs and Laws, to be concessa ultra p^tila, to say no
farther.

God forbid I should be guilty of charging my man, or men, with the neglect of
prosecuting His Majesty's and Parliaments good design, tho Enemies and
designing Men do take their advantage by breeding of Jealousies, and creating
of Differences amongst honest men, for their own bad ends, and would seem to
lay the charge either upon those worthy Instruments, who contribute their
advice to, and ventured their lives with the King in His first Enterprise,
(which in all healing Governments might be esteemed full expiations of persons
faults, though guilty) or others, who were the greatest Props in these
perilous critical ^^es: And the most active to promove, and to bring to a
happy conclusion the great Work then acted upon the Stage: And for which they
not only deserve the Laurels of praise, but also Promotions and Rewards, as
suitable returns, sed hec Deus jussit, non dii.

But I am apt to impute our nigrum vulnus of divisions and too much heat, and
apprehended disasters from the common enemy, to Fatality and God's permission:
For is there any evil comes upon the City that is not of the Lord, that is, by
his permission? more than from any apprehension I have of a conjunction of
those different Persuasions, and of different proposed ends: For I cannot be
driven to range in a Field of Diffidence toward honest men, who not only mean
well, but were considerable Actors of a happy Scene in the late Revolution. Nor
can I once imagine worthy Patriots will be guilty of being imposed upon by bad
men to break the Bond of Peace, ought to be (like the Guardian Knot) amongst
honest well-Principled Men, that have the same proposed good ends after a happy
Revolution in a healing time. And if we were so happy as to lay aside all those
personal Prejudices, Pieques, Heats, Animosities and Emulation incident to
Humane Frailty (maugre all evil Instruments) and in cold Blood weigh our duty
to God, to our Benefactors, Neighbors, and our selves, our holy Religion and
Profession, and the same and security we owe to our Posterity, more than
particular interest, and worldly gain, we needed not be afraid with evil
Aspects, or frightful Visions of the Enemies, Bandying together for our common
destruction.

The great work then in hand (to the concerting and accomplishing of which, I
pray the Heavens may be propitious to us for a happy issue) is, that all good
well-designing men, (who have nothing more before their eyes than the glory of
God, the King's honor, the common good, the advancement of our holy Religion,
and the general peace and tranquillity of the Nation) join together with heart
and hand, (not Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, but both
against Amalek, and all the uncircumcised) and bring Materials with them to
heal the breaches of our Walls where they are weakest, broken and exposed, too
obnoxious to the enemies watchful eye and insolence, whose bands are strong,
but not to be made stronger by our joining with them. And to the end that our
gracious King may be the more and more encouraged to grant all our just
desires, (so as we may not look upon him to be such a Father as would give us a
Scorpion for a Fish, which if we do, we are unhappy.) Let us in the first place
assist and enable him to make good to us, what we our selves in a manner
obliged him to perform, viz. the Grievances contained in these Articles, and I
doubt not but all our just emergent Grievances will be concerted to a general
satisfaction, which will March up in the Rere, and in its due time will join
with the Vanguard, and both will prove one Brazen Wall, which I hope the
common Enemy will never be able to come over again.

This would be the method to make King and People, Nobility, Gentry and Peasant
happy; for by joining together, the common enemy their expectations would fail,
nam sapiens dominabitur astris. Paracels.
But if we offer to take an evil Party by the hand, to heal those breaches
(which they themselves made in the Hedges of our Religious and Civil Rights)
they will prove Eels in our hands, yea bitter in the digestion, since their
Concoction had no good foundation; our true or pretended sufferings will be
forgotten, we'll lose our reputation we bore of Religion, Profession and
Virtue, and all good men will suspect our Principles and Ingenuity, yet God
will prosper his own Work begun, and it will be made evident to the World we
have no hand in it. For we must not only apply Mordecai's Message to Esther,
Cap 4. Verse. 13, and 14. to any particular person in the State, but to all good
men in the State in their several capacities, to put to their hand to heal the
breaches of the State and Church. But for all that is past, oblivioni tradita
esto; and all good men expect good things of us as yet, for all the great
Heats, Animosities, and Contests about trifles.

Then as ye love the Interest of God, your Religion, your King and Country,
and as ye tender a respect to the interest of Protestants at home and abroad,
all whose eyes are upon you, Let your moderation be known to all men, proceed
regularly and ingeniously, follow a solid method to settle State and Church.

And after ye have accommodated your Preliminaries, and constituted the House
in its Members, Privileges, and Committees, prosecute the great work in hand.

And the first particular breach in our Walls ought to be repaired, is, the
settling of the Church Government now without Form: In Concerting and
Establishing of which, I will not offer to prescribe Rules, submitting that to
the determination (by the Divine Assistance, with the Advice of a Moderate and
Learned Ministry) of such a Learned, Sage Parliament, as this is; but wishes it
may be so Concerted, as most agreeable to the Word of God, and general
inclination of the People; so as the Secular and Ecclesiastical Interests may
not interfier, or prove troublesome to one another, after the settlement, each
knowing their own Districts, and acting their part, and going about their
particular Duties and Callings, in their respective Spheres, without
intermedling in others bounds. Yet I presume, that such an Honorable, Wise and
Religious Parliament, as this is, will Establish that Church Government, which
is most agreeable to the Genious of the People of tenderest Consciences,
provided it be consonant to the word of God; for the Church Governments, which
were Established by Law in Scotland,, were only two; and no doubt, that part of
the People, who make Church Government a conscientious principle, for which
they could suffer in both their Fortunes and Lives, ought rather to be pleased
(giving and not granting, that both were equally stated) than the other, who
make both a matter indifferent, and could with a safe conscience (or once
hazard of the least suffering in either) join in discipline and worship with the
former, when as the former cannot join with them in either of the two.

The second is for you own Security, that ye cordially and unanimously, and
suddenly, if at all, grant such a Supply to Their Majesty's, as may not only
pay the Army their bygone Arrears, to satisfy the poor Country people, to
whom they are much indebted, and to Re-imburse the several Officers who have
been at vast Charges to serve the Public: But also to make it such a Supply,
as may be sufficient to maintain a competent number of Forces on Foot, for a
certain time, as will be sufficient to Reduce the Rebellious Highlanders, and
Defend the Country from Foreign Invasion, in this dangerous Conjuncture,
(when we have reason to doubt, whether many in our very Bosoms be Friends, or
Foes;) for without a considerable Fond, we cannot expect that the Forces can be
kept together, and yet without them, we are in no Security of our Lives or
Fortunes, nor are we, I hope, of that Persuasion, as to expect our Victory, or
Safety from Miracles.

It will be Objected, that we want Trade, and that the Land is not able to bear
a great Supply, (by reason of our frequent Harasses, and general Devastations,)
as will be sufficient to support an Army for any considerable time; Both may be
true, yet Necessity has no Law, but we must resolve to give part voluntarly to
Defend us, or to be Destroyed Root and Branch, (and both Moities will perish
likewise) if the Supply be not granted; and me thinks, there is no difficulty
to make such a Fond, for if Trade and the Land be not able to undergo the
Burden, why may not the Taxes to be laid upon the Land and Trade, be made
easy, by Imposing of an equal Poll upon all persons according to their Estate
and Degree, after the Laudable Custom of our Neighboring Nation, and that
Money bear its Burden also, (which was seldom or never Taxed) with due respect
always to men's desperate Sums and Debt, whose Stock consists in Movables only;
so that all persons under the Protection of the Government, will contribute
something, and the Impositions will be unsensible to all, if the Regulation and
Ingathering be trusted in conscionable, honest, and unquestionable Hands.

There is one great neglect, which it is wished might be remeided (humbly
Represented to the Honorable Parliament) would contribute much to advance, and
enrich the generality of people in this Nation, to the enabling of them to bear
Burden in such Exigencies, viz. That the Product of the Country, by an Act,
should be sold at greater Rates; for by the great price given for Foreign
Commodities Imported (many of which are more for the Fancy and Pallat, than the
Intrinsic Value, Profit, or necessity of bringing them home;) and the mean
prices of the Country Product, (Retailed at Home, or Exported Abroad,) the
Nobility and Gentry are not only at a great loss, but the poor Farmers are
Drudges and Slaves to particular people, and it may be rationally concluded;
that they are but particular persons in every corner of the Nation, who exhale
and drain the substance, (to whom the Civil Law did give but little trust, or
encouragement, who by their kind of Frugality, whether Just, or Unjust, it is
easily Divined) become rich on a sudden, and keeps the Body of the Nation, who
undergoes all the Burden, low, and the Commonality in Bondage.

I desire to be excused for this Digression, but the wisest of men are not one
whit the worse; nor does it derogat, to be put in mind of a Duty, or
convenience, e're whiles, -- Nam gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo.

The third Particular, is the Reducing of honest men's Forfeitures, whose
Estates and Fortunes (in the later Reigns) for their firm adherence to the
Reformed Protestant Religion, and for Conscience sake, were violently taken
from them by stretches of Law, and what else I know not; and the sudden
Restoring of these Noblemen and Gentlemen to their Just Rights, Estates, and
Fortunes, will not only enable them to join with their Councils and Interests,
to serve the Government, and to Support the necessary Burdens thereof in its
exigencies, but will also discourage a Malevolent, Restless Party, who go about
in Sheeps Clothing, so far as is possible to deceive the honest Party.

The fourth particular is, That there be Restitution made of all unjust Fines
and Losses of honest people, who suffered for Conscience sake only, that they
may put to their helping hand to Support the Government. I will not prescribe
Rules in this matter, Judging that honest people will be satisfied with the
equivalent; but we find, that both the Moral, and Roman Law, have prescribed
excellent Rules concerning Restitutions.

A fifth particular, with humble submission to the wise Parliament's better
Judgment, that the Burrows Rights and Grievances would be considered; for it
seems to be very hard, that the Burrows shall bear the sixth part of public
Burden of the Nation, and Unfree Corporations should inhaunce the very
Substance of Trade, yet bear no Burden for it.

We might have Treated upon all the rest of the Grievances, without giving
offense to any, but judges these to be sufficient for one days work.

And these being the first, and most necessary Grievances to be speedily
Redrest, the rest will follow in consequence, whether they be conditioned to
us, or come emergently under our view, and accounted as Remora's in our way to
Peace, Tranquillity, and Temporary Happiness.

It will be Objected, that when these Points, which we are all willing should
be first and principally concerted, are past into Laws, we may be disappointed
of the others, though als necessary, by Adjourning, or Dissolving the
Parliament before Redress, and therefore not fit to lay down the Cudgels
against our common, or particular Enemies, who are the disturbers of the
public Peace, till first we get these Grievances Redrest, which concern our
Rights, Liberties and Privileges, as well as the other, or have full assurance
of Redressing all.

I Answer first, That de posse ad esse non valet argumentum; but taking up the
Objection in the Complex, I Answer, Secondly, Though I be als much for
contributing my Mite, to have all just Grievances, public and private Redrest
as any mortal, and perhaps has been as actively concerned therein, pro rata,
as others pretending more; yet at the same time I cannot be driven from the
Opinion, to think that it were spliting upon the dangerous, inevitable Rocks of
Scylla, or Charybdis, to mistrust our Gracious King of His Word and Promise,
considering His natural and known Integrity, and Ingenuity, who assures us of
the Redressing of all our just Grievances, and is still ready to make all
reasonable Concessions. Or (though we had other thoughts of Him, or His
Ministers, as God forbid) that we should hazard the common Safety, and let the
Public suffer, by hindering the Settlement of the quid maxim necessarium, if
we obtained not all our Desires in one moment of time; or that for a small
delay in the one, we should be so wilful, or unfortunat, as to retard the
other, especially when I do not in the least doubt, if we put on the Armor of
Patience against our own precipitant temper, but by Peice-meal we might procure
all our Desires, and in common Discourse, we use to say, That Rome was not
built in one day: The Venetians, who are accounted the most Politic, and
Trimming Commonwealth in Europe, have a Proverb, He that walks slowly,
walks more securely.

And as for the frequent Adjournments of this Current Parliament, since the
last Sederunt, there were several Reasons of State for it, als well as for our
good, not fit to be exposed to every man's particular view, in such a critical,
prying Juncture, may afterward be made appear, to a general satisfaction, if
needful, and abstracting from what satisfaction could be truly given on this
head; all rational men will conclude, that sometimes delays are more agreeable,
and safe in many cases, weighing circumstances of people, time and place, than
too much precipitancy; so that as Ennius said, In commend Qu:

Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. I hope it may be verified in our
Gracious Prince, and His Council, Ministers in this case. Englished thus,

One man alone by sage delay,
Restored our State fallen to decay.
And did Our Gracious King Judge't expedient upon some emergent occasions to
Adjourn for a longer time, (as it is hoped there is not, nor shall be reason for
it) I Am persuaded there would be satisfactory Reasons given to the rational,
moderat, and well affected to the Government, in its due time for the accident.

But some perhaps may say, they have run so far, that they cannot in Conscience,
or at least in Honor, Retrive without a Golden Apple: I should be sorry to
think that by misapplication, Conscience, or Honor should be Dislodged, their
proper Domicils, that Candidats for want of Illuminations, should mistake, or
miss the Prize-Stake, where either of the two, or both may be placed, and wead
in a Flood, to gain them at a Stake, where none of the three are fixed; or
should make use of obscurer Instruments, where more proper ones are at hand, to
clear Difficulties, or Doubts, like the man that made use of a Lanthorn to know
the Hour in clear Day Light. The Wise ale ever ashamed to relinquish, or banish
an Error, be it hidden or conspicuous, if the faillure tend to the prejudice of
the public, or private Interest: For as a great Father said, Expedit been
timere quam male fidere, and melius est ut infirmus se homo agnoscat, ut fortis
existat quam fortis videri velit, and infirmus emergat. Atque errare humanum
est. sed in errore perseverare belluinum ac Diabolicum est. But if rational men
will perpetrat in their mistakes, (not that I charge particular persons with
any further than what is very incident to the greatest men's humane frailties)
maxim periculosum, est, I lay may hand upon my mouth, and crave their pardon,
if I have been officious, A Fool's Bolt being soon shot, so may mine: Yet at
the same time, I will be bold to say, that if our Paroxisms cure not in our
present Circumstances, we are not only unfortunat, and in imminent danger, but
are a people most undeserving of our signal Mercies received, and may add, in
relation to us all, this saying in the like case, Lactucas non dandas esse
hisce asinis comedendas, cum illis sufficiant Cardui. Sed datur locus
poenitentiae si seria videtur conversio.

And further, let us occasion our own misfortune, as we will, sure I am, a man
is honored with the Character of being Their Majesty's High Commissioner, who
as he labored under great Sufferings, sustained great losses for his
Religious, Conscientious Principles, and Countries sake, in the later Reigns,
was employed in Negotiations abroad by His present Majesty, to whom both his
Integrity and Capacity was sufficiently known; and whom, and others (now
employed in the present Government) He consulted concerning His great and
dangerous Interprize, for our Relief: So is a man likewise, who with the Noble
Roman, would upon all occasions Sacrifice his Life, and Worldly Interest for's
Religion, King, and Countrey's sake, and may be entirely Confided in, as one,
who to his power, will leave no Stone unturned, to bring our desirable Things
(if we be not the obstructers of our own good) to such a happy conclusion, as
may not only terminat in a general satisfaction of all good men; but also make
every man (who love Peace, unfeigned Truth, and Righteousness) to live in
safety under his own Vine.

And therefore should we be Rancountered with slights and disappointments in
our Worldly Interest, or Promotions, for a Season, Perinde est; provided our
Civil and Religious Rights, Liberties and Properties be secured, which is all
we seem to pretend to, and not tracing that Heathnish Immoral Resolution,
Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo. For did we propose, and elaboratly
pursue after greater things: Prove. cap. 16. ver. 33.
Let us at the same time consider Solomon's saying, that tho the lot be cast
into the lap, yet the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. Et si valde
quaesieri, non invenies.

Then I presume (without any Heat, Bias, personal Prejudice, or private
Interest, but in cold Blood) to sum up all with the Country Man's Loving (if
not Necessary) short Advice and Exhortation, to this Sage and Learned
Parliament, Nobility, Gentry, and Burgesses, therein Assembled, that each of
you in such a Critical Juncture, Cure his own weak Side, with the natural Balm
of Love, Unity and Charity, (burying all Heats, and Personal Prejudice, laying
aside Immoderat Zeal, and Private Interest,) to join Hand in Hand, to Consult
Unanimously, Concert Calmly, to Digest Wisely, and to Enact Resolutely, without
any By-ends, such solid Laws and Statutes, as may not only Restore the Church
to its Pristine Just Rights and Privileges; But also may Support It, and the
Government, ye your selves have Devolved upon Their Majesty's, in the first
place, without Doubts and Fears, and not to leave other Matters undone, in
their due Season.

Which if ye do, and Christianly, Unanimously, and Courageously Employ your
selves, in your several Capacities, to promote the Public Interest, and Common
Good before your Eyes, the Divine Hand will Assist you, and you will not only be
called in after Ages, The Happy and Blessed Instruments of Establishing the
Truth, a Profound and Lasting Peace in the Land; But also, Your Names will be
Recorded to all Posterity, as the best Members, of the best Session, of the
best Parliament, that ever was in Scotland.

FINIS.

