AN ACT For the Explaining of some DOUBTS Arising upon AN ACT ENTITLED, An Act
for the better execution of His Majesty's gracious Declaration for the
Settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of the several interests
of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other his Subjects there; AND For making some
alterations of, and additions unto the said Act, for the more speedy and
effectual settlement of the said Kingdom.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL V ^^NSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT



Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castlestreet. 1665.

Ano Regni Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, 17o.
At the Parliament begun at Dublin, on the eighth day of May, Anno Domini 1661.
in the 13th. year of the Reign of our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES the
Second by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King,
Defender of the faith, etc.

And there continued by several Prorogations, unto the 26 day of October, Anno
Domini 1665. and in the 17 year of His Majesty's Reign.

WHereas in the carrying on of that service which was appointed by a former Act
entitled, An Act for the better execution of His Majesty's gracious
Declaration for the settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of
the several interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other His Subjects there,
several doubts and difficulties have arisen partly from the uncertain and
ambiguous penning of diverse Clauses in the said Act, and partly from other
accidents, which could not then be foreseen, to the great obstruction and
hinderance of the Public ends and aims intended by that Act to be promoted,
and the very great disappointment of several persons and interests, which were
thereby intended to be secured, Insomuch, that the first and final settlement
of this Your Majesty's Kingdom can hardly be attained by any further
proceedings upon the said Act, as is already manifest by the experience which
has been had in the execution thereof: To the end therefore that Your
Majesty's most gracious and just intentions by that Act declared, may still be
pursued, as far as remains possible, the Revenues of the Church settled and
increased, Your Majesty's dutiful and loyal Subjects quieted and secured in
their just possessions, and the minds of all men so composed, that there may be
a general and universal care and industry by building, planting, and all other
ways of improvement, to repair and amend the ruins and desolations of this
Your Majesty's Kingdom: May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty, that it may
be Enacted, and be it Enacted by Your Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all
Honors, Manors, Castles, Houses, Places, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Right, Title, Service, Chiefry, Use, Trust, Condition, Fee, Rentcharge,
Chattels real, Mortgage, right of Redemption of any Mortgages, Recognizances,
Judgments, Forfeitures, Extent, right of Action, right of Entry, Stature, or
any other Estate of what nature or kind soever, in all and every the Counties,
Baronies, Cities, Towns Corporate, and walled Towns within this Kingdom, which
at any time from and after the Three and twentieth day of October, One thousand
six hundred forty and one, were seized or sequestered into the hands, or to the
use of His late Majesty King Charles the first, or of Your Most Gracious
Majesty, that now is, or otherwise disposed of, distributed, set out, or set
apart, by reason of, or upon account of the late horrid Rebellion or War, which
began or broke out in this Kingdom, upon the three and twentieth of October,
One thousand six hundred forty one, or which were allotted, assigned, given,
granted, ordered, distributed, disposed, demised, set out, or set apart to or
for any person or persons use or uses, for Adventures, Arrears, Reprizals, or
otherwise, or whereof His late Majesty, or Your Majesty that now is, or any
Adventurer, Soldier, Reprizable person or others respectively, had and
received the rents, issues and profits by reason, or upon account of the said
Rebellion or War; or whereof the Adventurers, Officers or Soldiers now, or
formerly of the English Army in this Kingdom, or transplanted, or
transplantable persons, or any of them, or their or any of their Heir, Heirs or
Assigns, or any other person or persons whatsoever, upon account of the said
Rebellion or War in this Kingdom, were in Seizin, possession or occupation by
themselves, their Tenants, Agents or Assigns on the Seventh day of May, One
thousand six hundred fifty and nine; or which were assigned, given, granted,
laid out, set apart or reserved for or toward the satisfaction of any the said
Adventurers, Soldiers, or other persons, for or in consideration of any money
or provisions advanced, lent or furnished; or for arrears of pay, or in
compensation of any service, or reputed services, or other account whatsoever;
or reserved, or mentioned to be reserved, for or in order to a reprizal, or
reprizals, for such Encumbrances as then were, now are, or shall be adjudged
due to any person or persons out of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
or for any other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, or whereof any Custodiam,
Lease for year, or years, or other Disposition or Grant whatsoever has been
made; or unto which Your Royal Father, or Your Majesty are any ways entitled
by reason of, or upon account of the said Rebellion or War, or which are
wrongfully detained or concealed by any person or persons whatsoever: As also,
all Chantries, and all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Pensions,
Portions, and other Hereditaments, or other things whatsoever, belonging to any
Ecclesiastical person or persons in his or their Politic capacity, and that
have formerly by them, or any of them been let in Fee-farm, the right whereof,
or title thereunto, or interest therein, was in any person or persons, his or
their Heirs or Assigns, who by the Qualifications in the said Act expressed,
have not been adjudged innocent persons: As also all Leases that have been made
by any Ecclesiastical persons of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments
belonging to them in their Politic capacity, to any person or persons, their
Executors, Admininistrators or Assigns, who by the Qualifications in the said
Act expressed, have not been adjudged innocent persons: As also all
Impropriations or appropriate Tithes belonging to any person or persons, his or
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, who by the Qualifications in
the said Act expressed, have not been adjudged innocent: And also all and
singular the Messuages, Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever,
whereof John fitz Gerald, alias fitz Gerard of Innishmoore, commonly called the
Knight of Kerry, Captain John Magill of the County of Down, Geoffry Fanning of
Ballingary, or any of them, or any of their Ancestors, whose Heirs they are, or
any other person or persons in trust for them, or any of them, or to their or
any of their uses were seized or possessed upon the Two and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one; Notwithstanding that the same were
not seized, sequestered, or set apart upon the account of the said late
Rebellion or War, are and shall be, and are hereby declared, deemed and
adjudged, as from the said Three and twentieth day of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, forfeited, and to have been forfeited to Your Majesty's
Royal Father of ever blessed memory, and Your Majesty, Your Heirs and
Successors; and they are hereby from the said Three and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty and one, deemed, declared, and adjudged
to have been, and to be in the real and actual possession and Seizin of Your
Majesty's said Royal Father, and Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors,
without any Office or Inquisition thereof found, or to be found, freed and
absolutely discharged of and from all Estates tail, and of and from all
Feoffments, and other Conveyances made before the Three and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, by any person or persons being
Tenants in tail, where the intail was not legally docked or barred by Fine or
Recovery, before the Three and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred
forty and one, and of and from all Titles and Estates derived by, from, or
under such Conveyances, and also of and from all and singular Remainders,
Reversions, Rights, Titles, Interests, Services, Chiefries, Uses, Trusts,
Conditions, Fees, Rent-charges, and Chattels real, Mortgages, Rights of
Redemption of Mortgages, Recognizances, Judgments, Extents, Rights of Action,
Rights of Entry, Statutes, and all other Estates, challenges and demands of
what nature or kind soever, to the intent that the same may be settled,
confirmed and disposed of, to and for such use and uses, as in and by the said
former Act were limited and declared, and are not by this present Act changed
or altered, and to and for such other use and uses as in and by this present
Act are declared or appointed, and not otherwise; Saving to Your Majesty, Your
Heirs and Successors all and singular such Estate, Right, Title and Interest
of, in, and unto any Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments within this Kingdom,
which Your Majesty has or ought to have in right of Your Crown in Ireland,
other than by virtue of the aforesaid Act, or this present Act; and otherwise
than by one or more Inquisition or Inquisitions of Lands in the Province of
Connaught, or Counties of Limerick and Clare, and the County of Tipperary,
found and returned in the time of the Earl of Straffords Government in this
Kingdom; which said Inquisition and Inquisitions is and are hereby declared to
have been from the time of the taking thereof absolutely null and void, to all
intents and purposes, as if the same had never been had nor taken, and other
than such Right and Title as in and by a certain Act of Parliament passed in
England, entitled, An Act of free and general Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion,
are mentioned, or intended to be barred or extinguished, Any thing in this Act
contained to the contrary notwithing. Provided always, That this Act, or any
thing therein contained, shall not be deemed, construed, or taken to forfeit
unto, or vest in Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors any Honors, Manors,
Castles, Houses, Places, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments or Chattel real
whatsoever in all, every or any of the Counties, Baronies, Cities, Towns
Corporate and walled Towns in this Kingdom on the Three and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, belonging in Possession, Reversion
or Remainder unto the University of Dublin, or to any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean,
Prebend, Dean and Chapter, or other Ecclesiastical person or persons in his or
in their Politic capacity, or to any other College, Hospital, Church
Collegiate or Parochial, or to the Church Wardens and Parishioners of any
Parish Church for the use of the said Church; or to any Guild, Corporation or
Fraternity Ecclesiastical or Lay; or to any Parson, Rector, or Vicar of any
Parish Church, or to any other person or persons particularly named in the
Proviso contained in the vesting Clause of the said former Act, and whose
Estate was thereby expressly saved and excepted from being vested in your
Majesty. Provided likewise, that this Act, or any thing therein contained,
shall not vest, nor be understood or construed to vest in your Majesty, your
Heirs or Successors, or otherwise be prejudicial unto, or take away any Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Service, Chiefry, Use, Trust, Condition, Fee,
Rentcharge, Chattels real, Mortgage, Right of Redemption of Mortgage,
Recognizance, Judgment, Forfeiture, Extent, Right of Action, Right of Entry,
Statute, or any other Estate of what nature or kind soever from any Protestant
or Protestants, their Protestant Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
whereof upon the Two and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred
forty one, they were respectively seized or possessed, or otherwise interessed
or entitled, or wherein they had any other Estate, Use, Possession, Trust,
Reversion or Remainder, other than such Estate and Interest, whereof they, or
any of them stood seized or possessed for the use of, or in trust for any Irish
Papist or Roman Catholic, who by the Qualifications in the said Act has not
been adjudged innocent, or any other forfeiting person or persons; nor to any
Judgment or Decree which has been obtained by any Protestant or Protestants
in the late Court, or pretended Court for Adjudication of Claims, or in the
Court of Exchequer, or any the four Courts sitting at Dublin, before the Two
and twentieth of August, One thousand six hundred sixty three; or for which any
Judgment or Decree has been confirmed, had or made by the Commissioners
heretofore appointed by his Majesty for the execution of His late gracious
Declaration and Instructions, or the aforesaid Act; Nor to the vesting any the
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments or Chattels real, Right, Title, Service,
Chiefry, Use, Trust, Condition, Fee, Rent Charge, Chattel real, Mortgage, Right
of Redemption of Mortgage, Recognizance, Judgment, Forfeiture, Extent, Right
of Action, Right of Entry, Statute, or any other Estate of what nature or kind
soever of any Papist, who by the Commissioners appointed for the execution of
the aforesaid Act has been adjudged innocent, or the Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of any such Papist, who has been so adjudged
innocent. And it is hereby declared, That no person or persons, who by the
Qualifications in the said former Act has not been adjudged innocent, shall at
any time hereafter be reputed innocent, so as to claim any Lands or Tenements
hereby vested, or be admitted to have any benefit or allowance of any future
Adjudications of innocence, or any benefit of Articles whatsoever, but that
they and every of them, and all and every person and persons claiming by, from
or under them, or any of them, shall be, and are hereby barred and excluded of,
and from all and singular claims and demands not particularly allowed and
provided for in, and by this present Act. And whereas some question or doubt
has arisen, whether the Lands of any Officers or Soldiers were to be
confirmed to them by the said Act, unless they had been formerly and were of
the Army, at the time of the making your Majesty's Declaration of the thirtieth
of November one thousand six hundred and sixty; Be it declared, Enacted, and
Explained by the authority aforesaid, that the word [And] used in that part of
the said Act, which relates to them, shall be taken disjuncttively, as if it
had been [or] so that no such Officer, or Soldier, his Heirs, or Assigns,
shall be excluded the benefit of the said Act, or this present Act, if he had
been formerly of the Army, and in Possession as aforesaid, the seventh day of
May, one thousand six hundred fifty nine, though he were not of the Army the
thirtieth of November one thousand six hundred and sixty, or at any time since.
And to the end that the persons, estates, and interests of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, of whom his Majesty ever had, and still has greatest
care and consideration in the Settlement of this his Kingdom, may be first
provided for; Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and
every the Adventurers, and Soldiers, their and every of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns respectively, who upon the seventh day
of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, were seized or possessed of any
Messuages, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, for or toward the
satisfaction of any Adventures or arrears, which by the rules of this or the
said former Act are allowed to be satisfied, And all and every other the
Adventurers commonly called deficient Adventurers, whether they be deficient in
whole or in part, (that is to say) such Adventurers who never had any Lands set
out to them in satisfaction of their Adventures, or were never fully satisfied
for the same, And the Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns of such
Adventurers respectively shall have, hold, and enjoy, and be settled, and
confirmed, in so much of the forfeited Lands, which by this Act are vested in
His Majesty, as will amount to two full third parts of what they, or those
under whom they claim, had, or in cases of deficiencie ought to have had upon
the Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, in manner following,
That is to say, The Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall diligently
examine, and compute, or cause to be computed, what quantity of Land any such
Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns of
such Adventurer or Soldier respectively had, or were seized or possessed of on
the Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, or of right ought to
have had and been seized and possessed of upon the Seventh of May, One
thousand six hundred fifty nine, in case he were a deficient Adventurer, or the
Heir, Executor, Administrator, or Assignee of any deficient Adventurer, And
shall set out and allot, or cause to be set out and allotted unto every such
Adventurer and Soldier, his and their respective Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns so much forfeited land as in quantity of Irish
profitable Acres (to be computed by Irish measure, according to the Down Survey
or Down admeasurement and not otherwise, where the Down Survey has been taken,
and where the Down Survey has not been taken, by the Survey taken in the Earl
of Straffords time, or by some other Survey to be taken according to Irish
measure, wherein the unprofitable Land is to be cast in together with the
profitable, according to the method of the said Down Survey) will amount unto
full two third parts (the whole in three parts being divided) of what such
person or persons to whom such allotment shall be made as aforesaid, or those
under whom they claim, did hold and enjoy, or in cases of deficiencie of right
ought to have held and enjoyed upon the Seventh of May, One thousand six
hundred fifty nine, which said two third parts so as aforesaid to be allotted,
shall be held and enjoyed by the persons to whom such allotment shall be made,
according to the tenor of their several and respective Letters Patents herein
after directed to be granted, and in full satisfaction of any right, claim, or
demand which by virtue of the said former Act, can or may accrue for or in
respect of any Adventures or arrears, any retrenchment of a third part by this
Act, or other matter or thing in the said former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. And in case any Adventurer or Soldier, Commissioned Officer,
who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine,
Protestant Purchasor in Connaght or Clare, before the first of September, One
thousand six hundred sixty and three, his or their Heirs, Executors or Assigns
shall be found to be in possession of any messuages, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, which by virtue of any clause herein after following, ought to
be restored and delivered up to any person or persons herein after named, the
Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall in the first place, and before
any such Restitution made, cause so much other forfeited or vested Land, to be
set out as in quantity of Acres will amount to full two third parts of the
Land so as aforesaid to be restored, and that the persons so to be removed be
duly Possessed of and settled in his said two third parts according to the rules
of this Act; And the Commissioners for execution of this Act are hereby
required and enjoined to take care that the Estates and Interests of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects in Ireland, be settled with all convenient Speed,
and that such parts of this Act, as have a rendencie thereunto be put in
execution in the first place, and before any other parts of this or the former
Act which relate to other matters. And to the end there may be as little change
and alteration of Possessions as can consist with the ends and aims of this
present Act, And that every persons improvements may be preserved unto him, as
much as is possible, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
where any Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heir, Executor, assignee or assigns
of any Adventurer or Soldier shall be found to have in his or their possession
more Lands undecreed away than his or their full two third parts will amount
to, according to the aforesaid rules of distribution and allotment, that in
every such case it shall and may be lawful for him or them to continue
possession, of so much as the Commissioners shall adjudge, his or their two
full third parts to amount unto, and to cut of the overplus at his or their own
election, in such manner as that the overplus relinquished or surrendered by him
or them may be contiguous and as near as may be within the same denomination,
in which retrenchment the unprofitable Lands as well as profitable are to be
reckoned and parted with together in like manner and proportion as the same
were set out together according to the said Surveyes, and in default of due
retrenchment, and cutting of the overplus in such manner as the Commissioners
shall approve, and within such time as the Commissioners shall direct, the
Commissioners shall cause the overplus to be set out, and ascertain the
residue, whereof possession is to be retained in such manner as they shall
think fit, observing therein rules of contiguitie and conveniencie as much as
may be, and reserving to him or them his or their house and the improvement
about it, and the like rule is to be observed in the retrenchment to be made of
the overplus of such Lands which have been set out in satisfaction of any
Adventurers upon the Ordinances commonly called the doubling Ordinances, and in
the retrenchment which is to be made from the Protestant purchasors in Connaght
and Clare, and where any Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heir, Executor,
Administrator, assignee or assigns of any Adventurer or Soldier shall be
found to be possessed of less Land than his or their full two third parts will
amount unto according to the rules of this Act, that then and in such case it
shall and may be lawful for him or them to continue and retain the possession
of what he or they have, and that the residue of what is wanting to make up his
or their full two third parts as aforesaid, be forthwith set out and made up
out of some other forfeited Land to be allotted set out and ascertained by the
Commissioners as aforesaid, and as near as may be with convenience to the Lands
in his or their present possession, any thing in the former Act contained to
the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that all and every the Adventurers and Soldiers, their heirs,
Executors, assignee or assigns, who upon the Seventh day of May, One thousand
six hundred fifty and nine were or ought to have been possessed of any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments set out for satisfaction of any Adventurers or
arrears not since decreed away by such decrees as are herein confirmed, shall
and may retain the Lands in his or their possession, or so much thereof as by
the Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall be adjudged to amount to his
or their full two third parts, any mistake or Misnomer of the County or Barony
wherein the Lands set out for Adventures or arrears and so possessed do lie, to
the contrary notwithstanding. And it is likewise declared that the Adventurers
and Soldiers, their Heirs, Executors and assigns who have voluntarily
relinquished or been removed from the Estate of James Duke of Ormond, and put
into possession of any other Lands in the County of Catherlagh, not since
decreed away from them, and all others who have relinquished any Lands whereof
they were possessed the Seventh day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and
nine, in obedience to his Majesty's Letters, and have since been removed to
other Lands not decreed away from them, shall have like liberty of retaining
the Lands whereof they are now possessed, or so much thereof as shall be adjudged
to amount to his or their full two third parts, as he or they might have had if
they had been so possessed upon the Seventh day of May, One thousand six
hundred fifty and nine; and what is wanting of two third parts shall be made up
and supplied by the Commissioners out of some other forfeited Lands by them to
be allotted. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that all and
every the deficient Adventurers, and the Heirs, Executors, assignee or assigns
of such deficient Adventurers who are to be satisfied for two full third parts
of such their deficiencies in quantity of acres to be set out and allotted as
aforesaid, And all and every other the Adventurers, Soldiers, Protestant
Purchasors in Conaught and Clare, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, to whom any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, are by the
rules of this Act to be set out and allotted for the supply and making up of
his and their full two third parts, shall be satisfied in the same Barony and
County, or in the next Barony and County nearest, in value to their respective
deficiencies and allotments, if the same can conveniently be done. And in order
hereunto, the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor and Governors, and
Council for the time being, are hereby enjoined to settle and declare the
several degrees of values of the respective Counties and Baronies; which
declaration shall be a rule and guide to the Commissioners in execution of any
part of this Act, where the considerations of values shall be necessary or
material; And where any Adventurer, his Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns
shall be found to be deficient in part, and yet to have more Lands in one
particular Barony or County, than his or their lot in that particular Barony or
County would have amounted to, it shall and may be lawful to and for him or
them, to retain and keep in his or their own possession so much of the overplus
whereof he or they shall be possessed in one Barony or County, as shall be
judged equal by the Commissioners, for and toward the satisfaction of his and
their deficiency in any other Barony or County; so always that the whole which
he or they shall so retain, exceed not the due proportion of full two third
parts which he or they ought to have, according to the rules aforesaid. And
where any Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns of any Adventurer or Soldier, shall be found to have more Lands in his
or their possession, than will satisfy the two third parts, which he or they
ought to have by the rules of this Act, and yet shall have no deficiencies of
their own to place upon such overplus, that there and in such cases, it shall
and may be lawful to and for such Adventurer and Soldier, his and their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to buy in, and purchase of any other
Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heir, Executor, Administrator or Assignee of any
Adventurer or Soldier, his or their right and title in and to the satisfaction
of any deficiencies within the same Province, which are satisfiable by the
rules of this Act, and to be satisfied for the right and title so bought and
purchased as aforesaid, by retaining the overplus Land whereof he or they were
seized, or so much thereof as shall not exceed the due proportion of two full
third parts which ought to be applied to the satisfaction of such deficiencies.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any
Adventurers or Soldiers, Commissioned Officers, who served before the fifth of
June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, Protestant Purchasor in Conaught, or
Clare, before the first of September, One thousand six hundred sixty and three,
his or their Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns, who are not by the rules
of this Act to be removed, have been already removed or kept out from the
possession of what they held, or ought to have held on the Seventh of May, One
thousand six hundred fifty and nine; yet neither by virtue of any Decrees made
by the Commissioners for execution of the said former Act, nor by virtue of any
Proviso or Clause in the said Act contained, or any other legal proceedings; in
which words Legal Proceedings, Custodiams, or any other Grant or Patent not
confirmed, or otherwise provided for by this Act, and the proceedings thereupon
are not intended to be comprehended, that then it shall and may be lawful to
and for the Commissioners for execution of this Act, to order and decree all
and every such person and persons so removed or kept out as aforesaid, to be
again restored and put into their possessions pro tempore, until the last and
final Decree touching the settlement of such person and persons shall be made,
and the respective Sheriffs and all other Officers and Ministers of Justice
whom it may concern, and to whom any Precept or other Warrant in that behalf
shall be directed, are hereby required and enjoined, to see the some executed
accordingly, to the end that all and every person and persons so as aforesaid
removed or kept out, may by such temporary restitution be enabled to retain so
much of the Land whereof they shall be so possessed, together with their
improvements, as their two full third parts, according to the aforesaid rules
shall or may amount unto.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Adventurer and Adventurers who adventured their money upon certain Ordinances,
or pretended Ordinances of Parliament made in the years, One thousand six
hundred forty three, and, One thousand six hundred forty seven, commonly called
the Doubling Ordinances, shall be esteemed, and are hereby declared Adventurers
for no more than the principal money bona fide paid amounts to, and that they,
their Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns, shall receive satisfaction for
the moneys really and bona fide paid in and advanced upon the said Ordinances,
or pretended Ordinances, in like proportion and manner as other Adventurers are
to have by this Act, and no otherwise; that is to say, by an allotment of so
much land as may be sufficient to satisfy full two third parts of the
principal money so paid in and advanced as aforesaid, and no more, to the
intent that he and they may be equally gainers or loosers with other
Adventurers; and in the setting out of this proportionable satisfaction, no
regard is to be had of the quantity of Land, whereof the Adventures upon the
doubling Ordinances, their Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns were
possessed the seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, but only of
the original money truly paid in as aforesaid; in the satisfaction whereof, one
third part is likewise to be retrenched, and only two full third parts to be
satisfied as aforesaid: Nevertheless, it shall and may be lawful for him or
them to continue the possession of so much as the Commissioners shall adjudge
to amount unto his or their full two third parts, in like manner as other
Adventurers by this Act are enabled to do, in case so much shall be left in his
or their possession, not decreed away by the Commissioners for execution of the
said former Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for execution of this Act, shall cause one or more books to be made, wherein
the portion allotted to each Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heir, Executor,
Assignee or Assigns of such Adventurer or Soldier, for and toward his and
their two full third parts, and the several Augmentations of any Archbishopric
or Bishopric, the allotment of Glebes, and the provisions made for the
College of Dublin, the maintenance of the Fort at Duncannon, and the
Corporation of Bandonbridge, shall be particularly and fairly set down, and
entered, and shall cause a Duplicate thereof to be made and returned into the
Exchequer, there to remain of Record, and that upon a Certificate under the
hands and seals of the Commissioners, or the major part of them, containing the
lands allotted to any the persons or purposes aforesaid, or to any Adventurer
or Soldier, or to the Heir, Executor, Assignee or Assigns of any Adventurer
or Soldier, for his or their two third parts, and expressing the name or names
of such persons, with convenient descriptions and denominations thereof, as to
the number of Acres, the Barony, County and Province wherein the same do lie,
and the rents reservable, as also the Tenure and Services, and presented unto
the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom for
the time being, he the said Lord Lieutenant, and other chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, shall be, and are hereby
authorized and required, upon request of the person or persons so producing and
presenting the Certificate aforesaid, to cause effectual Letters Patents under
the Great Seal of Ireland, to be passed in the usual manner of such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments to the persons concerned, by advice of His
Majesty's learned Council in the Law, or some of them, as the case shall
require, without expecting any further Letters or Warrants from His Majesty;
And for so doing, this present Act shall be to them and every of them their
sufficient discharge.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Letters Patents
granted by virtue of this Act, shall be, and are hereby confirmed unto the
several persons therein named, according to the several and respective estates
therein granted against the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and all
other persons claiming by, from or under him or them, and shall stand and be
discharged of and from all forfeitures, or pretended forfeitures, for
non-payment of rent, or any sum of money now due, or not putting in of Claims,
or not bringing in Field-books or Surveys, and of and from all further
inquiries into false admeasurements, holding of lands profitable for
unprofitable, or any other Qualifications whatsoever, and of and from all Measn
profits, arrearages and encumbrances not herein after excepted, and shall stand
and be good against all persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, and discharged
of all Estates tail, and all other Estates of Freehold, or Inheritance, and all
Reversions, Remainders, Titles and Interests whatsoever, not Decreed by the
Commissioners for execution of the said former Act, or in the said former Act
already allowed, whereby the Patentees can or may be encumbered and discharged
of all demands, other than what are intended to be preserved by this Act, and
shall be reserved in the same Letters Patents: Nevertheless it is hereby
declared to be excepted, and is further Enacted, That no Letters Patents
hereafter to be granted, shall any way extend to discharge or acquit any
arrearages of Quit-Rents reserved by the said former Act, and still behind and
unpaid, nor to acquit that part and proportion of the Three hundred thousand
pounds herein hereafter mentioned, and intended to be raised, and which by the
rules of this Act will be payable by such Patentee, and leviable upon the Lands
in the said Letters Patents contained, nor any Measn profits, which have been
received of lands set out for English arrears, or in satisfaction of any
adventures upon the doubling Ordinances, above what the original money did
deserve, or in satisfaction of any other Titles or Interests not satisfiable by
this or the said former Act; nor to discharge any sum or sums of money which
persons transplanted into Conaught, received upon sale of their estates in
Conaught, and yet have since been restored to their former estates, or some
part thereof, by virtue of some Clause in the said former Act contained, or
some Decree or other Proceedings had upon the said Act, or shall be so restored
by virtue of any Clause contained in these Presents, all which arrearages of
Quit-Rents, Measn profits, or other sums of money as aforesaid, shall be, and
are hereby made due and payable unto His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and shall be leviable and recoverable against every person and persons who
shall be liable thereunto, his and their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and all and every their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels whatsoever, Any
Grant, Patent, Settlement or other Disposition made in pursuance of this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the prevention of all unnecessary delays and unjust charges which can
or may happen to the Subjects of this Realm before their full and final
settlement, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where the
Commissioners for execution of this Act, or the major part of them, shall give
any Certificate under his and their hands and seals to any person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, in order to the passing of any Letters Patents
according to this Act, and shall likewise return a Duplicate of such
Certificate into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer at Dublin, to be there
enrolled, and the person or persons, Body Politic or Corporate, to whom such
Certificate shall be given, shall immediately upon the obtaining of such
Certificate, and from time to time during the space of six months next ensuing
the date thereof, diligently and without intermission pursue and prosecute the
having and obtaining of Letters Patents accordingly, and in order thereunto
shall pay or tender to such person or persons to whom they shall apply
themselves for their assistance toward the passing of such Letters Patents,
their several and respective fees to them due and payable, and shall not obtain
such expedition and dispatch, that their several and respective Letters Patents
may be full perfected and passed under the Great Seal of Ireland, within the
space of six months next after the date of such Certificate, but shall be
thereof delayed or hindered by the neglect of any Officers or Ministers as
aforesaid, that there and in such case the several and respective persons,
Bodies Politic and Corporate, to whom or in whose behalf such Certificate
shall be given or granted, shall hold and enjoy the several Messuages, Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the several and respective Certificates
mentioned and allotted according to such estate, and under such rents as are
therein mentioned, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes, as if
Letters Patents thereof had been granted and perfected, according to the
directions of this Act, Any thing in this or the said former Act, and any other
Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That where any Soldier or Soldiers,
Adventurer or Adventurers, his or their Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns,
have had any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments formerly set out to him or them,
as well in satisfaction of arrears due for service done in England, as of
arrears due for service done in Ireland, or in satisfaction of Adventures upon
the doubling Ordinances, or in satisfaction of any other titles and interests
not provided for by this Act, together with other Adventures, and such setting
forth of lands has been promiscuously and indefinitely as in the gross,
without any particular application or distinction of the lands, showing which
part of the said lands was intended as a satisfaction of the English Arrears,
and which part as a satisfaction of the Irish Arrears, or which part was set
out in satisfaction of Adventures upon the doubling Ordinances, or of other
titles or interests not provided for by this Act, and which part for other
Adventures, and the whole or part of the said lands so promiscuously set out as
aforesaid, has been Evicted or Decreed away by virtue of some proceedings of
the Commissioners appointed for execution of the said former Act, that then and
in such case the land so evicted or decreed as aforesaid, shall be accounted in
Law to be such lands only as were intended for the satisfaction of English
Arrears or Adventures upon the doubling Ordinances, or of other titles and
interests not provided for by this Act, so far as the same will extend, and all
accounts and payments of the Measn profits of the Lands so evicted, are to
cease for so much from the time of such Eviction or Decree as aforesaid:
Nevertheless it is declared, That nothing herein contained, shall exclude such
person or persons from having their full two third parts which are satisfiable
by the rules of this Act; and from retaining so much whereof they remain
possessed for and toward such satisfaction.

And to the end the Subjects of this Kingdom may be in some measure eased of
those charges which are usual and ordinary in passing of Letters Patents, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for so many of His Majesty's Subjects as shall desire the same, to be
joined in one and the same Letters Patents, the due cautions before mentioned
being therein observed, so as the Lands thereby granted in case of such being
joined, exceed not the quantity of fifteen thousand acres English measure in
one Patent; Nevertheless it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there
for the time being, in these and all other cases touching Patents to be granted
by virtue of this Act, to regulate and moderate the fees of Officers as they
shall think fit, according to circumstances.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Lands
shall be allotted unto, or detained by any Adventurer or Soldier, or the Heir,
Executor, Assignee or Assigns of any Adventurer or Soldier, for and toward
his and their full two third parts, or for any part thereof, which lands so
allotted or detained as aforesaid, shall be subject to any Estate, Remainder or
other Encumbrance already decreed by the Commissioners for execution of the
said former Act, or allowed by the rules of the said former or this Act, That
then and in such case, the Commissioners for execution of this present Act,
shall allot so much other forfeited land, as may fully satisfy for such
Encumbrance, and cause the same to be entered in Books returned into the
Exchequer: To the end, that upon Certificates made in manner aforesaid, Letters
Patents may be thereof granted and passed as aforesaid: And therefore the
Commissioners are with all speed to cast up the value of such Encumbrances, as
by reason of any former Decree shall charge any part of the said two third
parts, that so a recompense may be provided as aforesaid: And in the estimate
and valuation of such Encumbrances for which a recompense is to be provided,
the Commissioners are to proceed by such rules and measures, as by the
Instructions in the said former Act contained, were given for the valuation and
estimate of such Encumbrances on the Lands of Adventurers and Soldiers as were
therein appointed to be satisfied out of the forfeited lands in the County of
Kildare, as near as may be, and as far as may stand with equity and justice.

And it is further Declared and Enacted, That where any securities for money
have been allowed by the Decrees of the Commissioners for execution of the said
former Act, wherewith any land set out and allotted, or to be set out and
allotted to any Adventurer or Soldier, his or their Heirs or Assigns shall or
may be encumbered, that all interest thereupon due before the Nine and twentieth
day of May, One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall be, and is hereby
discharged: Nevertheless, the interest already received shall not be repaid,
and from and after the Nine and twentieth day of May, One thousand six hundred
and sixty, unto the times of the several and respective Decrees, no further or
greater interest shall be satisfied or paid for any the moneys due upon the
said security, than after the rate of Forty shillings per cent. for one year;
And from and after the time of the respective Decrees, full interest shall be
satisfied and paid; and further, that lands shall be set out in full
satisfaction of what shall remain due, after such abatement made as aforesaid,
according to the rate of eight years purchase, to such person or persons as
shall be prejudiced by such Encumbrances, by having his land liable thereunto,
or by his purchasing and buying in of the same, and that no part of the land so
allotted or detained as aforesaid may be subject to, or charged with any other
Encumbrance not Decreed by the Commissioners for execution of the said former
Act, or already allowed in the said former Act or this Act, Be it Enacted, That
all and every such Encumbrances as against the Adventurer or Soldier so settled
as aforesaid, other than such Encumbrances as are the proper act of the party
so to be settled, or those under whom he claims be utterly void, and of none
effect. And to the end that no person or persons who upon the seventh day of
May, one thousand six hundred fifty and nine was in possession of any lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, as an Adventurer or Soldier, or as the Heir,
Executor, or Assignee of such Adventurer or Soldier, may hereafter be molested
or impeached in the making out of his or their title in or to the lands so
possessed or debarred of such satisfaction, and other the benefits and
advantages which by this Act is given to them, who were so possessed as
aforesaid, for want of producing such Measn Conveyances, or such legal and
formal Assignments as in strictness of Law might otherwise be required, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any person or persons, or those
under whom he or they claim, were in possession of any Lands or Tenements upon
the seventh day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, which were set
out, or reputed to be held and enjoyed for and toward the satisfaction of any
Adventures or Arrears, that there and in such cases no proof of the Measn
Conveyances or other Assignments shall be required, but the possession it self
shall be, and so is hereby declared a sufficient evidence of the Title, unless
the same Lands have been likewise claimed by some other Adventurer or Soldier,
his or their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns respectively: In
which case the Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall upon such
evidence as can be produced before them, determine the Title: And because there
are several persons who pretend themselves able to discover much land, which is
detained and concealed by the Adventurers and Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns
by false admeasurement, although it be probable that after so long a tract of
time, such discoveries may not produce any great effect; Nevertheless, for the
avoiding the scandal of such frauds, and to give just satisfaction to all
persons and interests, who may pretend themselves to be prejudiced by such
concealments, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there
for the time being, shall have power upon information to them made of any such
concealments by false admeasurement as aforesaid, to cause a new survey to be
made of the parcels and lots wherein such false admeasurement is pretended,
observing therein these rules and cautions following;

First, That such information be given in within the space of three months
next after the passing of this Act.

Secondly, That the Defendant or Defendants against whom such information is
given, be first heard, before any new survey be ordered.

Thirdly, That the Informer or Informers do first put in security by
Recognizance acknowledged before the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas for
the time being, and with good and sufficient Sureties to be by him allowed, to
bear the whole charges of the new Survey, and over and above to pay and
satisfy unto the Defendant or Defendants his and their full Damages and Costs
which they shall sustain by such prosecution, and shall offer to make Oath of
before the said Lord Chief Justice, in case that upon the return of such
survey, it shall not appear that the Defendant or Defendants against whom such
new Survey is ordered, were possessed of more land by a full tenth part than he
or they ought to have.

Fourthly, Where any new Survey is ordered, the same shall be taken by two
Surveyors to be chosen for that purpose, one by the Informer, the other by the
Defendants, and both Surveyors shall be sworn.

Fifthly, Where the Books of Distribution and the Down Survey agree in the
satisfactions, which have been allotted to any Regiments, Troops, Societies or
persons, or do not differ more than in one tenth, there no resurvey shall be
ordered, notwithstanding such information.

Sixthly, What overplus soever shall appear upon the new Survey, if the same
exceed not one tenth part of what is due to the Defendant or Defendants, no
Retrenchment shall be made.

Seventhly, If the overplus exceed a tenth, it shall be lawful to and for such
Defendant or Defendants possessed of the overplus, to retrench the same where
they think fit, so as such Retrenchments be contiguous, and of unprofitable
land, together with the profitable, but is hereby discharged of all accounts
for the Measn profits of the lands so retrenched.

Eighthly, If the information of false admeasurement be against a Soldier, or
his Heirs or Assigns, there the lot of the whole Regiment, Troop or Company
shall be first surveyed, and if the same exceed not one tenth part of what such
Regiment, Troop or Company ought to have, then no survey shall be taken of any
individual lot or proportion.

Ninthly, Where the lot of the Regiment, Troop or Company shall exceed one
tenth part of what they ought to have, there the individual parcel to be
admeasured, if there be cause of Retrenchment, may retrench where he thinks
fit, so as such retrenchment be contiguous.

Tenthly, Whereas some lots for satisfying the Army fall in a good and bad
County or Barony, such as Kerry and Limerick, and Dowhallow and Orrery, and
whereas the Soldiers before they came to a particular Dividend of their
general lot, did mutually consent, that when a lot should fall in a bad County
or Barony, the persons to whom it there fell, should have more acres, and when
it fell in a good County they should have less acres, or that the acres in the
bad County should have a less rate or value set on them, And the acres in the
good County a greater rate or value should be set on them, It is therefore
declared that no overplus of acres in the bad County shall be considered as
such an overplus as is liable to retrenchment, but with a due respect to such
mutual agreements as were made in the general lot of the Regiment, Troop,
Company or Society before the persons concerned in it came to a subdivision.

Eleaventhly, No defendant or defendants whose lotts are not to be found within
the books of distribution, books of debentures, or books of Grocers-Hall, shall
be liable to any new survey or readmeasurent, his evidences being lost.

Twelfthly and lastly, All proceedings in order to a new Survey or
readmeasurement which shall not be finished and perfected within nine months
next after passing this Act shall cease and be void and the defendant to be
discharged of all such inquiries for concealments upon such informations.

And for the further directions of the Commissioners for execution of this Act
in their proceedings touching Encumbrances, It is ^^reby declared that where
the estate in any messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments recovered by any
Irish Claimant by virtue of any decree herein confirmed is noe other nor
greater than for the life of such Claimant only, there and in such case the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall give the person or persons
against whom such decree has been made or those who claim under them his and
their election whether they will accept the reversion in fee of the Lands so
encumbered with an estate for life expectant, upon the determination of the said
estate, in lieu of their two third parts for the same, or will rather choose to
have their full two third parts set out and allotted to them presently, out of
some other forfeited Lands, And the Commissioners shall give them certificates
in order to their passing of Letters Patents either of the reversion of the
whole or of two third parts in possession, according as such election shall be
made. And where the estate in any Messuages, Lands Tenements or Hereditaments
recovered by any Irish Claimant by virtue of any decree herein confirmed is
such an estate in remainder or reversion as will leave unto the person or
persons against whom such decree has been made an estate for the life of some
other person only; The Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall likewise
give the person or persons against whom such decree has been made or those who
claim under them, his or their Election whether they will choose to continue
the possession of the whole Land during the life of such person, and accept the
estate for life in the whole Land in satisfaction of one of the third parts,
which would otherwise be due by the rules of this Act, and demand no further
allotment of any other forfeited Land than what shall be equal in quantity of
acres to one third part only, or whether they would rather desire to have
their two full third parts to be set out and allotted presently out of some
other forfeited Lands and to relinquish the possession of that estate which
they hold for life, And the Commissioners are to proceed to give certificates
in order to Letters Patents according to the consequence and event of such
election,

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act do forthwith and with all convenient speed set out
and allot or cause to be set out and allotted unto the Archbishops and Bishops
in the said former Act in that behalf named respectively, and to their and
every of their respective Successors for ever such augmentations and
allowances, and out of such Lands as were formerly held or reputed to be held
in fee farm of any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, Dean and Chapter or other
Ecclesiastical person in his or their politic capacity under the reservation
of any cheifry, rent or other duty or service, and in such way and manner as by
the said former Act is directed and appointed, Provided always and be it
Enacted that where any Manors, Lands or Tenements not lying within the
security set a part for the satisfaction of the Commissioned Officers who
served in Ireland before the fifth of June One thousand six hundred forty nine,
nor by the said former Act or this present Act otherwise disposed to any
particular person or persons, have been given and granted to any such
Archbishop or Bishop and his and their Successors by virtue of any Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of Ireland bearing date since the passing of the
said former Act for or toward his and their respective augmentations and
allowances, that then and in such cases the Commissioners for Execution of this
Act shall cause the Lands so granted as aforesaid to be surveyed and valued,
and if upon the return of such survey, it shall appear that the lands so
granted as aforesaid, do not exceed the value of such Augmentations and
allowances as by the said former Act were intended to be settled upon the
respective Archbishops and Bishops to whom such Letters Patents were granted,
then the lands so granted as aforesaid shall be held and enjoyed by the several
and respective Archbishops, Bishops, and their Successors, according to the
tenor of their respective Letters Patents; And that the said Letters Patents
shall be of like force and effect as any other Letters Patents granted to
Adventurers or Soldiers, by virtue of this Act are or ought to be: but if the
lands so granted as aforesaid, shall exceed the value of such Augmentation, as
by the said former Act was intended to be settled on the Archbishop or Bishop
to whom the said lands were granted, then the Commissioners for execution of
this Act shall cause such Retrenchment of the overplus to be made, as may leave
unto the respective Archbishops and Bishops his and their due Augmentations and
Allowances, with as much convenience and contiguity as may be, and the Lands
and Tenements so left unto the said Archbishops and Bishops, shall be held and
enjoyed by them and their Successors respectively, as fully and amply as the
same might have been enjoyed, in case the lands granted by the said Letters
Patents had not exceeded the value intended by the said former Act, and the
said Letters Patents, as to so much of the lands therein contained, which shall
be retrenched by the Commissioners as aforesaid, are hereby declared to be null
and void, and the lands so retrenched, shall remain and be vested in His
Majesty to the uses of this present Act; And if the lands so granted as
aforesaid, shall fall short of the value of such Augmentations as in and by the
said former Act was intended to be settled, the Commissioners for execution of
this Act shall cause the same to be supplied and made up by a further allotment
out of such lands, and in such way and manner as by the said former Act was
directed.

And it is further Enacted, That in lieu of such provision for glebes, as by
the said former Act was intended, the said Commissioners shall likewise set out
so many Acres of Land more, as may be sufficient to endow or supply all and
every the Parochial Churches in this Kingdom with ten acres of Glebe at the
least (except such Parochial Churches as are endowed with the like, or a
greater quantity of Glebe already) and that the same be so allotted, as may be
most contiguous and convenient to and for the several and respective Parish
Churches hereby intended to be endowed, in which provision Parishes united, or
to be united by virtue of an Act entitled, An Act for real union and division
of Parishes, and concerning Free-Schools and Exchanges, are to be understood
but as one Parish, and Parishes within great Cities and walled Towns are not at
all intended to be comprehended, and the like care both for contiguity and
convenience is to be had in the setting out of the Augmentations of the several
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics not already provided for as aforesaid, as far
as may be, without the too great prejudice of the present Possessor who is to
be removed, and after the lands set out for the several Augmentations and
Glebes as aforesaid, the Commissioners shall certify their proceedings to the
Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor and Council for the time being: And
in case the proceedings of the Commissioners shall be there approved and
allowed, then the lands set out for Augmentations and Glebes as aforesaid,
shall be, and are hereby vested and settled respectively in the several and
respective Archbishops and Bishops, and Incumbents of Parochial Churches, and
their Successors for ever, and Letters Patents thereof are to be passed to them
and their respective Successors, in like manner as is directed in the cases of
Adventurers and Soldiers, and to be of like effect, subject nevertheless to
the Quit Rents hereafter mentioned, and no other.

And to the end the Revenues of the Church may be more speedily settled, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lands held, or reputed to
be held in Fee Farm of any Archbishop or Bishop, Dean, Dean and Chapter, or
other Ecclesiastical person in his or their Politic capacity, and by this Act
vested in His Majesty, and the several Impropriations forfeited to, and by
these Presents vested in His Majesty, shall be permitted to remain and
continue in the possession of the several Archbishops, Bishops and other
Incumbents, until the several and respective Augmentations, Endowments and
Glebes set out and satisfied as aforesaid, and from and after the Augmentations
satisfied, the residue of the lands held in Fee Farm as aforesaid, shall remain
subject to the uses of the former Act, not changed by this Act, and to such
other uses as in this Act are limited and appointed; And all and every the
Impropriations or appropriate Tithes vested in His Majesty by these Presents,
or otherwise escheated to His Majesty in Right of His Crown, and by the said
former Act vested and settled in the present and future incumbents and their
Successors, shall likewise remain and be vested in the present and future
Incumbents and their Successors, Subject nevertheless to such reservations,
provisoes, conditions, exceptions and other limitations, Authorities and
dispositions as by the said former Act the same were made Subject unto, so
always that all and every the matters and things which by the former Act were
limited and appointed to be done within the space of two years from and after
the passing of the said Act, be likewise done within the space of two years
from and after the passing of this present Act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all gifts, grants,
feoffments, fines and other conveyances hereafter to be made by any Archbishop
or Bishop of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments which by virtue of
or in pursuance of this or the said former Act entitled, An Act for the better
Execution of His Majesty's gracious Declaration for the Settlement of his
Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of the several interests of Adventurers
Soldiers and other his Subjects there, have already been or hereafter shall be
granted unto or settled upon any Archbishop or Bishop and his Successors as an
augmentation of the revenue of such Archbishopric or Bishopric respectively,
other than for the term of one and twenty years or three lives from such time
as any such lease, grant or assurance shall begin, And whereupon the full
moiety of the yearly value and improved rent, as the same are now worth to be
let, shall be reserved and payable during the said term of one and twenty
years, shall be utterly void and of none effect to all intents and purposes;
This Act or any other Act, law, custom or usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And the Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall likewise set out or
cause to be set out so many more acres of profitable Land as may be of the
yearly value of three hundred pounds per ann. or may be sufficient to answer
and secure a yearly rent charge of three hundred pounds per ann. to be issuing
out of the same, to the intent the same may be a perpetual revenue for the
support and maintenance of the Provost of Trinity College near Dublin and his
Successors, and be settled upon the said Provost of Dublin and his Successors
in such way and in such manner as the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor
or Governors of Ireland and Council for the time being shall direct; And the
Commissioners shall likewise set out or cause to be set out so many more acres
of profitable Lands, as may be of the yearly value of three hundred pounds, or
may be sufficient to answer and secure a yearly rentcharge of three hundred
pounds per ann. to be issuing out of the same, to the intent the same may be a
perpetual revenue for and toward the support and maintenance of the Fort at
Duncannon, and be settled for that purpose in such way and manner as the Lord
Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors and Council for the time
being shall direct, and in the setting out of the said Lands the Commissioners
shall not be obliged to proceed by any rules of contiguitie, but only to take
care that the value intended be secured: And the Commissioners shall likewise
set out or cause to be set out so many acres more of profitable Lands as may be
of the yearly value of one hundred pound per ann. or may be sufficient to
answer and secure a yearly rentcharge of one hundred pounds per ann. to be
issuing out of the same to the intent the same may be a perpetual revenue for
the Corporation of Bandon Bridge, and their Successors, and be granted to them
by Letters Patents in such manner as other Letters Patents are herein after
directed; Nevertheless if any Lands have been already set out for that purpose,
the Commissioners are to cause the same to be valued and to retrench so much
thereof as shall exceed the value of One hundred pounds per ann. And if the
whole fall short of that value to cause the same to be supplied by further
allotments as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Protestant
Commissioned Officers who were in Regiments, Croops or Companies raised in
Ireland or transported out of England and served His Majesty or His Royal
Father before the fifth day of June One thousand six hundred forty and nine,
and are not excluded by the said former Act, and all others mentioned and
intended by the said former Act to be satisfied equally and together with the
said Commissioned Officers out of the fame security, who received no Lands or
money for their pay due unto them for their said service, their Heirs,
Executors Assigne^, or Assigns, and also John Bartlet, and the Heirs of Thomas
Bartlet, their Heirs and Assigns shall hold and enjoy and be continued and
confirmed in all and singular the Messuages, Manors, Land, Tenements and
Hereditaments not already decreed away by the Commissioners for Execution of
the said former Act, and in the benefit arising from the redemption of
Mortgages, statutes and judgments, and in all other the benefits and
advantages whatsoever arising or accruing unto them by any Clause in the said
former Act contained, other than the years rent, and the year and halfs rent
therein mentioned, which rents are herein after otherwise satisfied and
discharged.

And it is hereby Explained, Declared and Enacted, That these words, The
benefits arising from the Redemption of Mortgages, Statutes staple, and
Judgments, where the lands are not already disposed of to Adventurers or
Soldiers, shall be understood and expounded, and so are hereby adjudged to be
meant and intended of all benefits of that nature, which on the two and
twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty and one, or at any time
since were belonging to any Irish Papist or Roman Catholic not already
declared innocent by the Commissioners for execution of the said former Act,
although the lands were not actually sequestered (saving and reserving as herein
after is saved and reserved) and that the Commissioners for execution of this
Act, shall cause all and every their securities for satisfaction of such
arrears arising by the said former Act, or this present Act, to be equally
divided and distributed amongst all and every the said Commissioned Officers,
and other the persons aforesaid, and the Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns
of such Commissioned Officers, and other the persons aforesaid, according to
the proportion of their respective Arrears stated, or appointed to be stated by
this Act; And therein care is principally to be taken, that such Officers who
served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, and
have yet had no satisfaction for their service in land or money, their Heirs,
Executors, Assignee or Assigns, may be satisfied in the first place after the
rate of Twelve shillings six pence in the pound, if the same will so far
extend; And if there shall be found any surplus, then the same shall be equally
distributed amongst all the Officers who served before the fifth of June, One
thousand six hundred forty and nine, and have any arrears due to them, as well
those who have formerly had satisfaction in part, as those who have yet had no
satisfaction, and amongst the respective Heirs, Executors and Assigns of such
Officers; And that all and every the respective securities herein before
mentioned, shall be forthwith put out of charge, without any fees to be
therefore paid in order to the distribution aforesaid, and until such
distribution made shall be managed for the benefit of the persons herein
concerned by such persons as in the said former Act is directed: And in case
any lands or houses within any of the securities aforesaid, shall by any
particular Clause in this Act be disposed unto, or settled upon any person or
persons not being a Commissioned Officer as aforesaid, nor having the same in
satisfaction of arrears due for service before the fifth of June, One thousand
six hundred forty and nine, or by way of confirmation of some Clause in the
former Act, The Comissioners for execution of this Act shall set apart so much
other forfeited land, as may be sufficient to reprize the said Commissioned
Officers for such loss and damage as they shall sustain by such Clause, that so
the said securities may remain and continue to and for the benefit of all
persons therein concerned, as full and ample as the same would have been by
virtue of this Act, if such particular Clauses or Dispositions had never been
had nor made: And the Commissioners shall cause the distribution of lands and
houses within the security of the said Officers to be fairly entered in Books,
as is before directed in the Settlement of Adventures and Soldiers, to the end
that such persons who shall be settled in any of the respective securities, may
be enabled to demand Letters Patents of the Houses, Lands and Tenements, Rights
of Redemption, sums of money, and other the premises which shall be allotted to
them for their proportion, which is hereby Enacted shall be granted
accordingly, and shall be good and effectual in Law, according to the tenor and
purport of the same, but subject to the Quit Rents of Eighteen pence per annum
to be paid to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors for every Twenty shillings
which any House, Orchard or Garden-plot within the security aforesaid is worth
to be let, according to the said former Act; and to such other Quit Rents as
any of the land within the said security ought by virtue of the said former
Act, or this present Act to be charged with, Saving nevertheless to all and
every the Archbishops, Bishops, and other the Ministers of the Church, such
right, benefit and advantage of, in and to the forfeited houses in Cities,
walled Towns and Corporations, as in and by the said former Act is given, the
said Houses to be set out by the Commissioners for execution of this Act.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the House chosen by Edward
Lord Bishop of Limerick, in the City of Limerick, and set out to him for seven
years, according to the Act of Settlement, together with that small waste plot
of ground, and two ruinous Tenements thereon, which the present Bishop thereof
now rents of the Trustees at Twenty shillings per annum, lying on the backside
of the said dwelling House equal with the front thereof, down to the Highway
adjoining to the wall of the said City, being from the said backside in length
threescore and six yards, and in breadth twenty and nine yards, be annexed unto
the Sea of Limerick for ever, and be a Mansion House for William the present
Bishop thereof and his Successors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the benefit and
advantage of all forfeitures by false certificates, shall be in the first place
applied to, and for the satisfaction of the persons aforesaid, who ought to be
satisfied twelve shillings and six pence in the pound, until twelve shillings
six pence in the pound be fully satisfied, in case the securities aforesaid
shall not be sufficient for that purpose, and after twelve shillings and six
pence in the pound fully satisfied to the persons aforesaid, then the whole
benefit of the said forfeitures shall be, and remain, and shall be applied unto
such uses, intents, and purposes as in and by the said former Act was
appointed, so as the said false certificates be found out, and discovered
within three months after the passing of this present Act.

And whereas by the said former Act such Officers or their Assigns who shall
purchase any Houses, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within any Corporation
are enjoined to give security to satisfy such as by virtue of any Lease or
contract for Lease have built or improved any House or Garden either in money
or else by granting to such person or persons a Lease at a Rent proportionable
to the said improvement so as the said proportion exceed not a fifth part of
the value the same are worth to be sold, Messuages built from the ground only
excepted; Be it Enacted and explained by the Authority aforesaid, that no
person or persons shall be admitted to have any satisfaction or security for
his or their improvements who upon Leases or contracts for Leases made before
His Majesty's happy Restoration were bound to make such improvements, And have
actually enjoyed the said Houses, Lands, and Tenements during the full time and
term of years for which they did contract and agree as aforesaid, any thing in
this or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding. And to the end
that all and every the Houses in Corporations being part of the aforesaid
securities may always continue in the hands of English and Protestant Subjects
as near as may be, It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no
Papist or Popish Recusant shall be admitted to purchase any of the Houses in
Corporations from the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, nor any other
person or persons but such who shall take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, which Oaths any of the said Commissioners or any Justice of Peace
has hereby power to Administer without the License and leave of the Lord
Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors in Ireland and Council there
by Act of Council first had and obtained: And further that no Commissioned
Officer who served before the fifth of June One thousand six hundred forty and
nine, nor the Heir, Executor, Assignee or Assigns of such Commissioned
Officer, or other person to whom any of the Houses within the said security
shall be allotted, or shall hereafter come, shall set, grant, alien, demise,
lease or otherwise dispose any House or Houses within the security aforesaid to
any Papist or Popish Recusant, or person refusing the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy as aforesaid, without License as aforesaid, under pain of forfeiture
of double the value of every such House so conveyed or disposed as aforesaid,
One moiety thereof the Kings Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, the other
moiety to him or them that will sue for the same to be recovered by action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or information in any of the four Courts of Record at
Dublin, wherein no Essoin, Protection, nor wager of Law, to be admitted, nor
any more than one imparlance, and the said Houses, and Lands in Corporations
together with the sum of One hundred thousand pounds herein after mentioned
are with all possible expedition to be distributed by the Commissioners for
Execution of this Act according to the rules aforesaid, that so the daily ruin
and decay of the said Houses may be prevented as soon as it is possible.

And whereas the Lord Lieutenant and Council of this your Majesty's Kingdom,
have at the humble suite of several of the said Officers conceived an order
bearing date at the Council Board of Dublin the twelfth of January One thousand
six hundred sixty three, wherein they have set down several rules and
directions for the stating the arrears of the several Armies which were
employed in the service of your Sacred Majesty, or your Royal Father of blessed
memory in your wars in Ireland, before the fifth of June One thousand six
hundred forty nine, which order by reason of the shortness of the time limited
for stating the said arrears, and issuing debentures unto the said Officers,
would not be punctually observed by your Majesty's Commissioners appointed for
Execution of the said Act, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the said order bearing date as aforesaid, shall be, and is hereby Enacted
in as full and ample manner, as if the same were particularly set down and
recited in this Act, and the Commissioners appointed or to be appointed for the
execution of this Act, are hereby authorized and required, before they proceed
to the giving out of any satisfaction for any arrears of pay due unto any of
the said Officers, or their Assigns, to take care that all the accounts of the
said Officers be made conformable unto the Rules and Directions of the said
Order, notwithstanding the Debentures issued as aforesaid, and that all
deductions by the said Order appointed to be made, be made accordingly, which
being done, the said Commissioners are to proceed to the setting out of
satisfaction to the said Officers or their Assigns, pursuant to the Rules of
this Act and the said Order, and not otherwise; Saving to Charles late Earl of
Mountrath, his Executors and Assigns the benefit of six thousand pounds due for
service before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, which is
hereby declared, shall be satisfied and paid out of the securities aforesaid,
equally and in like proportion to and with any other persons who are to be
satisfied their arrears, and have yet received no satisfaction for the same,
Any thing in the said Order of the Twelfth of January, or herein before
contained to the contrary notwithstanding; Saving also unto Edward Lord
Vicecount Conway and Kilulta the satisfaction of such arrears as are due to him
for his own service, or for his Fathers service in Ireland, before the fifth of
June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, in such manner and form as the same
ought to have been satisfied, if no such Order had been made by the Lord
Lieutenant and Council upon the twelfth of January, One thousand six hundred
sixty three, Any thing in the said Order, or in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas your Majesty taking into your Princely consideration, of how
great importance it is to the security, peace and good settlement of this your
Kingdom of Ireland, that the Maritime Towns and other places of strength,
should be put into such hands are are capable to carry on the plantation and
settlement of those places, whereby the further ruin of the houses in those
Towns will be prevented, and Commerce and Trade recovered, to the great
increase of your Majesty's Revenue, was graciously pleased by one or more
Letters under your Royal signature, to direct and appoint that Wentworth Earl
of Roscommon, and Roger Earl of Orrery, should have the privilege of
preemption, and be first satisfied out of the forfeited houses of your
Majesty's City of Limerick, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That Wentworth Earl of Roscommon, and Roger Earl of Orrery, their Heirs and
Assigns, in the distribution and setting forth of the security appointed for
the satisfaction of the arrears of the Commissioned Officers who served your
Majesty, and your Royal Father in Ireland, before the fifth of June, One
thousand six hundred forty nine, shall have the preference and primer
satisfaction of Fifty thousand pounds of their own personal arrears, or other
arrears purchased by them out of the forfeited Houses, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in the City, Suburbs and Liberties of Limerick, which are part of
the said securities, at the rate of eight years purchase, as they are or should
be found to be really and bona fide worth, and if any doubt or difficulty
should arise concerning the value of the said Houses or Lands, so as the
Trustees for the said Officers shall not be satisfied with the return already
made of the value of the same, that in such case, upon the desire and request
of the said Trustees, there shall be a new survey and valuation of the said
Town and Liberties, by such persons as shall be appointed by your Majesty's
Commissioners for the execution of this Act, by and with the consent of the
said Trustees, according to which return the said Houses, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments are to be sold, and not otherwise, And in case the said Earls,
their Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, shall offer unto your Majesty's said
Commissioners for the execution of this Act, any Debentures of Officers who
served as aforesaid, before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty
nine, for or in part of payment for all, or so much of so much of the said
houses and premises as shall be valued to be worth Fifty thousand pounds as
aforesaid, the same shall be allowed, and the said Commissioners are hereby
authorized and required to accept and receive the same, for all, or in part of
the said Fifty thousand pound, so as the said Debentures are capable of Prior
satisfaction, and there has been such deductions and defalcations made as are
directed by this Act, and the said former Act, and shall not be accepted to
satisfy more in the pound than the whole security will hold out to satisfy
the Debentures of the rest of the said Officers: And the said Commissioners are
also required and authorized, to give such Certificate as is necessary for the
passing of Patents thereof, according to the Rules in this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Protestants who before the first day of September One thousand six hundred
sixty three, purchased lands in the Province of Connaght, or County of Clare,
from any transplanted or transplantable person and the Heirs, Executors,
Assignee, or Assigns of such Protestant purchasor, shall hold, and enjoy, and
be continued, and confirmed in such two third parts of all and singular the
lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, so by them purchased as aforesaid, whereof
they are now in possession, which by the Commissioners for the Execution of
this Act shall be allotted to them, and shall hold the same for and during such
respective estates as were purchased, freed, and discharged from all penalties,
and forfeitures, and all inquiries or qualifications whatsoever, and of and
from all estates, titles and interests, claims or demands as fully, and amply
as any Adventurer or Soldier ought to enjoy his or their full two third parts
herein before expressed; And that the Commissioners for Execution of this Act,
do proceed with all expedition possible to the setting out of the two thirds,
and cause the same to be entered in Books in like manner as is before prescribed
in the Settlement of Adventurers and Soldiers, to the end that the persons
concerned in the said two thirds, and their Settlement thereupon may be enabled
to demand Letters Patents thereof in like manner as any Adventurer or Soldier
may demand for his part, which is hereby Enacted shall be granted accordingly,
and be as effectual to the respective persons therein mentioned to all intents
and purposes as any Letters Patents granted to any Adventurer or Soldier in
pursuance of this Act, are or ought to be; Nevertheless it is hereby declared,
That the persons to be settled as aforesaid, shall have the benefit of all
their respective improvements as near as may be, And shall have like liberty
and advantage in Retrenchment of that third part which they are to relinquish,
and upon like terms and conditions as the Adventurers and Soldiers are to have
in the Retrenchment of that part of their possessions which shall exceed their
full two third parts, and whatever shall be so Retrencht from the said
Protestant purchasors, or from any Adventurer or Soldier his or their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns shall remain in His Majesty, his Heirs,
and Successors, to the uses herein before and after mentioned; And where any of
the lands so purchased have been evicted by any Decrees herein after confirmed,
or shall be given, or restored to any person or persons by any special clause,
or provisoe herein contained, The Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall
set out, and allot unto the person prejudiced by such Decree, or clause, so
much other forfeited land as may be equal in quantity of acres to two third
parts of the lands so evicted, or restored as aforesaid: And it is likewise
further declared and Enacted, That the persons to be settled in Connaght and
Clare as aforesaid, and from whom a third part is to be Retrencht and cut of as
aforesaid, shall be and are hereby discharged of and from the years rent
reserved and paid by Charles Earl of Mountrath, and others in a particular
clause in the said former Act mentioned, and of and from all the arrearages
thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That neither Adventurer,
or Soldier Commissioned Officer, who served before the fifth of June, One
thousand six hundred forty and nine, Protestant purchasor in Connaght and
Clare, transplanted person, Nor the Heirs, Executors, Assignee or Assigns, of
them or any of them, nor any other person or persons, Body Politic or
Corporate who by the said former Act of Settlement is or are any way entitled
to reprizals for or in respect of some possession which they have quitted or of
some Decrees which have been made against them, or otherwise shall at any time
hereafter be enabled to demand or have the same reprizals further than what
will amount to his and their full two third parts as aforesaid, but shall be
thereof for ever barred and excluded any thing in the said former Act to the
contrary notwithstanding (His Royal Highness James Duke of York, His Grace
George Duke of Albemarle, and such others herein after mentioned according to
the provision herein after made only excepted)

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Adventurer or
Soldier, nor the Heir, Executor, Assignee or Assigns, of any Adventurer or
Soldier, who before any Decree of innocence made by the Commissioners for
Execution of the said Act, did by himself or any other directly or indirectly
compound or agree with any Irish claimant whose claim was then depending before
the said Commissioners shall ever be admitted to receive or have his two third
parts or any other satisfaction for that part of his estate which he so
compounded or agreed for, but as to so much of his estate for which any
agreement was made as aforesaid, shall be for ever barred, and concluded, to
demand his two third parts, as if the person so agreeing had never been seized
or possessed of the same, or entitled thereunto, so as such Composition or
agreement be made to appear before the Commissioners for execution of this Act,
within three months after their first sitting.

And for the better improvement and ascertaining of His Majesty's Revenue, Be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all lands by this or the
former Act vested in His Majesty, or restored by virtue of any Decrees herein
after confirmed, or settled, or mentioned to be disposed, restored, confirmed
or settled unto, or upon any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate,
by virtue of any Clause in this or the said former Act contained, and not
particularly by plain and express words excepted from Quit Rents in the same
Clause, and the Lands by this Act appointed to be set out for Augmentation of
Bishoprics, for endowment of Parochial Churches with Glebe, for the better
support of the Provost, or of the Provost and Fellows of the College of
Dublin, for the maintenance of the Fort at Duncannon, and the benefit of the
Corporation at Bandon-Bridge, and all the lands enjoyed by transplanted persons
in the Province of Conaght, or the County of Clare, and all other the Lands
seized, sequestered or set out by reason of or upon account of the late
Rebellion or War (the lands of James Duke of Ormond, Elizabeth Lady Duchess of
Ormond, the Earl of Burlington and Cork, the Earl of Roscommon, and other the
Protestants of Ireland, heretofore sequestered, only excepted) be subject and
liable to such Quit-Rents to be paid unto His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, as in the former Act is directed and appointed; Saving only that
the lands in the Province of Ulster, which by the former Act were charged with
one penny the Acre Quit-Rent, shall be, and are hereby charged from henceforth
with two pence the acre Quit Rent: Nevertheless, because it may so fall out,
that in some Counties and Baronies of this Kingdom, the Quit Rents which by the
Rules of this Act will be chargeable upon, and issuing out of the lands therein
lying, may exceed, or at least amount to the full value of the land therewith
charged, or very near the full value, to the great discouragement of all
Plantation and Improvement thereupon, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors, and Council for the time being, at any
time during the space of three years, from and after the passing of this
present Act, to make such abatement and moderation of Quit Rents, as they in
their judgments shall think fit, and that such Order of Council as shall be
made touching the abatement of Quit Rents, and enrolled in the Court of
Exchequer, shall be as good and effectual, as if the same had been Enacted by
these Presents, Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the better carrying on of this present Settlement, by raising such a
sum of money as may be sufficient to buy of several Estates and Interests,
which by virtue of the said former Act are now in being, and if they should be
strictly challenged and demanded according to the tenor of the said Act, would
in a great measure delay and hinder the execution of this present Act, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one years rent of all the
lands in Ireland which were returned by the Civil survey, to belong to any
Irish Papist, Popish Recusant, or Roman Catholic, according to the values of
the same lands were let at in the year, One thousand six hundred fifty and
nine, and of all other the lands wherein any Adventurer or Soldier, his Heirs,
Executors or Assigns has any benefit of Settlement or Confirmation by virtue
of this present Act (the lands settled by Erasmus Smith to any pious or
charitable use only excepted) be forthwith raised and paid unto the Receivers
herein after constituted and appointed, by two even and equal payments, the
first payment thereof to begin upon the first day of February, which shall be
in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty five, the second
payment to be upon the first day of February, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty six, under the penalty following, that is
to say, every person liable to the payment of any part of the said years Rents,
and making default and failing to pay the same, by the space of twenty days
after any the days and times wherein the same ought to be paid, shall be
chargeable, and is hereby charged with double the sum which ought to have been
paid as aforesaid, to be levied by Process out of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, in like manner as any the Rents whereof the said Earl of Orrery and
Lord Massereen were appointed Receivers by the said former Act, might have been
levied and if need so require like course is, to be taken for the ascertaining
of the value of lands charged with the said years rent, and of returning the
same into the Exchequer to remain and be a charge upon Record, as in and by the
said former Act, in case of the said other rent therein secured was appointed,
And the said Receivers herein after appointed are to account for and pay unto
Arthur Earl of Anglesey Vice-treasurer of Ireland, or to the Vice-treasurer of
Ireland, for the time being, all and every the sums of money by them to be
received; Nevertheless it is hereby declared and Enacted that all and every the
sums of money formerly paid to the Earl of Orrery, and Lord Vice-Count
Massareen, in pursuance of the said former Act, shall be allowed to the person
and persons so paying the same, his and their Heirs, Executors, and Assigns,
in full discharge of so much of the rent payable by this Act as the moneys so
as aforesaid paid, do or shall amount unto, and the two half years rents
payable to the said Earl of Orrery, and Lord Vice-Count Massereen, by any
Adventurer or Soldier, their Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, by virtue of the
said former Act shall be and are hereby from henceforth discharged. And in case
the moneys to be raised as aforesaid shall fall short of the sum of three
hundred thousand pounds, then it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord
Lieutenant or other chief Governor and Council there for the time being to tax
and assess upon all the lands in Ireland, so much more money, as together with
what has been before raised and allowed by virtue of this Act shall make up
the full and just sum of three hundred thousand pounds sterling, and to cause
the same to be assessed, distributed, raised, and levied by such ways and
means as they shall think fit, observing therein all the equality and
indifferency that can be, And Arthur Earl of Anglesey Vice-treasurer of
Ireland, or the Vice-treasurer for the time being, is hereby required and
enjoined to pay or cause to be paid out of the moneys to be received as
aforesaid unto the Kings Majesty the sum of fifty thousand pounds, and also
unto and amongst such Commissioned Officers who served before the fifth of
June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, and have not yet received any
satisfaction in lands or money, and amongst the Heirs, Executors, and Assigns,
of such Commissioned Officers, and other persons entitled to be satisfied
within their security such sums of money as the Commissioners for Execution of
this Act, having respect to the arreares already stated shall by any warrant
under their hands and Seals, or the hands and Seals of the Major part of them,
direct and appoint, until the whole sum of One hundred thousand pounds shall be
fully satisfied and paid, and the warrant or warrants under the hands and Seals
of the said Commissioners or the Major part of them, together with the
acquittance or acquittances of the party or parties who shall receive any money
thereupon shall be unto the said Vice-treasurer a sufficient discharge for so
much as the said acquittances extend unto; which said One hundred thousand
pounds so as aforesaid appointed to be paid, is hereby declared to be in lieu
and recompense of and in full satisfaction for the years rent payable out of
the lands of those Soldiers who had lands set out for their arrears in the
year, One thousand six hundred fifty three, and the year and halfs rent payable
by those other Soldiers who had lands set out for their arrears in the years
One thousand six hundred fifty five, One thousand six hundred fifty six, One
thousand six hundred fifty seven, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, One
thousand six hundred fifty nine, The payment of which said rents shall from
henceforth cease and determine, and the persons and estates there with charged
or chargeable by the said former Act, shall be, and are hereby thereof for ever
acquitted and discharged: And whereas several clauses in His Majesty's Gracious
Declaration of the thirtieth of November, in the twelfth year of his Reign, and
in the former Act, do entitle His Grace James Duke of Ormond, and the Lady
Duchess His Wife to great quantities of forfeited lands in the Counties of
Catherlagh, Galloway, Waterford, Dublin, Kildare, Mead, Cork, Kerry, Kilkenny
and Tipperary, and other places, and if the same were extended to the utmost
would greatly obstruct and hinder the Settlement now intended, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the full sum of fifty thousand pounds
sterling be paid out of the moneys aforesaid unto his said Grace James Duke of
Ormond, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, His Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, which the said Vice-treasurer is hereby required and enjoined to pay
or cause to be paid out of the moneys aforesaid unto His said Grace, or unto
such other person or persons as His Grace shall appoint, which is hereby
declared to be in lieu and recompense of and in full satisfaction for all such
forfeited and forfeitable estates, titles, interests claims or demands in or to
any Manors, lands Tenements or Hereditaments mediately or immediately held, as
of any of the Manors of the said Duke or the Lady Duchess of Ormond His Wife,
or heretofore granted by His Grace, or any of his Ancestors, or by any of the
Ancestors of the said Lady Duchess in Fee Farm or Fee tail, and of all and
singular the statutes, judgments, Mortgages, and other real securities for
money given, made, acknowledged or entered into by any person or persons holding
as aforesaid, to any other forfeiting person or person not declared innocent,
to all which premises the said Duke and Duchess respectively hy his Majesty's
said Declaration, and by the said former Act are entitled, and of all mean
rates, issues and profits thereof since incurred, and now due to His Grace,
other than what is already received to his use, for which he is hereby
acquitted, and of all and every the Reversions and Remainders which the said
Duke or Duchess now has, or have expectant upon the said forfeited and
forfeitable Estates tail, which Estates, Interests, and other the benefits and
advantages herein before mentioned are intended, and so are hereby declard to
be as against the said Duke or Duchess, their Heirs and Assigns utterly
barred and extinguished: Saving nevertheless to the said Duke and Duchess,
their Heirs and Assigns, and to such other person and persons as are concerned
in the uses expressed in one Quadripartite Deed bearing date the twentieth day
of December, One thousand six hundred sixty one, the full benefit and advantage
of all such Tenures, chief-rents, and other services, as the said forfeited and
forfeitable Lands and Tenements were held by, other than the benefits and
advantages of Wardships and Tenures by Knights Service, in as full and ample
manner as the said Duke and Duchess did hold or enjoy, or might have held or
enjoyed the same upon the Two and twentieth day of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, or at any time since; Saving also to the said Duke and
Duchess of Ormond, their Heirs and Assigns, the benefit of all forfeited and
forfeitable Estates vested in His Majesty, and held of them, or either of them
as aforesaid, their or either of their Ancestors, and which were never allotted
to any Adventurer or Soldier, in which words it is hereby declared, That the
Estates allotted or set out to any Soldier for service in England or
elsewhere, other than in Ireland, are not to be understood or comprehended, nor
the Estate of any Adventurer upon the doubling Ordinances, for more than such
Adventurer is to have by the rules of the said former Act, for the sum by him
disbursed, as other Adventurers, nor the estate of any Adventurer who claims
for sea-service, nor the estate allotted to any person whatsoever, by the free
gift of the late Usurpers, or of the then usurped Government, but that all such
estates shall be, and remain unto the said Duke and Duchess, their Heirs and
Assigns, as they did or ought to have been at any time before the making of
this Act; And also saving unto the said Duke and Duchess, their Heirs and
Assigns, the full benefit and advantage of all other matters and clauses in the
said Declaration and former Act contained, not herein and hereby expressly
changed and altered, and by the said Duke Duchess waved and parted withal,
which are hereby declared to remain, and be in full force, as they were before
the makng of this Act.

And whereas the most part of the Houses and Lands in the City of Kilkenny, and
in the several Towns of Clonmel, Carrick, Callin, and Inistioge, Traly and
Dingle, and in the Suburbs and Liberties of the said City and Towns, were held
the Three and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty and one,
of the said Duke of Ormond, either in his own right, or in right of the said
Duke or Duchess his wife, by reason whereof the forfeited and forfeitable
interest of any person or persons in the said houses and lands were not by the
said Declaration and former Act to be settled in any Adventurers or Soldiers,
or any other person whatsoever, other than the said James Duke of Ormond and
his Heirs, of which Concession if the said James Duke of Ormond did take the
advantage and full benefit as he might, the same would tend to a great
diminution of the security designed for satisfaction of the Commissioned
Officers serving in Ireland before the fifth day of June, One thousand six
hundred forty and nine; And be the said James Duke of Ormond might likewise as
a Commissioned Officer charge the remain of the said security with his arrears,
amounting to Threescore thousand pounds sterling, accompting to the tenth of
December, One thousand six hundred and fifty, yet is content to accept of the
said Houses and Lands in full discharge of his said arrears, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said James Duke of Ormond shall
have, hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs, in full satisfaction and discharge
of the said arrears, all and singular the forfeited and forfeitable Houses and
Lands lying and being in the said City, and in the said several Towns, and in
the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, other than what has been given out to
Adventurers and Soldiers, and by them, their Heirs or Assigns were possessed
upon the seventh day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, Any thing
in this or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding: He the said
James, Duke of Ormond and his Heirs, paying and satisfying to His Majesty, his
Heirs, and Successors yearly for ever out of the said Houses and Tenements in
the said City and several Towns and in the Suburbs and liberties thereof, one
shilling six pence yearly out of every twenty shillings yearly rent which shall
be had or answered out of the said Houses or Tenements, And the said
Vice-treasurer is hereby further required and enjoined to issue out and pay the
whole residue of the said three hundred thousand pounds unto such person and
persons as his Majesty already has or hereafter shall appoint as a Reward of
their Eminent services and sufferings for His Majesty or His Royal Father; And
for preventing of all doubts which may arise in the issuing and payment
thereof, It is hereby declared that the same shall principally, and in the
first place be applied to and for the payment and discharge of such sums of
money as his Majesty did heretofore appoint to be paid out of the half years
Rent payable by Adventurers and Soldiers by the said former Act, That is to
say, to and for the payment and discharge of such sum or sums of money
appointed by His Majesty to be paid to his Grace James Duke of Ormond, or so
much thereof as is in arrear, and also for the payment and discharge of so much
money, as the half years Rent payable by Adventurers and Soldiers in the
Counties of East and Westmeath, Wexford, and Kilkenny, would have amounted to
in case the same had not been discharged by this present Act which shall now be
paid out of the residue of the said three hundred thousand pounds unto the
Assignee of the half years Rents in the Counties aforesaid deducting only what
has been already received.

And be it further Enacted, declared and explained by the Authority aforesaid,
That all the Honors, Manors, Castles, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments of the Regicides in the said former Act, named, and of all other
seized or possessed in trust for them, or any of them or claiming by from or
under them or any of them, which by the said former Act were or ought to be
vested in His Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ulster etc.
and his Heirs, and of all other persons excepted in the Act passed in the
Parliament of England, entitled an Act of free and general pardon, Indemnity
and Oblivion, or His Majesty's late gracious Declaration, and Instructions in
the said former Act mentioned whose estates are not otherwise disposed, other
than the lands of such purchasors for valuable consideration from any of the
said Regicides who have paid their purchase money to His Royal Highness or his
Commissioners or to the Executors of such Regicides, who have since answered
the same upon their accounts to His Royal Highness or his Commissioners, and
other than the lands and Houses granted or intended to be granted unto James
Duke of Ormond, and the Lady Duchess his Wife, or either of them by this or
the said former Act, and other than the lands granted unto Michael now Lord
Archbishop of Dublin, heretofore Lord Bishop of Cork, and the lands granted
unto Francis Lord Aungier, and other than the lands granted to Sir George Lane
before, and confirmed in and by the said former Act, and other than the lands
settled upon Hercules Huncks, by the said former Act, which shall remain to
them their Heirs, and Assigns accordingly, and other than the lands which have
been decreed away by the Commissioners for Execution of the late Act, shall be
and are hereby declared to be and continue vested in his Royal Highness, and
his Heirs as fully and amply with all the like benefit and advantage as by the
said former Act is mentioned, discharged of all Rents, services and payments by
this or the said former Act reserved, created or imposed, but subject to the
same Rents, services and payments as other lands by this Act ought to be, in
case his Royal Highness or his Heirs shall alien or demise the same otherwise
than forlives or years, reserving the full Moyery of the improved Rent; And
where any lands formerly set out in satisfaction of any Adventures or arrears
or any other lands whatsoever due to the said Regicides, or any of them have
been evicted or recovered from his Royal Highness his Heirs and Assigns by
virtue of any such decrees as aforesaid, Be it further Enacted, That some other
like quantity of profitable and forfeited lands according to the down Survey
equal in number of acres to those which have been so evicted and within the
Counties of Dublin, Lowth, Kildare, and Cork, or some of them, if it may be or
otherwise elsewhere be forthwith set out by the Commissioners for Execution of
this Act, and allotted to his Royal Highness and his Heirs to be held as
aforesaid: And further that all deficiencies which have happened to all or any
the persons whose estates by the said former Act, or this present Act are
vested in his Royal Highness, and his Heirs, or which have happened to their or
any of their estates be fully satisfied and supplied out of some other
forfeited lands to be set out by the Commissioners for Execution of this Act,
and allotted to his Royal Highness and his Heirs, to be held as aforesaid, and
that all moneys lent or disbursed by any of the said persons or hy any others
for them or any of them for Provisions, Arms or Ammunition for support of His
Majesty's Army in Ireland, in the beginning of the Rebellion there, be likewise
satisfied out of the Lands and Houses for that purpose, according to His
Majesty's Declaration in the said Act of Settlement to be set out by the
Commissioners for execution of this Act, and allotted to his Royal Highness,
his Heirs and Assigns to be held as aforesaid, Any thing in this or the said
former Act to the contrary notwithstanding: Saving always unto Arthur Earl of
Anglesey, such Right and Title of, in and to such part of the premises as he
the said Earl of Anglesey has, or ought to have by virtue of the said former
Act, or this present Act, or by virtue of an Indenture of Lease under the hand
and seal of his Royal Highness, made between his Royal Highness of the one
part, and the said Earl of Anglesey on the other part, bearing date before the
passing of this Act, Any thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That this Act shall not extend, or be any
ways construed to take away, or be prejudicial unto any Estate, Right, Title or
Interest of George Duke of Albemarle, his Heirs or Assigns, of, in or to any
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, accrewing to him or them by virtue, or in
pursuance of the said former Act, or one other Act, entitled, An Act for the
securing several Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to George Duke of
Albermarle; Any thing herein before or after expressed to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted, That the Ferry at Wexford, with all the profits,
and other the Rights and Privileges thereunto belonging, or therewith used and
enjoyed, shall be, and are hereby vested and settled in the said George Duke of
Albemarle, and shall be held and enjoyed by the said George Duke of Albemarle,
his Heirs and Assigns.

And whereas several Lands and Tenements, whereof the said George Duke of
Albemarle was seized by virtue of one or both the Acts before mentioned, have
been evicted or recovered from the said George Duke of Albemarle, by virtue of
certain Decrees lately made by the Commissioners for execution of the said
former Act, and some Encumbrances have likewise by Decree of the said
Commissioners been allowed and charged upon the Lands of the said George Duke
of Albemarle, for redemption whereof the said George Duke of Albemarle has
paid and satisfied the full sum of Eight hundred pounds, Be it further Enacted,
That the Commissioners for execution of this Act, do forthwith set out and
allot to the said George Duke of Albemarle, and his Heirs or Assigns, out of
the lands in the County of Wexford, now, or lately held in Custodiam of His
Majesty by Sir Richard Clifton Knight, so much other land as may be equal in
quantity of profitable acres, to what has been so Decreed and Evicted as
aforesaid, and in value to such Encumbrance as has been recovered and
satisfied as aforesaid; which lands so as aforesaid to be allotted, shall be
held and enjoyed by the said George Duke of Albemarle, his Heirs and Assigns,
as fully and amply as the lands so Evicted and Decreed as aforesaid, might have
been held, in case no such Decree or Eviction had been, Any thing in this or
the said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Right
honorable Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord high Treasurer of England, Anthony
Ashley Lord Ashley, Chancellor and Vndertreasurer of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight and Baronet, Lord chief Justice of His
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, and Sir Henry Vernon Knight and
Baronet, shall have, hold, and enjoy to them, their Heirs and Assigns, all
that the Castle, Manor and Abbey of Eniscorthy in the County of Wexford, and
all the Manors, Towns, Vills, Lands, Tenements, Territories and Hereditaments
late of Robert Wallop, late of Farley-Wallop in the County of Southampton
called Kilbeg, Cloine, Tumsalow and Effernock, or by what other name or names
soever they are known or called, with their and every of their appurtenances in
the said County of Wexford, and all other Lordships, Manors, Castles, Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Arrearages of Rents reserved and payable upon any Lease or
Leases for lives or years, or otherwise, and all Reversions, Remainders,
Services and Hereditaments, late of the said Robert Wallop, with their and
every of their appurtenances in the said County of Wexford, and also all that
Priory, or Rectory and Church Impropriate of Selsker in the said County of
Wexford, and all Houses, Edifices, Barns, Stables, Tithes, Oblations,
Obventions, Profits, Commodities and Advantages whatsoever thereunto belonging
or appertaining, and all other Tithes or tenth parts of Corn, Grain, Hay, Wool,
Lamb, Fish, and other Tithes whatsoever, late of the said Robert Wallop, yearly
arising, coming, renewing or happening within the several Parishes and Towns,
Vills, fields, hamletts, tytheings and tytheable places of St. Margaret, St.
Ivern, Ishartenon, Kilmore, Killame, St. Peter, Carycke, Killoryn, Ballysonon,
Ballnalden, Killish, Ardcavan and Ard-Collme, Killmallock, St. Nicholas,
Takillin, Skreene, Killisk, Ballmestaine, Selsker and St. Toolirck in the said
County of Wexford, and also all other Lordships, Manors, Castles, Abbeyes,
Towns, Vills, Territories Messuages, Lands, Tenements, rents and arrearages of
rents as aforesaid, reversions, tithes and hereditaments whatsoever in Ireland,
late the possessions of the said Robert Wallop, and also all other Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, feedings, pastures, woods, under-woods,
tithes, rents, reversions, and hereditaments together with all and singular
Courts, Courts-leet, Courts-Baron, viewes of Franckpledge, and all that to
Courts-Leete and viewes of Franckpledge appertains, Perquisits and profits of
Courts, Chattels, Waifes, Estrayes, Rights, Jurisdictions, Franchises,
Privileges, Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments, Hereditaments whatsoever, to
the aforesaid Lordships, Manors, Castles, Abbyes, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments; and other the premises aforesaid, or any of them, or any part
or parcel of them in the said County of Wexford, or elsewhere in this Kingdom
of Ireland, belonging or appertaining, or accepted, used, reputed, taken or
known as part, parcel or member of them, or any part or parcel of them with
their and every of their appurtenances late of the said Robert Wallop, all
which premises by His Majesty's Letters Patents under his Great Seal of
England, bearing date the six and twentieth day of September, in the thirteenth
year of his now Majesty's Reign, were mentioned to be granted by his said
Majesty unto the said Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord Ashley, Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, and Sir Henry Vernon, and their Heirs, and all and singular
conditions, covenants, forfeitures, entries, titles and rights in any Indenture
or Indentures of Lease of the premises or any of them specified or contained
or otherwise.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all and singular
the said Castles, Manors, Hereditaments, and premises shall be and are hereby
declared and adjudged to be vested and settled in the said Thomas Earl of
Southampton, Anthony Ashley Lord Ashley, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, and Sir Henry
Vernon, and their heirs, and that as fully and amply as if the said Letters
Patents had been good and effectual in law according to the intent and purpose
thereof, any thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary hereof in any
withstanding,

And be it further Enacted, That Sir Maurice Eustace Knight late Lord
Chancellor of Ireland, Arthur Earl of Essex, Roger Earl of Orrery, Charles late
Earl of Mountrath, Richard Lord Baron of Coloone, Michael late Lord Bishop of
Cork, now Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and Lord Archbishop of Dublin, John Lord
Vicecount Massareen, Mark Lord Vicecount Dungannon, Rober Boil Esquire Sir Arthur
Forbus, Major George Rawdon now Sir George Rawdon Baronet, and the relict and
heirs of Sir Simon Harcourt, and the relict and Children of Colonel George
Cook, and the Orphans of Colonel Owen O Conelly, Sir George Lane, Sir James
Waymes, Sir George Ascough, Sir Theophilus Jones, Sir Walter Plunkett, Sir
George Preston, Sir John Bellew, Sir Martin Noel, Sir St. John Broderick,
William Leg Esquire Edward Vernon, Esquire Robert Southwell Esquire Captain William
Hamilton, Maurice Keating Esquire Erasmus Smith Esquire Susanna Bastwick and her
Children, Sir William Petty, and all others particularly provided for in the
said former Act, and not particularly mentioned in this present Act, and other
special provisions made for them, their heirs, executors and Assigns, do hold
and enjoy to them their heirs and Assigns all and singular the lands,
tenements and hereditaments in and by the said former Act settled, granted,
disposed and confirmed, or mentioned, meant or intended to be settled, granted,
disposed and confirmed to them, their heirs and Assigns, and not already
decreed away by such decrees as are herein confirmed, and all other the
benefits and advantages of this present Act, and the benefits and advantages in
and by the said former Act mentioned in any particular clause or other provisoe
relating to them or any of them, their heirs or Assigns, the benefit of
reprizals in the said former Act granted only excepted, any retrenchment or
alteration thereof made by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, or any
other matter or thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. And it is
further Enacted that Sir William Penn shall hold, and enjoy to him and his
heirs, all and singular the lands, Tenements and hereditaments situate in the
County of Cork, whereof he the said Sir William Penn by himself or his under
tenants was upon the first day of March, One thousand six hundred sixty and
four in possession, as tenant to his Majesty, and in case the same shall fall
short of the full value of One thousand pound per annum over and above all Quit
rents, charges and reprizes, the Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall
cause so much other forfeited land to be set out and allotted unto the said
Sir William Penn, his Heirs and Assigns, as may make up the same to the full
clear yearly value of One thousand pounds per annum as aforesaid, and in case
the lands held by the said Sir William Penn, his undertenants or Assigns upon
the said first day of March, One thousand six hundred sixty and four, shall
exceed the value of One thousand pound per annum over and above all Quit rents,
charges and reprizes as aforesaid, he the said Sir William Penn, his Heirs and
Assigns shall reconvey unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors so much
thereof as by the Commissioners for the execution of this Act, shall be
declared, or by any Inquisition to be taken within two years after the Royal
assent given to this Bill shall be found to be over and above the value of One
thousand pounds per annum as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Earl of
Clanrickard, Earl of Castlehaven, Morrough Earl of Inchequin, the Earl of
Clancarty, Lord Vice-Count Dillon, Simon Luttrell, Dudley Bagnall Esquire Henry
Bagnall, Catherine Corbett, Theobald Purcell Esquire and such others who are
particularly mentioned in the said former Act to be restored to their estates,
and therein, and thereby, are actually restored without any Previous reprizall,
and their and every of their Executors, and Assigns shall stand and continue
restored to and vested in such their estates thereby intended, and shall have
and enjoy the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the benefits
and advantages of the said former Act in such manner and form and for such
estates and with such privileges, immunities and discharges respectively as in
and by the said former Act are mentioned and expressed: Nevertheless it is
hereby declared, that this restitution and confirmation is not to extend to any
lands, Tenements or Hereditaments other than such as did truly and without
fraud upon the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty and
one, belong to and were enjoyed by the said persons or some of them, their or
some of their Ancestors or Heirs, or were in the possession and seizin of some
others in trust for them or some of them, or be particularly expressed in the
several and respective clauses of the said former Act; And to the end it may
more clearly appear how much land the persons aforesaid are truly entitled
unto by virtue of this or the said former Act, and how far the persons who are
or shall be dispossessed by them or any of them ought to be relieved by virtue
of this Act, It is further Enacted that all and every the persons aforesaid who
claim any benefit by the clauses aforesaid shall make out such their title as
to the several parcels of land which they demand before the Commissioners for
Execution of this Act within such time as shall be limited by the Commissioners
and take out their Decrees for so much as shall be allowed upon their Claims,
and in default thereof shall forfeit two years value of the lands in their or
any of their possessions respectively or in the possession of their tenants or
Trustees, one Moiety to the Kings Majesty, the other to the Informer, to be
recovered in like manner as other forfeitures are by this Act appointed to be
recovered.

And it is further declared and Enacted, That Thomas Pigott Esquire and Matthew
Lock Esquire shall have and enjoy to them and their Heirs two full third parts of
the lands in Westmeath, settled on them by the said former Act, with like
liberty of Retrenchment, retaining possession and of demanding and having
Letters Patents as other Adventurers and Soldiers ought to have, and as if the
said lands in Westmeath had been in the possession of the said Thomas Pigott,
and Matthew Lock, on the Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and
nine, and had been allotted to them as original Adventurers, any thing herein
before to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is hereby declared and further Enacted, That if any of the said persons
herein before mentioned to be restored and appointed to take out Decrees as
aforesaid, or any others who by virtue of any Decrees heretofore made by the
Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act, have been restored shall at
any time within two years next ensuing, be found by color of some clause in
the said former Act or Decree as aforesaid, to have entered upon and kept
possession of more land than did rightfully belong unto them, and was in their
possession on the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty
and one, unles the same land were particularly expressed and given in some
clause in the said former Act contained, that then and in such case the person
so offending shall forfeit double the value of the land so fraudulently
possessed and detained, unless the said offender shall within three months next
after the first sitting of the Commissioners for the Execution of this present
Act, discover and declare the same to the said Commissioners, and openly
relinquish and surrender the possession so unduely detained as aforesaid, of
which forfeiture one third part shall be to our Sovereign Lord the King, and
the other two thirds to him or them that will sue for the same to be recovered
by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or information in any of the four Courts of
Record at Dublin, wherein no essoyne Protection or wager of law shall be, or
any more than one imparlance.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
clauses in the said former Act contained, and not herein altered, explained or
repealed, and which will consist with the Execution of this Act, shall be and
so are hereby declared to remain and be of such like force and effect as the
same were before the passing of this Act, and that all other the clauses which
will not consist with the effectual Execution of this Act, shall be and are
hereby repealed, any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding: And further that all and every the clauses in this or the said
former Act contained, so far as the same remain in force, shall be construed,
expounded and taken in all Courts and places whatsoever most liberally and
beneficially for the protecting, settling and establishing the persons, estates
and interests of Protestants who are principally intended by these presents to
be settled and secured.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Decrees made by
the Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act whereby any Protestant
or Protestants have been declared innocent, shall be and are hereby absolutely
confirmed, and also that all Decrees whereby any Papist or Papists have been
declared innocent, and which shall be taken out within three months after the
first sitting of the Commissioners for Execution of this present Act, shall be
and are hereby absolutely confirmed according to the tenor, purport and effect
of the same, any exception touching the time wherein the same Decrees were made
and any irregularity or pretended irregularity in not pursuing the Declaration,
Instructions and the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding, such
Decrees wherein any lands are comprehended or which any Protestant or
Protestants was or were possessed before the two and twentieth of October, One
thousand six hundred forty one, and which were never seized or sequestered or
set apart upon the account of the late Rebellion or war, and such Decrees
wherein more lands are Decreed to the Claimant than were claimed by him, as to
those lands so Decreed beyond the claim only excepted, which are hereby
declared as for so much to be utterly void, so as the same be discovered within
six months next after the first sitting of the Commissioners, subject
nevertheless to such penalties, as in this and the said former Act are
contained, touching false and fraudulent Claims, so as the same be discovered
within two years next ensuing the passing of this present Act.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no person or persons, who by the
Commissioners for execution of the said former Act, have been adjudged and
declared innocent, and to whom any Land, Tenements or Hereditaments have been
adjudged and restored by the Decree of the said Commissioners, nor any other
person or persons claiming under such Decree, shall be permitted to sue or
prosecute the person or persons against whom such Decree was made, his or their
Executors or Administrators, or any of their Tenants or Assigns, touching or
concerning any Measn profits of the Lands and Tenements so as aforesaid
decreed, but that all Suits, Actions and Demands touching or concerning such
Measn profits, and all prosecutions therefore, whether in law or equity, shall
be, and are hereby barred and excluded, and all and every person and persons
liable to such actions, molestations and prosecutions, shall be thereof for
ever acquitted and discharged, Any thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And because many persons did put in their claims before the Commissioners for
execution of the said former Act as innocent persons, thereby demanding some
small parcel of land only, or deriving his or their title to some small part
from some Irish Papist, and thereupon no opposition being made, the said
Commissioners declared the said Claimant, or the person under whom the Claimant
derived, to be innocent quo ad hoc, since which time the said Claimants, and
the said persons under whom they derive, alleging themselves to be declared
innocent, enter upon great estates in several Counties, as divested out of the
Crown by such Judgment of Innocence, pretending the limitation of that
Innocence by the words of the Decree quo ad hoc to be repugnant and impossible,
contrary to the intention and meaning of the said Commissioners by them
publicly declared, whereas if the whole estates to which the said persons now
pretend, had been then in question before the said Commissioners, the several
Adventurers and Soldiers therein concerned, had been summoned to have taken
notice thereof, and might have made such opposition, and produced such proof of
their nocency as they thought fit, Be it therefore Enacted, That no Decree
wherein any person or persons have been declared innocent quo ad hoc, shall
give such person or persons any title by virtue of any such Decree, to enter
upon, or enjoy any more or other lands than what were particularly mentioned in
such Decrees, but that all other the lands of such person or persons declared
innocent quo ad hoc, which were sequestered upon the account of the late
Rebellion or War, shall remain and continue in His Majesty, to the uses of
this and the said former Act, Any thing in either of the said Acts to the
contrary notwithing.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, That nothing herein contained, shall extend
in any wise to ratify or confirm the Decree made by the Commissioners for
execution of the said former Act, wherein and whereby Oliver Earl of Tyreconnel
has been declared to be nocent, but that the said Decree, and every part
thereof, shall be, and so is hereby declared to be null and void, as if the
same had never been had or made, and that the said Oliver Earl of Tyreconnel,
and all others who upon the Three and twentieth of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, or at any time since were or are seized to his use, or in
trust for him, or in trust for Sir Thomas Fitz William, late Vicecount Meryon,
Father to the said Earl, or Christopher Fitz Williams, Uncle to the said Earl,
or in trust for the Countess of Tyreconnel, Wife of the said Earl of
Tyreconnel, and for her separate maintenance or claiming by, from or under him,
the said Earl of Tyreconnel, shall be and continue in such like estate and
condition, and no other nor better, than he or they ought to have been in case
no such Decree had ever been made, subject nevertheless to such Quit Rents as
by this Act are imposed, Any thing herein, or in the said former Act contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Oliver Earl of Tyreconnel shall hold
and enjoy to him and his heirs the lands in Cappock in the County of Dublin,
and Hanlaston and Athronan in the County of Mead, mortgaged by the Lord
Vicecount fitzs William his Father, now forfeited to His Majesty, and that His
Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date the
eight day of June, in the sixteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, containing His
Majesty's gracious pardon to the said Earl of Tyreconnel, and a clause of
Restitution of all the lands and Tenements of the said Earl, shall be, and is
hereby confirmed and shall be held and enjoyed accordingly, subject to Quit
Rents as aforesaid.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted and Explained, That no lands whereof
the Provost, Fellows and Scholars of the College of the holy and undivided
Trinity of Queen Elizabeth, near Dublin, were seized in Fee in the year, One
thousand six hundred forty one, and are now in their actual possession, nor any
lands held by virtue of any Grant, Lease or Fee Farm from the said Provost,
Fellows and Scholars, and forfeited to His Majesty, shall be disposed by
virtue of this or the said former Act, but that they and every of them remain
and be in the said Provost fellows and scholars, and their Successors for
ever, Subject nevertheless to the payment of such Quit rents for the said
forfeited lands, as Adventurers or Soldiers by virtue of this or the former
Act ought to pay, any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And because several persons have been decreed innocent, but nevertheless have
not been restored to the lands which they claimed before the Commissioners for
Execution of the said former Act, but have been left to the course of law for
the recovery of their possessions by trying their titles grounded upon the
validity of those evidences by which they pretended to claim, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and persons who
were defendant or defendants in the suit or claim upon which such decree was
made as aforesaid, and those claiming by from and under them, shall within
three months next after the sitting of the Commissioners for Execution of this
Act, declare and make his and their election by writing under his and their
hands and Seals, or under the hands and Seals of his and their Atturneys or
Agents thereunto lawfully authorized, whether they will immediately deliver up
and relinquish the possession of the lands in controversy unto the Kings
Majesty, and resort to their proportionable satisfaction out of other
forfeited lands, which if they do elect, they are to be admitted accordingly,
and shall be satisfied his and their full two third parts, and so much more as
may be Equivalent to his and their buildings and improvements, and then shall
part with the said lands, or whether they will rather abide the trial at law,
which if they do elect and the Irish claimant should fail to prosecute his
title, or a verdict or judgment shall be given against such Irish claimants,
or the person or persons who shall derive under such Irish claimant, then shall
such Adventurer or Soldier, or other person or persons his or their Heirs,
Executors or Assigns who shall be concerned in that suit, for ever and finally
hold the said land in question, and every part thereof to him and his Heirs;
but in case verdict or judgment be given for the title of the Irish claimant,
or no such election be made as aforesaid, the Adventurer or Soldier or other
person, his or their Heirs, Executors or Assigns shall be excluded from
demanding or having his two third parts or any other satisfaction, which
otherwise he might have had in respect of such land so recovered as aforesaid:
Nevertheless it is hereby declared that no other title shall be admitted to be
alleged or given in evidence by such Irish claimant or any claiming under
them, but such title as was alleged in the claim exhibited before the
Commissioners for the Execution of the said former Act: Provided that if any
secret agreement be made between the Irish Claimant and the party concerned as
aforesaid directly or indirectly, and the person so agreeing shall obtain any
satisfaction for or in respect of the lands so agreed for, that then and in
such case the party so offending shall forfeit double the value of the lands so
obtained, one Moiety to the Kings Majesty, the other Moiety to the Informer,
to be recovered in like manner as other forfeitures are herein appointed to be
recovered.

And be it further Enacted that all and every person and persons who now have
any grants or Patents of any lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or of any
titles of honor or dignity, or of any annuity, pension, office or employment
within this Kingdom, not already enrolled, do cause the same to be enrolled in
the Chancery of Ireland within the space of two years next after the Royal
assent to this Bill actually given under pain of forfeiture of two years value
of any lands, Tenements, annuities, pensions or offices whereof the Patents
shall not be enrolled as aforesaid, one Moiety to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, the other Moiety to him or them that shall and will sue for the
same to be recovered by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or information in any
Court of Record, wherein no essoyne, protection or wager of law, to be allowed,
or any more than one imparlance, and that all and every person and persons
having any Patents touching or concerning any title of honor or dignity not
already enrolled or to be enrolled within the time aforesaid, shall forfeit and
loose the sum of one hundred pounds sterling, one Moiety thereof to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the other moiety to him or them that shall
and will sue for the same to be recovered as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Letters Patents
hereafter to be granted of any titles of honor, offices or lands whatsoever,
shall contain in the same Letters Patents, a clause requiring and compelling
the said Patentees to cause the said Letters Patents to be enrolled in the
Chancery of Ireland within a time therein to be limited, and all Letters
Patents wherein such clause shall be omitted, are declared to be utterly void
and of no effect: Provided always and be it Enacted that nothing in this or
the said former Act contained, shall extend to prejudice or alter the right,
title or interest which Elizabeth Countess of Guilford has or ought to have in
the Manors, Castles, Towns, Villages, Messuages, lands, Tenements or
herediments lying or being in the County of Cork, and now in the actual
possession of her the said Countess or her Assigns, as the jointure or Dower
of her the said Countess the relict of the late Lord ViceCount Kynalmeaky, but
that the same be possessed and enjoyed by her the said Countess and her
Assigns in the same state and condition and no other, as she held and enjoyed
the same before the first sitting of this present Parliament, any thing in this
or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Charles Lord
ViceCount Fitz Harding, Treasurer of His Majesty's Household shall hold and
enjoy to him and his Heirs all and singular the lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments lately granted or mentioned to be granted unto Charles late Lord
ViceCount Fitz Harding, afterward Earl of Falmouth, and his heirs, in and by
certain Letters Patents thereof passed under the Great Seal of Ireland; And it
is hereby declared that the Adventurers and Soldiers and Protestant purchasors
of lands in Conaght and Clare, their Heirs and Assigns who shall be thence
removed, shall be satisfied his and their two third parts in like manner as any
other Adventurer or Soldier ought to be satisfied by the rules of this Act:
Provided always that if His Majesty shall at any time within the space of two
years next and immediately ensuing, pay or cause to be paid unto the said
Charles Lord ViceCount Fitz Harding, his heirs or Assigns, the sum of twenty
thousand pounds at or in the middle Temple-Hall in London upon notice thereof
first given to the said Charles Lord ViceCount Fitz Harding, and his heirs by
the space of one week before such payment, then all and singular the lands in
the said Letters Patents mentioned, shall return to and remain in his Majesty,
his heirs and Successors, to the uses of this Act, and that until the whole
sum of twenty thousand pounds shall be paid and satisfied as aforesaid, it
shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Charles Lord ViceCount Fitz
Harding and his Heirs, to retain and keep possession of the premises, and the
profits thereof to receive and convert to his and their own use without any
account to be therefore made, any thing herein before to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas Lewis Lord Vicecount Clanmalira being but tenant in tail of
certain lands in Ireland, exhibited his claim before the Commissioners for
Execution of the said former Act, but the same remained undetermined, and no
other claim was exhibited by any other person to any part of the lands of the
said Lewis Lord Vicecount Clanmalira, either in possession or reversion or
remainder, except only the claim of Sir Henry Bennet Knight, now Lord
Arlington, His Majesty's principal Secretary of State, to the reversion thereof
in fee, being granted to him the said Sir Henry Bennet now Lord Arlington, by
His Majesty's Letters Patents bearing date the fifth day of November in the
fourteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, which claim was by the said
Commissioners allowed, in so much that the estate and interest of such
Adventurers and Soldiers who were formerly planted thereupon are become very
doubtful, and that as at the best they were not to continue longer than during
the said estate tail, so now it may be doubted in law whether they be of any
continuance at all, and whether the said estate tail be not extinct in law by
the forfeiture of the said Lord Clanmalira, whose claim of innocence has not
been allowed, and so by consequence the reversion granted to Sir Henry Bennet,
now Lord Arlington as aforesaid, come to take effect in present possession, Be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Sir Henry Bennet,
now Lord Arlington, shall and may enter into and upon, and shall have, hold and
enjoy to him and his Heirs, all and singular the Messuages, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof Lewis Lord Vice-Count Clanmalira, or any
other person in trust for him was seized, or possessed the two and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, in as full and ample manner as the
said Sir Henry Bennet now Lord Arlington might have held or enjoyed the same by
virtue of the said Letters Patents, in case the said estate tail had been spent
or expired, or otherwise determined or extinguished, which said Letters
Patents, and all and every the clauses therein contained, are hereby confirmed
and declared to be good, valid and effectual in law to all intents and
purposes; and that all and every the Adventurers and Soldiers, their Heirs,
Executors, Assignee or Assigns who are to be removed in order to the quiet and
peaceable possession of the said Sir Henry Bennet now Lord Arlington, shall be
satisfied their full two third parts respectively in like order and manner, to
and with other Adventurers and Soldiers, any clause matter or thing in this or
the said former Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And Whereas Francis Lord Aungier, in and by the said former Act was entitled
unto some part of the premises amounting to the value of two hundred pounds
per annum, or there abouts, which, as is alleged, lies so intermixed with the
residue of the said estate, that the same cannot without great inconvenience,
be continued in the possession of the said Francis Lord Aungier in such manner
as now it is held, Be it therefore Enacted, That the said Sir Henry Bennet now
Lord Arlington, his Heirs or Assigns, shall before the first day of January
next ensuing, convey and assure unto the said Francis Lord Aungier, his Heirs
and Assigns, so much of the premises as Arthur Earl of Anglesey and Roger
Earl of Orrery, or the surviver of them, shall by any writing under his or
their hands and Seals, before that time to be made, declare and appoint in lieu
and recompense of the estate of the said Francis Lord Aungier, of and in the
premises, and in default of such Declaration and appointment, or of the
performance thereof, the said Francis Lord Aungier shall hold and enjoy to him
and his heirs, the Messuages, Lands and Tenements, whereof he is now in
possession, and to which he stands entitled by the said former Act, according
to the tenor thereof, any thing in this present Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be, and
is hereby constituted and erected an office, or place of Register to the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, who shall take care that due entries
be made of all Retrenchments of any third part, or other proportion of lands to
be cut off from any Adventurer or Soldier, their Heirs and Assigns, and the
valuations thereof, and of all Decrees, and certificates to be made by the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, and of all other the proceedings in
order to the service of this Act, which are fit and proper to be Registered, And
that the said Office, or place shall be held by Sir John Percival Baronet,
during his natural life, to be exercised by himself, or his sufficient Deputy,
and that the said Sir John Percival by himself, or his Deputy shall be, and is
hereby empowered, and required to have the care and custody of all claims,
certificates, plots, surveyes, (except such as relate to the Office, and
employment of the Surveyor General) Debentures, Duplicates, Entries, and copies
of them, Returns of Commissions, Valuations, Examinations, Affidavits, Reports,
Rols and all other public Books, Papers, writings and Records whatsoever,
which any the Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners for the service of this Act,
shall use in such Office, or place wherein they sit, and which shall be
dependant on the said service or relating thereunto; and all persons who have
any of the like Books or Papers aforesaid, which have been used in or toward
the Execution of the said former Act, shall forthwith deliver the same, or
cause the same to be delivered to Sir John Percival: And to the end that no
fraud or deceit may be used herein, nor any of the said writings, or Records
be imbeizeled, the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, for the time being, and the Council there, shall have power to send
for any person or persons, whom they shall suspect to have any of the writings,
or Records-aforesaid, and to examine him, or them upon his or their Oaths
touching the same, and to commit to prison such person or persons as shall
refuse to be examined, or being examined shall refuse to deliver such Books,
Papers, and Records relating to the service of the said former Act, as shall
appear to be in his or their hands, or which they can come by: And further the
said Sir John Percival by himself, or his Deputy, and by such under Clerks for
which he will be responsible, shall from time to time attend such
Commissioners, and transcribe, Copy, Prepare, Register, Enter, Draw up, and
enrol, or cause to be transcribed, Copied, Prepared, Registered, Entered, Drawn
up and enrolled all and every the Decrees, Judgments, Orders, Warrants,
Summons, Injunctions, Reports, and certificates of any of the Commissioners, or
Sub-Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act, not already enrolled or
entered, or of any the Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners for the service of
this Act for the time to come, and shall also Act, and do or cause to be Acted,
and don all and every the matters, and things which do or may any way concern
the Office of Register, or other the premises as fully and amply as any
Register or Registers to the Commissioners for Execution of the said former
Act, and his and their Clerks did or ought to have done, he and they taking
therefore such Fees only and no other, as by the Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor and Governors of Ireland for the time being shall be held
reasonable, which Fees he and they are hereby enabled to receive and recover
accordingly: And it is hereby declared and enacted, That the said Sir John
Percival, shall yearly and every year during the Execution of this and the
former Act account for and pay unto the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor and Governors of Ireland, one full third part of the clear annual
Profits of the said Office, the necessary charges to be expended in and about
the Execution thereof being first deducted, And the said Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, are hereby required to cause
all the moneys so as aforesaid, received, to be issued out and paid from time
to time to such person or persons as his Majesty already has appointed or
hereafter shall appoint: And it is further declared, That an acquittance or
receipt signed with the sign manual of the said Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, shall be for so much as is therein
contained, a sufficient discharge unto the said Sir John Percival, his heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, And for the more just
regulation of proceedings in this Office, the Commissioners for Execution of
this Act, are hereby empowered and required to Administer an Oath to the said
Sir John Percival, and all others who shall be employed in any ministerial
Office or employment relating to the service of this Act in these words
following; You shall swear that you shall well and truly execute the place of
(...) according to the best of your skill and knowledge, and therein you shall
spare no person for favor and affection, nor any person grieve for hatred or
ill will, so help you God.

And whereas there is one clause contained in the said former Act in these
words following, And for the better prevention of all future Rebellions, and to
the end our good Subjects of Ireland may be likewise secured against all
Insurrections or attempts for the time to come, and the said Kingdom be the
better planted and improved, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors and Council of Ireland, for the time being, from time
to time and at all times hereafter, during the space of seven years to be
accounted from the first day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty five, to
make and establish such rules, orders and directions for the better planting
with Protestants, the Lands by this Act vested in His Majesty and not appointed
to be restored to innocent persons. And for the better regulation of Cities,
walled Towns and Corporations, and the electing of Magistrates and Officers
there, and to inflict such penalties for the breach thereof, as they in their
wisdom shall think fit, so as the penalties for breach of the rules of
plantation do not extend further than to treble the Quit-rents due for the
lands which shall be planted otherwise than those rules shall direct, the said
penalties to continue, and be yearly paid to the King, His Heirs and
Successors, till the said Rules of plantation be performed, and thenceforth the
rent by this Act reserved to be only payable, and so as the penalty for breach
of the rules to be made touching Corporations, do not extend further than to
the removeall or disfranchisement of such persons as shall be found guilty of
the breach thereof, which Rules, Orders and directions so as aforesaid to be
made, shall be as good and effectual in Law, to all intents and purposes, as
if the same had been established by authority of this present Parliament, and
shall remain, continue and abide in force for such and so long time as in and
by the said Rules, Orders and directions shall be limited and appointed.

And whereas some doubt does arise whether the Lord Lieutenant, Chief Governor
or Governors, and Council of Ireland for the time being, may make and
establish Rules, Orders and directions for the better regulating of such
Cities, walled Towns and Corporations as have been anciently incorporated, or
only for the better regulating such corporations as shall or may hereafter be
created according to the Tenor and purport of His Majesty's Gracious
Declaration for the Settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of
the several interests of Adventurers, Soldiers and other his Majesty's
Subjects there; for the clearing whereof, Be it further Enacted, and it is
hereby declared and Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor Governors and Council of Ireland for the time being, from time to
time, and at all times to come, during the space of seven years to be accounted
from the nine and twentieth day of September One thousand six hundred sixty
five, to make and establish such Rules, Orders and Directions for the better
regulating of all Cities, Walled Towns and Corporations both new and old, and
such as shall be created within this Kingdom, and the electing of Magistrates
and Officers there, and to inflict such penalties for the breach thereof, as
they in their wisdom shall think fit, so as the penalties for breach of the
Rules, Orders and Directions to be made touching such Corporations, do not
extend further than to the removeall and disfranchisement of such persons as
shall be found guilty of the breach thereof, and such Rules, Orders and
directions so to be made as aforesaid shall be as good and effectual in law to
all intents and purposes as if the same had been specially and particularly
established by Authority of this present Parliament, and shall remain, continue
and abide in force for such and so long time as in the said Rules, Orders and
Directions shall be limited and appointed, any thing in the said Act or
otherwise to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas the Officers and Soldiers who served in Ireland, since the fifth
of June One thousand six hundred forty nine, and the Connaght purchasors for
the better furtherance and management of their common interest, have by their
humble address represented the necessity of raising of moneys and supplicated
leave for so doing, as was formerly granted to the Adventurers and their
Assigns in the like case, and least some of the said Officers and Soldiers or
some of their respective Assigns may prove to be refractory in paying and
allowing their just proportions of money for the said ends and for defraying of
the public charge there about, it being nevertheless very expedient that a
service of such a public and common advantage should be equally born by all
persons concerned therein, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that the said Officers and Soldiers, and Connaght purchasors, their Heirs and
Assigns shall allow satisfy and pay such sum and sums of money, as Arthur Earl
of Anglesey, Roger Earl of Orrery, the Lord Vice Count Conway, Lord Kingston,
Sir John Skeffington Baronet, Sir Thomas Clarges Knight, Sir Thomas Stanley
Knight, Sir Richard Kerle, Sir William Petty, Doctor Robert Gorges, Henry
Nicoll, John Brett, and Miles Cook Esquire or any three or more of them meeting at
Dublin the first Thursday in Hillary Term One thousand six hundred fifty and
five, or any other Term after at the four Courts in Dublin, between two and
five of the Clock in the afternoon, shall think fit and assess, which said sum
or sums so to be assessed and raised, shall not exceed two pence for every
profitable Acre, which shall be by virtue of this Act confirmed unto them,
their Heirs and Assigns now in their possessions, or at any time hereafter
shall be confirmed upon them respectively, and shall be paid unto the Receivers
herein after mentioned, and shall be disposed by them or any three or more of
them, for and toward the end aforesaid, and not otherwise: Provided always
that of the three there be always one of the Peers, and two of the Commoners
before specified, and for default of payment of any sum or sums so assessed,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the persons aforesaid, or any three or
more of them, or such other person or persons as they shall direct and appoint,
to levy by distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of such person or
persons so making default, double the sum that shall be upon him or them
assessed, and in arrears, rendering the overplus to the party distrained.

And whereas amongst several Bills certified, and transmitted under the Great
Seal of Ireland, unto his Majesty in his High Court of Chancery in England, by
a certificate bearing date at Dublin the thirteenth day of May, in the
sixteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, a Bill is transmitted entitled an Act
for settling of Certain lands of Erasmus Smith Esquire for charitable uses, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments in the said Bill mentioned, and thereby intended to be disposed
for charitable uses, and not already Decreed away by the Commissioners for
Execution of the said former Act, shall be continued and applied unto, and
preserved entirely for such pious and charitable uses, and that the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall not allot, or distribute the
said lands, or any part thereof, or suffer the same to be allotted, or
distributed to any Adventurer or Soldier in pursuance of this Act; And where
any of the lands set out by the said Erasmus Smith, to pious or charitable
uses, have been evicted, recovered, or charged by any Decrees, which are
confirmed by this Act, the Commissioners for Execution of this Act shall cause
a like quantity of forfeited and profitable Acres within the County of Lowth,
if so much can there be found, or otherwise elsewhere, to be set our and
allotted to the same pious uses, as may be sufficient to recompense the loss
which has happened by such Decrees as aforesaid, any thing in this or the said
former Act to the contrary notwithstanding. and Whereas several lands and
Tenements in the County of Tipperary, heretofore in the possession of Erasmus
Smith, upon the Seventh day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine,
and claimed by him as an Adventurer, according to the rules of His Majesty's
late Gracious Declaration and the said former Act, were after the said
Declaration, and before the passing of the said Act granted by His Majesty's
Letters Patents unto Sir John Stephens and his Heirs as lands concealed, which
grant nevertheless might at any time by the rules of the said former Act, have
been revoked by His Majesty, if His Majesty had not been pleased since the
passing of the said Act, to release his power of Revocation, by reason whereof
great suits and controversies are likely to arise between the said Erasmus
Smith, and the said Sir John Stephens, and such as do or may hereafter claim
under them respectively, to the end therefore that speedy right, and justice
may be done, and the said controversies appeased, and determined, Be it Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners for Execution of this Act
shall examine the right and title of the said Erasmus Smith, and of the said
Sir John Stephens, in and to the said lands and Tenements, and if they shall
find that the said Erasmus Smith, or those under whom he claims, were on the
Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine seized or possessed of
all, or any the said lands, as an Adventurer or Adventurers, or as the Heir or
Assignee of any Aduenturer, then they shall forthwith restore the possession to
the said Erasmus Smith, to be held by him, and his Heirs and Assigns in like
manner and proportion as other Adventurers ought to enjoy their several and
respective proportions, according to this Act, in which case the said Erasmus
Smith, is hereby enabled to sue for, and recover the Measne profit thereof
received, but if they shall find the said lands to have been held by the said
Erasmus Smith without any such title as aforesaid, and that the same were
concealed from his Majesty at the time of the passing of the said Letters
Patents, then they shall adjudge the said lands, or so much thereof as they
shall find to be so concealed, to Sir John Stephens and his Heirs to be held by
him and his Heirs according to the tenor of his said Letters Patents, and such
judgment and Decree as the said Commissioners shall make touching the
premises shall be, and is hereby made concluding to the said Erasmus Smith,
and the said Sir John Stephens, their Heirs and Assigns, any thing in the said
Letters Patents or in the said former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas William Mountgomery of Rosemound in the County of Down Esquire did
purchase of several persons certain Debentures which were due for service done
in Ireland since the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty and nine,
and placed the same in and upon the purchase of a part of his own Estate called
or known by the name of the Manor of Florida in the County aforesaid, then set
out or set a part by reason of or upon account of the said late Rebellion or
war, since which time the said William Mountgomery has by the Commissioners
for the Execution of the said former Act been declared and adjudged an innocent
Protestant, and thereupon the said Manor of Florida, together with the rest of
the Estate of the said William Mountgomery has been decreed unto him, by
reason whereof the Debentures so purchased and placed thereupon as aforesaid do
remain wholly unsatisfied, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the Commissioners for execution of this Act shall set out or cause to be
set out unto the said William Mountgomery so much forfeited Land as may be
sufficient to satisfy the said Debentures in like manner and form, and
according to such Rates and proportions as any other like Debentures ought by
the Rules of this Act to be satisfied as fully and amply as any other purchaser
or Assignee of the said Deventures ought to have been satisfied in case the
same had been placed on the said Manor so evicted or decreed as aforesaid.

And whereas in and by a certain Clause in the said former Act, Colonel John
Fitz Patrick of Castle-Town in the Queens County, is restored in blood, and
also restored unto and vested in the real and actual possession and seizin to
him and his Heirs, of all and every the Castles, Manors, Lands Tenements, and
Hereditaments, reversions, remainders and Leases, whereof the said Colonel John
Fitz Patrick or his Father or any other in trust for them, or either of them,
or to their use, were at any time before the two and twentieth of October, One
thousand six hundred forty one, Lawfully seized or possessed, upon which words
Seized or possessed some doubt or question in law may arise how far the said
clause may avail the said Colonel Fitz Patrick, by reason that a certain Office
or Inquisition was found in the nineteenth year of King James, by which His
Majesty is or may be intiled or presented to be entitled to the whole
Territory of Upper Ossery, within which place the Lands intended to be restored
to the said Colonel John Fitz Patrick do lie, and so by consequence the seizin
and possession thereof, which was in the said Colonel John Fitz Patricks
Grandfather at the time of the said Office or Inquisition found, may be from
the said nineteenth year of King James, conceived to have been in the Kings
Majesty, and not not in the said Colonel Fitz Patricks Grandfather, or any
other in trust for him, although he or some of them were then in the Actual
possession and occupation thereof, and received the profits, Be it therefore
Enacted and explained by the Authority aforesaid, that the said Colonel John
Fitz Patrick shall hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs the full benefit of the
clause and provisoe in the said former Act contained, the said Office of
Inquisition or any other matter or thing in the said former Act or this present
Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is hereby declared and Enacted, that all and every the Adventurers and
Soldiers, their Heirs and Assigns to whom any Lands or Tenements in the Queens
County, were set out and allotted, and whereof they were possessed the seventh of
May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, the Lands of the said John Fitz
Patrick excepted, shall hold and enjoy such part of the said Lands and
Tenements as will be due to them by the Rules of this Act, the said Office or
Inquisition in the nineteenth year of King James to the contrary
notwithstanding; Provided always that all and singular the Clauses in the said
former Act contained, wherein or whereby any Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments are granted to or vested in Theobald Earl of Carlingford, or
whereby any other benefit or advantage can or may accrue unto the said Earl of
Carlingford, shall be and are hereby again confirmed, and shall be enjoyed by
the said Earl of Carlingford, in as full and ample manner as in the said Act is
contained, any retrenchment, change or other alteration thereof made by the
Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, and any other clause, matter or thing
in the said former Act, or this present Act contained to the contrary thereof
in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always and it is hereby declared and Enacted, That Sir Richard
Ingoldsby Knight of the Bath, and Sir Henry Ingoldsby Baronet, shall hold and
enjoy to them and their Heirs all and singular the Lands within and contiguous
to the Mileline in the County of Clare, which were set out to them or either of
them, in satisfaction of fifteen hundred and fifteen pounds eleaven shillings
two pence, with their Houses and Gardens in Limerick, and also all and every
their Lands of which they or either of them were possessed by themselves or
their Tenants the seventh of May One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, such
part of the Premises only excepted, as have been Decreed away by the
Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act, any thing in this or the
said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Whereas Captain Henry Finch, late of Londonderry, Deceased, in pursuance
of a Commission from Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Birlacy, sometimes Lords
Justices of Ireland, did in the month of November, One thousand six hundred
forty one, levy and Arm a Company of Foot consisting of One hundred Men,
besides Officers in the County of the City of Londonderry, and maintained the
said Company for three years at his own charges, and continued in the command
of the said Company against the Rebels from the month of November, One
thousand six hundred forty one, until the month of October, One thousand six
hundred forty and eight, and was then disbanded without receiving any the least
satisfaction, and yet nevertheless the arrears due to the said Henry Finch, for
his service before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, have
not been cast up, nor stated by the Commissioners for Execution of the said
former Act, partly by reason of some doubt conceived that the said Company was
not upon the establishment of the Ulster Army, Whereas in truth the said
Company was received into the said establishment, though the Order whereby the
same should be made appear could not then be produced, and partly by reason of
other accidents, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith and before any
distribution made of the Houses, lands, Tenements, Hereditaments or sums of
money herein before appointed for the security and satisfaction of such
Commissioned Officers as served before the fifth of June, One thousand six
hundred forty nine, cast up, and state the arrears which were due to the said
Henry Finch Deceased, for the service aforesaid, and that after the arrears so
stated, William Finch and Henry Finch, Sonns and Administrators of the said
Henry Finch Deceased, shall be satisfied and paid, and are hereby Enabled to
demand, and receive satisfaction equally and proportionably, having respect to
the arrears stated, and in like manner as any other Commissioned Officer who
served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, and
whose arrears are stated and allowed by the Commissioners for Execution of the
said former Act, may or ought to be satisfied, and as fully and amply as if the
arrears which were due to the said Henry Finch Deceased, had been stated and
allowed within the time limited by the said former Act, any thing in the said
former Act, or this present Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas Alice Countess Dowager of Barrimore, would have been lawfully
entitled unto the payment of and satisfaction for the several and respective
arrears which were due unto David late Earl of Barrimore ber Husband, and to
James Barry her son deceased, as Commissioned Officers, for service done in
Ireland before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, if the
same had been duly stated and allowed within the time limited by the said
former Act; And whereas also Dennis Muschampe Esquire would have been lawfully
entitled to the payment of and satisfaction for the Arrears which were due to
Agmondisham Muschamp Esquire his deceased Father as Lieutenant of the Ordinance in
Munster, and a Commissioned Officer for service done in Ireland before the
fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, if the same had been
duly stated and allowed within the time limited by the said former Act; And
whereas also Sir Alexander Keith Knight would have been lawfully entitled to
the payment of and satisfaction for the Arrears due to Lieutenant Colonel
George Keith as a Commissioned Officer for service done in Ireland before the
fifth of June One thousand six hundred forty nine, if the same had been stated
and allowed within the time limited as aforesaid; And whereas also Captain John
Annesley served in Ireland as a Commissioned Officer before the fifth of June,
One thousand six hundred forty nine, and ought to be satisfied and paid the
Arrears due to him for such service, if the same had been timely stated and
allowed as aforesaid; And whereas also Margery Symmes the relict of Major John
Symmes would have been lawfully entitled to the payment of and satisfaction for
the Arrears which were due to the said Major John Symmes her deceased Husband
as a Commissioned Officer for service done in Ireland before the fifth of June,
One thousand six hundred forty nine, if the same had been duly stated and
allowed within the time limited by the said former Act; And whereas also
Colonel Robert Broughton and Widow Cooper, late wife of Josuah Cooper, Major in
Sir Foulke Huncks Regiment, would have been lawfully entitled to the payment
of, and satisfaction for the Arrears which were due to them the said Robert
Broughton and Josuah Cooper, for service done in Ireland, before the fifth of
June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, that is to say, from the four and
twentieth of May, One thousand six hundred forty two, until the six and
twentieth of January, One thousand six hundred forty three, if the same had
been duly stated so far, and allowed within the time limited by the said Act;
And whereas Horatio Woodhouse, Brother and Administrator of Sir Michael
Woodhouse, would have been lawfully entitled unto the payment of and
satisfaction for the arrears which were due to him the said Sir Michael
Woodhouse, for service done in Ireland, as a Commissioned Officer before the
fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, if the same had been duly
stated and allowed within the time limited by the said Act, which several
arrears could not be stated or allowed within the time limited by the said
former Act for stating arrears, by reason that the Commissioners for Execution
of the said former Act, was straightened in time when they entered upon that
work, and by reason of some other accidents which did intervene, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners for Execution of
this Act, shall forthwith and before any distribution made of the Securities
set apart for the satisfaction of the Commissioned Officers who served before
the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, cast up and state the
respective arrears which were due to David late Earl of Barrymore, James Barry,
Agmondisham Muschamp, and Lieutenant Colonel George Keith, and Captain John
Annesly, Major John Symmes, Colonel Robert Broughton, and Josuah Cooper, and
Sir Michael Woodhouse, for service as aforesaid, and after the arrears so
stated, the said Alice Countess of Barrymore, Denny Muschamp, and Sir Alexander
Keith, Captain John Annesly, Margery Symmes, Colonel Robert Broughton, and
Widow Cooper, and Horatio Woodhouse, respectively shall be satisfied and paid
for all and every the respective arrears to which they are mentioned to be
entitled as aforesaid, as fully, amply and in like proportion and manner as any
other Commissioned Officer who served before the fifth of June, One thousand
six hundred forty nine, ought to be, and as if the said respective arrears had
been stated and allowed within the time limited by the said former Act, any
thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it Enacted, That all and singular the lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in the Barony of Imokelly in the County of Cork, granted or
mentioned to be granted by his Majesty in and by certain Letters Patents under
the Great Seal of Ireland, bearing date (...) unto Sir Henry Tint Deceased,
which have not been Decreed away by the Commissioners for the Execution of the
said former Act, shall be held and enjoyed by the Lady Mabel Tint, relict of
the said Sir Henry Tint, for and during her life, and after her Decease, by the
Son and Heir of the said Sir Henry Tint, and his Heirs, during the estate
granted by the said Letters Patents, and that where any of the lands in the
said Letters Patents mentioned, have been evicted or hereafter shall be evicted
by virtue of any Decrees made by the said Commissioners, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors,
and Council there for the time being, to make and Order such proportionable
Defalcation of the Rent reserved in and by the said Letters Patents, as they in
their judgment shall think fit, and such Order of Defalcation enrolled in His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, shall be as good and effectual as if it had been
Enacted by these presents, any thing in the said Letters Patents, or this Act
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it Enacted, That Francis Lie of Rathbride Esquire Son of John
Lie Deceased, shall hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs, all and singular the
lands, Tenements and Hereditaments situate in the County of Kildare, or
elsewhere in the Kingdom of Ireland, granted or mentioned to be granted, in and
by certain Letters Patents under the Great Seal of Ireland, bearing date the
tenth day of May, in the fifteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, and not since
Decreed away by the Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act, in as
full and ample manner as in and by the said Letters Patents is mentioned, any
thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Whereas Nicholas Lord Vice-count Nettervill who claimed an estate Call to
him and the Heirs males of his body of and in certain lands in Ireland, was by
the Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act, adjudged nocent, but
the younger Brothers and Sisters of the said Lord Vice-count have by the
judgment and Decree of the said Commissioners recovered their several and
respective remainders expectant upon the Death of the said Lord Vice-count
without issue Male, and also their several and respective portions, chargeable
on the estate of the said Lord Vice-count, and by reason thereof were entitled
to the present possession of the said estate in order to the satisfaction of
their respective portions, and when the said portions should be satisfied,
Edward Smith Esquire Sir Courtney Pool Baronet, and other the persons entitled to
the said estate, so long as the said Lord Vice-count shall have issue male of
his body, were still to continue their possession; Nevertheless His Majesty
being desirous that all just interests should be provided for, and being
willing to extend his mercy unto the said Nicholas Lord Vice-count Nettervill,
as far as may stand with His Justice, is graciously pleased that it may be
Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for execution of this Act, do forthwith set out unto the said Edward Smith Esquire
Sir Courtney Pool Baronet, and other the persons entitled to the lands of the
said Lord Vice-count, their Heirs and Assigns, their several and respective two
third parts, which by the rules of this Act they ought to have, and after such
two third parts set out, shall restore the said Lord Vice-count Nettervill unto
the possession of all and singular the Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements,
Reversions, Remainders, and all other Hereditaments, Right, Title and Interest
whatsoever in the said Kingdom of Ireland, with his deceased Father and
Grandfather, or either of them, or any other person or persons in trust for
them, or either of them, or to their or either of their use or uses, or any
other or others to whom he may or can derive as heir, or otherwise had, held or
enjoyed, or of right ought to have held or enjoyed on the Two and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, (Rectories and Parsonages,
Impropriated and Appropriate Tithes excepted) and that the said Lord Vice-count
shall hold and enjoy all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so
restored, according to such Estate, Right and Title as he ought to have had in
the same, in case he had been adjudged innocent, and no other; and also shall
be, and is hereby restored in blood to all intents and purposes, Any thing in
this present Act, or the said former Act, or any other Act, Law, Statute,
Ordinance, Order, Outlary, Attainder, Record, Provision, Sequestration,
Distribution, Allotment, Judgment, Conviction or Decree, or any other matter,
clause or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

And because the Estate, Right and Inheritance of, in and unto several Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments is by several clauses in this Act vested and
settled in, or otherwise disposed of unto several persons in the said several
and respective clauses particularly named and mentioned, whereby great
prejudice may arise unto others, whose right was not intended to be barred or
extinguished, if a timely remedy be not provided, Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That in all and every such clauses it shall be
understood, and so is hereby Declared, That all the right, title and interest,
either in law or equity, which any person or persons, Body Politic or
Corporate, their Heirs, Executors, Successors or Assigns, or any of them had
on the Two and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, or
at any time since, other than His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and those
who shall or may claim by, from or under His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, or any of them, by virtue of this or the said former Act, and other
than such person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, their Heirs,
Executors, Successors and Assigns, whose right is particularly mentioned to be
barred and excluded, shall be, and is hereby preserved unto them, their Heirs,
Executors, Successors and Assigns respectively, as fully and amply, as if a
particular saving of Rights had been annexed to and repeated in every such
clause, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas in and by the said former Act, the fractions of od pounds,
shillings and pence were to be struck off and deducted out of all sums of
money, Debentures, Certificates or Decrees for Arrears, Adventures, Public
Debts, Reprizes, or other allowed Interests, which according to the said Act
were to be ascertained, stated or settled, and the fractions of od acres, roods
and pearches were also to be deducted out of the respective proportions of
lands which should be granted or settled in satisfaction of any of the
aforesaid interests, so as such deductions did not exceed the hundredth part of
the money or lands out of which such Deductions were to be made, which
Deductions were appointed to be satisfied as entirely as might be, in such
convenient proportions and places as the Chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland for the time being should appoint, and reserved to be disposed to such
uses as His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors should appoint, His Majesty is
graciously pleased that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no fractions of od pounds, shillings or pence, or of od acres,
roods or pearches, or any satisfaction for the same, be at any time hereafter
made or given unto His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or unto any other
person or persons claiming the benefit thereof by virtue of any Patent, Grant,
or other Assignment from His Majesty, but that the same be for ever released
and discharged, and that all and every the clauses in the said former Act
touching and concerning the giving or reserving such fractions, and the
satisfaction thereof unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, shall be and
are hereby repealed and made void, to all intents and purposes, as if the same
had never been had nor made, Any thing in this or the said former Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas the survey and admeasurement of certain lands in Ireland, was
heretofore undertaken and finished by Sir William Petty Knight, upon an
agreement made with the Soldiers to have for his pains one penny for every
acre so surveyed and admeasured as aforesaid, whereof part has been already
paid, and some does still remain in arrear, to the end therefore that
satisfaction be made to Sir William Petty for what remains unpaid by the
Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns, and for His better encouragement to finish
the several Mapps and Descriptions of this Kingdom, Be it further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland for the time being, with any six or more of His Majesty's
Privy Council, shall have power to examine how much of the said penny the acre
has been already paid, and for what lands, and how much thereof remains behind
and unpaid, and to give Order or Orders, Warrant or Warrants, for the levying
and receiving one penny per acre out of all the lands in the admeasurement
whereof he was employed, that have been or shall be appointed to be set out for
satisfaction of arrears, out of which such acrige was agreed or ought in
justice to be paid, and has not been already paid, and to give such further
encouragement to the said Sir William, for the finishing of the said Mapps, as
they shall think fit, And that it shall and may be lawful to and for Sir
William Petty, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from time to time as
often as any such Order or warrant shall be made to enter into all and every
the lands in such Order or warrant mentioned, and to levy the respective sums
therein appointed to be paid, not exceeding one penny the acre, by distress,
and sale of such distress as shall there be found belonging to the occupiers of
the said lands, returning the overplus, and whatsoever the Tenants or occupiers
of the lands shall pay, or shall otherwise be levied upon them as aforesaid,
not exceeding one penny the acre, shall and may be deducted out of the rents by
them respectively payable, and for so much they and every of them shall be, and
are hereby discharged against their several and respective Landlords,

And because the Settlement now intended, and endeavored to be perfected,
would be very much obstructed if the Heirs or Assigns of Wentworth late Earl
of Kildare, should hold and enjoy the full benefit of a certain clause in the
said former Act contained, whereby the Preemption of all forfeited estates and
interests held of or from Wentworth Earl of Kildare, or George Earl of Kildare,
or either of them, and of all other lands lying intermixed with the said Earl of
Kildares estate, is given to the said Wentworth late Earl of Kildare, his Heirs
and Assigns, and further the arrears due to George Earl of Kildare for service
before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, were appointed
to be satisfied in the County of Kildare, and else where lying most convenient
to the said Earl of Kildares estate, as the said Wentworth late Earl of
Kildare, should make choice of, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That so much of the said clause as concerns the preemption of
forfeited estates and interests held of and intermixed with the Earl of Kildares
grant as aforesaid, or appoints the satisfaction of personal arrears for
service to be within the County of Kildare, or elsewhere at election as
aforesaid, shall be and is hereby repealed, which arrears of the said George
Earl of Kildare, now belonging to Sir James Shaen, Knight and Baronet,
Administrator of the said George Earl of Kildare, are to be satisfied as in and
by another clause herein after following and providing for the satisfaction of
the interests of the said Sir James Shaen, is declared, and that in lieu and
satisfaction of those privileges and advantages in and by the said clause given
or intended to be given, the Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall
forthwith set out or cause to be set out unto John now Earl of Kildare and his
Heirs, so much undisposed forfeited lands as shall be of the clear yearly value
of five hundred pounds per annum over and above all charges and reprizes, and
therein shall take care that the same may be set out as near unto the said
Earls estate, and as contiguous to the Lordship of Kilka in the County of
Kildare, as the same can conveniently be done, and after such allotment and
setting forth, the same shall be granted by Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of Ireland, unto John Earl of Kildare and the Heirs Males of his body, And
for want of such issue to remain and be to Robert Fitz Gerald Esquire uncle of the
said John Earl of Kildare and the Heirs Males of his body, and for default of
such issue, to the right Heirs of Wentworth late Earl of Kildare for ever
subject nevertheless to the payment, reimbursement and discharge in the first
place of all such sum and sums of Money with interest for the same, as upon
any contract or bargain heretofore made by the said Wentworth late Earl of
Kildare, touching the benefit of the said former provisoe or touching the
benefit of any part thereof, have been paid unto the said late Earl or shall be
paid hereafter to such Contractors, during the minority of the the said John
Earl of Kildare, and liable also to such other charges and payments as shall be
necessarily made and disbursed in and for the settling and securing the
premises, And that the Letters Patents so as aforesaid to be granted shall be
of like force and effect, as any other Letters Patents herein before appointed
to be granted, are or ought to be.

Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That out of the
estates of John Fitz Gerald, John Magill and Ieoffrey Faning, before by this
Act vested in His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, It shall and may be
lawful for the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governors of Ireland, to restore
unto and settle upon them and their Heirs respectively, such part or parts of
the said respective estates, as they shall think fit.

Provided also and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Sir
John Stephens Knight, Governor of His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, shall and
may have, hold and enjoy to him, his Executors and Assigns, all and every the
lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the County of Cork, which at any time
were reputed to belong to Sir Brice Coghran, by color of any grant or gift of
the late Usurped powers, and which are or have been possessed by the said Sir
John Stephens, by virtue of Letters Patents under the Great Seal or otherwise
for and during such time and term of years, and under such rents only as in
the said Letters Patents are expressed, and no other, so as he the said Sir
John Stephens, do place or cause to be placed upon so much of the premises as
shall be found to be within the securities set apart for satisfaction of the
Commissioned Officers who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six
hundred forty nine, so much of the stated arrears due to such Officers which
are satisfiable, and for which no satisfaction has yet been given as the value
of the premises may amount unto, any thing in this or the said former Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular
the Moneys which by virtue of this or the said former Act shall or may grow
due unto His Majesty for or in respect of the measne profits of those lands
which have been set out and received in satisfaction of any arrears, for
service done in England, commonly called English arrears, or for or in respect
of the measne profits of those lands which have been set out to any person or
persons in satisfaction of any Adventures upon the Ordinances, commonly called
the doubling Ordinances, or for or in respect of any other measne profits which
by this Act are made due and payable unto His Majesty, as being received out
of lands set out in satisfaction of interests not satisfiable by this or the
said former Act, and also all and every the sums of Money now due unto His
Majesty, which any person or persons transplanted into Connaght, and since
restored, or hereafter to be restored to his former estate, did or might have
received upon the sale of the lands in Connaght, to which he or they were
transplanted, shall be paid unto the Receivers herein after constituted and
appointed, who shall account for and pay the same over unto Arthur Earl of
Anglesey Vice-treasurer of Ireland, or to the Vice-treasurer of Ireland, for
the time being, And that the said Arthur Earl of Anglesey, or the
Vice-treasurer of Ireland, for the time being, shall thereout issue and pay
these several sums following: That is to say, To Morough Earl of Inchequin,
the full sum of Eight thousand pounds sterling, as a mark of His Majesty's
favorable and gracious consideration of the losses and sufferings of the said
Earl; To John Lord Berkeley the sum of four thousand pounds; To Charles Lord
Vice-count Fitz Harding Treasurer of His Majesty's Household the sum of two
thousand pounds; To Henry Coventrey Esquire Groom of His Majesty's Bedehamber the
sum of two thousand pounds; To Colonel William Leg the like sum of two
thousand pounds, in full satisfaction of all the right and interest which they
the said Henry Coventrey or William Leg, can or may have of, in or to any
fractions of od aeres, pounds, shillings or pence in or by the said former Act
reserved to His Majesty, and by this present Act released and discharged as
aforesaid; To Colonel Edward Villiers, the sum of One thousand pounds; To
Elizabeth Terrill Wife of Sir Tymothy Terrill, the sum of three thousand
pounds; To Colonel Marmaduke Darcy, the sum of three thousand pounds; To Sir
Connel Farrell, the sum of two thousand pounds; To Colonel Daniell Treswell,
Captain of His Majesty's Guard of Battle Axes, the sum of One thousand pounds;
Sir William Armorer, the sum of five hundred pounds; Nicholas Bailey Esquire the
sum of two thousand pounds; Thomas Lynch, the sum of One thousand pounds: And
if any more moneys shall arise out of the premises than will be sufficient to
discharge the respective sums herein before mentioned, the same shall remain
in His Majesty's Exchequer at Dublin, to be further applied and disposed as His
Majesty being informed thereof shall direct and appoint.

And whereas the Towns and lands of Shamaclone, Garons-Brury, Garrane,
Lishanacone, Ballifoukin, Ballimoran, Balliwillin in the Barony of Conello and
County of Limerick, and also fifteen hundred acres in Garundenny in the Barony
of Slewmargye in the Queens County, were allotted to Charles Lloyd Esquire now Sir
Charles Lloyd Baronet, as an Adventurer for lands in Ireland, the rents, issues
and profits of which lands have notwithstanding by Samuel Avery and other
Adventurers been wrongfully received, or in the hands of the Tenants of the
said lands detained, Be it therefore Enacted, and it is Enacted by this present
Parliament, That the said Sir Charles Lloyd, shall have, receive and recover
all and singular the rents, issues and profits of the said lands, remaining in
the hands of the respective Tenants thereof, or in the hands of their Executors
or Administrators, which have grown due since the lands were allotted as
aforesaid, any thing in this present Act, or any other Act of Parliament
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And it is here by further Enacted and ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith restore Sir
Richard Bellings Knight, unto the present and actual possession of all and
singular the Manors, Castles, Lordships, Lands, Tenements, Reversions,
Remainders and all other Hereditaments, interests, conditions, powers of
Redemption, right and title whatsoever in the said Kingdom of Ireland, which
Sir Henry Bellings Knight, Grandfather to the said Sir Richard Bellings, and
Richard Bellings Father of the said Sir Richard Bellings, or either of them, or
any other person or persons in trust for them, or either of them, or to their
or either of their use or uses, had, held or enjoyed, or of right ought to have
held or enjoyed on the two and twentieth day of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, and that from and after such Restitution as aforesaid, the
same shall be granted by Letters Patents, and settled upon and confirmed unto
the said Sir Richard Bellings, the Grandsonn, and his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, This present or any other Act, Ordinances, Order, Vtlary, Attainder,
Record, or any other matter, cause or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That John Lord
Kingston, shall hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever, all and every the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the said former Act, ratified and
confirmed unto him, and all other the benefits and advantages of the said Act
(the Lands Decreed away by the Commissioners, and the full benefit of
reprizals, and the Lands herein granted or confirmed unto Charles Lord
Vice-count Fitz Harding, formerly granted to Charles late Lord Vice-count Fitz
Harding Earl of Falmouth, only excepted) as fully and amply, and with the like
Confirmations, Privileges, Immunities and exemptions as any adventurer or
Soldier by this or the said former Act, may or ought to hold and enjoy any of
the Lands whereof they or any of them respectively were possessed the Seventh
day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, and as if the several clauses
and provisoes in the said former Act on that behalf had been in this Act
particularly recited and Enacted, and shall also have, hold and enjoy to him
and his Heirs for ever, all and every the Towns, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments given granted and confirmed, or mentioned to be given, granted
and confirmed unto him in and by His Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the five and twentieth day of
January, in the sixteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, And that the said
Letters Patents, and all clauses and things therein contained, shall be and are
hereby ratified and confirmed and shall be taken most beneficially to and on
the behalf of him the said Lord Kingston, his Heirs and Assigns according to
the tenor and purport thereof to all intents and purposes, and as if the same
Letters Patents and every clause therein had been in this Act fully and at
large recited, and particularly Enacted; but in case the Lands in the said
Letters Patents mentioned which shall be possessed and enjoyed by the said Lord
Kingston, and not recovered or granted away from him by this or the said former
Act, shall exceed the present clear yearly rent of Seven hundred pounds, and
two full third parts of all the Lands recovered against him the said Lord
Kingston, by any Decrees herein confirmed, then such overplus shall be
reconveyed to such as the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall
appoint: And be it also Enacted in case the said Lands shall not be sufficient,
That then the Commissioners, or such person or persons as are or shall be
appointed for Execution of this Act, do and shall forthwith cause to be set
out, and delivered unto him the said Lord Kingston, his Heirs and Assigns, so
much more other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the Counties of Cork,
Limerick, and Tipperary, which by virtue of this Act shall or may be Retrenched
from any Adventurers, Soldiers, their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or of
other forfeited lands within the said Counties, or within the Counties of
Dublin, and Kildare, or some of them, as together with the lands in the said
Letters Patents granted, or mentioned to be granted to him as aforesaid, and as
shall be possessed and enjoyed by him, and not recovered or granted away from
him by this or the said former Act, are of the said present clear yearly rent
of Seven hundred pounds, and as over and above the said yearly rent, are equal
in value, worth and purchase unto two full third parts of all the lands
recovered against him by virtue of any Decrees herein confirmed, or that have
been delivered up, or parted with to William Lord Vice-count Dungan, and others
in observance of His Majesty's Letters, To the end that like effectual Letters
Patents may thereof also be granted unto the said John Lord Kingston and his
Heirs, as are herein before appointed to be granted to other Adventurers and
Soldiers of their respective allotments, any matter or thing whatsoever in
this or the said former Act, or any other Act contained or otherwise to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding, Saving unto Charles Lord Vice-count Fitz
Harding and his Heirs such right and title in and to any of the premises as he
or they can or may claim by virtue of any Letters Patents thereof granted unto
Charles late Lord Vice-count Fitz Harding, after Earl of Falmouth, by His
Majesty, any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
Sir John Percivall Baronet, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
and may hold, possess and enjoy the Town and Lands of Kinsaley, in the County
of Dublin, for the term of sixty one years from the first day of May, One
thousand six hundred sixty and three, according to the tenor and full effect of
an Indenture of Lease under the Great Seal of Ireland, to him thereof made, and
under the rents, covenants and conditions thereby reserved, expressed and
limited, any thing in the last precedent clause or in this present or any other
Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also that nothing in this Act or the Letters Patents granted to the
said Lord Kingston, shall enable him the said Lord Kingston, his Heirs or
Assigns to hold or enjoy any manors, lands or Tenements lying or being within
the Securities set apart for satisfaction of the Commissioned Officers who
served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, unless he
the said Lord Kingston, his Heirs or Assigns shall cause so many Debentures
for arrears due to the said Commissioned Officers as are satisfiable by the
rules of this Act, and have not been satisfied in part to be placed thereupon
as after the rate of eight years purchase, may be sufficient to purchase the
premises, any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular
the messuages, Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements and other the Hereditaments
whereof Sir Daniel O Bryen, now Daniel Lord Vice-count O Bryen, of Clare, or
his Brother Tige O Bryan, Esquire, or Connor O Bryan, Esquire Son and Heir apparent to
the said Lord Vice-count, or Morough O Bryan, one other of the Sonns of the
said Vice-count O Bryan, or any other person or persons whatsoever to their or
any of their use, or in trust for them, or any of them, were upon the two and
twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, lawfully seized
of any estate of freehold or inheritance, or possessed for any term of years yet
in being, as also one stone-house in the City of Limerick (impropriations and
appropriated tithes excepted) shall be by the Commissioners for Execution of
this Act set out and allotted unto and placed in the present and actual
possession of Daniel O Bryan, Esquire Son and Heir apparent of the said Connor O
Bryen, and the Heirs and Executors of the said Daniel O Bryen respectively,
without and before any previous reprizal, any clause, matter or thing in the
said former Act, or in this present Act, herein before or after contained to
the contrary notwithstanding: And that the Commissioners for Execution of this
Act, shall grant unto the said Daniel O Bryen, such certificates as may be
necessary in Order to the passing of Letters Patents of the premises, and
further that until such final Settlement and allotment as aforesaid, it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Daniel O Bryen to enter upon and retain
and keep possession of the premises, and all and every the Adventurers and
Soldiers, Protestant purchasors of Lands in Conaght or Clare, and Commissioned
Officers who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty
nine, their heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns who shall be removed
to make way for such restitution or be prejudiced thereby, shall after such
restitution made be satisfied by the allotment of some other forfeited and
undisposed lands as may be equal to their several and respective two full third
parts of what they depart from or may be prejudiced in according to the rules
of this Act, and all and every the persons transplanted into and upon any part
of the premises, their Heirs and Assigns shall have full satisfaction out of
the forfeited lands undisposed of to the English Protestants, as the Lord
Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, shall think fit, after the several interests
of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects in Ireland, have been fully settled and
satisfied according to this Act.

Provided always and it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall restore James Fleming of
Staholmock Esquire unto all the Lordships, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements, Rents
Reversions, Remainders, Hereditaments, Right, Title, interest and estate
whatsoever, whereof the said James Fleming, or any or others in trust for him,
or to his use, were seized or possessed the three and twentieh of October, One
thousand six hundred forty one, And that after such Restitution, the said James
Fleming shall hold and enjoy the same to him and his Heirs, this Act or any
other Act, Record, Outlary, Attainder, or any other matter or thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall restore unto Captain Charles Farrell, all and
singular the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the County of Longford,
whereof he the said Charles Farrell, or his Father, or any other in trust for
them, or either of them, were seized upon the two and twentieth day of October,
One thousand six hundred forty one, or at any time since, and that after such
Restitution made, the said Charles Farrell shall hold and enjoy the same to him
and his Heirs, Subject nevertheless to the quit-rents by this or the former Act
imposed, and liable to all and singular the statutes, Mortgages, Debts,
Charges, and all other the Acts and Encumbrances whatsoever of him the said
Charles Farrell, or his Father, any thing in this or the said former Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall out of such forfeited lands, as shall remain
undisposed after all the English interests herein provided for shall be
satisfied, set out, and allot unto Frances Darcy widow, so much land as shall
be of like yearly value, as the lands which she the said Frances Darcy formerly
held, or ought to have held for her joincture, to be held and enjoyed by the
said Frances Darcy during her life, any thing herein before contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the sum of Four
thousand five hundred pounds due for service done in Ireland, before the fifth
of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, unto Arthur Lord Vice-count
Ranelaugh, by Debentures already stated and allowed by the Commissioners for
Execution of the said former Act, shall be paid and satisfied out of the
securities thereunto liable by this present Act, unto Richard Earl of
Burlington and Cork, Lord High Treasurer of Ireland, Arthur Earl of Anglesey,
Roger Earl of Orrery, and Sir John Skeffington Baronet, and the Survivors and
Survivor of them, and that they and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the
Heirs of the Survivor, shall have, hold, receive and enjoy to his and their
Heirs, all and singular the Manors, lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and
all other the satisfaction whatsoever, or of what nature or kind soever which
shall or may be hereafter appointed, allotted or otherwise set out and
Assigned for the satisfaction of the said Four thousand five hundred pounds;
Nevertheless in trust to and for the only use, benefit and advantage of
Frances Jones and Elizabeth Jones Daughters of the said Arthur Lord Vice-count
Ranelaugh, their Executors and Assigns, and to and for no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever, any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it further Enacted, that all Leases, terms and estates
which upon the three and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty
one, did not exceed three lives, or one and thirty years, and are forfeited to
or vested in His Majesty, whereof or whereupon the next and immediate
Reversion or Remainder, does or shall appertain to any innocent Protestant, be
and are hereby declared to be ceased, determined, null and void, any thing in
this or the said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it Enacted, That nothing in this present Act, nor in
the former Act, shall be taken or any ways construed to weaken or make void
all or any of the right, title and claim which Lawrence Hide, of
Henton-Dawbney, in the County of Southampton Esquire has by virtue of any Statute
Staple, Mortgage or otherwise unto the Towns and Town Lands of Ballihenukin,
Knockanammy, and part of Chancellors-town in the Barony of Iffa, and Offa, and
the lands of Quarter-cross, parcel of the town and Lands of Clare, nor unto two
acres great Country measure in Burdens-Grange in the Barony of Middle-third,
in all containing about eight hundred acres, lying and being in the County of
Tipperary, but that it shall and may be lawful to and for the Commissioners for
Execution of this Act, to examine the right and title of him the said Lawrence
Hide, of, in and to the said lands and Tenements, or to any sum of money which
can or may be levied thereupon, and to make such Order and Decree for the said
Lawrence Hide or his Assigns, to hold and enjoy all and singular the
premises, until he or they shall be fully satisfied and paid the moneys to him
due as aforesaid, together with what interest shall be due for the same as they
shall think fit, any thing in this Act, or in any former Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas Colonel Christopher O Bryen was appointed by His Majesty in his
late gracious Declaration, to be restored unto his estate, as one who in an
especial manner had merited his Majesty's Grace and favor, and was afterward
in pursuance of His Majesty's Orders, put into possession thereof, by the
Sheriff of the County of Clare, in which County the said estate does lie,
notwithstanding which if the same should be strictly examined according to the
Rules of the said former Act, It may be doubted whether such delivery of
possession were legal, and whether the lands so delivered do not still remain
Subject to the uses of the said former Act and this present Act, And whereas
the said Christopher O Bryen is lately Dead without issue, and all his estate,
right, title and interest descended unto and upon Morogh Earl of Inchequin his
next and immediate Brother and Heir, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith
restore unto the said Morogh Earl of Inchequin and his Heirs the present and
actual possession of all and singular the Castles, Houses, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments which the said Colonel Christopher O Bryen, or any
other in trust for him or to his use, had, held or enjoyed upon the two and
twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, or at any time
since, the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments formerly belonging to the said
Christopher O Bryen, and now in the possession of Pierce Creagh, excepted,
which are hereby granted and confirmed unto the said Pierce Creagh and his
Heirs, and shall likewise set out and allot unto the said Earl of Inchequin and
his Heirs so many acres more of undisposed and forfeited lands, as may be equal
in quantity of acres to the said lands held by the said Pierce Creagh, and from
and after such restitution and allotment so made as aforesaid, the said Morogh
Earl of Inchequin shall hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs all and singular
the messuages, lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, so as aforesaid restored and
allotted, and all and every the persons transplanted into and upon any part of
the premises, their Heirs and Assigns, shall have such satisfaction out of
the forfeited lands undisposed of to English Protestants, as the Lord
Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, shall think fit, after the several interests
of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects in Ireland, have been fully satisfied and
settled according to this Act, any thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas Sir Thomas Sherlock Knight Deceased, was in his life time a very
dutiful and Loyal Subject, and from the time of the first breaking out of the
said Rebellion and War unto the last end thereof, behaved himself with great
courage and diligence in His Majesty's service, and suffered great hardships
and extremities from the said Irish Rebels, by reason of such his fidelity and
Obedience to the Crown of England, until at last being taken prisoner by them,
he was forced for fear of his life, to subscribe their Oath of association, and
having so gained his Liberty did immediately fly unto Dublin, and there
submitted himself to the now Lord Duke, then Lord Marquess of Ormond, His
Majesty's Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and continued there ever after serving
His Majesty, and his Authority to the uttermost of his power, The
consideration whereof inclined His Majesty to mention the said Sir Thomas
Sherlock, in his late gracious Declaration amongst the names of those few
persons, whom His Majesty was pleased to appoint to be restored to their
former estate without any further Proof of their innocence, which said Sir
Thomas Sherlock was afterward by the Commissioners for Execution of the said
former Act adjudged a nocent person, upon no other grounds or evidence than the
enforced subscription of the Oath of association as aforesaid, His Majesty
therefore being very unwilling to proceed with such rigor and strictness
toward any of his good Subjects, or to suffer a Decree so severe to continue
any longer in force, to the ruin of the said Sir Thomas Sherlock and his
Family, is graciously pleased, That it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall
forthwith and without any previous reprizall restore unto Paul Sherlock Esquire
son and Heir of the said Sir Thomas Sherlock, and his Heirs the possession of
the principal and capital Message or seat, and also one third part of all and
singular the Messuages, Manors, lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof
the said Sir Thomas Sherlock, or any other person or persons in trust for him
or to his use, were seized or possessed upon the two and twentieth of October,
One thousand six hundred forty one, (Impropriations, and appropriat, tithes
excepted) and shall also with all convenient speed restore the whose residue of
the said lands and Tenements (Impropriations and appropriate tithes excepted)
the respective Adventurers or Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns now in
possession thereof, or claiming the same, being first satisfied their
respective two third parts, and for their several and respective improvements
which will be due to them by the rules of this Act, and from and after such
restitution so made as aforesaid, the said Paul Sherlock shall hold and enjoy
to him, his Heirs and Assigns all and singular the lands and Tenements so
restored in as full and ample manner as he or they might have done, if no such
Decree had ever been had or made, any thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act shall restore unto Nicholas Bourke of Limerick, Son
and Heir of James Bourke, his Heirs and Assigns the principal and capital
Message, whereof he the said Nicholas, or his Father, or any other in trust
for them or either of them or to their use, were seized or possessed the two and
twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and also two thousand
acres thereunto adjoining, or so much thereof as they or either of them, or any
other to their use, were seized or possessed of, on the said two and twentieth of
October, and that so much other forfeited and undisposed land be likewise set
out and allotted unto the said Nicholas Bourke and his Heirs, and within such
County and Barony, as the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor and
Governors of Ireland and Council there shall direct and appoint.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith restore unto the Lord Vice-count
Gormanston and his Heirs, all and singular the Messuages, Manors, lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders and Hereditaments, to which he is not
already restored by some Decree of the Commissioners for Execution of the said
former Act herein confirmed, and all other the estate, Right, Title and
interest whatsoever, whereof the said Lord Vice-count Gormanston, or Nicholas
late Lord Vice-count Gormanston his Father, or any other person or persons to
their use or in trust for them, or either of them, were seized or possessed the
two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one,
(Impropriations and appropriate tithes excepted) the Heirs or Assigns of
Charles late Earl of Mountrath, now having or claiming the same being first
satisfied by an allotment to them and their Heirs of so much forfeited lands,
as may be equal in quantity and number of profitable acres to the lands so as
aforesaid to be restored, and being also first satisfied and paid or otherwise
secured for the Rents, issues and measne profits received and detained by the
said Lord Vice-count Gormanston and his Agents, since his entry on the
premises, or to be received and detained until such allotment shall be made as
aforesaid, according as the same shall be ascertained by the Commissioners for
Execution of this Act, and at such times and in such manner as they shall
appoint, and from and after such Restitution made as aforesaid, the said Lord
Vice-count Gormanston shall hold and enjoy to him, his Heirs and Assigns all
and singular the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so restored, this Act or
any other Act, Record, Vtlary, or Attainder or any other matter or thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith restore unto John Grace of
Court-stown Esquire and Colonel Richard Grace and their respective Heirs, all and
singular the Messuages, lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, except
Impropriations and appropriate tithes, and except the houses in Kilkenny, which
they or either of them respectively, or any other person or persons in trust
for them, or either of them respectively had, held or enjoyed upon the Two and
twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and which are not
already restored to the said Richard Grace by some decree of the Commissioners
for execution of the said former Act herein confirmed, the respective
Adventurers or Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns now in possession thereof, or
claiming the same, being first satisfied their respective charges and
proportions, and for their several and respective improvements, which will be
due to them by the rules of this Act, and from and after such restitution so
made as aforesaid, the said John Grace shall hold and enjoy to him and his
heirs, all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so to be
restored, and the said Richard Grace shall hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs
the lands so to be restored, Any thing in this or the said former Act contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for execution of this Act, shall forthwith restore unto Patrick Archer
Merchant, all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which he, or
any other person or persons in trust for him, had, held or enjoyed upon the Two
and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, the respective
Adventurers or Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns now in possession thereof, or
claiming the same, being first satisfied their respective shares and
proportions, and for their several and respective improvements, which will be
due to them by the rules of this Act; And from and after such restitution so
made as aforesaid, the said Patrick Archer shall hold and enjoy to him and his
Heirs, all and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so to be
restored, Any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas upon the passing of certain Letters Patents under His Majesty's
Great Seal of England, bearing date the eight day of April, in the Fourteenth
year of His Majesty's Reign, unto Richard Earl of Clanrickard and his Heirs an
use was therein limited, or some other provision thereby made for the better
securing unto Charles late Lord Vice-count Muskry, the sum of Ten thousand
pounds, by the yearly payment of Two thousand pounds sterling per annum, for
and during the term of five years next ensuing the date of the said Patent; And
forasmuch as it may so fall out by reason of sundry emergent occasions, that
the payments thereby secured may not be fully completed within the said term
of five years, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Letters
Patents: Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the term of
five years in the said Letters Patents mentioned shall be and is hereby
enlarged unto the term of three years more next after the said five years ended
and determined, and that if the several payments in and by the said Letters
Patents intended to be secured, shall be made and determined within the time
hereby enlarged, the same shall be as good and effectual in Law, as if they had
been made within the said five years, and that in all other uses, limitations,
matters and things, the said Letters Patents, and every Clause and Article
therein, shall be as good and effectual in Law, and of like force and effect,
as the same were before the making of this Act, Any thing in this or the said
former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the end that no person or persons, who is or shall be restored, or
entitled unto, or confirmed in any Messuages, Manors, Lands, Tenements or
other Hereditaments by virtue of any Clause in this Act contained, or by virtue
of any Letters Patents, Grant, Restitution or other Disposition or Allotment
herein made, or hereafter to be made in pursuance of this Act, may by pretense
of such new title avoid the payment of any just debts to which they or their
respective Testators or Ancestors were or ought to have been liable, Be it
therefore Explained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person and persons, their Heirs and Assigns having and holding or claiming to
have and to hold any messuages, Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments as
aforesaid, shall be and are hereby made Subject unto, and charged with all and
singular the Debts and sums of money now due and owing by them or any other
person or persons whose Heirs, Executors or Administrators they are, and under
whom they claim their several and respective allotments, as Heir, Executor or
Administrator, whether the same Debts be due and owing by virtue of any
specialty or matter of Record, and that all and every the messuages, lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments so held and claimed as aforesaid, shall be held and
accounted as Assets in Law, and are hereby declared to be Assets for and
toward the satisfaction and payment of all such Debts to which the first
takers thereof are in their own right, or as Heirs, Executors or Administrators
of any other person or persons made liable by this Act, any thing in this or
the said former Act, or any other Law, matter or thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it further Enacted, That the Heirs or Assigns of
Charles late Earl of Mountrath, shall have, hold and enjoy all such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, which were settled upon or granted unto the said
late Earl, by any Letters Patents of the late Usurped Powers, whereof he was in
possession the seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, except
such as have been decreed or shall be by this Act, or restored unto the Irish
Proprietor, for which he or they shall forthwith have the like quantity of
profitable Acres set out unto him or them respectively, and that all the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments and other the advantages by this or the said former
Act, intended to be given, granted or confirmed unto the said late Earl of
Mountrath, his Heirs or Assigns, shall stand and remain disposed and divided
among and between the now Earl of Mountrath the relict and younger Children of
the said late Earl, subject and liable unto such limitations, uses, debts,
portions and legacies, as are expressed and contained in a decree made by the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, bearing date the (...) day of October, One
thousand six hundred sixty and three, any thing in this or the said former Act
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas Sir Audley Mervin Knight, Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir
George Lane Knight. Clerk of the house of Lords, Philip Ferneley Esquire Clerk of the
House of Commons, and other the attendants on either of the said Houses, do
claim certain Fees, to be due and payable to them for every Bill containing
any grant or restitution of any forfeited Lands to any person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, their heirs or successors, touching the
ascertaining whereof, and giving due remedy for the recovering of the same,
some provision was made in and by a clause in the said former Act, in which
clause the Speaker of the House of Lords and the Clerk of the Council of
Ireland are not mentioned; Be it therefore explained and Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Speaker of the house of Lords and Clerk of the
Council of Ireland shall be deemed and adjudged to be comprehended in the said
clause, and that the said Speaker and Clerk of the Council, and Sir Audley
Mervin, Sir George Lane, Philip Ferneley, and others mentioned in the said
clause, contained in the said former Act, be paid by such person and persons,
Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs and successors, who receive any
grant of or Settlement in any forfeited Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments by
virtue of or in pursuance of this Act, or of the said former Act, not set out
to them in satisfaction of Adventures or Arrears, or of purchases made in
Connaght, or any restitution to any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, the
Incumbents of the several Parochial Churches excepted, such Fees and no other
as the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor and Governors of Ireland and
Council there shall think fit and appoint, and that after the same Fees so as
aforesaid ascertained, like remedy shall be given for the recovery thereof, as
in and by the said former Act is provided, any thing in this or the said former
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it Enacted, That no Lease or Custodiam made or granted
by the Kings Majesty unto Edward late Lord Bishop of Limerick, now Lord Bishop
of Cork, Cloyne and Rosse, or unto any other person or persons, of any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments in the Baronie or Baronies of Conello, and
Pople-Bryan in the County of Limerick, or either of them, whereof William
Barker Esquire by himself, his Agents or undertenants was in possession the seventh
of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, shall any way prejudice the right,
Title, Interest or Possession of the said William Barker of, in or to the same,
but that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said William Barker his
Heirs or Assigns, to enter into and take possession of all and singular the
said lands and Tenements in the said Baronies, or either of them whereof he was
so in possession, not Decreed away by the Commissioners for Execution of the
said former Act, and the same to have, hold and enjoy to him the said William
Barker, his Heirs and Assigns, and that the said William Barker and his heirs
shall have like privilege and advantage in retaining the possession of the
Premises, and in retrenching the third part thereof, or placing such
deficiencies thereupon as are satisfiable by the Rules of this Act, as any
Adventurer or Soldier ought to have, and that the Commissioners for Execution
of this Act, shall proceed to give such certificates thereof in order to the
passing of Letters Patents, as may be necessary for the final Settlement of
him the said William Barker, his Heirs and Assigns, in lieu and satisfaction
of his purchase of Gilbert Marshall, in as full and ample manner as he the said
William Barker, his Heirs or Assigns might have held and enjoyed the same, if
he the said William Barker had still continued in possession, and as if no such
Lease or Custodiam had ever been made or granted, subject nevertheless to such
Quitrents, Services and Payments as other Adventurers in the said County of
Limerick, ought to pay, and with like benefits and advantages as other
adventurers ought to have by this Act; any thing in the said Custodiam or in a
certain clause for confirmation of the Patent granted to John Lord Kingston,
herein mentioned, or any other matter or thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas it was provided by the said former Act that every of the
Adventurers whose estates were to be confirmed, should pay such sum or sums
of money as the Committee of Adventurers sitting at Grocers-Hall London, or any
five or more of them should appoint, not exceeding two pence for every twenty
shillings adventured, toward defraying of such public charges as would
conduce to the Settlement of that interest, And whereas the same is to be
levied upon such persons as shall make default, by distress and sale of their
Goods, The generality of such persons making default, not liveing in this
Kingdom, the said provision has been hitherto rendered very much fruitless, Be
it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for better answering of
those ends, and raising the said sums, the several persons hereafter named,
viz. Sir Charles Lloyd Baronet, Sir Stephen White, William Barker Esquire (...)
Gower Esquire (...) Ridge Esquire (...) Lenthall Esquire (...) Radcliffe, Edward Smith Esquire
or the Major part of them, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, be and are
hereby Authorized to be Treasurers of the said moneys, and shall and may by
Order under their hands and Seals, levy or cause to be levied any sum or sums
of Money, that the said Committee of Adventurers, or any seven or more of them
shall think fit and appoint, upon all and every the Adventurers for lands in
Ireland, their lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Lessees, Tenants or
Assigns, by distress and Sale of their Goods, rendering the overplus to the
owners, which said Lessees, Tenants or Assigns shall be discharged of, and may
retain so much of their Rents in their hands, as the said sum to be levied
shall amount unto, such sum or sums of money so to be levied, not exceeding two
pence for every twenty shillings originally paid and adventured and that shall
be satisfied in lands in this Kingdom: Provided always that neither this nor
any thing herein contained, shall extend to charge any person or persons, with
any sum or sums of Money that has been paid to any person or persons upon
the account of the two pence in the pound in the said former Act granted, but
that such person or persons who received the same, are to stand and be
chargeable with, and accountable unto the said Treasurers for all the Money by
him or them received, and the said Treasurers are to take care to employ
persons of integrity and trust, for levying and collecting the said sums under
very good security for whom they will answer, and not to dispose of any sum or
sums without order from the said Committee, or any seven or more of them, to
whom alone they are hereby made accountable.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners for
Execution of this Act shall forthwith and without staying for any previous
reprizal, restore unto Sir Henry O Neil, his Heirs and Assigns, all and
singular the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the County of Antrim,
whereof the said Henry O Neil or any other person in trust for him, or to his
use, were or ought to have been seized or possessed upon the two and twentieth
day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and that after such
restitution, in lieu and satisfaction thereof, the said Commissioners do
likewise with all convenient speed set out and allot or cause to be set out and
allotted unto John Lord Vice-count Massareen, his Heirs and Assigns, so much
other forfeited lands as may be of equal value, worth and purchase to the lands
so as aforesaid to be restored out of the lands in the County of Lowth, or if
there shall not be found sufficient in that County, then out of other lands to
be disposed of by this Act, and that such further satisfaction be given the
said Lord Massareen and his Heirs, as is appointed by the said former Act, and
will stand with the rules of this Act, so that the said lands may as near as
may be lie contiguous, And that like effectual Letters Patents be thereof
granted to the said John Lord Vice-count Massareen, his Heirs and Assigns as
any other Adventurer or Soldier by the rules of this Act ought to have, any
thing in this or the said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it further Enacted, That the town and lands of Artain
alias Tartain, with the appurtenances in the County of Dublin, containing by
estimation two hundred twenty five acres, be they more or less, be granted,
ratified and confirmed unto Sir Nicholas Armourer Knight, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, according to the tenor and effect of your
Majesty's Letters Patents under the Great Seal of Ireland, bearing date the
nineteenth day of November, in the fifteenth year of your Majesty's Reign, any
thing in this, the former or any other Act, matter or thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular
the Messuages, Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whereof Sir John
Fitz Gerald Knight, dyed seized, and whereof Sir Fitz Edmund Gerrarld Knight,
the Grandchild dyed seized or possessed in the year One thousand six hundred
and forty, and which were then belonging and of right appertaining to the
Bishop of of Cloyne and his successors, and were by the last Will and Testament
of the said Sir John Fitz Edmund Gerrald, and the Schedule and Codicil
thereunto annexed dated the first of September, One thousand six hundred and
forty, given and bequeathed, or mentioned to be given and bequeathed to His
late Majesty King Charles the first, shall be and are hereby vested and
settled in the now Bishop of Cloyne and His Successors for ever, The several
rectories and impropriate tithes therein and thereby bequeathed unto His said
late Majesty only excepted, which said rectories and impropriate tithes are
hereby declared to be vested and settled in and upon such of the present and
future incumbents and their successors who have or shall have actual cure of
Souls in those respective Parishes wherein such impropriations are, and such
impropriate tithes do arise and renew, and in default of an actual incumbent,
then in the respective persons now serving the cure and their successors, who
for that end shall be and are hereby made actual incumbents and capable to take
to them and their successors, and the presentation to the respective Churches,
so as aforesaid endowed, shall be for ever, and the patronage thereof in the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and that all other the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments so given and bequeathed as aforesaid, and not
formerly belonging or appertaining to the Bishopric or Sea of Cloyne, shall be
vested and settled in His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors: And whereas the
right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Cork, Cloyne and Rosse,
and Sir William Flower Knight, have been at great pains and charges in
discovering of his Majesty's title to the premises, as well precedent to the
forfeiture by the late Rebellion, as by reason and upon the account of the said
Rebellion, Be it therefore Enacted that the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland or other
Chief Governor there for the time being, do cause a Lease of so much as is
hereby settled in his Majesty, to be passed under his Majesty's Great Seal of
Ireland, unto the said Edward Bishop of Cork, Cloyne and Rosse, and Sir
William Flower, their Executors and Assigns for the term of one and thirty
years, rendering yearly unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors after the
rate of treble such Quitrent as the Adventures and the Soldiers do pay for the
like proportions within the said Province of Munster, any thing in this or the
said former Act contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding:
Saving and reserving nevertheless to Edmund Fitz Gerald of Ballymalowe and his
Heirs, all such right and title which he the said Edmund Fitz Gerald had unto
the premises or any part thereof, upon the two and twentieth of October, One
thousand six hundred forty one.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall set out and allot unto the Provost, Fellows
and Scholars of the College of the holy and undivided Trinity near Dublin, the
six hundred sixty six Acres two Roods and twenty six Poles English measure, in
the County of Tipperary, and Barony of Elioguarty, heretofore allotted to
William Sheeres for his Fathers Adventure of three hundred pounds, which in
pursuance of a Decree in the High-court of Chancery in England, were since
conveyed, or mentioned to be conveyed to the said Provost, Fellows and
Scholars of the College of the holy and undivided Trinity near Dublin, toward
the satisfaction of a charitable bequest devised to them, by Elias Traverse
Doctor of Divinity Deceased, And that like effectual Letters Patents shall be
thereof granted unto the said Provost, Fellows and Scholars, and their
Successors for ever, as any Adventurers or Soldiers by the rules of this Act
ought to have, to be held by them the said Provost, Fellows and Scholars, and
their Successors, without any defalcation or Deduction whatsoever, Subject
nevertheless to the Quit-rents by this Act imposed, any thing in this Act to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Whereas Richard Earl of Arran has purchased from Erasmus Smith Esquire his
interest which he had as an adventurer, in the Isles of Arran, commonly called
or known by the names of the Great Island, the small East Island, and the
Island of Inishmaine, Be it therefore Enacted, and provided by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Isles of Arran, commonly called by the several names
aforesaid, lying and being in the half Barony of Arran, in the County of
Gallway, together with all the Royalties, Mineralls, (Royal mines excepted)
Fishings, Profits and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging, or
therewith enjoyed by the former Proprietors thereof, before the two and
twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, be and are hereby
vested in, settled upon and confirmed unto the said Richard Earl of Arran, his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, any thing in this Act or in the said former Act to
the contrary notwithstanding, Subject nevertheless to such Quit-rent payable to
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as other the lands lying and being in
the province of Connaght allotted to Adventurers or Soldiers are liable to.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith and without any previous reprizal
restore unto Patrick Lord Baron of Dunsany and his Heirs, the possession of the
principal and capital message or seat, and also one third part of all and
singular the Castles, lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Rents, Reversions,
Remainders, Right, title, interest and estate whatsoever, which he the said
Patrick Lord Baron of Dunsany, or any other person to his use or in trust for
him, were seized or possessed of upon the two and twentieth of October, One
thousand six hundred forty one, except impropriations and appropriate tithes,
And shall also with all convenient Speed restore the whole residue of the said
lands and Tenements, impropriations and appropriate tithes excepted, unto the
said Lord Dunsany and his Heirs, the respective Adventurers or Soldiers, their
Heirs or Assigns now in possession thereof, or claiming, the same, being first
satisfied their respective shares and proportions, and for their several and
respective improvements, which will be due to them by the rules of this Act,
And from and after such restitution so made as aforesaid, the said Patrick Lord
Baron of Dunsany, shall hold and enjoy to him, his Heirs and Assigns all and
singular the lands and Tenements so restored, any thing in this or the former
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas one thousand Acres of forfeited lands in the Barony of Slane, were
heretofore set out in satisfaction of an Adventure of six hundred pounds
advanced by Sir William Massam Baronet Deceased, and as is alleged was
possessed accordingly until about Michaelmas in the year, One thousand six
hundred fifty eight, at which time the said Sir William Massam being Dead, and
the interest in the said Adventure being come unto Elizabeth Massam the widow
and relict of William Massam Esquire Son and Heir of the said Sir William, and
then Deceased also, Sir Robert Forth Knight, pretending some interest in the
said lands, got possession thereof by an execution or executions issued upon a
Judgment or Judgments in an action of Ejectment, being as is alleged
Surreptitiously obtained without any due notice or legal proceedings, the said
Elizabeth by reason thereof having no possession upon the Seventh of May, One
thousand six hundred fifty nine, could claim no benefit of confirmation by the
said sormer Act, and it is much to be doubted whether she could demand any
satisfaction as a deficient Adventurer, the Lot being once set out and enjoyed,
for remedy hereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith examine the truth of
the Allegations aforesaid, and if they shall find the possession of the
premises to have been wrongfully taken from the said Elizabeth Massam, they
shall cause the said Elizabeth Massam to be put into possession thereof, And
the said Elizabeth Massam shall hold the same to her and her Heirs as fully as
any other Adventurer by this Act ought to do, until the Commissioners for
execution of this Act, shall set out and allot to her and her Heirs, so much
thereof as they shall adjudge to amount to her proportion, And if the said
Commissioners shall find the said Sir Robert Forths title to possess the said
lands to be good and valid, then they shall set forth such satisfaction of land
for the said Adventure, as shall be according to the rules and proportions
limited for other Adventurers by this Act, And Letters Patents shall be thereof
granted to the said Elizabeth, and the said Elizabeth shall enjoy the same to
her, and her Heirs and Assigns accordingly, any thing in this or the former
Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas Captain John Wakeham, and Lieutenant Richard Wakeham, were seized
or possessed before the Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine,
of certain lands set out to them in satisfaction of their arrears, and were
thereof put out and dispossessed before the said Seventh of May, by virtue of an
extent, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall set out and allot to the said
John Wakeham, and Richard Wakeham, their Heirs and Assigns so much forfeited
and undisposed land, as may be equal in quantity of Acres unto two full third
parts of the lands whereof they were so possessed, as fully and amply as if they
had been thereof possessed upon the Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred
fifty nine, any thing in this or the former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall restore unto James Reynold of Loghscurr in the
County of Letrim Esquire and his Heirs, the possession of all and singular the
lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which the Father of the said James Reynolds,
or any other person to his use or in trust for him, were seized or possessed
upon the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, or
at any time since, the respective Adventurers or Soldiers, their Heirs or
Assigns now in possession thereof, or claiming the same, being first satisfied
their respective shares and proportions, and for their several and respective
improvements which will be to them by the rules of this Act, And from and after
such restitution so made as aforesaid, the said James Reynolds shall hold and
enjoy to him, his Heirs and Assigns all and singular the lands and Tenements
so restored, any thing in this or the former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further explained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing in this or the said former Act contained shall any way extend to Bar
any right or title of Escheat which his Majesty has unto the lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments of Con O Rourk in the County of Letrim lately Deceased
without Heirs, and which is found by Inquisition now remaining upon Record in
his Majesty's High-court of Chancery, But that his Majesty's right and title
thereunto by Escheat as aforesaid be fully saved and preserved unto his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, any seizure or sequestration of the
premises or any part thereof upon the account of the said late Rebellion or
War, or any other matter or thing in this or the said former Act contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall out of such forfeited lands as shall remain
undisposed after all the English interests herein provided for, shall be
satisfied, set out and allot unto Mary Coghlan widow the relict of Terence
Coghlan of Kilcolgan in the Kings County Esquire Deceased, so much land as shall be
of like yearly value, as the lands which she the said Mary Coghlan formerly
held or ought to have held for her joincture, to be held and enjoyed by the
said Mary Coghlan during her life, any thing herein before contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall out of such forfeited lands as shall remain
undisposed after all the English interests herein provided for, shall be
satisfied, set out and allot unto Anne Lady Dowager of Slane, so much lands as
shall be of like yearly value, as the lands she formerly held or ought to have
held for her joincture, as widow and relict of the Lord Delvin her former
husband, to be held and enjoyed by the said Lady Dowager of Slane, during her
life, any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, do forthwith restore to John Talbot of Malahyde all
and singular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the County of Dublin,
which he the said John Talbot, held and enjoyed upon the two and twentieth day
of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, or at any time since, such
person or persons who purchased the same of and from Susanna Bastwick or her
children or their Assigns, being first satisfied out of the forfeited lands
undisposed by this Act, by an allotment of so many profitable Acres as may be
equal in value, worth and purchase to the lands so to be restored, and after
such restitution so made as aforesaid, the said John Talbot shall hold and
enjoy to him and his Heirs, all and singular the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments so restored, but subject to Quit rents, any thing in this or the
said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Sir George Harbert
of Dorrow in the Kings County Knight and Baronet, shall by the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, be forthwith restored unto and placed in the present
and actual possession of all and singular the Lands, Tenements and all other
Hereditaments, right, title and interest whatsoever in the said Kingdom of
Ireland, which he the said Sir George Harbert or his Uncle Sir Jasper Harbert
deceased, or either of them, or any other person or persons in trust for them,
or either of them, or to their or either of their use or uses, had, held or
enjoyed, or of right ought to have, held or enjoyed on the two and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, or at any time since, the
respective Adventurers or Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns now in possession
thereof claiming the same, being first satisfied their respective shares and
proportions, and for their several and respective improvements, which will be
due to them by the rules of this Act, And from and after such restitution so
made as aforesaid, shall hold and enjoy all and singular the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments so to be restored unto him and his Heirs, by such tenures,
rents and services, and no other, (tenures in Capite or by Knights service
excepted) as the same were held by, on the said two and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, any thing in this or the said
former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Sir Henry Tichborne
Knight, shall hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs, all and singular the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, which were set forth unto him in recompense and
satisfaction of money and other provisions by him furnished for relief of the
Army in Ireland, between the years One thousand six hundred forty one, and One
thousand six hundred forty three, which have not been Decreed away by the
Commissioners for Execution of the said former Act, And that the Commissioners
for Execution of this present Act, shall out of the forfeited Lands, which
shall remain undisposed by this Act to Adventurers or Soldiers, set out and
allot unto the said Sir Henry Tichborne, so many Acres of profitable land, as
may be equal in quantity to the lands so Decreed away, to be held and enjoyed
by the said Sir Henry Tichborne and his Heirs, and that like effectual Letters
Patents shall be thereof granted, any thing in this or the said former Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall out of such forfeited lands as shall remain
undisposed, set out and allot unto Mabell Countess Dowager of Fingall, so much
lands as shall be of like yearly value as the lands which she the said Countess
Dowager of Fingall formerly held or ought to have held for her joincture, to be
held and enjoyed by her the said Countess Dowager of Fingall for and during the
term of her life, any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas Samuel Avery late of London Alderman, was in his life time an
Adventurer for Lands in Ireland, and did subscribe and pay in the sum of
eleaven hundred pounds or thereabouts, The satisfaction of which Adventure was
afterward set out and allotted unto him the said Samuel Avery, in the Barony
of Conello and County of Limerick, who notwithstanding such allotment quitted
the possession of his own lot, and entered upon the lot of Sir Charles Lloyd
Baronet, another Adventurer satisfied in part within the same Barony of
Conello, which lot continued in the possession of the said Samuel Avery, his
Heirs and Assigns, until the same was lately restored unto the said Sir
Charles Lloyd, And whereas the said Samuel Avery did also in his life time
contract and agree with the late Usurpers in England, for the Farm or Receipt
of certain customs or impositions upon merchandise exported or imported, then
and there usually paid, And upon such his contract and undertaking became
indebted and stood charged and chargeable with the sum of Tenn thousand
pounds, or thereabouts, as in and by the Records thereof remaining in the Court
of Exchequer in England more fully appears, which said Debt and duty stands
excepted out of the Act of Parliament passed in England, entitled, An Act of
Free and general pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, and remains vested in his
Majesty, and is still unsatisfied, no lands or Tenements, Goods or Chattells
of the said Samuel Avery, whereupon the said Debt might be levied, being to be
found in England, and the whole Adventure of the said Samuel Avery, and the
lands therefore set out in the said Barony of Conello, although no defalcation
thereof be made, are too little to satisfy the said Debt so long behind and
unpaid, To the end therefore that full satisfaction may be made unto his
Majesty for his said Debt as far as by the said Adventure is possible, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in the Barony of Conello, set out and allotted unto the said
Samuel Avery as aforesaid, not already Decreed away by the Commissioners for
Execution of the said former Act, into whose hands soever the same be come by
any right or title derived by, from or under the said Samuel Avery, his Heirs
or Assigns, shall remain and continue vested in his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, in satisfaction and discharge of the said Debt, and if any part of
the said lands have been Decreed away by the Commissioners for Execution of the
said former Act, The Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith
Assign unto his Majesty by Deed under their hands and Seals, to be enrolled
in Chancery, so much more as may be equal in quantity and number of Acres to
the lands so decreed away, which lands so assigned shall be and are hereby
vested in his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and discharged of the uses or
trusts in this or the said former Act expressed, any thing in this or the said
former Act, or any other Act, matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the fifty four
persons herein after named, That is to say, The Earl of Westmeath, the Lord
Vice-count Ikerryn, The Lord Baron of Dunboyne, The Lord Baron of Trymletstown,
The Lord Baron of Upper-Ossory, The Lord Bermingham Baron of Athunry, Colonel
Richard Butler, Sir Richard Barnwell Baronet, Sir Redmund Everard Baronet, Sir
Dermott O Shagnussey Knight, Master Edmund Fitz Gerald of Balymalo, Master
Thomas Butler of Killcomell, Master (...) Macnemarra of Crevagh, Master David
Power of Kibolane, Master Donnogh O Callaghan of Clonmeen, Master Barnard
Talbott of Rathdown, Conly Geoghegan of Donore, who were mentioned amongst the
thirty eight persons in his Majesty's late Gracious Declaration, and were
restored after reprizalls set out, and for whom no provision has yet been
made, and also the Heirs of Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, the Heirs of Sir Valentine
Blake Baronet, Sir Robert Talbott Knight, Sir Richard Blake Knight, Doctor
Gerrard Fennel, Geoffry Brown, John Brown of the Neale, John walsh, Thomas
Terrill, Edmund Dillon, Francis Coghlan of Kilcolgan in the Kings County,
Robert Nugent of Cartlanstown, Sir John Bourke of Derry-Maclaghney, Thomas
Arthur Esquire Doctor in Physic, Gerald Fleming of Castle-Fleming, and Bartholemew
Stackpoole Esquires, who were also mentioned in the said former Act to be
restored to their former estates as aforesaid, and for whom no provision has
yet been made, And also the Lord Baron of Brittas, Master Tute Son to Andrew
Boy Tute of Cullanmore, in the County of Westmeath Esquire Master (...) Walsh Heir
of David Walsh of Bally-Beaghan in the County of Tipperary, Esquire Sir Edmund
Bourke Baronet Son to Sir Vlick Bourke of Giusk in the County of Roscomon
Baronet Deceased, Sir Thomas Esmond Baronet, Sir Lucas Dowdall Knight Son of
Lawrence Dowdall of Athlumney in the County of Mead Esquire Master (...) Walsh
Heir of Walter Walsh of Castle Hoyle in the County of Kilkenny Esquire Edward Wall
of Ballinikill in the County of Catherlagh Esquire Master (...) Butler Son of
Theobald Butler Son of James Butler of Derry-Luscan in the County of Tipperary
Esquire James Tobyn of Killaghee in the County of Tipperary Esquire Richard Butler of
Ballinikill in the County of Tipperary Esquire Philip Purcell of Ballyfoyle in the
County of Kilkenny Esquire Sir Edmund Fitz Gerald of Clanlish in the County of
Limerick Baronet, Pierce Walsh of Abbey Owhney in the County of Limerick Esquire
John Power of Doneile in the County of Waterford Esquire Pierce Power of Money
Largy in the County of Waterford Esquire, William Brabazon, the Heir of Anthony
Brabazon of Balinaslo in the County of Roscomon Esquire Daniel O Brien of Dnogh in
the County of Clare Esquire Lord Vice-count Iveagh, Sir Edward Fitz Harris of
Clogh-Notefoy in the County of Limerick Baronet, John Cantwell of Mokarky in
the County of Tipperary Esquire and their Heirs and Assigns, shall by the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, be restored unto their several and
respective principal Seats, That is to say, unto their several and respective
principal Messuages, Houses or Castles, ( Kilmedan and the lands thereunto
belonging excepted) or in case they have several Messuages, Houses or Castles
to such of their several messuages, Houses or Castles ( Kilmedan and the land
thereunto belonging excepted) as they shall respectively choose within two
months after the first sitting of the Commissioners for Execution of this Act,
and unto two thousand acres of land thereunto adjoining, if they or any of
them, their or any of their Ancestors, or any other in trust for them, or any
of them, or to their, or any of their use, were seized or possessed of so much
upon the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and
were thereunto lawfully and rightfully entitled: And in case they or any of
them, their or any of their Ancestors, or any other in trust for them, or any
of them, or to their use, were not seized or possessed upon the two and
twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, of two thousand acres
as aforesaid, then unto so much thereof as they were seized or possessed of as
aforesaid, and which lies contiguous to their respective principal Seats, and
if any of the four and fifty Persons herein before named, shall be found to be
in possession of any message and lands thereunto adjoining, which to them or
any of them did rightfully belong upon the said two and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and the lands so possessed shall
be found to exceed the quantity of two thousand acres, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors
of Ireland and Council there for the time being, to cause so much thereof, as
shall exceed the quantity of two thousand acres, to be retrenched and cut off,
in such way and manner as they shall think fit, and the land so retrencht shall
remain and be vested in His Majesty, to the end that the same may be further
disposed to the uses of this Act; And for the better support of such of the
four and fifty Persons herein before named, who shall not have two thousand
acres near adjoining and lying contiguous unto his and their respective Seats,
to which they are to be restored, or having two thousand acres shall not be
thought to be thereby sufficiently provided for, It is further declared and
Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or
other Chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time
being, upon due consideration had of the several and respective cases and
merits of the persons aforesaid, to direct and appoint the Commissioners for
Execution of this Act, to set out and allot or cause to be set out and allotted
unto any of the persons aforesaid or their Heirs so much of the forfeited lands
which shall remain undisposed after the several Protestant interests herein
before provided for, shall be satisfied, as the said Lord Lieutenant, or other
Chief Governor or Governors and Council shall think fit*

Provided always, That nothing herein contained shall extend to restore or
entitle the said Sir Thomas Esmond Baronet, to the possession of any Messuages,
Manors, lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whereof George Duke of Albemarle is
now in possession by himself, or his under-tenants, or any ways entitled
thereunto, but that the same shall be held and enjoyed by the said George Duke
of Albemarle, his Heirs and Assigns, any thing herein before contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That if any person or persons shall within the space of six
months next after the Royal assent to this Bill, actually given, allege
before the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Gobernours of Ireland,
and Council there, that the said Sir Edward Fitz Harris, has committed any
Massacre, Murder, or other such like Heinous Crime or cruelty upon the persons
of any of his Majesty's good Subjects, and shall prove the same by such
witnesses or other evidence as the said Lord Lieutenant or other Chief
Governor or Governors and Council there, shall think good proof, that then
and in such case it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors and Council there, by order
of the Council, to declare and adjudge him the said Sir Edward Fitz Harris to
be guilty of the Crime or cruelty so alleged and proved as aforesaid; and upon
such declaration and judgment, the said Sir Edward Fitz Harris and his Heirs
shall be and are hereby made incapable of any benefit or advantage, in and by
this present Act given, or of any restitution as aforesaid, but shall remain
and be, to all intents and purposes, in the same plight and condition, as he or
they would have been, if the said Sir Edward Fitz Harris had not been named in
this present Act, Any thing herein before contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted, That all and every the Adventurers, Soldiers and
Commissioned Officers, who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six
hundred forty and nine, their Heirs and Assigns, who are to be removed to make
way for the restitution of the four and fifty persons herein before named, or
any of them, shall be first satisfied by some other forfeited lands to be set
out and allotted to them by the Commissioners for execution of this Act, equal
in value, worth and purchase to the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments from whence they are to be removed; and all and every the
Protestant Purchasors in Conaght and Clare, shall be first satisfied by an
allotment of land equal in value unto the lands from whence they are to be
removed.

And be it further Enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That where
any person or persons now in the possession of any Messuages, Lands, Tenements
or Herements, ought to be reprized for the same, and after reprizals first set
out, to be removed from thence, to make way for the restitution of any of the
fifty four persons herein before named, their Heirs or Assigns, or for the
restitution of any other person or persons herein before or after mentioned,
who by the Rules of this Act is made restorable after previous reprizals, that
there and in such case it shall and may be lawful to and for all and every the
person or persons so as aforesaid appointed to be removed, to have, receive and
keep the rents, issues and profits of all and singular the Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whereof they are now in possession, to their own
use and behoof, without any account to be therefore made or rendered, until the
Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall have set out and allotted unto
the person or persons so as aforesaid appointed to be removed, such forfeited
lands by way of reprizal, as they shall adjudge to be due to them by the rules
of this Act; And all and every person and persons, who after reprizals set out
and allotted by the Commissioners, shall refuse to accept of such reprizalls,
and shall detain and keep the possession of the lands from which they ought to
be removed, shall account for and pay unto the person who ought to be restored,
all the Rents and profits received from the time of setting out such
reprizalls, until the restorable person shall be put into actual possession of
the same, any thing here in before or after contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every the Leases which have been made
Bona Fide, of any the lands or Tenements which by virtue of any clause in this
Act, are to be restored, shall be held and enjoyed by the several and
respective Tenants during their respective Leases, they paying the Rents and
services thereupon reserved, and performing the covenants and agreements
therein contained, unto the person or persons to whom the Reversion thereof
shall appertain, but if such Leases have been made in consideration of a fine
paid, and by reason thereof a Lesser Rent has been reserved, than otherwise
the premises were worth to be let, then the person to be removed shall pay or
cause to be paid unto the person to be restored, the said fine, and shall be
satisfied for such fine so paid by such an allotment of so much other forfeited
lands as after the rate of eight years purchase may be Equivalent thereunto;
And it is further declared, That no Restitution made unto any of the persons
herein before named, (The Restitution of Francis Lord Bermingham Baron of
Atthunry excepted) shall any way extend to alter or diminish the right which
the Officers who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred
forty and nine, can or may claim by virtue of this or the said former Act, to
the benefit arising from the Redemption of Mortgages, Statutes Staple, and
Judgments which do or may incumber the premises so to be restored:
Nevertheless the four and fifty persons so as aforesaid to be restored, their
Heirs and Assigns (The Lord Bermingham excepted) shall have full power and
Authority at any time within the space of two years next after the Royal
assent to this Bill given, to Redeem all and every the Mortgages, Statutes and
Judgments which have been entered into by any forfeiting person or person not
decreed innocent, and do incumber the premises, so as the moneys thereupon due
and owing for such part of the encumbrances as are within the security set a
part for the Commissioned Officers who served before the fifth of June, One
thousand six hundred forty and nine, be paid and satisfied unto their use, the
payment whereof shall be and is hereby declared a sufficient discharge of such
encumbrance, and no possession is to be delivered of the premises until the
respective forfeited Encumbrances thereupon lying be paid and satisfied as
aforesaid; And all and every the Mortgages, Statutes and Judgments which have
been entered into to any forfeiting person or person not declared innocent, and
do incumber the premises or any part thereof herein before appointed to be
restored unto the said Francis Lord Bermingham Baron of Atthunry, shall be and
are hereby released, barred, discharged and extinguished, And the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, are to set out so much other forfeited land, as may
be sufficient to satisfy the Officers who served before June, One thousand six
hundred forty nine, for the several forfeited Encumbrances within their
security and extinguished as aforesaid: And to the end that the Protestants who
upon or since the Seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, have
been in the actual possession of any Messuages or lands which by virtue of this
Act shall be restored or given unto any person or persons herein before or
after named, may not wholly loose the benefit and charges of their respective
improvements, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every the Protestants so to be removed shall be and are hereby enabled to
demand, and shall upon their requests have Leases made to them of all and
singular the Messuages and lands in their manual occupations, for three lives,
or one and twenty years, at a moderate Rent not exceeding three fourthes of the
true value of the lands, in satisfaction of their improvements, except it be a
capital message, and then the party to be restored shall either make such
Lease as aforesaid, or pay unto the person to be removed, in ready money the
full value of such improvements, and in case of default or refusal, to make
such Lease as aforesaid upon request, or to give such satisfaction in money,
shall be and are hereby enabled to reenter and to retain the said lands, until
such Lease made or satisfaction given as aforesaid; And to the end there may
not be any difference touching the values of the lands so to be demised, or of
the improvements to be satisfied as aforesaid, The Lord Lieutenant or other
Chief Governor or Governors and Council for the time being, are hereby
enabled upon the Petition of the parties concerned, to appoint such
Commissioners from time to time as they shall think fit, to settle the
difference aforesaid, Provided always and it is Enacted, That nothing herein
contained shall enable any of the four and fifty persons herein before
mentioned, to demand or have, or to be restored unto any Impropriations or
Appropriate tithes, or to any Glebe Lands, parcel of any Rectory impropriate,
but that the same shall remain and be to such uses, as they would have been by
this and the said former Act, if the said fifty and four persons, or any of
them, had not been named, Any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That those who were in
possession of any lands or houses upon the two and twentieth day of August, One
thousand six hundred sixty and three, to which they were restored by virtue of
any His Majesty's Letters, if they or any of them, their or any of their
Ancestors, or any other in trust for them, or any of them, were thereof seized
or possessed upon the Two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred
forty and one, and thereunto rightfully entitled, and are not otherwise
provided for by this Act, shall by the Commissioners for execution of this Act,
be restored unto, and put in possession of such houses, and so much of the
lands lying contiguous and thereunto adjoining, as shall not exceed the
quantity of two thousand acres, in the doing whereof the Commissioners are to
proceed by the same rules, orders and directions, and in like manner and form,
as they ought to proceed in the settlement and restitution of any of the four
and fifty persons herein before named, and not otherwise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That nothing in the said
former Act, or in this present Act, herein before or after contained, shall be
understood to give, restore or confirm to any Irish Papist or Popish Recusant,
or any other person seized or possessed in trust for any such Irish Papist or
Popish Recusant, any Advowson or Right of Patronage of or in any Ecclesiastical
Benefice or Promotion, or any Right of Nomination, Presentation or Collation
to, or Donation of any such Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion, but that all
and every such Advowsons and Rights of Patronage, and the Rights of Nomination,
Presentation, or Collation to, or Donation of any such Ecclesiastical Benefice
or Promotion, but that all and every such Advowsons and Rights of Patronage,
and the rights of Nomination, Presentation, Donation or Collation of or to any
such Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion shall vest, remain and continue, and
so are hereby adjudged to vest, remain and continue in His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, until such Irish Papist or Popish Recusant, or the right heir
of such Papist or Recusant, shall come to Church and receive the Sacrament
according to the Rites of the Church of England, and from and after such
conformity, shall be again revestel in the person so conforming and his heirs,
Any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Sir Edward Smith
Knight, Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, Sir Edward Dering
Baronet, Sir Allen Broderick, Sir William Churchill, Knights, and Edward Cook
Esquire and such others as upon the death or removal of them, or any of them, shall
be appointed by His Majesty from time to time, shall be Commissioners, and
that they, or any three or more of them, shall have power to put in execution
all and every the matters of this present Act, and of the said former Act,
which remain still in force, and are directed to be done by Commissioners, or
are not particularly entrusted to some others by the said Acts, and that they
and every of them shall before they act any thing in execution of the said
Commission, take an Oath before the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of Ireland, or before the Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court
of Chief Place, or the Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Common
Pleas, or be-before the Lord Chief Baron of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer
for the time being, which Oath they or any of them have hereby power to
administer, as there shall be occasion, in these words following; YOu shall
swear, That you shall to the best of your skill and knowledge, truly and
impartially execute the place and duty of a Commissioner for putting in
execution an Act, entitled, An Act for the explaining of some doubts arising
upon an Act, entitled, An Act for the better execution of His Majesty's
gracious Declaration for the settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and
satisfaction of the several Interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other His
Subjects there, and for making some alterations of, and additions unto the said
Act, for the more speedy and effectual settlement of the said Kingdom: And of
so much as is still in force, and remains to be executed, of an other Act,
entitled, An Act for the better execution of His Majesty's gracious
Declaration for the settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of
the several Interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other His Subjects there,
so long as you shall continue in that employment, and therein you shall spare
no person for favor and affection, nor any person grieve for hatred or ill
will.

So help you God.


And that in all cases which shall happen before the Commissioners within the
space of two years next after their first sitting, wherein the construction of
this or the said former Act shall appear doubtful to them, or that the Act it
self shall be found defective in some points necessary for the carrying on of
the intended final Settlement, and not clearly enough determined and provided
for by this Act, the Commissioners or any three or more of them, shall and may
by writing under their hands and Seals acquaint the Lord Lieutenant, or other
Chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time
being, with their proceedings and the doubts arising thereupon, and the defects
appearing in this present Act, and such order of amendment, enlargement of
periods, explanation or direction as shall be thereupon made by the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors and Council by Act of
Council in writing for the better and more easy Execution of this Act, and for
promoting the ends thereof only, shall be as binding to the Commissioners and
all other persons, and effectual as if the same had been part of this present
Act, so always that the said Act and Acts of Council be made within the said
two years, and enrolled in the High Court of Chancery.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the time and space
of two years to be computed from the day of the first sitting of the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall be and is hereby allotted unto
the said Commissioners for putting this Act in Execution, and for performance
of the several matters and things hereby entrusted to them, And in case the
same shall not then be finished, it shall and may be lawful for the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council
there for the time being, to enlarge the time for the ends and purposes
aforesaid, to such other and further periods, as they by any Act of Council and
enrolled in the Chancery of Ireland, shall think fit to declare, so as such
enlargement of time exceed not the space of one year from the expiration of the
two former years, and that such order as to the enlarging of periods of time,
shall be as good and effectual in Law, as if it had been particularly expressed
and enacted by these presents.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Sherriffs,
Mayors, Bailiffs and all other Officers, and Ministers of Justice shall well
and truly execute all orders and decrees to be made by the said Commissioners,
or cause the same to be executed, and shall also from time to time obey and
execute all such precepts, Warrants or other commands, as by the said
Commissioners to them or any of them shall be directed, And that the
Commissioners shall have such like power of proceeding in the cases of
contempts and misdemeanors committed in open Court, or of wilful neglect or
disobedience, as any of the four Courts at Dublin do or may lawfully use.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all suites and
proceedings at Law, wherein the Authority of this Act may any way avail the
Tenant or Defendant, in such suite it shall and may be lawful to and for such
Tenant or Defendant to plead the general issue, and to give this Act and the
proceedings thereupon in evidence, and if upon the trial a verdict pass, or
upon Demurrer Judgment be given for the Tenant or Defendant, or the Plaintiff
or Demandant be non suit, that in all and every such case the party or parties,
Tenants or Defendants shall recover his or their double costs and damages.

And be it further Enacted and ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners appointed or to be appointed by his Majesty for the Execution of
this present Act, shall and may receive for themselves and for the
Sub-Commissioners, which they shall choose to attend and assist them therein,
the Fees hereafter mentioned, and no other; That is to say, two pence for every
profitable English acre which by any sentence, Judgment or Decree hereafter to
be made by the said Commissioners, shall be granted, assigned, set out,
restored or confirmed to any Adventurer, Soldier, old Proprietor or other
Irish Papist, or to any Parentee, or Grantee, or any other person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate whatsoever, in pursuance of any part of this
present Act, or of the said former Act, or of any provisoe or grant therein
made, or by the same or these presents ratified or confirmed, and such other
Fees, salaries and rewards for and in recompense of their pains and endeavors
in the Execution of such other parts of this and the said former Act which are
entrusted to them, as the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor and
Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, and the Council shall think fit
and appoint.

Be it hereby further provided and Enacted by this present Parliament, and by
Authority of the same, that no prejudice or damage whatsoever shall arise to
or befall John Pain Esquire for or by reason or in respect of his being
necessitated to accept of One hundred pounds or thereabouts in the time of the
late Usurpers for the present subsistence of himself and Family then residing
in Dublin, but that as to his full arrears due before the fifth of June, One
thousand six hundred forty nine, for service in Ireland, the said John Pain,
his Heirs and Assigns, shall be admitted to have, ask, demand and receive as
full and ample satisfaction for the same, out of the security by this Act, set
apart for satisfying the arrears of the Commissioned Officers before the fifth
of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, to all intents and purposes, as
if he were to that end named, provided for and saved in his Majesty's
Declaration of the thirtieth of November, One thousand six hundred and sixty,
and as any Commissioned Officer or Officers whatsoever who served in Ireland,
before the year One thousand six hundred forty nine, and has hitherto received
no part of satisfaction for such his service, shall, may or ought to receive,
any clause, Article, matter or thing whatsoever in this present Act, or any
other Act mentioned or contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That all Arrears of pay grown due
before the fifth day of June, in the year, One thousand six hundred forty nine,
for which Sir Thomas Gifford Baronet deceased, was to have received
satisfaction in case he had now been living, shall be satisfied unto Dame
Martha Gifford, the Relict and sole Administratrix of the said Sir Thomas
Gifford, her Heirs and Assigns, in such and the same manner as the same should
or ought to have been satisfied to the said Sir Thomas Gifford, Any thing in
the aforesaid Act, or this present Act, contained, or any other matter or thing
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas in and by the said former Act, the Manor, Castle, Town and Lands
of St. Woolstownes, alias Allens Court, were intended to be settled upon Hugh
Earl of Mount-Alexander and his Hiers, with benefit of reprizal in case of
restitution, as Adventurers by the said former Act ought to have had, as in and
by the said former Act more at large appears, since which time the
Commissioners for execution of the said former Act, have by their Decree
adjudged James Allen to be innocent, and restored the said Lands to the said
James Allen and his Heirs, against which Decree an appeal was made to His
Majesty, by a Petition exhibited by William Montgomery Esquire on the behalf of
the now Earl of Mount-Alexander, an Infant Son and Heir of Hugh late Earl of
Mount-Alexander, on hearing of which case, and on the defense made by Colonel
Richard Talbot, to whom part of the lands restored by the said Decree, were for
good and valuable considerations, and by sufficient assurances in Law, legally
conveyed by the said James Allen, His Majesty thought not fit to alter the
said Decree, or weaken any of the said assurances, His Majesty is therefore
graciously pleased that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall set out and
allot, or cause to be set out and allotted unto the now Earl of
Mount-Alexander, his Heirs and Assigns, so much other undisposed forfeited
lands, as may be equal in quantity of acres unto two full third parts of the
lands so evicted and recovered by Decree as aforesaid, and that Letters Patents
shall be thereof passed in like manner, and shall be of like effect as any
other Letters Patents granted by virtue of this Act, are or ought to be.

And whereas in and by certain Letters Patents passed under the Great Seal of
Ireland, and bearing date the Seventh day of March, in the twelfth year of the
Reign of His Majesty's Royal Father, the Territories and precinct of Feartry in
the County of Wicklow, and certain other Manors, lands and Tenements in the
said Letters Patents contained, were thereby given and granted unto Sir John
Coke knight and his Heirs, his late Majesty's principal Secretary of Estate,
And whereas Thomas Coke late of Grayes-Inn in the County of Middlesex, His
Majesty's Solicitor General, son of the said Sir John Cook Deceased, was in
his life time lawfully seized of, or otherwise entitled unto the said Territory
and precinct of Feartry, and other the lands and Tenements in the said Letters
Patents contained, the Inheritance whereof after the Death of the said Thomas
Coke Deceased, did descend and come or of right ought to have descended and
came unto (...) Coke an infant only Son and Heir of the said Thomas Coke
Deceased, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
sequestration or allotment of any of the lands or Tenements in the said Letters
Patents contained, to any Adventurer or Soldier, shall any way Bar or weaken
the right or title of him the said (...) Coke in or the said lands or Tenements
but that he the said (...) Coke shall and may hold and enjoy the same to him
and his Heirs, according to the tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents,
any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas in this and the said former Act, great care is taken of the relict
and Heirs of Sir Simon Harcourt Knight Deceased, upon whom his Majesty's Royal
Father did by Letters under his Privy Signet appoint that lands of the value
of four hundred pounds per annum, to be taken out of the forfeited estate of
Luke Nettervill, should be settled, part of which estate together with certain
Houses in Dublin, were set out accordingly, and the relict and Heirs of Sir
Simon Harcourt thereof possessed at the time of His Majesty's late Gracious
Declaration, and so still are, which lands and Houses together are, as is
alleged, still short of the value of four hundred pounds per annum, intended
to be settled as aforesaid, It is therefore Explained and Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful to and for Sir Philip
Harcourt Knight, son and heir of Sir Simon Harcourt Knight, to hold and enjoy
to him and his heirs, the houses in the City of Dublin, so as aforesaid set out
and possessed, so as the houses and lands together, do not exceed the value of
Four hundred pounds per annum, Any thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas Thomas Cunningham and Captain Lewis Dick in the year, One thousand
six hundred forty two, pretended to have performed acceptable services against
the then Rebels in Ireland, by hindering provision coming to them by Sea, and
by relieving the English Garrisons which were in distress, wherein they so far
gained belief, as that they obtained from the Treasurer for the Irish
Adventurers and acknowledgement, that they paid in Seven thousand pounds, as
money adventured, and for which they likewise had a certificate from the
Committee of Adventurers sitting at Grocers-Hall in London; And howbeit the
said Thomas Cunningham, or Captain Lewis Dick never did any service on the
coast of Ireland, according to the said undertaking, nor paid in any money as
other Adventurers did, yet by color of the said certificate, there were set
out for the said Seven thousand pounds, the number of fifteen thousand five
hundred fifty and five acres of Land in the County of Tipperary and Limerick,
whereof they the said Thomas Cunningham and Captain Lewis Dick, or their
Assigns, were possessed the seventh of May, One thousand six hundred fifty
nine: Now least by the general rule of the present settlement, the said number
of acres, or two third parts thereof, so unduly obtained as aforesaid, should
be secured to the said Thomas Cunningham and Captain Lewis Dick, or their
Assigns, His Majesty is graciously pleased that it be Enacted, and be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said fifteen thousand five hundred
fifty five acres, so set out as aforesaid for and on pretense of the said Seven
thousand pounds, shall be, remain and continue, and are hereby vested in his
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors for ever: Provided nevertheless, That if the
said Thomas Cunningham and Captain Lewis Dick, their Heirs or Assigns, shall
within two months after the Royal Assent shall be actually given to this
present Bill, make it appear by full and clear proof, before the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors and Council of Ireland, that
the said Adventure money of Seven thousand pounds was really and bona fide
issued and paid in pursuant to the several Acts made by His late Sacred
Majesty, for reducing the Rebels of Ireland, then they shall have the like
benefit and advantage by the said Adventure, and out of the said fifteen
thousand five hundred fifty five acres, as other Adventurers are to have by
virtue of this present Act.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Lieutenant, or
other Chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, shall
and may assess any sum not exceeding three pence per acre, in and out of every
acre of profitable land of Plantation measure, which is by the late Court of
Claims, or shall be pursuant to this or the former Act, decreed or confirmed,
or set out or delivered unto any person or persons of the Popish Religion in
this Kingdom, and the same to cause to be levied by Distress or otherwise, and
to be paid unto the receivers herein after mentioned, to the intent that Five
thousand pounds be paid to Milo Power Esquire his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and that the residue may afterward be issued out unto such of the
Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, who as Agents, or otherwise since His
Majesty's most happy restitution, shall by the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors be judged meriting the same, and that in such
proportions as the said Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors
shall think fit and direct.

Whereas Colonel Carry Dillon has been dispossessed of Two thousand and six
hundred and four acres of land, whereof he was possessed the seventh of May,
One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, as being set out unto him for service
in Ireland, and which were confirmed unto him by the said former Act, amounting
to Three hundred and fifty pounds per annum; And whereas the late Lords
Justices had by their two Orders bearing date the eighteenth and nineteenth of
July, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, assigned certain lands in the
County of Galway, unto the said Colonel Carry Dillon, for his Reprizal of the
whole, and also for satisfying of him Three hundred and fifty pounds sterling,
which was one years rent of what he had lost, grown due unto him from the time
he had been dispossessed, but the said Colonel Dillon received no benefit
thereby, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners appointed to put in execution this Act, shall forthwith set out
and allot unto the said Colonel Carry Dillon, his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
One thousand seven hundred thirty five acres of profitable forfeited lands, of
twenty one foot to the perch, being two third parts in quantity of what he
has already lost as a Soldier, and that the same do in present yield two full
third parts of Three hundred and fifty pounds per annum, being the value of
what he has lost as aforesaid, with as much convenience of building and other
advantages thereon as they can, in regard of the considerableness of the places
and buildings from whence he is removed, which shall be granted unto him by
like Letters Patents, as any other Soldier by this Act are to have; And if the
said Commissioners shall think it necessary, that a Commission be issued for
the inquiry into the value of any Lands, Castles, Tenements or other
Hereditaments, in order to the setting out of the said Reprize, the Chancellor
or Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, are hereby required to issue
the same, Any thing in this Act, or the said former Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas upon a solemn hearing before His Majesty at His Council Board in
England, upon a Petition exhibited by several Adventurers and Soldiers against
Randall Lord Marquess of Antrim, and against the Judgment and Decree given by
the major part of the late Commissioners for execution of the said former Act,
whereby the said Marquess was adjudged innocent, His Majesty after much time
spent in the examination of the case, declared that he saw no cause why the
said Marquess should be adjudged innocent, much less that the Commissioners not
at all considering the proofs which they heard against the said Marquess,
should lay the whole weight of their judgment upon His Majesty's Certificate,
the said Certificate being only to declare, that the Marquess was employed
into Ireland, to procure what Forces he could from thence, to be transported
into Scotland, for his late Majesty's service under the late Marquess of
Montross, To the end that the conversation of the said Marquess of Antrim in
the Rebels quarters, which was necessary for that service, might not according
to the letter of the former Act render him criminal, if that had been the
only, as it was the least objection against him, And therefore His Majesty
resolved that the said Marquess of Antrim should undergo a new trial, to
prevent which the said Marquess of Antrim by an humble Petition to His Majesty
did acknowledge himself guilty, and humbly besought His Majesty, That he might
be supported by his mercy, as being not able to support himself by his own
innocence, Therefore His Majesty is pleased that it may be Enacted, and be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Decree and all and every
clause therein contained shall be and so is hereby declared to be null and void
to all intents and purposes as if the same had never been had or made;
Nevertheless His Majesty Reflecting upon the many services heretofore
performed by the said Marquess toward his Royal Father of Blessed Memory, and
some eminent services done by the said Marquess for his Majesty himself, the
said Marquess having besides assisting him with Arms and ammunition when he was
in the West, furnished him with ships to make his escape into foreign parts,
when his Armies were defeated in the West, and considering that His Majesty's
mercy is by this Act extended to some who have as much Demerited, Is graciously
pleased that it may be further Enacted, and be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall
forthwith and without staying for any previous reprizall set out, restore and
allot unto the said Marquess of Antrim, or cause to be set out, restored and
allotted unto the said Marquess of Antrim, all and singular the Honors,
Manors, Castles, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other
the estate, right, title and interest, whereof the said Randall Lord Marquess
of Antrim, or any other person in trust for him or to his use, was seized or
possessed on the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty
and one (the lands in the Barony of Glanarme herein after mentioned to be
restored to Alexander Macdonell, and also all impropriations and appropriat
tithes excepted) And that the said Marquess of Antrim shall hold and enjoy all
and singular the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so restored unto him the
said Marquess of Antrim, except before excepted, and the Heirs males of his
Body begotten, any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the
contrary notwithstanding, Subject nevertheless to such Debts and other
Encumbrances as the same were or ought to have been Subject unto, upon the said
two and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, (and to
such Leases and estates thereof made for satisfaction of Creditors, as are
provided for in and by the said former Act) and to the payment of such further
Quit-rents as any other lands within the same County or Province are Subject
unto; And the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, are hereby required with
all convenient Speed to set out and allot unto all and every the Adventurers
and Soldiers, their Heirs and Assigns, who shall be dispossessed by the
restitution of the said Marquess, so much other forfeited land as may be
sufficient to reprize and satisfy the persons so to be removed, for their
several and respective two full third parts which will be due to them by the
rules of this Act: And for the better enabling the said Marquess of Antrim to
pay his Debts, when he shall be restored, by sale of land or otherwise, which
cannot well be done unless the Reversion or remainder in Fee expectant upon the
said estate Tail be taken out of the Crown, It is therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the lands and Tenements so, as
aforesaid, appointed to be restored, And all and every the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders thereof shall be and are hereby vested and
settled in Alexander MacDonnell Brother of the said Marquess, and his Heirs, as
a remainder in Fee expectant upon the Death of the said Marquess without issue
male.

Provided always and it is hereby Enacted, that no fine, recovery or other Act
or thing whatsoever to be done or suffered by the said Marquess, (other than
Leases for one and forty years or three lives in possession and not in
reversion, whereupon the Highest improved Rent which the same were let for in
the year One thousand six hundred thirty and five, shall be reserved) touching
or concerning any the Messuages, lands, Tenements or Hereditaments situat lying
within the Barony of Donluce in the County of Antrim, shall any way extend to
Bar, discontinue, defeat or incumber the remainder thereof intended by this
Act to be settled upon the said Alexander, but that the said messuages, lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments in the Barony of Donluce in the County of Antrim,
shall after the Death of the said Marquess without issue male of his Body,
remain and be in the said Alexander Mac Donnel and his Heirs, Any such Fine,
Recovery, or other Act or thing done or suffered to the contrary
notwithstanding: Nevertheless it is hereby declared, That as to all other the
Lands and Tenements so, as aforesaid, to be restored, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Marquess by Fine, Recovery or any other way be shall
think fit, to bar, discontinue, defeat or incumber the remainder thereof, so
limited and settled as aforesaid.

Provided always, and it is Enacted, That nothing herein contained, shall any
way extend to restore the said Marquess of Antrim to the possession of any
Lands which he the said Marquess or his father did heretofore grant or convey
in Fee Farm to any forfeiting person or persons not declared innocent, or to
the possession of any lands whereof he the said Marquess or His Father did make
any Lease for lives or years to any forfeiting person or person not declared
innocent, during the lawful continuance of such Lease, but that the Lands so
granted in Fee Farm, or Demised as aforesaid, shall be put into the possession
of such person and persons, for and toward the satisfaction of their two third
parts, as would have been entitled to the same, if the said Decree had not been
made, nor the said Marquess hereby restored, Any thing herein before contained
to the contrary notwithstanding; saving to the said Marquess and his heirs, the
Rents and Services due and to be due for the premises.

Provided also, That nothing herein contained shall any way extend to bar or
hinder Rose Lady Marquess of Antrim of her Right and Title of Dower of, in or
to any the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so as aforesaid to be restored,
but that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Lady Marquess, after
the death of the said Lord Marquess her husband, to sue for and recover her
Dower of the said Lands and Tenements, Any thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for execution of this Act, shall forthwith and without staying for any previous
Reprizal, set out, restore and allot, or cause to be set out, restored and
allotted unto the said Alexander Mac Donnel and his Heirs, all and singular the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the Barony of Glanarm in the County of
Antrim, which were settled or intended to be settled upon him the said
Alexander Mac Donnel by his late father, and all other the Estate, Right, Title
and Interest whereof he the said Alexander Mac Donnel, or any other in trust
for him, was seized or possessed upon the two and twentieth day of October, One
thousand six hundred forty and one, Impropriations and appropriate tithes
excepted, subject to the debts and Encumbrances of him the said Alexander Mac
Donnel, and such other debts as were thereupon charged by the Father of the
said Alexander, and liable to a proportionable part of the Rentcharge granted
to Alice Countess of Antrim, and to such Quit-Rents as by this Act are payable
for lands in the same Province, Any thing in this or the said former Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to prevent all Riots or Disturbances which may happen in taking or keeping
possession of the premises, before the final settlement thereof, It is further
Declared, That so much of the premises hereby intended to be restored to the
said Marquess, whereof the said Marquess by himself or his Vnder-tenants was in
possession upon the first of July, One thousand six hundred sixty and five,
shall remain and continue in his and their possession, until restitution be
thereof made by the Commissioners as aforesaid; And that the Adventures and
Soldiers, their Heirs and Assigns, may retain so much of the premises hereby
intended to be restored to the said Marquess, and the said Alexander Mac
Donnel, whereof they were in in possession the said first of July, One thousand
six hundred sixty five, until restitution be thereof made by the said
Commissioners, as aforesaid; And that Alexander mac Donnel may enter upon all
the premises hereby intended to be restored to him, which are not in
possession of Adventurers or Soldiers, their Heirs or Assigns, and the same to
retain and keep in his possession, until restitution thereof be made by the
Commissioners as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Manor of
Edenduffcarick, and all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the
Baronies of Toom and Antrim, which were given and bequeathed to Rose Lady
Marquess of Antrim, by the last Will and Testament of Sir Henry O Neile her
deceased Father, shall be held and enjoyed by the said Lady Marquess and her
Heirs, Any Prosecution had against the said Lord Marquess her Husband, or any
other matter or thing in this or the said former Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Whereas by a Decree of the late Court of Claims, Patrick Coleclough was
restored to an Estate in the County of Wexford, in Remainder after the death of
Dudley his Father, part of which was by a clause in the said former Act vested
in Robert Clayton and John Morris in trust for Sir John Cutler and others in
the said Act mentioned, and had before that time been purchased from Soldiers
or other reprizable persons in order to the erecting of Iron works which have
since accordingly been erected, and are of publicque benefit to this Nation,
and the increase of His Majesty's revenue, and if the said Decrees should
remain in full force, the said advantages might be lost, for the preservation
thereof It is therefore Enacted and be it enacted by this Parliament, that the
said John Morris and Robert Clayton shall and may have, hold and enjoy such
part of the lands contained in the said Patrick Colcloughs Decree, as they were
formerly seized of against the said Patrick and Dudley and their Heirs, and
against the said Decree made as aforesaid, And it is further Enacted that in
lieu and compensation thereof, the said Patrick Colclough shall have the full
benefit of the reprizall due to the said John Morris and Robert Clayton upon
the said Decree, And that until the said reprizalls shall be set out, that the
said lands hereby settled on the said John Morris and Robert Clayton, shall be
chargeable, and are hereby charged with the annual Rent of One hundred pounds
payable yearly on the first days of May and November, and made liable to the
distress of the said Patrick upon non payment thereof at the said days of
payment, And that as soon as the said reprizalls shall be set out as aforesaid,
the said yearly Rent shall cease and absolutely determine, And to the end that
the said Iron works may be kept up, It is likewise Enacted that if the said
former or ancient proprietor or his Heir of any the lands whereof the said John
Morris and Robert Clayton are now seized in the said County of Wexford, shall
be or is by this Act restored to his estate, then and in such case the said
John Morris and Robert Clayton and their Heirs, shall notwithstanding have hold
and enjoy such part of the said former Proprietors estate as they now stand
seized of, And the said Proprietor for so much is elsewhere to be reprized, any
thing in this present Act, or any other Act of Parliament contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Whereas His Majesty by several Letters Patents under His Great Seal of
Ireland, whereof one patent was dated the sixteenth February, One thousand six
hundred and sixty in the thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, the other
dated the tenth day of July, One thousand six hundred sixty and three in the
fifteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, did amongst other things give, grant and
confirm, or mentioned or intended to give, grant and confirm unto Sir George
Lane Knight, and his Heirs, all the Castles, Manors, Houses, lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, and other interest whatsoever, which Philip Hoar late of
Kilsalchan attainted of High Treason was seized or possessed of at the time of
his said attainder, since which time two several Decrees have been made in the
late Court of Claims in this kingdom, to the prejudice of the said Grants, one
at the suite of the Son and Daughters of the said Philip Hoar attainted, for
portions, and the other at the suite of the Sonns of Philip Hoar the younger
Son to the said Philip attainted, for several remainders, which Decrees were
upon a petition exhibited to His Majesty by the said Sir George Lane
questioned, and on hearing of the cause, it was ordered that the said Sir
George Lane should be at liberty to impugn the said Decrees by any matter in
fact or Law, that he could object against them, whereupon the said Philip Hoar
the younger who made defense in the said cause before His Majesty, and the
said Sir George Lane did mutually agree for avoiding of all future differences
touching that matter, that all the said estate and interest should be divided,
and a share thereof settled on the said Sir George Lane and his Heirs, for
quitting his whole pretense and right to that estate, and the remain thereof
settled on the said Philip Hoar the younger and his Heirs for all his
pretenses, and the pretenses likewise of his Brothers, Sisters and children to
that estate, which agreement the said parties did by their joint Petition
humbly desire to be established by several provisoes in this Act, whereupon
His Majesty's was graciously pleased that it should be Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, And it is hereby Enacted, that the said several Decrees be and are
hereby made null and void, as if there had never been any such, And that the
said Sir George Lane shall be and is hereby restored unto, settled, confirmed
and established in the present and actual seizin and possession of the manor,
Castle, Town and lands of Kilsalchan with a windmill and six messuages
containing by estimation three hundred acres of land, be it more or less,
within the County of Dublin, with a Court Leet and Court Baron to be held
within the said Manor of Kilsalchan, the meadow called the Lords mead in the
Feilds of Stradbally, a message and ten acres of land in Stradbally aforesaid
in the Feilds thereof next adjoining to the Lords mead aforesaid, and all other
the said Philip Hores lands in Stradbally aforesaid, now or late in the tenure
or possession of John Murphy, John Quin and Walter Ryan, or one of them, one
Message and forty acres of land with the appurtenances in Swords, one Message
and five acres of Land in Rolls Towns, two Messuages, one Pigeon House, one
hundred acres of land, ten acres of meadow, and ten acres of pasture, with the
appurtenances in Ardlaw, nine Messuages, nine Gardens, and one hundred acres of
land, with the appurtenances in Stradbally, commonly called Bealings Land in
Stradbally, the village, Hamlet and Lands of Great Kingston, with the
appurtenances containing by estimation one Message, and fourscore acres of
land, two houses with Gardens, and a Park or Orchard, commonly called Pond-Park
to them belonging, in Newstreet in the Suburbs of the City of Dublin, one Close
or Park commonly called Barries-Park, without Bongans Gate, all lying and being
in the Parish of St. Nicholas, Barony of Uppercross, and County of Dublin,
fifty shillings yearly rent issuing out of the Manor of Westpalstown, nine
pence chief rent out of the lands of Criuserath, nine pence chief rent out of
the lands of Knightfield, and thirteen shillings and four pence chief rent out
of Dowdes land, Bealings land, and Talbots land in Stradbally aforesaid, the
Town and lands of Paslockes-Town and Maces-Town in the aforesaid County, the
Town and lands of Kilmore in the Barony of Coolook and County aforesaid, by
virtue of a Mortgage from one Christopher Nugent of Robins-Town, in
consideration of Fourteen hundred pounds, All which Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Chief Rents, are situate, lying and being within the County
of Dublin aforesaid, And also of three Messuages, two stables, one piece of
waste ground, one Garden, and other Edifices near the said stable, in the
Parish of St. Bridget, sometimes in the possession of William Badger, or his
Vnder-tenants, within the County of the City of Dublin, and Suburbs or
Liberties thereof, two Messuages with the appurtenances in Oxmantown, in the
Parish of St. Michans, sometimes in the possession of Peter Decoster, one Brick
house, three Messuages covered with straw in Oxmantown aforesaid, which Patrick
Martin and Peter Decoster sometimes held, one Message or Tenement in Mary Lane
in Oxmantown aforesaid, which James Lewesly sometimes held, one stated
Message, and one stable in Pill Lane in Oxmantown, which the aforesaid James
Lewesly sometimes held, one Brick house with the appurtenances in Pill Lane in
Oxmantown, sometimes in the possession of Margaret Lewesly deceased, one other
Brick house and garden, two several Cottages upon Cock-Hill near St. Mary
Abbey, which John Fisher Tailor formerly held, one Message with the
appurtenances in Mary Lane in Oxmantown, sometimes in the possession of John
Arundell, one Message with the appurtenances in Mary Lane aforesaid, sometimes
in the possession of Barbara Bath, two Messuages with the appurtenances in Pill
Lane in Oxmantown, which Edward May deceased, sometimes held, one shop or room
in Highstreet under the house wherein Robert Dowling formerly lived, which shop
was held by John Jourdan, one thatch't house or message with the appurtenances
in St. Mary Abbey, in the Parish of St. Michans, which John Hoar sometimes
held, a message with the appurtenances in Highstreet, in the Parish of St.
Michaels, sometimes in the possession of Richard Barry of Dublin Alderman, one
piece of waste land in Bull Lane in Oxmantown, formerly in the possession of
John Moor Merchant, one piece of waste ground whereon two messuages were built,
in St. Francis Street, formerly in the possession of William Lock, one message
or tenement with one garden and the appurtenances in Oxmantown near Fishers
Lane in the possession of George Carleton Esquire, one garden or waste plot of
ground in Cookstreet, in the Parish of St. Audeons, upon which are now houses
built by one Robert Eustace, and now in the possession of Bryan Jones Esquire,
one message or tenement with the appurtenances on the Merchant Key, in the
Parish of St. Audeons, sometimes in the possession of John James and others,
which the said Philip Hoar held from Christopher Chilham of Drogheda Merchant
for certain years yet to come, yielding thereout yearly to the said Christopher
and his heirs nine pounds sterling, at the Feasts of Easter and St. Michael the
Archangel, which rent the said Christopher did mortgage unto the said Philip
for ninety pounds sterling, one piece of ground called the Bean Yard in
Oxmantown, in the Parish of St. Michans, late in the possession of Sir Anthony
Morgan Knight, one house on the Pavement in Oxmantown aforesaid, leading to
Youngs Castle, sometimes in the possession of Walter Scanlan, all which houses,
tenements and premises are situate, lying and being within the City and County
of the City of Dublin, or in the County of the City of Dublin, or in the
Suburbs or liberties thereof, together with all other the houses, lands,
tenements and and interest formerly belonging or in any ways appertaining to
the said Philip Hoar within the said City and County of the City of Dublin, the
Suburbs and Liberties thereof, And also the Town and lands of Bulls Town, the
Town and lands of Clatters Town, with a Water-Mill and Pigeon-House, and part
of the Town and Lands of Cales Town, the Towns and Lands of Bewtown and
Swines-Deane, all lying and being in the County of Mead, And all other the
lands, tenements and hereditaments formerly belonging or appertaining to the
said Philip Hoar in the said County of Mead; And that he the said Sir George
Lane, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators respectively, shall have, hold,
possess and enjoy all and singular the premises, with all the rights, members
and appurtenances, Rents, Issues and Profits, and all other advantages
whatsoever to them, and every of them belonging or appertaining, to the use of
him the said Sir George Lane, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns
respectively, subject to such rents and services as the same are liable unto by
this Act; And the said several and respective Letters Patents, as to all things
therein contained, and not herein after changed or altered, shall be and are
hereby ratified and confirmed, Any thing in this present Act, or any other
former Act, cause, matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Philip
Hoar the son shall be and is hereby restored to his blood, and shall and may
derive his pedigree and descent from all and every of his Ancestors lineal and
collateral, other than as to the premises so settled on the said Sir George
Lane as aforesaid: And that he the said Philip Hoar shall be and is hereby
restored unto, settled, confirmed and established in the actual and present
Seizin and possession of the Town and lands of Castleknock and Irishtown, with
a Mill and Salmon Wire thereunto belonging on the Liffy, Hartstown, Stahenny,
Castle-Curragh, alias, Curragh, Ballidowde, Rickinhead, Balliboggan, Lusk,
alias, Lusks Land, Rath Lucastown, The Logh, alias, Loghes Hill, alias, Bullogs
Land, the Rath of Killosery, alias, Ashborn-Rath, two Watermills in the Town of
Killosery, with three acres of land thereunto belonging, Blackhall, containing
sixty acres, lying in the Parish of Killosery, Beauford with twenty acres
thereunto adjoining, late in the tenure of Walter Ryan and John Ryan, and now
leased by the said Philip Hoar to Richard (...) Shoemaker, Correstowne sixty
acres, Coolcoigh, Dunmucky and the twenty acres, alias, Thornetown, Chapel
Middway, one shilling chief rent out of Killmartin, eight pence chief rent out
of Ashtowne in the County of Dublin, as also shall be and is hereby restored
unto, settled, confirmed and established in the actual and present seizin and
possession of one Burgage in St. Maryes Parish in the town of Wexford, one toft
called Allens Walls in St. Peter's Parish in the said Town of Wexford, one wast
message and fifteen acres of land called Farrans Town, alias Lackans land in
Taghmon, The Manors of Skallrish, alias Ballimaskalrish, and Kildowan,
containing the Castle, Town and lands of Drinagh, Ablinstown, Stapolestown,
Doumshtown, Mil-town, Whits-town, Levets-town, Rows-town, Kellis-town,
Synotts-town, in Great Killian twenty Acres, in Whits-town called Morrisgate,
Forty acres, in Jacketts-town, little Ballifenock, Morrens-town,
Gurtchynininog, Quoans-town, Polebreane, Fardeles-town, the Commons of Drynagh
containing sixty five acres, Bogganstown, Carran in Carne containing two acres,
Cullentragh, a plott of ground on the Castle Hills in Wexford, Balleshellan,
Martells-Knock, Graigshallagh, little Johnstown, The Dirr, Youngestown,
Harviestown, and the mill thereunto belonging, PoleHore, Bolgerstown, and
Muchy-wood, and Mullindery with the appurtenances, all lying and being in the
County of Wexford, And that he the said Philip Hoar shall have, hold, possess
and enjoy all and singular the premises to him and his Heirs against the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and against the said Sir George Lane and
his Heirs, and all claiming by from or under them or any of them by virtue of
this or the said former Act, with all the rights, members and appurtenances,
Rents, issues and profits, and all other advantages whatsoever to them and
every of them belonging and appertaining, to the use of him the said Philip
Hoar his Heirs, Executors and Administrators respectively for ever, Subject
unto such rents and services as the same are liable unto by this Act, This
present Act, or any other Act, Law, Statute, Ordinance, Order, Grant, Decree,
Outlawry, Attainder, Record, Provision, Sequestration, Distribution, Allotment,
Judgment or Conviction, or any other clause, matter or thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

His Majesty having taken to his Princely consideration the many faithful and
acceptable services of Sir George Hamilton Knight, performed as well to his late
Majesty of Glorious Memory, as to himself in the Wars of Ireland, and that in
several qualities, as Captain of Horse, Colonel and Captain of Foot, Governor
of the Castle of Nenach, and other capacities for which there were arrears to
great value accrued to the said Sir George Hamilton before and after the fifth
of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, which, though not stated, are by
agreement and consent between him and other the Commissioned Officers and
Trustees, serving in Ireland before that time, reduced to five thousand pounds
sterling, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Sir
George Hamilton shall in full satisfaction of all personal arrears due unto him
for his service in Ireland, in the several employments he had there before and
after the said fifth day of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, be
satisfied the sum of five thousand pounds sterling out of the security set a
part and designed by this and the said former Act for satisfaction of the
arrears of such Commissioned Officers as served His Majesty or his said Royal
Father in the Wars of Ireland, at any time before or after the fifth of June,
One thousand six hundred forty nine, in such manner as by the said agreement is
directed, this Act, or any other Act or matter to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided Always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any
lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which were seized, sequestered or set apart
upon account of the late Rebellion or War, have been given and granted by any
particular clause or provision in the said former Act mentioned, or by any
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, or under the Great Seal of
Ireland, to any person or persons whose estates therein were confirmed by the
said former Act, or are confirmed by this present Act, and whereof a third part
has not been already evicted by some Decrees herein confirmed, (the lands
granted to his Royal Highness James Duke of York, George Duke of Albemarle,
Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Roger Earl of Orrery, Charles late Earl of Mountrath,
Richard Lord Baron of Coloony, Charles late Earl of Falmouth, Theobald Earl of
Carlingford, Henry Lord Arlington, John Lord Kingston, Chidley Coot and Thomas
Coot Esquires, the relict and Heirs of Sir Simon Harcourt, and the relict and
Children of Colonel George Cook, Sir William Pen, Sir Theophilus Jones, Sir
George Ayscough, the Orphans of Colonel Owen O Conell, Sir George Rawdon
Baronet, Sir George Lane, Edward Vernon Esquire, Erasmus Smith Esquire and the lands
conveyed or mentioned to be conveyed by John Parker to certain Trustees for
pious uses, which Trustees are hereby made responsible to the Lord Lieutenant,
or other Chief Governor and Governors and Council there for the time being,
touching the execution and performance of the said Charity, and the lands
granted to any person or persons in satisfaction of arrears due for service
done in Ireland, or in satisfaction of any debt owing to them for provisions
for the Army or Navy in Ireland, and the lands which by the said former Act are
restored to former Proprietors, only excepted) That there and in such cases,
the said Provisoes, Clauses, Grants and Letters Patents shall be understood,
and so are hereby declared to be good and valid for no more than two full third
parts of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments therein mentioned, and thereby
granted, and as to one third part of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
therein contained, shall be and so are hereby declared to be null and void, Any
thing in the said Provisoes, Clauses, Letters Patents, or in the said former
Act, or in this present Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding:
Nevertheless such Grantees, and all those who claim under them, shall have like
liberty of Retrenchment, and in like manner and form as Adventurers and
Soldiers are to have by the rules of this Act, and the third part so as
aforesaid to be retrencht, shall remain and be vested in His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, to be disposed and applied to such uses as other
forfeited lands by this Act ought to be, Any thing herein before contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That out of all
the Lands which have been decreed to any Irish Papist, Popish Recusant, or
Roman Catholic, by virtue of any Decrees not grounded upon some particular
Proviso in the said former Act, and made by the Commissioners for execution of
the said former Act, after the second day of July in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty three, and herein confirmed, one years rent,
according to the values the same were let at in the year, One thousand six
hundred fifty nine, over and above all other the rents and payments by this Act
imposed or made levyable, shall be raised, and levied, and paid unto the
Receivers herein after mentioned, by two even and equal payments, the first
payment thereof to begin upon the first day of November, which shall be in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and seven, and the second
payment thereof to be upon the first day of November, which shall be in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and eight, under the penalty
following, That is to say, every person liable to the payment of any part of
the said years rent, and making default, and failing to pay the same by the
space of twenty days next after any the days and times wherein the same ought
to be paid, shall be chargeable, and is hereby charged with double the sum
which ought to have been paid as aforesaid, to be levied by Process out of His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, in like manner as any other the rents herein
before imposed or appointed to be levied; And the said Receivers herein after
mentioned, are to pay the moneys by them received from time to time unto
Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Vice-Treasurer of Ireland, or unto the Vice-Treasurer
of Ireland for the time being, And the said Arthur Earl of Anglesey, or the
Vice-Treasurer of Ireland for the time being, is hereby appointed to issue out
and pay all and singular the moneys which by virtue of this clause shall be
received and paid in, or otherwise levied as aforesaid, unto such Irish
Papists, Popish Recusants and Roman Catholics, as served under His Majesty's
Ensigns abroad, and are particularly mentioned in the late Declaration, and
were seized of or entitled unto any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments upon the
three and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty and one, to
which they are not yet restored, and in such parts and proportions as the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time
being shall direct and appoint.

And whereas in the said former Act it is provided, That the sum and sums of
money which have been forfeited by any Adventurer or Adventurers, by reason he
or they did not satisfy or pay in their full proportions or sums of money
respectively subscribed by them, according to the tenor of the Acts of
Parliament of the seventeenth and eighteenth of King Charles the first, be and
are hereby vested and settled in His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, as in
and by the said Act more fully appears, which forfeited subscriptions,
adventures or sums of money are commonly called by the name of lapsed money,
And whereas His Majesty for the better increasing of the stock of undisposed
forfeited lands, and to the end that more of the ancient and former Proprietors
may come to be restored, is graciously pleased to relinquish his satisfaction
of the said lapsed money by or out of any forfeited lands to be therefore set
out, and to accept of the sum of Thirty thousand pounds sterling, to be paid
unto His Majesty in lieu and recompense thereof, Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That His Majesty's right and title in and to any
forfeited lands, in recompense of and satisfaction for the said lapsed moneys
shall be and is hereby released and discharged; and further, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, and other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, to assess and
impose upon all and every the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which by
virtue of this Act shall be restored or confirmed to any former Proprietors of
the Popish Religion, or granted to any the Roman Catholics of Ireland, such
further and other sums as they shall think fit, for the raising and levying of
Thirty thousand pounds sterling, in the most equal and indifferent way that may
be, to be paid unto the Receiver herein after mentioned, by two even und equal
payments, the first payment thereof to begin upon the first day of May, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and six,
and the second day of payment to be upon the first day of November, in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and six, and in case any person or
persons liable to the payment of any part of the said Thirty thousand pounds
so, as aforesaid, to be assessed and imposed, shall make default of payment, by
the space of one and twenty days next after any the days and times wherein the
same ought to be paid, then the person so making default shall be chargeable,
and is hereby charged with double the sum which ought to have been paid as
aforesaid; and the Vice-Treasurer of Ireland for the time being, shall issue
out and pay, or cause to be issued out and paid unto Richard Stratford of
London Gentleman, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the sum of Three
thousand pounds sterling, and the residue thereof being Twenty seven thousand
pounds, and all other the forfeitures and penalties which shall be incurred for
non payment of the said Thirty thousand pounds, unto such person and persons,
and to and for such uses as the said lapsed moneys, or the lands to be set out
in satisfaction of the same, were or ought to have been granted, in pursuance
of His Majesty's several and respective Letters under His Royal Signet, bearing
date upon the tenth, or eleventh, or the twelfth day of February, in the
Fourteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, and in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two, or by any other Letters under His Majesty's
Royal signet, or by any Letters Patents to Roger Earl of Orrery, or others, Any
thing in this or the said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the customs,
duties and impositions of what nature or kind soever which are or shall be due
for any goods, wares or merchandise imported into or exported out of the ports
and havens of Strangford and Ardlass, or either of them, or any the members
thereof, or Creekes thereunto belonging, heretofore the inheritance of
Wentworth late Earl of Kildare, and by him sold unto His Majesty, shall be and
are hereby vested in the Kings Majesty, and shall be held and enjoyed by His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, any defect in the conveyance thereof to his
Majesty, or other matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Capital
message, mills, manors, towns and lands of Chappel-Izzard, alias Izzod, with
all the rights, members and appurtenances thereof, heretofore conveyed or
mentioned to be conveyed or contracted for, by or in behalf of the Kings
Majesty, and agreed to be conveyed by Sir Maurice Eustace Knight, late Lord
Chancellor of Ireland, unto the Kings Majesty, and for which part of the
purchase money has been paid by the Kings Majesty unto the said Sir Maurice
Eustace in his life time, shall upon payment of the residue of the purchase
money unto the lawful Executors of him the said Sir Maurice Eustace, be and is
hereby vested in the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and shall be
held and enjoyed by his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors against the said Sir
Maurice Eustace and his heirs, and all and every other person and persons
claiming by from or under him, them or any of them, any defect in the
conveyance or assurance of the premises, any thing in the said former Act or
this present Act, and any other matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall set out and allot, or cause to be set out and
allotted unto Major John Neil so much of the undisposed and forfeited lands in
the Barony of Barrymore in the County of Cork, as may be sufficient to reprize
him the said John Neile for the Houses in Waterford, whereof his Father was
seized and possessed the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred
forty and one, any thing in the said former Act or this present Act contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this present Act, shall restore unto Sir Luke Bath Baronet,
and his Heirs, all the Castles, Houses, Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Rents, Reversions or Remainders, Right, Title, Interest and
Estate whatsoever, which he the said Sir Luke Bath, or his deceased Father
James Bath, or any other in trust for them, or either of them, or to their or
either of their use, was seized or possessed on the two and twentieth day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, (except the houses and lands
within the City of Dublin and Liberties thereof, and also except all
Impropriations and Appropriate tithes) which said Manors, Lands, Houses and
Hereditaments so, as aforesaid, to be restored, shall after such restitution be
held by the said Sir Luke Bath, and his Heirs and Assigns, and shall be
subject to such Quit-rents, Services, and other payments, as the same are made
liable unto by this Act, and would have been charged with, in case the same had
continued in the possession of any the Adventurers or Soldiers, or of their or
any of their Heirs or Assigns; And it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That the
Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith set out and allot unto
the said Sir Luke Bath and his Heirs, so much forfeited lands in lieu of the
said houses and lands in Dublin, formerly belonging to him the said Sir Luke
Bath or his Father, and to which he is not to be restored, as may be sufficient
to reprize him the said Sir Luke Bath and his Heirs, for the houses and lands
aforesaid; And the said Commissioners are also to set out and allot unto His
Royal Highness James Duke of York and his Heirs, so much other forfeited lands
as may be equal in value, worth and purchase, for what he has in Custodiam of
the Estate of Sir Luke Bath, and that the Adventurers and Soldiers, and the
Officers who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred and
forty nine, and all other who are possessed of, or entitled unto any of the
estate of the said Sir Luke Bath, according to this Act, shall be likewise
reprized in two full third parts of the value of their respective interests,
before the said Sir Luke Bath be restored to such part of his estate from
whence they are to be removed, Any thing in this Act, or the former Act, or any
other Law, Statute, Ordinance, Vtlary, Attainder, Record, Sequestration,
Allotment, or any other cause, matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Commissioners for execution of this Act shall forthwith and without staying
for any previous reprizal, restore unto Garret Moor of Mourueene in the County
of Mayo Esquire His Heirs and Assigns, all and every the Manors, Castles, Lands,
Tenements, Reversions, Remainders, and all other Hereditaments, Right, Title,
Condition, and other Interest and Estate whatsoever, which he the said Garret,
or his Father, or any other in trust for them, or either of them, or for either
of their uses, had, held, possessed or enjoyed, or ought to have had, held,
possessed or enjoyed on the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, and that after such restitution, and in lieu and
satisfaction thereof, the Commissioners do likewise with all convenient speed
set out and allot, or cause to be set out and allotted unto the Adventurers and
Soldiers, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns respectively, who shall be
removed to make way for such restitution, their several and respective two
third parts, out of some other undisposed forfeited Lands, Any thing in this or
the said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding-

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Commissioners for execution of this Act, do forthwith and without staying
for any previous Reprizal, restore unto Edmond Lord Vice-count Mountgarret, his
Heirs and Assigns, his and their principal and Capital Message, with the
appurtenances, and shall also forthwith restore unto the said Edmond Lord
Vice-count Mountgarret, his Heirs and Assigns, all and singular other the
Messuages, Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Remainders, and
other Hereditaments, Right, Title, Condition and other Interest and Estate
whatsoever, which he the said Edmond Lord Vice-count Mountgarret, or his
Father, or any other in trust for them, or either of them, or for either of
their uses, had, held, possessed and enjoyed, or ought to have had, held,
possessed or enjoyed on the two and twentieth of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, and whereof no Adventurer or Soldier, nor the Heir,
Executor, Administrator or Assignee of any Adventurer or Soldier is now in
possession (Impropriations or Appropriate tithes only excepted) And that all
and every the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whereof the said Edmond Lord
Vice-count Mountgarret, or his Father, or any other person or persons in trust
for him, or to his use, were seized or possessed on the said two and twentieth
day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and which are now in the
possession of any Adventurer or Soldier, or of the Heir, Executor,
Administrator or Assignee of any Adventurer or Soldier shall after their
several and respective full two third parts to them set out and allotted out of
other forfeited and undisposed lands in satisfaction of their several and
respective interests, be likewise set out and allotted unto and placed in the
possession of him the said Edmond Lord Vice-count Mountgarrett and his Heirs,
any thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith restore unto
Colonel Lucas Taaffe and Elizabeth his Wife all and singular the Ioinctures,
portions, lands, Tenements and Hereditaments and other interest whatsoever
which the said Elizabeth or any other in trust for her or for her use had or
ought to have had, held, possessed or enjoyed the two and twentieth of October,
One thousand six hundred forty one, or at any time since, any thing in this Act
or any other Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided Nevertheless that no reprizable Soldier, Adventurer, Officer serving
before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, or Protestant
Purchasor in Connaght or Clare, be removed out of any part of the premises,
which they are to have by the rule of this Act, before they be first reprized
for the same according to the said rules.

And be it further Cnacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Richard Earl of
Burlington and Cork, Lord High-treasurer of Ireland, his Heirs and Assigns in
the distribution and setting forth of the security appointed for the
satisfaction of the arrears of the Commissioned Officers who served your
Majesty, and your late Royal Father in Ireland before the fifth of June, One
thousand six hundred forty nine, shall have the preference and preemption of
all the forfeited houses, lands, tenements and Hereditaments in the town of
Youghill or the liberties thereof, belonging unto and which are part of the
said securities, at the rate of Eight years purchase, as they are or shall be
found to be really and Bona Fide worth, and that Arthur Earl of Anglesey
Vice-treasurer of Ireland, his heirs and Assigns shall have like preference
and preemption of all the forfeited houses, lands, tenements and hereditaments
in the town of Rosse in the County of Wexford, or the liberties thereof,
belonging unto and which are part of the said securities, at the rate of eight
years purchase, as they are or shall be found to be really and Bona Fide worth,
and if any doubt or difficulty shall arise concerning the value of the said
houses or lands, so as the Trustees for the said Officers, shall not be
satisfied with the return already made of the value of the same, that in such
case upon the desire and request of the said Trustees, there shall be a new
Survey and valuation of the said towns and liberties thereof, by such persons
as shall be appointed by the Commissioners for the Execution of this Act, by
and with the consent of the said Trustees, according to which return the said
Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, are to be sold and not otherwise,
And in case the said Earls, their Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, shall
offer unto the said Commissioners for the execution of this Act, any Debentures
of Officers who served as aforesaid before the fifth of June, One thousand six
hundred forty nine, for or in part of payment for all, or so much of the said
Houses and premises in the said several towns, as shall be by them
respectively contracted and agreed for, that the same shall be allowed, and the
said Commissioners are hereby authorized, and required to accept and receive
the same, for all or in part of the purchase money, so as the said Debentures
are capable of prior satisfaction, and there has been such Deductions and
defalcations made as are directed by this Act, and the said former Act, and
shall not be accepted to satisfy more in the pound than the whole security
will hold out to satisfy the Debentures of the rest of the said Officers, and
the said Commissioners are also required and authorized to give such
certificates as are necessary for the passing of Patents thereof, according to
the rules of this Act.

And whereas there is a Lease granted of a House in Dublin, called Cork house,
with the appurtenances, unto the Right Honorable Richard Earl of Cork and
Burlington, by the name of Richard Earl of Cork Lord High-treasurer of
Ireland, from James Margetson Doctor of Divinity, Treasurer of the Cathedral
Church of St. Patricks Dublin, by the approbation of the Archbishop of the same
Diocese, and in obedience to his Majesty's Letters of Recommendation to that
purpose dated the twentieth of July, One thousand six hundred sixty, and
confirmed by the several Deans and Chapters both of the Holy Trinity Dublin,
and St. Patricks Dublin, bearing date the three and twentieth of January, One
thousand six hundred sixty, for the term of forty years from the Feast of the
Nativity of our Blessed Savior then last past, which was made upon good and
valueable considerations, Be it therefore Enacted and it is hereby Enacted and
ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Richard Earl of Cork and
Burlington, his Executors and Assigns, shall and may have, hold and enjoy the
said house with the appurtenances mentioned in the said Lease, for and during
the years therein mentioned, at the Reservations thereby reserved, Any thing in
this Act, or any other former Act or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it Enacted, That all and singular the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, which Arthur Lord Vice-Count of Valentia and Earl of
Anglesey has purchased from any person or persons in actual possession
thereof, by virtue of any Grant, Order or Disposition of the late Usurped
Powers, or any of them, the Lands and Tenements Decreed away by the
Commissioners for the execution of the said former Act, only excepted, shall
be settled, and are hereby granted and confirmed unto him, his Heirs and
Assigns, and he and they shall have, hold and enjoy the same; and that for such
of the said estates, or any part thereof as have or has been Decreed away as
aforesaid, or shall be decreed away in pursuance of this Act by the
Commissioners appointed, or to be appointed for the execution thereof, the said
Earl, His Heirs and Assigns, shall forthwith be fully reprized for the same,
and without any Retrenchment by the said Commissioners, by so much forfeited
lands as may be sufficient to make up and supply unto the said Arthur Earl of
Anglesey, his Heirs and Assigns, what was or is granted, or intended to be
granted by the said Act, or by this Act; And the said Earl, his Heirs and
Assigns shall have, hold and enjoy all other the benefits and advantages in and
by the said former Act given, granted or provided, or intended to be given,
granted or provided to or for the said Earl, his Heirs or Assigns, Any thing in
the said former Act, or in this present Act, or otherwise to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Explained, Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every payment and payments, sum and sums of money which are and
shall be made by any Adventurer, Officer and Soldier, Connaght-Purchasor,
Irish Papist, Popish Recusant, Roman Catholic or others, out of or for any of
the said forfeited, vested or escheated Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
Estates, by virtue or in pursuance of His Majesty's said Declaration,
Instructions, the said former, or this present Act, or by all, every or any of
them, to or for any use or uses, intent, end or purpose therein respectively
mentioned, expressed, declared, limited or appointed; Excepting only the
Quit-Rents and other Chief-Rents reserved and payable unto His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, and such other sums as are herein otherwise directed to
be paid, shall be paid for the said uses, intents and purposes into the hands
of John Bence and Alexander Bence Esquires, or either of them, who are hereby
constituted and appointed jointly and severally to collect and receive the
same, and to be Collectors and Receivers thereof by themselves or their Deputy
or Deputies respectively, whose Acquittance or Acquittances, Receipt or
Receipts for the said several and respective payments, sum and sums of money,
being entered and signed as after is directed, shall be firm, valid, effectual
and sufficient discharges in Law for the same respectively: And to the end our
said Vice-Treasurer may know what sums of money he is to receive, all
Acquittances which shall be given as aforesaid, are to be entered and signed by
the several Officers of the Exchequer, according to the accustomed manner of
Acquittances: All which payments, sum and sums of money, the said Receiver or
Receivers are to account for and pay over unto Arthur Earl of Anglesey, His
Majesty's Receiver General and Vice-Treasurer of this Kingdom, or to the
Receiver General and Vice-Treasurer of this Kingdom for the time being, to be
diposed of, issued and paid out by him to and for the several uses, intents and
purposes unto which, and in such manner as the same are respectively designed,
limited or appointed, and to no other intent, use or purpose; upon the issuing
whereof, the said Earl of Anglesey, or the Vice-Treasurer for the time being,
shall take the usual accustomed fees payable for other moneys, And the said
Collector or Collectors, Receiver or Receivers for their pains, care and
service herein, shall have, take, receive and deduct out of and for the
respective payments, sum and sums of money which they shall so receive, pay
over or account for such fees as were formerly allowed unto and taken by the
former Receivers of the money payable by the Adventurers and Soldiers, Any
thing in the said former or this present Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding: Nevertheless it is hereby declared, That the Commissioned
Officers who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty
nine, shall be and are hereby discharged of and from the payment of any fees
due and payable unto the said John Bence and Alexander Bence Receivers
aforesaid, for or out of any Debentures due to the said Commissioned Officers,
but that the said John Bence and Alexander Bence shall in lieu of and
satisfaction for the same, receive such compensation and recompense out of the
Rents, Issues and Profits of the Security appointed for satisfaction of the
said Debentures, as the Lord Lieutenant and Council shall think fit.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Commissioners for execution of this Act, do forthwith and without staying
for any previous Reprizal, restore unto Theobald Lord Vice-Count Mayo, his
Heirs and Assigns, his and their principal and Capital Message, with the
appurtenances, and shall also forthwith restore unto the said Theobald Lord
Vice-Count Mayo, his Heirs and Assigns, all and singular other the Messuages,
Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Remainders, and all other
Hereditaments, right, title, condition, and other interest and estate
whatsoever, which he the said Theobald Lord Vice-Count Mayo, or his Father, or
any Ancestor whose heir he is, or any other in trust for them, or any of them,
or for any of their uses had, held, possessed or enjoyed, or ought to have had,
held, possessed or enjoyed on the two and twentieth of October, One thousand
six hundred forty one, and whereof no Adventurer or Soldier, nor the Heir,
Executor, Administrator or Assignee of any Adventurer or Soldier is now in
possession (Impropriations or Appropriate tithes only excepted) And that all
and every the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whereof the said Theobald Lord
Vice-Count Mayo, or his Father, or any other Ancestor whose heir he is, or any
other person or persons in trust for them, or any of them, were seized or
possessed on the said two and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred
forty one, and which are now in the possession of any Adventurer or Soldier,
or of the Heir, Executor, Administrator or Assignee of any Adventurer or
Soldier, shall after their several and respective full two third parts to them
set out and allotted out of other forfeited and undisposed lands, in
satisfaction of their several and respective interest, be likewise set out and
allotted unto, and placed in the possession of him the said Theobald Lord
Vice-Count Mayo and his Heirs, Any thing in this or the said former Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
nothing herein contained shall in any sort prejudice the right, title or
interest of Captain Owen Mac Carthy of Clogheroe in the County of Cork, unto
any of the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments in the said County, mentioned or
specified in his Claim, upon which he was adjudged innocent by the late
Commissioners, but left to the Law for the recovery of the same; And that the
Lands so claimed by him shall continue and remain in His Majesty's hands,
undisposed of, for the space of twelve months next after the passing of this
Act, to the end that the said Owen Mac Carthy may within that time make out his
right and title thereunto, if any he have, and cause the same to be adjudged
and determined by due course of Law; And in case the said right and title be
not made to appear, and be determined as aforesaid, within the time aforesaid,
then all and singular the said Lands shall and may be disposed of as any other
forfeited lands by this Act ought to be, Any thing in the said former Act, or
this present Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the arrears due
unto the late Marquess of Clanricard, for the several times and employments he
had in this Kingdom before the tenth of December, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, be allowed and satisfied to the Executors or Administrators of the said
Marquess of Clanricard, out of the Securities set apart for satisfaction of the
Commissioned Officers, who served before the fifth of June, One thousand six
hundred forty nine; And that the said Executors and Administrators be and are
hereby admitted and allowed to state all the said arrears due to the said
Marquess of Clanricard before and until the tenth of December, One thousand six
hundred and fifty, before the Commissioners for execution of this Act, before
any distribution made of the said Securities, Any thing in this Act, or the
said former Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

His Majesty taking into consideration the many good and faithful services
performed by Charles late Vice-Count Muskry in Foreign parts, and particularly
that in consequence of the Disposition of Dunkirk, the state of His Majesty's
affairs did not admit the continuance of the pay of the Regiment of Foot
commanded by the said Charles Vice-Count Muskry, was therefore graciously
pleased by His Royal Letters of the sixth of April, in the fifteenth year of
His Reign, to direct and appoint that all the Lands in the Barony of Muskry, in
the County of Cork, forfeited to His Majesty, and not set out to Soldiers or
Adventurers, nor restored to the former Proprietors, the greatest part whereof
were held of the estate of Donogh Earl of Clancarty, the said Charles his
Father, should be by one or more Grant or Grants passed under the Great Seal of
Ireland, unto the said Charles late Vice-Count Muskry, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, To his and their use and uses without any account to be given for the
same to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, as by the tenor of the said
Letter more at large may appear, since which time the said Charles late
Vice-Count Muskry has ended his long continued Services by the loss of his
life in the late expedition at Sea against the Hollander, His Majesty is
therefore graciously pleased pursuant to His said former Royal intentions, That
it be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners for execution of this Act, shall set out and allot unto
Charles-James Mac Carthy now Vice-Count Muskry, Son and Heir to the said
Charles Vice-Count Muskry, all the forfeited lands in the said Barony, not set
out formerly to Adventurers and Soldiers, nor restored to the former
Proprietors, And that the said Commissioners shall quiet and establish the said
Charles-James Vice-Count Muskry in the possession thereof, which he is to hold,
possess and enjoy to him and the heirs males of his body, and for want of such
issue, the Remainder to the said Donogh Earl of Clancarty, and the heirs males
of his body begotten, the Remainder in Fee to the right heirs of the said Earl,
Any thing in this Act, or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding;
And that Certificates be thereof granted in order to the passing of Letters
Patents: Provided nevertheless, That the said Donogh Earl of Clancarty,
Grandfather to the said Charles-James now Vice-Count Muskry, or the now
Countess of Clancarty, if she survive the said Earl, may by way of Lease for
years of any part of the premises, or by grant of a Rentcharge for years out
of the premises, or or otherwise, as to him the said Donogh, or to her the
said Countess, if she survive, shall seem meet, afford such relief out of the
premises to the former Proprietors thereof, as he or she shall find do best
merit the same, And what he or she shall do therein, is hereby allowed of, and
made good and valid in Law.

And whereas Sir Philip Percival Knight Deceased, for and on the behalf of of
Thomas late Earl of Strafford, and Sir George Radcliffe Knight Deceased, and
their Heirs, in or about the year One thousand six hundred thirty and six, did
contract and agree with Teige O Connor Sligoe, Uncle and Heir in tail to
Donogh O Connor Sligoe then lately Deceased, and also with Edmond Mac Jordan
and Dorothy his Wife, sole Sister and Heir General to the said Donogh, for
diverse Lordships, Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the
County of Sligoe, being formerly the estate of the said Donogh O Connor Sligoe,
whereupon several sums of money were paid, disbursed and secured to be paid by
the said Sir Philip Percival, to the said Teige O Connor, Edmond Mac Jordan and
Dorothy his Wife, and to some other person or persons by their or some of their
consent, direction or appointment, for the freeing, discharging and disingaging
the said premises of or from some mortgages, Leases or Encumbrances thereupon
or some of them, but no legal conveyance were or could then be made or
perfected to him the said Sir Philip Percival by reason of the Grand Office
then lately found in the Province of Connaght, whereby his Majesty was
entitled to the said lands amongst diverse others in the said Province, Be it
therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the
said Lordships, Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances formerly belonging to the said Donogh O Connor Sligo and the said
Teige O Connor Sligo, or to either of them, shall be and are hereby settled
upon William Earl of Strafford Son and Heir of the said Thomas Earl of
Strafford, and Thomas Radcliffe Esquire Son and heir of the said Sir George
Radcliffe, and their heirs under the Rents and services due and payable
thereout to his Majesty in the year One thousand six hundred forty one, And
that they the said William Earl of Strafford, and Thomas Radcliffe, and their
heirs be forthwith settled in the possession of all and singular the said
Lordships, Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, by the
Commissioners appointed or to be appointed for the Execution of this Act, any
thing in the aforesaid Act, or in this Act contained to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding: And be it further Enacted that all depositions and
examinations of witnesses that have been taken in a cause lately depending
before the Lord Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, between the said William
Earl of Strafford, and Thomas Radcliffe Esquire and Sir John Percival plaintiffs
against Martin O Connor Grandsonn and heir to Teige O Connor Sligoe Esquire
Deceased, Richard Lord Baron of Coloony and others defendants, shall and may be
read and made use of as good proof for all such lands, Tenements and
hereditaments as by the said Depositions have been proved to be part of the
said Donogh O Conners estate: And be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said William Earl of Strafford, and Thomas Radcliffe or
either of them, their heirs or Assigns, shall within six months time after
the passing of this Act, pay or cause to be paid all such sum or sums of
money, as shall within the time of the said six months be made appear to be
justly due from the said Teige O Conner Sligoe, Edmond Mac Jordan and Dorothy
his Wife, Sir Philip Percival, Thomas late Earl of Strafford, and Sir George
Radcliffe or any of them, their heirs or Assigns of any of them, and not by
them or some of them already paid for and toward the purchasing and buying
off of any of the said Mortgages, Leases, or Encumbrances which were upon the
estate of the said Donogh O Conner at the time of the said contract made as
aforesaid, which sum or sums of money so made appear to be due as aforesaid
from the said Teige O Conner, Edmond Mac Jordan, and Dorothy his Wife, Sir
Philip Percival, Thomas late Earl of Strafford, and Sir George Radcliffe, their
heirs or Assigns or any of them, or by them or any of them, deposited in the
Clerk of the Councils hands, in Order to the buying off of any of the said
Mortgages, Leases or encumbrances, shall be and are hereby vested in, and made
payable unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to be disposed of by his
Majesty as by his Signet and Sign manual he shall declare and appoint, Saving
and excepting hereour such sum and sums of money as shall appear to be justly
and legally due by one Mortgage upon part of the said estate, made by the said
Donogh O Conner to certain Feoffees to the use of the children of Sir Francis
Blundell, their heirs or Assigns.

Provided that the Adventurers, Commissioned Officers who served before the
fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, and Soldiers who are now
in possession of all or any the said lands, or ought to have the same according
to the rules of this Act, and are by virtue hereof to be removed from the same,
shall have so much other forfeited lands set out to them by the Commissioners
for the Execution of this Act, as may be sufficient to reprize and satisfy
them for two full third parts of the lands from whence they are to be removed,
and certificates shall be thereof granted in order to the passing of Letters
Patents, which shall be of like force and effect as any other Letters Patents
granted in pursuance of this Act, are or ought to be, And they and every of
them are hereby likewise discharged for them, their Heirs and Executors
respectively, of and from all arrears of rent and measne profits received or to
be received by them at any time before they shall be removed as aforesaid.

Provided also, That the Town and Lands of Bradcullen, and so much lands
contiguous about the same, as may amount unto three thousand acres of
profitable land, with the appurtenances, which by the said Contract made with
the said Teige O Conner, were to have been given or assured to the said Teig O
Conner and his heirs, shall be and are hereby excepted from being settled upon
the said William Earl of Strafford and Thomas Radcliffe, and their Heirs, or
any of them, and shall remain diposeable between Sir Francis Gore Knight, and
Captain Robert Parkes, according to their several proportions of what they
respectively possess of the said estate, and what by the rules of this Act
shall belong to them respectively, and are to be reckoned and numbered out of
such lands which are now in their or either of their possessions, most
contiguous to the said Town of Bradcullen, in pursuance of the said Contract.

And whereas the said Sir Philip Percival and Sir George Ratcliffe, or one of
them, did (besides the said Donogh O Connors estate) in like manner purchase
some other small parcels of lands, tenements and hereditaments in the said
County of Sligoe, from several other persons, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said William Earl of Strafford and Thomas
Radcliffe shall be and are hereby restored to all the Estate, Right and Title
which the said Thomas late Earl of Strafford and Sir George Radcliffe, or
either of them had either in Law or equity in or to the said last mentioned
lands, tenements and hereditaments in the year One thousand six and forty, And
that they the said William Earl of Strafford and Thomas Ratcliffe, shall by the
said Commissioners for execution of this Act, be forthwith restored to the
possession of all such of the said last mentioned lands, tenements and
hereditaments whereof the said Thomas late Earl of Strafford and Sir George
Radcliff, or either of them, or any other person or persons to their or either
of their uses, or in trust for them, or either of them, were seized or
possessed in the said year, One thousand six hundred and forty, under the rents
and services due and payable thereout to His Majesty in the said year; And
forasmuch as the Adventurers and Soldiers, and Commissioned Officers, who
served before the fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, and are
now in possession of, or claim the same, may the better know whether they may
hold the said lands, or take themselves to their Reprizals, the said
Commissioners are required to hear and determine of the said purchases, and of
the right, title and interest either in Law or Equity which they the said
William Earl of Strafford and Thomas Radcliffe have or had in or to the said
last mentioned lands, and to reprize the said Adventurers, Officers and
Soldiers in other lands of equal value, worth and purchase, according to the
rules of this Act, in case the said lands shall be evicted from them as
aforesaid, who are hereby discharged of and from all arrearages of rent and
mean profits received at any time before they shall be removed from the said
last mentioned lands, Any thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Explained, Declared and Enacted by by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and singular the lands, tenements and hereditaments, and
other estates, with their and every of their members and appurtenances of,
within or appertaining to the half Barony of Irris, alias Irrus, or Erris, and
the Parish of Dunfiny, alias Ducuni, adjoining unto Irris in the County of
Mayo, and the Parish of Termon-barry, alias Tearmonbeary in the County of
Roscommon, and all and every or any of them vested in, settled on, forfeited
to, or belonging (upon the said three and twentieth of October, One thousand
six hundred forty one, or at any time since) unto Your Majesty or Your Royal
Father, together with all the Mines and Minerals therein (Royal Mines
excepted,) and all Fishings on the Sea coasts of the same, as also on the
Loughs and fresh Rivers and waters thereunto in any wise belonging or
appertaining, be and they are hereby as from the five and twentieth day of
March, One thousand six hundred sixty five, in the Seaventeenth year of your
Majesty's Reign vested in, settled on and granted unto Sir Robert Vyner Knight,
Thomas Vyner Esquire, James Temple, Henry Lewis, and Silvanus Hyde of London Gent.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to be held of your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors, as of your Castle of Dublin, in Free and Common Soccage, at and
under the yearly Rent of fifty pounds to be paid into your Majesty's Exchequer
at Michaelmas and Easter, by equal portions, And that Thomas Earl of Ossory,
Richard Earl of Burlington and Cork, Roger Earl of Orrery, Richard Earl of
Arran, and Robert Boil Esquire, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, shall
possess and enjoy the full benefit, advantage and effect of your Majesty's
gracious Letters under your Royal Signet, bearing date the Five and twentieth
day of March, One thousand six hundred sixty two, in the Fourteenth year of
your Reign, for granting of several houses and lands unto Sir James Shaen, his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, in, for or toward satisfaction of Adventures or
Arrears for service done in Ireland, and other interests confirmed, allowed or
satisfied by, or intended, allowed, confirmed or satisfied by or in pursuance
of your Majesty's said gracious Declaration of the Thirtieth of November, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, and other Concessions consistent with, and
agreeable to the same, And also to have, hold and enjoy to them, their Heirs
and Assigns for ever, the full benefit, advantage and effect of your Majesty's
Letters under your Royal Signet, bearing date the Four and twentieth day of
July, One thousand six hundred sixty five, in the Seventeenth year of your
Reign, in trust for and to the uses, intents and purposes therein expressed,
mentioned and declared, Excepting only what concerns the lands and premises
in Irris, Dunfiny and Tearmonbeary, or any of them, Any other Clause, Provisoe,
Sentence, matter or thing whatsoever in the said former or this present Act
contained, or any retrenchment, order or other matter or thing to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding, so far forth as the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief
Governor or Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, shall find the
several matters and things herein contained to be consisted with or agreeable
unto your Majesty's said Declaration, the said former or this Act, or any of
them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That nothing in the said
former or this present Act, may or shall in any sort impeach the innocence of,
or otherwise prejudice Francis Ferrall of Mornine in the County of Longford Esquire
but that he shall be and he is hereby restored unto all and every the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments claimed by him, whereof he was possessed the Three
and twentieth of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, and thereunto
rightfully entitled, and are particularly recited and mentioned in his Decree
from the late Commissioners, whereby he is adjudged an Innocent person,
Notwithstanding his taking of lands in Conaght, or any other cause, matter or
thing to the contrary.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for the execution of this Act, shall forthwith set out and restore to Sir
Connel Farrell Knight and his Heirs, all and singular the Messuages, Manors,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments which in and by the said former Act were
granted and restored, or mentioned, meant or intended to be granted and
restored unto the said Sir Connell Farrell, and all other the benefits and
advantages of the said former Act, And that certificates be thereof granted
unto the said Sir Connell Farrell, in order to the passing of Letters Patents
accordingly; And the said Commissioners are likewise to set out to Cornet
Robert Meredith, and all others who were or are seized or possessed of any of
the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments in satisfaction of any Adventures or
Arrears, such other forfeited lands as may be equal in quantity of Acres unto
two full third parts of the lands so to be restored, any thing herein before
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it further Enacted, that the Commissioners for Execution
of this Act, shall forthwith and without staying for any previous reprizal,
restore unto Colonel John Kelly of Skryne in the Barony of Athlone and County
of Roscomon, his heirs and Assigns, all and every the Manors, Castles, lands,
Tenements, reversions, remainders and all other hereditaments, Right, title,
condition and other interest, and estate whatsoever which he the said John
Kelly, or any other in trust for him or to his use, had, held, possessed or
enjoyed, or of Right ought to have had, held, possessed or enjoyed upon the two
and twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, And that
after such Restitution and in lieu and satisfaction thereof, the Commissioners
do likewise with all convenient Speed set out and allot, or cause to be set out
and allotted unto the Adventurers, Soldiers, Protestant purchasors of lands in
Connaght and Clare, before the first day of September, One thousand six hundred
forty nine, or their Trustees, and their heirs, Executors and Assigns
respectively, who shall be removed to make way for such restitution, their
several and respective two third parts, or such other satisfaction as will be
due to them by the rules of this Act, out of some other forfeited and
undisposed lands, any thing in this or the said former Act contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas His Majesty in and by certain Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of Ireland, did give and grant unto Sir Henry Talbott Knight, certain
lands in Connaght, in Exchange of and for certain other lands of his the said
Sir Henry Talbott, adjoining to the Castle of Dublin, and convenient for His
Majesty's service, It is therefore hereby provided and Enacted, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said Sir Henry Talbott, to have hold and enjoy
to him and his heirs, all and singular the lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
in Connaught, in and by the said Letters Patents granted according to the tenor
and effect of the same Letters Patents, any thing in this Act contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith set out and allot unto all and every
the Adventurers, Soldiers and Commissioned Officers who served before the
fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, their heirs and Assigns
who now are seized or possessed of any Castles, Houses, lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Rents, interests and estates whatsoever in this Kingdom, which
Nicholas Plunkett of Balrath in the County of Mead Esquire now Sir Nicholas
Plunkett Knight, rightfully had and enjoyed upon the two and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, so much other forfeited lands as
may be equal in value, worth and purchase to two full third parts of the lands
whereof they are so possessed, if they shall be willing to accept of such
reprize, and to be removed from the same, And that all and every the messuages,
lands, Tenements and Hereditaments for which they or any of them shall accept
of such reprize, and from which they or any of them shall be removed as
aforesaid, and the other third part of the premises, and all other messuages,
lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Rents, Interests, trusts and estates
whatsoever, which at the time aforesaid did belong to the said Nicholas
Plunkett, shall be by the said Commissioners set out and allotted, and granted
unto James Hamilton Esquire one of the Grooms of His Majesty's Bedchamber and his
heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns respectively, And in case any
person or persons seized or possessed of the premises or any part thereof,
shall not be willing to be reprized for or removed from the same as aforesaid,
the Commissioners for Execution of this Act, shall forthwith set out and allot
unto the said James Hamilton and his Heirs, so much forfeited lands in some
other convenient place as may be equal in value, worth and purchase to the said
lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or to so much thereof as the said
Adventurers and Soldiers or other persons aforesaid, shall be unwilling to be
removed from, and herein they are required to proceed with all convenient
speed, any thing in the said former or this present Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas in and by the said former Act and the Declaration therein recited,
it was provided that it should and might be lawful to and for his Majesty to
restore any innocent Papists who were dispossessed of their Houses in
Corporations, to their several and respective Houses within the said
Corporations, His Majesty is graciously pleased that it may be Enacted, And be
it Enacted, That the said clause and the power thereby reserved to His
Majesty, shall be and is hereby repealed, released and discharged.

Provided always and it is hereby Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for Richard Stephens the younger to hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs,
all and singular the messuages and lands, Tenements and other the Hereditaments
situat, lying and being in and about the Town and Corporation of Kells in the
County of Eastmeath, whereof he the said Richard Stephens the younger by
himself or his under-tenants was seized or possessed upon the Seventh of May,
One thousand six hundred fifty nine, and which lie within the securities set
apart for the satisfaction of the Commissioned Officers who served before the
fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, he the said Richard
Stephens placing thereupon so many Debentures for arrears due for service done
before the said fifth of June, One thousand six hundred forty nine, for which
no satisfaction has yet been given, and which are satisfiable by the rules of
this or the said former Act, as do amount unto the full sum of three hundred
pounds, any thing in this or the said former Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas Sir Theophilus Jones Knight, was heretofore settled in and planted
upon a Message and certain Lands in and about Lucan, and now by virtue of some
Decree made by the Commissioners for execution of the said former Act, and
herein confirmed, is only to enjoy the said Messuages and Lands during the
life of Patrick Sarsfield, who was declared nocent, after whose death the said
lands are declared to come unto William son of the said Patrick, an infant, and
the heirs males of his body, by reason whereof the said Sir Theophilus Jones is
likely to sustain great prejudice, if due consideration be not had of his
improvements, Be it declared and Enacted, That the Commissioners for execution
of this Act, shall forthwith set out and allot unto the said Sir Theophilus
Jones and his heirs, so much forfeited land as may be sufficient in value,
worth and purchase, fully to reprize the said Sir Theophilus Jones for the
Message, Lands and Improvements which have been so evicted and decreed away
from him, Any clause, matter or thing in this or the said former Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful to and for Pierce Creagh, to
hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs, all and singular the Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments in the Province of Connaught, and County of Clare,
or either of them, whereof he the said Pierce Creagh, is now in possession by
himself or his Vnder-tenants, and into which the said Pierce Creagh was
transplanted by the late Usurpers, Any thing in this or the said former Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And because the Adventurers and Soldiers are by this Act exempted from
payment of such Fees to the Officers attending both Houses of Parliament and
others as in and by the said former Act might have been demanded or pretended
to, as due, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland and Council there, to assess and impose upon all and
every the Adventurers and Soldiers, who by the said former Act were liable, or
might be pretended to be liable to the payment of such Fees, such further and
other sums of money not exceeding Five thousand pounds, as they shall think
fit, and to cause the same to be levied in such manner, as any other the sums
herein before imposed, are levyable, and to be paid to the Receivers aforesaid,
to the end the same may be issued out unto and distributed amongst such
Officers in such manner and according to such proportions as the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor and Council, after the advice of both
Houses of Parliament thereupon had, shall direct and appoint.

Provided always, and be it further Cnacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
Colonel William Leg, one of the Grooms of His Majesty's Bedchamber, shall in
lieu of what has been retrenched of his Provisoe in the former Act, have, hold
and enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever, all and singular the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments by His Majesty's Letters Patents to him granted and passed
under the Great Seal of Ireland, pursuant to and according to the tenor and
effect of His Majesty's Letters under His Privy Signet and Sign Manual, bearing
date at Whitehal the Nineteenth day of January, One thousand six hundred sixty
and three, without any Retrenchment or Defalcation whatsoever, Any thing in
this or the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That James Fitz Gerald of Laragh in the County of
Westmeath, and his Heirs, shall have the like restitution, privileges,
advantages and benefits in all respects, as any of the fifty four persons
provided for by this Act, Any thing therein contained or otherwise to the
contrary notwithstanding.

His Majesty being fully satisfied of the constant loyalty and Innocence of
Robert Arthur deceased, late of Dublin Alderman, and of John Arthur his son and
heir, who were both Inhabitants of Dublin, is graciously pleased, That it be
Enacted, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
John Arthur shall be by the said Commissioners restored unto, settled and
established in the quiet possession, and shall thenceforth have, hold, possess
and enjoy to him and his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns
respectively, all and singular the Manors, Houses, Castles, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, Reversions, Remainders, Leases, Rights, Titles, Interests
and Estates whatsoever in the Kingdom of Ireland, which the said Robert Arthur,
or any other person or persons in trust for, him or to his use, had, held or
enjoyed on the twenty second of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, or
at any time since, Except what thereof is in the hands of Adventurers or
Soldiers, or is in the City of Dublin, for which the said John is to be
forthwith reprized elsewhere, to the full value thereof, as near and contiguous
to the said City, as conveniently may be, and the said John Arthur is likewise
restored unto, and is hereby enabled to demand, recover and receive to his own
use, all and singular the debts and sums of money which at any time heretofore
were due and owing to him the said Robert Arthur, and are still unpaid, This
present, or any other Act, Clause, matter or thing therein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas Randall Marquess of Antrim, did on or about the One and twentieth
day of November, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred thirty
seven, demise and grant the Barony of Carry, the Lordship of Ballycastle, and
the Island of Rathcline, and all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments within
the said Barony, Island and Lordship, unto Alexander Macdonnell, John Moore,
Archbald Steward, and John Trayleman, for the term of ninety nine years from
Michaelmas, One thousand six hundred thirty seven, in trust for payment of
certain debts in a Schedule thereunto annexed, for which the said Alexander
Macdonnell, John Moore, Archibald Steward, and John Trayleman, or some of them,
were jointly bound for the said Marquess, and for their Counter security
against those engagements, which said Lease of ninety nine years was in and by
a Clause in the said former Act, enacted to be of the effect and force in Law,
and no other, as the same was before the making of the said Act, and was also
therein and thereby transferred from the said Leasees unto and vested and
settled in Martin Noell then Esquire now Sir Martin Noell Knight, Thomas Carleton
Citizen and Mercer of London, and John Bradburne of the Middle Temple London
Gentleman, in trust to dispose the Rents and profits thereof toward the
payment of all such Debts as were intended by the said Lease to be secured,
which Debts are yet but very ill secured in regard the said Marquess was but
tenant in tail of the premises at the time of the making of the said Lease,
and so still continues, by reason whereof the said Lease will become of no
force and effect in Law after the Death of the said Marquess, nevertheless to
the end that some more certain and lasting provision may be made for the
payment of such Debts as were thereby intended to be secured in such
proportions and upon such terms and conditions as are herein after mentioned,
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Reversion and Inheritance of
all and singular the premises shall be and hereby is vested and settled in
Martin Noell Esquire Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir Martin Noell, George
Blake and John Robinson of the City of London Esquires, upon these trusts
following: that is to say, if any person or persons, their Executors
Administrators or Assigns to whom any Debt is owing which was intended by that
Lease to be secured, will at any time before the nine and twentieth of
September, One thousand six hundred sixty seven, accept of one moiety or half
of his or their principal money due, and have interest for the said moiety from
the time of such acceptance, at the rate of ten pounds per centum in full
satisfaction of his or their whole debt intended by the said Lease to be
secured, and shall declare his or their acceptance by writing under their hands
and Seals, to be acknowledged before the Lord Chancellor, Master of the Rolls
or any Master in Chancery either in England or Ireland, and to be registered in
the Rolls of either Kingdom, and if the said Marquess shall happen to dye after
such acceptance declared and before the said moiety of the principal money,
interest at the rate aforesaid, be fully satisfied and paid, then the said
Trustees of the Reversion and inheritance of the premises, the survivor and
survivors of them, and the Heir of the survivor shall out of the Rents, issues
and profits thereof, pay or cause to be paid the said Moyetie of the principal
with interest as aforesaid, or so much thereof as at the time of the said
Marquesses Death shall be behind and unpaid, And if the said Marquess or his
Heirs shall at any time before the nine and twentieth of September, Which shall
be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred seaventy five, pay or
cause to be paid all and every such Creditors, their Executors or Assigns, who
before the nine and twentieth of September, One thousand six hundred sixty
seven, shall compound as aforesaid, their full composition money with interest
as aforesaid, then the Reversion and Inheritance of the premises shall be and
is hereby transferred unto and vested and settled in the said Marquess and his
Heirs, Nevertheless it is hereby declared and Enacted, That no settlement of
the Reversion and inheritance by this Act, nor any fine, Recovery or other Act
or thing done or suffered or to be done or suffered by the said Trustees of the
Reversion and inheritance of the premises without the privity and consent of
him the said Marquess, shall any ways extend or be construed to give any
strength or continuance to the said lease for ninety nine years, further than
during the life of the said Marquess, but that the said Lease from and after
the Death of the said Marquess, shall be and so hereby is declared to be fully
determined both in Law and equity, to all intents and purposes, And it is
further declared that no Creditor who shall refuse to come in and compound, as
aforesaid, shall be admitted to have any benefit in or by the trust of the
reversion and inheritance as aforesaid, And where any Debts secured by the said
Lease shall be compounded and agreed at one moiety of the principal with
interest as aforesaid, to the end that such composition may not avail or
profit such other Creditors who shall refuse to compound as aforesaid, It is
further declared and Enacted, That the other moiety of the said principal Debt
with the interest thereof, shall be and is hereby vested in and made payable to
the said Marquess, and that he the said Marquess shall have the like benefit
for the payment and satisfaction thereof out of the Lease of ninety nine years,
as any other Creditor refusing to compound, can or may have, and the Trustees
of the said Lease shall pay and satisfy the said Marquesses Executors and
Administrators the other Moiety of the said Debt so compounded, with the
interest thereof equally and in like manner and proportion as the not
compounding Creditor can or may be satisfied, this Act or any other Law to the
contrary notwithstanding: And it is further Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Alexander MacDonnell, John Moore, Archibald Steward,
and John Trayleman Suerties for the said Marquess, and counter secured by the
said Lease for ninety nine years until the same was transferred as aforesaid,
and every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators
shall be and are hereby discharged of and from all actions, suites, executions
and demands which can or may be had against them or any of them, their or any
of their Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattells for or in respect of any of the
said Debts intended by the said Lease to be secured as aforesaid.

His Majesty taking notice of the Barbarous and uncouth names by which most of
the Towns and places in his Kingdom of Ireland, are called, which has
occasioned much damage to diverse of his good Subjects, and are very
troublesome in the use thereof, and much Retards the reformation of that
Kingdom, for Remedy thereof is pleased that it be Enacted, And be it Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Lieutenant, and Council shall and may
advise of settle and direct in the passing of all Letters Patents in that
Kingdom for the future, how new and proper names more suitable to the English
tongue, may be inserted with an alias for all Towns, Lands and places in that
Kingdom, that shall be granted by Letters Patents, which new names shall
thenceforth be the only names to be used, any Law, Statute, Custom or usage
to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

