The INTEREST OF The English Nation Under the Happy Government OF King William
III. Once more Asserted: In ANSWER to the Challenge of a Iacobite. WHEREIN IS
PROVED That that Law which forbids taking up Arms against the King upon any
Pretense whatsoever, is Consistent with the late Revolution.

By Philo-Kalo-Basileos.

If we take the whole People as one Body and Mass, then as the Head is ordained
for the Body, and not the Body for the Head; so must a Righteous King know
himself ordained for his People, and not his People for him. King James I. his
Speech to both Houses of Parliament, March 19. 1603. London, Printed and are to
be Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers Hall, by Amen-Corner. 1696.

The PREFACE.
EVer since our Glorious Monarch King William came to the Crown, I have made it
my Business upon all occasions to the utmost of my Power and Capacity, to
Assert his Interest, and to set forth the Happiness of these Kingdoms, together
with my own Unspeakable Satisfaction under his Government. -- To this purpose I
have written several Papers, some of which were lost in the Crowd, when they
were by Learned Hands recommended to the Public, and others have been
neglected, and thrown aside as inconsiderable; and yet for all that I am not
discouraged: For I find so much Pleasure in the Cause I am Defending, and such
Refreshment in diverting my self with Political Reflections in this Auspicious
Reign, that however I may fail in the Management, I shall never be Deficient in
my Zeal and Hearty Endeavors to Support and Maintain the present Government.

Amongst the rest, the following Discourse, together with the Vindication
thereof, was extorted from me by the insolent Prating, and undecent Scribbling
of certain Jacobites, one of which would needs urge upon me the following Case,
which he presumed to be such a Capping Question as no Body could Answer. I say
it was extorted from me at that Time, being unwilling to engage in a Debate
with my Neighbors; and having besides other things under Consideration. For
though such Rencounters are a Pleasure and Diversion to me, at a proper Season,
yet when other Business is before me, or when my Mind is Cloudy, I am willing
enough to leave these Debates to better Hands; being sensible that what is mean
at best, must be yet meaner under such Circumstances. Upon which account the
Reader will not sind here so even a Thread of Discourse, as might be Expected.
But that I little value, not seeking my own Credit, but the Security of the
Government.

Had I begun to write about the Discovery of the Plot, it might perhaps have
sharpened: he Dullness of my Pen, and inspired a Creeping Style with Life and
Vigor; but I was not so happily Timed. And even now when the Snare is broken,
it is a better Season for Rejoicing and Thanksgiving, than for Satyr and
Invective: For the Jacobites have left us nothing to say; their Actions strike
us Dumb; and their Bloody Designs cry so loud, that nothing can be heard. They
have indeed been sufficiently exposed already, but this Plot has painted them
more Black and Monstrous, more Loathsome and Abominable than any thing that has
been said, or could be thought of heretofore. And if Oldham were alive again,
he would be confounded with the Subject, and not know where to begin his Satyr.
They are a Generation Proflig ate and Absurd beyond the Examples of former
Ages, and made up of such Heterogeneous Stuff, that they are perfectly
Unaccountable. but may they never succeed better in their Plotting, and we
shall the better forgive them; especially since Vengeance is waiting for them,
and Providence seems abhorrent of their Villainy. And since they have left the
Church because a Protestant King is there Prayed for, it is but Decorum, that
they should Reform their Devotions, and, to their Prayers for K. James, add
this for themselves, Vos O mihi manes,
Este boni, quoniam superis aversa Voluntas.


After all, it is to be hoped, that the Jacobites will divide their Forces; and
some that have not yet made Shipwreck of Shame and Modesty, may come over to
our Party; others will be for making Apologies, endeavoring to shift the Odium
of the Plot off from themselves; others may grow desperate, if they think fit,
and rage like the Devil, when he has but a a short time to reign; and some will
fret and fry in their own Grease, like a certain Brother of theirs, mentioned
by the Poet, Qui Centum vinctus ahenis,
Post tergum nodis, fremet horridus ore Cruento.


But I now leave them, either to the Gallows, or at least the Discipline of
their own wicked Minds, and the secret Lashes of an Evil Conscience.

Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum. THE Challenge of a Jacobite
ANSWERED.
Which was to show, How that Law which forbids taking Arms against the King
upon any Pretense whatsoever, is Consistent with the late Revolution.
IN the first place, I lay down this for a Foundation, That General Rules have,
for the most part, some tacit Exceptition, which must of necessity be
understood, though not expressed: And this is more especially so, when the nature
of the thing is such, that the Exception ought not to be made, nor can be
mentioned without great Inconvenience.

Now two things I am obliged to do in this matter; first, I shall give several
plain and undeniable Instances, to evince the Truth of what I have here laid
down: And secondly, I shall give Reasons to show that it ought to be so in the
Case before us.

1. Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthrown, Jonah 3.4. This is
positive and absolute; yet here is to be understood, Except they Repent.

2. Children obey your Parents in all things, Ephesians. 6.1. Yet if they command
sinful things, I must not obey them.

3. Wives are commanded in Scripture to be subject to their Husbands in all
things, without any Exception mentioned; yet still we must except sinful
Commands.

4. Marriage obliges the Parties to live together till Death part them; but
Adultery may part them sooner, and that Legally too.

5. Thou shall not steal: This is spoken without any explicit Reservation; and
yet Casuists tell us, That in Cases of extreme hunger, and peril of Starving,
and being denied all manner of Relief, a Man may take where he can come to it,
any thing to eat or drink, for the preservation of Life. But after the
strictness of this Precept, even the plucking Ears of Corn and eating them, in
another Man's Field, is plain Stealing.

Now as on the one hand, both Scripture and Reason will justify these
Exceptions; so on the other side, there is all the reason in the World why they
should not be expressed: For if Jonah had preached to the Ninevites, That they
should be destroyed in forty days, if they repented not; it is very like they
would have delayed their Repentance: But the Terror of a Peremptory Doom
wrought more effectually.

If Children and Wives had been commanded Obedience with a Reserve, it would
have implied that Husbands and Parents might prove so wicked as to command them
sinful things, which ought not to be supposed: And then ill-disposed Children
might disobey upon slight occasions, and fancy all such Commands to be unjust,
as they had not a mind to observe.

If Marriage did oblige the Parties to live together till Death or Adultery
should make a Separation, and that it were so expressed in the Office; this
would be an odious and shameful Insinuation, that one or both of them might
prove so wicked, as to give occasion of Divorce.

And if the Law had said, Thou shall not steal, without extreme Necessity; this
would have been taken for little less than a License tosteal, every one judging
for himself of his own Necessity.

Thus we may see how natural it is for General Words to carry along with them,
a reserved Condition or Limitation, which yet ought by no means to be Mentioned
or Expressed. And thus it is in the Case before us: For if the Law had Said,
Thou shall not take Arms against the King upon any pretense whatsoever, Except
the King designs to Subvert the Government, This would have been a Disloyal
Intimation, that the King might prove a Tyrant; and would have given
Incouragment to the people to Suspect his Intentions; and many times, without
any Cause, to Censure his Actions; Yet, that thus it must be Understood, will
Appear by the Reasons Following.

1. The first is this, That if it be Understood in the Utmost Force and
Latitude that the words will bear, it makes Void all other Laws; nay even the
Law of God-cannot stand in its way. If you take it by the wrong handle, it will
be so ill Conditioned as to Suffer no Law but it Self. The design of the Law is
to secure to Every Man his Right. It is by Law that we attend our Callings,
that we Eat and Sleep in quietness, that we Enjoy what we Call our Own, that we
can serve God in Peace, and that our Churches are not turned into Idol-Temples.
But now if we must upon no account whatsoever defend these Rights when they are
Invaded, what benefit have we by the Law? Or to what End serves it? If we must
upon no pretense whatsoever, even at the utmost Extremity, resist the Illegal
Proceedings of the Prince, then is the whole Law of England no more but Sham;
and whatsoever we have, we enjoy it only at the Kings discretion, and during
his pleasure: Nay all the Societies of men in England, are no more but as so
many Herds of Cattle to Labor for the Use, and to be slaughtered at the
pleasure of the King. So that either we must qualify that Article of the Law,
or give up all the rest.

2. There is a difference (as all men know) between the power of Making Laws,
and the power of Executing the same; the latter rests entirely in the King, but
not the former. Now with respect to the Executive power, we yield (if that will
please our Adversaries) That the King is not to be resisted, upon any pretense
whatsoever; Whilst he is Executing the Law, no man may say unto him What do
thou? Whatever color there may be of maleadministration, that can be no Just
ground of Resistance, because the Law provides a remedy, and the Ministers must
Answer for it. But then, this can never be Extended to the Legislative Power,
unless you will suppose that the Parliment when they made that Law, intended
not only to Cancel all the rest, but never to make any more. This had been a
final Dissolution of all Parliaments, and of the Government it self: It had put
all into the Kings hands, and made him Arbitrary by a Law. As if they had
Enacted, Let the King henceforward make Laws without a Parliament, Let him pull
down the Church and set up an Idol, Let him Alienate his Kingdom, and sell his
People for Slaves, or any thing else, what he pleases: Nay, if he be seized
with a Phrenzy, and Kill the People about him, he is not to be resisted, upon
any pretense whatsoever. And if he should Attempt to kill himself, there is no
means of prevention, no touching him, no laying hands upon him, though it be for
his Safety: See what Extremity and Absurdity this Doctrine of our Adversaries
leads to! But if they will admit of an Accommodation, we are Content to Divide
the Truth, and let them take one half, but we will never yield the other. The
King then in Executing the Laws made according to the Constitution of the
Government, is not to be resisted on any Account whatsoever: But if they will
have the King to make Laws by himself, and do what he pleases without
Resistance, they talk without book, and will never be Convinced till they are
going to the Gallows, or to a Stake.

3. The King, being no more than a Man, cannot do much harm by his own proper
strength; so that supposing him to be a Tyrant, I never can fear that he will
come in Person and take away my Life or Estate: He must then act by
Commissioners. Now these Commissioners must be duly qualified persons, and
rightly Commissioned according to Law, to do some legal Act. Coming then under
these Circumstances, they are God's Ministers to me for my Good; in resisting
them, I resist the Ordinance of God, and must expect Damnation and Judgment,
for so doing. And here again I suppose the Jacobites and I are perfectly
Agreed. But what if these pretended Commissioners should happen to be Papists,
French Dragoons, or Rapparees, and came without any legal Commission, to Robb
me, by virtue of a Writing, which they call a Commission, under the Kings Hand
and Seal, what then? Why truly then I might happen to be Robbed or Murdered.
And what say our Self-denying Adversaries to this? They say I must patiently
suffer and submit; for though these persons be not qualified according to Law,
yet they Act according to the King's pleasure, and I must lie at their Feet;
Yes, so I would, if I could not help it: But so would I do at the Feet of
High-way-men, and from them I should find more Mercy. Thieves and Robbers spoil
some particular persons: But these are the Villains that destroy Government.
Were it not for these, the King could do no harm: They are Devouring Beasts,
and Savage Monsters broken loose; and ought to be treated accordingly.

4. I shall add in the 4th place, That the King of England is King by Law, it
is by Law that he wears a Crown, and is clothed with Royal Power: But if he
Subverts the Foundation of the Government, he takes away the Foot he stands
upon; he destroys his own Authority, and Ceases to be a King; He is then but
like Robin-hood, an Outlaw: For a King without Law, Implies a Contradiction.
The Matter then in short is this; The King Executing the Law is not to be
resisted upon any pretense whatsoever; but if he lay aside the Law, and become
Arbitrary, he divests himself of his Crown and Dignity, and is no longer a King.

But because our Adversaries will storm heavily at this Saying, how Undeniable
so ever it be, let us see if we can Strengthen it by Authority; And first, That
of a Wise and Learned King, viz. James the First, who in a Speech before the
Parliament, 1609. has these words. A King Governing in a Settled Kingdom,
leaves to be a King, and Degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to
Rule according to his Laws; and they that persuade them the Contrary, are
Vipers and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth. So that it seems a
King may fall from his Power, and cease to be a King; and he actually does so,
when he leaves off to Rule according to his Laws. Let us now see what the force
of Truth has Extorted from a Learned Man of our Adversaries Party, a Mighty
Asserter of Monarchical Power, the Famous Barclay. Two Cases, he says, there
are, whereby a King, ipso facto, becomes no King, and loses all power and Regal
Authority over his people, for he divests himself of his Royal Crown and
Dignity, he returns to the state of a private Man, and the People become
freeand Superior. All the words in the Dictionary cannot cut deeper than
these, nor kill the Cause more Dead upon the Sport: to Add any thing, would be
Substraction; and to offer at Illustration would be to darken. I shall only
mention his two Cases, and leave it. The first is, If the King Endeavor to
overturn the Government, and have a purpose and Design to ruin the Kingdom and
Common wealth. The Second is, If he make himself the Dependant of another, and
betray his people into the Power and Dominion of a foreign Nation. These two
Cases are both so like ours of Late, that one would think this Author had
written by Inspiration: And the best of all is, he is taken for an Enemy, which
makes his Testimony on our sides the more Considerable.

By this time I think it may appear, that Non-resistance is not to be taken in
the rigid and inflexible Sense of our Adversaries; but so qualified as to let
the English Frame and Constitution of Government stand where it is. But there
is nothing, almost, which may not be Spoiled by overdoing: Nothing better in a
well-settled Government than Obedience; but once misplaced, there is nothing
worse. This is that which had it been Universal, had left nothing ere this day,
but Grief and Lamentation, Chains and Slavery, Superstition and Idolatry, for
which Posterity might have had cause to Curse the Servile Baseness of the
present Generation, had not K. William, and many Noble Englishmen, stood in
the Gapp, to Save the Nation from Sudden Ruin, and from a Sad Character in
after times.

Now let our Adversaries stand still a little, and Consider whether they be not
righteous overmuch Eccl. 7.16. And whether they do not make themselves
over-wise. I would as soon pass my word for Wisdom and Righteousness, that they
should not be Capable of Excess, as any thing Else that I can think off. And
yet even in that Case the wisest of Kings thought a caution Necessary. And this
is the Character of those men we have to deal with; they will be wiser than the
Public Wisdom of the Nation; and more Righteous than the whole Church whereof
they profess to be Members.

I very well remember the time when these Men, above others, were Continually
Charging the Dissenters with Pride and Self-Conceit, with willful Obstinacy,
with Faction and Disobedience; some could find nothing Else to Preach on, and
others made it their common Discourse; and now, out of their own mouths they
are Justly Condemned. Some Dissenters indeed have some needless Scruples about
Cermonies; but These only scruple Deliverance; and to be Saved from Ruin and
Misery, lies heavy upon their Conscience. They pay Faith and Allegiance to a
Tyrant, or a Non-Ens: and they return Malice and Ignominy for Security and
Protection.

I shall conclude this matter with a Sentence taken from a very learned Pen,
which also has been asserted by others; Namely, That when a Prince breaks in
upon the Religion and Liberties of his People, they ought to stand up in their
own Defense, and may also call in a Neighbor, or Forreigner to their
Assistance. And this very thing has been Declared Lawful by Queen Elizabeth, by
K. James the first, by K. Charles the first, with their Parliaments; and by
Arch Bishop Laud into the Bargain, as may be further made Evident upon occasion.

And here I thought to have made an End; But I find our Adversaries, when other
reasons fail them, betake themselves to the Bible, wherein they think to find
their Unlimitted Power and passive Obedience. I cannot pretend to Remember all
those passages of Scripture, which they have Pressed for this Service; but two
or three of the more remarkable, I shall Endeavor at present to Release from
the Unnatural force and Violence put upon them, and the rest as I meet with
them.

First Prove. 30.31. A King against whom there is no rising up. I grant it, in
the Sense aforementioned: That is, So long as he remains a King, and Keeps the
Laws, he is a Rebel that opposes him: But when he falls from that, he is a
Rebel himself. I speak not this at Random, but I Will make it good. The first
King of Israel was a Rebel, if you will believe the Prophet Samuel: For he
plainly Charges him with Rebellion. Behold (says he) to obey is better than
Sacrifice, and to harken than the fat of Rams: For Rebellion is as the Sin of
Witchcraft etc. 1. Sam. 15.22.

God had given a Command to Saul, that he should Smite Amaleck and Destroy
utterly all that they had. This was the Law he was to observe: But he disobeyed
it, and thereupon the Prophet not only gives him a severe Reprimand, but Saul
left his Kingdom beside. After this, David was so far from Nonresistance, that
he Armed himself in his own Defense, and about 600 Men. And he Seized upon
Strongholds at Engedi. It Is true, David would not Kill him Cowardly, which was
a Noble and brave Example, but had he met him fairly in the Field, no doubt but
he would have Fought him. He gave him at one time such a Lecture as made him
fall a weeping: At another time he preached to him from the top of an Hill, so
long till Saul Prophesied David's Success, and the ruin of his own Kingdom.
Thou shall both do great things, and also shall prevail. 1. Sam. 26.25. Now
all this being done by David in a posture of Defense, and probably with
Goliah's Sword in his hand, amounts sufficiently to a Rising up against Saul,
and Consequently that these words are not to be taken Strictly, but in such a
qualified sense as may comport with other parts of Scripture, as will further
appear by considering another Text here following, Eccles. 8.4. Who may say
unto a King what do thou?

With the former Scripture our Adversaries would bind our hands, and with this
they would tie our tongues: The one must deprive us of Self Defense, and the
other of the Liberty of Speech. It is not Enough to Suffer unjustly and to be
destroyed, but it is a Crime to Complain, or to represent our Grievances. How
unlike are some Earthly Gods to the God of Heaven, whose Authority they have,
and whom they ought to Resemble! He invites, nay he Commands us to petition him
for what we want. They Cannot bear to be petitioned at all, but call it
Rebellion. He will not suffer us to be tempted beyond what we are able to bear:
They will take our Fields and Vineyards, make us Slaves and Beggars, and we may
not enquire the reason.

En quo discordia Cives
Perduxit miseros! En queis consevimus agros!
Such was the Effect of Court Flattery, that none must look into the Kings
Measures, nor dare to ask a Question: None must admonish him of Danger, reprove
him of Evil, nor advise him for Good; for who may say unto him, What do
thou? Counselors and Chaplains (at this rate) must all take their leave,
there is no occasion or business for them. This indeed was lately our Case, and
thus our Adversaries would have it still.

But by their Favor, as the Case is now (God be praised) happily altered, so
neither is this the intent of the Text, it being only an Emphatical Expression
to show the Greatness of a Kings Power, and how insolent a thing it is, to
question him in the just Exercise of his Regal Authority, whilst he is
Executing the Laws of his Country, for the punishment of Evil Doers, and for
the Praise of them that Do Well, why should any one oppose him? But if he be
setting Fire to a City, subverting his Government, betraying his People, or
destroying himself: One need not ask indeed what he is a doing, for the thing
speaks it self; He is throwing off his Crown and Dignity, and Resistance is the
only way to keep it on. This should be endeavored with all the respect to a
Crowned Head, that the matter will bear; but if Force be necessary, it must be
used. They are good Subjects that prevent their King's falling down a Precipice
though it be by violent Hands; but they are Traitors, who out of Respect and
Reverence will let him break his Neck. And we have the Authority of King James
the First, and of the Learned Barclay, That where a King has no Authority,
there he ceases to be King, and returns to the state of a private Man. But call
him King still, if you please, it is however the Duty of his Council, and those
about him, who have opportunity, to admonish him of Danger, and prevent his
Ruin as far as they can, before it be too late. And perhaps the mis-applying
of this very Text, may have made some Men over-Cautious, and deprived Kings of
that free and wholesome Advice which might have been eatly serviceable to them.

Let us now look into the Scriptures, and see whether what has been said to
Kings in former times, may not seem to counter-ballance this Interrogative,
What do thou? Samuel told King Saul, he had done foolishly, and charges him
with Disobedience, Stubbornness, and Rebellion. Elisah told King Ahab, That he
had sold himself to do evil in the sight of the Lord, and that it was he and
his fathers House that troubled Israel. These are Reproofs to the purpose, and
certainly of no less importance than to say, What do thou? Now it is to be
supposed that God would inspire his Prophets to speak such words to their
Kings, as were not fit to be spoken by others upon the like Occasion? So that I
conclude, this Text hinders not at all, but that a King pulling down the Church
and the Law, and setting up Superstition, Idolatry, and Arbitrary Power, may be
questioned and gainsaid by his Council, and resisted too, by the Majority of
the Nation.

Another Text, which is wont to be urged for the Power and Sacredness of Kings,
is Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: But I never hear
them read the Context, by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the Earth: And good reason, for this would prove too much, and more than they
would have, namely, that Judges are Jure Divino, as well as Kings; for by the
same Logic that the one is inferred from the 15th Verse, the other will follow
from the 16th Verse; I challenge any one to show me the difference. This would
have been strange Doctrine in the late Reign, when Durante Beneplacito came
into fashion, and Judges were turned out for doing Right.

But I do not see how either of the two can be proved from this Scripture: For
who is this Me, and this I, mentioned here in my Text? It is not Solomon, for
verse. 23. I was set up from Everlasting. Nor is it God himself, for at Verse.
22. he says, The Lord possessed me in the beginning. But it is Wisdom which is
here spoken of, and which Solomon personates all along, speaking in the first
Person, from Verse the 12th to the end of the Chapter; and setting forth the
Nature and Excellency, the Power and Advantages of Wisdom; I Wisdom dwell with
Prudence, etc. and a little after, By me Kings reign, etc. So then the plain
meaning of the Text is this, That Kings reign by Wisdom, and that Nobles and
Judges, who have the Administration of Public Affairs, are qualified by Wisdom
to manage the great Concerns and Business of a Kingdom; And though all Kings and
Ministers of State are not thus qualified (which is the Cause of many short and
unfortunate Reigns) yet here we are taught what it is that qualifies them for
Government, and that Wisdom is to be sought by them more than fine Silver, and
Knowledge rather than choice Gold. If this Lesson had been well learned by our
late Kings, England had been a flourishing Nation at this day, and might
perhaps have given Laws to the Christian World.

By this time our Adversaries will be ready to demand, after their scoffing
manner, When is it time for the People to Rebel? And who must judge between
them and their King? To this I shall answer, after I have made an Observation
about the word Rebel, or Rebellion.

It has been often observed by Learned Men, that the Scripture condescending to
humane Capacity, uses such Forms of Speech as are common among Men, though the
same are not to be taken in a strict and proper sense. Thus it is said God made
two great Lights, the one to Rule the Day, the other to Rule the Night; whereas
it is certain that the Moon has no more light in it self than a Stone-Wall;
only it shines by reflecting to us that borrowed Light it receives from the
Sun. So when a People Arm themselves against their King, it is very obvious to
call it Rebellion, tho their Cause be never so just: And it seems to me, that
the Scripture in sundry places speaks after the same manner, calling that
Rebellion, which strictly and properly is not so, or which at least is not
Rebellion in a Criminal Sense.

This perhaps may seem strange to some People; but let them impartially
consider 1 Kings 12.19. where it is said, Israel rebelled against the House of
David unto this Day: And to this Day they were never reproved for it; and good
reason, For this thing is from Me, says the Lord, by the Prophet Shemaiah,
verse. 24. Nor can we call this a bare Permission, but it was Determined
beforehand, and a Prophet sent to Jeroboam to give him Notice of it, Beheld I
will rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give Ten Tribes to
thee, 1 Kings 11.31. And why should God do this? Because, says he, they have
for saken me and worshipped Idols, etc. So that here is a peremptory Decree for
this Defection, with the Reason annexed, and God ordered seeond Causes so as to
bring it about. Learned Men may dispute, if they please, whether the Ten Tribes
were free Agents in what they did; it is evident from the Text, That this
Revolt of theirs was the Purpose and Design of God, and was approved by him,
though it is called in Scripture Rebellion.

Another Instance of this kind we have in 2 Kings 18.7. where it is said of
Hezekiah, That he rebelled against the King of Assria. Was Hezekiah an Offender
in this? No, for the Lord was with him. Whatever Promises or Covenants had
passed between him and the King of Assyria, we know not: This is certain, That
King Hezekiah did well in throwing off the Assyrian Yoke, though it has the name
of Rebellion; for he clave to the Lord and departed not from following him, but
kept his commandments. So that after him was none like him among all the Kings
of Judah, nor any that were before him. Behold here a Sinless Rebellion, which
was the thing I aimed at; and now let the Jacobites call us Rebels or what
Else they please.

I shall now proceed to give my Answer, when it is time to Rebel: having first
declared when it is not time. It is not to fly to Arms for some few private
Injuries done to particular persons, whilst Law has its due Course in the Main,
and the Vital parts of Government remain safe. Indeed people are seldom forward
to hazard their own Lives and Fortunes to Revenge private wrongs. Nor yet ought
they to Embroil a Kingdom for some public Miscarriages of the King, when it
may be reasonably supposed, that he has Used his Prerogative for the good of
his people, to the best of his Judgment, though in Effect it has proved
Contrary. What is well meant, and will afford a tolerable reason, should be
forgiven, notwithstanding the ill Consequence, when it is not wilfully
persisted in. There is a time for Prayers as well as for Self-defence, and that
should be tried in the first place; and so long as any hope remains, it is a
proper Season for Faith and Patience.

But when the Kings Illegal Proceedings have Extended one way or other to the
Majority of the People, and from particular injuries have advanced to an
invasion upon all men's Liberties; When the Violence that has affected many, is
of such a Nature and Consequence as to threaten All; When
High-Commission-Courts are set up to disseiz Men of their Free-holds, and
Charters called in for packing of Parliaments; When honest Magistrates are
every where turned out, and sworn Enemies to the Established Government fill
their places; When we are threatened, like the Israelites, to be Chastized with
Scorpions, and Foreign Cutthroats like to be let in among us; When Religion
and Property, Life and Posterity, are almost within the Jaws of a Gaping
Monster; When all the Foundations, and the whole Frame of Government are so
shaken, that Dissolution must ensue; When there is no hope left, nor any
Counsel can be heard but Jesuits and bigoted Papists; And to complete all,
when all Men are sensible, and three quarters at least of the Nation are
persuaded in their Consciences that all this is really so: If ever Men will
stand up for Self-Defence, and to save Posterity, This is the Time. When
Matters are brought to this pass, to talk of Passive Obedience, is the greatest
Nonsense in the World; and to tell the People of being subject to Authority,
when there is no Authority, but Illegal Force, and all the Rules and Measures
of Government broken, is to talk to the Wind, and persuade Men to be tamely
Murdered in Obedience to Illegal Violence. Rebellion in this Case (as they
please to call it) becomes a Duty; and to be Passive, is to Betray the Nation.
And then for the other part of the Question about a Judge, there is none upon
Earth to determine this Matter, but the Sword. Every Man will Judge for
himself, and Consult as he can for his own Safety: But there lies no Appeal,
but only to the Court of Heaven for the Success of the Cause; and that Court (
God be praised) has determined the Matter, by sending us a King that Maintains
our Laws and Ancient Government.

PART II. A DEFENSE OF THE Foregoing DISCOURSE AGAINST Certain Exceptions
Communicated in Writing.
SIR,
I Received your Paper of Exceptions against what I have been saying hitherto,
in behalf of the present Government, and in Defense of the late Happy
Revolution: But I am sorry you should trouble your self and me with so many
trite and common things, which have had full and sufficient Answers usque ad
Nauseam: However since you seem to expect it, I shall go through them all, and
doubt not to satisfy any indifferent Person. But such as are, or seem to be
under Judicial Blindness and Infatuation, may seek for Conviction by Miracle,
if they please; and it is a question whether that would do it: For they do not
appear to be capable of any Satisfaction, till they find it in the smart of the
Misery and Slavery, which they have long been Courting and Admiring, and are
now grown Impatient of Delay. But of you I hoped better things, and shall be
sorry to find my self mistaken.

The first thing I meet with is this; But what, I pray, if Kings misdemean
themselves in their Government, must they presently cease to be Kings?

You put this Question, as if you had not read what you are pretending to
Answer, without taking any notice of what I quoted you from K. James and Mr.
Barclay, and so you go on as if nothing at all had been said in this Matter.

Therefore I proceed to

The next thing; God Almighty made them Kings, and how can less Authority
Dethrone them?

This is no better than pure Sophistry, as if Kings were not of Hunane Race,
but made in Heaven, and sent down upon Earth to devour Mortals, like so many
Frogs to be eaten up by a Stork without any hopes of Deliverance. What would
you think if I should advance this for an Argument, God makes Merchants and
Lawyers; therefore Merchants cannot break, nor Lawyers prevaricate. I am sure
Kings are not made without Means no more than other Conditions of Men: All is
Providence, from the Throne to the Dunghill; and we find in Scripture Kings made
by the People. Nay even Hereditary Kings are made by the People as well as
Elective: For Crowns, at this day, are not Entailed by Messages from Heaven,
but by Laws made upon Earth; and I pray who made these Laws? Had the People no
Hand in them? Historians tell us, That the Right Descent of English Kings has
been broken now Nine times since K. William the First. And the Scriptures tell
us, That the Lineas Succession of the Kings of Israel and Judah have been
Interrupted and cut off, sometimes by express Nomination from God by a Prophet,
and sometimes also Providentially. Jehu, a Subject, was Anointed King by a
Prophet, Baasha show Nadab and Succeeded in the Kingdom, and Omri was made King
by the People without any Divine Appointment. So that here is Jus Divinum, the
Sword, and the People, each of them setting up their several King. And in a
word, all Kings are made and unmade by Divine Providence, which outs down one
and sets up another; and we quarrel at this, and think much that God should
Rule the World, unless he give us a particular Account of his Ways.

But suppose they do really design the Subversion of the Government, who shall
or ought to punish them?

Barclay says, in that Case, the King returns to the state of a private Man,
and the People become Free and Superior. This is so cutting a thing, especially
from one of your own Party, that I suppose you durst not so much as touch it.
But I Answer; None ought to punish the King, nor to hurt his Person, though he be
fallen from his Power: But I say, that when a Government is breaking up, and
all things at the brink of Ruin and Confusion, every Man ought to stand for his
Life, and to Defend his Family and Posterity, the best he can, from future
Misery; other wise they are guilty of Self-Murder, and of Betraying their
Country, provided they be in a Condition to appear in the Field, as many Brave
Englishmen did at York, and in Cheshire, and other places of this Kingdom, in
Nov. 1688. In the mean time, the King is to be Counseled to keep within the
Sanctuary of the Law, or at least to keep his Person out of Danger, and not to
Head his Party. But if he will, against all Justice, Prudence, and Persuasions,
Join with Wicked Men, and Expose himself to Blind Bullets, and fall in the
Field, it is to be looked upon as an Accidental thing, and none can help it. God
forbid that any one should think of hurting him on purpose; and Charge should
be given to all to beware as much as possible of so doing. For this, see
further that Nameless, but very Learned Book, which your self put into my Hands.

You come next to your Boys Play, Give a thing and take a thing; where from a
certain Maxim of your Learned Politician, you infer, that the People have
wholly and entirely divested themselves of all their Power and Right, without
any Limitation whatsoever, and therefore they can by no means call for it back
again.

I cannot deny at this time of Day, that a Free People may make themselves
Slaves by Consent: There are those among us, who not only seem forward to do
it, but take it ill that the whole Kingdom will not do the like. Hitherto I
have thought it impossible that any Wise Man should do an Act without having
some end in it; or should give up his whole Right to the Will of another,
without any respect back again upon himself. But the Jacobites, whose
Principles are Unaccountable, have given us a Demonstration of it, and to them
only are we Indebted for so Noble a Discovery. I could wish they would try the
Experiment in France, and not trouble us here in England, who are under better
Circumstances. Indeed those that have made an ill Bargain, must be content to
stand by it, till they can be released: But we have made a good one, and will
stand for it, not doubting the performance on either part. We have Sworn
Allegiance to the King, and he has Sworn to Rule by Law; Allegiance and
Protection are Correlatives, and will be so while this Kingdom stands: Take
away the one, and the other falls to the Ground. But no Scheme of Politics
will please you, but that of Holbs, or Filmer, which teaches Kings to break
through the most Sacred and Solemn Obligations, and to Act Leviathan without
Control.

Your last Argument was Argumentum Puerile, taken from Boys Play; the next is
Argumentum Pestiferum, taken from the Common Pests of the Nation, as you are
pleased to style the poor Bailiffs; and thus you express it.

As to the Power in not being resisted in the Execution of the Laws, which you
are pleased to allow to Kings, if that be all they are Kings for; truly I think
they are in a far worse state and condition than the Common Pests of the
Nation, the Rogue Bailiffs.

But by your Favor, I did not say, that is all they are Kings for, but I said
the King in Executing the Law is not to be Resisted, not denying him his proper
share in the Legislative Power, in which none will oppose him: But if he should
assume the whole Legislative Power, as some in Effect have done, that would
mightily alter the Case. But besides all this, the King of England has a Royal
Prerogative, which is not a Dispensing Power, or a Power above the Law to do
what he pleases; but it is a Power Residing in the King, partly defined and
limited by the Law it self, and partly left to the King's Wisdom and Clemency,
to be exerted for the Benefit of the Subject, where the edge of the Law is too
sharp, which often happens by Casualty or Humane Infirmity. For the Law is an
Excellent Rule, but in many Cases it may be defeated; nor can it provide for
all future Accidents. Infirmity or Knavery in Witnesses may occasion a wrong
Sentence: And Laws can never be made so complete, but that Summum Jus may
happen to be Summa Injuria. So that the King's Prerogative is to Relieve the
Subject in Extraordinary Cases, and being used with Prudence and good Advice,
is a Glorious Jewel of the Crown.

Let us now pursue the Comparison between an English Monarch and a Bailiff: The
one let us View upon a Throne, Clothed with Power and Excellent Majesty,
Vested with a Noble Prerogative, and giving his Royal Assent to Laws made for
the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well: Or let
us consider him in the Field giving Laws to Princes, Commanding many Thousands,
Protecting the Innocent, Defending the Faith, Astonishing his Enemies, and for
several Years together Defying the Philistine, and Desiring Nothing more than
to meet him fairly in the Field. Now what is there in a Bailiff, to bear up the
Credit of such a Comparison? He is indeed a Lawful and Necessary Officer, but I
know not how it comes to pass that he should not only be a Rogue, but the
Common Pest of the Nation. If this be a mean Character of a Bailiff (as I think
it is) what must it be of the King of England, who (because he is not
Arbitrary) is in a far worse State and Condition? This is a vile Reflection
upon the English Frame of Government, which many Wise Men think is the best
Constitution in the World.

But here comes the Old Killing Question, as briskly as if it had never yet
been Answered; Who must be Judge when the King has a Design to Subvert the
Government? And it is brought in with these Triumphant words; You see, Sir, what
a goodly thing you have made of your so much boasted Cause and Demonstration of
Nothing.

To this I Answer, First, That some People through Blindness, and others through
Prejudice, are not capable of a Demonstration. Secondly, I will venture my
Paper and yours before any Learned Men, even though he be a Jacobite, and will
for once be Judged by him, whether your Cause or mine is better Managed.
Thirdly, You have in my Paper a full Answer to this very Question; but you do
so abound in your own Sense, that you could not see it; or perhaps indeed you
have not read it, for haste to get my Paper Answered, I shall therefore Answer
it once more with some small Improvement. I say then, these very Three Parties
you mention, namely, the King, the People, and a Forreigner, are all of them
Comperent Judges in this Matter.

For First, Cannot the King easily tell what he himself Designs to do?
Certainly he is a Competent Judge of his own Mind and Intention, whether he
declare it or not. K. James said in his First Council, he would Maintain the
Church of England, and many well-meaning People were so simple as to believe
him: Yet not long after it was declared in a private Letter (said to be his)
That he would Reduce the Kingdom to the Catholic Religion, or Die a Martyr.
But whether this be true or no, every Man certainly is a proper Judge of his
own Intention, but he is not like to discover the same, when such Discovery may
be a Means to prevent his Design.

Secondly, The People too are Judges in this Case: For cannot every Man tell
what he feels, and what he fears? When a Man's Head is broken, or his Goods
taken from him, he has reason to know that it is so; and his Neighbor that is
a Spectator to Day, may be a Sufferer to Morrow. Jam proximus ardet, is
Scarborough Warning. If a Charter be taken from a Corporation, are the People
no Judges as to Matter of Fact? If the Master and Fellows of the College are
turned out of their Freehold, must some body else Judge for them, and inform
them that they want Lodgings? If a Protestant Justice of Peace be turned out of
Commission, and a Papist put in his room, he certainly knows that he is not on
the Bench, and is capable of making a Rational Judgment, not only of the Matter
of Fact, but of the Consequence. If I see a Cutthroat Murdering my Neighbor,
and then making toward me with his long Knife, you would have me to stay till
my Throat be cut, before I must judge what his meaning is. In short, your whole
drist is to make the King an Idol, and the People Sots.

And then Thirdly, As to a Forreigner, or Neighboring Prince, it is very
possible, that he may make as true a Judgment as any other: A By stander sees
how the Game goes better sometimes than he that plays it. And it is well that
it was so in our Case of late, else you and I might have been Disputing in a
Dungeon, or a worse place; for which all Protestant and true Englishmen ought
to give Thanks to God, and next to Him, to our Gracious Deliverer, K. William.
Thus you may see, if Prejudice will permit, that after all your flourishing,
each of the three Parties you except against, are, or at least may be; proper
Judges in the Case before us.

But indeed I thought at first your Question had been this, When a difference
breaks out between the King and his People, who is a proper Judge to determine
the matter between them? For it is one thing to judge Rationally, and almost
infallibly, when ill Designs are on foot; and another thing to judge between
the Parties at odds, and to determine the Difference. As to the former, I
believe that even your self did once judge that we were in an evil Case, and
so, I am sure, did most of the Jacobites; and now you long to be so again, or
in a worse: But in the latter Case there is no Judge upon Earth; and this I
also told you before. There lies no Appeal but to the Court of Heaven, nor any
way to plead the Cause, but with the Sword; and the God of Battle, that gives
Victory, must Judge and Determine the Controversy. But this is always to be
understood when all other means have been tried. For if the Case will admit of
Entreaties, sober Counsels, or Legal Appeals, they are to be used: But if there
be no room for these, or if they take no place, but illegal force be used; that
force may, nay must be resisted, or Evil is consented to: For he that will not
serve the Public by that means, when there is no other, does actually consent
to the ruin of it, and is a Betrayer of his Country. They are Rebels (says a
Learned Author) who Arm against the Government, and not they who Arm to defend
it.

In the next place, you say, That if a King do give Authority to Rogues, and
that too under his Broad Seal, to cut any of his Subjects Throats, be they more
or fewer, such Persons may resist such illegal force, in defense of their
Lives, and kill their Assailants too, if they be able, and justify the same by
the Established Laws of the Nation.

Admirably well! Right every Word. See here the force of Truth, that cannot be
stifled under the greatest prejudice. This is all the Resistance I contend for.
Did ever any one plead for the Resistance of Lawful Authority? No sure: It is
only the Kings Unlawful Commands that may be resisted, not his Lawful Ones. Yet
you conclude this Point with the most Comical Fancy in the world; you say, I
have brought my Hogs to a fair Market; when on the contrary you do here justify
all that I have said, or can say upon this Argument, and you have given up your
Cause to all intents. Since I was born, did I never see such a Conclusion from
such Premises.

You seem to take exception that I should say, The King is King by Law, but you
do not well explain your self, nor tell me where your Exception lies. Yet you
urge that Maxim of the Law, That the King can do no wrong, as if it were on
your side, which makes altogether as much against you; for these two
Expressions are of the same importance, it being all one in effect, to say he
is King by Law, and to say, He can do no wrong. For what is the reason that the
King, being but a Man, can do no wrong? It is not because he does not do amiss
in granting illegal Commissions; for no doubt he sins in it, and does that
which is Morally Evil: But the reason is, because he can act nothing, qua Rex,
but by or according to Law; So that unless the Law be wrong, the King can do
none. From whence it naturally follows, that whatsoever the King does beside or
Contrary to the Law, is not the Act of a King but of a private person.

Suppose, for Example, a King at one time Corrects a Servant moderately for a
real Fault, at another time he beats him severely without a Cause, and the
third time he kills him without any provocation: These are none of them Regal
Acts; for the First he does as Master of a Family; the Second, as a Man in
Passion; the Third, as a Tyrant. Yet I do not say that this Tyrannical Act
Vnkings him: For one Act makes not a Habit, and it is possible he may repent of
it, and lay it so to heart, as to become a better Man and a better King ever
after. But this I do say, That a constant Course of Arbitrary Proceeding, so
far as to lay aside the Laws, and actually Change the Government, does Unking
him; and the reason is, because he destroys that by which he has his being: It
is the Law makes him a King, which being removed and laid aside, he has no
Foundation to stand upon. This I said before, and by your Favor it is not
Gratis Dictum, as you are pleased to say, but you have Answered my paper
without reading it, or at least without regarding what you Read.

Nor is this a Parallel Case with that which you put, of whipping your Boy too
Severely, and thereupon ceasing to be his Father: There is a wide difference
between the Dissolution of a Government and the Correction of a Child, the one
is Destroyed and the other Improved; But if you destroy your Child, that is,
kill him by Correcting him, this will bring the Comparison nearer home. For as
a King Ceases to be a King when he has destroyed his Kingdom: So a Father
ceases to be a Father when he has no Child. So that your own Comparison with a
little improvement makes altogether against you. Besides there is a manifest
difference between a Natural and a Political Relation: The one can never be
dissolved while the parties are in being, but the other may. A good King may
happen to lose his Kingdom and remain in Exile, that I know you will readily
grant: But he that Succeeds him in the Administration of Sovereign power is
King, at least de Facto, and the Law requires Allegiance to be paid him, so
that the former relation Ceases. But this puts me in mind to recommend to you
Sr. To. Filmers, Political Babel, whereof this is the Corner Stone, that we are
all born Slaves, and that a Son, a Subject, a Servant and a Slave, are all one,
without any Difference. If you are not yet acquainted with that worthy Author,
its great pity you should not, for I believe you would greatly admire him.

You tell me next, To bring the Authority of K. James the First is all over
Jargon, with a great deal more to the same purpose; where you make Reflections
upon that Learned King, so shameful, and so false, that it will be a kindness
to you to suppress them, I shall only hint at Two Things, and pass on. First,
You suppose, that these imprudent Sayings, (as you imprudently call them) were
spoken to Court the People at his coming to the Crown, and you will find them
in the Ninth Year of his Reign. Secondly, This is the first time that I have
heard the Cause of our Civil Wars, and the Crime of K. Charles's Munder, laid
at his Door. I rather think with submission to better Judgments, that if his
Cautions had been observed, it might have been a means to prevent the Evils
following.

You approve, it seems, of those Determinations made in Parliament at several
times, namely, under Q. Elizabeth, K. James the First, and K. Charles the
First, with the Judgment of Archbishop Laud, according as I set it down before,
for you say you cannot but grant it very Lawful. And I tell you once more, you
have entirely given up your Cause; for I cannot understand how any thing can go
higher in Defense of the Late Revolution. But you go on with the greatest
Confidence in the World, saying. It was to suppress a Rebellion begun by the
Subjects; Cujus contrarium verum est, it was to stop the Encroachments of
Princes upon their Subjects. But this it is to write before you read; the words
are these, When a Prince breaks in upon the Religion and Liberties of his
People, they ought to stand up in their own Defense, and may also Call in a
Neighbor to their Assistance. This you may find upon Record, and taken notice
of by several Learned Men of late. See especially the Protestant Mask, supposed
to be written by Dr. C.

In the next place you falsify my words, to make me speak what I was not
thinking of; and you jumble together a deal of Nonsense, and would have me to
own it; concluding with your usual Confidence, This you will say your self (I
suppose) needs no Confutation. So indeed I do, and with very good Reason, for
it is your own Stuff, and none of mine. And thus it follows;

You cannot but Wonder that a Man of my parts, etc. Should make no Difference
betwine a people Rebelling against their Lawful King, and a people Rebelling
against God, when there is no such passage to be found, nor any thing like it.
My words are these, So long as a King remains a King, and Maintains the Laws,
he is a Rebel that opposes him: But when he falls from that, he is a Rebel
himself. For this I quoted the place (as may be seen) 1 Samuel 15.32. where
Samuel Charges Saul, with Rebellion. And I now add, that a King of England is
as much obliged to Govern by Law, as the King of Isfrael was to observe God's
Commands. As for the Story of An^^^eck, It is only touched upon to bring in
Samuel's severe Reproof and David's taking Arms against him.

But say you, Saul was at that Instant rejected from his Kingdom. What trifling
is this! He was King so long as he lived, and David was his Subject, never
pretending to the Crown in his lise time, yet he took Arms to defend himself:
And his behavior toward Saul is a good Example both ways; Namely, of Dutiful
respect toward the King, in sparing his Person and giving him Honor and
Reverence. And at the same time in taking care of his own Life and Security.

I agree with you, that all possible Respect should be paid to the Persons of
Kings: But I would not have them flattered, nor taught to be Arbitrary. I would
not have them told that Subjects have nothing of their own, not so much as
their Souls; that they are only the Kings Vassals and Slaves, and that he may
take their Lives and seiz their Fortunes at his pleasure; that God made Kings,
and no body can unmake them, nor ought to oppose them, whatever they do: such
Flattery and Sycophantry makes Kings first aspire, and then tumble.

I come now to a Greek Word, which is here employed to no purpose, but only to
show that you are a Learned Man, which I knew before: And here you affront the
plain Letter of the Scripture, being in such have that you could not turn to
the place I quoted. I shall wonder no more at your insulting over me, when the
Word of God can not be quiet for you.

The business was this: Whereas the Jacobites love to call us Rebels, I
undertook to show that there was a sinless Rebellion, and that the word was not
always taken in an ill sense; for this I quoted 2 Kings. 18.7. where it was
said the Lord was with him, (viz. Hezekiah) and he Rebelled against the King of
Assyria, and served him not; and you say it was not certainly Rebellion: Now
whether must Your Authority, or the Scripture, carry it? If you had said this
is not to be taken strictly, then you had come to an Agreement with me, as to
that matter, and there needed no words about it; but that you cannot endure; I
am to be run down at any rate, and that with Triumph, when you have not said
one word to refute me. And all along I observe, that when you have the least to
say, you are the most confident: I conclude this in the Style which you except
against; So the People of England Rebelled against K. James, for God was with
them.

I now draw near to the Conclusion of your Paper, where after many Windings and
Doubles, like a Hare run almost to Death, I had you where we started, namely,
at the Act forbidding to Arm against the King, upon any pretense whatsoever. I
gave you four Reasons at large to show that these words could not possibly be
understood without a tacit Reservation: Nor have you offered ought that looks
like an Answer to any of them.

The First you have quite omitted. To the Second, you have only brought a
Comparison between an English Monarch and a Bailiff, showing that the King is
by great odds the worse Man of the two. The Third you have fairly yielded, and
therein given up your Cause. To the Fourth, you take Exception that I should
say, The King is King by Law; and yet you own the Maxim, That the King can do
no Wrong. And now after all (suspecting perhaps your Weakness and Inconsistence
hitherto) you come to offer something that looks at first sight like a Dilemma,
but unfortunately it wants one of its Members, which it seems you have dropped in
great precipitation.

The substance of the matter is this: Either the Parliament did consider the
Consequence of making such a Law, or they did not: If not, (say you) they were
a Club of Blockheads and mere Loggerheads. Very good! Here Is the Consequence of
that. But what if the Parliament did consider, what then? Why then (you say)
you have in a few words run through all I have said in this Cause: An admirable
Consequence, and a rare Dilemma! The one is lame of a side, and the other is
false, unless you have run through my Papers with some small Needle, which I
cannot perceive.

But let us Come once more to the Merits of the Cause; I grant the Parliament
might, and I believe they did consider the Consequences of both sides, that is,
with respect to the King and the People. And though it is possible they might
compute amiss, yet I rather incline to think they did not: For Either they
must Speak in General terms, or else they must make some Limitation or
Exception. Now there is no Exception to be made, but only this, In case the
King should become a Tyrant, and Endeavor to Subvert the Government: But how
shameful and dangerous a thing must it have been to mention such a thing in an
Act of Parliament! It might have provoked the King to Dissolve them, or it
might have prepared the people for a new Rebellion. So that supposing it
necessary to pass such an Act, it must of Necessity pass in general Terms, though
it may seem hard upon the people. But it is not hard upon them at all, being
understood in such a Sense as to be Consistent with other Laws: And either it
must be so understood or it does Actually change the Government, and gives the
King a despotick Power, which that the Parliament did ever design, is Nonsense
to Imagine.

I am now at the foot of the Account, and you think you have given me a full
Answer, desiring me to look once more over my Papers, and tell you, if you are
not Mistaken in your Answers. I have told you already, and now I tell you
again, that you are mightily mistaken, and I shall never be made to think
otherwise. I have looks over my Papers, and yours too, several times, which you
I believe, have not done once, or if at all, I am sure without due
Consideration. But you were so Ambitious to answer my Papers all at one
Sitting, that you had far better have let it alone. Many things you have left
Untoucht, and those you have, are no worse for your handling. Amongst the rest,
I wonder you have taken no Notice of what I quoted you out of the famous
Barclay, so great an Asserter of Monarchy, that he is Reckoned the head of your
party: And yet no writing that I have seen has determined this point more
directly against you. You have Ruffled the Memory of his Royal Master with a
witness, and it is strange that he also should not come in for a Cast of your
Office.

To conclude, Sir, If I were worthy to advise you, I should desire that you
would forbear idle company, and not spend your Money on those that poison and
corrupt you; that you would think more, and talk less, and read with
consideration such Books as are written on this subject by Men of the greatest
Learning and Piety, and particularly that which you lent me; that you would
scribble no more in this manner quicquid in Buccam venerit, and think with your
self whether you be fit to cope with the greatest Men in England: For I have
said nothing here, but what such have said before me, tho not in the same
words, yet in far better. However, being Challenged at first, and now again
Urged with so much Confidence and Triumph, I would not wholly decline the
Argument, and doubt not to defend it against the best of your Party. I call it
your Party, but I hope I shall have occasion to retract that expression; for I
remember the time you were of another Opinion, and do expect to find you so
again: For I am persuaded it is not of your own proper Genius that you are what
you are, or what you seem to be at present; but by having sometimes your
Conversation amongst Men of Slavish, Debauched and Pernicious Principles: And
this is the Case of a great many more, that were once well-affected to the
present Government. But you have had the Advantage of a Generous Education, and
your Learning is beyond many of your Profession, which also is one of the most
Honorable and most Loyal: For, but few of your Brethren Comparatively are
Jacobites. Be not you (I beseech you) tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, nor led away with the prating Confidence of Pragmatick Fellows.
Consider what a parcel of Atheists and Profligates weigh, being laid in the
Balance against the Church of England, and other Reformed Churches, together
with that vast Body of Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, and Substantial Commoners of
the Kingdom. They are but like the Vermin in the Fable that would needs swell
to the bigness of an OX. And they may burst themselves with their own Poison if
they please, the Government does not care a Straw for 'em, nor do I fear that
ever they will be able to hurt it. And so Fare you well.

FINIS.

