AN ACT For the Better Observation of the LORD'S DAY, Commonly Called SUNDAY.



DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
on Ormonde-Key, 1695.

An Act for the Better Observation of the Lords Day, Commonly called Sunday.
CHAP. XVII.
FOR the Better Observation and Keeping Holy the Lord's Day, Commonly called
Sunday,

Be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled; and by the Authority of the same, That all and Every
Person and Persons whatsoever, shall on Every Lord's Day apply themselves to the
Observation of the same, by Exercising themselves thereon in the Duties of
Piety and True Religion, Publicly and Privately: And that no Tradesman,
Artificer, Workman, Labourer, or other Person whatsoever, shall Do or Exercise
any Wordly Labor, Business or Work of their Ordinary Callings upon the
Lord's Day, or any part thereof (Works of Necessity and Charity only Excepted.)
And that Every Person being of the Age of Fourteen Years, or Upwards, Offending
in the Premises, shall for Every such Offense Forfeit the Sum of Five
Shillings. And that no Person or Persons whatsoever shall Publicly Cry, Show
Forth, or Expose to Sale any Wares, Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, Goods or
Chattles whatsoever upon the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, upon pain that
Every Person so Offending shall Forfeit the same Goods so Cried, or Showed
Forth, or Exposed to Sale.

And it is further Enacted, That no Drover, Horse-Courser, Waggoner, Carryer,
Butcher, Higler, their or any of their Servants, shall Travel, or come into
his or their Inn, or Lodging upon the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, upon pain
that Each and Every such Offender shall Forfeit Twenty Shillings for such
Offense: And for prevention of Disorders and Breaches of the Peace, which
commonly happen in Diverse parts of the Kingdom, by reason of Tumultuous and
Disorderly Meetings, which have been, and frequently are, used on the
Lord's Day, Commonly called Sunday, under pretense of Hurling, Commoning,
Foot-Ball-Playing, Cudgells, Wrestling, or other Sports.

Be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall Play, Use, or Exercise any Hurling, Commoning,
Foot-Ball-Playing, Cudgells, Wrestling, or any other Games, Pastimes, or Sports
on the Lord's Day, or any part thereof. And if any Person or Persons shall
Offend therein, and be thereof Convicted in such manner as herein after
Directed; Every such Person and Persons shall Forfeit the Sum of Twelve-pence,
sterling. for Every such Offense, to be immediately paid to such Justice of the
Peace, Officer or Officers, before whom such Conviction shall be. And that if
any Person Offending against this Act, or any thing therein Contained, shall be
thereof Convicted before any Justice of the Peace of the County, or of the
Chief Officer of Officers, or any Justice of the Peace, of, or within any City,
Borough, or Town Corporate, where the said Offense shall be Committed upon his
or their View, or Confession of the Party, or proof of any one, or more
Witnesses, by Oath, which the said Justices, Chief Officer or Officers is by
this Act Authorized to Administer: The said Justice, or Chief Officer or
Officers shall Give Warrant under his or their Hand and Seal to the Constables
or Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where such Offense shall be
Committed, to Seize the said Goods Cried, Showed Forth, or put to Sale, as
aforesaid; And to Sell the same: And to Levy the said other Forfeitures or
Penalties, by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods of Every such Offender
Distrained, rendering to the said Offender the Overplus of the Moneys Raised
thereby. And in Default of such Distress, or in Case of Insufficiency, or
Inability of the said Offender to pay the said Forfeitures and Penalties, That
then the Party Offending be Set Publicly in the Stocks by the space of two
Hours, and all and singular the Forfeitures or Penalties aforesaid, shall be
Employed and Converted to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the said
Offenses shall be Committed, saving only that it shall and may be Lawful to and
for any Justice, Mayor, or Head Officer or Officers, out of the said
Forfeitures or Penalties; to Reward any Person or Persons that shall Inform of
any Offense against this Act, according to their Discretions; so as such Reward
Exceed not the third part of the Forfeitures or Penalties.

Provided that nothing in this Act Contained shall Extend to the Prohibiting of
Dressing Meat in Families, or Dressing or Selling of Meat in Inns, Cooks-Shops,
or Victualling-Houses, for such as otherwise cannot be provided: Nor the Crying
or Selling of Milk or Fish before Ten of the Clock in the Morning, or after
Four of the Clock in the Afternoon; Nor to the Using of Hackney-Coaches in or
about the City of Dublin.

Provided also that no person or persons shall be Impeached, Prosecuted or
Molested for any Offense beforementioned in this Act, unless he or they be
Prosecuted for the same within Ten Days after the Offense Committed.

Provided; And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons whatsoever, which shall Travel on the Lord's Day, shall be
then Robbed, that no Hundred, or the Inhabitants thereof, shall be Charged
with, or Answerable for any Robbery so Committed; but the person or persons so
Robbed shall be harred from bringing any Action for the said Robbery, Any Law
to the Contrary Notwithstanding.

Nevertheless the Inhabitants of the Counties, Hundreds, or Baronies, after
Notice of any such Robbery to them, or some of them given; or after Huy and Cry
for the same to be brought, shall make, or Cause to be made, fresh Suite and
Pursuit after the Offenders, with Horsemen and Footmen, according to the
Statute made in the Tenth Year of the Reign of King CHARLES the First, upon
pain of Forfeiting to the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, as much
Money as might have been Recovered against the said Hundred or Barony, by the
Party Robbed, as if this Law had not been made.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, That no person or persons upon the
Lord's Day, Commonly called Sunday, shall Serve, or Execute, or Cause to be
Served or Executed, any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment, or Decree
(Except in Cases of Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace) But that the
Service of Every such Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree, shall
be Void to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever; And the person and persons so
Serving or Executing the same shall be as Liable to the Suite of the Party
grieved, and to Answer Damage to him for Doing thereof, as if he or they had
done the same without any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree at
all. And for the better preventing, Drinking and Intemperance on the
Lord's Day, Commonly called Sunday.

Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Keeper of any Tavern,
Alehouse or public Victualling-House, shall Receive, Entertain or permit to
remain in his House any person or persons, During the Time of Divine Service,
Except those who are of their own Family, or Lodgers in the said House; or
furnish them with Wine, Ale, Beer, or other Liquor of any sort, upon the
penalty of Forfeiting of Ten Shilings for Every such Offense, to be paid by
Every such Keeper of Taverns, Alehouses, or Public Victualling-Houses; and
also of the sum of Five Shillings to be Forfeited by Every such person or
persons who shall Enter or Remain in such Taverns, Alehouses, or
Victualling-Houses, Contrary to this Act.

And for the better Execution thereof all Constables and Churchwardens of
Parishes, within the several Cities and Towns Corporate within this Realm, are
Commanded and Required Frequently, and as often as they have Reasonable Cause
so to Do, to Enter into all Taverns, Alehouses, and Victualling-Houses, within
their Parishes or Districts, where they shall Reasonably suspect any person to
be and Remain, Contrary to the Intent of this present Act: And to Apprehend
such persons as they shall find or Reasonably suspect to be Offenders against
the same: And also the Master or Keeper of such House where such Offenders
shall be Apprehended; and them in Custody to Carry before the next, or some
other, Justice of Peace near the place where such person shall be Apprehended;
which Justice or Justices of the Peace are hereby Empowered to Examine Witnesses
upon Oath touching the Breach of this Law: And after Examination to proceed to
a Conviction or Acquittal of the persons Accused, which shall be Final to all
Parties. And if such Justice or Justices of the Peace shall upon proof Convict
the persons Accused to have Offended against this Law, the said Justice of
Peace shall forthwith Demand from such Offenders the Penalties on them Intended
to be Imposed by this Act, and to Receive the same; and in Default of payment,
to Commit the Offender to the Goal of the said County, till he shall have made
payment of the same; which Sum so paid and Received shall be Applied to the
Use of the Poor of the Respective Parishes where such Offenses have been or
shall be Committed.

Provided nothing herein Contained shall Extend to Persons who have been in any
Inns before the Lord's Day, Commonly Called Sunday, and Design to Abide there on
Sunday: But it shall and may be Lawful for such persons to Continue and Remain
in such Inns and Public Houses, as if this Act hade never been made.

Provided always that this Act shall Commence and Take Effect on the First Day
of November, in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Five, and
not before.

FINIS.

