THE POPES Threatening Letter TO THE FRENCH KING, OR The present Grand
Controversy BETWEEN POPE INNOCENT the XIth. And the most Christian KING LEWIS
the XIVth. ABOUT THE REGALIA, etc.

H B
printer's device of Henry Brom

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West end of St. Paul's. 1681.

THE POPES Threatening LETTER TO THE FRENCH KING.
Charissimo in Christo filio nostro Ludovico Francorum Regi Christianissimo,
Innocentius Papa XI.

CHarissime in Christo fili noster, etc.
Binis jam Literis fuse and luculenter ostendimus Majesti tuae, etiam ex
concordi omnium fere Galliae Scriptorum testimonio, and ex ipsius Regii
Tabularii Actis, quam esset libertati Ecclesi^sticae injuriosum, omni humano
Divinoque J^^^ ^^ntrarium, and alienum a perpetuo Regum majorum tuorum more and
exemplo Edictum septem abhinc annis, a Te decretum, quo consuetudinem illam
custodiendi fructus vacantium Ecclesiarum quam Regalia vocant, ad alias quoque
Ecclesias, extendi jubes, quae ejusmodi oneri obnoxiae nunquam fuere. In quibus
Literis vehementer a Te, pro Pastorali Officii nostri debito, and pro Paterna
quam gerimus aeternae salutis tuae cura efflagitamus, ut decretum, aliaque
deinceps Acta adversus Jura, libertatesque Ecclesiarum abrogari, abolerique
mandares. Et sane, illud est causae ipsius meritum, ea de Regia animi tui
aequitate, and magnitudine opinio nostra, ut certa spe duceremur Majestatem
tuam, omnibus in locum pristinum, quamprimum repositis, Cor nostrum ab
ulteriore tantae rei solicitudine, tot aliis in Ecclesiae procuratione
districtum, liberaturam. Verum, postquam plurium mensium spatium, quod
longanimitati nostrae probandae, ab ultimis literis effluxit, nullum adhuc,
neque ad eas literas responsum, neque ex eis fructum videmus, quinetiam ex
plurimorum literis, and sermon ad nos, pro comperto affertur collationes, and
canonicas institutiones impediri, Episcoporum authoritatem pessundari,
Ecclesiasticam Disciplinam, ordinemque turbari, novamque denique praxim veteri
Ecclesiae praxi, and Divinae Institutioni contrariam invehi a saeculari
potestate, neque ea clanculum aut timide fieri, sed ^alam, and manu Regia. Non
repetimus hoc ^^co, ne actum agamus, quot inde scandala, and querelae, quot in
Clerum Gallicanum incommoda nascantur, quod Ecclesiae universae a tali exemplo
periculum, quae tempestas immineat, quae honori and nomini tuo macula, quae
conscientiae labes inuratur; satis enim ea in superioribus Literis indicavimus,
satis patent ipsa per se. Non patitur tamen, syncera plane, and Paterna erga Te
Regnumque istud amplissimum charitas nostra in tanta Divini honoris injuria, in
tam gravi tui ipsius periculo adhuc silere; sed cogimur, iterum intimo Cordis
affectu, in visceribus Jesu Christi rogare, obsecrareque Majestatem Tuam, ut
memor ejusdem Christi verborum ad Ecclesiae praepositos, Qui vos audit, me
audit; nos potius qui tibi Parentis and quidem amantissimi leco sumus, audire
velis, vera and salutaria suadentes, quam filios diffidentiae qui terrena
tantum sapiunt, quique consiliis in speciem utilibus, sed revera perniciosis,
inclita ipsius Regni fundamenta in rerum sacrarum reverentia, and in Ecclesiae
Authoritate, juribusque tuendis posita, convellunt; qui quidem si hi esse
vellent quos ipsorum dignitas and officium, Tuaque singularis in eos benignitas
esse postulat, imitari potius deberent integritatem fidemque little, quos olim
pari loco positos, memoriae proditum est, and in Cleri Gallicani Acta nuper
relatum, libera aliquando voce, in simili causa monuisse Reges predecessores
Tuos; meminissent quid and qua Jurejurandi Religione, uhi Regni gubernacula
suscepturi, sacro Chrismate inungerentur, polliciti deo fuissent, se videlicet,
Divinae ejus gloriae, omni open and studio inservituros, and pro Ecclesiae suae
sanctae jurihus and liberate asserenda paratos fore semper sanguinem suum
vitamque profundere: Considerarent fluxam and fugacem esse mortalium vitam,
Regum praesertim and principum, qui ubi ad districtum Dei judicium vocarentur,
illuc accederent sine custodibus sine comitatu, sine ullis Regiae vel
Dignitatis cujuslibet insigniis, vel potentiae praesidiis, nudi atque inermes
reddituri omnis anteactae vitae rationem Judici scrutatori cordium, quem nulla
res latet, apud quem non est acceptio personarum, qui habet potestatem mittere
in Gehennam, ubi potentes potenter tormenta patientur. Nec superiori saeculo
defuit in Gallia Episcopus qui in frequenti aliorum praesulum, aulaeque
procerum corona, ad Henri cum Regem hujus nominis tertium, cleri Gallicani
causam in re non absimili orans, Regi dixerit observatum fuisse, nunqum in
Gallia Regias slirpes defecisse, nifi ubi Reges indebitas ad beneficia
nominationes arrogare fibi coepissent, a quibus S. Ludovicus Rex Christianae
humilitatis gloria, quam Regiae dignitatis culmine sublimior, usque adeo
abhorruisset, ut ultro, etiam pontificia authoritate sibi delatas rejecerit.
Fuit haec quondam, fuit in Gallia, imo ad haec nostra tempora strenue retenta,
and penes Episcopalem ordinem Apostolica loquendi libertas, nihil metuens,
nihil sperans nisi a Deo. Neque id solum per Reges licuit, sed ita Episcoperum
monita semper accepta sunt, ut Episcopi ipsi and sibi meritam landem, and
causae optatum exitum sint consecuti, manseritque propterea inviolata tamdiu,
atque inconcussa sanctio Occumenici Concilii Lugdunensis, adeo ut nonnulli
Galliae Reges, impios and sacrilegos publico decreto eos apellaverint,
quicunque Regalia ad Ecclesias eis non assuetas extendere aliqua ratione
tentarent, sicuti in vestris Annalibus traditum reperitur. Haec autem temporis
praesentis infirmitas, eo acerbior nobis accidit, quod scimus Majestatem tuam
nihil ducere inter Regii animi ornamenta praeclarius Zelo Justitiae, and studio
divini honoris, pro quo tam pia, tam salutaria decreta nuper edidisti, and tam
multa tanta cum nominis tui laud, and bonorum omnium laetitia in praesens
agis, destruendo Synagogas and Asylos Haereticorum, ut tibi non minora in coelo
statuere videaris conservatae propagataeque Religionis trophaa, quam in terris
relicturum speramus devictarum Gentium barbararum. Cavendum tamen diligenter
est, ne quod dextera, hoc est, ingenita pietas tua aedificat, destruat
sinistra, hoc est, callida and iniqua consilia dicentium tenebras lucem, and
lucem tenebras, cum Apostolico moneamur oraculo, qui in uno deliquit, esse
omnium reum. Non defuere, hac etiam occasion in Gallia quidam, neque plures
deessent ex fratribus nostris Episcopis viri fortes, and divinae legis ac
libertatis Ecclesiasti^ae Zelatores, qui gravissimam hanc, toti Franciae Regno,
immo Ecclesiae universae communem causam pari constantia and spiritu apud
Majestatem tuam agerent, sed metu quodam, ut ipsis quidem videtur justo
ignoscendoque, ut nos autem judicamus, vano, and non solum Episcopali officio,
sed etiam magnanimitati, aequitatique tuae injurioso retenti silent,
expectantes dum humilitas nostri a filiali tua in hanc sedem observantia
impetret, quod a Regia Justitia Ecclesiis suis debitum poscere ipsi non audent.
Itaque in his Literis nostris illorum omnium justum dolorem, and preces ag
nosce, quini mo Dei ipsius voluntatem ore te nostro alloquentis, ac serio
monentis, ut praedictum decretum, and quicquid ipsius occasion adversus
Ecclesiae libertatem and jura actum gestumque hactenus fuit, corrigi,
emendarique omnino cures. Alioquin mag nopere veremur, ne subire aliquando
debeas quod tibi in aliis literis, denunciavimus, and nunc iterum, ac tertio
inviti quidem, quantum pertinet ad sensum amoris in te nostri, sed Deo nos
interius monente, aperte denunciamus coelestis irae animadversionem. Nos sane
neque hoc negotium per literas amplius urgebimus, neque desides erimus in
adhibendis remediis quae traditae nobis divinitus potestati competunt, quaeque
in tam gravi and periculoso morbo omittere, sine gravissima neglecti Apostolici
muneris culpa non possumus. Nequc tamen ullum inde incommodum, aut periculum,
nullam quantumvis saevam ac horribilem tempestatem pertimescemus; ad hoc enim
vocati sumus, neque facimus animam nostram pretiosiorem quam nos, probe
intelligentes, non forti solum, sed etiam laeto animo subeundas esse
tribulationes propter Justitiam. In quibus and in Cruce Domini nos unice
gloriari oportet. Causam Dei agimus, quaerentes non quae nostra sunt, sed quae
Jesu Christi. Cum eo propterea, non nobiscum tibi erit negotium in posterum,
cum eo scilicet, adversus quem non est Sapientia, non est Consilium, non est
Potentia. Nos, postquam Ministerii nostri parts, plantando and rigando, sicut
oportet, impleverimus, expectabimus dum operi det incrementum Deus, a quo
accurata prece flagitare non desinemus, ut verbis and hortationibus hisce
nostris vim and robur infundat Majestatis tuae animam ad salubriora consilia
flectendo, unde mereri tu possis, and nos laetari, res tuas omnes secundiore,
indies, cursu flue^e, and subditas imperio tuo gentes perpetua atque optima
pace florere, tibiq, Apostolicam benedictionem amantissime impertimur.

Datum Romae, etc. die Decembris 29. 1679. Copia vera.
To our most dear Son in Christ, Lewis the most Christian King of the French,
Innocent the XI, Pope.

OUr dearest Son in Christ, etc.
We have already in two former Letters at large, and clearly showed unto your
Majesty from the unanimous Testimony even of almost all French Writers
themselves, and the very Records of the Kings Exchequer, how injurious unto the
Liberties of the Church, how contrary unto all right both Humane and Divine,
and how different from the constant manner and example of all your Royal
Ancestors was that Edict seven Years since by you set forth, wherein you
command that, that custom of receiving the Revenues of Vacant Churches (which
they call the Regalia) should be extended unto such other Churches as were
never heretofore liable to any such Burden or Imposition. In which Letters as
we are bound by our Pastoral Office, and for the Fatherly Care we have of your
eternal Salvation, we earnestly request of you that you would command that said
Edict and other after Decrees against the Rights and Liberties of those
Churches to be abrogated and abolished. And truly, such is the merit of the
Cause it self, such our opinion of the Royal justness and greatness of your
Mind, that we certainly hoped your Majesty by speedily putting all things again
into their ancient Channel, would have eased our Heart of any farther trouble
about this so great Affair, that is otherwise busied about so many other
matters in the Care and Government of the Church* But after that we have waited
several Months which since the sending of our last Letters for the proof of our
patience have passed away, we as yet see no answer to those Letters, nor any
good effect of them. Nay farther, we are given to understand for certain, both
by the Letters and Discourse of many, that Collations and Canonical
Institutions are stopped, that the Authority of Bishops is trampled upon, the
order and discipline of the Church disturbed and overthrown, and new Practices
contrary to those of the Ancient Church and the Divine Institution, are
introduced by the Secular Power, and that not timourously and by stealth, but
openly by the Kings Authority. We do not here repeat, least we should loose our
labor, how many Scandals and Complaints, how many Inconveniences will from
hence arise to the Gallican Clergy, what danger and peril such an Example may
import to the Universal Church, what a blot it will be to your Name and Honor,
what a sting to your Conscience. These things we have sufficiently manifested
in our former Letters: They are indeed sufficiently evident of themselves.
Notwithwanding our sincere and Fatherly affection toward you and that noble
Kingdom, will not permit us yet to be silent when God's Honor is so much
injured, and you your self are in so great danger. But a most inward passion of
Heart does constrain us yet again to ask and beseech your Majesty by the bowels
of Jesus Christ, that being mindful of the same Christ's words unto such as had
charge of the Church, He that hears you, hears me, you would rather hearken
unto us who are to you as a Parent, and that a most loving one too, when we
give you true and wholesome Advice, than to the Children of diffidence who only
mind earthly things; who by Counsels in appearance advantageous, but indeed
pernicious, do remove the glorious foundations of the Kingdom it self, laid and
consisting in a reverence of holy things, and the maintenance and defense of
the Church, its Rights and Authority: Who truly, if they would be such as their
dignity and place, and your singular bounty toward them requires them to be,
they should rather imitate the integrity and faithfulness of those who being
heretofore in like place (as History tells us, and it is lately inserted into
the Ecclesiastical Records of France) have sometimes in the like case with great
freedom of speech admonished the Kings your Predecessors, that they would
remember what, and how religiously with an Oath they had promised unto God,
when at their entrance upon the Government they were anointed with holy Oil,
viz. That they would to the utmost of their power endeavor to promote his
Glory, and always be ready with their lives and fortunes to assert and maintain
the Rights and Liberties of his Holy Church: That they would consider that the
life of mortals was very frail and uncertain, the life especially of Kings and
Princes, who when called to the severe judgment of God, must come thither
without any Guards or Attendants, without the signs of any Majesty or helps of
power, to give an account naked and unarmed of all their foregoing life, to
that Judge who is the searcher of hearts, from whom nothing is hid, with whom
there is no respect of persons; who has power to cast into hell, where mighty
men shall be mightily tormented. Nor was there wanting in the age last past in
France a Bishop who in a great assembly of other Plelates and Nobles pleading
the cause of the French Clergy in a business of like nature before Henry III.
told the King that it had been observed that the Royal Line had never failed in
France but when the Kings had begun to assume unto themselves undue Nominations
unto Benefices: a thing which St. Lewis (a Prince more exalted in the glory of
his Christian Humility, than the height of his Kingly Dignity) did so much
abhor, that of his own accord he refused them when delegated to him by the
Popes authority. Such, such an Apostle-like freedom of speech had the Episcopal
Order heretofore in France. Such did it hold and maintain even down to these
our own times, having no fears nor expectations but from God alone. Nor did
Kings only allow it in them, but the admonitions of the Bishops were always in
such manner received and accepted of, that they themselves gained due applause,
and the cause its desired issue. And for this cause did the Sanction of the
Ecumenical Council at Lions so long continue firm and inviolable, insomuch
that some Kings of France (as you may find in your own Annals) have in their
public decrees styled them impious and sacrilegious whoever they were that
should any ways endeavor to extend the Regalia unto such Churches as were not
anciently accustomed to them. But this weakness of the present age is therefore
the more grievous to us, because we know your Majesty among all the Ornaments
of a Princely Mind reckons none more glorious than a Zeal for Justice, and an
earnest affection for the honor of God, for which you have lately set forth
such pious and good Edicts, and do at present act so much to the praise of your
own name and the joy of all good men by destroying the Synagogues and
Sanctuaries of Heretics, that you seem to erect in heaven no lesser Trophies
of your defense and propagation of Religion, then we hope you will leave on
earth of your Victories over barbarous Nations. But however, you must
diligently take care lest what your right hand, (i. e.) your own innate piety
does build, your left hand, (i. e.) the crafty and unjust counsels of those who
call darkness light, and light darkness, do destroy, forasmuch as we are told
by the Apostolic Oracle that who-so offends in one point is guilty of all.
There have not been wanting upon this occasion in France some, nor should more
of our Brethren the Bishops, men of courage and zealous for the divine Law of
Ecclesiastic Liberty, now fail to plead this weighty cause (the common cause
not only of the whole Kingdom of France, but of the whole Church too) with a
like constancy and resolution before your Majesty. But they hold their tongue,
being restrained as they think by such a fear as is just and pardonable, but
is, as we judge, vain, and not only injurious to their Episcopal Function, but
also to your Magnanimity and Justice, waiting and expecting till our Humility
obtain that from your Filial respect unto this See which they dare not demand
of your Royal Justice as a due unto their Churches. Wherefore from these our
Letters take notice of these our just grievances and petitions, nay more of the
will of God who speaks unto you by our mouth, and seriously warns you to take
care that the foresaid Decree, and whatever upon occasion of it has been done
and transacted to the prejudice of the Liberty and Rights of the Church, be
thoroughly corrected and amended, otherwise we very much fear that you must at
length suffer what we have declared unto you in our other Letters and now again
the third time, (unwillingly truly, as to the sense of our love toward you, but
from the inward dictate of God) do openly denounce, the vengeance of his
heavenly wrath. As for our selves we shall no more press this Affair by
Letters, nor shall we be slack in applying those remedies which appertain unto
the power that is given us from above, and which in so grievous and perilous a
disease we cannot omit without becoming guilty of that most heinous crime, the
neglect of our Apostolical Charge. Nor will we fear any inconvenience, or
danger, any calamity however cruel and dreadful, that may from thence ensue.
For unto this we are called, nor do we set a greater value upon our life than
we do upon our selves, as well knowing that we must endure tribulations for
righteousness sake, not only with a courageous but a joyful mind. In which and
in the Cross of our Lord we ought only to glory. We act in Gods cause, not
seeking our own, but the things of Jesus Christ. With him therefore and not
with us you will have to do hereafter, with him against whom there is no
Wisdom, nor Counsel, nor Power. We, when we shall have fulfilled the duty of
our Ministry by planting and watering as we ought, will wait till God give
increase unto the work. Of whom we shall not desist by special prayer to beg
that he would infuse force and strength into these our words and exhortations,
by inclining your Majesty's mind unto better counsels, from whence you may
merir to have your affairs daily go on in a more prosperous course, the Nations
subject to your Empire flourish in a good and perpetual peace, and we rejoice
in their doing so. We give you most kindly our Apostolical Blessing.

Given at Rome, December. 29. 1679.
For the better understanding of the above Letter from the Pope, and of the
whole Difference, take the ensuing of a later Date from a Private Gentleman in
France.
SHall I write you some News? Or rather will it be News before I have written
it? For in likelihood these things are more common with you than us. The Pope
and the King of France are at odds about the Kings Regalia, as they call it;
which, they tell me, means Nomination to Bishoprics, and other Benefices, and
I think receiving the Revenues in the Vacancy. The King enjoys this Right
uncontestedly in a great part of his Kingdom; but some Years since made a
Declaration to extend it to all the Kingdom; and proceeded in consequence of
that Declaration without opposition, till he happened to have to do with the
old stubborn Jansenists, Alet and Pamiers, his Nominees coming to take
Possession of their Benefices by provision from him in their Diocesses, were
opposed by them, and upon contest Excommunicated. This Excommunication was
taken off by their Superior Archbishop, and so the Business carried to the
Pope. Alet is dead during the Contest, to whom nothing was done; The King upon
consultation what to do with him, being persuaded by the Chancellor Tellier, to
let him alone, and die out of the way, since being esteemed a Saint, it would
show scurvily to persecute him: And besides, it was not easy to find a Course
to take with him. Pamiers lives still and holds out, and the Pope takes his
part. His Temporals were seized, and he lived a while upon Alms himself, only
desiring of the King the Poor, to whom he distributed constantly a good part of
his Revenues, might not suffer for his sake; in which request the King
gratified him immediately, and has since, they say, restored him the rest. But
the Pope insists to have the Declaration; and all done in consequence of it
recalled. Two Briefs having had no Answer, he has lately sent the third; and,
as he says, the last. It is a Letter becoming a Pope, grave and tender, but
very positive, and which at last threatens in plain terms to write no more;
but, in case satisfaction be not given, to make use of his Power. This being
put to the Council, the hot men were for playing the Canons of France against
the Canons of Rome. But Tellier's more moderate counsels have prevailed again
to refer it to Treaty. And so Cardinal D'Estrees has the Commission, and they
say is gone about it, and we like to have no Sport. It being likely 'twill end
so, and the great King of France submit: For he is reported to have said in
Council, It became not the Son to fall out with the Father. The jest is, the
Jansenists are now of the Pope's side, and the Jesuits ill with him. Maimburg
has offended him so by his two last Books, I suppose for favoring the Regalia
principally, that he has censured them, and ordered them to be put into the
prima Classis; and besides, bid the General send for him, and deliver him up;
the General replied, it was more than he could, Maimburg being too well
supported; yes, says the Pope, there is another, meaning La Chaise, of greater
credit than he. What followed I have forgot, but there is (...) talk as if La
Chaise meant to go to Rome, which no body believes. But for Maimburg there is
no talk of his stirring. Upon another occasion the General of the Jiesuits
appealing to the Pope from a Decree of the Propaganda, the Pope not only
confirmed the Decree, but added to it, and pulling out of his pocket the names
of four or five Jesuits, ordered the General to suspend them. And, he going
away, turned to the Cardinals about him saying, we shall now see whether the
Jesuits be such obedient sons of the Holy See as they would pass for. Tellier
has a Letter of thanks from the Pope. And the Archbishop of Paris, who is
thought to have counseled th^^ King to proceed as he has done about his
Regalia, is upon ill terms not only wi^^ the Pope but King. He hardly does any
thing in his Bishopric, which makes some think him suspended: others say a
Suspension or Interdict being upon the way, was taken from the Messenger before
he reached France. The Clergy in their late little Assembly signed a Letter to
take the Kings part in the Quarrel against the Pope. I have not seen it, though
it be printed; but hear some look upon it as an unworthy piece of Flattery. And
so I have written News, if it be so, for a whole Year.

August 8. 1680.
ERRATA. Page 1. lin. 3 In the Latin, read Majestati, lin. 7. in the English,
read Acts recorded in the Royal Roll^

FINIS.

