AN ACT For Granting an Additional Duty ON TOBACCO, And for continuing unto His
Majesty, an Aid, or Additional Custom on several Goods and Merchandises.

AND ALSO For continuing the Additional Duty on Beer and Ale, and other
Liquors, till the Twenty Fifth day of December, One thousand, Seven hundred
and Two.

DVBLIN: Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
on Cork-Hill, near Copper-Alley. MDCXCVII.

An ACT for Granting an Additional Duty on Tobacco; and for continuing unto His
Majesty an Aid, or Additional Custom on several Goods and Merchandises. And
also, for continuing the Additional Duty on Beer and Ale, and other Liquors,
till the Twenty fifth Day of December, One thousand Seven hundred and Two.
Anno Regni Nono Guilielmi Tertii. CHAP. XXIX.
WE Your Majesty's Obedient and Faithful Subjects, the Commons of Ireland, in
Parliament Assembled, being by Duty Obliged, and always ready to the utmost of
Our Abilities, to Supply and Furnish Your Majesty with such Sums of Money, as
may Defray the necessary Charge of the Government of this Kingdom, and to
Provide for such Public Works, as may tend to the Quiet and Good of the same;
do with all Gratitude and Humility, Express our Thankfulness to Your Majesty,
for having upon the Address of Commons in Parliament Assembled, given Orders to
Grant Respites from time to time, to the Collecting of Quit-Rents, Crown-Rents,
and Composition-Rents, Due to Your Majesty, out of the Houses and Lands, which
through the Calamites of the late Rebellion, have been waste from the Five and
Twentieth of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety two, to the Five and
Twentieth of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety five, and thereby have been
Disabled to pay the same; and also for giving Orders and Directions for the due
Regulation and Government of the Army in this Kingdom, by which means the
Soldiers have been less Grievous and Burdensome to the same then formerly, in
their respective Garrisons and Quarters.

But forasmuch as it is found to be absolutely necessary; as well for the good
Discipline and Order of Your Majesty's Army, as for the welfare of Your
Majesty's Liege People of this Realm; that the said Army should be Disposed of,
and Lodged, and Quartered in Barracks, whereby they will not only be kept
together, under the Eye and Care of their several Officers, but Your Majesty's
other Subjects of this Kingdom, will thereby be Eased of Quartering in their
Houses, to which they have formerly, for the necessity of Affairs submitted:
Therefore, as a further Supply to Your Majesty, and also toward the Building
and Erecting Barracks, in such convenient and necessary parts of this Kingdom,
for the use of the Army, as to Your Majesty shall seem most proper for the
same; and that the said Respited Arrears of Quit-Rent, Crown-Rent, and
Composition-Rent, due out of waste Houses and Lands, from the Five and
Twentieth of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety two, to the Five and
twentieth of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety five, may be effectually
Answered unto Your Majesty's Exchequer, and to Answer the other Uses hereafter
in this Act provided for, in Addition to the Supplies already Granted to Your
Majesty this Session of Parliament; We humbly beseech Your Majesty, that it may
be Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That an
Additional Duty of One Penny per Pound, be Raised and Levied upon all Tobacco
that shall be found to be, or to have been in this Kingdom, in the Hands of any
Merchant or other Person whatsover, the First Day of November, One thousand Six
hundred Ninety seven, whenever the same was Imported: Also upon all Tobacco
that shall be Imported into this Kingdom after the First Day of November, One
thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, until the Five and twentieth of December,
which shall be in the Year of Our Lord, One thousand Six hundred Ninety nine.

And whereas it is found Necessary to answer the Ends aforesaid, That the
Additional Custom Granted to His Majesty, on several Goods and Merchandises, by
several Acts made in this Session of Parliament, shall be continued till the
Five and twentieth of December, One thousand Seven hundred and Two

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Tobacco, Muslin,
Callicoes, and all sorts of Liunen, Scotch-cloth, and Wines, except Wines of
the Growth of Spain, and of the Dominions thereunto belonging, that shall be
Imported into this Kingdom at any time, from and after the Four and twentieth
Day of December, One thousand Six hundred Ninety nine, unto the Five and
twentieth Day of December, which shall be in the Year One Seven hundred and
Two, and no longer, shall Answer and Pay unto His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, over and above all Rates and Duties due or payable for, or out of
the same, by Virtue of any former, or other Law in Force in this Kingdom
(except only the several Statutes formerly made in this present Session of
Parliament, which laid several Additional Duties on the said Goods, until the
said Five and twentieth Day of December, which will be in the Year One thousand
Six hundred Ninety nine) the several Rates and Duties hereafter mentioned.
(That is to say) For every Pound weight of Tobacco to be Imported within the
time aforesaid, Two pence Halfpenny, Sterling, for every Ell of Muslin,
Callicoe, and of all and every other sorts of Linen, Imported within the time
aforesaid (Scotch-Cloth Excepted) Six pence Sterling, and for every Yard of
Scotch-Cloth Imported within the aforesaid time, Six pence Sterling; for every
Tunn of Wine (except Wines of the Growth of Spain, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging) Imported within the time aforesaid, Three Pounds Sterling, and so
proportionably for a greater, or lesser quantity: Which several Duties shall,
and may be Raised, Collected and Levied, and paid unto His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, during the time aforesaid, at the same times, and in the same
manner and place, and by such Rules, and Ways, and Means, and under such
Penalties and Forfeitures, as are mentioned and expressed in one Act of
Parliament, made in a Session of Parliament, which began the Eighth day of May
in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of the late King Charles the Second,
Entitled, An Act for Settling the Excise, or New Impost, upon the said late
King Charles the Second, His Heirs and Successors, the same to be paid upon
Merchandises Imported and Exported into, or out of the Kingdom of Ireland,
according to the Book of Rates to the said Act annexed.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Merchant, or other Importer, of any Tobacco, so Charged, as aforesaid,
which the said Additional Duty of One penny per Pound weight, until the Twenty
Fifth of December, One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety Nine, and with the
Additional Duty of Two pence halfpenny, per Pound, from that time till the
Fifth of December, One thousand Seven hundred and Two, shall have like time
for payment of such Additional Duty and Duties, as they had, or ought to have
by virtue of the abovenamed Act of Excise, or New Impost; any thing herein
contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That from and after the Twenty fourth day of
December, which will be in the Year One thousand Six hundred Ninety eight,
there shall be throughout this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Raised,
Levied. Collected and Paid unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, unto the
Twenty Fifth day of December, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord God, One
thousand Seven hundred and Two, for Beer, Ale, and other Liquors hereafter
expressed, by way of Excise, over and above all other Duties, Charges, and
Impositions thereout, then payable, the Excise, or Duty hereafter following:
(That is to say) For every Thirty two Gallons of Beer, or Ale, above Six
Shillings the Barrel price, Brewed within his Kingdom, by the Common Brewer, or
in his Uessels, or by any other person or persons who does, or shall sell Beer
or Ale publicly, or privately to be paid by the Common Brewer, or by such
other person or persons respectively, One shilling and Six pence, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, over and above the Duties
payable for the same, if this Act had not been made. And for every Thirty two
Gallons of Beer, or Ale of Six Shillings the Barrel, price, or under, Brewed by
the Common Brewer, or other person or persons who does or shall sell Beer, or
Ale publicly, or privately, to be paid by the Common Brewer, or by such other
Person or Persons respectively, for a greater or lesser quantity, Three pence,
over and above what would be payable for the same, if this Act had not been
made.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Twenty Fourth Day of December, in the Year of Our Lord God One thousand Six
Hundred and Ninety eight there shall be throughout this His Majesty's Kingdom
of Ireland, Raised, Levied, Collected, and Paid unto His Majesty, during the
aforesaid space and term of Four Years, ending on the Twenty Fourth Day of
December, One thousand Seven hundred and two, an Additional Duty, or Excise of
Three pence upon every Gallon of Aquavitae, Strong Water, and Balcan, or other
potable Spirits, made or Distilled in this Realm for sale. whether of Foreign,
or Domestic Spirits, or Materials; the same to be paid by the First Maker or
Distiler thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, over
and above all other the Duties, that would have been payable for the same, if
this Act had not been made.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Rates
and Duties of Excise, hereby Granted on the several Liquors aforesaid, shall be
Raised, Levied, Collected, Recovered and Paid unto His Majesty in the same
Manner and Form, and by such Ways and Means, and under such Penalty and
Penalties, and Forfeitures, as are mentioned and expressed, and directed for
the Collecting, Gathering, and Recovering of the several Duties of Excise, in,
and by the said Act of Excise, or New Impost, made in the Fourteenth Year of
the late King Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for Settleing of the
Excise, or New Impost, upon His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, according to
the Book of Rates therein incerted, or by any other Law now in Force, with the
like Liberty of Appeal to, and for the Parties grieved, as in, and by the said
former Act is respectively provided.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Inkeeper,
Uictualler, or other Re-tailer of Beer or Ale, at any time hereafter, during
the continuance of the aforesaid Additional Duties on Beer and Ale, by this Act
Imposed, shall be Sued, Impleaded, or Molested by Indictments, Informations,
Action, or otherwise, for Selling and Uttering of Beer and Ale, at any other,
and higher Prices, then the Prices heretofore Limited and Appointed; but that
all Officers and other Persons, concerned in Assizeing of Beer and Ale
throughout this Kingdom, shall take Care to Assize the same, with Regard to the
Additional Charge or Duty aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all,
and every Merchant, Importer, Shopkeeper, Re-tailer, or other Person or
Persons, Inhabiting or Tradeing within the City of Dublin, and all other Towns
Corporate, Ports, and all other places of this Kingdom, do within the several
times herein-after mentioned (That is to say) in the City and Suburbs of
Dublin, within Four days after the First Day of November, One thousand Six
hundred Ninety seven; and in all other places, within Ten Days after the First
Day of November, One thousand Six hundred Ninety seven, Make and Deliver under
His, or Their Hands, to the Commissioners of Excise for the time being, their
Sub-Commissioners, Collectors, or other Chief Officers of Excise, of the
District, in which he or they Live or Inhabit; a true and perfect Account, of
all Tobacco remaining in the Possession of every such Merchant, Shopkeeper,
Re-tailer, or other Person whatsoever; or in the Possession of any other, to
His or Their Use, at the Respective times aforesaid; and shall likewise make
Oath before the said Commissioners, Sub-Commissioners, Collectors, or other
Chief Officer as aforesaid, who, or any of them, hereby are Authorized to
Administer the same, that the Account by him or them Given, is a True, Just,
and Perfect Account, of all the Tobacco in his Possession or in the Possession
of any other in Trust for him or them; and the said Commissioners of Excise, or
their said Sub-Commissioners, Collectors, or other Chief Officer, respectively,
are hereby Charged and Required, to send one, or more Officer or Officers, to
enter into the Cellar, Uault, Store-celler, Storehouse, Warehouse, or other
place, or places whatsoever, to any Merchant, or other person in this Kingdom
belonging, to Search, See, and Try, whether the quantity of Tobacco do not
exceed such Account given under Hand, as aforesaid; and if the same shall be
found to agree, that then the Duty of One Penny, per Pound, shall be
immediately paid down at the usual Allowance of Imported Excise, or Bonds with
sufficient Security, be immediately passed to His Majesty, for payment of the
same in Three Months time; and in Case any Merchant, or other Person liable to
give an Account, as aforesaid, shall Neglect, Omit, or Refuse to Make and
Deliver in such an Account at the time aforesaid, or else Making and Delivering
in such Account, shall not upon Demand thereof, by such Officer or Officers as
shall be thereunto Appointed, suffer him or them to Enter into His or Their
House or Houses, Warehouse, Store-cellar, Storehouse, Ualts, or any Place or
Places, to him or them belonging, or Admitting them, as aforesaid; shall Hide,
Conceal, or not show all, and every, His and their Uaults, Storehouse,
Warehouses, and other places; or shall make a short Return of any Tobacco to
him or them belonging; or Conceal it from Uiew of the Officer or Officers,
appointed to Search for, and Uiew the same, shall for every such Offense,
Forfeit Five pounds Sterling, over and above such Quantity or Quantities of
Tobacco, as shall be found to exceed such His Account, returned under His or
Their Hand or Hands, the one Moiety to His, Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
and the other Moiety to the Informer; the said Penalties and, Forfeitures, to
be Prosecuted, Recovered, and Condemned in the same manner, and according to
the Methods prescribed in the said Act, for Settleing the New Excise, or
Impost, upon the said late King Charles the Second.

And be it further Enacted, That whatsoever sum or sums of Money, the said
Aid, or Additional Duty shall yield unto His Majesty, over and above the sum
of Fifty thousand pounds, Sterling; immediately, and in the first place payable
unto His Majesty, be, and shall be paid and applied to the several Uses
following, and to no other Use whatsoever (That is to say) The sum of Twenty
five thousand pounds, which shall be first Raised, Levied and Received out of
the Aid aforesaid, over and above the said sum of Fifty thousand pounds, shall
be Employed in, and applied to the Building of Barracks, for Soldiers, in the
most useful, convenient and necessary parts and places in this Kingdom,
according to the Directions of the Chief Governor, or Governors, for the time
being; which Barracks, shall be forthwith begun, and carried on from time to
time, as fast as any part of the said sum of Twenty five thousand pounds
allotted for the Building thereof, shall come in and be received, out of the
said Additional Duties, or Aid, Granted to His Majesty by this present Act. And
We humbly beseech Your Majesty, That Your Majesty will be Graciously pleased,
to accept of the further Sum of Twenty one thousand, and Twenty seven Pounds,
Three shillings, and Six pence halfpenny, to be Raised and Levied out of the
said Additional Customs, or Duties, by this present Act, Granted unto Your
Majesty, in full Discharge of the Arrears of Quit-rent, Crown-rent, and
Composition-rent, due to Your Majesty out of the Houses and Lands that were
returned to be waste, from the Five and twentieth Day of March, One thousand
Six hundred and Ninety two, to the Twenty fifth of March, One thousand Six
hundred Ninety five; the Collection whereof, was respited upon the Humble
Application of Your Majesty's Subjects, the Commons of Ireland in Parliament
Assembled.

And be it further Enacted, That the several Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, returned to have been waste, from the Twenty fifth of March, One
thousand Six hundred Ninety two, to the Twenty fifth of March, One thousand Six
hundred ninety five, and respited as aforesaid, shall be, and always hereafter
shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged to be Free and Discharged of, and from all
Quit-rents, Crown-rents, and Composition-rents, and of, and from all Arrears
thereof Contracted, Incurred, or become due, between the said Twenty fifth Day
of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety two, to the Twenty fifth of March,
One thousand Six hundred Ninety five, inclusive; and that no person or persons
whatsoever, hereafter shall be Distrained, or otherwise Sued, Uexed, Processed
or Impleaded for, or on Account for the same, or any part whatsoever thereof;
and that no Officer or other person whatsoever do Distrain, or Issue any
Process for the same, or any part thereof, under the pain and penalty of paying
to the person grieved thereby, double Costs, and double Damages, for such
unjust Suit, Molestation, or Uexation.

And to the End the Arrears of Quit-Rents, Crown-rents, and Composition-rents,
hereby intended to be Discharged, may be ascertained.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners of
His Majesty's Revenues, from the Books and other Papers which have been
Transmitted to them, from the Collectors and other Officers of His Majesty's
Revenues, before the One and twentieth Day of August, One thousand Six hundred
Ninety seven, wherein any such Rents are mentioned to be respited, as being
Charged upon any Houses or Lands that are wasted, shall make a particular
Account in Writing, of all such Arrears so Respited for the time aforesaid, in
Case they do not exceed Twenty one thousand Twenty seven Pounds, Three
Shillings and Six pence Halfpenny; and if they do exceed Twenty one thousand
Twenty seven Pounds, Three Shillings and Six Pence Halfpenny, then an
Apportionment shall be made of the said Rents, so that the said Account shall
not exceed in the whole, Twenty one thousand Twenty seven Pounds, Three
Shillings and Six Pence Halfpenny; and that the said Commissioners shall
Deliver the said Account into the Office of the Auditor-General, before the
Twenty fifth Day of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety eight, to which all
Persons concerned, shall have free Access without Fee or Charge.

And it is hereby Provided and Enacted, That nothing in this Act contained,
shall extend to Discharge any Arrears of Quit-Rents, Crown-Rents, or
Composition-Rents, Charged on any Houses or Lands for being wasted, unless such
particular Arrear be contained in the said Account of Arrears to be Discharged
as aforesaid.

And in Case the said Commissioners shall refuse, or neglect to Make, and
Deliver into the Auditor's Office, the said Account within the time aforesaid,
they, and every of them, shall Forfeit Treble Damages to every Person who shall
be Grieved by such Neglect, or Refusal, to be Recovered by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at
Dublin, in which no Essoyn, Protection, Wager of Law, or more then one
Imparlance shall be Allowed, any thing herein Contained to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

And if any Person or Persons shall be hereafter Impleaded, or Molested,
contrary to the Scope or Intent of this Act, that such Person, or Persons,
shall not be obliged to Discharge himself by Plea, or Record, from such Charge,
but shall be admitted to Discharge himself by Motion, in His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, without any Charge, Fee, or Reward, and by showing unto the said
Court this present Act, and making it appear by Affidavit, and Certificate of
the Auditor-General, that the Quit-Rent, Crown-Rent or Composition-Rent, for
which he is Distrained, Sued, or Impleaded, become Due, between the Twenty
fifth of March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety two, and the Twenty fifth of
March, One thousand Six hundred Ninety five, Inclusive, out of Houses, or Lands
Returned waste, as aforesaid, before mentioned, and are mentioned, and
comprehended in such Account, Transmitted to the Auditor-General, to be Charged
upon waste Lands, and for that Reason Respited as aforesaid; which Certificate,
the Auditor-General shall be obliged to give on Demand, to the Person requiring
the same, without Fee or Reward.

And be it further Enacted, That from and after the time that the said sums of
Fifty thousand pounds, and Twenty five thousand pounds, and Twenty one thousand
pounds, and Twenty Seven pounds, Three shilling and Six pence halfpenny shall
have been Levied and Paid unto His Majesty out of the present Aid, or
Additional Custom, Granted unto His Majesty by this present Act, that what
other or further sums, shall, and may be Levied and Collected, by virtue
thereof, shall and may be paid, and applied to the use following: That is to
say.

Whereas Sir Audley Mervin, Knight, Prime Sergeant to His Majesty King Charles
the Second, was in his lifetime Speaker of the House of Commons, in the
Parliament which began in this Kingdom, in the Year, One thousand Six hundred
and Sixty one, and Continued so till the Disolution of the said Parliament, in
the Year One thousand Six hundred and Sixty six; During which time, the said
Sir Audley Mervin not only spent great part of his Fortune supporting the State
and Dignity of that Honorable Employment, but wholly declined his Practice at
the Bar, which was very Considerable.

And whereas the said House of Commons, humbly Addressed themselves to the
Government, in behalf of the said Sir Audley Mervin, for the Sum of Six
thousand pounds, Sterling, to be Bestowed on him, for his great Services done
to His Majesty, and the English Interest of this Kingdom, in that Station, of
which sum, however, he never received any part, so as the said Sir Audley
Mervin, was forced to Charge his Real Estate with great sums of Money, for
Portions and otherwise, and the same has been and still is greatly Encumbered
with Debts: That the sums that shall be Levied, as aforesaid, after the
payment of the said sums of Fifty thousand pounds, Twenty five thousand
pounds, and Twenty one thousand, Twenty seven pounds, Three shillings, Six
pence halfpenny, be applied and paid as follows, viz. Three thousand pounds
thereof to Audley Mervin, Esquire, eldest Son of Henry Mervin, Esquire, Son and
Heir of the said Sir Audley Mervin, and the other Three thousand pounds to be
equally divided between Hugh Mervin, and George Mervin, Esquires, younger Sons
of the said Sir Audley Mervin. And also, that after the payment of the said
sum of Six thousand pounds, that the further sum of Six hundred pounds
Sterling, shall, and may be Levied, Collected and Paid, over out of the said
Aid, or Additional Custom, or Duties, unto Richard Warburton of Garryhinch, in
the Queens-County, Esquire, being a sum due to the said Richard Warburton, for
Services by the said Richard Warburton performed, during the said Parliament,
which began in this Kingdom in the Year of Our Lord god, One thousand Six
hundred Sixty and one.

FINIS.

