AN INVITATION TO THE Aforementioned SOCIETY OR LITTLE COMMONWEALTH.

SHOWING The excellency of the true Christian love, and the folly of all those
who consider not to what end the Lord of heaven and earth has created them.

MAT. 12. 50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the
same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.

LONDON. Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Black-spread Eagle
near the West End of Paul's, 1660.

An invitation to the aforementioned Society, or little Commonwealth, etc.
THough men are bound one to another upon several accounts, and knit together
with very straight bonds, and that the likeness either of manners, or of life
and conversation, or of parentage and education, begets a mutual friendship
between them, yet this is the most perfect, and of all others, the most
blessed, when God by the dispensation of his secret counsel joined some such
together as do agree with his divine will, and with the rules of nature, and
they will not exchange their union or fellowship for all the riches in the
World.

But the more divine this state of friendship is, the seldomer is it seen
amongst us, and the more is Satan (that enemy of mankind) against it, who knows
full well that he has not so much right or power to meddle with this holy
fire, and the matter which maintains it, as he has where either recreation
or advantage is only looked after; which kind of friendships he uses with
very little trouble to dissolve; but in this way of amity, God only is the
bond wherewith they are tied together without being liable to be unloosed, and
upon which foundation being fixed, they resolve to withstand all assaults
whatsoever.

If then there be any felicity in the life of man, or any efficacious remedy to
prevent his future misery; I conceive nothing was ever more solacing or
reviving, and come nearer to the divine nature, then love, viz. true love,
which does so communicate it self in, and to that wherewith it reciprocates,
that it seems to have exchanged therewith, and made over thereto, whatsoever it
did possess before; so that amongst true friends there is such an agreement,
that no secret, no joy, no profit, nor any cross or affliction is undivided,
but whatsoever betides either of them, is no otherwise then if it were the
change of one alone, so that death it self can scarce separate souls so totally
united; certainly the Heathens (who in all things pursued that which they
esteemed best, found nothing more delightsom then perfect friendship.

But how far does Christ excel all others in love, who by his Doctrine and
Example has instituted a partnership or society of mutual love by the
denomination of Brethren, abolishing amongst his Disciples, all preheminency or
domineering of one over another, requiring that the gifts and means of
subsistence in the World (for necessity and delight) should be common, having
called his people to a moderation, and to a life suitable to pure nature, so
that all Christendom ought to be merely a certain great fraternity, consisting
of such as (having denied the World and their own lusts) conspire together in
Christ, the sole head and spring of love, doing well to one another, and for
his sake distribute their goods to those that stand in need.

Oh that we had this perfection, and were answerable to the end of our
creation! certainly there would not be such going to law, such intrenching and
incroaching upon the bounds of lands, such hiding and close locking up of
money, nor would there be such scraping together of superfluous Estates.

Oh total sum and highest pitch of all good! if any may be admitted (and that
in due time) to this divine favor; for even many decrippid aged persons do
seldom attain to this; Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc. having spent all their
years, all their strength of body and soul, have little or no time left them to
serve a better Master then the World; and therefore if God do join some such
together as endeavor after a life more regular then their former, each of them
being at a loss for a companion to better and promote his resolution, one to
whom he may communicate his secrets, a friendly reprover of his errors, a
reclaimer of him from the Worlds allurements, a comforter in adversity, a
moderator of joy in prosperity, and in all respects a sharer in that which God
has liberally given; and last of all, one ready for all cases and conditions
that may happen: I say and judge, that these are the happiest of all persons
that ever were upon the earth. For as no painfuller or miserabler thing can be
thought on then that life which a man lives according to the course of the
world; so nothing is more acceptable and lovely in the Universe, then that
harmony and concord which has its Original from God, and influence upon the
man that is joined with his fellow-man, so agreeable to his mind; which
certainly can be found no where, but there only, where a firm love, agreement,
and concurring will in well doing, as also a liberal distribution and imparting
of all created things is entertained.

It is evident that the most wise God would honor the sacred society of
Matrimony, with the utmost perfection of this so great love, since they that
are so joined together, and built upon the right foundation, have not only
their goods, but also their joys and griefs common, and cannot be severed by
any kind of reproaches, or malicious endeavors of the envious.

The World has her delight in different degrees of dignities, states, titles,
and offices, exalting themselves one above another; but Christ on the contrary
will that every one shall perform his office as a member of one and the same
body, in which no one exalts it self, nor accounts it self worthier then
other; the eye is not puffed up because it sees; the foot is not grieved that
it sees not; if any member in the body is blemished, it is carefully covered by
the other; if any be weak, it is diligently provided for by the rest; whereas
on the contrary, every one in the World (which by his Office or Title is
differenced from others) conceives he is quite another thing, and in himself
better then others, and must be reputed for one that is set together and
composed of some finer substance, and designed to a sweeter life, yea, to an
higher place in heaven then others.

Now if you do but divest and strip the World of her Riches, Honors and State,
how naked and rufully forlorn will she remain? and how far different will she be
found from that she seems to be? and then it will be easy to believe that she
is shored up by nothing else but wormeaten props, which if they were once
pulled away, they would be fitted and made free for the imitation of Christ.

Do but see (oh man!) what kind of things they are which do shut the door
against true love, and hinder communion or fellowship with Christ, viz.
Nugatory, frivolous things, and trifles, which only consists in a vain
esteem and opinion which some of the very heathens who saw a little further
then others, did laugh at.

1. First, Riches and Estates, which as our natures are satisfied, are
altogether superfluous, and very troublesome, the vanity whereof, who does not
see it? They are a burden to to the rich, causing them to fill their houses
with variety of costly furniture, which in many years (or never) happens not to
be useful to them; they are a trouble to get them; a perplexity to keep them,
and a grief to part with them; their houses are spacious and great, so that
there is either much void and empty room within, or else they put themselves to
a great deal of trouble and molestation in furnishing and filling them; their
clothes are so dainty and curious that they cannot sit down any where without
fear of spoiling their Apparel; and unless they have some to behold their
splendour, all is little to them; but if they have spectators, they fear some
will lurch, and others filch away from them; their sleep is almost none. Oh how
great a misery is it to be laden with riches!

Secondly, Honor and Dignities, which if we measure according to the design of
nature, and the rule of Christ, may not otherwise be distinguished then by
several Names or denominations of diverse members of one and the same body; the
name of the tongue; is that any more worthy name then the name of the finger?
The name of the eye; is that more excellent then the name of the breast? No
certainly; that whereby the members are differenced, does not lift them up; as
with us the name of Lord and Gentleman puffs up; and what else is it but a
mere Name, the vanity whereof who sees it not? The very foundation of it is
nothing else but the noise of the tongue, and the report of others; or the
knee, or the hat, all fleeting and variable things that are to be bought for a
very small matter; and yet we are oftentimes so foolish, that though such
things commonly come not from the heart, neither are fruits of an upright and
sincere mind; nay, when on the contrary our own minds do suggest to us, that
there is I know not what kind of tacit derifion in it, and does oftentimes
signify nothing else but hatred and ill will, yet we do delight in such
trifles, and give way to them so far, that we will rather hear a lie from a
notorious parasite or flatterer, if it be but on our side, then to hear the
truth from an honest man, if it cross our interest.

Do but now cast up thy account (oh man!) how dearly thou have ventured to buy
the friendship of the World, which yet thou never foundst to be thy friend, but
feignedly, and that for a spurt; on the contrary, consider how little, or
almost nothing, thou have best owed to answer the love of God, who nevertheless
would have been the most assured, and most faithful and unchangeable friend.

Thou have trimmed and decked thy body, and in Apparel thou have been passing
sumptuous, that some silly creature might gaze on thee with admiration: In
feasts thou have been prodigal, that thy companions and associates might
commend thee; thou have distributed thy gifts and presents, that thou may
seem liberal; thou have put forth thy art and skill, that thou may be called
and accounted learned; thou have daubed thy house with many colors, to cause
them to stand still that pass by; in the mean time thy reward has been nothing
else but a great toil, and the sudden, uncomposed, disagreeing, and
unreasonable judgment and censure of other men: Consider in the mean while
whether thou have provoked God thereby, or honored him; it is most certain
that thou might have served God, and have performed the office of love to
thy neighbor at a far cheaper rate; for by how much profuse and slavish thou
have been in the service of the World, by so much the more have thou been
partimonious and sparing in the service of God; for it is evident the World
requires costly attendance, as to all her matters, being never sollicitous of
the heart, how it stands with that, if you be but careful that nothing be
wanting in outward appearance, in dissembling and complemental deportments; or
if there be but ceremony and external semblance, and fine show enough, so that
by the very aspect it is plain that the slaves of the World may be discerned
from the true servants of God, in as much as the first are moveable, flexible,
fickle, and variable; but the latter have their eyes always fixed upon the
mark which is set before them.

If we but once bring our selves to the touch and travel through the World,
with a free and pure mind, we shall be able to obtain so much from our selves
as in Christian simplicity, silence and unincumbredness, to exclude the Wisdom,
Eloquence and Prudence of the World, concluding (as in truth it is) that
nothing is to be compared with our Master Christ, and that none other knows any
thing, or can give any counsel that is savingly profitable, but he; nor shall
we repute them happy who have no other character or superscription then the
Worlds Endowments, knowing that Worldly knowledge is not so great a thing as it
is commonly esteemed, for as much as under the title and disguise of learned,
the very shame of being found ignorant, does (with many inventions and cheating
subterfuges) endeavor the hiding of it self from being discovered to the eyes
of the common people.

Shall we never be able to attain to that equal judgment in putting a true
value upon real virtue wheresoever it be found, as well in a beggar as in a
Prince? and to leave off more to admire the Ornaments of a Magistrate, then the
Office he sustains? and esteeming less of poverty, then of superfluity? of the
honor, then of the state? of a good conscience, less then of a popular or vain
applause? of a piece of bread, then of delicious dainties? of Water, then Wine?
of a green bank of Turf? then of a costly Couch?

Shall we not be able to arrive to this, to esteem one only Sentence of the
holy Scriptures more then the highest accuteness of all the Worlds Philosophy?
We shall be able to do it if we did well weigh that the Worlds turn is but a
short Comedy, and that we are but Actors who appear no more then once upon the
Stage; and if we did seriously consider that all things are described and
represented to us in the World far otherwise then they are in themselves, but
especially when we have well pondered that honest and godly people after a very
little while are to expect a participation and enjoyment of another kind of
honor and dignity then any the World promises.

Shall we never be able to attain to this, to choose rather to lay up our
Estates in the hungry bellies of the poor, then in a few bags? to lay the
foundation of our praise upon the prayers of the poor? to make the cross of
Christ our glory, and not to efchew the dissavour of man, as the reward of our
well-doing? In a word, to put off all desire of fame and renown, as also to
refer all desire of revenge, to the judgment of Christ; we shall be able to do
all this, if we forget not that our God is the most faithful of all Debtors,
and the most sure of all Securities; if also we never forget that his praise
which shall be given to us in the presence of men and Angels, is the most
glorious praise, and that his renumerations and recompenses are the most noble
and everlasting.

To how happy an hour are we born if we do enter upon this communion or
fellowship! And from how many vexations will it release us! Whereof the
Heathens, having obtained but a shadow, how magnanimously did they in their
minds soar aloft above all Kings, and worldly glory? how did they despise all
terrene affairs (as they that from above look down upon that which is below)
and had pity on them, and so did indeed avoid the greatest miseries of man's
life.

But since Christian Religion is come into the world, it is a wonderful thing
to consider what a light brake in together with it, viz. such a light that all
they whose hearts were touched therewith, throwing all from them, betook
themselves to it for refuge, as to a true and steadfast liberty after a long and
horrible captivity, easily forgetting their riches, state, rule and possession,
forsaking Parents, Wife, Children, Relations, and whatsoever before was most
near and dear unto them, not being by any temptations of Tyrants, to be drawn
from the sweetness of the Christian life.

The same have appeared in the memory of our Forefathers, when the bonds of
Antichrist (it is strange to think how firm they were) were broken, when they
who a little before were forced to creep upon the ground began to rise up,
with what readiness that syrannical Worship of Invocating so many deceased
Saints was rejected, and the unconfined Worship of God re-entertained? And with
what readiness that vain (though gainful) fancy of Invocating Christ by so
many Intercessions came to naught; so that it appears in all respects, how much
God has chalked out in nature it self the pure and true Worship, as also the
amicable and friendly conversation of man, and likewise how easily those things
which are contrary thereto, perish and come to nothing, and how far our
Religion with-draweth us from all Theatrical or Stage Play gestures, and
countenances, and all those troublesome Ceremonies wherewith we torture our
selves, in speaking, eating, saluting, walking, clothing, yea and in all the
actions of our life: But on the contrary, how conformable it makes us to the
celestial Hierarchy and natural Policy, and yet in these petty and
altogether childish things, men are so hard to be convinced and drawn off from
them, as if all their well-being depended thereon, and the beatitude or
happiness of all mankind had all its foundation therein, and never give so much
scope to reason and well-guided understanding, as either to acknowledge their
vanity, or if it be known to them, rather to throw it off then to retain and
daily augment it with new and exottick bawbles.

In truth, as often as we do strictly ponder to what end God the Creator and
Ruler of all things, has brought every one of us into this great Fabric of
the World, and yet for us to observe that the life of almost all men is either
unprofitable, idle, wicked, or hurtful to mankind; we have reason to be afraid
and jealous of our selves, least peradventure either by the corruption of the
times, or our education, we have applied our selves to some manner of life
which is not suitable to the will of God, and the end of our Creation, being not
able to give a just account wherein we have lived to the glory of God, and the
advantage of mankind.

Certainly to have eaten, to have drunk, to have slept, yea to have read much,
writ much, seen, heard, and traveled much, and let this also be added, to have
managed an Estate, to have kept Hounds, Horses and Servants; to have had Arts
and Learning in great esteem; to have trimmed up Houses, to have often made
Banquets; to have born Titles of Honor; to have collected many Books together;
in a word, to have been employed and very busy to the uttermost, in things
that do not relate or belong to Christ, let them be what they will, certainly
all that will never satisfy God, nor endure the touch or trial of the fire but
being consumed as stubble, will leave man bare and naked, a Malefactor, and
guilty in the presence of God for his lost time, and his neglect of friendship
and union with God, together with the neglect of the Endowments, as well of
body, as of spirit, so that there will be an horrible distance between them and
those whose faith in God, and love to man, has been steadfast and firm.

Let us take heed Brethren, least those among us who either in understanding,
learning, riches, beauty, or arts, excel others, do conceit that God is
therefore more gracious and favorable to them then others, and that they have
attained to the best life; for such men do grossly deceive themselves, because
the manner of Gods judging is quite different from that of the World, his eyes
are quite other kind of eyes, and his policy differs from the Worlds policy,
as much as Heaven from Earth, as one who chooses the unvvorthy and despised,
rejects and abhors that which the World do highly esteem.

If any think this our Society and Fellowship to be a new thing, so that he
cannot (as it was in old time) so much as point out five pair of such friends,
he has reason with me to lament, that while men do curiously, and with anxity
of mind, search into the course of the Stars and Planets, the virtues of Plants
and Vigitables, yea into the very bowels of the earth, yet they are so
neglective of their salvation, that they do not (in the least) so much as seek
and look after that life for which they would not need so much Silver and Gold,
so many Titles of Honor, so many Buildings, such Clothes, so much Furniture for
their Houses, so many Messes and Dishes at their Meals, so many Arms and
Ammunition, or Warlike provisions, so many Judgments or Decrees of Law, so
many Medicines, nor so many Books, all which are causes of vast trouble, so
that the men of the World themselves (if they were but wise) would avoid these
occasions, or (as they themselves do confess) necessities of sinning.

This Society or fellowship has not always been so rare, and so thin sown, but
was very rife in the primitive times, till the enemies of the first innocence
did insinuate themselves thereunto, whereby the life which men were bound to
live, as in obedience to the Laws of Christ, began to be accounted such as a
man may choose whether he would embrace or no, and take up a meritorious and
superoragatory life, comprizing such a sanctimony or holiness as was more then
necessary to salvation, and was only to be used by such as desired a greater
reward in Heaven then others; which opinion gave a beginning to many Orders of
lazy and wanton beasts, (I mean Monks, and the like) and of many thousand
fables and cheats, which things when men came to themselves, they did justly
reject; and when they are grown wiser, they will totally cast off, even those
poor ones who now scrape and rake together the riches of the World, as also
those (seeming) humble and lowly persons that now take up the high Seats of the
World, and such pretended simple ones who now fill and disturb the whole World
with their cunning and deceit.

But for us, let us hold fast that which is in this life the best thing, viz.
The universal love to Gods creation; and if we be insufferable to the World,
and they be incorrigible or unbetterable as to us, then let us reduce our
friendship and society to a few in number, and maintain it in such places as
are separate from other men, where we may with less impediment or hinderance,
love one another, and mind the Wonders of God, eating the bread we shall earn
with our own hands, leaving nothing to the body but what its nakedness, hunger,
thirst, and weariness calls for, to help our necessity and health, then it will
appear how many things we may well be without, what things we may refrain, and
what kind of matters we ought not to know; how many things we may avoid, in
what things we may best quiet our selves, and how far easier we may satisfy
Christ in his little ones with a penny, then the World with a pound.

For Princes are not born on purpose to rear up stately Palaces; the Le^rned
are not born for the writing of many unprofitable and (for the most part)
frivolous Books; the rich are not born to boast of their gold, silver and
christal-Vessels; the rest of the people are not born for so many various
unprofitable Handy-crafts: In a word, mankind is not born for so many kinds of
education, of being rich, and running into excess; but all these racks of the
mind it has invented of it self, and now made a custom and habitual, so that
it has made the life more grievous to it self every day, under so many painful
and laboursome inventions.

Now I would that they that stand and admire at the fine Wits of our age, and
the sublime learning of our times, did but consider with me, Whether these
things which daily please our eyes with their novelty, be indeed such for which
we may justly rejoice; or whether on the contrary it were not much better
(since they are the cause of so many griefs and troubles in man's life) that we
were wished and advised by our learned men to put them away far from us.

For what greater fruit of Wisdom, or what greater glory of the new revived
learning could there possibly be, then by that to bring humane matters to such
a posture that we may attribute our well-being and felicity in this life to
them under God, that by the wholesome instruction thereof, that which is
superfluous, useless and unnecssary, might be thrown away, and that which is
nugatory, trifling and unprofitable, might be cut off, and that we might truly
be distinguished from the barbarous and savage people, not by Books, nor by
Titles of Honor, nor by Universities, but by such morality as Christian
Philosophy does prescribe.

Let there come forth from the Studies and Liberaries of our Wise men into the
light, not a continuation or prosecution of old Errors, or an heaping up of new
to the old, but on the contrary, a Rule or Direction for a new and reformed
life in Christ, which may demonstrate, that as we are professors of the best
Religion, we are also imitators of the best life; then shall we return to their
Society or Fellowship, and be subject to their good Laws and Orders, and
observe their rational Customs.

In the mean time let them not take it ill that we do not make any great
ac^ount of these Sciences that are void of Christ, that we do not desire to
know them; and if we have drunk in any such, yet we desire to unlearn them, and
with singleness of heart to become as children, who are altogether unacquainted
with voluptuousness, ceremonies, riches, and foolish labor; henceforward we
desire to live toward God, in unincumbredness, void of carking for the
multiplicity of super-necessary things, exercising a delight in real equality,
and for the rest, acknowledge Christ only for our Lord and Master, and in this
School of his we hope that neither Divine Mysteries, nor secrets of Nature, nor
the contemplation of rare matters, shall be wanting to us, since he formerly
has made it evident by the example of his Apostles and holy men, how powerful
he is in teaching, and then especially he displayeth his riches, and opens his
unexhaustible treasures when humane Wisdom cease, and the skill of the World
melts away.

But that we now are so weak, and the strength of our Religion that is grown so
faint with us, that the Majesty of the Divine presence, with the miraculous
working, is removed from us, whom shall we accuse for this, but our selves, who
in the midst of the Divine Light have scarce retained any more then the bare
name, being content if we may but be called Christians, as to the rest being
altogether like to the World? So that it is no marvel that we who do not excel
others in the pursuit of honest actions, as Justice, Mercy, and the propagation
of the Name of Christ, nor in the education of children, do not also in the
least go beyond them in those gifts which were peculiar to upright and zealous
Christians; and yet we ought in so clear a light of the Gospel as we have, to
be so far distinguished as to excel other men; so that if others do not commit
Adultery, we should not so much as desire another man's Wife; if they do not
commit Murder, we should not at all be angry with our brother; if they love
them that are like to them, we should love our enemies; if they do lend to
those that have to give again, we should lend to those from whom we cannot hope
to receive any thing again; for it becomes us who hope for the inheritance of
an eternal life, in all things to go beyond those that know only this present
life: But if (nevertheless) we be found beneath these, or if we be found but
like to them, and no more, how much will their accusation press us down, and
condemn us to the like, yea to a more grievous punishment.

Let us look back to the former Ages, and it will appear that the Divine Power
was then most of all vigorous and eminent, when there was not such ostentation
of fine Wits, but the supreme knowledge was then placed in the Cross of Christ;
but now while matters go quite otherwise, and the creatures of our brain do
obumbrate, or overshadow and obscure the Works of God, we do things according
to the will and pleasure of Satan, who being the most subtle of all
Philosophers, Logicians, and Artists, is not afraid of us if we go his way; and
by that occasion he insinuates himself more and more into us, and glideth in
by means of such things which we most admire.

Do not you see, Brethren, that by the goodness and long-suffering of God, it
is in our hand and power, now we have tasted of the bitterness of this Worlds
pleasure, to rid our selves of very many troubles, going on by a way that is
not crooked and rugged, but straight and smooth, tending to the true rest, and
highest pitch of all perfection, by applying our selves to this Communion or
Society whereof we have made mention, which suffers no pride, riot, excess,
uncleanness, injustice, or any evils which have been pourtrayed in their native
colors; from which Society no man that professes the Name of Christ, and
practices his Doctrine, is excluded, of what sect, party, or by what Name
soever he is called or known.

We desire therefore, that all who love their own peace and welfare, will
consider of our Order or Institution, which is propounded for a general rule;
for we judge it to be not only a true opposition to all evil, but also a means
to rid the World of all unprofitable and hurtful Handy-crafts, being the cause
of sin and slavery; to which we hope that God (who is the Husband of Widows,
and a Father of the fatherless) will vouchsafe his blessing, through Jesus
Christ, that so the pure and uncorrupted Worship (which consists more in
well-doing, then in much speaking) may break forth to the glory of his holy
Name, and the good of all mankind.

THE END.
A Letter written in order to the now mentioned Society, or little
Commonwealth, by some well-affected persons, whose hearts and hands have
already joined therein, to stir up all such who are truly sensible of the poor
and needy, to carry on this so necessary and charitable a work.
HAving not only considered the poverty, afflictions, and streights of many
well-minded people, together with the evil consequences that arise from the
corrupt customs and ways of most employments, and the general disorder
proceeding from riches and poverty; but also the way propounded by the
endeavors of our friend Peter Cornelisson, to rectify all such and many other
inconveniences, by bringing together a fit, suitable, and well qualified people,
into one Houshold-government, or little Commonwealth, wherein every one may
keep his propriety, and be employed in some work or other, as he shall be fit,
without being oppressed, as is more at large expressed in a Platform to that
purpose.

Whereupon we are resolved judging it to be necessary, and our duty to promote
so good and pious a work, with the assistance of other merciful and rational
men, to lay such a foundation as may tend to the relief of the oppressed, the
preserving of such as are in danger of falling into temptations and snares, and
the increase of understanding and mutual love, as also the exemplary ordering
of such acts as may be accomplished by prudential charity.

And hereunto we do earnestly invite all persons that have a willing mind to do
good according to their abilities, some by their wisdom and counsel, others by
money and credit, or by both, as they shall be able and free, that so a stock
may be raised for the carrying on of this good and beneficial work.

To which end we have subscribed our Names, and the sums of money which we are
willing to give, hoping that all such as are for so general a work, will upon
due consideration likewise subscribe for such a sum of money as they are
willing to give toward the accomplishment of the premises, and meet together
to confer and order the said sums of moneys into the hands of some trusty
persons, for the use and benefit of the Society only, and what else shall be
^ound conducing to the perfecting of this work, ^^ll the Society can subsist of
it self in order, which we believe may s^on be, from the credible information
of diverse persons, relating that many hundreds in Transylvania, Hungaria, and
the Paltsgraves Coun^r^y, from a s^^ll beginning have attained not only to a
very comfo^table life among themselves, but also ability of doing much good to
others not of their Societies.

Subscribed toward the raising of a Stock, as follows.
I. S. -- 100. l. VV. R. -- 100. l. C. O. -- 10. l. VV. VV. -- 20. l. R. S. --
10. l. P. C. -- 20. l. H. D -- 50. l.



