By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

Upon consideration of the annexed Instrument, whereby it is concluded and
accorded that there shall be a further continuation of the Cessation of Arms,
and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom, until the last day of January,
next ensuing the date hereof, at the hour of twelve of the clock of the same
day. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council do by this Proclamation in His
Majesty's Name, Ratify, confirm and publish the same, And do require all His
Majesty's Subjects whom it may concern by Sea and by Land to take notice
thereof, and ^eeld all obedience thereunto in all the parts thereof.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 18. November, 1644. Ri. Bolton. Canc.
Roscomon. Ant. Midensis. Cha. Lambart. Fr. Willoughby.


GOD SAVE THE KING.
WHEREAS Articles of Cessation of Arms were agreed and concluded on at
Sigginstowne in the County of Kildare, the fifteenth day of September, in the
nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, By and between Us the Lord Lieutenant
by the name of JAMES Marquis of Ormonde, Lieutenant General of His Majesty's
Army in the Kingdom of Ireland, For and in the Name of our Gracious
Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, etc. By virtue of His Majesty's Commission bearing date at Dublin,
the last day of August, in the said nineteenth year of His Majesty's Ragine, of
the one part, And Donogh Viscount Muskery, and others authorized by His
Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects then in Arms in the said Kingdom, etc. of
the other part: Which Cessation of Arms was by the said Articles to continue
for one whole year, beginn^ing the fifteenth of September, one thousand six
hundred forty and three, at the hour of twelve of the clock of the said ^ay.
And whereas by His Majesty's Commission under His Great Seal of England, dated
the four and twentieth ^f June last. We the Lord Lieutenant are Authorized to
Treat concerning the settling and establishing of a firm and ^erfect Peace
within this Kingdom. And whereas the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His
Majesty's Authority en^usted with Us as His Lieutenant General, and General
Governor of this His Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and For and in
the Name of His Majesty of the one part, And the Lord Viscount Muskery,
Nicholas Plunket Esquire. Sir Robert Talbot Barronet. Dermot o Bryen, Patrick
Darcy, Geffrey Brown and John Dillon, Esquires. Deputed and Authorized on that
behalf by His Majesty's said Subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom,
of the other part, did on the fifth day of September last conclude, and accord
that there should be a further Cessation of Arms, and of all Acts of Hostility
in this Kingdom, until the first day of December next, at the hour of twelve
of the clock of ^he said day. Now forasmuch as We find that by reason of the
many and manifold preparations necessarily incident ^o so great a Work, the
said Treaty of Peace cannot be concluded within the said time limited for the
present Cessation of Arms, Namely the first day of December next. We the Lord
Lieutenant by virtue of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as His
Lieutenant General and General Governor of this His Kingdom, and by advice
of the Council, and For, and in the Name of His Majesty of the one part, And
We the said Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexander mac Donell, and Nicholas Plunket,
Esquires, Sir Robert Talbot Barronet. Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy, Geffrey
Brown John Dillon, Esquires. Deputed and authorized in that behalf by His
Majesty's said Subjects now, or late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other
part, Have concluded and accorded, And it is accordingly hereby concluded and
accorded that there be a further continuation of the said Cessation of Arms
and of all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom, until the last day of January,
next ensuing the date hereof, at the hour of twelve of the clock the same day,
upon the like Articles and agreements, to all intents and purposes as are
expressed in the said former Articles of Cessation, concluded on at
Sigginstowne, on the fifteenth of September, one thousand six hundred forty and
three. And as if the said Cessation first agreed had continuance until the
said last day of January next, at the hour of twelve of the clock of the same
day. In witness whereof, the said Lord Lieutenant to that part of this
agreement which remains with the said Lord Viscount Muskery, Alexander mac
Donell, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy,
Geffrey Brown, and John Dillon, has put his hand and seal, and the said Lord
Viscount Muskery, Alexander mac Donell, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot,
Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy, Geffrey Brown, and John Dillon, to that part of
this agreement which remains with the said Lord Lieutenant, have put their
hands and seals the eleaventh day of November, one thousand six hundred forty
and four, and in the twentieth year of His Majesty's Reign.

ORMONDE.

Jmprinted at DUBLIN by WILLIAM BLADEN, Printer to the Kings most Excelle^^
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1644.


