BY THE COUNCIL AND CONGREGATION
WHereas such of the Roman Catholics as reside within the English Quarters
fear to be plundered, or be otherwise endamaged by the Armies and Forces of
the Confederate Catholics in their thoroughfare or march near or through
those their Quarters: And forasmuch as Our desire is, and always has been to
preserve the Roman Catholics of this Realm, and their goods and possessions,
who bear not arms against the Confederate Catholics or their Adherents, We
therefore to prevent that mischief do pray and require all the Generals,
Commanders and other Officers, of the Armies and Forces of the Confederate
Catholics aforesaid, not to permit any of their Forces or Soldiers to
pillage, plunder or take away any of the goods of the Roman Catholics
inhabiting within the said. English Quarters or elsewhere, nor to molest or
trouble them in their persons or possessions, but to take them into their
protection, and defend them against such attempted suffering them quietly and
peaceably to enjoy their freedom, goods and estate without their let or
hinderance: And this We command and enjoyne the said Generals Commanders and
Officers, and all others whom it to may concern, to observe and perform upon
pain of encurring Our highest indignation, and such other punishment as We
shall impose, and the quality of that their offense shall deserve, Provided
always that all the said Catholics be subject to such Contribution for the
maintenance of the said Armies ratably according their ability and estates, as
other^ of the Confederate Catholics are liable unto in like kind, in the
march of the Armies.

Kilkenny 28. Septembr. 1646. IO. BAP. ARCHIEP. FIRMAN. ET NVNCIVS Emer.
Clogherensis. Nicolaus Fernensis. Fr. Pa. Plunket. L^^the Alex. Mac Donnells.
N. Plunket. Phe: O Neill. Piers Butler.


WE the undernamed Generals, in pursuance of the above Declaration and Order,
do straightly Charge and Command all Commanders* Off^^^^^ and Soldiers, of
our Armies and all other, whom it may concern give due obedicnce to the said
order and declaration, and to observe, fulfill and keep the premises, duly
and fully in all points, upon pain of Death, and to be aiding and assisting
from time to time, in the due execution of the same.

Thomas Preston. Owen O Neale.


Printed at Kilkenny in the year of our Lord, 1646.


