royal English blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION By his Majesty's
Commissioners for executing his gracious Declaration for the Settlement of
IRELAND.
WHEREAS the Kings most excellent Majesty by his Commission under the great
Seal of this Kingdom of Ireland, bearing date the nineteenth day of March, in
the thirteenth year of his Reign, has nominated and appointed Us Commissioners
for the putting in execution his Majesty's gracious Declaration of the
thirtyeth of November last, for the Settlement of this Kingdom of Ireland, and
satisfaction of the several Interests of Adventurers and Soldiers, and other
his Subjects there, according to the tenor of certain Instructions to the said
Commission annexed; And whereas by the said Instructions, We are amongst other
things required to cast up the whole Debt, and demand of the Adventurers, as
well those that are satisfied, as those that are in part, or in whole
deficient, and also all the forfeited Lands assigned for the said Adventurers
satisfaction, in order to the more particular apportioning and dividing the
said Lands amongst the said Adventurers, and satisfying their deficiencies, and
assertaining their respective proportions.

We therefore in order to the more speedy and effectual execution of the said
Commissions and Instructions, have thought fit to Publish and Declare, and do
hereby Publish and Declare, That all and every Adventurer and Adventurers for
Lands in Ireland, his or their Assignee or Assigns, as well those who have
received satisfaction either in Lands or Houses for their said Adventurers, or
those who are in part or in whole deficient, do by themselves, or their Agent
or Agents suficiently authorized, within forty days after publication hereof,
deliver unto Us in writing under their Hands and Seals a paricular of the
sums of money for which he or they do demand satisfaction by way of Adventure
out of any forfeited Lands or Houses in this Kingdom: and therein do also
insert the Names of such persons, in whose right they claim the said Adventure,
and also the place where the same by Lots formerly drawn amongst the said
Adventurers is fallen to be satisfied. And further, that such of the said
Adventurers who have received satisfaction either in Lands or Houses for the
sums of money so by them adventured, or any part thereof, do therein also
insert a particular of the Houses and Lands by them possessed, together with
the content and number of Acres both profitable and unprofitable in each
Town-Land, Village, Balliboe, or Quarter of Land, as the same were admeasured
to them or for their use, and if such Adventure be for Houses in any City, such
Adventurers are to deliver in, not only the particular Houses and Tenements by
them possessed, but also the values of them resectively as set out to them, or
any other for their use. And we do further hereby Publish and Declare, That his
Majesty by his said Idstructions to Us has signified his pleasure, That if any
Adventurer, or the Assignee, or Assigns to such Adventurer, shall neglect to
return unto us such certificate, or shall willingly make and deliver a false
Certificate of the sums he was to be satisfied according to the Acts for
satisfaction of Adventurers, or of the Town-Lands, Villages, Quarters, or other
denomination of Land assigned or given out for satisfaction of such debt or
demand, or of the Contents or number of Acres according as the same were set
out unto him or them, such Adventurer or his Assignee, shall forfiet for three
years the Rents and Profits that such Houses, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments
shall yield that he shall so omit to certify, or that he shall not rightly
certify. And we do hereby further require all such of the said Adventurers as
have taken Surveyes of their Lands, that they do forthwith bring unto Us the
said Surveyes or Duplicates thereof, together with the Field-Books, if in their
possession, to the end, the said Surveyes may be compared with such other
Surveyes, as by Order of the late pretended powers have been taken of such
Lands: And hereof all persons concerned are to take notice.

Dated at the Kings-Inn in Dublin this 27 day of March 1661. in the thirteenth
year of his Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Montgomery. R. Coote. Santry. Hen. Tichborne. Jo. Bysse, Art. Forbess. Ja.
Ware. Ol. St. George. John Cole. Au. Mervyn. Ja. Cuff. Hen. Warren.

DVBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, by special Order: And now reprinted at
London, An. Dom. 1661.


