By THE COMMISSINORS appointed for hearing and Determining the CLAIMS of
Trasplanted persons, in the Province of CONNAUGHT, and County of CLARE.
WHEREAS by a Proclamation, bearing date the 26th day of this Instant June,
published by the Lord Lieutenant and Council of this Kingdom. All persons
concerned in any of the transplanted Lands in the said Proclamation mentioned,
are required to put in their Claims before us before the 21th. day of August
next, and that they do with all convenient speed apply themselves to us for the
hearing and determining of the said Claims and prosecute the same with Effect,
in such manner and at such time as we should direct. And whereas we Judge it very
conducible to the due execution of the great trust reposed in us for the
settling the said Interest according to our said Commission, that a fitting and
regular course be observed in thee forming of Claims which shall be exhibited
before us. And to the end that all Persons who are concerned in the putting in
of Claims before us their council Attorneys, Sollicitorsd and Agents, may have
timely notice of what is expected from them in this behalf, We do declare and
publish, that the Claims which are or shall be exhibited to be proceeded upon
by us shall be in such manner and form as is herein after by us directed, which
we do require to be observed and performed accordingly, that is to say; that
such of the said transplanted Persons as do claim Lands or Deficiencies in the
Province of Connaught, or County of Clare, their heirs or assigns, and every
of them, do in their respective Claims under their hands and Seals, or under
the hands and Seals of their Agent or Agents lawfully authorized to be
exhibited before us (within the said prefixed time,) set forth the substance of
the respective decrees of the late pretended Court of Claims sitting at
Athlone, made on their behalfes, and such as had Lands set out, do likewise set
forth the substance of the final settlement of the late pretended Commissioners
at Loghreah thereupon, together with a particular of the Lands and Tenements in
lieu and right whereof the said Lands were set out unto them, or to those under
whom they derive their Titles, as also a particular of the Lands and Tenements,
so to them respectively set out, by apt denominations and descriptions, ^i^h
the content and number of Acres, with a distinction how many were ^^^ out for
profitable, and how many for unprofitable in each Town, Land, Village,
Ballyboe, or quarter of Land, and also what estates the persons so transplanted
respectively had in the Lands from which they were removed, whether in fee
simple or for any lesser estate, and how. And that such persons as claim any
Lands whereof they are not in possession, do also set forth in their claim, by
whom the said Land is detained or Evicted from them, and by what Title or
Pretense of Title and that such as claim by purchase set forth their measne
conveyances and such as claim as Heir; show how. And we do hereby further
declare that for our more orderly proceedings upon Claims brought before us, We
have nominated and appointed certain persons uiz. Robert Longeville, Edward
Mosley, Richard Brooking, James Clarke, John Moland, Peter Ormsby, Hugh Kelly,
Charles Monk, Henry Daniell, and Joseph Barry, Gent. Who, and no other, without
our special order to the contrary, shall be Attorneys in the Court for
adjudication of Claims, to be held before us, and that we have agreed, and
ordered, that every person which shall bring in any Claim before us, shall
elect or retain one of the said persons to be his Attorney in the said cause,
and that the name of the said person so Elected be endorsed upon the said
Claim, as his Attorney, and that every person which shall put in an Answer
before us unto any Claim or if more persons than one shall put in a joint
Answer, that he or they shall likewise Elect and retain one of the said persons
to be his or their Attorney in the said Cause and that the name of the said
persons so elected be endorsed upon the said Answer as his or their Attorney.

And to prevent the unnecessary attendance of Clayments and others, We do
hereby signify to all persons concerned, that we will first proceed to the
adjudication of the Claims of all persons Claiming, as transplanted persons in
the County of Clare, and in the respective Baronies thereof, and that therein
we shall begin first with the Baronies of Tullagh and Bunratty, immediately
after the said 21th day of August, and that we shall from time to time send
forth public notice of the respective times when we shall proceed to the
heareing of the Claims in the other Baronies of the said County and in the
other Counties in the Province of Connaught

And if any person Claim Lands in several Baronies or Counties set forth in
satisfaction of on decree, that we shall proceed to the adjudication of all the
said Claims, and settlement of the said Lands, or of so much thereof as shall
be contained in on Decree in that Barony and County wherein he shall first come
to be heard before us. But if the same be in satisfaction of several Decrees,
that then the same shall be heard and determined in the respective Baronies and
Counties, wherein the said respective Decrees shall be satisfied.

Given at the Kings Inns Dublin the xxxth day of June in the Eight and
Twentieth year of his Majesty's Reign. Charles Meredith. To: Booth. Tho:
Ratcliffe. He: Hene. Rich: Reynell.

Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Exellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castlestreet. 1676.


