A Just NARRATIVE, OR, ACCOUNT Of the Man whose Hands and Legs rotted off: In
the Parish of KINGS-SWINFORD, IN STAFFORDSHIRE, Where he died, June 21. 1677.

Carefully Collected by JA. ILLINGWORTH, B. D. An Eye and Ear-Witness of most
of the material Passages in it.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's, 1678.

To the Reverend S. FORD. D. D. Rector of Old-Swinford in Worcestershire.
SIR,
BEing importuned by diverse (Gentlemen, Ministers, and others of our
Neighborhood) to draw up a full Narrative and Account of that late sad
Providence (which has filled the hearts and mouths of the Country round about
us, the fame whereof is also spread into remote parts) I was at last prevailed
with to endeavor their satisfaction: And the rather because of a general
rumor in the Country, that the man had declared several things to me of near
concernment to himself, which he concealed from all other Visitants. That I
might not therefore suffer such Reports to pass uncertain, nor be wanting in
that which was by some urged as my duty; I did (by traveling, at several
times, above sixty miles in the parts adjacent) enquire into diverse particular
circumstances, which I was not before fully clear in: and have now at last set
all down in plain words (suitable to such an account) that the meanest concerned
to know and make good use of the providence, might at first reading clearly
understand it.

Sir, That I address this to you, is, that I may take an opportunity to make my
hearty acknowledgments for your learned and useful Discourses in the Pulpit
upon this occasion, to the general satisfaction of your Hearers; and I must in
my own name, and many of theirs, entreat, you would make the substance of them
more public from the Press, that the Readers may learn not to be too
censorious in things of this nature, nor yet to pass by so signal a Providence
without that just Observation it deserves, and due reverence toward that God
who is known by the Judgments which he executes, as you have fully showed us.
I hope, Sir, I invite you to nothing, but what your own Judgment accounts
worthy your labor; and I am confident it will be no mean addition to your
former elaborate services of God and his Church. In which that you may be long
continued for his Glory, and the good of his People, shall be the hearty Prayer
of (Reverend Sir)

Your most affectionate (though unworthy Friend) to honor and serve you, J.
ILLINGWORTH.

A just Narrative or Account of the Man whose Hands and Legs Rotted off in the
Parish of Kings-Swinford in Staffordshire, where he Died, June 21. 1677.
RIchard Duncalf of Codsal Parish, not far from Wolverhampton, in the County of
Stafford, dying many years since (and his Wife also) left behind them many
Children, and but slender provision for them.

One of their Sons, John Duncalf, bound himself an Apprentice to Thomas Gibbons
of Kings-Swinford in the same County, Wheelwright. When he had served his
Master two years and seven months (or thereabouts) he and his fellow Apprentice
stealing from their Master a considerable quantity of Iron, delivered it to a
third person, who promised to conceal it from their Master: but being all
brought before the Right Honorable the Lord Ward of Dudley-Castle, upon
examination severally, they accused each other, and confessed the whole: By
which means there was found concealed (as Tho. Gibbons says) 26 pound of old
Iron, besides more that was wrought up, new Waggon-Nails, ends of Bars, etc.
Upon their Confession the Lord Ward sent them to the House of Correction, about
October 14. 1675. But the other Apprentice being dangerously sick there, and
this John Duncalf pretending, at least, to be sick also, they two were set at
liberty the week following. After which time this said John Duncalf refused to
come again to his former service (saying he would never set his feet in
Kings-Swinford whilst he lived)
but offering and engaging to pay to his Master forty shillings, his Master and
he gave Releases to each other: by which means this young man (who was then
full twenty years of age, and at more liberty than formerly whilst an
Apprentice) gave himself up to licentious courses, viz. (as he confessed to me,
April 26. 1677) to Idleness, Stealing, Lying, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness,
and Uncleanness with Women. Which last, he said, was not by committing actual
Fornication or Adultery, but in the thoughts of his heart, and by lascivious
words, and gestures, whereby he had endeavored to tempt them to lewdness in
diverse places. I must therefore here clear my self and him from an unjust
rumor and report common (as I am informed) in the Country hereabouts, which
many people yet believe, viz. [That he confessed some things to me which he
desired might be concealed whilst he lived, as, that he had committed a Rape
upon a young person, and afterward murdered her: That he was guilty of Buggery,
or lying with Beasts, etc.] I do therefore openly declare to all; that these
were groundless rumors or reports, and I do assure them he never desired me to
conceal any thing he said or confessed to me, nor did he ever speak to me of
any such things as these which some have reported and others believed. But the
faults abovementioned seemed to lie as an heavy burden upon his Conscience,
when he judged Gods hand was severely chastizing him for them, and all his
other impieties; among which his constant profaness had not been the least, in
that, although he could both read and write, yet he had (as he said to me) a
long time neglected all manner of Service and Worship of God, as well on the
Lords day as other days, and that both in private and public. It is said, he
stole many things to supply his growing necessities (which his idleness and
intemperance brought upon him) chiefly Bibles; and the rather because they
would soonest be bought by others. About January the 6th. 1676/7 coming to the
house of Humphrey Babb, living at the Grange-mill, about three miles from
Wolverhampton, he begged of Margaret, the said Humphrey's Wife, Victuals and
small drink. The Woman having formerly known him, and compassionating his
present condition, gave him freely such as she had, but whilst she stooped to
draw drink for him, he stole her Bible, (as he confessed to her afterward.)
This Bible he sold for three shillings to a Maid of John Downings, who lives
near the Heath-Forge, not far from the place where he stole it. By which means,
not long after, Humphrey Babb's Wife heard of her Bible, demanded it of the
Maid that bought it, and making her some allowance toward what she paid for it,
received it again long before either of them saw him, or heard what was become
of him: But this being noised in the Country thereabouts, one Henry Evans told
his Father Thomas Evans (commonly called Painter) who lives near Henly or
Himley (they both knew him) what John Duncalf had done: at which the said John
Duncalf, when he heard of it, was very angry, and gave out threatening words
against the young man; but being charged with it by them, he did not only deny
it with some fierceness, but execrated and cursed himself, wishing his hands
might rot off, if that were true (as the said Thomas Evans testifies) and John
Bennet his Keeper, says, he often heard him say to Gentlemen that visited him
in his sickness, that he did so curse himself upon that occasion to Thomas
Evans. And this he acknowledged of his own accord, to me and many others,
several times, when he seemed most serious and in earnest [That he so cursed
himself, and that immediately upon the execration or cursing of himself, he had
an inward horror or trembling upon him, a dread and fear of the Divine Majesty,
and Justice of God, which fear and working of his Conscience continued more or
less many days after.]

When I asked him (upon this ingenious acknowledgment) why he did not confess
his wickedness, and endeavor that the Bible might be restored to the owner?
his answer was, [That the Devil and his own heart would not suffer him.] Yet
this he acknowledged to me [That within a few days after that execration his
flesh began to look black at the wrists of his hands, and so continued diverse
weeks before it did sensibly rot.] He went then and wrought with one Thomas
Osborn a Joyner in Dudley, and (as Osborn says) continued with him about a
fortnight (Shrovetuesday being the last day as he well remembers) and that it
was the last work that ever he did; which I cannot wonder at, considering what
this poor man said to me concerning himself in reference to that time, viz.
[After I had cursed my self about the Bible, I wrought with a Joyner at Dudley;
but at that time I had a fear and trembling upon me, which frequently troubled
me, and made me have no great mind to work; and so feeling my self weak and
faint, and fearing an Ague or Fever, I went toward my acquaintance, but in the
way finding I was unable to go any further, I laid my self down in a Barn (at
Parton-Hall as I remember) belonging to Sir Walter Wroteseley, and there
continued two days and nights before I was found] (some say he said (at other
times) from Tuesday night to Friday morning.) Being found, he was kept at the
charge of the Parish of Tettenbal (in which Parton-Hall stands) until the next
monthly meeting of the Justices of the Peace, who ( March 27. 1677.) by
examination finding Kings-Swinford to have been the last place of his
settlement, made an order he should be carried thither, and maintained by that
Parish. There he was received, March 28. and John Bennet appointed to take care
of him: first in a Barn belonging to the three Crowns, (an Inn standing on the
Road between Wolverhampton and Kidderminster) and after one fortnight removed
by the Overseers for the Poor, to the dwelling house of the said John Bennet
his Keeper in Wall-Heath-side. His flesh at first began to rise in great lumps
or knots at the wrists of his hands, and at his knees (as his Keeper tells me)
and after a little time to break and run, and shortly after to shrink from the
bones at those places, at which time, white putrid matter came out and ran
abundantly, causing exquisite pain and torment to this poor man: And so
offensive was the smell for several weeks together, that those who came to
visit him who were not only many hundreds, but, it is believed, thousands (his
Keeper and Neighbors say many thousands) were not able to abide in the room
with him, nor stand near without the door, except they had herbs or other
things at their mouths and noses to smell to. The Visitants being so numerous
at all times of the day, especially on the Lords-days, it seemed to give him
great disturbance, and made him very unwilling to talk many times, or answer
them any thing. They moved him once so far to impatience, when they crowded
about him each with a question, having Herbs, and other things at their Noses,
that his passion made him to forget his own condition, and wish their Noses
might rot off (as diverse there present assured me;) for which I gently, but
seriously, reproved him at my next visit. He seemed to take the reproof well,
acknowledging the fault of his passionate expressions toward them (provoked as
he said, by their crowding, impertinent curiosity, and foolish questions; or to
that effect:) But he had forgot, or would not confess, that he used those
words, -- about their Noses rotting off.]

But his Keeper tells me, he would often be very impatient toward the
multitude, and call to him, saying, John, why do thou not dash out their
teeth? do thou not see how they grin at me? and the like.

About the twentieth of April many little Worms came out of the rotten flesh,
such as are usually seen in dead Corpses (as his Keeper told me) but after he
was well washed and cleansed, those ceased, and the room and smell was nothing
so offensive as formerly: yet all that while (though it was rumor'd in the
Country) he would never confess his execration, and wishes against himself,
until his Keeper denied to ease him of the Vermin, Lice, etc. that filled his
shirt and doublet, and continually tormented him. He then first promised, that
if his Keeper would cut them off and cleanse him, (he had long before cut off
all the hair of his head) he would acknowledge the whole truth, which he then
did in manner as is before related.

And now he began to beg instruction, and help to repent, and that some
Ministers and others, who came to visit him, would pray for and with him, which
many did, both public Preachers and others, at several times; and some who
lived near him (as I did) often. Being asked by me what he desired might be
begged of God for him, he returned answer to this purpose: That God would give
him repentance, and pardon his sins abovementioned, viz. Idleness, Stealing,
Lying, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, unclean Thoughts, and constant
Profaneness, etc. that he would save him for Christ's sake, and give him
patience in the mean time.] I did accordingly endeavor to represent his case
before God, and with humble earnestness to pray for mercy for him; and he
seemed at that time to be somewhat affected with the Prayer, etc.

It was about this time, if I mistake not, that he sent for Humphrey Babb's
Wife, from whom he stole the Bible, she came and brought the Maid he sold it
to, along with her: to them he confessed the wrong he had done, and desired
they would forgive him; which the Wife told me she did heartily, and prayed God
to forgive him as she did. The Maid seemed to be of the same mind and Christian
temper.

Very many (as I hinted before) hearing of him, came from all parts adjacent,
and some from places far distant, to see this sad spectacle of Divine Justice:
and amongst the rest, some of the Romanists, one of which, he and his Keeper
supposed to be a Priest of that profession, who was earnest with him to
renounce his Religion, and become a Catholic (as he called it) and they would
remove him, take care to heal his Sores, and (said the man, whom they supposed
to be the Priest) I will pawn my soul for thine, that thou shall be saved:
which I am informed, is an ordinary form of speech amongst the Papists of this
Country, when they would persuade men to their party. When I enquired of this
poor man (to try him) why he did not accept of their offers? he answered to
this purpose, [To what end? How can he pawn his soul for mine? none can save me
but Christ.]

Others who had occasion to travel this way from London, and other parts far
off, West and North, visited him, we hope not to satisfy their curiosity so
much, as to behold a monument of Divine severity, and that they might bear
witness, that although sentence against an evil work is not always executed
speedily, yet, God leaves not himself without witness, in this, as well as
former ages, against Atheism and grand impiety.

Upon the eighth of May following, both his legs were fallen off at the knees,
which the poor man perceived not until his Keeper told him and showed them to
him, holding them up in his hands, and his right hand, hanging only by some
ligament, by a little touch of a knife, was taken off also: The other hand at
the same time being black as a shoe, and not much unlike, in the fancy of
some, for roughness and hardness, to the outside of a dried Neats-tongue. This
hand hanged on a long time afterward by some such thing as the former, and
might ('it is possible) have continued in that manner until his death, if he had
not desired his Keeper to take that away also as the former, because it was
troublesome to him. Now although putrid matter frequently issued out at those
places, yet he had not so much pain as he had formerly for a month or six
weeks, as he freely confessed; and acknowledged that his stomach was good, and
did digest such meats as he took, and that he had evacuations by siege and
urine, as heretofore in his health.

So that, continuing in this condition some weeks, many began to think the
Issues might be stopped, and his life preserved many years, if regularly
ordered. Some of the Parishioners were moved in it, that Physicians and
Surgeons might be consulted, and good advice taken in the case; but I cannot
learn that any thing was done about it, being judged, by some, incurable. It is
said that he expressed himself to some that visited him in this manner. [That
now the curse wherewith he had cursed himself being fully come to pass (in that
his hands were rotted off) he was persuaded it would go no further.] But he
forgot that God punished him, not for that sin only, but, for all his great
transgressions (though for that chiefly) as he formerly confessed to me, he
believed. At last his flesh began to wast, and his spirits to fail; so that
visiting him again, and observing some change in his flesh and countenance more
than formerly, I labored to convince him more fully of his condition, and to
persuade him to look up to the great Physician, in whose hands are the issues
of life and death, etc. He seemed to give diligent attention, and earnestly
desired me to pray with him; after prayers, when I was about to leave him for
that time, he desired I would not forget him in my prayers; making it also his
earnest request, that I would come again when ever he should send for me, which
I promised I would at any hour day or night. This was June 16. and on the 19.
(as his Keeper acknowledges) he was in great anguish and trouble of mind,
crying out [What shall I do to save my poor soul?] with many other expressions
to the same purpose; being very sick, and fearing his approaching death. But
upon what account his Keeper would not send for me (in whose hearing he so
earnestly desired me to come to him) he knows best, and must answer it, if it
was his fault for private respects, as is conjectured. On June 21. in the
morning, I went again to visit him, unsent for, but found him unsensible, and
past any further advice. I staid by him until almost noon. He lay still, with
his eyes fixed, as a dying man, moved not at any thing we said to him, but upon
pouring into him a little drink with a spoon at several times, he coughed a
little, and groaned, and then lay as before. When I saw there was no
probability he would understand any thing I said, I left him (after prayer made
for him with the company there present, in the house) and had notice brought
me, that he died about two hours after my departure from him.

Before I sum up the whole of this Narrative, and account of his condition, I
judge it may be acceptable to the Reader to insert some short Observations,
communicated to me by an ingenious Gentleman, our Neighbor, who several times
visited him in his affliction. Take them therefore in his own words.

When I first saw this young man (which was quickly after he was brought into
Kings-Swinford) he appeared to me to be of a vigorous state of body, and of an
healthy constitution, saving the strange defect under which he labored, his
hands and legs being then deprived of sense and motion. I observed them, and
handled him: They were from both wrists and knees blackish and dying; and I
took notice, that about each wrist and knee there was as it were a Circle at
the joint that divided the sound from the dying parts, and seemed like a
ligature, prohibiting any nourishment to pass those bounds; so that the blood
and spirits being wonderfully stopped in their circulation, it must necessarily
follow, that the parts thus deprived of their wonted supply, must wither and
die as a leaf in Autumn: which sad progress they made till both hands and legs
from the wrists and knees became dead and dried, black and hard, like Mummy,
before they fell off at the joints, which they afterward did. I also observed,
that at the first, above each of the forementioned circles, there brake out a
sore, at which the nourishing juice (designed by nature to have fed those
parts) emptied it self (now in those sores corrupted) in a quitture or sanies,
so horribly stinking, that few of his Visitants could well endure the room
without some strong smelling defensative. But visiting him after those dead
limbs were fallen from the body (all but one hand which was almost severed) I
saw the joints with the flesh look well and healthy. They seemed to me free and
untouched by the former mortification, being quick and sensible, that now the
fellow complained upon the least touch thereof, yet seeming to promise an easy
cure, for that ichorous stinking humor was gone; the flesh was raw, but sweet,
and here and there besmeared with a thick corrupt pus, an encouraging sign (say
Artists) that sores incline to healing: But this poor creature wanting all help
from Art or Medicine, save what the application of the leaves of Mullein
afforded, which by his Keeper were used to defend the raw parts; in some weeks
there issued the like thin and stinking humor as before, which soon put a
period to his life. So far my Friend.

As to the young man himself, he was (as he told me a few days before he died)
about twenty two years of age. It was easy to observe, he had been a strong
young man, naturally of a stubborn temper, much hardened by evil courses; yet
he seemed sometimes to be affected with his condition, the discourses made to
him, and prayers with him; and I wish I might have had from him as clear an
evidence of a comfortable change wrought in him, as I would gladly have told
the world. I must in charity leave his final condition to God, who thus
afflicted and chastized him for the space of near about four months, that he
might be a signal spectacle to thousands, of Gods displeasure against impiety.

The sum of all is this, That a strong, lusty, young man, as most in the County
where he was born, being unfaithful to God and his Master, and giving himself
to licentiousness and wickedness, was brought to a morsel of bread; and by
doing evil and denying it with execrations, had a sting and secret remorse in
his conscience, by which, and want (the fruit of his idleness and intemperance)
he grew faint and weak, and his hands waxed feeble: not being able to work,
designed to betake himself to his Friends, but was stopped by the way, forced
to lie down under the hand of God, that the Curse wherewith he had cursed
himself might come upon him; and so by the stupendous providence of God he was
made a spectacle to the world of Divine severity many weeks, that others might
see, and hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly. And I wish, God may have no
reason to say to any, (as by the Apostle in another case, Acts 13.41.
) -- Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for I work a work in your
days, which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.

FINIS.
SIR,
Being requested by Mr. Illingworth to give you an account of what I am able to
say concerning John Duncalf, I apprehend the best way is by a bare and brief
Narrative of that discourse that passed between us whilst I was with him; if
there is any thing worth your cognizance, you may make use of it as you please.

Our Discourse was as follows.

May 1st 1677.

Quest. SPeaking to him of the deplorableness of his Condition, and that sure
there was a more than ordinary hand of Gods Providence in it arising from some
evil act or actions of his.

Answ. Answered yes, 'twas for his sins.

Quest. When I told him that sin was generally the procuring Cause of every
man's sufferings; but under such remarkable and dreadful sufferings as these
were, there is usually one or more special sins to be inquired after, as the
nearest procuring Cause or Causes.

Answ. He answered yes; so it was in his case. He stole a Bible from a Woman,
and being charged with it, denied it with this fearful wish, [That his Hands
might rot off if he stole it.]

Quest. Then I asked him, whether his hands began to blacken, or change Color,
or tingle, etc. presently after the imprecation, or that fearful wish of his?

Answ. Answered no; but his Conscience tingled sadly.

Quest. John, how long was it e're your hands began to rot, or had any signs of
putrefaction upon them after the Curse?

Answ. About a fortnight.

Quest. Have you made your peace with God for so great an offense?

Answ. [Being a man not apt to speak, and ignorant withal] made little answer,
only shaked his head.

Quest. Have you asked the Woman forgiveness, and to your power endeavored to
make satisfaction; or if the Bible were in your hands, to make Restitution?

Answ. Yes, he did send for her, and she came accordingly, and prayed God
forgive him, for she did.

Quest. John, can pray? I have not found in thee any motions or inclinations
thereunto since I came.

Shakes his head again, and nothing he said.

Quest. John, do thou know how at so great a distance as sin has made thee,
to go to the Father?

Answ. Yes, by Jesus Christ, whispering it softly, yet so as I might hear him.

Quest. Then fearing he did not understand what Christ has done for the World,
I very briefly opened to him the Tenor and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace,
and so how he must expect Mercy at the hands of God.

Answ. Then (so far as I could guess) he began somewhat to relent, for the
Tears trickled down his cheeks, and many Symptoms of conviction and sorrow
seemed to be upon him; saying these words, or to this purpose: For Gods sake,
Sir, pray for me.

Quest. John, I am glad to see some, though the least tokens of penitence in
thee -- The Lord enlarge thine heart, and make thy Conscience tender -- I am
willing, John, to pray for thee, and so I perceive is this whole company: But
it would be great satisfaction to us, if you would acquaint us, what we should
more particularly desire of God on your account.

Answ. Good Sir, that my sins may be pardoned, as loss of Time, neglect of
Duty, and the service of God.

Quest. Is not Sabbath-breaking one?

Answ. O yes, yes!

Quest. Have you any thing else to say?

Answ. No. Then let us pray. --

Ending with the Lords Prayer, he repeated the Petitions after me, saying Amen,
with somewhat an elevated voice; being observed to weep several times whilst we
continued prayer.

After which I parted with him, making me to promise him the continuation of my
Prayers.

About a fortnight after he sends a Messenger to me to tell me he desired my
company again; at which time I made it my business not so much to ask him
Questions, as to inform him of those Truths that as I thought had a necessary
conducency to our eternal peace. [Spending some hours with him that day, as I
could bear the noysom stench that then came from him.] Before I came away that
time, which was the last time that I saw him; his Keeper told me, that a Popish
Priest had been with him some few days before, earnestly endeavoring to
proselyte him to their Religion; using this Argument: That if he would turn
Roman Catholic, I will pawn my Soul to thy Soul thou shall be saved. But all
he could obtain of the poor man, was only this, that he would consider of it.
Then asking John Duncalf, whether this was true? He answered, Yes. Praying with
him, I took my final leave and farewell. This is all (worthy Sir) that I know
concerning him. I can only add that I am

Your most humble Servant, JONATH. NEWEY.
Kinfare, Aug. 17. 1677.
WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, living in the Neighborhood of
Kings-Swinford, where John Duncalf the subject of the preceding Narrative,
whilst Gods hand was so severely upon him, for the most part resided; and
having most of us visited him and discoursed him in that condition, and the
rest of us received frequent Informations of the Passages herein mentioned from
a multitude of credible Witnesses; do (in order to the rendering so useful a
Relation more creditable so far as we are known) attest, that we judge it to be
very exactly and impartially penned in all the particulars: and especially, in
those Passages of it which contain the frequent serious acknowledgements of the
mentioned John Duncalf, (That he did imprecate that Judgment upon himself which
is here expressed, and upon the occasion here related) which he made not only
in the hearing of the Author, but also of most of us: as also, in the substance
of those that relate the rotting off of his Hands and Legs before his death, in
the manner herein mentioned. And this attestation we make with no other design,
but that God may have the glory, and the world the benefit of so Exemplary a
Providence. For which end we as heartily accompany this Narrative with our
prayers, as with our hands.

Simon Ford, D. D. Tho. Wilsby. Amb. Sparry. John Raynolds. Samuel Mountfort.
Edward Paget.



