DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

FOR the prevention of all Evil designs and practices by any persons of the
Popish Religion in this Kingdom, against His Majesty's Government, the Peace
and Quiet of this Realm, and the Protestant Religion; We the Lord Lieutenant
and Council, Have thought fit, and accordingly by this Our Proclamation do
charge and command, all and every person and persons of the popish Religion, or
so reputed, that he and they and every of them, from and after the publishing
of this Proclamation, do forbear to come within His Majesty's Castle of Dublin,
or any other His Majesty's Forts and Cittadal of this Kingdom, without special
Order from Us the Lord Lieutenant.

And for the better security of His Majesty's Garrisons in 'the Towns of
Drogheda, Wexford, Cork, Lymerick, Waterford, Youghal and Galway. We do hereby
order and command that the Market and Fairs, usually held in every of the said
Towns, be from henceforth (until further order from this Board) held and kept
in some convenient places without the walls of the said several Towns, and that
no person or persons of the Popish Religion, be suffered to reside or continue
in the said Towns, or in any other of the Corporations of this Kingdom wherein
any Garrison is kept, who have not for the greatest part of twelve months now
last past inhabited within some one of the said Towns, or Corporations; and
also that no such Persons, be suffered to come to any fairs or Markets, within
this Kingdom Armed, with Swords, Pistols or any other weapons, or Fire-armes
whatsoever.

And We do hereby, also require all Persons of the Popish Religion, that they
do forbear meeting together, at any time either by day or night, in any great
or unusual numbers, in any places within this Kingdom, and the Sheriffs and
Justices of the peace of the several Counties of this Kingdom, and all his
Majesty's Officers both Civil and Military, are hereby strictly required to
take care to disperse, and dissolve all such Tumultuous and unlawful meetings,
and assemblies, and also to commit the principal offenders to prison, there to
remain until they find good Security to answer the same at the next General
assizes or sessions of the peace to be held for such Counties, and that they do
also from time to time send unto Us an account thereof, as also the names of
all such persons as shall either occasion, maintain or countenance any such
tumultuous unusual and unlawful meetings and assemblies, and all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Justices of peace, and all other His Majesty's Officers both civil
and Military, are hereby required to take care to have this our proclamation
strictly and duly Executed.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 20th. of November 1678. Mich:
Dublin C. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. R. Coote. Ed: Villiers. Rob.
Fitzgerald. Ca: Dillon. Char. Meredith. To. Booth. Jo: Davys. Wm: Gore. Will:
Stewart. John Cole. Hans Hamilton. VVm: Flower. Ric: Gethin. H: Ingoldesby.
Walter Plunkett. Theo: Jones. Tho: Radcliffe.


DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent Majesty
and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's Printing House in
Skinner-Row, 1678.


