Ignoramus VINDICATED, IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Prejudice and Indifference.
Touching the Duty, Power, and Proceedings of JURIES: Together, with some
Material Points Relating thereunto, declared for Law by the Right Honorable
Sir John Vaughan, Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
Indifference. HOW go Causes now adays, Monsieur Prejudice?


Prejudice. Basely, Roguishly, Factiously, Whiggishly,, not according to
Evidence. There are a sort of Folks called Ignoramus-men, that refuse some
times to find Bills, though there be Positive Oaths before them.


Indiff. That may be, because perhaps, Posiitive Oaths are not always true
Evidence; and therefore, for ought I know, these Folks may not be such
Dishonest, or such Ignoramusfollows as you take them for: But Persons that have
a due regard to their duty, and the weight of their Office, wherein other Men's
Lives, and their own Souls are concerned, and understand themselves so well as
to know, That they are Judges (in some respect) as of Law, as well of Fact.


Pred. How, Juries Judges of Law, that is fine I says?


Indiff. How fine soever you think it, it is true; I say in some respect: For,
ex facto jus Oritur, the Law arises out of, and is complicated with the Fact;
and no Man can well and truly try, and true deliverance make, nor well and
truly Inquire and Present Crimes, without respect had to both of these, and
comparing one with the other. It Is true, in difficult points Juries may, and
ought to crave the Advice and Opinion of the Judgess and so they have oft-times
the Statutes read to them; and to what purpose, if not to judge of them, and
compare the matter with them. But in Common Cases he is not fit to be a
Grand-Jury-Man, that does not understand the Nature of Offenses by our Laws;
and to think that he is bound to find contrary to his Knowledge in such Cases,
is Absurd: As, suppose a Man should be Indicted of High Treason, for that he
Traitorously, Maliciously moved by the Instigation of the Devil, had, and kept
an English Bible in his House: Now let an hundred and fifty people swear
positively the Fact, viz. That he had such a Book in his Custody, would you, if
you were a Grand-Jury-Man, retorn this Indictment Billa vera, and charge the
poor Man upon your Oaths, to answer for High Treason?


Prej. Well! This is nothing to my Business: There was no doubt or scruple in
the late Cases, about matter of Law; and though there were positive proofs as
to Fact, yet they did not find the Bills.


Indiff. That possibly may be, (as I told you but now) because, such positive
proof was no good Evidence; for the Jury are Judges of Evidence, or else they
signify no more than some would have them, that is just nothing: And therefore
let Witnesses be never so Rampantly positive; yet if the Jurors have good and
sufficient Grounds, not to believe them, they will, nay they must remain as
Ignorant as before, because there comes no credible proof to satisfy them (who
are upon their Oaths as well as the Winesses) that the Party is Guilty of the
Crime charged, or ought to be put to Answer for the same. For that in Law is
called EVIDENCE, by which we may Evidere quid sit Justum plainly see what is
Just, or as Cook 1. Instit. fol. 283 says, it is called Evidence, because
thereby the matter is to be made Evident to the Jury.


Prej. Well for all your pratting, I hope to see good Christian Juries once
again amongst us.


Indiff. What do you mean standing ones, People that made a Trade on it, got a
Livelihood by the Groats and Sixteen Pences, and now and then a good Dinner, or
small present by the by; Fellows that were Indigent in Estates as
Understandings; That slept over an Evidence, found Bills of Course, Hanged or
Saved, Pro-Plantiff'd or Pro-Defendanted it by pure chance; Threw Dice for
their Verdicts, Esteemed themselves Retorn'd and Sworn only to be the Courts
Eccho's, and thought it piacular not to incline that way the Judge Nodded his
Reverend Head.


Prej. Better such say I than Ignoramus-men; But I meant, we shall have no
Dissenters Jurymen, for don't you know, it is a late Ruled Case that such ought
not to be Impannel'd.


Indiff. I know no such matter, however for ought I see it is all one, for
lately when there was not one Dissenter, there was as much Clamor as if they
had been all so, nor did I ever hear of any Law of England that excludes any
Protestant from being a Jury-man, because he is a Dissenter from or
Non-frequenter of Church Ceremonies, If qualified with Estate and
Understanding; For at that rate, if Popery should ever get uppermost, no
Protestant at all would be capable of being a Jury-man, because a
Nonconformist to Holy Church; Old Lawyers tell us, Vbi Lex non distinguit, nec
nos distinguere debemus, we never ought to put a difference, where the Law puts
none. Now if no Statute excludes Protestants unconvict of any Crime, or
Dissenters (Qua tales) to serve on Juries, I should think we ought to wait at
least till an Act of Parliament be made to that purpose, before we deny them
Liberam Legem, And to Act otherwise in my silly Opinion seems not only
unwarrantable, but a daring Usurpation of Legislative Power, But what
sentiments future Parliaments may have thereof -- Ignoramus. But I pray what
Reason can be assigned to exclude them.


Prej. Reason stout and substantial, because they are Breakers of the Law, For
can it be Rational to suffer one Breaker of the Law to give a Verdict against
another Breaker of the Law, for every Verdict of a Grand Jury is a kind of
Evidence against a Prisoner in order to Trial or Discharge.


Indiff. Well then, if because they are Breakers of the Law, they must be
excluded, let all Common Swearers, Drunkards, Profaners of the Lords Day, etc.
be shut out, for these are Law-breakers too. To sell Claret is to Violate the
Law Therefore no Vintner may be a Jury man (if they could not be Captains
neither, what a sad case were we in!) Besides, if to be Breakers of the Law
disable men to be Jurors, why should not the same take away the Credibility of
a Witness? So that it seems if none give Evidence to a Grand Jury but such as
are Law-Breakers, they will have no Reason to Credit them, and if they do not
believe the Evidence, what can they do but return an Ignoramus?


Prej. But how shall the Jurymen know the Witnesses are Law-Breakers?


Indiff. Oh, they have Engines called Interrogatives, will do that feat, as
suppose a Person swears John a Styles spoke such or such Treasonable Words, the
Grand Jury ask when, and he names Four or Five Months ago, then they demand
when he first discovered it to any Magistrate, and he say, but Two or Three
days ago, now is it not plain, that here the Witness confesses himself. a
Breaker of the Law. viz. Guilty of Misprision of Treason for concealing of
Treason so many Months. And was not this the Case of all the Evidence against
Rouse? and in my opinion concealing of Treason is a greater Breach of Law then
going to a Conventicle.


Prej. But the Witnesses had got Pardon?


Indiff. All of them had not, besides though a pardon exempt a Man from
Punishment and render him a Legal Witness, yet how far it makes him a Credible
Witness, is only in the Breast of a Jury.


Prej. Why pray was Docter Oats and others believed against the Papists?


Indiff. Because his and their Testimony was Backed by that undeniable Evidence
of Colemans Papers, Godfreys Murder and a thousand other pregnant
Curcumstances, which makes the Case much different from that where people of
very suspected Credit, swear the Grosest Improbabilities.


Prej. But the very same Witnesses had lately been believed against the Papist?


Indiff. What then? May not a Man be very Honest and Credible at one time, and
Six Months after by necessity, Suborn. ^on^ Malice, or Twenty ways, become a
Notorious Villain.


Prej. But what proof was there of any such Change?


Indiff. How know you, but the Jury or some of them knew it of their own
knowledge, for I shall show you by and by that the Law supposes the Jury to
know more of the Witnesses than the Court does. If one of the Evidence, shall
in giving his Testimony, possitively affirm things, which some of the Jury of
their own knowledge know to be absolutely false, can you blame them if they
give little Credit to all the rest that such a Fellow shall swear? Again the
Law says, for such a Crime, a Man unless he be Prosecuted within such a time,
shall not suffer the Pains or Penalties that otherwise are awarded, now if
after this time elapsed an Indictment be brought, and Twenty Witnesses swear
the Crime, and the Jury believe them too, yet they ought not to find the Bill,
because the Law has already acquitted the Party for want of Prosecution; which
is none of the Grand-Juries fault, And indeed delays in bringing men to Trial
are apt to raise a strong suspicion that the Evidence is not Right, and that
the Prosecutor himself thinks so, For a Trayter ought not to live an hour; a
Witness against the Prisoner may dye, and so a Traitor escape, or a Witness my
dye that could have spoken materially for him, and so an Innocent Subject may
lose his life, when he is Guiltless. And therefore certainly, a Prosecutor will
never put off a Trial for Four or Five Months, unless he want Witnesses or the
Witnesses want their Lesson, which may possibly be, for it is a difficult
matter, especially for an Irishman to learn to spoke true English.


Prej. Irishman* why, what have you to say against Irish-men?


Indiff. Nothing, Sir, only I find in Bakers Chronicle, fol 347, That the
Bishop of Rosse being questioned before Q Elizabeth's Council for Treason, and
urged with somewhat that some English Gentlemen had testified against him: He
lovingly requested their Lordships to give no Credit to it; for as much (says
he) as by a received Custom, which has the force of a Law, the Testimony of
an Englishman against a Scotch-man, or of a Scot against an Englishman is not
to be admitted: Now I think there is as much Reason for such a Custom against an
Irishman, as against a Scot.


Prej. Prithee no more of Irish, we shall have the Irish Evidence Eves drop us,
by and by.


Indiff. God shield Man; I Will have nothing to do with them, If I can help it,
and therefore, because we have hitherto been dull, I Will tell you a Story.


Prej. Ay, do, I love Stories dearly; but especially Thompson-Stories, and
Observator Stories.


Indiff. Mine is of neither of those sorts but an honest Country Calve-shire
Story. for it comes from about Ded ham in Essex -- There was a Londoner that
had a Farm thrown upon his Hands, came down with several of his Friends to Buy
Cattle to stock it; and there was a farmer (a Rich Jolly Blade, for all he wore
a Red Jacket) brought him into a public Field, where was an Herd of Irish
Cattle, and some English amongst them; the Londoner and his Companions first
handled the English Cattle, though very gently; for they would scarce endure to
be touched, which made them suspect they were not sound as they should be: Then
they handled one of the Irish Cattle and found it not only Rascally Lean, but
that it had a kind of base Disease Contracted, as it is supposed by eating some
Hired Pasture, or else by feeding amongst other infected Irish Cattle: Then
they handelled a second Irish Bullock that looked more lusty, yet had the same
Distemper; and in a word, they perceived that all the rest were Diseased and
Rotten within; and inquiring the Reason, were told, that one Gaffer Mouse or
House, or such a kind of Name, had been Herdsman, who not allowing so much
Pasture, as they craved for mere Hunger made them leap out of those short
Commons into the Grounds of one of the Richest men of all the Country, and
there had surfeited themselves with too greedy feeding. So upon full view the
Londoner and his Friends could not believe there was one sound Beast among
them, neither English nor Irish: For all grazing in the same Ground, and
drinking in the same Pond, they had all Contracted an In-Credible Distemper,
and indeed they smelt strangely, and a lewd Hogo came from their very Breath.
And therefore they would have no such Cattle to stock their Ground with, and
told the Farmer that he would do well to separate his Irish from the English
Cattle; for that by the Late Act of Prohibition of Irish Cattle, all English
were to be forfeited, that should be found in the same Herd with the Irish; or
rather that he should send all the Irish back, to see if their own Native Soil
would Recover them. And it is thought he will take their Council, for these and
some other Londoners, have so blown upon the whole Herd; that it is believed no
Essex or Middlesex Graziers, nor Oxfordshire Butchers, nor scarce a Chapman in
the whole Country will meddle with them; so that the last news I heard from
thence it was thought the whole Herd would die in a Ditch, and be made Carrion
or Hawksmeat of.


Prej. What a vengance is all this story of rotten Cattle and a Cock and a Bull
to our Discourse?


Indiff. Nothing that I know of, but I love to humor the World sometimes and
talk Impertinently; But if we must have the other crash about Juries, then I say,
That if an Indictment be laid against a Man for Criminal Words, said to be
uttered in a Colloquium or Discourse, now the Witnesses roundly swear all the
Words in the Indictment, yet unless they will relate and set forth the
substance of the whole talk, it is impossibe the Jury should judge of the
Matter, For the foregoing and subsequent words may render expresions that are
Innocent and Loyal, which taken to halfs, may be rank Treason: As if one should
say, to affirm the King has no more Right to the Crown of England than I have
(which is the Opinion of the Jesuits of his Majesty, if once Excommunicated by
the Pope) Is detestable Treason* And two Men at some distance, not well hearing
or remembering, or maliciously designing against his Life, should swear -- That
he said the King had no more Right to the Crown than he had; now that the Man
did utter these very Words is true, but if you ask the Evidence the rest of the
Coloquium, they shall tell you there was much more discourse but they cannot
remember it, what satisfaction is this to a Jury, or would it not be hard for a
man to be put to hold up his Hand at the Bar, under the frightful charge of
Treason in this Case. Or if a Minister in his Sermon, should recite that of the
Psalms, The Fool has said in his Heart there is no God. Jesuited Evidence now
may come and charge him with Blasphemy, and swear that he said there was no
God, and ask them what expressions besides he used, may excuse themselves and
say, it is a great while a go we cannot remember a whole Sermon, but this we all
positively swear-He said there was no God.

The Inquiry of a Grand Jury should be suitable to their Title, a Grand
Inquiry, else instead of serving their Country, and presenting real Crimes,
they may oppress the Innocent, as in the Case of Samuel Wright and John Good
the very last Sessions, Good Indicts Wright for Treasonable Words, and swore
the Words positively, but after a Grand Inquiry, the Grand Jury found that
Wright only spoke the Words as of others, thus they say, so and so, -- and
concluded with this -- They are Rogues for saying it; And also Good at last
confessed that Wright was his Master, and corrected him for misdemeanors, and
then to be revenged he comes and swears against him, which he confessed he was
Instigated to by one Powel, so the Grand Jury finding it to be but Malice,
returned the Bill Ignoramus, whereas if they had not Examined him strictly, they
had never discovered the Intrigue, and the Master had causelessly been brought
to great Charge, Ignominy and Hazard.


Prej. Well, still I say Juries ought to go according to Evidence.


Ind. What is, or is not sufficient Evidence to sway with the Consciences of a
Jury, they themselves are the only Judges.


Prej. You mightily magnify Juries I Will warrant you would have them sit with
their Hats on.


Indiff. Truly since they are a necessary part of every Court, and have a
Power vested in them by Law, of determining the Lives and Estates of their
Fellow Subjects, I know not why they should sit creeping with Cap in Hand; Nay,
I conceive when Grand-Juries are forced (as of late, for I know no ancient
precedents for it) to hear and Examine Evidence in Court, if they should put
on their Hats, the Court cannot by Law Fine them; For by Immemorial Custom,
they have taken such Examinations sitting with their Hats on, which Conciliated
a respect to them from the Witnesses, whereas if they sit in a Crowd truckling
like Schoolboys, the Witnesses will not regard to Answer their Questions, or
Discover the Truth. And the reason (as I conceive) why the Law provides that
Grand-Juries should take Examinations in private, is on purpose that Men or
their Crimes might not be exposed, before it appeared to a Grand Jury, that the
matter ought to be Publicly Tried; Whereas when they are compelled to take it
in public, it is a kind of Arraigning a Man before the Bill be found against
him. To what purpose is it for the Court, to hear the Evidence given to the
Grand Jury, the Jury are upon their Oaths, and ought to follow the Dictates of
their own belief and understanding, the Court have nothing to do to meddle, or
interrupt. For they are bound by the Verdict, not by the Evidence.


Prej. Well but if the Jury goes contrary to Evidence, cannot the Court Punish
them.


Indiff. Not at all, the Law has provided no punishment and very reasonably,
For it is impossible the Court can know that a Jury goes contrary to Evidence.
But to satisfy you fully as to the Law in this matter I shall here recite an
Adjudged Case, that of Bushel in the Two and Twentieth year of His Majesty,
reported by the Learned Sir John Vaughan, whose Book is Licensed by the present
Lord Chanceller, the Lord Chief Justice North and all the Judges then in
England, the said Case begins fol. 135 and continues to 150. The whole well
worth reading, but I shall only select certain passages.


The Case was this, Bushel and others of a Jury having at a Sessions not found
Pen and Mead (Two Quakers) Guilty of a Traspass, Contempt, unlawful Assembly
and Tumult, whereof they had been Indicted, were Fined Forty Pound a Man, and
Committed till they should pay it. Bushel brings his Habeas Corpus, and upon
the return it appeared he was Committed -- For that contrary to Law, and
against full and clear Evidence openly given in Court, and against the
directions of the Court in matof Law, they had acquitted the said W. P. and W.
M. to the great obstruction of Justice, etc.

Which upon solemn Argument, was by the Judges resolved to be an insufficiant
cause of Fineing and Committing them, and they were discharged, and afterward
brought Actions for their Damage. The Reasons of which Judgment are reported by
Judge Vaughan, and amongst them he uses these that follow, which I shall give
you in his own Words.

Fol. 140. One fault in the Retorn is, That the Jurors are not said to have
acquitted the Persons Indicted, against full and manifest Evidence, Corruptly,
and knowing the said Evidence to be full and manifest against the Persons
Indicted; for how manifest soever the Evidence was, if it were not manifest to
them, and that they Believed it such, it was not a Fineable fault, nor
deserving Imprisonment; upon which difference the Law of punishing Jurors for
false Verdicts principally depends.

And fol. 141. I would know whether any thing be more Common, than for two Men,
Students, Barristers, or Judges, to deduce contrary, and opposite Conclusions,
out of the same Case in Law? And is there any difference that two Men should
infer distinct Conclusions from the same Testimony? Is any thing more known,
than that the same Author, and place in that Author, is forceably urged to
maintain contrary Conclusions, and the Decision hard, which is in the right? Is
any thing more frequent in the Controversies of Religion, than to press the
same Texts for opposite Tenets? How then comes it to pass, that two persons may
not apprehend with Reason and Honesty, what a Witness, or many, say, to prove
in the understanding of one plainly one thing; but in the apprehension of the
other, clearly the contrary thing, must therefore one of these Merit Fine and
Imprisonment, because he does that which he cannot otherwise do, preserving his
Oath and Integrity? And this often is the Case of the Judge and the Jury.

And fol. 142 I Conclude therefore, That this Retorn, Charging the Prisoners to
have acquitted P. and M. against full and manifest Evidence first, and next
without saying that they did know and believe that Evidence to be full and
manifest against the Indicted Persons, is no Cause of Fine and Imprisonment.

In the Margent of that fol. 142. it is thus noted: Of this mind were ten
Judges of Eleven; the Chief Baron Turnor gave no Opinion because not at the
Argument.

And in the same fol. 142. he says The Verdict of a Jury, and Evidence of a
Witness, are very different things, in the truth and falsehood of them* A
Witness Swears but to what he has heard or seen, generally or more largely, to
what has fallen under his senses: But a Jury man swears to what he can Infer
and Conclude from the Testimony of such Witnesses, by the Act and Force of his
Understanding, to be the Fact inquired after, which differs nothing in Reason,
though much in the Punishment, from what a Judge, out of various Cases
considered by him, infers to be the Law in the question before him.

If the meaning of these words, finding against the direction of the Court, in
matter of Law, be, That if the Judge having heard the Evidence given in Court,
(for he knows no other) shall tell the Jury upon this Evidence, the Law is for
the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, and you are under the pain of Fine and
Imprisonment to find accordingly; and the Jury ought of duty so to do: Then
Every Man sees that the Jury is but a troublesome delay, great Charge, and no
use in determining right and wrong, and therefore the Trials by them, may be
better Abolished than Continued, which were a strange New found Conclusion,
after a Trial so Celebrated for many hundred years.

It is true, if the Jury were to have no other Evidence for the Fact, but what
is deposed in Court, the Judge might know their Evidence, and the Fact from it,
equally as they, and so direct what the Law were in the Case, though even then
the Judge and Jury might honestly differ in the Result from the Evidence, as
well as two Judges may, which often happens. But the Evidence which the Jury
have of the Fact, is much otherwise then that: For,

1. Being returned of the Vicinage where the Cause of Action arises, the Law
supposes them thence to have sufficient Knowledge to Try the Matter in Issue
(and so they must) though no Evidence were given on either Side in Court; but
to this Evidence the Judge is a Stranger.

2. They may have Evidence from their own Personal Knowledge, by which they may
be assured, and sometimes are, that what is deposed in Court is absolutely
false; but to this the Judge is a Stranger, and he knows no more of the Fact
than he has learned in Court, and perhaps by false Depositions; and
consequently, knows nothing.

3. The Jury may know the Witnesses to be Stigmatized and Infamous, which may
be unknown to the Parties, and consequently to the Court.

Fol. 148. To what end is the Jury to be Returned out of the Vicinage where the
Cause of Action arises? To what end must Hundredors be of the Jury, whom the
Law supposes to have nearer knowledge of the Fact than those of the Vicinage
in general? To what end are they Challenged so scrupulously to the Array and
Poll? To what end must they have such a certain Freehold, and be Probi and
Legales homines, and not of affinity with the Party concerned? To what end must
they have in many Cases the View for their exacter Information chiesly? To what
end must they undergo the heavy Punishment of the Villainous Judgment, if after
all this they implicitly must give a Verdict by the Dictates and Authority of
another Man, under Pains of Fines and Imprisonment, when sworn to do it
according to the best of their own knowledge?

A Man cannot see by another Eye, nor hear by another Ear; no more can a Man
conclude or infer the thing to be resolved, by another Understanding or
Reasoning: And though the Verdict be right the Jury give, yet they being not
assured that it is so from their own Understanding, are forsworn, at least in
Foro Conscientiae.

Fol. 149. And it is absurd to Fine a Jury for finding against their Evidence,
when the Judge knows but part of it; for the better and greater part of the
Evidence may be wholly unknown to him; and this may happen in most Cases, and
often does.

THUS far Judge Vaughan, whose Words I have faithfully recited; which, I
conceive, will be sufficient to silence this Controversy for ever, and stop
the Mouths of all those scandalous Observators, Heraclitus's, and other yelping
Curs, which so impudently have presumed to Bark or Hiss against the Legal
Verdicts of some late Grand-Juries.

London, Printed for William Inghall the Elder, 1681.


