royal English blazon or coat of arms By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE,
FOR the more due and orderly preservation of His Majesty's Games of Pheasants,
Partridges, Grows and Hares, and all other Game whatsoever, for the Recreation
of the Lord Lieutenant and Council, especially near about the places where the
Lord Lieutenant and State shall for the most part reside: We do hereby in His
Majesty's Name strictly charge and command all persons whatsoever that they do
not presume to kill or take, or attempt to kill or take any Pheasant,
Partridge, Grows, Hares, or any prohibited Game whatsoever, either by Hawks,
Nets, Guns, Setting Dogs, Greyhounds, or any other Engine whatsoever, in any
place or places within seven miles from the City of Dublin, as also within the
Bounds of the Curragh of Kildare, or within three miles distance from the same,
except only that Counselors of State may take their Recreation with Hawks or
otherways within the said Limits. And We do likewise charge and command all
persons, That they do not shoot within the Limits aforesaid in any Gun or
Piece, except Soldiers at the time of their Exercizing, and such others as
shall be lawfully authorized either by the Lord Lieutenant, or the Master of
His Majesty's Game for this Kingdom, which Licenses We think fit to be
hereafter granted with as much caution as may be, for the avoiding the
destruction of the said Game: And We require all persons to whom any such
License shall be granted, that they give Bond to the Master of the Game, in the
sum of Forty pounds, not to kill or shoot at any Game whatsoever within seven
miles of this City of Dublin, or the Limits specified about the Curragh of
Kildare. And We do strictly charge and command, That no person or persons
whatsoever within the Realm of Ireland, do presume to use or keep any Setting
Dogs, but that it may be lawful for the Master of His Majesty's Game, or his
Deputies, to seize, take and destroy such Setting Dogs at their pleasure. And
We do strictly charge and command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Sovereigns, Portriffs, Constables, Officers and Ministers of Justice
whatsoever, to take special care for apprehension of Offenders against this
Proclamation and to bind them over to appear before Us His Majesty's Lord
Lieutenant and Council to answer their Contempts, that so they may receive
punishment according to their demerits.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the xiv. day of November, 1662.
GOD Save the KING.
Jo. Armachanus, Mau. Eustace Canc. Ja. Dublin. Ossory, Orrery,
Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Dungannon, Fran: Aungier, Hen. Midensis, Tho. Pigot,
Theo. Jones.

DVBLIN, Printed by JOHN CROOK, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller, in Castle-street, 1662.


