NEVVS FROM Sr. William Waller, THE Lord Gray, AND Sir. Thomas Armstrong, And
of Several others Fled from JUSTICE, In a Letter from Amsterdam. To his Friend
in London.
Sr.
THe horrid villainous Conspiracy of the Sectaries and Republicans in England,
is now become the discourse of other Countries, and our Flemish Brethren of of
the same Leven, do outwardly show their detestation of such Barbarous
Principles, with a seeming grief, that Men professing themselves the most
reformed in Religion and Manners, should own and justify, such actions as
would make an Jnfidel or an Heathen blush to be suspected guilty of.

But when I call to mind some miscariages of the same Party' in times past, and
their dispositions that attended such miscariages (though never so villainous) I
always observed their grief rather to proceed from the disapointment, than the
least remorse for the Breach of those Fences that principally secure humane
society.

In the last letter I received from the Northeren parts, I was advised from my
correspondent at Breman. That the late famous Sr. William Waller, (after all
his shifting in these parts) had acquired the dignity of a Governor in that
little Common Wealth, and is upon a Capitulation with the Senate there, for
removing several English Merchants with their Effects from Hambourgh thither;
and endeavors to persuade those States that his Intrest with the godly sober
Party in England (as he styles them) is sufficient to prevail, with the chief
Heads of the Faction there to follow the example of their H^mbourgh Brethren:
and by those means in a short time, to make Bremen, compare with any City of
this part of the World, in point of Trade, Strength, and Riches. But when I
consider, that almost every week in this place, produces fresh Faces of the
same Party from England, and that many of them make it their business to become
free Bourghers of this City. I am apt to believe the Party give little heed to
the seeming pleasant charms of the little Conjurer of Bremen, and rather look
upon the Air of Amsterdam, to be the more sweet, pleasant, healthful and safer
place of the two; Besides the infallable convenience, of being certain to find
any Religion here that might be lost on a journey hither, which is a necessary
satisfaction to any man that makes a Trade of it, of which those that are
lately Arrived from England upon that account, and that seem to be of the
chiefest note, are as follows.

Francis Smith, John Starkey, Booksellers, John VVilmer, a Leather seller, Mr.
Emerton, lately Christened, Dr. Temple a Phisician; Convict for Treason, Mr.
Dare a Goldsmith outlawed Allison a Scotch Gentleman, broke Gaol, Guttery a
Scotchman, a Shooemaker and Preacher, by Trade was one of the Cargalits, and
100. pound Sterling set on his Head, for any that could apprehend him etc. John
VValters, a Mariner, late of St. Katherin's excommunicated; John Brisco and
Edward Whitacre Vpholsterers, The abovenamed Persons were at the procurement of
one Abraham Keck, (being the Person at whose House the late Earl of Shaftsbury,
dyed) presented to the States of this City, and by them accepted, and made free
Bourghers thereof. There was also one William Lewis (said to be an Evidence by
his Trade) endeavored to be admitted with those that were to have a freedom
here, his Petetion was rejected, there being no want of his profession in this
place, after whieh I was told he is Herded amongst the Jews: having suffered
himself to be Circumcised, and quite Abandons that company he came over with.

It is likewise said here that the Lord Gray, Sr. Tho. Armstrong, and Ayliff,
who are fled from Justice in England, are at Cleves, a City belonging to the
Duke of Brandenburgh; And the weather beginning to break more of the said Party
are daily expected from England, Of which as often as any of them are admitted
to our Freedom, I shall not forget to give you a particular, or of any other
matter that may be worthy of your note. In the mean time be pleased to give me
leave to Subscribe my self.

Your most humble Servant, I C.
Amsterdam New-stile, Feb. the 16th. 1684.
London Printed by E Maket


