CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. A Proclamation Concerning Passes for
Ships,
ESSEX.

WHEREAS his Majesty with the advice of his Privy Council of England, has
thought fit to require us by Proclamation to publish and declare, That all
Passes for Ships Entered out for the West Indies, or the parts of Africa beyond
Cape Verde, which were granted before the date hereof shall determine upon the
return of the said Ships, and their being unladen in some Port of Ireland, and
that all passes by virtue of any other Treaties than those with Algiers, Tunis,
and Tripoli, for ships entered out for the Mediterranean seas or Tradeing there
granted before the 25th. day of March 1676. shall determine at Michaelmas 1677.
And that all such Passes for such ships granted after the said 25th. day of
March 1676. and before the date of this Proclamation shall determine the 25th.
day of March 1678, and that if any of the said ships shall be in any Port of
the Kingdom of Ireland, or in any other member or Creek thereof at the time of
the publication of this Proclamation, their passes shall be then void, and if
any of the said ships shall happen to come into any Port of Ireland, after the
publishing of this Proclamation, and before the Expireing of the said Periods
and unlade, their passes shall thereupon determine, and also that all passes
granted to ships entered to any other parts of the world, or Coast-wise such
passes shall determine on the last day of April one thousand six hundred
seventy seven.

And Whereas we are further by his Majesty's special command required to
publish and make known, that all passes in pursuance of his Majesty's Treaty
with Denmark, for all Ireland, England, and Scotland, and the rest of his
Majesty's Dominions, are to be under his Majesty's Royal Signature to be
procured by his Majesty's principle Secretary of state And that all passes, or
sea Breifs, in pursuance of the Treaties with Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli are to
be had for all Ireland England and Scotland, and the rest of his Majesty's
Dominions from the Lords Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord high
Admiral of England sitting at Darby-House, and that all passes in pursuance of
the Treaties with Spain and the united provinces, and in pursuance of the
treaty with Sweaden, are to be had viz. for the Port of Dublin, and that
District from the Lord Mayor of the City of Dublin, the Extent of which
District is from Skerries inclusive to Wicklow, inclusive; for the Port of
Wexford and that District from the Mayor of Wexford the extent of which
District is from the Port of Waterford, exclusive to Wicklow exclusive, for the
Port of Waterford and that District including the Port of Ross, from the Mayor
of the City of Waterford, the extent of which District is from the Port of
Wexford exclusive to Dongarvan exclusive, for the Port of Yougha^l and that
District from the Mayor of Youghall, the Extent of which District is from
Dongarvan inclusive to the Port of Cork exclusive, for the Port of Cork, and
that District which is only to extend to that Port from the Mayor of the City
of Cork, For the Port of Kinsale, and that District from the Sovereign of
Kinsale the extent of which District including the Port of Baltimore, is from
the Port of Cork exclusive to Bantry inclusive, for the Port of Lymerick, and
that District from the Mayor of the City of Lymerick, the extent of which
District is from Bantry exclesive including the Port of Dingle to the Port of
Galway exclusive, for the Port of Gallway, and that District from the Mayor of
Galway the extent of which district is from the Port of Lymerick Exclusive to
the Port of Sligoe inclusive, for the Port of Londondery and that District from
the Mayor of the City of Londondery, the extent of which District is from
Sligoe exclusive including the Port of Kilabeggs unto the Port of Colerane
inclusive, for the Port of Carregfergus and Belfast, and that District from the
Mayor of Carregfergus, the evtent of which District is from the Port of
Colerane, exclusive including the Ports of Donaghadee and Strangford unto
Carlingford exclusive, for the Port of Drogheda, and that District from the
Mayor of Drogheda, the extent of which District is from Carlingford inclusive,
including the Port of Dundalk to Skerries exclusive.

And in regard that such Passes as are to be made in pursuance of the treaties
with Denmark, are to be under his Majesty's Royal Signature, and that the
Passes, or Sea Briefs, in pursuance of the treaty with Algiers, Tunis, and
Tripoli, are to be had from the Lords Commissioners for executing the Office of
Lord high Admiral of England, Sitting at Darby-House. We do hereby further
Publish and make known, that as to such of his Majesty's Subjects of this
Kingdom, as shall have occasion to make use of any Passes in pursuance of the
Treaty with Denmark, or of any Passes or Sea Briefes, in pursuance of the
Treaty with A^giers, Tunis, and Tripoli, that care shall be taken upon their
applications to Us the Lord Lieutenant, that they shall be readily furnished
with such Passes.

All which in obedience unto his Majesty's said special Commands, We do
hereby publish and make Known, and require all persons who are therein any way
concerned, to take notice of the same at their Perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the tenth day of January 1676. Ja:
Armachanus. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Char: Meredith. I: Povey. To: Booth.
Jo: Bysse. Ric: Gethin. VVm: Flower. Tho: Newcomen. Ja: Cuff.

God Save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castlestreet. 1676


