AN IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE Arraignment, Trial and Condemnation OF THOMAS Late
EARL of STRAFFORD, And Lord LIEVTANANT of IRELAND: BEFORE The PARLIAMENT at
WESMINSTER, Anno Dom. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh at the Black Bull near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil, 1679.

TO THE READER.
AMongst the Superfoetations of the Press, I hope you will have no Cause to
reckon this small Collection, either if you respect the Matter of it, I mean
the Pleadings in it, or the Great Personage concerned in them: I am apt to
persuade my self it may not altogether be unseasonable in the present
Conjuncture of Affairs, or unbeneficial to the Reader, who shall carefully
peruse it: The Case it self, as well as the Actor the Great and Noble Earl of
^trafford, have somewhat more than ordinary and peculiar in them; and as this
Great and Solemn Trial is so Paramount in the Equipage of all its
Circumstances, that (as former Ages have been unable) so future are unable to
produce its Parallel. To give you, though but a Rude Draught of this Great
Master of Defense, who so easily put by the Thrusts of his most applaudedly
Skilful and Dexterous Adversaries, will require an Abler Pencil than mine. Take
then his Character in this Book from his own Mouth; seeing otherwise whatsoever
may be spoken of him, is beneath what was spoken by him; and instead of those
Strange and Unheard of Monopolies laid to his Charge in this his Trial, he may
seem a greater himself in engrossing so much of Worth and Ability in his own
Bosom.

As to the Matter of these Collections, you have in them a Fine and Pleasant
Intermixture of Points of Law and Matters of State: You may thereby understand
the Constitutions of the two Kingdoms, which were then in a strange and most
preter-natural Fermentation, a Sick Stomach, nauseating at Pleasant and
Wholesome Meat; the Body Politic growing Hot and Feavourish, in strange
Jactations and Unquietnesses, wilfully refusing and scorning the Help and
Advice of a most Skilful Aesculapius. The Collector, you will find, hat^ very
well discharged his Part, Ne quid Falsi dicere audax, ne quid Very dicere non
audax: Herein is nothing false Reported, no material Truth Omitted, and nothing
Trivial to swell the Book, and make it more Chargeable, and less Useful to the
Peruser, is for any private End or Design of the Publisher's Gain, here set
down or observed: So that I may compare this Collection to a well-made and
easily manageable Net, that as Nothing Considerable escapes its Draught, so
there is no great Pains or Toil in the Cleansing of it, no Sticks, Stones, or
Small Fish to give thee any Trouble to return them whence thou had them. To
be short, In the Perusal of this Brief; but Full Account of this Great
Transaction, ^s thy Pains will not be Great, so thy Charge (but not Advantage)
will be Inconsiderable. Farewell.

THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THOMAS Earl of STRAFFORD, Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND,
in the Parliament at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1641.
Sir,
YOu have here the Diurnal of the whole Process against the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland it was taken by the hand of a ready Writer, a faithful Ear, and an
understanding Head, He was present at all the Action, and I make no doubt of
the Fidelity of his Relation; Which begins thus:

THE House for the Appearance of the Lord Lieutenant, was the great Hall in
Westminster, where there was a Throne erected for the King, on each side
thereof a Cabinet enclosed about with Boards, and before with a Tarras; Before
that, were the Seats for the Lords of the Upper House, and Sacks of Wool for
the Judges; before them ten Stages of Seats, extending farther than the midst
of the Hall, for the Gentlemen of the House of Commons; at the end of all was a
Desk closed about, and set apart for the Lord Lieutenant and his Council.

Monday Morning about seven of the Clock, he came from the Tower, Monday^
accompanied with six Barges, wherein were one hundred Soldiers of the Tower,
all with Partisans for his Guard, and fifty pair of Oars: At his Landing at
Westminster, there he was attended with two hundred of the Trained Band, and
went in, Guarded by them, into the Hall: The Entries at White Hall, King Street
and Westminster were guarded by the Constables and Watchmen, from four of the
Clock in the Morning, to keep away all base and idle persons.

The King, Queen and Prince came to the House about Nine of the Clock, but kept
themselves private within their Closets, only the Prince came out once or twice
to the Cloth of State; so that the King saw and heard all that passed, but was
seen of none: Some give the reason of this from the received practice of
England in such Cases: Others say, that the Lords did entreat the King either
to be absent, or to be there privately, lest Pretentions might be made
hereafter, that his being there, was either to threaten, or some otherwise to
interrupt the course of Justice: A third sort, That the King was not willing to
be accessory to the Process, till it came to his Part, but rather chose to be
present, that he might note and understand what Violence, Rigor or Injustice
happened. When the Lieutenant entered the Hall, the Porter of the Hall (whose
Office it is) asked Mr. Maxwel whether the Axe should be carried before him or
no? who did answer, That the King had expressly forbidden it; nor was it the
Custom of England to use that Ceremony, but only when the Party accused was to
be put upon his Jury, Those of the Upper House did sit with their Heads
covered, those of the Lower House uncovered: The Bishops upon the Saturday
before did voluntarily decline the giving of their Suffrages in Matters
Criminal, and of that Nature, according to the provision of the Cannon-Law, and
Practice of the Kingdom to this day, and therefore would not be present: yet
withal they gave in a Protestation that their Absence should not prejudice them
of that or any other Privilege competent to them, as the Lords Spiritual in
Parliament, which was accepted.

The Earl of Arundel, as Lord High Steward of England, sat apart by himself,
and at the Lieutenants Entry commanded the House to proceed. Mr. Rym being
Speaker of the Committee for his Accusation, gave in the same Articles which
were presented at his last being before the Upper House; which being read, his
Replies were subjoyned and read also, the very same which were presented before
in the Upper House. Some give the Reason of this, because the Lower House had
not heard those Accusations in public before (...) others, that the Formality
of the Process required no les; however that day was spent in that Exercise.

The Queen went from the House about eleven of the Clock, the King and Prince
stayed till the Meeting was dissolved, which was after two. The Lieutenant was
sent to the Tower by his Guard, and appointed to return upon Tuesday at nine of
the Clock in the Morning. The Crowd of People was neither great nor
troublesome, all of them saluted him, and he them, with great Humility and
Courtisie, both at his entrance and at his return, therefore let Fame pretend
what it please about the Malice and Discontent of the Multitude, That if he
pass the stroke of Justice they will tear him in pieces, yet I see there is
more in Rumor then in Sight and appearance, and in this Report, as in all
others of this nature, more is thrust upon the vulgar (who seem as well fearful
of Punishment, as exempt from it, for all their great number) than they do
justly deserve.

Tuesday
On Tuesday in the Morning he came accompanied, as before, to Westminster; and
having stayed in the Exchequer Chamber till nine of the Clock, the King, Queen
and Prince came, as before upon the first day.

Pyms first charge.
Then Master Pym, being called for, aggravated the Charge which was given the
day before, by a very ample Speech* It is impossible to call to mind all the
Hyperboles, the Flashes and superlative Expressions that he used, the main
points were: That it was a Treason far beyond the reach of words, that he the
Lieutenant, a native Subject and a Peer of England, the prime Governor of
Ireland, the Commander of his Majesty's Forces, and a Protestant in Religion
should have in such an impious and gross manner, recompensed his Majesty's
favors, abused his goodness, and drawn all his Dominions into hazard and
peril of their Religion, Lives, Goods and Privileges: That one of these
faults alone had been enough and too much for the fulfilling of the exorbitancy
and wickedness of any one Man, and that no Punishment could be thought upon
sufficient to expiat Crimes of such a Transcendent nature.

The Lieutenant with no less Moderation and Wisdom than the other with heat and
passion, spoke to his own defense, and that with such a measure of Eloquence
and Livelihood, that his very Enemies were affected with it and do
mervailously report of it.

The Lieutenants Answer.
He modestly recounted his Services done to the King and Crown of England, his
endeavors for advancement as well of the Honor as Commodity of both Kingdoms
in general, but in particular that of Ireland; How he had engreatned and
advanced the Kings Revenues there, Restored the Churches maintenance,
Suppressed the Outlaws, established obedience to Royal Authority, and impedited
the Tyranny and Usurpation of greater ones over the Commons. And for the
effecting of all these Actions, he mentioned himself the most weak and meanest
Instrument, with a wonderful Prudence, in a middle way, betwixt the affectation
of baseness, or dejectedness, and Allegiance.

Three new Articles.
Master Pym, after the close of his Speech, told him that there were three new
Articles adjoined (by an after search) to his Charge, and desired that he might
presently Reply to the same.

Whereunto the Liutenant answered. It was very strange, that after the close of
the Process, and when matters were come to be scanned, and examined by proof,
that any new Charge should be given in; Yet lest he should seem to decline the
maintenance of his own Innocence, and the just de^ence of his Honor, he was
most willing to hear them and have them alleged, provided that a convenient
time might be assigned him to make his Replies against them, as he had done to
the other given in before.

But Master Pym excepted against this, and told him that the House did conceive
it to be dangerous to grant any farther Prorogation.

Upon this the Lords of the upper House (who did not think it sit as yet to
voice any particular in the audience of the House of Commons) did retire
themselves, and after a pretty time of stay, they returned and declared, that
they had found the Lieutenants suit to be equitable in desiring of further time
for answering; yet seeing the Articles themselves, neither for number nor
weight, seemed to be of that importance, but that he might furnish out a
present Answer, they thought it ^tting to grant no delay.

The Lieutenant then (entreating them to pass by and pardon the weaknesses of
his extemporary Answers) desired to hear the Articles read which were these.

First, That he had within these two years withdrawn Forty Thousand pound
Sterling, from the Exchequer in Ireland, and employed it to his own private
uses.

Secondly, That in the beginning of his Government, the Garrisons in Ireland
had been maintained by the English Treasury.

Thirdly, That he had advanced Popish and Infamous persons, as the Bishop of
Waterford and others, to the prime Rooms in the Church of Ireland.

To the first he answered, That Thirty Thousand Pounds were set apart for the
Kings late Service, at his own most special and most peremptory Commands, for
which he produced the Kings own Letter, already approved as his Acquittance at
the Exchequer board in Ireland.

To the second, That at the beginning of that Charge against him, as ever
before his time, the Garrisons had been burdensome to the Kingdom of England,
but that he had so improved it, and settled the Kings Revenue there, that the
like is not to be heard in all the times that are by past; For which (if the
best endeavors of a Subject may justly expect any reward from his King and
Country) he craved leave to think that he rather deserved many thanks, than the
least Punishment.

To the third, He attested all the Clergy in Ireland, if ever he had taken upon
him any particular meddling in advancing their Churchmen, or whether he had
done any thing concerning such Affairs, but upon the special advise and desire
of the best and wisest of their Number: For his part, when he befriended the
Bishop of Waterford, he conceived of him, as a Man of Integrity and Learning,
fit for such an Employment; nor was there then the least suspicion of those
monstrous Impieties, wherewith he was afterward Charged, that he had now justy
suffered for the same, and that he hoped they would not lay a necessity upon
him to Prophecy and divine of the future Conditions and Deportments of Men: For
others of the Church, suspected of Popery, he knew none such, but should answer
to the Particulars so far as they concernd him, when they should happen to be
alleged.

After this the House disolved for that night, the Kings Majesty and the Prince
having stayed all the time, and the Lord Lieutenant was appointed to come
thither again on Wednesday Morning, at which time they are to proceed to the
first Article, to give an Oath to the Witnesses, and to examine all the Proofs
whereon the Process was Builded.

It will be a very hard matter for him to expect every Man's Testimony, and to
give his answers, either for full satisfaction or diminution of all Objections,
which way of proceeding will spend at least a Fortnight, if not a greater space
of time, yet it is thought the lower House are impatient of delays: The
expectations are exceeding various and different, about the event of this great
action; some think it will be impossible to escape the many and great
accusation laid to his Charge; Others, and that the greater number too, are of
oppinion that he will be in no hazard of his Life, and that it will not be
possible to bring him into the compass of Treason (quod tam misere cupio ut non
credam) his adverse party is so great, and so far interested both in point of
safety and Honor against him, that Flectere si nequeunt superos, etc. Nothing
will be left unassayed that may accelerate his Ruin.

He has all this time carried himself courageously, to the admiration (and
with all so moderately, that it is to the great satisfaction) of his very
Enemies, so that he seems neither dejected with fear, nor to affect boldness
with confidence, but to carry himself with that constancy and resolution which
his Innocence and brave parts do promise.

The Irish Commissioners here, have hitherto abstained from giving in any
Remonstrance against the Lieutenant, and do still plead to have an immediate
dependence from the King, and not from the Parliament of England: There was a
Report that the Parliament of Ireland had sent a Protestation against the Act
made the last year, for the Kings Supply in his Expedition against the Scots,
as a thing which was violently in part, and in part surreptitiously obtained
from them: but I have learned this to be an untruth. I had almost forgotten one
passage of Mr. Pym, who in the aggravation of the Lieutenants faults, had this
Expression, That he was like the Whore in the Proverbs, He wiped his mouth, and
with a brazen face said he had done no evil.

To this the Noble Lord replied, That he wished his Innocence might not be
taken for Impudence, That he hoped shortly to clear himself of all those foul
Aspersions which his malicious Enemies had cast upon him; and he was very
confident that he should give the Honorable Houses full satisfaction
concerning his Life hitherto, and thought of nothing more hereafter than to
retire himself from all public Employments.

Mr. Pym gave at this a great shout, and desired the House to take notice what
an injury he had done to the Honorable House of Commons, in calling them his
Malicious Enemies.

Whereupon the Lieutenant falling down upon his Knees, humbly besought them
that they would not mistake him; and withal gave a large Panegyric of their
most just and moderate proceedings, protesting that if he himself had been one
of the House of Commons (as he had the Honor once to be) he would not have
advised them to have done otherwise against his dearest Friend: but withal told
them, that he might justly say he had his own un-friends* which he hoped in
time to make known: nor did he all this time speak one bitter word against Mr.
Pim, though justly incensed, which has infinitely advanced his Reputation.

I have been a daily hearer of these Proceedings against this great Personage
now upon the Stage, therefore do presume I can give a reasonable account
thereof: The Book of his Charge is extant in Print, so it shall be needful for
me only to name the Articles as they were canvassed: and those designed by the
House of Commons to be his Accusers; which were these that follow.

The Names of his Accusers.
Pym, Glin, Maynard, Whitlock, Lord Digby, St. John's, Palmers, Sr. Walter
Earls, Stroud, Seilden, Hamden, etc

One of these began the Speech, the rest after their Colleague has done,
follow in their turn, so that he has all of them to wrestle against; and yet
sufficiently able for them all; though by his agitation his Spirits are much
exhausted.

Mr. Glyn, after a large Flourish, on Wednesday, told the Lords, That the Lord
Strafford was impeached, not with simple, but accumulative Treason: For though
in each particular Article, such a monstrous Crime could not be deprehended,
yet when all was conceived in the Mass, and under one view, he should be
undoubtedly found the most wicked and exorbitant Traitor that ever was
Arraigned at that Bar. He added, That his Charge was for intending to subvert
and change the Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of both the
Kingdoms, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Form of Government.
This, he said, could not appear, but by the Fruits, which were either in
Expression or Action. The Expressions were four.

Expres.
First, That before several Witnesses he had said at York, That the King's
little Finger should beheavier, to them, than the Loins of the Law.

To this the Lieutenant replied, That having spoken sufficiently before to his
Justification in general, he would moreover add these few Words, by their
Favors: That it strike him to the heart to be attached of such a wicked Crime,
by such Honorable Persons; yea, that it wounded him deeper, in regard that
such Persons who were the companions of his youth, and with whom he had spent
the best of his days, should now rise up in judgment against him; yet he
thanked God for it, it was not Guilt, but Grief, that so much troubled him. He
added, That it was a wonder how he had gotten strength sufficient in such
Infirmity of Body, and such Anguish of Mind, to collect his Thoughts, and say
any thing at all for himself: But the Almighty God, who knows him to be
innocent, had furnished him with some abilities to give Testimony to the Truth,
and to a good Conscience: He therefore entreated, that i^ either in Judgment or
in Memory, he should at any time fail, it might be imputed to his great
Weakness. And although the Gentlemen his Accusers should seem more ready in
their Accusations, than himself in his defense, yet that might not prejudice
his Cause, who in very unequal terms, had to do with learned and eloquent
Lawyers, bred up a long time and inured to such judiciary pleadings, and whose
Rhetoric he doubted not, might present many things to their view in a
Mutiplying Glass; He told them farther, that for these many years he had been
weary of public service, and that now it was his resolution, after he had
vindicated his Honor, to retire himself* and enjoy his much longed for
privacy, And yet he could not but tell them so much, that it had been his
hearty wish and desire, rather voluntarily to have resigned his places of
Honor, like a ripe Fruit fallen from the Tree, than to be violently pulled
from thence, as a fruitless and unprofitable withered Branch.

To the Charge of Treason, he said, that under favor, he conceived that
although all the Articles contained in his impeachment were verified against
him, yet they would not all amount to Treason, neither simple not accumulative:
For (said he) I do not understand by what Interpretation of Law, the diversion
of Justice can be called a Subversion of the same, or the exceeding of a
Commission, the usurpation of a new Power* To the particular he replied, that
his words were clearly inverted, for that his expression was, That the little
finger of the Law (if not supported by the Regal Power, in granting Pardons for
poenalties of the same) was heavier then the Kings Loins. That this was his
expression he verified.

First by the occasion, for he spoke the words a long time since, to some Men
who had lain imprisoned at York, and were then by the Kings favor set at
Liberty, whom he incited to thankfulness (by this expression) toward his
Majesty.

Secondly, by witnesses produced by him: In the examination of their witnesses
he convinced one of them of untruth, by interrogating him where he was when the
speech was heard, and how far distant from him, when the Man had replied, that
he was twelve Yards from him, he answered that it was impossibly for him to
hear a Man three Yards off, by reason of a deafness that had held him 14 years,
which being found true, the witness was rejected.

Another witness (Sir David Fouls) was brought against him, against whom he
excepted as his known and professed Enemy; 'twas told him that he himself did
not use to admit of exceptions against Witnesses, and therefore was to expect
the same measure.

He replied that Master Pim might one day perhaps be atached for persuading the
House of Commons to commit the same Crime that was laid upon him as a Charge of
Treason: But for all this the Witness was received, because in matter of
Treason a Man's Enemy may witness against him pro Domino nostro Rege, Though, I
suppose the Kings advice was never asked for the present. This was all that was
done for that time.

On Thursday he was charged with the second Expression; Thursday. Expres. 2.
That he said Ireland was a Conquered Kingdom, and that the King might
prescribe them what Law he pleased.

This they aggravated as a prime note of his Tyrannical will and affection,
that would permit no Law to bound the Subject, but what himself and such as he
might draw up by sinistrous informations, from a gracious and well meaning
Prince, and if this were admitted, the whole Power and Liberty of the
Republique would be utterly lost.

To this he replied, Staffords Reply.
that neither was the Expression in those words nor in that sense spoken or
meant by him; The first part of it (said he) cannot be denied; To the second
that he had said only, that the King was the Lawgiver, which he hoped none
could deny without incurring the Crime of Treason; And that the Kings Sentence
was a Law in matter not determined by Acts of Parliament, which all but
disloyal Subjects would grant; and that it had ever been his endeavor to have
the Liberty of the Subject, and the Royal Prerogative follow both in one
Channel: If either of them crossed other, we could expect nothing but a
Subversion of the Commonwealth, either by Tyranny or Rebellion; That the
Prerogative was like the first; the Liberty of the Subject like the second
Table, either both or neither can be preserved, that in his duty he stood
obliged first to the King, as Gods Anointed, then in the second place to his
Country, if it did not cross the Regal Power: And therefore hoped that what
he had spoken was so far from being Treason, that he thought a thousand such
Expressions would not make up one Felony.

On Friday the two other Expressions were followed; That he said, Friday.
Express. 3. and 4.
He would not suffer his Ordinances to be disputed by Lawyers, before inferior
Judicataries, and that he would make an Act of State equivalent to an Act of
Parliament.

To the first he said, that he had often said (more then once) that he would
not suffer his Ordinance to be contemned, because, in him, his Masters Honor
was wounded.

To the second, He thought a proportionable obedience was due to Acts of State,
as well as to Acts of Parliament, otherwise they were made in vain if that both
did not bind in one kind.

The Lord Cork (though his mortal Enemy) was now examined and admitted, Corks
two Falls.
as a Witness, whom in his Deposition he convinced of two shameful oversights:
For Cork had declared upon his Oath, 1 Interlining.
that the Lieutenant had caused to be interlined an Ordinance against himself,
and had caused some words to be scraped out, which words were notwithstanding
still found to be in the Sentence by an authentic Copy under the hand of Sir
Paul Davison, Clerk to the Councel-board of Ireland.

Then Cork alleged, that he had advanced a Groom of his to be a Preacher, 2
His Groom.
who by a Testimony from the University of Dublin he verified to have been a
Master of Arts, ten or twelve years before his advancement, adding withal, that
my Lord of Cork was an excellent Scholar, who was able to breed such Grooms.

Upon Satturday, having done with his Expressions, Satturday.
they canvased the first Article about his Actions.

Against the Lives of the Kings Subjects, Charge. 1.
both in the Case of the Lord Mount-Norris and also of another of the Kings
Subjects, both of whom he had Sentenced to Death by Martial-Law, contrary to
all Law, and to the manifest Subversion of the Privileges of Subjects, Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right.

To the Lord Mount-Norris his Case, he Replied:
1. Staffords Reply.
That though that Sentence had been unjustly given and rigorously prosecuted
against him, yet the greatest Crime that he could be charged withal would but
amount to Manslaughter, or Felony at the most.

2. That he hoped (though this were true) to obtain a Pardon from his gracious
Master the Kings Majesty, as well as Conway, and Sir Jacob Ashley had lately
done, for e^ercising Martial Law in the Northern Army.

Then he Replied to all the parts of the Charge which were four.

1. That he had exercised Martial Law in time of Peace,

To this he Answered:
1. That all Armies have been, and must be, governed ever by Martial Law.

2. That there is a standing Army in Ireland, and therefore the Case is all one
is time of Peace or War; And that the Army might be undone if they should not
use Martial Law, but were to expect Remedy for the settling of a Mutiny, or
assurance of obedience from the Common Law.

3. That it had ever been the practice of the Deputies, particularly of Wilmot,
Faulkland, Chichester, yea Cork himself, and therefore was no new thing,
brought in by him; This he proved, both by the production of the Military
Ordinances, and by diverse Witnesses who knew Sentences given in that kind by
them.

4. That he had a particular Warrant in his Commission for this Power.

5. That in the Lord Mount-Norris his Case, he was commanded to exercise the
same, by the Kings particular Letter, both which he caused to be read.

Charge. 2.
The second Charge was, That he was both Party and Judge in the Lord
Mount-Norris 's Cause.

Straffords Reply.
To this he Replied, That he had sitten in Judgment, because he was one sine quo
non, the Judgment could not proceed without him, but that he was not Judge but
Party appeared.

1. Because he sat discovered all the time.

2. Because he refused to give his own Opinion.

3. Because he did not give his Suffrage one way or other.

4. Because he removed his Brother Sir George from having hand in the Process,
in regard of interest of Blood.

Charge 3.
The third Charge was, That he proceeded summarily in the matter of the Lord
Mount-Norris.

He Replied.
Straffords Reply.
First, that he was not Judge in it, and that the Council of War was to be
answerable in the Justification of their own Proceedings.

Secondly,
That after a long reasoning he had heard them say, that no delay could safely
be granted in Martial Courts.

Charge 4.
The fourth Charge was, That he had not heard the Exceptions made by
Mount-Norris against his Witnesses.

Straffords Reply.
To this he answered, as before, That he was not Judge in the Case, and that he
remembers no Exceptions made against any Witnesses, To which he added, that as
he had been regulated in his Proceedings, so he had been moderate in the
Execution of that Sentence: For though the Lord Mount Norris justly deserved to
die, yet he had obtained him the Kings Pardon, for the saving of his life, and
protested that he intended nothing by that Sentence, but in some measure to
repair his own Honor, and to give Mount-Norris fair reproof, who was known to
be of an exorbitant and licentious Tongue and Spirit: Adding, that if the House
of Commons would go on the same way with him, and assure him that the Issue of
his Charge, should be nothing else but to admonish him for the time to come, he
would thank them heartily for it, and study amendmant in all pretended
oversights. And whereas Mount-Norris complained that he had jeeringly told him,
when the Sentence was passed and pronounced against him: That ere he lost his
head, himself would lose his Hand; He answered, that he had been thought to be
very insolent and haughty, yet he was never so impertinent to use this
expression; If any fault were, it was for undervaluing himself in saying, that
ere a hair of Mount-Norris should perish, he would lose his hand: And truly
(said he) if Mount-Norris would say so to me now, even in the worst sense that
can be conceived, that ere I died he would lose his hand, I would take it very
kindly from him.

For the other man he avouched that he himself had voiced to hang him, both
because he was an arrant Thief, and also had fled from his Colors, which by
the Common Law (and to this effect he cited a Statute 20. Hen. 6. and 7. Hen.
7.) That to fly from their Colors is Felony. He concluded that seeing he was
not accessory to the Sentence against Mount-Norris, had not sat there as
Judge, had a power to keep Martial-Courts by his Commission, had not exercised
the same till a new Command came from his Majesty, had done no more than ever
was practiced in Ireland, before his time, and had at least obtained
Mount-Norris his Pardon, he hoped there was nothing accusable in him but his
too remiss and too moderate Proceedings.

Glinn 's Ejaculation.
Master Glin bitterly Replied, That he knew the time when the Earl of Strafford
was no less active and stirring to enlarge the liberty of the Subject, and
advance the Petition of Right, than now he is for extending his own Arbitrary
and Tyrannical Government.

Straffords Reply.
To this he Replied without the least semblance of Passion, that if at any time
he had done the least service to the House of Commons, he thought his whole
life well spent, nor could they ever so graciously reward him as to give
Commission to that Gentleman, to express so much before that Honorable
Assembly: But withal if ever any such thing was done by him, he entreated it
might now be remembered, and might now serve to over balance some slight and
mean oversights committed by him, which he hoped should never make him guilty
of Treason, unless it were Treason for a Man to have no more wit and Prudence
than God and Nature had bestowed upon him. And so much for Saturday.

Upon Monday he was charged with the sixth Article: Monday. Charge Art. 6.
That he had used a Tyrannical Government, not only over the Lives (as appeared
by the last) but also over the Lands and Goods of the Kings Subjects, as
appeared by this Article: wherein he was Charged to have dispossessed the Lord
Mount-Norris of a Tenure of Lands, by a Summary Process before himself,
contrary to all Law, and therefore had failed.

1. Against the Act 7 Hen. 6. which provides all matters to be determined by
the ordinary Judges.

2. Against the Cautions sent to Ireland by King James, expressly forbidding
such power hereafter to be exercised.

3. Against the Kings late Proclamation.

4. Against the practice of all Deputies before that time.

Withal they added, That it was a Tyranny that could not be expressed, to
exercise this power over the Persons of the Peers of the Land, and their Goods.

To this he replied, That for his part, Strafford 's Reply.
in matter of Justice (under favor he spoke it) he thought there was no
distinction to be made betwixt a Peer of the Land, and one of the Commons,
except they did think that either Fear or Faction should do somtehing, which
had no place in him.

To the Particulars.
1. That the Act of Hen. 6. answered it self sufficiently, both because it
excepted the Court of Requests (and that his proceedings were nothing else in
Ireland, and also makes an express Reservation of the Kings Prerogative, which
he said was his strength, because he derived his Commission from the King, and
that the Act* was the most express warrant in the world for him.

2. That he had not failed against the Cautions given by King James.

1. Because they were not Charged upon him. 2. Because they were never
observed, nor could be by the Deputies to whom they were given; which he proved
both by Witnesses and Writings. 3. Because the Caution made rather for him,
than against him, in that it contained the Word Hereafter, which manifestly
employed that the Power had been sometimes before exercised in Ireland; and not
only by himself, and therefore thanked them for that Testimony and hint. 4.
That though the Cautions had been given to him, yet he had received an express
Command from the King his Master, to put that Power in use, causing the Kings
Letter, for that purpose, to be read; and professing withal, that he was tender
to exercise that Power, till the King (induced by the humble Remonstrance of
the meaner sort of people) had most peremptorily, and upon most just Reasons
commanded him.
3. That he could not obey the Kings Proclamation five years before it came
out, and that he wished from his heart, that they would but respect the Kings
Commands and Commissions, with that tenderness of Affection and Obedience as he
did his Proclamations.

4. He proved it to be the constant practice of all Deputies that went before
him.

It was Objected, Charge.
That other Deputies had indeed upon Suits of Equity determined themselves, and
matters of Debt; but never of Land.

He Replied, First, Strafford 's Reply.
That the same Authority reaches as well to the one as to the other: Secondly,
That neither he nor they had ever given Sentence, or determined any thing
concerning Matters of Inheritance, but only concerning violent intrusion, which
fell directly within a Suit of Equity. To which he added,

First, The Equity of that Court; that it proceeds upon the same Grounds and
Evidences of that of the Common Pleas; and that he had the assistance of two of
the Learned Judges, in deciding the Controversy.

Secondly, The Profit of that Court, which dispatcheth the poor in a day or
two, whereas the Common Law would keep them so many years, which they are not
able to sustain.

Thirdly, The Necessity of that Court in that Kingdom, which has been ever
governed by that way, and therefore impossible to debarr the Natives from it,
without great inconvenience, for it would utterly undo them, and none is
prejudiced by it but the Lawyers: And therefore seeing that he had done nothing
but what was customary, necessary and equitable; commanded to it, and the
Sentence just, he hoped rather for Thanks from the State, than a Charge for his
ill Deportment: withal, he showed with what Extortion and Violence the Lord
Mount-Norris had taken seizure of that piece of Land, and made the playing of
his Game to be very foul: And at last he added, That he had done no more in
Ireland, than the Court^ of Request in England usually does; and that the
Chancery-Court in Ireland does the same daily, and the last Chancellor was
never Charged (said he) for such Proceedings, though this his Power and
Authority was less than mine: But the difference of the Person and his
Authority (it seems) differs the Matter. And this was the Business on
Monday.

Tuesday. Charge latter part of the 8th. Article Lady Hibot's Case.
On Tuesday they passed by the 7th. Article, and the two first parts of the 8th.
about the Lady Hibbot's Land; That he had violently thrust her from her
Possession, by this Summary way of Justice, and afterward Purchased the Land
to his own use, by borrowing the Name of Sir Robert Meridith.

In this Probation, the Testimony of the Gentlewomans own Son was used, of the
Lord of Cork, and the Lord Mount-Norris, all his back-Friends, or professed
Enemies; and yet they proved very little, but what they took upon Hearsayes.
Their prime Allegation was,

First, That though the Major part of the Council Board had Voted for the Lady,
yet the Lord L^utenant had given Decrees against her.

Secondly, That all was done to his own behoof.

Strafford 's Reply.
To the First, He produced the Sentence, under the Hand of the Clerk of the
Council Board, Subscribed by the Major part.

To the Second, He attested that he had no under-dealing with Meredith; for the
Lady had got her own Lands back from the said Sir Robert Meredith: he also
declared at length, with what fraud and deceit the Lady had come to her Lands,
and upon what Reasons they were restored.

Charge Article 9.
After this Article they fell upon the 9th. about the giving of Commission to
the Bishop of Down and Connar, for apprehending all such Persons, and
presenting them before the Council Board, as contemned the Ecclesiastical
Ordinances.

'This was aggravated as a Point mainly against the liberty of the Subject.

To this he Replied,
Stafford 's Reply.
First, He produced the Primate of Ireland's Testimony under his Hand (he being
himself sick) that the same course had been used in Ireland before, and that
Bishop Mountgomery, his Predecessor in the Bishopric of Methe, had had the
same.

Secondly, He showed the Equity that such assistance should be given to
Churchmen, who otherwise, because of Papists and Schismatics, either to God
or the King, would have no Repect or Obedience given them in that Kingdom.

Thirdly, He proved by two Witnesses, that such Warrants were in use before his
time.

Fourthly, He said he had never granted any but that one, and had presently
within some few Months called the same in again; what (said he) was the Bishop
of Downs carriage in it, he had no reason to answer for; but he presumed the
Bishop could give a satisfactory answer for himself, when he should be called
in question; and so he concluded that a matter so just, so necessary, so
customary and practical before, he hoped should not be Charged upon him as an
Introduction of a new and Tyrannical Form of Government: and therefore
submitted himself to the Mercy of God, and the Equity of his Peers in his
Trial. And this was the Work on Tuesday.

'The Ability of this brave Gentleman ravished his Hearers with admiration,
though he be 'infinitely spent both in Body and Mind, by the continued and
almost un^interrupted Agitation.

Wednesday. Charge. Artic. 10.
After the Ninth Article was passed against the Commission issued in favor of
the Bishop of Down and Connar; Upon Wednesday Mr* Glyn proceeded to the Tenth
Article. The Charge was, That the Earl of Strafford, having established an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, over the Lives, Lands and Liberties of the
Kings Subjects, his next desire was to make intrusion upon the Crown it self,
that by applying to his own use the Public Revenues, he might be the more
enabled to accomplish his Disloyal and Traiterous Intentions: To which end,
having by a new Book of Rates, enhaunced the Customs, he had gotten by
advantage of his Lease, above twenty six thousand pound yearly. This (they
added) was a Crime of higher nature than those contained in the preceding
Articles, because in those there was some color or pretext of Justice, here
none; those in Particulars, this in General; those against the Subject only,
this against the King himself.

For the Proof of the Charge, they produced the Lease of the Duke of Buckingham.

Which was read and compared with that Lease to the Duchess of Buckingham
(which the Lieutenant has now by Assignment) and some Difference shown arising
to the Sum of two thousand pounds in the Dukes Lease, only the Moiety of
concealed and forfeited Goods were due to him, but the whole Goods to the
Duchess in her Lease: Again, the Kings Ships of Prizes did not pay Custom in
the Dukes Lease; in the Dutchesses they did: Again, the Impost of the Wines
(then belonging to the Earl of Carlisle) was not in the Dukes Lease; in the
Dutchesses it was: Lastly, Whereas the Earl of Strafford paid but fourteen
thousand pounds per annum for the Custom, it was worth to him, as was apparent
by the Books of the Exchequer, forty thousand pounds. Witnesses were examined.

First, Sir James Hay, who deposed that the Earl of Carlisle had an advantage of
one thousand six hundred pounds per annum by his Lease of Wines.

Secondly, The Lord Renelaugh, who deposed that by the inspection of the Books
of Accounts, he had found the Customs to be Anno 1636. thirty six thousand
pounds; Anno 16^7. thirty nine thousand pounds; Anno 1638. fifty four thousand
pounds; Anno 1639. fifty nine thousand pounds.

With the Proof they concluded the Charge: That notwithstanding the Lord
Strafford pretended a great measure of Zeal and Honesty in His Majesty's
Service, yet it is evident he had abused the Trust put upon him, and by
withdrawing so great Sums of Money from the Crown, had weakened the King,
prejudiced the Subject of the Protection they were to expect from him, and had
been the cause that the extraordinary way of Impost and Monopolies had been
undertaken for supplying of the Royal Necessity: And that this Act, therefore*
ought to be enough to make the Charge and Impeachment of High Treason laid
against him.

The Lieutenants Reply was, Strafford 's Reply.
That he conceived he had given full satisfaction to all hitherto brought
against him, about that pretended Arbitrary Government, nor would he spend time
in vain Repetitions, for the present Article, though in all its parts it were
granted to be true, yet he could not perceive, by what Interpretation of Law,
it could imply the least Act of Treason, and when it should be directly Charged
upon him as a point of Misdemeanor, Oppression, or Felony, he made no doubt but
he should be very able to clear himself abundantly in that point also* yet lest
any prejudice might stick to his Honor, by these bold Assertions, he was
content to step so far out of the way as to give Answer.

First, That it concerned him nothing what particulars in the Lease had past
betwixt the King and the Duchess of Buckingham, or whether she had obtained a
more ea^ie condition than the Duke her Husbands, especially seeing that same
was granted some years before his coming to that Government; yet thus much he
could say, that the Duchess had paid thirty thousand pound fine, and therefore
no marvail her yearly Rent was the less.

Secondly, For the Book of Rates (wherein the chief matter of Oppression and
Grievance seemed to rest) the same was there established by the Deputy
Faulkland, An. 1628, three years before his going into Ireland, and therefore
it was exceeding strange, in his apprehension, now that could rise up in
judgment against him.

Thirdly, That he had his interest in the Customs by Assignation of a Lease
from the Duchess, which was given her before his Government, nor did he ever
hear it alleged as a Crime of Treason for a man to make a good Bargain for
himself.

Fourthly, That not of his own accord, but at the Kings special Command he had
undergone that Charge, on hopes that upon the enquiry into the worth thereof,
the Customs might be improved for the Benefit of the Crown, and the true value
thereof discovered. This he proved by the Lord Cottington, and Sir Arthur
Ingram.

Fifthly, That when a new Book of Rates was recommended to man by the Council
Board of England, in the time of his Lease, he so far preferred a fear he had,
That the Trade of Ireland might thereby be discouraged, before his own
Commodity, as he presumed, in all humility, to refuse the said Book of Rates,
and tendered his Reasons thereof to the Kingdom and Council Board of England.

Sixthly, That he never understood that the Customs could a^^e to those great
Sums alleged, but though they should, yet his advantage was but ^mall; for
first dividing the fourteen thousand pounds he paid to the King, then five
parts of eight; which was yearly given in upon Oath, (and that procured first
by himself) at the Exchequer-Board, the other three parts (...) ide^ amongst
four of them which were equal sharers in the Lease, would not amount to any
great Sum of Money: And therefore except it were Treason for him to have
^mproved the Kings Revenue, encouraged the Trade, and refused the new Book of
Rates, he could in his own weak ^udgment discern none there, nor could he think
it a Crime for him to take an Assignation of a Lease* granted before his time,
and to insist in the Book of Rates used before his coming over; and therefore
was confident the Lords would rather take his Accusation as an exercise of
Rhetoric in the Gentlemen his Adversaries, than as a thing spoken in good
earnest by them.

Charge. Artic. 11.
The same day the Eleventh Article, concerning Tobacco, was Charged on by the
same man Mr. Glyn, after this manner: That for the farther advancement of his
Tyrannical and Avaritious Designs, he had, of himself, established a Monopoly
for the restraint of Tobacco in that Kingdom; where they offered Five
Particulars to the Proof.

First, That he had restrained the Importation of Tobacco.

Secondly, That in the mean time he had brought in a great quantity himself,
and sold the same at exorbitant Prices.

Thirdly, That of Tobacco already imported, he had forbidden any to be sold,
but was first sealed by his Officers.

Fourthly, That upon a pretended Disobedience, he had punished a great Number
of People, by Seizures, Imprisonments, Fining, Whipping, Pillory, and such like
cruel and inhumane Vsages.

Fifthly, That by these means he had gained one hundred thousand Pounds yearly.

For Proof hereof,
First, The Proclamation for restraining Tobacco, was read.

Secondly, The Proclamation about the Sealing of the same.

Thirdly, Some Witnesses, who declared that Ships had been restrained from
Landing Tobacco.

Fourthly, Others who had known some Tobacco seized on as forfeited.

Fifthly, The Remonstrance of the House of Commons in Ireland, declaring that
the Earl had sold 500 Tun of Tobacco, which sold at 2 s. 6 d. per pound,
amounts to 100000 l.

They concluded the Charge: That he had sucked up the Blood, and eaten up the
Kings Liege-People, and had by this one point of Oppression, raised greater
Sums to himself, than all the Kings Revenue in that Kingdom extended unto: And
therefore was liable to the Crime of Treason, for troubling the Peace, and
bereaving the People of their Goods, who were entrusted into his Care and
Government.

The Lieutenant's Reply was,
Strafford's Reply.
That his most secret Thoughts were conscious of nothing but of a sincere
intention and endeavor to promote and advance the welfare of that Kingdom;
and withal he conceived (by their leaves) that nothing in that Charge could
have the least reference to Treason; yet as he said before, for removing of all
prejudice, he was content to answer:

First, That long before his coming to Ireland, the same restraint had been of
Tobacco, and the same Impost of eighteen pence per pound, enjoined by King
James.

Secondly, That at that time the Tradesmen for this Commodity paid but twenty
pounds a year to the Crown for the Impost, but now 400 l.

Thirdly, That the Parliament in Ireland 1628, had Petitioned to have this
Impost settled by an Act of State for ever afterward, as a part of the Revenue
of the Crown.

Fourthly, That he had express Command from the King, for issuing those
Proclamations, and therefore could not imagine more danger in them, than in
others for Monopolies in England, in the worst sense.

Fifthly, That the Proclamations were not put forth by himself alone, but by
the whole Councel-Board of Ireland.

Sixthly, That for the Contract of Tobacco, he was so tender of it, that it was
sent over hither, and seen and approved of by the Councel-Board of England,
before it was condiscended to in Ireland.

For the Proclamations; he told them it was his own opinion (and if he failed
in it, he humbly craved pardon, and hoped that it should not be treason to have
no more Judgment than God had bestowed on him) that the King was endued by
God, with a power, to make temporary Laws, and cause the same to be promulgated
for the good of his People, upon sudden emergent occasions to which Laws
obedience is due, till they be abrogated by ensuing Parliaments; that he
restrained no man from importing Tobacco, who was willing to pay the appointed
Impost; that for his part, he had never traffict in all his time, in that kind,
nor had any part with the Contractors: And if any Tobacco was seized on, it was
upon contempt of the Proclamations; And if any Person were censured to the
Pillory, or Whipping, it was for known perjury, the ordinary and usual
punishment in such a Case; concerning the Tobacco imported (he said) no
consideration was taken of the prices given for the Tobacco beyond Seas, of the
Kings Revenue of four thousand pound, of the Merchants pains and danger,
bringing the same home: For his part, if any advantage were made, surely it was
not his, nor could he annul every Contract or Lease made by the King: And
therefore, seeing his interest was none, he had done nothing but at the Kings
directions, and at the advice of the Councel-Board; seeing the same Impost was
in King James his time, and Petitioned for by themselves in Ireland: He hoped
the carriage in the business should be so far from a Crime of Treason, that it
should rather be thought no Crime at all. So much for Wednesday.

Upon Thursday he was Charged with the twelfth Article, concerning Flax,
Thursday Artic. 12. Charge by Maynard.
by Master Maynard, on this manner: That the Flax, being the native and
principal Commodity of that Kingdom, was by him (the Lieutenant) restrained,
and the Subjects put to that which was unknown, yea impossible for the Irish to
make the same into Yarn, here they complained of three things.

First, That by Proclamation he had restrained selling of Flax.

Secondly, That he had ordered the making of Yarn of such and such lengths and
numbers of Threads.

Thirdly, That the Native Irish, being unacquainted with such Customs, upon a
pretended disobedience, had all their Flax and Yarn seized on to his use,
whereby a great many Families were reduced to such penury that they died, by
great numbers in the Fields for want of Food.

For proof hereof they brought:
First, The Proclamation about the Restraint.

Secondly, The Warrant for seizing the forfeited goods.

Thirdly, The Execution of this Warrant, proved by Sir John Clotworthy, Lord
Ranelaugh.

Fourthly, The Remonstrance from the House of Commons, in Ireland, that upon
the rigorous course and execution of this Warrant, many persons died for want
of Food. They concluded the Charge therefore: Though the Article did not
individually imply Treason, yet it did make very much for the Accumulation of
Treason.

The Lieutenants Reply was,
That as before he would and must ever repeat it, Staffords Reply.
that nothing was in the Charge that contained Treason, to the matter it self
he answered.

First, That the Proclamations issued forth, were grounded not only upon
convenience, but upon necessity, because that except some way had been taken
for ordering of Yarn, the Merchants had absolutely given over the Linnen-trade
in that Kingdom.

Secondly, That the Councel-Board was as liable to the Charge as himself,
amongst whom were, at that time, the Primate of Ireland, the Archbishop of
Dublin, Chancellor Loftis and the Lord Mount-Norris, all Subscribers to the
Proclamation, men to them of known integrity and Judgment.

Thirdly, That nothing was more common, then for the Councel-Board of Ireland
to give one Orders for reducing the Natives to the English Customs, and to
fine them for drawing their Horses by the tails, during their Corn, and such
like, and he conceived that to be a thing of the same nature.

Fourthly, That the special thing inducing him to it was, because he perceived
the trade of Wool to increase much in that Kingdom; He dissuaded by all means
the making of Wooles-Cloath, because of the infinite detriment that might
happen thereby to the Kingdom of England, and therefore thought this the best
way to encourage the way of Linen Cloth; For the Warrant to seize upon the
goods, he affirmed the same to be necessary, because there should be no
contempt to Proclamations; But that any part thereof did accrue to him, he
flatly denied; If any rigor was used in the execution, he said not he, but his
Officers were to answer for it; for this might happen in the most just and
necessary commands, nor was there eyer any complaint presented to him of any
such matter; For his part he had lost thirty thousands pounds in the
Manufacture, established by himself for the encouragement of others.

To that, that Persons died by this means, he Replied, that it was more then
ever he heard* or could think possible, yea that he was cleared by the
allegation it self, which says that the same happened since his coming from
Ireland.

To the Remonstrance of Ireland, he conceived that a charge was but a slender
proof of a Charge, and that especially upon Interrogatories, not upon Oath,
seeing that privilege was not due to the House of Commons, neither here, nor
there; that he might say it in truth and modesty, he deserved much better of
that People, and might take up that in the Gospel. For which of all my good
Deeds, etc. Yet he hoped to be better understood shortly, both here and there,
and for his part, though his pursuit had been very hot, yet God was his Witness
he never intended to take the least Impression of Revenge, for those
discontents and affronts which had been eagerly put upon him, or to carry any
thing hence with him from that Bar, where so many foul Aspersions had been
unjustly thrown upon him, but only Gratuitas Cicatricis.

Charge by M^. Palmer, latter part of the 15. Article seizing and laying
Soldiers upon the Subjects.
The same day a fresh man (Master Palmer) entered the Lists against him; who
having past by, for want of proof the thirteenth, fourteenth; and part of the
fifteenth Articles, insisted only upon the second part, for giving Warrant to
Sergeant Savil, for seizing and laying Soldiers upon the Subjects, he Charged
thus That the Lord Strafford, having by a Tyrannical Power inverted the
ordinary course of Justice, and given immediate Sentence upon the Lands and
Goods of the Kings Subjects, under pretense of disobedience, had used a
Military way for redressing of the Contempt, and laid Soldiers upon the Lands
and Goods of the Kings Subjects, to their utter ruin. This Article (he said)
of it self did contain an individual Treason, so that if there were no more
than this, it were more than sufficient to convince him of his Impeachment.

Here he offered two things,
First, The proof of the point.

Secondly, By what Statute this Act of Tyranny, directly and by it self,
employed Treason: For the first, Sergeant Savil was called, who produced the
Copy of the Warrant upon which he had settled the Soldiers.

Straffords Reply.
At this the Lieutenant rose, and humbly entreated the Lords no evidence should
be received against him, upon an Article of such importance, but what might be
thought authentic, and such a one, under favor, he conceived that Copy not
to be.

First, Because no transcript, but the Original only, can make faith before the
Kings Bench, in a matter of Debt, therefore far be it from them to receive a
most slender Testimony, in matter of Life and Death, before the supreme
Judicatory of the Kingdom*

Secondly, If Copies be at any time received, they are such as are given in
upon Oath, to have been compared with the Originals, which are upon Record,
such an one was not that Copy.

Glins Speech.
It was Replied by Master Glin (for all of them spoke as occasion served) that
the House had but the day before admitted Copies as Evidences, much more should
they do this, when it was prosecuted by the Officer himself, who best knew it,
having executed the same.

Straffords Reply.
To this the Lieutenant answered, that all other Copies ought to be received
upon Oath* to have been compared with the Original, as right reason requires,
but that this was not so; and for the Officer himself pro^ucing it, that was
the best Argument he could use, why it should not be admitted. For (said he)
Master- Savil may be charged with Treason, for seizing Men of War upon the
Kings Subjects, he has nothing for his defense but a pretended^Warrant from
me: Now what he swears to my prejudice, is to his own advantage, nor can a Man
by any equity in the World, be admitted to testify against another, in suum
justificationem.

Sergeant Savils Copy of the Commission rejected.
The point seemed exceeding weighty, and in effect was the groundwork of the
whole Article, which not proved, nothing could evince him to have been
accessory to the Consequence* The upper House therefore adjourned themselves,
and went up to their own Court, and after a very hot contestation between the
sactions, and above an hours stay, they returned and declared that the Lords
after mature deliberation* had resolved that the Copy should not be admitted,
and desired them to proceed to other preo^s, which after a little pause they
did,

First, the Lord Renelaugh affirms, that he heard of such a Warrant, and knew
sometimes three, sometimes five Soldiers Billeted by it.

Secondly, Master Clare declares the very same.

Thirdly, Another Deposes he had seen such a Warrant* under the Deputies Hand
and Seal: And so much for the proof.

For the Statute, they alleged one of Edward. 3.6. that whosoever should carry
about with them English Enemies, ^sh R^bels, or Hooded-Men, and less them upon
the Subject, should be punished as a Traitor. Another of Hen. 6.7. That
whosoever should ^ess Men of War, in his Majesty's Dominions, should be thought
to make War against the King, and punished as a Traitor. They concluded* It was
evident the Lord Strafford had incurred the penalty and breach of both the
Statutes, and therefore desired the Lords should give out Judgment against him
as a Traitor.

The Lord Lieutenants Reply was.
Straffords Reply.
That in all the course of his Life, he had intended nothing more, than the
preservation of the Lives, Goods and welfare of the Kings Subjects, and that he
dared profess, that under no Deputy, more than under himself, had there been a
more free, and un-interrupted course of Justice.

To the Charge he answered.
First, That the Customs of Ireland differed exceedingly from the Customs of
England, and was clear by Cooks Book, and therefore, though sessing of Men
might seem strange here yet not so there.

Secondly, That even in England he had known Soldiers pressed upon men, by the
presidents of York and Wales in case of known and open Contempts, and that both
in point of Outlary and Rebellion, and also even for sums of Debt between party
and party, there is nothing more ordinary than these Sessings to this day in
Scotland, whereby the chief house of the owner is seized upon.

Thirdly, That to this day there has been nothing more ordinary in Ireland,
than for the Governors to appoint Soldiers, to put all manner of Sentences in
execution, which he proved plainly to have been done frequently, and familiarly
exercised in Grandisons, Faulklands, Chichesters, Wilmot, Corks, Evers, and all
preceding Deputies times: And had even for Outlaries, for the Kings debts in
the Exchequer, of Collection, of Contribution money, and (which comes home to
the point) for peteet sums of money between party and party, so that he
marvailed, qua front, or with what boldness it could be called an Arbitrary
Government lately brought in by him.

To this the Lord Dillon, Sir Adam Loftis, and Sir Arthur Teringham deposed;
the last of whom told, that in Faulklands time he knew twenty Soldiers Sessed
upon a Man for refusing to pay sixteen shillings sterling.

Fourthly, That in his instructions for executing his Commissions, he has
express warrant for the same, as were in the instructions to the Lord Faukland
before him, both of which were produced and read.

Fifthly, That although all these presidents were not, yet it were not possible
to govern the Kingdom of Ireland otherwise, which had been from all times
accustomed to such summary proceedings.

Sixthly, That no Testimony brought against him can prove that erer he gave
warrant to that effect, and for the Deeds of the Sergeant at Arms, he did
conceive himself to be answerable for it.

As for the Acts of Parliament, he had reserved them to the dispute of his
Lawyers, but was content to say thus much for the present.

First, That it is a ground in the Civil Law, that where the King is not
mentioned, there he cannot be included. But (with all distance to his sacred
Person be it spoken) he conceived himself to be in his Master the Kings place
(for so his Commission did run) in that Kingdom of Ireland.

Secondly, The words of the Statute are not appliable to him, for God knows, he
never went about in person to lay Soldiers upon any of the Kings Subjects.

Thirdly, That the Kings own Soldiers, enquiring in a customary way obedience
to his Orders, could in no construction be called Irish-Rebels, English
Enemies, or Hooded-men.

Fourthly, That the use and custom of the Law was the best Interpreter thereof,
and for that he had already spoken enough.

Fifthly, That it favored more of prejudice than equity, to start out such an
old Statute against him, and none others, though culpable of the same Fact, to
the overthrow and ruin of him and his Posterity.

Sixthly, That (under favor he conceived) for any Irish Custom, or upon any
Irish Statute, he was to be judged by the Peers of Ireland.

Seventhly, That Statute, of what force soever, was repealed.

First, By the Tenth of Henry the Seventh, where it is expressly declared,
nothing shall be reputed Treason hereafter, but what is so declared by the
present Statute, now not a word there of any such Treason.

Secondly, By the eleventh of Queen Elizabeth, where expressly power is given to
the Deputy of Ireland, to sess and lay Soldiers, although the same be reputed
Treason in any other.

To the Statute of Henry the Sixth, he Replied, that a slender Answer might
serve: He hoped that no man would think him so inconsiderate to war against the
King of Britain and Ireland, by the sessing of five Soldiers, that he had been
charged by many for taking Arms for the King, but to that time, never for
taking Arms against him; and that he heartily wished that no man in all his
Majesty's Dominions, had more practices with Rebels and Rebellious Designs
against the King than himself. So much for Thursday.

'At the Close he desired the intermission of a day, that he might recollect
his Spirits and 'Strength against the next Quarrel, and with some difficulty
obtained rest till Saturday.

Upon Saturday Mr. Palmea proceeded to the sixteenth Article, and Charged thus:
Saturday. Charge. Article 1^. by Mr. Palmer.
That the Lord Strafford, having established a Tyrannical and Independent
Authority, by giving Summary Decrees and Sentences, had deprived the Subject of
all just Remedy; for in that Kingdom there was none supreme to himself, to whom
they might appeal; and lest their just grievances might be made known to His
Majesty, he had obtained* a Restraint, That no complaint should be made of
Injustice or Oppression done there, till the first Address had been made to
himself, and that no person should come out of that Kingdom but upon License
obtained from himself.

For Proof of this,
First, the Instructions were read, whereby that Restraint was permitted.

Seconly, the Proclamation, That all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Undertakers,
Officers, or other Subjects that should resort into that Kingdom, should not
come from thence without a License from him.

Thirdly, That he had restrained the Earl of Desmond, because of a Suit in Law
depending between the Earl and himself, till Publication of the same was passed.

Fourthly, That the Lord Roch, being informed against before the Star Chamber,
he would not License him to come into this Kingdom, till the Sentence was
passed against him.

Fifthly, Than one Marchatee, having pretended a mind to travel, was denied a
License.

Sixthly, That the whole Committee for the Parliament, was restrained this last
year by Deputy Waniford, which they said might be interpreted to be his Fact,
both because they had such intelligence the one from the other, as also by the
Proclamation issued by him before.

Seventhly, That one Parry, Servant to Chancellor Loftis, was fined five
hundred pounds at his return, for departing Ireland without License.

Eighthly, That the Irish Remonstrance complained of this, as the greatest
Innovation and Thraldom put upon them since the time of the Conquest.

They concluded the Charge; That by this means, having taken of that
Intelligence which should be between the King and his People, and having
deprived them of that Remedy which in Reason they might expect from so Just and
so gracious a Prince he had taken upon him a Royal and Independent Power, and
had faulted highly both against King and State.

The Lievtenants Reply was,
Straffords Reply.
That he hoped to make it clear, that he had done nothing in that particular,
but what was usual, necessary and just, and that he should be very well able
(by the Grace of God) not only of that, but of all other his public Actions,
to give a reasonable Account, though not be free from much weakness, yet
certainly from oll Malice and Treason.

To the Particulars.
First, For Instructions laid upon him, he was not so much Chargeable as those
of the Council of England, whereof there was a great many present who could
witness their Commands; but lest any thing should seem unjustly enjoined by
them, or embraced by him, he desired that the Reasons of their Instructions
might be read: which were; That it were Injustice to complain of Injuries, of
Oppression done in that Kingdom, till first the Deputies Judgment was informed,
and Trial made of his Integrity; That it would much discourage the Ministers of
State there, and expend the Moneys of that Kingdom, if upon every trifling
business Complaints should be admitted in England: And that if Justice were
there denied by the Deputy, it should be lawful for any man to come over.

Secondly, For the Proclamation: That the same was builded upon the Statute of
that Kingdom, the 25 of Hen. 6. which contained the same Restraint verbatim.

Thirdly, That Anno 1628. the Agents for the Irish Nation had Petitioned for
the same from the King.

Fourthly, That the Deputy Faulkland had set forth the same Proclamation.

Fifthly, That he had the Kings express Warrant for it, Anno 1634. which was
read.

Sixthly, That he had received the Warrant in January, yet the Proclamation
issued not out till September after.

Seventhly, That the whole Council Board of Ireland, had not only condescended,
but also pressed him to it.

Eighthly, The Necessity of the Kingdom required the same; for, if the Gentlemen
had the Ports open to go to Spain, and their Scholars to Doway, Rhemes or St.
Omers, it were likely that at their return they would put fire both in Church
and State, and produce very sad Events, by practicing to distemper both.

Ninthly, He conceived that the King, as great Master of the Family, might
restrain whom he pleased from departing his Kingdom without his privity, and
here it was not lawful for any to go from England without License, how much
more necessary was this from Ireland?

To the Proofs he answered,
First, For Desmond, he granted he was Restrained indeed, but not for any Suit
of Law betwixt them, but because at that time he stood Charged with Treason
before the Council in Ireland for practicing against the Life of one Sir
Valentine Cook.

Secondly, For the Lord Roch, he had oftentimes marvailed with what reason the
man at that time could seek a License, seeing he was a Prisoner for Debt in the
Castle of Dublin; and if he had granted a License to him then, it had been a
far more just Charge of Treason than now.

Thirdly, For Marcattee, he was afraid of his going to Spain; and if he had
intended to go for England, and complain of himself, he would not have refused
him Liberty, as he never did to any.

Fourthly, That the Committy of Irish was not restrained by him, and therefore
did not concern him at all

Fifthly, That for Parry, he was fined indeed, but that it is expressly said in
his Sentence, that it was not for coming over without License (as is suggested)
but for sundry contempts against the Councel-Board in Ireland.

Sixthly, That he had Replied in the last Article, a Remonstrance was no proof
at all; He concluded that he hoped the least Suspicion of Treason could not
accrue to him from the Article; For Oppression or Misdemeanour, when it was
laid to his Charge, he made no doubt but he should be able to answer it.

The same day a new man was hurried out against him; Whitlocks Charge Article
19. Oath to Scots in Ireland.
(Mr. Whitlock) who hav^ng past over the 17 and 18 Articles, rests on the
nineteenth, about the Oath administered to the Scots, in Ireland and Charged
thus:

That it was the height of his Tyranny, not only to dominier over the Bodies,
but also over the Consciences of Men, to which purpose he had enjoined an Oath
to the Scots in Ireland, and because some out of tenderness of Conscience did
refuse to take the ^ame, he had fined them in great Sums of Money, Banished a
great number from that Kingdom, called all that Nation Traitors and Rebels, and
said, if ever he returned home from England, he would root them out both Stock
and Branch.

For Proof of this.
First, Sir Jammy Mountgomery was produced, who declared at large how that Oath
was contrived.

Secondly, Sir Robert Maxwell, of Orchiardon, who spoke to the same purpose.

Thirdly, Sir Jo. Clotworthy, who declared that a great number had fled the
Kingdom for fear of that Oath.

Fourthly, One Mr. Samuel, who deposed, that upon the tenth of October, 1638.
He heard the D^puty say these words, that if he returned, he would root them
out Stock and Branch.

They Concluded, That this was a point of the most Tyrannical and Arbitrary
Government, that before this time was ever heard of, not only to Lord it over
the Fortunes, but also over the Souls of Men. And that it rested only in the
Parliament, which has the Legislative Power to enjoyne Oaths: And that
therefore this was one of the chief points he had done against the Privileges
and Liberty of the Subject.

The Lieutenant Replied:
That every new Article acquainted him with a new Treason, Straffords Reply.
that if he had done any thing in all his life acceptable to the King and
Country, he conceived it to be this. To these Particulars:

First, He desired the Lord would call to mind the condition of those times, no
than (pointing to my Lord Steward) knows better than your Lordship, who had
then the chiefest place in his Majesty's Service; I would be very sorry to rub
(said he) old Sores, especially seeing I hope things are in a fair way to a
firm Peace, and I wish that I may not be deceived, that is, that it may be so,
only thus much I may say, we had then greater fears and apprehensions in
Ireland, left the Scots in the Kingdom (who were above one hundred thousand
Souls) might have joined with their Contrymen at home, for the disturbance
of our Peace, mean time we detected a Treason of Betraying of the Castle of
Knockfergus, to a great Man in that Kingdom (whose name I now spare) by one
Freeman, who upon the discovery was executed.

The Councel-Board therefore in Ireland resolved to prescribe the Scots an
Oath, whereby they might declare their discontent at their Countrey-mens
proceedings, and obliege themselves to the Kings Service; but while we were
about this; they, of their own accord, come to Dublin, to Petition for it, and
took it with a wonderful alacrity and heartiness, so that it is a marvelous
falsehood for any man to say it was invented, or violently enjoined by me.

Secondly, about the same time, the same Oath verbum verbo was by the Council
of England prescribed to the Scots, at London and else where, which was no
small encouragement to us in Ireland.

Thirdly, I had (said he) which I never showed, because I had no need before
this time, a special Warrant from the King, all Written with his own hand to
that effect; and when the King commands a matter not contrary to Law, truly I
(said he) do conceive it both contrary to Law and Conscience, not to yield him
all due obedience. For the Proof brought against him, there was nothing seemed
to be of any moment but the words.

For the first words, That he had called all the Nation Rebels and Traitors, He
said there was no proof at all, nor indeed could there be any, for if I had
said it (quoth he) I had been perfectly out of my Wits; And, he thanked God,
such irrational-speeches used not to escape him: He honored that Kingdom very
much, because it was the native soil of our dread Sovereign, his gracious
Master, and because he knew a part, yea (he hoped) the greatest part of them
had been, and ever will be as loyal and dutiful to the King, as any other of
his Subjects; and of those too who had subscribed that unhappy combination, he
knew a great many had done it against their hearts and wills, and would be ever
ready upon occasion to remonstrate the same, by adhering to the Kings service:
So that this accusation was nothing but a wrestling and perverting h^s words
and meaning, of purpose to make him odious, and irritate a whole Nation against
him.

For the other words, they were proved only by one Witness, which could make no
sufficient faith, and that Witness too he would evince, if not of perjury, yet
of a notable mistake; For he had sworn positively that he had spoken these
words the tenth of October, whereas he was come out of Ireland into England the
twelfth of September before, and was at London the one and twentieth.

For th^se that had fled the Kingdom because of that Oath he knew none such,
and if they did, they fled into Scotland, which might sufficiently argue their
Intentions and Resolutions; For his part, if they were not willing to give that
Testimony of their Loyalty to their Prince, although he had known of their
Departure, he would have been very loath to have kept them against their wills,
but should have been gladly rid of them, and have made them a Bridge to be gone
rather than stay.

Monday Article 20 the next (...) crowded together.
Upon Monday Master Whitlock Proceeded to the 20 Article, and told him, that
because the matter was intervenient, and consimilis nature, they had resolved
to join the five next Articles together, because all of them tended to one
point or period, that is, to show what bad Design he had to have subdued the
Kingdoms both of Scotland and England by force of Arms, and to reduce them to
that arbitrary Government he had lately introduced into Ireland.

The Lieutenant entreated that they would proceed according to the order
prescribed by the House, which was Article by Article; He said five Articles
were many, the matter weighty, his Memory Treacherous, his Jugment weak.

Glyn^ Honey Comb interposed. Straffords Reply.
It was bitterly replied my Master Glin, that it did not become the Pris^ner at
the Bar, to prescribe them in what way they should give in their Evidences.

The Lieutenant modestly answered, that if he stood in his place, he would
perhaps crave the like favor, unless his abilities did furnish him with more
strength than he could find in himself; for his part he was contented they
should proceed any way, always provided they would grant him a competent time
for Replying.

Then Whitlock went on and told the Lords, that something in those Articles
concerned the Scottish, something the English Nation, that which concerned the
Scottish, he reduced to five heads.

First, That the Deputy had said at the Councel-Board, that the Scots demands
contained sufficient (...) to persuade to an offensive War.

Secondly, Thus the same demands did strike at the Root and Life of Monarchical
Government, and were only to be answered by the Sword.

Thirdly, That he had caused some Scottish Goods and Ships, to be seized on in
Ireland.

Fourthly, That he had engaged the Irish Parliament, by their Declaration, in
that War against the Scots.

Fifthly, That by all possible means, he had put had thoughts and Suspicions
into his Majesty against his Scottish Subjects, and labored to make a National
quarrel between them and England, which, if the Kings Piety, and the Prudence
of better affected Statesmen had not prevented, could not have been s^erd up
again without much Blood.

Concerning England, his Speeches were either before or after the Parliament.

First, Before his Creature and Bosom friend Sir George Ratcliff, he had said
to Sir Robert King, when he was doubting how the King might have Moneys to pay
his Armies, that the King had four hundred thousand pounds in his Purse, thirty
Thousand Men in the Field, and his Sword by his side, and if he wanted Money
afterward who will pity him.

Secondly, That his Brother Sir George Wentworth had said to Sir Robert
Be^ington, upon the dissolution of the last Parliament, that seeing the English
would not grant supply to the King, it seems they were weary of their Peace,
and desired to be conquered a second time.

Thirdly, That he himself, upon a discourse with the Primate of Ireland, had
said, that he was much of the mind of those English Divines, who maintained it
lawful for a King, having tried the affection and benevolence of his People,
and then denied their help, upon an inevitable necessity and present danger of
the Kingdom, that he might use his Prerogative for his own supply, and the
defense of his Subjects.

Fourthly, To the Lord Conway, in a Discourse he had said, That if the
Parliament (meaning the last Parliament) should not grant a competent Supply,
that then the King was Acquitted before God and Man, and might use the
Authority put into his hands.

Fifthly, That he did say at the Council Board, If the Parliament should deny
to help the King, he would take any other way be could for his Majesty's
Service and Assistance.

His Expressions after the Parliament were two;
First, That the Parliament had forsaken the King, and that the King should not
suffer himself to be over-mastered by the frowardness, obstinacy and
stubbornness of his People.

Secondly, That if his Majesty pleased to employ Forces, he had some in Ireland
that might serve to reduce this Kingdom.

The Proofs for the Scots Particulars were these:
First, The Lord Traquiere, who was indeed very favorable to the Lord
Lieutenant, and spoke nothing to his Disadvantage, but what was scrued from
him, with much difficulty he told them, That when he gave in the Demands, he
heard him say, that it was high time for the King to put himself into a posture
of War, but that first, all the Council of England said the same as well as he:
secondly, That it was a double Supposition; 1. That the Demands were truly
given in 2. That there was no other Remedy left but Arms, to reduce them.

Secondly, The Earl of Morton's Testimony (being sick himself) was produced,
and it was one and the same with the Article.

Thirdly, Sir Henry Vane was examined, who declared, That he had heard the
Lieutenant to advise the King to an Offensive War, when his own Judgment was
for a Defensive.

Fourthly, The Testimony of the Earl of Northumberland was produced, which was
the very same with Sir Henry Vane's.

Fifthly, The Treasurer of England deposed the same with Traquiere.

Sixthly, One Bean, from Ireland, told, That he had known Ships seized on
there; but by whose Procurement or Warrant he knew not.

To the Articles about England.
First, Sir Robert King and the Lord Renelaugh deposed the same, that Sir
Robert King and the Lord ^enelaugh had heard Sir George Ratcliffe speak those
words in the Article.

Secondly, Sir Robert Barrington, of Sir George Wentworth.

Thirdly, The Primate's Testimony (who is sick) was the same with the Article.

Fourthly, The Lord Conway deposed the same with the Article.

Fifthly, Sir Henry Vane deposed, He had heard those Words spoken at the
Council Board.

For the Words spoken after the Parliament: To the first,
Sir Tho. Jermyne, Lord Newburg, Earl of Bristol, Earl of Holland were
Examined; Bristol did mince the Matter; but Holland's Testimony was express,
because of the exceeding great Love he carried to the Man.

For the last, which were the most dangerous Speeches (about the reducing of
this Kingdom) there was only Sir Henry Vane's Testimony, who declared only
thus, That he had either those Words or the like.

Here some of the Lieutenants Friends showed themselves.
1. The Lord Savil, who desired of Sir Hen^y Vane, to know whether he said
their, or this, or that Kingdom; and withal said, it was very hard to condemn a
man for Treason upon such petit Circumstances.

2. The Earl of Southampton desired to know whether Sir Henry Vane would swear
those words positively or not? Sir Henry Vane said positively either them or
the like: The Earl replied, that under favor, those or the like could not be
positive.

3. The Earl of Clare desired to know what could be meant by this Kingdom; for
his part (he said) he thought it meant of the Kingdom of Scotland* to which the
Word this might very well be relative, that Kingdom being only mentioned in the
preceding Discourse. And that he was the more ready to be of that Opinion,
because he could not see by what Grammatical Construction it could be gathered
from his words, that he meant to reduce England, which neither then was,
neither is now (God be thanked) out of the way of Obedience, nor upon
Rebellious Courses.

They at last concluded the Charge, That the Words were so monstrous, that to
aggravate them* was to allay them; and therefore they would simply leave them
to the Judgment of the Lords.

The Lieutenant's Reply was;
That though the heaping up of those Articles had put him to a great Confusion,
Strafford 's Reply.
yet he would endeavor to bring his Answer into the best Method he could, and
first he would reply to the Proo^, then add something in general for himself,
in what a hard taking and lamentable Condition he was to have his private
Discourses, his most intimate and bosom friends searched and sisted to the
least Circumstance, that he might seem guilty of that which, by God's
assistance, he should never be.

To the Lord Traquieres, and the Deputies Depositions, he thought their Proofs
did not much stick upon him; for upon the Suppositions, first, That the Demands
were true; secondly, That they were not justifiable; thirdly, That no other
Course could prevail: He could not see what other Advice he could possibly give
the King, than to put himself into a posture of War, especially seeing then
there was frequent Reports of the Scots invading or entering into England, nor
was he of any other mind than all the rest of the Council Board.

For that of Morton's* he does not positively remember the Words, but if the
Demands were read, perhaps they would imply nothing less; and if so, how
otherwise to be answered but by the Sword; all other Means being first assayed,
which is ever to be supposed?

For Sir Henry Vane's and Northumberland's Testimony, about persuading of an
Offensive War, he said, he remembered it very well, and thought it as free for
him to give his Opinion or an Offensive as they for a Defensive War: Opinions
(said he) if they be attended with Obstimacy or Pertinacy, may make an
Heretic, but that they ever made a Traitor, he never heard it till now; nor
(under favor) should I be an Heretic either (said he) for as I was then, so
am I now, most willing to acknowledge my Weakness, and correct my Errors,
whereof no man has more, or is more sensible of them, than I my self: yet, if
that Opinion of mine had been followed, it might perhaps have spared us some
Money (said he) and some Reputation too, of which we have been prodigal enough.

For the last, about the Ships, it proves nothing but he would willingly
confess, that some Ships were there detained, and that by himself, and his own
Direction, as Vice Admiral of Connaugh, but it was at the Command of the Lord
Admiral the Earl of Northumberland, and produced his Letter to that purpose.

To the English Proof, He marvelled much how Sir George Ratcliff's Words could
be put upon him; Sir George (though alleged to be his Bosom Friend) yet had
thoughts of his own, and might have some other thoughts in his Bosom, and be to
some other Expressions than Sir George Ratcliffe: No man (said he) can commit
Treason by his Attorney, and should I, by my Friend Sir George, as by a Proxy?

For his Brother, He never knew him before so rash; but that was nothing to
him; except they could prove a nearer Identity than Nature had instituted, and
that his Brother's Words and his were ^ll one; yet withal he conceived that his
Brother's Words might be very well understood, of the Scots conquering England,
but not at all of the Irish; and so he wished with all his heart, that he had
not spoken something which is like a Prophecy.

To the Primate's Testimony (with all Reverence to his Integrity be it spoken)
he is but one Witness, and in Law can prove nothing; Add to this (said he) that
it was a private Discourse between him and me, and perhaps spoken by me
Tentandi gratia, and how far this should be laid to a man's Charge, let your
Lordships judge.

Yea, this seems to me against Humanity it self, and will make the Society of
men so dangerous and loathsome to us, that our Dwelling Houses will be turned to
Cells, and our Towns to Defarts: That which God and Nature (our Tongues) have
bestowed upon us [for the greater comfort of venting our own Conceptions, or
craving the Advice of Wiser and Learnecer men] should become Snares and Burdens
to us, by a curious and needless Fear; yet if my Words be taken, said he, with
all that went before and followed after, I see no danger in it.

To the Lord Conway I may reply the same, with this Addition, That it is a very
Natural Motion, for a man to preserve himself: every Greature has this
Privilege; and shall we deny it to Monarchy, provided this be done in a
lawful, though in an extraordinary way? This grain of Salt must be added to
season all my Discourse.

To that of Sir Henry Vane, of offering my Service to the King, I thank him for
the Testimony, and think he has done me much honor thereby; but if he or any
body else do suspect that his Majesty will employ me in unlawful Enterprises, I
shall think them more liable to the Charge of Treason than my self,

To the subsequent Testimonies, I shall not need to wrestle about them much,
only the last of Sir Henry Vanes pinches, and lies sore upon me, but to that
which the Earl of Clare (and I thank him for it) has said already, give me
leave to add this, that the Testimony of one man is not a sufficient Witness,
nor can a man be Accused, much less Condemned, of Treason, upon this, and for
that read the Stat. of Hen. 7.12. and of Edw 6.5.

Now my Lords (said he) to give you further satisfaction, I shall desire all
the Lords of the Council, which were then present (only to the number of eight)
may be examined whether they heard these words or not, for the Archbishop and
Sir Francis Windebank they cannot be had, Sir Henry Vane gives the Testimony, I
deny it, four only remain.

First, The Earl of Northumberlands Testimony, which was read, had declared
expressly that he had never heard those words, nor any like them from the Lord
Strafford, but he spoke with great Honor and regard to the Kingdom of England.

Secondly, the Marquess Hamilton, who declared upon his Oath, that he had never
heard such words, but that he had heard the Lieutenant often say, that the King
was to rule his Royal Power Candide and Cast, that it would never be well for
this Kingdom, till the Prerogative of the Crown, and the Privilege of the
Subject went in one pace together, and that Parliaments were the happiest way
to keep a correspondency between the King and People.

The very same was delivered by the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Cottington.

Now, my Lords, you may mervail how these words rested only on the ears of Sir
Henry Vane, but my Lords, said he, that I may remove all scruple from you, I
will make it evident that there was not the least intention that the Irish Army
should set a foot in England, and then I hope you will conceive that I had no
meaning to reduce this Kingdom.

This he made clear by the Testimony of Northumberland, the Oaths of Marquess
H^milton, Lord Cottington, Lord Treasurer, Sir Thomas Lucas, who only were
private to that matter.

For other of my words my Lords (said he) I desire you would not take them by
halves, if so, who should be free from Treason? Certainly, if such a precident
take sooting, Westminster Hall shall be more troubled with Treason then with
Common Law, look therefore to the Antecedents and Consequents of my Speeches,
and you shall find the state of the question clearly altered; the Antecedents
were upon an absolute or inevitable necessity, upon a present Invasion, when
the remedy of a Parliament cannot be expected; the Consequents for the defense
of the Kingdom, which acompts afterward to the Parliament. The qualifications
too in a lawful, convenient, and ordinary way, so far as the present necessity
can permit. Add but these, and which of you are not of my mind? Is the King
endowed with no power from the Lord? Is he not publicus inspector Regni? Stands
it not him in hand to do something on present necessities.

And that these were his words he often proved, over and over again, by the
Marquess, by the Lord Treasurer, Cottington, Sir Tho. Jermine.

My Lords, what I have kept to the last (said he) is this, and I would entreat
you seriously to think of it; If a man's Table, his Bed, his House, his Brother,
his Friends (and that too after they have given an Oath of Secrecy) to be Ra^^
to find out Treason against him, who never knew what it meant, what earthly Man
shall pass free from Treason? Let my misfortune my Lords, be your
advertisement, your wise Ancestors were glad to put bands and limits to this
Lion Treason, if you give him the large scope of words to range into, he will
at last pull you or yours all to pieces.

But my Lords, I did never think till now, that matter of Opinion should be
objected as matter of Treason.

For, first Opinions are free, and Men may argue both pro and eon, in all
faculties without any stain of his Reputation, otherwise all consultations
would be vain.

Secondly, I may be of another Judgment then I declare my self to be of
opinion, perhaps to gain better Arguments for the maintenance of my own Grounds.

Thirdly, Many, and my self often times, have propounded my Opinion, yet upon
hearing better Judgments have presently changed it.

Fourthly, We use to strain our Opinions too ^igh, sometimes, that we may meet
in a just moderation with those whom we conceive in the other extremity to be
too low.

Fifthly, It is expressly commanded by the Stat. Hen. 6.9. That though a Man
should say the King is not lawful Heir to the Crown, and may be deposed, yet he
is not to be charged with Treason, but only with Felony, and I hope my Lords,
those words are of a more trans^endent and superlative nature, than any
alleged by me to be spoken: But my Lords (said he) lay it to your hearts it
must come to you, you and your posterity are they whom God and Nature, Birth
and Education have fitted to beautify the Royal Throne, and to sustain the
weighty affairs of the Kingdom, if to give your Opinions in Political
Agitations shall be accounted Treason, who will be willing to serve the King,
or what a dilemma are you in; If, being sworn Counselors, you spoke not your
minds freely you are convict of perjury, if you do* Perhaps, of Treason. What
detriment! What Incommodity shall fall to King and Kingdom, if this be
permitted? Which of you hereafter will adventure, yea dare adventure, so much
as to help by your advise, unless you be weary of your Lives, your Estates,
your Posterity, yea your very Honor; Let me never live longer than to see this
confusion, yea I may say it, this inhumanity in England, for my part (my Lords)
I here confess my self, I ever have, and ever shall spa^k my opinion ^ely, in
any thing that may concern the Honor and safety, either of my gracious King or
my deer Country, though the Sword be two Edged, fearing rather him that
kills the Soul, than him (...) power reaches only to the body.

Nor do I see how I am culpable of Treason, unless it be Treason for not being
Infallible, and if it be so, my Lords, you have this rag of mortality before
you, laden with many infirmities; though you pull this into shreds, yet their
is no great loss, yea there may be a great gain, if by the same I may seem to
have dared to far, to give a Testimony to the World of of an Innocent
Conscience toward God, and a Resolute loyalty toward my Prince [which have
ever been my only Pol^ st^r^ in the whole course of my life] and if by spilling
of mine, there be not a way found how to trace out the Blood of the Nobillity
(which I hope your Lordships will look too) there is no disadvantage at all
suffered by the loss of me. You have his very words as near as I could
recollect.

Tuesday was a day of Rest.
Wednesday Whitlocks Charge.
Upon Wednesday Whitlock Charged thus: That the preceding Articles were of so
high a consequence, and of so transcendent a Nature, that nothing wanted to
make up the perfect measure of the most horrid Treason, and monstrous Attempt
that ever, by a Native, was intended against his King and Country: But putting
these designed projects into Execution, which had undoubtedly happened to the
ruin and Subversion both of Church and State, had not the clemency and
goodness of the Prince, and the Piety and carefulness of the well affected
Peers timously foreseen and prevented the same; that still the Principles of
Tyranny and Oppression had lodged within his (...), and therefore had burst
forth into these expressions and advises contained in the following Articles,
where first, in the twenty fifth, they Charged him with three things.

First, That ^e had advised the King to a rigorous and unlawful exaction of
Ship Money.

Secondly, That he had given Council, that if the Sherifs should deny their
best endeavors, and assistances to that effect, they should be sent for and
fined by the Star Chamber, and Imprisonment.

Thirdly, That when the Aldermen of London, had in all humillity represented
the Causes why the Ship Money could not be collected amongst them, and had
given in the Reasons why the refused to give in a List of their names, within
their City, who were able to afford the Loan-Money; He in a contemptuous and
Tyrannical manner, in the face of the Councel-Board had said to the King. Sir*
These Men because of their obstinacy and frowardness, deserved very well to be
fined, ransomed and laid by the heels, And it will never go well with your
service, until some of them be hanged up for examples to others.

The Proofs were these:
First, The Bishop of Laden, Lord Treasurer, who declared that he remembered the
words very well, that the Lord Lieutenant had advised the King to cause the
Ship Money to be gathered in, but he remembered withal, that both himself and
all the Council had done the like, and that it was upon a present necessity,
and defect of Money, for entertaining the Army, which (the condition of the
times considered) they all conceived, was by any means to be kept on foot.

Secondly, Alderman Wiseman declared, that upon an humble Remonstrance made to
the Council Board, the City would take it ill, if a Tax-role should be
delivered of their Estates, who were thought able for the Loan Money; the Lord
Strafford said, they deserved to be fined, Ransome^, and laid by the Heels, but
for the words of hanging them up, he heard not at all.

Thirdly, The Earl of Barkshire declared, that the Lord Strafford had said,
that upon the refusal of such a service enjoined by the Kings Peremptory
Command, it was his Opinion, they might be fined.

Fourthly, Alderman G^^way attested the preceding words, and ^ithal added,
that the Lord Lieutenant, to his best remembrance, had said, It were well for
the Kings service if some of them were hanged up.

They closed the Charge, That by such undutiful Expressions, he had injured the
propriety of the Subject, and had put such discontent upon the City, that they
were the less willing upon any occasion to (...) for the advantage of the Kings
Service.

The Lieutenant Replied:
First, That though all the Charge were, Straffords Reply.
in the most strict and rigid way o^ sense verified against him, yet he could
not conceive by what Interpretation of Law it could be rech't home to
High Treason, and to that common objection (that the Treason was not individual
but Accumulative) he replied that under favor he thought to that manner, were
as much as to say, no Treason at all: Because,

First, That neither in Statute Law, Common Law, nor practice, there was ever,
till this time, heard of such a matter as Accumulative-Treason, or a Treason-by
way of Consequence, but that it is a word newly coined to attend a Charge newly
invented, such an one as never was before.

Secondly, That Treason was a thing of a simple and specificative nature, and
therefore could not be so by accumulation, but either must be so in some, or
either of the Articles, or else could not be so at all.

Thirdly, He did conceive that it was against the first principles of Nature,
and false; therefore could not be so by Accumulation, but either must be so in
some or each of the Articles, or else could not be so at all. That a heap, or
Accumulation, should be and not be of Homo-genous things, and therefore that
which, in its first being, is not treasonable, can never confer to make up an
accumulative Treason. Cumulus, an heap of Grain, so called because every, or at
last some of the individuals are grain, if otherways, an heap it may be, but
not an heap of Grain: Just so, perhaps these Articles may make up an heap of
Felonies, Oppressions, Errors, Mis^demeanors, and such like (and to the thing
it self I shall give an answer when, under that name, they shall be Charged
against me) but they can no ways confer to the making up of Treason, unless
some, at the least, be Treason in the Individual.

Secondly, That the Testimonies brought against him, were all of them single,
not two one way, and therefore could not make Faith in matter of Debt, much
less in matter of Life and Death; yea, that it was against the Statute
expressly, to impeach a Man of High Treason under the evidence of two famous
Witnesses, much less to adjudg and convince him upon attestation of one.

Thirdly, To the Lord-Treasurers Testimony, he did with all his heart
condescend unto it, but upon shese grounds only, that there was a present
necessity of Money, that all the Councel-Board had so voiced with him, yea
before himself, and he always thought it Presumption in a Man, not to follow
the wiser and more judicious, and that there was than a Sentence of the
Star Chamber, for the right of paying Ship Money; for his part, he would never
be more prudent then his teachers, nor give Judgment against the Judges, and
therefore he thought it not far amiss to advise the King for the collecting of
that, which by Law was his own, in such a present and urgent necessity, and
although his opinion (and it was no more) had been amiss, he hoped, that though
in case of Religion, being attended with stubbornness and pertinacy, it might
come home to Heresy, yet in his case opinion could not reach so far as
Treason; unless it be Treason for a Man to spoke his Judgment freely, when he
is upon his Oath to do the same.

Fourthly, For the words about fining, he had already acknowledged in his
general Answers to be true, but with these qualifications, that it was his
opinion only, that it was upon the refusal (as he conceived) of a just service,
that he had spoken them, by no means to prejudice the Citizens, but to make
them the more quick and active in the Kings service* that no ill consequence at
all happened upon them; that they were words might have been spared indeed, but
innocently, though suddenly, spoken; which he hoped might proceed from a Man of
such a hasty and incircumspect humor as himself (made so both by nature, and
his much infirmity of body) without any mind at all to Treasen, and that if all
Chollerick expressions, of that nature, should be accounted treasonable, there
would be more suits, of that kind, fly up and down Westminster Hall, then
Common Law.

Fifthly, To those words attested by the Alderman, he positively denied rhem,
and hoped they should never rise up against him in Judgment, because the
Testimony was single and not positive, but only to his best remembrance, and
that it was exceeding strange, that not any one man, neither of the Council or
other Aldermen were so quick to observe them, but only Alderman Garway, which
he thought sufficient to nullify that single Testimony, except he could
demonstrate himself to have some rare and singular faculty of hearing.

In the Close, He desired the Lords, from his misfortune, to provide for their
own safety, and seriously to consider what a way was chalked out to ruin them
both in their Lives and Estates, if for every opinion given in Council, or
words suddenly or hastily spoken, they (who are born to weild the great affairs
of the Kingdom) should be Arraigned and Sentenced as Traitors.

Then they went to the twenty sixth Article and Charged thus:
Charge Article 26.
That the Lord Strafford, having by his wicked advises exhausted the Kings
Treasury, did also Council him:

First, To imbase the Coin, by an allay of Copper-Money.

Secondly, To seize upon all the Bulloin in the Mint.

Thirdly, That in discourse with some of the Aldermen, about that business, he
had said, the City was more ready to countenance and relieve the Rebels than
the King; and that the King of France did use to manage such businesses, not by
Treaties or Requests, but by sending forth his Commissaries to take Account of
Men's Estates, accompanied with Troops of Horses.

The Proofs were.
First, Sir Thomas Edwards, who declared, that in discourse with the Lord
Strafford, having remonstrated unto him, that their goods were seized on beyond
Seas, because of the Money taken out of the Mint; he told him that if the
Londoners suffered it, it was deservedly, because they had refused the King a
small Loan of Money upon good security, and that he thought them more ready to
help the Rebels than the King.

Secondly, Mr. Palmer declared that he spoke something about the King of
France, but whether with relation to England or not, he did not remember.

Thirdly, Sir William Parkise attested in the same words, and withal that the
Lord Cottington was then present, and could declare the whole business.

Fourthly, Sir Ralph Freeman declared, that in a discourse with the Lord
Strafford he had said that the servants in the Mint-house would refuse to work
the Copper Money, and he replied, that then it were well to send those Servants
to the House of Correction.

They closed the Charge, That by such undutiful Council and words, he had given
more then sufficient proof, of his Design and purpose to subdue this Kingdom,
and subvert the Fundamental Laws, and Privileges of the same.

The Lieutenants Reply.
First, That he had expected some proofs about the two first particulars, but
did hear of none, Straffords Reply.
and that it was no small disadvantage to him, to be charged with a great many
odious Crimes, by a Book Printed, and flying from hand to hand, through the
whole Kingdom, yet when they came to prove there should be no such thing laid
against him.

Secondly, About the Speeches. He ingeniously confessed that some such thing
might perhaps have escaped the door of his lips, when he saw their backwardness
to his Majesty's Service, and as the times were then conditioned he did not
think it much amiss to call that faction by the name of Rebels, but yet he
thought he had abundantly satisfied for that oversight, (if it was any) at
York: For having understood there that the City of London were willing to make
a Loan of Money, he there before the great council of the Peers, expressed
himself to this sense, that the Londoners had sufficiently made up all their
delays hitherto by their Act that the King was obliged to their forwardness,
and that he himself should be as ready to serve them as any poor Gentleman in
England: About the other words he said, that being in conference with some of
the Londoners, there came at that time to his hands a Letter from the Earl of
Leicester, then at Paris, wherein were the Gazets enclosed, reporting that the
Cardinal had given some such order, as to leavy Money by forces, this he said
he only told the Lord Cottington standing by without the last application or
intention concerning the English Affairs, Cottington being examined upon this,
declared the same in the same manner.

Thirdly, to Sir Ralph Freeman, he said, that his Testimony did not concern the
Charge at all, nor did he think any thing amiss in it, though he had said it;
if the Servants of the Mint refused (...) work, according to directions they
did deserve the House of Correction, nor was it Treasonable to say the King
might use that House for the Correction of his Servants, as well as any Man in
the City for theirs.

Fourthly, He said that there was no great likelihood that he had committed
real Acts of Treason, when his adverse party was content to trifle away so much
time about words, neither was there any Treason in them, though they had been
fully verified, and therefore in that (as in all other Articles) he reserved a
power for his Council to dispute in matter of Law.

They went to the Twenty seventh Article, and Charged thus; Charge Article 27.
That immediately after his Appointment to be Lord Lieutenant to the Army here
in England, he showed what Principles of Arbitrary Government lurked within his
bosom; for by his own immediate Authority, without and against Law, he had laid
Impost of Money upon the Kings Subjects: where they mention three Particulars.

First, That he had imposed 8 d. per diem upon the County of York, for
entertaining the Trained Bands, there one whole Month.

Secondly, That they had sent out Warrants for collecting the same, and
threatened to imprison such as should refuse to pay.

Thirdly, That he said that it was a Crime nigh to the Crime of high Treason,
not to pay the sa^.

Fourthly, They added that in his general Replies, he had brought two things
for his defense; first, that this money was freely and voluntarily offered by
those in Yorkshire, secondly, that the great Council of the Peers had notice
of the same.

To the first they answered, that a Petition was indeed preferred by the York
shire men, and a Month, pay offered, but that the Lord Srafford had refused to
present the same upon this exception only, because in the same they had
petitioned for a Parliament whereby he evidently declared what little
^nclination he had to that way.

To the Second, They appealed to all the Lords present, whether any such Order
did pass before the Council of the Peers at York.

The Proofs were,
First, A Warrant issued by Colonel Pennyman, for this Money, and another by
Sir Edward Osborne.

Secondly, Mr: John Burrowes, who declared that he was Clerk to the great
Council, but did remember of no Order; and withal added, that it might have
passed at that time, when he attended at Rippon.

Thirdly, Mr. Dunston who declared, that he had known that Money levied by some
Musketeers.

Fourthly, By Sir William Ingram, who declared, that he had heard the
Lieutenant say, that to refuse the same, came nigh to the Crime of High Treason.

The concluded the Charge, That by these Particulars, it was more than evident
what unhappy^ Purposes and Traiterous Designs he had to subdue this Kingdom,
and subvert the Fundamental Laws and Privileges.

First, To the Petition, That it was a true Petition, Strafford 's Reply.
drawn up by the Yorkshire Gentlemen, and as true that he had refused to
present the same, because of that clause about the Parliament; but the matter
was thus; At his Majesty's coming to York, it was thought necessary for the
defense of that County, to keep the Trained Band on foot, because the Enemy was
upon the Borders; and therefore the King directed him to write to all the
Freeholders in Yorkshire to see what they would do for their own defense.

The Time and Place were designed by the King* but the night before the Meeting
a small Number convented, and in a private and factious way, did draw up that
Petition upon the morrow* at their appointed Diet, in presence of the whole
Number, the Petition was presented to him, where he did advise them to leave
out that Clause, and that because he knew the King, out of his own Gracious
Disposition, had intended to call a Parliament, which he desired should rather
be freely done, than upon the constraint and importunity of Petitions; moreover
it would seem a Mercenary thing in them, at one and the same time to offer a
Benevolence, and withal to Petition for his Favor: upon this Remonstrance,
they were all willing to recall the Petition, and directed him by word of
Mouth, to offer unto the King the Months pay in their Names; which he did
accordingly, in the presence of Forty of them, to their no small advantage.

This he proved by Sir William Pennyman, Sir Paul Neale, Sir George Wentworth,
Sir William Savil, Sir Thomas Danby, who all of them declared as much in ample
terms; and withal added, That nothing was done upon better grounds of Necessity
and Obedience than the Offer of that Money, and that they never had heard any
man grudge against it to this time.

For the Second, about the Council of Peers, he alleged that he never made
mention of any Order of theirs, but he remembered very well it was twice
propounded before them, that the King had approved it at that time a just and
necessary Act, and none of the Council had contradicted it, which he conceived
as a tacit approbation and an Order in Equivalence.

But though that had not been, yet there was nothing done in the Business, but
at the special desires of the Gentlemen themselves, and for their necessary
Defense and Protection; ye^, though he had done it by himself alone, yet he
conceived he had so much power by his Commission, causing the Commission to
that effect to be read: That albeit he should mistake his Commission, and do
some inferior Act beyond it (because Military proceedings are not always
warranted by the Common Law) yet it should not be imputed as an Act of Treason
to him.

And to this effect read a Statute of the Seventh of Henry the Second.

To the Proofs.
First, Colonel Pennyman's Warrant, or Sir Edward Osburnes, it nothing
concerned him, and he doubted not but these worthy Gentlemen could justify
their own Act, and that he had enough to do to answer his own Misdemeanors.

Secondly, For Sir John Burrowes, he was at Rippon when that Proposition was
made.

Thirdly, That as the Warrant, so neither the Execution troubled him at all.

Fourthly, For Sir William Ingram, he was but a single Testimony, and that such
an one too as he could produce an Evidence to testify, he had mistaken himself
in his Testimony upon Oath, if it were not to disadvantage the Gentleman.

He concluded, That he had done nothing in that Business, but upon the Petition
of that County, the King's special Command, the Connivance at least of the
Great Council, and upon a present necessity, for the Defense and Safety of the
County.

And so much for Wednesday.
Thuasday. Charge, Sir Walter Earl's Observations.
Upon Thursday the Committee for the Charge declared that they had done with all
the Articles, and were content to wave the last, for Reasons best known to
themselves; only Sir Walter Earls added that he had some Observations to bring
forth upon the two and twentieth Article, which he conceived might do much to
prove the Earl of Strafford's Designs for Landing the Irish Forces in England.

And they were,
First, That in his Commission he had Power to Land them in Wales, or in any
part of England, or in Scotland, which were altogether superfluous, unless
there had been some purpose for the same.

Secondly, That within two days before the Date of the Commission, Letters were
sent to the Lord Bridgewater and Pembroke from Sir Francis Windebank, to assist
the Earl of Worcester, in Levying Forces for the Kings Service, and these might
be supposed to have intended a joining with the Irish.

Thirdly, That the Lord Ranelaugh at the raising of the Irish Army, did fear
such a Design as this

Fourthly, That the Town of Air in Scotland, where the Lord Strafford
pretended he would Land those Forces, was fortified with a Bulwark, a Garrison
and Block house, which would prohibit Landing there; that the Earl of Argile's
Bounds were divided thence by the Sea, and that the Bar or Entry into the Town
was very dangerous and shallow.

The Proofs were only the Reading of the Commission granted to the Lord
Strafford.

The Lieutenants Reply.
First, That his Commission was the same Verbatim with Northumberland's for
England, and and that it was drawn up by the Council Board here, and sent over
unto him; so no more Design in him than in the Gentlemen of the English Army,
nor no larger than that was put upon him.

Secondly, That this was the first time he heard of any such Letters, nor did
they concern him more than any of the House.

Thirdly, That he was not bound to purge the Lord Ranelaugh from all his Fears,
and that he had his own Fears too, which God forbid should be Evidence of
Treason against any man whatsoever.

Fourthly, That it seemed the Gentleman had better Information from that
Kingdom than himse^f, yet he would be confident to say, at Air there was never
such a thing as a Block-House or Garrison. But to remove all Scruples (for
indeed the Road or Landing-place is not there safe) he declared that it was his
intention to have Landed some Miles above Air, and made only his Magazine of
that Town.

To the Earl of Argiles Bounds, he hoped the Gentleman knew they came not on
foot out of Ireland, but had Ships to wast and transport themselves, and that
one of his prime Houses ( Rosneth) was within some few Miles of the same Frith.

The Lord Digby finding Sir Walter Earls on ground, did handsomely bring him
off, and told the Lords that all their proofs for that Article were not yet
ready, and that this was a Superfoetation only of the Charge, and that in such
a Business ac the Plotting of Treason, they must be content sometimes with dark
Probabilities.

Glyns charitable speech
Then Mr. Glyn desired the Lieutenant to resume his Defense, that they might
give a Repetition of their Charge, and so close the Process so far as concerned
the matter of Fact,

Strafford's Reply.
He replied, that in his Case all slackness is speed enough, the matter touched
him narrowly even in his Life and Estate, yea, in that which he esteemed above
them both, his Honor and Posterity, and therefore he confessed he had no
desire to ride post in such a Business. That he knew the Gentlemen at the Bar,
if they were in his Case, would think the time little enough, except their more
able Judgments could sooner dispatch the matter in hand; and therefore he
humbly entreated that that day might be granted to him for strengthening
himself, and recollecting his Thought and Spirits, and to morrow he would be
ready with his last Replies for himself; which after a little Ceremony and
Contestation, was condescended unto by the House of Commons.

Upon Friday Morning, about Eight of the Clock; Friday he was hindered from
coming by a fit of the Stone.
the Lieutenant of the Tower, and my Lord's Chamber-Groom came to the Hall, and
gave information to the House, upon Oath, That the Lord Strafford was taken
with an exceeding great pain, and fit of the Stone, and could not upon any
conditions stir out of his Bed.

Mr. Glyn replied, That it was a Token of his wilfulness, not his weakness,
Glyn again.
that he had not sent a Doctor to testify the same.

The Lord Steward made answer, that a Doctor could not be had perhaps so soon
in a Morning, nor was it possible for any Physician to give a certain judgment
concerning a man's disability by the Stone; because there is no outward
Symptom^ that appear.

Mr. Glyn excepted; That if he did not appear upon Saturday Morning, he should
lose the privilege to speak in his own defense afterward; and they permitted
to proceed.

The Lord Steward replied, That the Lords had appointed four of their Number to
go to the Tower, and learn the just cause of his Stay; and if by any means he
were able, he should be obliged to come then; if not, Humanity, and common
Equity would excuse him.

In the Afternoon it was reported that he was dead, Report of my Lord
Strafford's death.
of which there can be no better reason given, than the Humor and Genius of
the Times, that dally with nothing oftener than untruths, and calumnies; and
certainly there are many men of shallow understanding, and weak affections, who
either will not, or cannot understand the Gentleman's worth, but out of fearful
and needless apprehensions, are so desirous to hear of his Ruin any way, that
their busy Tongues will dare to anticipate the stroke of Justice.

Mr. Glyn proffers new proofs concerning the two and twentieth Article.

Upon Saturday Morning he presented himself at the Bar, Saturday.
where he expected nothing but Repetitions of Charges and Defenses; but mean
while Mr. Glyn proffers some new Proofs concerning the two and twentieth
Article, which the noble Lord refused, alleging the Process was closed; Mr.
Glyn answe^ed, the Process is not closed, as long as the business stands
unrepealed; and that it did not become a Prisoner at the Bar to prescribe a
Method of proceeding to the House of Commons in England.

It was answered by the Lord Lieutenant, That he thought it stood him in hand
as nearly to maintain his life, as it did any to pursue him for it, yet he was
willing they should bring in new Proofs, provided that he might have time to
make new Replies, and withal use some new Witnesses in some Articles, that
concerns his justification*

The Lord Newark, upon these motions desired the House might be adjourned;
after two hours stay, and a hot conflict upon the Lords, they returned, and the
Lord Steward commanded the Order to be read, which consisted of two Articles.

First, That it was granted unto them to bring in Proofs concerning the two and
twentieth Article; so it was to the Lord Strafford to make his replies, and use
his Witnesses concerning the same.

Secondly, That if they went to no more Articles, no more should the Lord
Strafford; but if they did, that he might pitch upon any one Article as he
pleased.

The House of Commons presently declined all other Articles, and conceived the
Order expressly for them, restraining him from all other Articles, except that
only.

He conceived the Order was for him, and said, That seeing they had picked out
their Article, it was against all common Equity to tie up his hands, and not
admit of a common Rule for them both; they replied, That when the Article was
canvased, they reserved Witnesses till another time; he answered, That he had
done the same upon every Article; they replied, That the House had refused his
Reservation; he answered, Nor had they passed an Order for theirs.

Upon this new Contestation the House rose again, and was adjourned. It is
supposed that the House of Commons had the better ground, because they had
particularly named their Witnesses in their Reservation, the Lord Strafford not
so; they pressed but one Article, he many. But such was the pleasure of the
Lords, that though the matter did not deserve to be much stood upon, yet after
two hours vehement agitation of the business in the Upper-House, they returned,
and the Order was in his favor to this effect.

First, That both of them should wave their new Proofs, and go immediately to
that which follows.

Secondly, If they would not do so, the Lords conceived themselves common
Judges to both, and therefore would not deny Strafford the liberty of pitching
upon what Article he pleased, as they had done.

Thirdly, That both of them should name their Witnesses at the Bar instantly.

The Commons were much grieved at this, yet desired him to nominate his
Witnesses, if he would make any benefit of the Order; he answered, That he
would nominate after them, because they were first in order; they replied, That
he knew their Article, they not his, He said, He was to bring Proofs about the
second, fifth, thirteenth, and the fifteenth Articles, and did desire them that
they would now proceed to nomination.

But they told him, they could not embrace the Order without advice of the
whole House; then on a sudden, a mighty noise followed of the whole House,
Withdraw, Withdraw, and was in so uncouth and tumultuous a confusion, that it
produced both admiration and fear in the Beholders, wherein we might easily
feel the Pulse of a distempered State; both the Houses brake up, not appointing
so much as the n^ Diet, each man's countenance spoke anger and discontent, and
nothing sounded in our Ears all Sunday but terrors and affrightments, of a
present division and breach between the two Houses; That the House of Commons
would declare him a Traitor, and all such Lords too, as were his adherents;
that he should be no more heard in public, that (though Parties and not his
Peers) they would Vote in his Sentence, That a Bill of Attainder should
presently be drawn up against him, and that nothing could content them but
present execution. Big words flew up and down all Monday.

Monday spent in a conference betwixt both Houses.
That whole day was spent in a Conference betwixt the Houses, without any
meeting in the Hall, but the Lords (who had learned, as it seems, to force
their own ruin by his misfortune, and now conceive that Monarchy and Nobility
are of such Identity, that one and the same is the diminution of both) kept
fast to their conclusion, and would not pass from their Order, notwithstanding
all the many dangers represented, so that the House of Commons were constrained
at last to give way, and embrace the first part of the Order, by waving
Witnesses on both sides.

This has been no small discouragement to his Enemies; for a more real
Demonstration of his party amongst the Lords could not have been shown.

Upon Monday, some of the Lords went so high in their heat, as to tell the
House of Commons, that it was an un-natural motion for the Head to be governed
by the Tail; That they hated Rebellion as bad as Treason; That the same blood
that ennobled their Ancestors, did move also in their Veins, and therefore they
would never suffer themselves to be suppressed by a popular faction.

After a great deal of storm all was (as well as might be) sodered up again,
and Tuesday appointed to be the day for the Lieutenant to resume his Defenses,
and they their Charge, without any more proof, to be used on either side.

Tuesday.
Upon Tuesday, the Lord Steward, at the entry told them, the Lords had Ordered,
that both their Testimonies should be waved, that they should proceed
immediately to what followed, so that that day might put an end to what
concerned the matter of Fact.

Strafford's reply.
The Lord Lieutenant replied, That in all humility and obedience, he would
submit himself to that, or any other their Decrees whatsoever, though it should
reach as far home unto him as his own Life; but withal humbly begged, That if
hereafter he should be troubled (for they were to speak last) with new matter,
or with supplemental Proof, he might have leave to speak something in his own
Defense.

The Lord Steward answered, It was all the reason in the World.

The Lieutenant went on thus: MY LORDS,
My Lord Strafford's last Speech in the Hall.
This day I stand before you charged with High Treason, the burden is heavy,
yet far the more, in that it has borrowed the Patrociny of the House of
Commons; if they were not interessed, I might express a no less easy, than I
do a safe issue and good success to the business: But let neither my weakness
plead my Innocence, nor their power my Guilt. If your Lordships will conceive
of my Defenses* as they are in themselves, without reference to either (and I
shall endeavor so to present them) I hope to go away from hence as clearly
justified, as I am now in the testimony of a good conscience, by my self. My
Lords, I have all along my Charge watched to see that poisoned Arrow of
Treason, that some men would sain have to be feathered in my Heart, and that
deadly Cup of Wine; that has so intoxicated some petty misalleaged Errors, as
to put them in the Elevation of High Treason, but in truth it has not been my
quickness to discern any such Monster yet within my Breast; though now perhaps,
by a sinistrous Information, sticking to my Clothes: They tell me of a twofold
Treason, one against the Statute, another by the Common Law; this direct, that
consecutive; this individual, that accumulative; this in it self, that by way
of construction.




For the first, I must and do acknowledge, that if I had the least suspicion of
my own guilt, I would spare your Lordships the pains, cast the first Stone at
my self, and pass Sentence of condemnation against my self: And whether it be
so or not, I refer my self to your Lordships Ju^gment and Declaration: You, and
only you* (under the favor and protection of my gracious Master) are my
Judges, under favor none of the Commons are my Peers, nor can they be my
Judges, I shall ever celebrate the Providence and Wisdom of your noble
Ancestors, who have put the Keys of Life and Death (so far as concerns you and
your Posterity) into your own hands, not into the hands of your inferiors:
None but your own selves know the rate of your noble Blood, none but your
selves must hold the Balance in dispensing the same.

I shall proceed in repeating my Defenses, as they are reduceable to these two
main points of Treason, and for Treason against the Statute (which is the only
Treason in effect) nothing is alleged for that, but the fifteenth, two and
twentieth, and twenty seventh Articles. Here he brought the sum of all his
Replies made to these three Articles before, and almost in the same words as
before; only that testimony of Sir Henry Vane's, because it seemed pressing, he
stood upon it, and alleged five Reasons for the nullifying thereof.

First, That it was but a single testimony, and would not make Faith in a
matter of Debt, much less in a matter of Life and Death, yea that it was
expressly against the Statute to impeach (much less to condemn him) upon High
Treason, under the testimony of two famous Witnesses.

Secondly, That he was dubious in it, and expressed it with an, as I do remember,
and such, or such like Words.

Thirdly, That all the Council of eight, except himself, disclaim the words, as
if by a singular providence they had taken hold of his Ears only.

Fourthly, That at that time the King had levied no Forces in Ireland, and
therefore he could not be possibly so impudent as to say to the King, that he
had an Army there which he might employ for the reducing this Kingdom.

Fifthly, That he had proved by Witnesses beyond all exceptions (Marquess
Hamilton, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Northumberland, Lord Cottington, Sir
William Pennyman, and Sir Arthur Terringham) that there was never the least
intention to land those Forces in England. He went on:

So much for the Articles that concern Individual Treason.
To make up the Constructive Treason, or Treason by way of Accumulation; many
Articles are brought against me, as if in a heap of Felonies or Misdemeanors
(for in their conceit they reach no higher) some prolifical seed apt to produce
what is treasonable, could lurk: Here I am charged to have designed the ruin
and overthrow, both of Religion and State: The first seems rather to have
been used to make me odious than guilty, for there is not the least Proof
alleged concerning my confederacy with the Popish-faction, nor could there be
any indeed, never a Servant in Authority beneath the King my Master, was ever
more hated and maligned by those men than my self, and that for an Impartial
and strict executing of the Laws against them.

Here your Lordships may observe, that the greater number of the Witnesses used
against me, either from Ireland or from Yorkshire, were men of that Religion:
But for my own Resolution (I thank God) I am ready every hour of the day to
Seal my disaffection to the Church of Rome, with my dearest Blood.

But, my Lords, give me leave here to pour forth the grief of my Soul before
you, these proceedings against me seem to be exceeding rigorous, and to have
more of prejudice than equity, that upon a supposed Charge of my Hypocrisy or
Errors in Religion, I should be made so monstrously odious to three Kingdoms; a
great many thousand Eyes have seen my Accusations, whose Ears shall never hear,
that when it came to the upshot I was never accused of them. Is this fair
dealing amongst Christians? But I have lost nothing by that: Popular applause
was ever nothing in my conceit, the uprightness and integrity of a good
Conscience, was, and ever shall be, my continual Feast; and if I can be
justified in your Lordships judgments from this grand imputation (as I hope now
I am, seeing these Gentlemen have thrown down the Bucklers) I shall account my
self justified by the whole Kingdom, because by you, who are the Epitomy, the
better part, yea the very Soul and Life of the Kingdom.

As for my Design against the State, I dare plead as much Innocence here, as in
matter of my Religion: I have ever admired the wisdom of our Ancestors, who
have so fixed the pillars of this Monarchy, that each of them keep a due
proportion and measure with other, and have so handsomely tied up the Nerves and
Sinews of the State, that the straining of any one may bring danger and sorrow
to the whole Economy. The Prerogative of the Crown, and the Propriety of the
Subject, have such mutual Relations, this takes protection from that, that
foundation and nourishment from this. And as on the Lute, if any one string be
too high or too lowly wound up, you have lost the Harmony, so here the excess
of a Prerogative is oppression of pretended Liberty in the Subject, Disorder,
and Anarchy. The Prerogative must be used as God does his Omnipotency, upon
extraordinary Occasions; the Laws (answerable to that potentia ligata in
Creaturis) must have place at other times: And yet there must be a Prerogative,
if there must be extraordinary occasions, the Propriety of the Subject is ever
to be maintained, if it go in equal pace with this: They are fellows and
Companions that have and ever must be inseparable in a well governed Kingdom;
and no way so fitting, so natural to nourish and entertain both, as the
frequent use of Parliaments: By those a commerce and acquaintance is kept,
betwixt the King and Subject. These thoughts have gone along with me these
fourteen years of my public Employments, and shall God willing to my Grave:
God, His Majesty, and my own Conscience, yea, and all those who have been most
Accessory to my inward thoughts and opinions can bear me witness, that I ever
did inculcate this; That the happiness of a Kingdom consists in a just poize of
the King's Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberty. And that things would never
go well, 'till they went hand in hand together.

I thank God for it, by my Master's favor, and the providence of my Ancestors,
I have an Estate, which so interesseth me in the Commonwealth, that I have no
great mind to be a Slave, but a Subject; nor could I wish the Cards to be
shuffled over again, upon hopes to fall upon a better Set: Nor did I ever
nourish such base mercenary thoughts, as to become a Pander to the Tyranny and
Ambition of the greatest man living: No, I have and ever shall aim at a fair,
but a bounded Liberty, remembering always that I am a Freeman, yet a Subject;
that I have a Right, but under a Monarch. But it has been my misfortune now
when I am gray headed, to be Charged by the Mistakers of the times, who are now
so highly bent, that all appears to them to be in the extreme for Monarchy,
which is not for themselves. Hence it is, that Designs, Words, yea Intentions,
are brought out for real Demonstrations for my misdemeanors, such a multiplying
Glass is a prejudicate Opinion.

The Articles contain Expressions and Actions: My Expressions either in Ireland
or England; my Actions either before or after these late stirs (in this Order
he went through the whole Charge, from the first Article to the last, in an
excellent Method, and repeated all the Sums and Heads of what was spoken by him
before, only added in the twenty eighth Article) if that one Article had been
proved against him, it contained more weighty matter than all the Charge
besides: And it had not only been Treason in him, but also Villainy, to have
betrayed the trust of His Majesty's Army. Yet because the Gentlemen had been
sparing (by reason of the times) to insist upon that Article, though it might
concern him much, he resolved to keep the same Method, and not utter the least
expression that might seem to disturb the happy agreement intended, though he
wished the same might deceive his expectation: Only thus much he admired, how
himself, being an Incendiary against the Scots, in the twenty third Article, is
now become their Confederate in the twenty eighth Article; or how he could be
Charged for betraying New Castle, and for fighting with the Scots at Newbourn
too, seeing fighting with them was no possible means for betraying the Town,
but to hinder their passage thither.

That he never advised War farther (than in his poor judgment) concerned the
very life of the King's Authority, and the safety and honor of his Kingdoms:
Nor saw he what advantage could be made by a War in Scotland, where nothing
could be gained but many hard blows: For his part, he honored the Nation, but
he wished they might be ever under their own Climate, and had no desire they
should be too well acquainted with the better Soil of England: But he thought
that Article had been added in jest, or as a supernumerary; and he very little
suspected to be reckoned a Confederate with the Scots, and wished (as he hoped
it was) that every Englishman were as free from that imputation as himself,
[closing his Defense with this Speech.]

My Lords, You see what may be alleged for this Constructive, rather
Destructive Treason. For my part, I have not the judgment to conceive, that
such a Treason is agreeable, either with the fundamental grounds of Reason, or
Law: not of Reason, for how can that be Treason in the lump or mass, which is
not so in any of the parts? Or how can that make a thing Treasonable, which in
it self is not so? Not of Law, since neither Statute, Common Law, nor Practice,
has from the beginning of this Government ever mentioned such a thing; and
where, my Lords, has this Fire, without the least appearance of any Smoke,
lien hid so many hundred years, and now breaks forth into a violent Flame to
destroy me and my Posterity from the Earth? My Lords, do we not live by Laws,
and must we be punished by Laws before they be made? Far better were it to live
by no Laws at all, but to be governed by those Characters of Discretion and
Virtue, that Nature has stamped in us, than to put this necessity of
Divination upon a man, and to accuse him of the breach of Law, before it be a
Law at all. If a Water-man upon the Thames split his Boat by grating upon an
Anchor, and the same have a Buoy appending to it, he is to charge his own
Inobservance; but if it has none, the owner of the Anchor is to pay the loss.

Mr Lords, if this Crime which they call Arbitrary Treason, had been marked by
any discerner of the Law, the ignorance thereof should be no excuse for me, but
if it be no Law at all, how can it in rigor or strictness it self condemn me?
Beware you do not awake these sleeping Lions, by the searching out some
neglected Moth-eaten Records, they may one day tare you and your Posterity in
pieces: It was your Ancestors care to chain them up within the Barracadoes of
Statutes, be not you ambitious to be more skilful and curious than your
Forefathers in the Art of killing.

My Lords, it is my present misfortune, for ever yours; and it is not the
smallest part of my Grief, that not the Crime of Treason, but my other Sins
(which are exceeding many) have presented me before this Bar, and except your
Lordships wisdoms provide for it, it may be, the shedding of my Blood may make
way for the tracing of yours; you, your Estates, your Posterities, lie at the
sta^e. If such Learned Gentlemen as these, whose Tongues are well acquainted
with such Proceedings, shall be started out against you, if your Friends, your
Council denied access unto you, if your professed Enemies admitted to witness
against you, if every Word, Intention, or Circumstance of yours, be sifted and
alleged as Treasonable, n^ because of a Statute, but because of a Consequence,
or Construction of Lawyers pieced up in an high Rhetorical strain, and a number
of supposed probabilities: I leave it to your Lordships consideration, to
foresee what may be the issue of such dangerous and Recent Precedences.

These Gentlemen tell me they speak in defense of the Commonwealth, against my
Arbitrary Laws; give me leave to say it, I speak in defense of the
Commonwealth, against their arbitrary Treason, for if this latitude be
admitted, what prejudice shall follow to King and Country, if you and your
Posterity be by the same disenabled from the greatest Affairs of the Kingdom;
for my poor self, were it not for your Lordships interest, and the interest of
a Saint in Heaven, who has left me here two Pledges on Earth, [At this his
breath stopped, and he shed Tears abundantly in mentioning his Wife, which moved
his very Enemies to Compassion] I should never take the pains to keep up this
Ruinous Cottage of mine, it is laden with such infirmities, that in truth I
have no great pleasure to carry it about with me any longer: Nor could I ever
leave it in a better time than this, when I hope the better part of the World
would perhaps think, that by this my misfortune I had given a testimony of my
Integrity to God, my King and Country: I thank God, I count not the afflictions
of this present life comparable to that Glory, which is to be revealed in the
time to come.

My Lords! my Lords! my Lords! Something more I had to say, but my Voice and
Spirits fail me, only I do in all humility and submission cast my self down
before your Lordships Feet, and desire that I might be a Pharos to keep you
from Shipwreck; do not put such Rocks in your own way, which no prudency, no
circumspection, can eschew or satisfy, but by your utter Ruin; and whether
your judgments in my Case (I wish it were not the Case of you all) be either
for life or death, it shall be righteous in my Eyes, and received with a Te
Deum Laudamus, (and then he lifted up his Eyes, and said) In te Domine confido,
ne confundar in aeternum.

This he spoke with an inimitable Life and Grace. You have his very Words as
near as I can remember, only with so much loss and detriment as has perished
by transcribing the Copy from his own mouth: But you desire impartiality, and
indeed you have it, and with some Grains too of allowance, for I was so afraid
of my own affection to the Gentleman, that I rather bowed to the other
extremity, and therefore have set down his defenses, rather to his disadvantage
by my rude Pen, than in the native Color, to his Eternal Glory, and the
Confusion of his Enemies.

The Repetition of the Charge did not spend much time, they proceeded orderly
Article by Article, in the very same Words and Matter as before, only there
were some remarkable flashes that passed from Mr. Glyn (who was the man) in the
time of their handling.

He told them that he should represent the Lord Strafford as cunning in his
Replies, as he had been crafty in his Actions; that he waved all that was
material, and insisted only upon the Secondary Proofs, that it was more than
evident throughout all his Charge how he had endeavored to bring in an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical form of Government over the Lives, Lands, and
Liberties, of the King's Subjects, yea had exercised a Tyranny over their
Consciences too, by the Oath administered in Ireland; and though his malicious
Designs had taken no effect, yet no thanks to him, but to the goodness of the
King, and the vigilance of the Peers: Had they pleased, it had been too late to
have punished him, for no Rule of Law had been left whereby to Censure him,
after the death and expiration of the Laws. And if the Intention of Guido Faux
might be thought Treason, though the House was not blown up, then this
Intention of his may admit the same censure.

He closed, that throughout all his Defenses he had pretended either Warrants
from the King, or else the Kings Prerogative, and what was this else but to
draw up a Cloud, and exhale the Vapor for the eclipsing of the bright Sun, by
the Jealousies, or Repinings of his Subjects; If the strength of his Piety and
Justice should not dispel all these Mists, and send them down to their
Original: That the very standing and falling of these three Kingdoms stood upon
this Process, all of which do conceive their safety so far interessed in his
just punishment, that no settling of their peace or quiet could be expected
without this: That they hoped the Law should never protect him, who had gone
about to subvert all Law; nor the Nobility (who had the same Blood moving in
their Veins) by submitting themselves to his base Tyranny, lose that privilege
and liberty, which their Ancestors had bought with their dearest Lives. Though
there was no Statute for his Treason, was it the less monstrous? For there was
none for so many hundreds of years that durst ever adventure upon such
Insolences, to occasion such a Statute: And were not the fundamental Grounds,
Rules, and Government, sufficient to rise up in Judgment against him, without
the making a particular Statute? This he said he left to the dispute of the
Law, and concluded, That seeing they had found out the Jonah, who these many
years had tossed and hazarded the Ship of the Commonwealth, with continual
Storms and Tempests; there could no calms be expected, but by casting him out
into the Seas; which in all Justice they must and do expect from their hands,
who are entrusted by the body of the Kingdom to do the same. The Aggravation of
the Offense he said, he had left to Mr. Pym, who here spoke that Speech which
is now in Print.

It was a Sport to see how Mr. Pym in his Speech was fearfully out, and
constrained to pull out his Papers, and read with a great deal of confusion and
disorder, before he could recollect himself; which failing of his memory was no
small advantage to the Lieutenant, because by this means the House perceived it
was a premeditated flash, not grounded upon the Lieutenant's last Answer, but
resolved on before, whatsoever he should say for his own justification; but the
Lieutenant was not suffered to reply a word, either to Glyn or Pym, because the
last word must be theirs. And so with Tuesday ended the matter of Fact.

On Thursday the Dispute in Law is expected.

Upon Wednesday we were big with expectation for the matter of Law, having done
before with the matter of Fact; but it seems the House of Commons had perceived
a great defection of their Party, and a great increase of the Lord Strafford's
Friends in both the Houses, occasioned by his insinuating, honest, and witty
defenses, and therefore they resolved of no more hearing in public; therefore
it was thought upon by his Accusers to draw up a Bill of Attainder, and present
the same to the Lords, whereby first the matter of Fact should be declared to
have been sufficiently proved, and then in the matter of Law that he had
incurred the censure of Treason, for intending to subvert the fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom, for though (said they) he cannot be charged by Letter of
Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, yet he is within the compass
of the Salvo, whereby it is provided, that the King and Parliament has Power
to determine what is Treasonable, and what not, and that they were confident the
Lords would ratify, and approve of this Bill of theirs, and give Judgment
accordingly.

The motion was stoutly opposed by three great Lawyers, (all Members of the
House) Seldom, Holborn, and Bridgeman, who made it manifest, that the Salvo of
25 Edward 3. was repealed, and that no man could now be convicted of Treason,
but by the Letter of that Statute: But being put to Voice, it was carried for
the Bill, and a Committee appointed for to draw it up.

This gave occasion of much talk abroad, and they who were otherwise the Lord
Strafford's Enemies could not find Equity enough in the Bill of Attainder. Some
could not conceive what difference imaginable was betwixt the Bill and the
Charge presented before, for in the Charge he was accused of Treason; and the
Bill (though they had no Legislative power) seemed nothing but an Affirmation
of the same. Others (who would have the Bill understood of a Definitive
sentence, because it was consecutive to the Proofs) were not satisfied, but
that it was against all practice, that the Commons should give sentence upon
the death of a Peer; and that it was against common Equity too, that the Party
accusant should give the Judgment, if the complainers were admitted to be
Judges. A third sort gave it out, that this was no Sentence against the Lord
Strafford, but only a passing of a new Act of Parliament, about a matter not
hitherto declared Treasonable; but yet these doubted, that by declaring the
matter of Fact to be approved, and applying the censure to it, in reference to
the Lord Strafford, it would ever be thought a Sentence against him, to blemish
his own Fame, and the Blood of his Posterity. Moreover, that if they were about
to make a new Act, it were strange to punish a man for the breach of such a
Statute as was not yet extant in Rerum Natura, which should in reason refer
only to fu^ure obedience. And (what is more strange) though there were a new
Statute, yet by what Authority the Parliament has or could declare any
Individual or Accumulative Act, which is already, to be Treasonable, which must
be Treason by virtue of a Statute, or else no Treason at all; now there is none
can be brought except the twenty fifth of Edward the third, whereof the Letter
of that Statute cannot by their own Confession, nor was not so much as once
alleged against the Lord Strafford; and for the Salvo or Proviso (which they
mainly insisted on) the same stands repealed by two posterior Acts of
Parliament.

You have the Mutterings of all sorts of People.

The Lords fearing the Proceedings, as a beaten Path trodden out to the ruin of
their own Lives and Estates, told the House of Commons in their Conference upon
Thursday, That they would go on the same way they did already, and according to
the Order of the House give full Audience to the Lord Strafford's Council in
matter of Law, and that they themselves, as competent Judges, would by
themselves only give Sentence in the Cause, nor was there any other course
suitable to the practice and Statutes of the Kingdom, the Safety of the
Nobility, or to Equity, or common Justice.

It was replied by them of the Lower House, That they were resolved to go on
with their Bill, and if the same should be rejected by the Lords, they feared a
Rupture and Division might follow, to the utter Ruin and Desolation of the
whole Kingdom, that no content would be given to the Subject (and this was a
strong Argument indeed, yet better beseeming Partiality and Violence, than the
pretended Justice and Piety of the times) unless the man, who had so much
intruded upon their Right, and discontented the People, might be punished as a
Traitor; and for the practice of the Kingdom, that no man had ever found such a
favorable hearing, and that the Process against Essex, Norfolk, Somerset, were
all of them closed up in one day.

Upon Friday the Lords gave Answer, That they could expect nothing from the
House of Commons, but what should tend to the Peace and Preservation of the
Kingdom; nor was there a more forceable way than to preserve the Laws and
Customs thereof, lest Innovation so much complained of by them, might unhappily
be found among themselves: That the Subjects should have all that Justice could
afford, but that an Act of Injustice would never give satisfaction to the
World, nor safety to themselves; the Eyes of all Foreign States being fixed
upon the business now in agitation, and the wisdom of our Nation either to be
much advanced or depressed by their Judgments in this Case: That the Process
against Norfolk and Essex (for Somerset was convict only of Felony, and had not
so much Animadversion to save himself by his Book) were for direct and formal
Treasons, comprised in one or two Individual Acts; but this against the Lord
Strafford only Arbitrary and Accumulative, to be picked out of Twenty eight
Articles. And therefore that it was impossible to have a full Examination of
them all, to give Sentence against him; and those Noble men were charged with
some Actual breach of Statutes, formerly made; but here a new Statute was to be
made, or else he to be found guiltless. They concluded, that they had given
Order for his appearance on Saturday, and that in the Great Hall at
Westminster, where the House of Commons might, if they pleased, be present.

After some deliberation with the House, the Conferrers answered, That since
the Lords had so resolved, they would not deny to be there present, and to hear
what his Council could say for him, but to reply any more in public, they
neither could nor would, because of the Bill already past, only if the Lords
should take any scruple in the matter of Law, they would be ready to give them
satisfaction by a private Conference, (so they willingly declined to do what
indeed they could not possibly do) that is, to give public satisfaction in the
matter of Law.

Upon Saturday they convened in the Great Hall, but they that were of the
Committee for the great Charge, did not stand at the Bar as before, but sat
promiscuously with the rest of their Fellows, so that a mouth was not opened in
the behalf of the House of Commons all that day. After they were set, the Lord
Steward told the Lieutenant, That the Lords had resolved to give him a fair
hearing in the matter of Law, and therefore desired that the Council might keep
that distance, moderation, and respect, to the Judicatory that was fitting, and
not at all to meddle with the matter of Fact.

The Lieutenant replied, That in all humility he did acknowledge that favor
from the Lords, and that it was such an one too, as he could not but expect
from such honorable Peers, and just Persons, in whose integrity and goodness
(under that which he had placed above) he had reposed his chiefest confidence;
for his Council, they knew much better than himself what concerned the point of
Discretion and Reverence, and that he doubted not but that they would give all
satisfaction and obedience.

Then his Council were called to the Bar, Mr. Lane, the Prince's Attorney; Mr.
Gardener, Recorder of London; Mr. Lo, and Mr. Lightfoot. Mr. Lane spoke, and
much to this sense and purpose.

My Lords, there is an heavy Charge lies on me and my Fellows, nothing less
than to defend the Life, the Estate, the Reputation, yea the Posterity of this
Honorable Person at the Bar; if therefore we shall be more pressing, we hope
your Lordships will interpret this our forwardness to be for Honor and
Conscience sake, in a matter that concerns both so nearly: But it shall be
our endeavor to carry our selves with our best respects to your Lordships, and
with all content and satisfaction to the honorable House of Commons; and
because your Lordships mentioned the matter of Fact, one thing I dare be bold
to say, that all the time of this Noble Lord's defenses, he did not so much as
crave any one of our Opinions, yea, or acquainted us with any thing that tended
that way: And for the matter of Law, those Statutes cited by himself were none
of our stock, but taken up at his own adventure; nor do I speak this to
derogate from the pertinency of those Statutes (for they shall be the subject
of my discourse) but that the Nobleman be not disappointed of your right
Conceptions, and his own due Praise.

My Lords, It is your pleasure we meddle not with matter of Fact, and indeed we
need not meddle at all with it, because we hope it is already done, and that
sufficiently to our hands, yet the matter of Law does so naturally arise out of
the matter of Fact, that of necessity (under your Lordships savours) we must
somewhat grate on this, if we speak of that, nor do I conceive it possible for
us to speak advantagiously enough for the Lord Strafford's just defense* unless
the whole matter of Fact be determined, either as proved or not proved, or at
least some states of Questions agreed upon, where we may fix and settle our
Arguments, and therefore it is, my Lords, that I have chosen not at all to
touch the matter of Law (until your Lordships shall be pleased to chalk me out
^way) unless it be to clear your judgments in one Statute only, viz. 25 Ed. 3.
Because when the same was alleged by the Lord Strafford in his own Defense,
that not being convicted of the Letter thereof, he could not be convicted of
Treason; I remember the Salvo of that Statute was much insisted upon by those
from the House of Commons, as much conducing to their own ends. My Lords, I
will first speak of the Statute it self, and then of its Salvo or Provision:
The Statute is, (That if any man shall intend the death of the King, his Queen,
their Children; kill the Chancellor, or Judge upon the Bench; imbase the King's
Coin, or counterfeit the Broad-Seal; etc. he shall be convicted and punished as
a Traitor) that the Lord Strafford comes within the Letter of this Statute is
not so much as once alleged, nor indeed it cannot be with any reason; all that
can be said is, That by Relation, or by Argument a minore ad majus, he may be
drawn thither, yet that this cannot be, I humbly offer these Considerations.

First, This is a Declarative Law, and such are not to be taken by way of
Consequence, Equity, or Construction, but by the Letter only, otherwise they
should imply a contradiction to themselves, and be no more Declarative Laws,
but Laws of Construction, or Constitutive.

Secondly, This is a Penal Law, and such (if our Grounds hitherto unquestioned
hold good) can admit of no Constructions or Inferences, for Penalties are to
persuade the keeping of known Laws, not of Laws conjectural, ambiguous, and by
consequence, which perhaps the most Learned may not in their Disputes question,
much less the Subject (who is not obliged to interpret the Statute) doubt of in
the point of Obedience, yea rather without any doubt, he is to obey the Letter
of the Statute, and conceive, (and that truly) that he is not liable to the
Penalty.

Thirdly, We have a notable Law, 13 Eliz. cap. 2. whereby it is declared, That
the bringing in of Bulls from Rome, to stir up the Subject to Mutiny and
Rebellion, shall be punished as Treason: Now if by interpretation, or by
consequence, this sense might have been thrust upon the preceding Statutes, the
making of this had been superfluous, yea the persons then charged with that
Crime, might have been impeached of Treason, even before the making of this Act.

Anno 21 of Ed. 3. We have a Statute declaring, That for a Servant to kill his
Master is an Act of Treason, and in the three and twentieth year of the same
King, a Process of Treason was framed against a man for killing his Father,
grounded upon the same Argument a minori ad majus: But it was found (and the
Sentence is yet in the Records) that although in the one and twentieth year of
Edward the third, that Argument might have been admitted, yet in the 27 it
could not, by reason of the Declarative Law intervening in the 25 year, and
this Case comes very home to the Point in Law.

My Lords, I will not demand what kind of Offense it may be, for a man to
subvert the fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, the Crime doubtless is unnatural and
monstrous, and the punishment must keep the same proportion, only I presume to
offer these few things to your Lordships considerations.

First, That one or more Acts of Injustice, whether maliciously, or ignorantly
done, can in no sense of Law be called the subversion of the fundamental Laws;
if so, as many Judges (perhaps) so many Traitors. It is very incident to man's
Nature to err, nor does the Lord Strafford plead his innocence in over-sights,
but in Treason.

Secondly, I do remember the Case of John de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk, this
man in the twenty eighth of Henry the Sixth, was charged by the House of
Commons with Articles of Treason, and those too very like to these against my
Lord Strafford.

1. That he had given the King bad advices.

2. That he had embased his Coin.

3. That he had sessed men of War.

4. That he had given out summary Decrees.

5. That he had Imposed Taxes.

6. That he had corrupted the Fountain of Justice.

7. That he had persuaded the King to unnecessary War, and to the giving over
of Anjou in France, Ovum Ovo.

And for all these, though he was Charged with High Treason, for wronging the
right of the Subject, and subverting the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; yet
after a long Agitation, the matter was found by the Lords of Parliament, not to
imply Treason, but only Felony. Add to this another, who in the twenty third of
Henry the eighth, was charged for subverting the English Laws, and yet no
Treason charged upon him. Add to both the Charge of Richard Larks, pleaded at
the Common Pleas, who was charged with Treason for subverting the Law, but
convicted only of Felony, by which you may see, my Lords, what to this time
has been subverting the Laws.

Thirdly, It is very considerable, that the Lord Strafford is not charged to
have subverted, but only to have intended to subvert the fundamental Laws, and
this I conceive, if there were no more, might keep him free from that Statute
of the twenty fifth of Edward the third: For although as touching the King, his
Queen, and Children, intention is Treasonable; yet in all other things there
mentioned, there must be action beside intention; for it is not said, if a man
do intend to kill a Chancellor, it shall be Treason, but only if he do kill
him; and if he does actually counterfeit the Broad Seal: And although a man
should prepare a Furnace, make ready his Stamp, melt his Bullion, yet if he
gives not the King's impression upon the Coin, all his intentions, yea, his
preparations will not serve to make up a Treason.

And this (under favor) may serve to answer the Case of Guido Faux, lately
objected, unless it be alleged, that the Lord Strafford had as real an
intention against the King's Life as Faux had: For though the intention in that
Case be Treason by the Statute, yet in all other things there is no Treason
without the Action, so immense and vast a difference both is, and ought to be,
betwixt a project against the Royal Blood, and all things else of a lower and
under Nature.

You see therefore my Lords, that the body of the Statute cannot stick against
the Lord Strafford, neither in Letter, nor in consequence, this is not, that
must not be; all that can be said is, that his Fact may be Treason by the
Common Law: For my part I profess my ignorance, who ever thought the Common Law
might declare, but never make a Treason, that is, it might be presupposed that
there is a Statute whereupon to build a Declaration, and therefore to say there
is no Statute for it, is to say it is no Treason at all. The Statute ever makes
the Treason; and to be declared to be Treason, either by Common Law, or by
Parliament, are but two different ways of Proceedings, and must both resolve
into one Principle, yea, which comes home to the point, in the one and
twentieth of Edward the third, To kill a man employed in the King's War was
Treason; and the twenty third, To kill the King's Messenger was Treason by
Declaration of the Common Law, but always by reason of the Statute, yet none of
these are now Treasons but Felonies only, by reason of the intervening Statute
the twenty fifth of Edward the third, such has ever been thought the force of
its Letter and Declaration: And so I will leave it, and speak a word or two of
the Salvo, which is this. That because all particulars could not be then
defined, therefore what the Parliament should declare to be Treasonable in time
to come, should be punished as a Treason.

And according to this Reservation, in the eighth year of Richard the second,
one who was charged before the King's Bench, was afterward referred to the
Parliament, and there, though the Fact was not contained in the body of the
Statute, yet because of the Proviso aforementioned, it was adjudged Treason.

In the eleventh year of the same King, the Duke of Ireland, and Nevil
Archbishop of York, were impeached of High Treason by Glo^cester, Arundel, and
Warwick, and notwithstanding the Statute, were convicted thereof by the Salvo.
But in the one and twentieth of the same Richard the second, the Tid^-turned,
and the King had such a hand with the Parliament, that the Sentence was
recalled, and those three Noblemen themselves adjudged Traitors. Again in the
first of Henry the fourth his Successor, that Revocation of the one and
twentieth of Richard the second was repealed, and the Sentence of the eleventh
of his Reign established; such were the tossings too and fro of Treason, and
all because of that uncertain Proviso.

Therefore it was, That in the same Parliament the first of Henry the fourth, a
Petition was preferred by the Nobility to have Treason limited with some
Statute.

Because they knew not what to speak, or what to do, for fear thereof; and in
the tenth Chapter an Act was made upon this Petition, that the Salvo should be
holden Repealed in all times to come, and nothing esteemed Treason but what was
literally contained in the Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third;
and therefore it is said in the Records, That there was great joy at the making
of this Act, in that the drawn Sword hanging over every man's head, by this
slender Thread of a consequence, or illation, was moved by that Act. Add to
this, that in the first of Queen Mary, the first Chapter, the same is repeated,
That no man shall be punished in Life or Estate as a Traitor, but for the Crime
contained in the Statute, 25 Ed. 3. without the least mention of a pretended
Salvo.

The Earl of Northumberland's Case comes nigh to the Point, he was charged with
Treason, the fifth of Henry the fourth; and if the Statute of the first of
Henry the fourth, the first Chapter, whereby this Proviso is Repealed, had not
intervened, no doubt he had been condemned of Treason, but he was only convict
of Felony, and that because he could not be drawn within the Letter of the
Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, and I dare confidently say it,
that since that Act was made, the first of Henry the fourth, the first Chapter,
whereby the Proviso is Repealed, no man has ever been declared a Traitor,
either by King or Parliament, except it were upon that or some other Statute,
literally, and declaratively taken. These two things I do offer to your
Lordships considerations. That the Lord Strafford cannot be impeached of
Treason, by the Statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, and that the
Salvo contained in the same stands Repealed almost two hundred years ago, and
this is all I conceive to be necessary for that Statute which was alleged by
the Lord Strafford in his Defense for matter of Fact.

Then the Recorder spoke some few Words to this purpose, That what was spoken
upon the Statute, The Recorder.
was because it seemed inseparable from the matter of Fact, that they could
proceed no farther, 'till a State were afforded them, that to do otherwise they
conceived might be very prejudicial unto my Lord Strafford:

First, In that they should suppose that to be done, which is not proved to be.

Secondly, That the matter of Law arises so naturally from the matter of Fact,
that it will be impossible to separate one from the other.

Thirdly, That it is the course of all Judicatories, first to settle the
Verdict, and upon that to fix the Arguments, otherwise he could conceive no
possible way of proceeding; and therefore, in the Lord Strafford's Name he most
humbly entreated, that the Lords would either wholly determine the matter of
Fact (or whether Treason or not; for then all other proceedings in the Law were
unnecessary, but whether done or not done) or else to give them some States of
the question whereunto they might confine themselves.

Upon this motion the House was adjourned for that day, nor has it met since,
for the House of Commons are turned to their old byas, and will hear of nothing
but the Bill of Attainder, but the Lords seem to be more resolute than before,
because they find that they have no Authority to declare a Treason in a Fact
already past, the Salvo of the twenty fifth of Edward the third being Repealed,
withal that if the Bill of Attainder should proceed, the King has as great
power to hinder that at the last blow as any other Statute, but I hope the
Lords will disburthen him of that envy.

All the which stand obliged to the Lord Strafford, in blood, affection, or
deserving, and all who have been interessed with him in the King's Service, and
many too, who both hate his person, and dislike his proceedings, will doubtless
look upon it, and tender their own safety, all of them in likelihood being
subject to the Charge of Treason, if ever they chance to be called to do the
King Service in any place of importance.

I cannot express how much the voice of the multitude is now altered from what
it was lately, nothing now talked of what should be done, but only of what must
be done: So that if the Lord Strafford dies, his very Enemies will confess that
it is done more for necessity than for Justice, and rather for the satisfaction
of rancorous apprehensions, than for any guiltiness in the Cause.

Thursday.
Thursday last, (viz.) April 29. was designed for the Agitation of the long
intermitted business concerning the Lieutenant, and the way was this:

The Lords did meet at the Great Hall at Westminster about Nine of the Clock,
not in their Robes, nor did the Lord Steward sit upon his Sack, but with the
rest promiscuously, The formality of a conference.
nor did the Committee for the House of Commons stand at the Bar, but sat with
the rest of their Fellows, and the Earl of Strafford sat behind the place where
he used to sit before; the reason of these changes were, because the Diet was
appointed, not for a Meeting but for a Conference, so curious are we (and
that is all) about formalities: The King, Queen, and Prince were there,
according to their Custom, not a man spoke a word in the House all the time,
but only Mr. St. John, the King's Solicitor, one of the Committee, whose drift
and purpose was to furnish the Lords with reasons, why the House of Commons had
proceeded with a Bill of Attaindor: And withal, to reply to what the Lord
Strafford had spoken, either by himself, or his Council, in matter of Law.

The Speech is in Print.

If it were not without my S^ere to give my opinion of Mr. St. John's Speech,
it should be this, That he spoke little (...) nothing to purpose, except, in
his fifth or sixth Arguments, and in them, I believe without his book, if not, I
should conceive it better and safer to live under the Laws of any other Nation,
that these of England, where all Law is, at last* resolved into an Arbitrary
power, and that by these very men, who so much elsewhere enveigh against it: Of
the Presidents which seem to pinch hardest, many of them were since the Proviso
Repealed (which is an Argument, in my apprehension of the Pleaders penury)
others nothing to purpose, as that of Felony, etc. to the other few, if Lawyers
can give satisfaction, I am confident Mr. St. John did rather advantage, than
hurt the Earl by his Pleading.

The next news which we expect to hear, is with what Resolution he went out of
this World; for it is concluded amongst the major part of his Judges; that one
must die for the People* It were well, if the blood of one, two, or three could
satisfy. The Bill, for certain, is past the higher House, to which, it is
thought, the King will be persuaded to give way* The Scaffold is built upon the
Tower Hill; God grant him Mercy for his other Sins, and I hope he will easily
answer that of Treason: He dies, as we hear, upon the Twenty third Article, for
the words attested by Sir Henry Vane, though His Majesty publicly protested
the Words were never spoken by him.

Upon the close of Mr. St. John's Speech the House dissolved; nor was there a
Word spoken but by Mr. St. John's, only the Lord Lieutenant used the last part
of his Rhetoric, and by a dumb eloquence, Manibus ad Syderatensis, all along
Mr. St. John's Speech, made his Replies with a deep silence.

Upon Friday, he Petitioned the Lords to be heard again, and that, because his
Lawyers had not fully spoken at their last meeting; but this was denied him,
because the House were to have the last Speech, nor were they content to speak
again.

Upon this Information, or what else is not known, the King (it seems, fearing
the Inconstancy of the Lords) came to the House of Saturday, at Ten of the
Clock, and having called for the House of Commons, spoke much to this effect.

The King's Speech to the House of Commons.
THat He had sincerely, without Affection or Partiality, endeavored to inform
himself concerning the Lieutenants Charge; and had, at length, seriously
pondered with himself, both concerning the matter of Fact and the matter of
Law; and now it stood him in hand to clear their judgments; then to exonerate
his own Conscience: For them, He had two things to declare.

First, That there was never such a Project, nor had the Lord Strafford ever
offered such advise, for the Transporting of the Irish Army into England; so
that in nothing the Lieutenant had been more mis-understood than in that: Which
imputation, did in no small measure, reflect on himself (the King) as if he had
intended to make War upon His own good Subjects; which thought (he said) was
far enough from his Breast; nor could any man in probability think so
unworthily of him, who had perceived how graciously he had dealt with His
Subjects elsewhere, that had deserved a great deal worse.

Secondly, That the Lieutenant had never advised him to establish an Arbitrary
Government; nor, if he had, should he have escaped condign punishment; nor
would any of His good Subjects ever think otherwise, unless they conceived him
either to be a Fool, or a Tyrant; that he either could not, or would not
discern such wickedness. He was well content (he said) with that Authority and
Power which God had put into His hands; nor should he ever think it His
Prerogative, to intrude upon the Propriety of the Subject.

For Himself, and His own Conscience (he said) he was now to Declare, That in
His own judgment, there was nothing in the Process against the Lieutenant that
deserved the censure of Treason: Over-sights, and Mis-demeanours there were, in
such a measure, that he confessed the Lord Strafford was never worthy hereafter
to bear any Office in His Kingdoms, no, not so much as of a Constable; but was
to be answerable for all his Errors when they were to be charged upon him, and
to this no^ of them should concur with greater alacrity than himself; That he
hoped, none of the^ would deny to give him the privilege of the first Voice,
which was, That he would never, in heart nor hand, concur with them to punish
this man as a Traitor, and desired therefore, that they would think of some
other way how the Business might be composed; Nor should it ever be less dear
to him (though with the loss of His dearest Blood) to protect the Innocent,
than to punish the Guilty.

At this the House of Commons startled, and adjorned themselves till Monday;
diverse censures are past upon the King's Speech, even of those that loved His
Honor; some think he was drawn to this, by a certain foreknowledge of the
Lords facility to give way to the Commons, and that it was better to express
himself then, (if by that means he could hinder the Sentence) than to
countermand the Execution thereof, when it was passed, and so draw all the envy
upon himself: Others are of opinion (which is more probable) that this has
been a Plot of the Kings bosom enemies, to set him at odds with His Subjects,
that thereby they might Fish the more securely in these troubled Waters. The
reason is, because it is very likely the Lord Strafford might have passed free
by the Voices of the Lords; but now howsoever the matter falls out, all the
blame will be imputed to the King; for if he be condemned, it will be no thanks
to the King; if justified, that will certainly be laid to the King too, as who
by His Threats and Menaces has forestalled the Voices of his Nobility: It is
conceived by wise men (and such as wish no evil to my Lord Strafford) that it
had been far better both for the King and him, to have first* ^^yed the utmost
of the Lords; for the King, because it was both possible and probable that he
might have gained the Declaration of the Lords for him; if not, it was time
enough to Interpose His own Power afterward; for the Lord Strafford, because
it has made the House of Commons a great deal the more pressing, fearing, by
the King's Peremptory Answer (from whom, in regard of the advantage of the
times, they expected nothing but a Concedimus omnia) that there is some Plot
under hand. And these thoughts produced the late tumults of the Londoners, of
which more by and by. And it is verily thought, that for these two Reasons, the
Lieutenants seeming Friends, but indeed real Enemies, have put the King upon
this way, hoping thereby, that the Lords should find occasion to pretend
necessity of doing that, which perhaps, in regard of common equity, or the
King's displeasure, they could, nor durst have done; howsoever Facta est alia,
the King is now so far engaged, that with respect to Honor and Conscience, he
cannot retire; for if the Procedure be by a Legislative Power, it falls
directly upon him, nor can he give his assent; if by a Judiciary, then must he
either hinder the Execution, or be said to have Charged himself with Injustice.

This has produced strange alterations, even the Marriage of the Prince of
Orange, (done on Sunday last, May the Second, with ordinary Solemnity) is now
exceeding hateful to the Commons, which so much before desired it; some say,
the Precipitation of that Marriage Imports no good; others, that the Parliament
had condescended to that Marriage, but did not expect that Acceleration; a
third sort, that the Party is mean enough, if not too low for the King of
England's Eldest Daughter; all of them, that the Dutchmen have offered Money
to the King for a new Service of War, and have thereby bought this Honor; this
is increased by the Landing of a Dutchman, who is to be Gentleman of the Kings
Horse; And shortly with us the Hollander will be no less odious than the
Spaniard. Oh, the wonderful changes of the untoward, unconstant, and giddy
multitude! How unhappy a time it is to know what Liberty means! and to get the
Reins cast about their own necks; it ranges madly up and down nec modum tenens
nec terminum, nor is capable of subsistence, till it has lost it self, and
what it so much affects, Liberty: So Knives are put into the hands of Children,
who discern no danger, but affect them for their splendour and glittering: So
Poison into the Mouths of Fools, which is judged only by the Taste and
Sweetness. But it seems, the Judgment of this Kingdom cannot be prevented; and
because they have sinned against themselves, by abusing their Plenty and
Fatness, it is the just Judgment of God, that they be the Executioners of his
Judgments upon themselves.

Before I tell you of Monday and Tuesdays Madness, I must tell you when and
whence this fury has its first motion.

Upon the Thursday before, a great many Apprentices beset the Spanish
Ambassadors House, near Bishops^gate, threatening to pull it down, and kill the
Man; the Mayor of London comes amongst them, and with a great deal of pains,
persuaded them to retire home, and afterward entered into the Ambassador's
House* at his coming in, the Ambassador desired him to pull down his Sword
which was carried before him, because he was now where the King of Spain had
Jurisdiction. That being done, he told the Lord Mayor, that in all his life
time he had never seen such a barbarous attempt, and desired to know whether
England was a civil Nation or no, where the Law of Nations was so monstrously
violated. The Mayor replied, That they were of the base and rascally sort of
People, and entreated the Tumult might not be imputed to the Town. The
Ambassador answered, That he could hardly acknowledge that to be a Town, ^e^
scarce a Society of Men, where there was so little Civility and Government. The
Mayor told him, That the people were discontent because Mass was said in his
house. The Ambassador replied* That the English Ambassador had the free
Exercise of his Religion at Madrid, and that he would rather forgo his life,
than any of those Privileges due to him by ^action, and the Law of Nations. The
Mayor answered, They were the more incensed against him, because the Londoners
popishly affected, were permitted to come into his house to Mass, which was
beyond both Law and Custom. The Ambassador replied, That if the Mayor would
keep them without doors, he would promise to send for none of them; but if they
came once within his doors, he could not in preservation of his Conscience, or
his Master's Honor, deny them either access to his Religion, or safeguard to
their Persons, as far as in him lay. Upon this a Guard was appointed to attend
the Ambassador's house, whether to keep out Papists, or to preserve them that
were within, or to let in others, is yet to be disputed.

The storm was quiet from thence 'till Monday, when the people being inflamed
again by the King's Speech, came to Westminster with the number of five or six
thousand, having Weapons and Battoons in their hands; at the entering of every
Coach some cried Justice; others Execution, a third man told his Fellows that
both were to be conjoined, and that Justice and Execution was the noble Word;
upon which (quasi dato-signo) all the Rabble cried aloud with one voice Justice
and Execution, with a wonderful strange noise. Some went to the Coach side and
told the Lords, that they must and would have Justice done upon the Deputy. In
particular, above 1000 of them beset the Lord Steward's Coach, and demanded
Justice and Execution of him; Justice, said they, we have gotten already, and
we only desire (and must have it) Execution. The Lord Steward replied, they
should have Justice and Execution, and desired them only to forbear, and have
patience a while: No, said they, we have had too much patience, we will not
suffer longer, and therefore, my Lord, before you go from us you must grant us
Execution* The Lord Steward told them, he was going to the House to that
effect, and that they should have all content. But whilst they were about to
detain him longer, some of the greatest Power amongst them said, We will take
his word for once, and with difficulty enough made passage for him.

The Lords stayed within 'till twelve of the Clock, nor was there any course
taken in the mean time for dissolving of the multitude; the greatest part of
them went home the back way by Water, only when the Lord Holland, Lord
Chamberlain, and Bristol, came out to their Coach, all of them called Justice
and Execution; but when they perceived that Bristol was in the Coach, they drew
near the Coach side, and told him, For you my Lord Bristol, we know you are an
Apostate from the Cause of Christ, and our mortal Enemy, we do not therefore
crave Justice from you, but shall (God willing) crave Justice upon you, and
your false Son the Lord Digby.

Let a man cast his Eyes back now but for some few Months past, and he shall
see what trust may be reposed in the favor of the giddy multitude, unless a
man shall resolve to quit all Religion and Honesty* and to mould and fashion
his Conscience to the present distemper and fancy of the people, neither can he
do so safely, when so much hazard lies in the Inconstancy of their Conceptions.

After this they drew up all the Names of those, either in the House of
Commons, or the House of Lords, whom they imagined to favor the Lieutenant,
and gave them the Title of Straffordians, with this close, That all those, and
all other Enemies to the Commonwealth, should perish with him; and did post up
the Paper at the Gate of Westminster, as if the old Democracy of Rome, and the
Tribunitial Power thereof in Cippo proscribere, were now renewed and revived.

A Copy of the Paper, posted up at the corner of the Wall of Sir William
Brunkard's House, in the Old Palace-Yard in Westminster, Monday, May 3. 1641.
The Names of the Straffordians posted.
1. Lord Digby. 2. Lord Compton. 3. Lord Buckhurst. 4. Sir Robert Hatton. 5.
Sir Thomas Fanshaw. 6. Sir Edward Alford. 7. Sir Nicholas Slanning. 8. Sir
Thomas Danby. 9. Sir George W^ntworth. 10. Sir Peter Wentworth. 11. Sir
Frederick Cornwallis. 12. Sir William Carnaby. 13. Sir Richard Winn. 14. Sir
Carvis Clifton. 15. Sir William Withrington. 16. Sir William Pennyman. 17. Sir
Patrick Curwent. 18. Sir Richard Lee. 19. Sir Henry Slingsby. 20. Sir William
Portman. 21. Mr. Garvis Hollis. 22. Mr. Sydney Godolphin. 23. Mr. Cook. 24.
Mr. Coventry. 25. Mr. Benjamin Weston. 26. Mr. William Weston. 27. Mr. Seldom.
28. Mr. Alford. 29. Mr. Floyd. 30. Mr. Herbert. 31. Captain Digby. 32. Sergeant
Hide. 33. Mr. Tailor. 34. Mr. Griffith. 35. Mr. Scowen. 36. Mr. Bridgeman. 37.
Mr. Fett^plass. 38. Dr. Turner. 39. Captain Charles Price. 40. Dr. Parry,
Civilian. 41. Mr. Arundell. 42. Mr. Newport. 43. Mr. H^lb^r^. 44. Mr. Noell.
45. Mr. ^ir^on. 46. Mr. Pollard. 47. Mr. Price. 48. Mr. Travanni^n. 49. Mr.
Jane. 50. Mr. Edgerombe. 51. Mr. Chi^^eley. 52. Mr. Maltery. 53. Mr. Porter.
54. Mr. White, Secret. E. D. 55. Mr. Warwick.
This and more shall be done to the Enemies of Justice afore-written.

Nor stayed they here, one of them in the height of his fury cried out
(Hornesco Referens) if we get not satisfaction of the Lieutenant, we will have
it of the King, or, as some say, worse, If we have not the Lieutenant's life,
we will have the King's. Oh impious Mouth! Oh un-natural Miscreant! This Man
was marked by a Gentleman of the Inns of Court, and four or five requested by
him to bear witness of the Words. Nor did he stay here, but the Gentleman (with
fidelity and courage enough) went to the fellow, and kindly invited him to
drink a Pint of Wine, the Fellow suspecting nothing went along with him, but in
the mean time he sent for a Constable, in whose hearing he asked how he durst
speak such Words as those; he like a madman replied, That he would maintain
them: Whereupon he was apprehended by the Constable, and committed to the
Gate House, where he was three or four times examined yesternight; some report
that he freely confessed his Words, and withal, threatened to show great
Authority for them, even within the Gates of the Court. This day I hear little
of him, but some say, the business will be slubber'd over with this. That he
said only, If we get not satisfaction of the Lieutenant, we will go to the
King. And it is likely this will be the Issue of the business, lest this zeal
should be quenched in the breeding and beginning, whose surcharge and excess is
laudable, yea necessary, in a time of Reformation. Add to this, that if this
man should suffer it might settle and calm the forwardness of the people,
before the whole business be ended about the Earl of Strafford.

They have further threatened, that after Wednesday they will shut up their
shops, and never rest from petitioning, till not only the Liuetenants matter,
but also all things else that concern a Reformation, be fully perfected.

The house of Commons sat all that day, (Monday) till 8 at ^ight, Monday
Protestation.
nor were they Idle all that time, but brought forth that Protestation, or band
of Association (as they term it) which is now in print, it was then drawn up,
and without further process or delay before they came out subscribed by the
whole House, except the Lord Digby* and an Uncle or Friend of his.

It is thought by some (whose heads are not green) that it is very like a
Covenant in Scotland, but that must be left to further time and wiser heads, if
that Comment that perhaps will follow, be not worse then the ^ext, it may in
probability happen out to be canonical enough, but the too general Phrase in
it, lies very open to have senses (pro re nat^) thrust upon them, which may, be
very justly suspected to have been intended; where the Oath and Lawgiver, is
the party, only some have observed two remarkable things upon this.

First, Some think it strange that seeing the House of Commons have lately
fined the Convocation House, upon this ground especially, that they enjoined an
oath, which is a Legislative power (say they) and only due to Parliaments, how
they at this time, (as if all the Legislative power were in them) without the
advice of the Lords (I say not of the Church, though in matters Ecclesiastical)
or approbation of the King (which is conceived to be a mighty encroachment upon
his Prerogative) should offer either to prescribe, or subscribe such an Oath*
as if it were essential to our Reformation, ever to be done by the people,
without Authority of the Superior Powers, and yet before it pass into a
Statute it must come in by a Bill ^steron proteron* but perhaps it is hoped
that by this Anti-dated subscription, they shall find out the more easy passage
for the Bill when it comes to be propounded.

Secondly, That the House of Commons were four hours pleading, upon that one
expression in the Protestation, [ The true reformed Religion expressed in the
Doctrine of the Church of England.] Some who were more tender toward the
Church, and desiring that the word Discipline, might be adjoined to the word
Doctrine, but others mainly opposed that, reasoning that no Discipline could be
admitted, but all to be esteemed as Popish that was not contained in the
Doctrine, that is in the word of God, which party at the last did prevail,
though the other affirmed, that there was more express warrant in the word of
God for Bishops, than for ruling Elders; but if some Hint be not there intended
against the Deans and Chapters, the Lyturgies, and Ceremonies, yea the very
Bishops of the Church of England, let any man judge; and of what dangerous
consequence that may be, if those who pretend to have authority in all Church
Affairs may be permitted to give Sentence, is not difficult to determine.

This day the people met again, but in smaller numbers, they have threatened to
come to morrow with all their main forces, and not to des^^t till the
Lieutenant be executed, and their other petitions obtained. The Oath was
likewise presented to the Lords, and some say all of them (except the eight
Recusant Lords, and four of the Bishops) have signed the same, but others say
they have only admitted the Bill, which is more likely. I think it is Luca^
tells us the tale, That when the 100 handed Giant Briareus (whom the
Mithologizers of Poems use as a Type of the multitude) was first brought into
the world, his Father Jupiter desired Mercury, to set his Scheme, and calculate
the Stars of his Nativity* no Father, said Mercury, that is needless, a little
time will show his disposition, for so many hands cannot belong Idle: A very
lively Idea of this business now in Agitation: Your self may make the
application by the events.

Upon Saturday, May the eighth, the Bill against the Lord Strafford past the
Lords, Saturday May 8.
there were forty five present, of which nineteen voiced for him, and twenty
six against him, the greatest part of his friends absented themselves upon
pretense, (whether true or suppositious) that they feared the multitude,
otherwise his Suffrages had more than counterpoised the Voters for his death.

In the Bill he is condemned of Treason, and all his English Lands (the other
part of the Coat is left for those in Ireland) forfeited, with an especial
Proviso, that this Act shall in no ways he forceable against others, than if
it never had been made; which to his friends of Judgment smells strongly of a
particular hatred against him, as if the same common way of Justice should not
equally strike against all (which it should do in true Justice) but that Crimes
did differ in their Subjects.

Two ways there were to have proceeded against him, by a Legislative, or by a
Judiciary power, both did strike home alike at his life and his Estate, both
alike ready, both sure by reason of the proofs, the Difference only this; this
might have been done without the King, that only by him, because this is a
Sentence, that a Statute: A man would think the Judiciary way had been the more
sure, and that the King would rather have connived, and not exercised his
Prerogative by a Reprival, than to have Intressed himself in the Legislative
proceedings, by consenting to the Act against him; in whom the world conceived
(for by past and future services) he had so great an Interrest: But they (it
seems) notwithstanding his Majesty's late Attestation, of the Gentleman's
Innocence in point of Treason, were more confident of his gracious Inclination
to Justify their own Act; and more desirous too that he should demonstrate his
willingness in punishing such transgressors, and therefore the Bill went on by
the Statute.

The same day another Bill passed both the Houses, that because of the
important business of the Kingdom, the Parliament should not be broken up by
the King without the special advise and consent of both the Houses, till all
their grievances were redressed, and their safety provided for, which space of
time, for any thing I know, may last till dooms day; some would have had the
prefinition of 5, some 7, some 9 years put to it; others replied, that this
would be both odious and dangerous; odious, in that it should seem so long a
Parliament; dangerous, in that the time may happen out possible to be longer;
some think it an honor (I rather ^ fatality, or to sweeten the word a
Providence) that both their Bills should pass at once, as if [ Generatio ^nius,
were Corruption alterius.] And this new Government should take life from the
death of the Earl of Strafford.

In the afternoon the House of Commons desired access to the King in the
Banqueting House, and having stayed there an hour for his coming, in three
words they propounded these two great Bills, desiring that he would give his
Royal Assent to them both (Quod si non prosint singula, Juncta Jubant) Withal
humbly showing that the present danger of the Kingdom could admit of no
delays. The King told them they should expect an answer on Monday Morning.

The Court at this time was surcharged with a confluence of People, quasi
Civitas tota sedibus suis mota, as if the whole City was come to petition for
Justice, a Government indeed worse than a Democracy, where the people do not
rule but play the Tyrants: If there were no Monarchy there needs no conscience
to obey it; But where it is, and cannot protect it self, the good subject must
either forget himself, or his loyalty; A two edged sword killing either the
body or the soul, nor in this are men in better case than the winged Fishes,
that our Southern Mariners tell us of, which, if they swim beneath the water
are caught by Dolphins, if they fly above for refuge, snatched away by the
hungry Ravenous souls, (Lord help then the times, or help our patience, and
Resolutions, give us either redress in thee, or confidence in thee.)

The wiser sort conceived these two Bills too big for them to desire at once,
and that both of them together might procure a flat denial, but the more
courageous knew the readier way by far, having often had experience of his
Majesty's readiness to grant just desires; resolving that he that expects to
lose the day, is beaten at his own diffidence, and it is the quality of some
men to swallow Camels upon a sudden, who (if you give them leisure) will
perchance strain at a Gnat. Their Resolutions may aim at this, but despair to
remedy that; Nature gives the reason, Omne agens se exercet intra spharam
Activitatis. Dangers, if they come but straggling upon us, we may collect our
spirits well enough, and easily resist them; but if they come by whole troops,
Amazment and Fear admits of no consultation for the future, but only intends to
decline the present and pressing hazard; whereon the ancient Ga^ls made their
first on-sets, with valor beyond the courage of men, and with fearful cryings
and shouts belying their own Animosity, to stupify and quell that of the enemy.

Sunday.
Sunday, All the day the King was resolute never to give way to the Bill against
the Lord Strafford, telling them withal, that it seemed strange to him, that
the man could not die, unless he, and he only; by giving Sentence the Kings
Legislative way, should condemn him: The Lord Pembrook brought the King a piece
of Scripture, 2 Samuel 19. from the 5 to the 9 verse; the words indeed became a
Joab rather than himself till he had scattered the force of the Kings (not
eldest Son yet eldest) Daughter, the Kingdom of Scotland; here is some Analogy
with Absalom and in nothing else, for David was sorry for shedding the nocent,
they not sorry for shedding the Innocent blood, though the Issue be not the
same.

Four Bishops
Four Bishops were sent for by the King, the Primate of Ireland, the Bishop of
Durham, Lincoln and Carlisle: Some say (and I do rather believe it) that the
King was desirous the Bill should be voiced again, and argued, the Bishops had
their suffrages in the admission though not in the approbation of the Bill,
others think in regard the Primate was there, (who had no Interest in this
Kingdom) it was to resolve the Kings Conscience; for my part I see not how they
should do this, seeing the business was grounded upon a case in Law, which none
of them (unless the Bishop of Lincoln had learned when he was Lord Keeper)
could possibly discuss; for if the King was tender in it, how could they
persuade him to give way, if not, what needed their Resolution?

But it may be that they persuaded him, that in conscience he might prefer the
Opinion of the Judges before his own, and that if (though with some
reluctation) they thought upon their Oaths, the Proceedings to be lawful, he
might give way to them. This is not unlikely, because the Judges were sent for
the same time, and it seems, for the same Service; and if it be so, I admire
(and adore too) the wonderful providence of God, who in his preparatory Act, to
this unlawful Judgment (which undoubtedly will follow) suffers not only the
King and the Country, but the Church too, (as if her Cup were not yet full) to
be involved.

But could this be to the matter of Fact, the King I am sure knew him to be
free from any the least intention of subverting the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, and could the Bishops satisfy this scruple too, it may be they are
persuaded, that the Proofs might be taken Implicitly from the House of Commons,
as the Law from the Judges: It is reported indeed that they besought the King
with many Tears to give way, and that to prevent the ruin of the Kingdom, which
these Statesmen (who will be ever content with the longest life for themselves,
'till by piecemeal they be thrust from all) did see would necessarily follow.
Well, I dare Prophecy to them they shall not want their Reward, neither from
the King nor People, for the next tumult of people shall be against their
Liturgies, Surplices, and Church-Ornaments. And seeing they have now
over-persuaded the King in this, if they can procure him, then to protect
themselves from those imminent dangers which hang over their heads, they shall
do a miracle. Sed quos perdere vult Jupiter, dementat. Some body else will
persuade the King that to satisfy the common People, and to prevent the Ruin
of the Kingdom, Bishoprics, Deans, Prebends, and all Cathedrals must down, Sed
omen avertat Deus optimus.

Sunday, all day nothing sounded in the King's Ears, but fears, terrors, and
threatenings of worse and worse, the noise of Drums and Trumpets were imagined
to be heard of rebelling People from every corner of the Kingdom, yea
Apprentices, Cobblers, and Fruiterers, presented themselves, as already running
into the King's Bedchamber.

After they they had wrestled him breathless, and (as they do with great
Fishes) given him scope of Line wherein to spend his strength, at last, victus
dedit manus, being overcome with such uncessant Importunities, he yielded up
the Buckler, And about Nine of the Clock at Night (oh deplorable necessity of
the times! or rather, oh the frailty of human Nature! that can neither foresee,
nor sustain this necessity) the King promised to Sign both the Bills the next
Morning, which was accordingly done, and a Commission drawn up for his (I do
not care in what Relation you take the word) Execution. Ingentes Curae stupent,
loquuntur leves.

Though I had resolved with the Painter (who could not express his Grief
sufficiently in weeping for his Daughter) here to have drawn the Curtain, yet
it will not be, something must overflow.

Consider the Gentleman as a Man, his Judgment, Memory, Eloquence, real
Perfections in this age of appearances, consider him as a Subject, his Loyalty,
his Courage, his Integrity to King and Country, in these disloyal and
faint-hearted times; consider him as a Christian, his love to the Church, his
respect to Churchmen, in this profane and over-weaning Generation; let Worth,
Honesty, and Religion, weep his Funerals, who suffers for all, and yet by all,
yea as an Enemy to all these; talk not hereafter to me of Justice, Equity, or
Conscience, they are but Names, and those scornful and empty Names too. It is
Power, Faction, and Interest, that are the managers of human Affairs, and sways
the times. I defy all History to furnish us with the like Parallel, of a man
accused by his Country, by reason of his noble and eager desires to maintain
them in plenty and reputation, convicted by the Church for his actual
performance, and serious intention, to restore both the Dignities and Revenues
thereof; his Prince even forced to condemn him, after his integrity to persuade
due obedience, and to protect Royal Authority. Happy, yea thrice happy he,
whose Innocence was wedded to his Perfection, and both of them (for so it shall
ever be in my Calendar) crowned with Martyrdom. Forgive, I entreat you, these
broken Expressions of a passionate Soul, my obligements to the Gentleman were
little, my expectation from him nothing, only an ingenious, though perhaps a
simple thought of the present Crimes, and future punishment of this Kingdom
(unless God be more merciful) whether from the privation of his Life, or merit
of his Death, has extorted thus much from me. Remember the story of Innocent
Socrates.

You desire me to be present, and see the Catastrophe of the business; I should
pluck out mine Eyes, if I thought they had so much cruelty to behold such a
spectacle; you may think it courage, but I inhumanity: My own Sins do too much
interest me in his sufferings, though I be not accessory by my sight. The
zealous Pilgrims of the Turkish Religion, after they had seen the blessed
Spectacle of Mahomet's Tomb at Mecca, do presently make themselves blind by
continual poaring upon hot burning Bricks, so destroying the Optic Nerves, as
thinking themselves unworthy ever afterward to look upon any worldly Object; I
leave your self Sir to make the application, I dare ingeniously say it, that
all my sufferings to this time (and I have not been without a round share of
them) did never touch me so nearly, as the sufferings of Justice, Religion, and
Loyalty, by this one Fact: Not for any evil consequence to me (God knows) I am
beneath the reach of Fortune, and can easily change my Climate; but for that
Cloud which hangs over the public, and will not, I fear, be dissolved till
the measures of deservings be made up brim full.

What turbulency, what confusion is within me, you may easily guess by these
Symptoms that are without, those raw and indigested expressions, it is my
daily labor to obtain the Mastery of my self and my affections, but upon such
extraordinary times and occasions, they grow too strong for me; I must give way
and retire before I get new strength again: Hence it is, that though at the
Lord Strafford's last departure out of this World, I might have been assured of
his Mantle, that is, the doubling of his Perfections upon me, and of a capacity
to admit of the least of them, yet I could not have attended his Execution; my
heart was too weak, and my Eyes too blind to behold such a woeful spectacle; but
be you assured he will not dye like one of the vulgar, nor like one of those
wanton Coursers who can rush fiercely into the Battle, yet withal start at his
own shadow: He has done, and can do, greater things than dye, and that too
without any in-decorum. As he has lived for the real Demonstration of his
service and fidelity, so he can dye for the pretended safety of his Sovereign,
and that in a strange way too, as if the head could not be safe, but by cutting
off the right hand.

Sir, your desires have obliged me to unty my Wounds, yet scarce bound up, and
by reflection upon that sad object, to fall a bleeding again; nor can I grant
your suit to make that great Lord speak in his own dialect. Pythagoras's
transmutation could not have found out a fit lodging for that noble Soul, nor
does nature give us wonders every day, nor strain her self ambitiously to show
forth the utmost reach of her perfections or Masterpiece, and to present us
with such a rare conjunction of such a courage, attended with loyalty to
danger; wisdom accompanied with eloquence to admiration. What could not that
man think? What think and not speak? What speak and not do? But I will not be
too Rhetorical, that Speech, or rather Blemish, printed and pretended to be
spoken by him in the Tower, is as like him as he was to a Pedant, his Soul now
laughs (if that natural sense could reach so high) at that poor injury, it does
exceedingly well become the Charity of the times, not only to perturb his rest,
but also by belying his Expressions, to make his own hands the Scatterers of
his own dust, and his own Tongue the Trumpet of his own infamy: That Speech is
a foist and a lie. His other Speech on the Scaffold, and with it, his Letter to
the King, you shall find at the end of this Letter, in the best way we could
get it, something of his greatness appears in his phrase, and as much life too
as could by snatches be gathered from his mouth, yet it comes far short of that
Grace which it had when it was delivered by himself, what by the escapes of the
Observers, what by the Faint-heartedness of the Press, which durst not speak
freely, for fear of Arbitrary Treason.

Two observable Expressions I had from an understanding Auditor.

First, Sir George Wentworth weeping extremely upon the Scaffold, was thus
checked by him: Brother, what do you see in me that deserves these Tears? Does
my fear betray my guiltiness? Or my too much boldness any Atheism? Think now
(and this is the third time) that you do accompany me to my Marriage Bed: Nor
did I ever throw off my Clothes with such freedom and content, as in this my
preparrtion to my Grave. That Stock [pointing to the Block appointed for his
Execution] must be my Pillow, here must I rest, and rest from all my labors;
no thoughts of Envy, no dreams of Treason, jealousies of Foes, cares for the
King, the State or my self, shall interrupt this nap; therefore Brother, with
me, pity mine Enemies, who beside their intention have made me blessed; rejoice
in my Innocence, rejoice in my happiness.

Secondly, Kneeling down upon the Scaffold he made this Protestation; I hope,
Gentlemen, you do think that neither fear of loss, nor love to Reputation, will
cause me to belly God and my own Conscience, for now I am in the door going out,
and my next step must be from Time to Eternity, either of Peace or Pain; to
clear my self to you all, I do solemnly protest before God, I am not guilty (so
far as I can understand) of that great Crime laid to my Charge, nor have ever
had the least inclination or intention to damnifie or prejudice the King, the
State, the Laws, or Religion of this Kingdom, but with my best endeavors to
serve all, and to support all [ So might God be merciful to his Soul.] His
words did justify him more there than in Westminster Hall, and made such a
deep impression in the hearers, that a great many of those who cried out for
Justice against him (after their fury was spent, and their madness strewed with
cold Blood) wished their Tongues had been cut out of their heads, before they
had opened their mouths against him; others most ignobly imputed this to his
effronted boldness, and are so persuaded of their own infallibility, that they
marvelled he believed not his Actions to be Errors upon their Word, and did not
confess their Opinions to be Truth it self: A kind of People they are beyond
the cure of Bedlam, and nothing but the Whipping-post, or letting Blood can do
them good, or bring them remedy, Vexatio tantum dabit Intellectum, it is nothing
but sense will teach them Judgment, and affliction Charity, and both these, I
fear, are hastening on a pace.

His Countenance was in a middle posture, betwixt Dejection and Boldness, a man
may call it even Courage and Innocence it self, without any fear of Critics;
nor could his very Enemies, through their multiplying Glasses, perceive the
least affectation of disguise in him; never man looked Death, more stately, in
the Face; never man trembled more at his Sins, such were his Contritions for
his Oversights, and such his immovable confidence of Gods Pardon and his Mercy.

His Prayer ravished all the standers by, that they could not judge whether to
prefer his Zeal, or his Penitency; yea, the Primate of Ireland (who is no
complementer) reported afterward to the King, that he had then first learned
to make supplications aright to Godward; and withal, told His Majesty, That he
had seen many die, but never such a white Soul (this was his own expression)
return to its Maker; At which Words, the King was pleased to turn himself
about, and offer a Tear to his Memory. -- Tantorum mercede Laborum. --


And because mis-report, about him* and my Lords-Grace of Canterbury, has
wandered as far as Cambridge, give me leave to add the Story of that mistake. It
was reported here by the divulgers of such slanders, that a little before his
death, he had charged all his Misfortunes, Oversights, and Misdemeanors, upon
the Archbishop of Canterbury, as the prime Author, and had bitterly cursed the
Day of their first Acquaintance: A pretty Invention it was, to charge the Axe
again, and to furnish the People with lungs and voices to cry for another
Sacrifice; yea, to stain this Martyrs long white Robe, with the Innocent blood
of another. Hero. O ye sons of men! How long will ye love vanity, and seek
after leasing?

For this cause, I was the more Inquisitive to learn out the Truth of this
particular, and had it thus related to me by a worthy Divine, Doctor Wimberly,
who dining with my Lord of Canterbury, the day after the Earl of Strafford's
Execution, had it from his own mouth. And my Lords-Grace, it seems, having
heard of the mistake, did at every period take the Lieutenant of the Tower,
then present, his Attestation and Approbation.

That the Lord Strafford, the Night before the Execution, had sent for the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and asked him whether it were possible he might speak
with the Archbishop; the Lieutenant told him he might not do it, without order
from the Parliament. Mr. Lieutenant, said he, you shall here what passes
betwixt us; it is not a time now, either for him to plot Heresy, or me to plot
Treason: The Lieutenant answered, That he was limited, and therefore desired
his Lordship would Petition the Parliament for that favor; No (said he) I have
gotten my dispatch from them, and will trouble them no more; I am now
petitioning an higher Court, where neither partiality can be expected, nor
error feared: But my Lord, (said he) turning to the Primate of Ireland, then
present, what I should have spoken to my Lords-Grace of Canterbury, you shall
desire the Archbishop to lend me his Prayers this Night, and to give me his
Blessing when I do go abroad to Morrow, and to be in his Window, that by my
last farewell, I may give him thanks for this, and all other his former favors.

The Primate, having delivered the Message without delay, the Archbishop
replied, That in conscience, he was bound to the first, and in duty and
obligation to the second, but he feared his weakness and passion would not lend
him Eyes to behold his departure.

The next Morning, at his coming forth, he drew near to the Archbishops
lodgings, and said to the Lieutenant, Though I do not see the Archbishop, yet
give me leave, I pray you, to do my last observance toward his rooms; in the
mean time, the Archbishop, advertized of his approach, came out to the Window;
then the Earl bowing himself to the Ground, my Lord, said he, Your Prayers, and
your Blessing, The Archbishop lift up his hands, and bestowed both, but
overcome with grief, fell to the Ground in Animi Deliquio. The Earl proceeding
a little farther, bowed the second time, saying, Farwell, my Lord; God protect
your Innocence.

To this relation, the Lord of Canterbury added, that it might perhaps seem an
effeminacy, and softness unbecoming him, to be so cast down, but he hoped, by
God's Assistance, and his own Innocence, that when he came to his own Execution
(which he daily longed for) that the World should perceive he had been more
sencible of the Lord Strafford's loss, than of his own; and good reason it
should be so (said he) for the Gentleman was more serviceable to the Church (he
would not mention the State) than either himself, or any of all the Churchmen
had ever^been.

And that there may be a slaughter-Goat for the Sins of the People in Scotland,
to wait upon this report, they have fained another of the same Meal; that the
Arch Bishop of Canterbury casts back all his misdemeanors upon the Bishop of
Ross, as if either the Lord Strafford had been tutored by the Archbishop, or
he by the Bishop of Ross, in the King and Countries Service; I did not think
that both of them had past their pupilage, and could not have been bended to
execute the directions of any man living, but only their own Masters; but this
is a fair advertisement to the Bishop of Ross, to make himself the Scapegoat.
Heu fuge nate Deo.


Give me leave to adjoin one thing more; When he was marched to the Scaffold,
more like the General in the head of an Army, to breath Victory, than like a
condemned man, to undergo the Sentence of Death; the Lieutenant of the Tower
desired him to take Coach, for fear the People should rush in upon him and tear
him in pieces; No, (said he) Master Lieutenant, I dare look death in the Face,
and I hope the People too; Have you a care that I do not escape, and I care not
how I dye, whether by the hand of the Executioner, or the madness and fury of
the People. If that may give them better content, it is all one to me.

It is but diminutive to call it a wonder, it is something above, that his
thoughts and expressions should be so present with him; no more putrefaction in
them, than if he had been about some ordinary business: His Alacrity, his
Devotion did amaze; yea, tear in pieces the hearts of all those about him, who
had the least Grace or Humanity in them.

Too much Perfection indeed to be lost at one blow; but this Age was not worthy
of it, nor shall any after Age, I think, ever enjoy the like, that only which
is possible is the object of the Will, and therefore I will not endeavor to
find out words for expressing this wonder of the Times; only I leave his
virtues to speak the rest, to the Admiration of Ours, and Compassion of
succeeding Ages.

A Letter to a Friend.
BElieve me, Sir; this blessed departure of his, has put me in love with
Scaffolds more than Deathbeds; Let it be my Paradox, (if not Prophetical to me)
that it is the best kind of Dissolution, provided there be Innocence to uphold
the Conscience; and (with good men at least) to maintain the Reputation
afterward: Here you are attended with the Pregnancy of Judgment and Memory,
not weakened, nor clouded with tedious and giddy Sicknesses: Here you have a
time prefixed, and must of necessity concentricate your self and your best
resolution; elsewhere Nature is unwilling to find a Suspension, abhorring its
own Destruction, (Imo quam multos in medio scelere mors occupavit and medium
secuit crimen.) Here a Moment ends the Pain, which perhaps not seven
Apprentiships elsewere; and here, if any where, we find pity, yea, deservings
both with God and good men; but he that sent us hither must prescribe us the
way of our return.

Upon that very day of the Execution, in the Afternoon, ( Abyss^s abyssum
invocat, Blood calls for Blood) there happened a conflict betwixt the Scots and
English Army, no certain number yet reported, nor what occasion; (some say Six
score, some Three score Scots; some Twenty, some Thirty English) only the
matter it self was represented by the General, (the Lord Holland) upon a Letter
from Sir John Conniers to the Parliament, upon Friday, with a mighty regret,
that he had been appointed for Peace, but that unhappy rub had fallen out much
contrary to his desire.

The King sent a Letter the day before the Execution, by the Prince, to the
Vpper-house, desiring the Rigor of that Sentence might be remitted; but it was
sent back unbroken up, for fear either to refuse the King, or discontent the
People: God forbid His Majesty should give so slender an ear to their Petitions.

The Lord Strafford's Children are restored to all his Estate, and if they
Petition for it, shall be to his Honors too; the House of Commons have been as
forward in this as any else; whether to make some recompense to them, or to
give proof to the Nobility (lest they should be scared by the example) that not
so much the Means as the Man was aimed at. But it will be a Question, whether
they can restore that Head too, when the Kingdom shall need its service. It is
to be feared, that his great Abilities will shortly be more understood by our
want of them, than our fruition; so dark is man's understanding in Preserving
that which is virtuous and useful amongst us. Virtutem Incolumem odimus.



The Earl of Strafford's Letter to His MAJESTY.
IT has been my greatest grief in all my troubles, to be taken as a person
that should endeavor to present and set things amiss between Your Majesty and
Your People, and to have given Council tending to the disquiet of Your Majesty,
and Your three Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that such an attempt (my private condition considered) had
been a great madness, seeing through your gracious favor I was so provided, as
I could not expect in any kind to mend my Fortune, or to please my mind, more
than by resting where your bounteous hand had placed me; nay, the business is
most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty it is well known, that my poor
and humble advices concluded still in this, That your Majesty should never be
happy, 'till there were a right understanding procured betwixt you and them: No
other means to effect and settle this happiness, but by the Council and Assent
of the Parliament; and no way to prevent the growing Evils of this State, but
by putting your self entirely upon the Loyalty and good Affection of your
Subjects.

Yet (such is my misfortune) the truth finds little credit, the contrary (it
seems) generally believed, and my self reputed the cause of this great
separation betwixt you and your People: Under a heavier Censure than this I am
persuaded no Gentleman can suffer, and now I understand that the minds of Men
are the more incensed against me, notwithstanding your Majesty has declared,
That in your Princely Opinion I am not guilty of Treason, nor are you satisfied
in Conscience to pass the Bill: This brings me into a great straight. Here is
before me the ruin of my Children and Family, hitherto untouched in all the
branches of it with any foul Crime. Here are before me the many Evils which may
befall your Sacred Person, and the whole Kingdom, should your self and the
Parliament be less satisfied the one with the other than is necessary for the
King and People. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared by
mortal Men [Life and Death:] To say, Sir, there has not been a conflict within
me about these things, were to make my self less Man than (God knows) my
infirmities will give me leave, and to call a destruction upon my self, and my
young Children, where the intentions (at least) of my heart, have been innocent
of this great Offense (may be believed) would find no easy consent from Flesh
and Blood.

But, out of much sadness, I am come to a Resolution of that which I take to be
best becoming me, that is, To look upon that which is principally to be
considered in it self, and that is doubtless the prosperity of your sacred
Person and the Commonwealth, infinitely to be preferred before any Man's
private Interest: And therefore in few words, as I have put my self wholly upon
the Honor and Justice of my Peers; so clearly as I wish your Majesty has been
pleased to have spared that Declaration of yours on Saturday last, and to have
left me entirely to their Lordships; so now (to set your Majesty's Conscience
at Liberty) I do most humbly beseech You, for the preventing of such mischiefs
as may happen by your refusal, to pass the Bill; by this means to remove
(praised be God I cannot say this accursed, but I confess) this unfortunate
thing forth of the way toward that blessed Agreement, which God, I trust,
shall for ever Establish betwixt you and your Subjects. Sir, my consent herein
shall acquit you more to God, than all the World can do beside. To a willing
Man there is no injury done, and as by God's Grace I forgive all the World;
with a calmness and meekness of infinite contentment to my dislodging Soul, so,
Sir, I can give the life of this World with all cheerfulness imaginable, in the
just acknowledgment of your exceeding favors, and only beg, that in your
goodness, you would vouchsafe to cast your gracious Regard upon my poor Son and
his three Sisters, less or more, and no otherwise, than their unfortunate
Father shall appear more or less guilty of this Death. God preserve your
Majesty.

Tower, May 9. 1641. Your Majesty's most Humble, and Faithful Subject and
Servant, STRAFFORD.

The Petition of THOMAS, Earl of STRAFFORD, to the Right-Honourable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, at Westminster, 1641.
Shows,
THat seeing it is the good Will and Pleasure of God, that your Petitioner is
now shortly to pay that duty which we all owe to our frail Nature; He shall in
all Christian Patience and Charity conform and submit to that Justice, in a
comfortable assurance of the great hope laid up for us, in the Mercy and Merits
of our Savior, Blessed for ever.

Only he humbly craves to return your Lordships most humble thanks for your
noble Compassion toward those Innocent Children, who now with his last
Blessing, he commits to the protection of Almighty God, beseeching your
Lordships to finish your pious Intentions toward them, and desiring that the
reward thereof, may be given you by him, who is able to give above all that we
are able either to ask or think, wherein I trust the Honorable House of
Commons will afford their Christian assistance.

And so beseeching your Lordships, charitably to forgive all his omissions and
infirmities, he does heartily and truly recommend your Lordships to the Mercies
of our Heavenly Father, that for his goodness, he may protect you in every good
work. Amen.

There was a foolish, ridiculous and scandalous Speech Printed, which was
pretended to have been spoken by the Earl of Strafford, to certain Lords,
before his coming out of the Tower, which is protested against, and avowed to
be false, by the Lord Primate of Ireland, Earl of Cleveland, Earl of Newport,
Lord Rich, Sir William Balfoure, Sir William Wentworth, Sir George Wentworth,
Dr. Carre, Dr. Price. -- De Moriuis nil nisi verum.


The Paper containing the Heads of the Lord Strafford 's last Speech, written
with his own hand, as it was left upon the Scaffold, falling out of his Bosom.

1. Come to pay the last Debt we owe to sin. 2. Rise to Righteousness. 3. Dye
willingly. 4. Forgive all. 5. Submit to justice but, in my Intentions, Innocent
from subverting etc. 6. Wishing nothing but good Prosperity to King and People.
7. Acquit the King constrained. 8. Beseech to Repent. 9. Strange way to write
the beginning of Reformation, and settlement of a Kingdom in Blood. 10. Beseech
that demand may rest there. 11. Call not blood on themselves. 12. Dye in the
Faith of the Church. 13. Pray for it, and desire their Prayers with me.

A true COPY of his SPEECH delivered on the Scaffold.
My Lord Primate of Ireland,
IT is my great comfort that I have your Lordship by me this day, in regard I
have been known to you these many years, and I do thank God and your Lordship
for it that you are here, I should be very glad to obtain so much silence as to
be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not, the noise is so great. My Lords,
I am come hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay that
last Debt I owe to Sin, which is Death; and by the blessing of that God, to
rise again through the Merits of Jesus Christ to Righteousness, and Life
Eternal. [Here he was a little interrupted.]

Mr Lords, I am come hither to submit to that Judgment which has passed
against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind; I thank God, I do
freely forgive all the World, a forgiveness that is not spoken from the Teeth
outward, (as they say) but from the very Heart: I speak it in the presence of
Almighty God, before whom I stand, that there is not a displeasing thought
arising in me toward any man living. I thank God I can say it, and truly too,
my conscience bearing me witness, that in all my Employment since I had the
Honor to serve His Majesty, I never had any thing in the purpose of my heart,
but what tended to the joint and individual prosperity of King and People,
although it has been my ill fortune to be misconstrued.

I am not the first that has suffered in this kind, it is the common Portion
of us all, while we are in this life to err, Righteous Judgment we must wait
for in another place, for here we are very subject to be mis-judged one of
another; there is one thing that I desire to free my self of, and I am very
confident (speaking it now with much cheerfulness) that I shall obtain your
Christian Charity in the belief of it. I was so far from being against
Parliaments, that I did allways think the Parliaments of England were the most
happy constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived under, and the best means
under God to make the King and People happy.

For my Death I here acquit all the World, and beseech the God of Heaven
heartily to forgive them that contrived it, though in the intentions and
purposes of my heart I am not guilty of what I dye for: And my Lord Primate, it
is a great comfort for me, that His Majesty conceives me not meriting so severe
and heavy a punishment, as is the utmost Execution of this Sentence. I do
infinitely rejoice in this mercy of his, and I beseech God return it into his
own bosom, that he may find mercy when he stands most in need of it.

I wish this Kingdom all the prosperity and happiness in the World, I did it
living* and now dying it is my wish; I do most humbly recommend this to every
one who hears me, and desire they would lay their hands upon their hearts, and
consider seriously, whether the beginning of the happiness and reformation of a
Kingdom, should be written in Letters of Blood; consider this when you are at
your homes, and let me be never so unhappy, as that the last drop of my Blood
should rise up in Judgment against any one of you; but I fear you are in a
wrong way.

My Lords, I have but one word more, and with that I shall end. I profess that
I dye a true and obedient Son to the Church of England, wherein I was born, and
in which I was bred. Peace and prosperity be ever to it.

It has been objected (if it were an Objection worth the answering) that I
have been inclined to Popery; but I say truly from my heart, that from the time
that I was one and twenty years of Age, to this present, going now upon forty
nine, I never had in my heart to doubt of this Religion of the Church of
England, nor ever had any man the boldness to suggest any such thing to me, to
the best of my remembrance. And so being reconciled by the merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior, into whose bosom I hope I shall shortly be gathered, to
those Eternal happinesses which shall never have end, I desire heartily the
forgiveness of every man for any rash or unadvised words, or any thing done
amiss, and so my Lords and Gentlemen farewell; farewell all things of this World.

I desire that you would be silent, and Join with me in Prayer, and I trust in
God we shall all meet and live Eternally in Heaven, there to receive the
accomplishment of all Happiness, where every Tear shall be wiped away from our
Eyes, and every sad thought from our Hearts, and so God bless this Kingdom, and
Jesus have mercy on my Soul.

Then turning himself about, he Saluted all the Noblemen, and took a solemn
leave of all considerable persons upon the Scaffold, giving them his hand.

After that, he said, Gentlemen, I would say my Prayers, and entreat you all
(...) pray with me, and for me; then his Chaplain laid the Book of
Common Prayer upon the Cha^ before him as he kneeled down, on which he prayed
almost a quarter of an hour, and then as long or longer without the Book, and
concluded with the Lords Prayer.

Standing up he spies his Brother Sir George Wentworth, and calls him to him,
saying, Brother, we must part, remember me to my Sister, and to my Wife, and
carry my Blessing to my Son, and charge him that he fear God, and continue an
obedient Son to the Church of England, and warn him that he bears no private
grudge or revenge toward any man concerning me; and bid him beware that he
meddle not with Church Livings, for that will prove a Moth and Canker to him in
his Estate, and wish him to content himself to be a Servant to his Country, not
aiming at higher Preferments.

Aliter.] To his Son Mr. Wentworth he commends himself, and gives him charge to
serve his God, to submit to his King with all Faith and Allegiance in things
Temporal, to the Church in things Spiritual; charge him again and again, as
he will answer it to him in Heaven, never to meddle with the Patrimony of the
Church, for if he did, it would be a Canker to eat up the rest of his Estate.

Carry my Blessing also to my Daughter Anne, and Arabella, charge them to serve
and fear God, and he will bless them; not forgetting my little Infant, who yet
knows neither good nor evil, and cannot speak for it self, God speak for it,
and bless it. Now, said he, I have nigh done, one stroke will make my Wife
Husbandless, my dear Children Fatherless, and my poor Servants Masterless, and
will separate me from my dear Brother, and all my Friends, But let God be to
you and them all in all.

After this, going to take off his Doublet, and to make himself unready, he
said, I thank God I am not afraid of Death, nor daunted with any discouragement
rising from any fears, but do as cheerfully put off my Doublet at this time, as
ever I did when I went to bed; then he put off his Doublet, wound up his Hair
with his Hands, and put on a white Cap.

Then he called, Where is the Man that is to do this last Office? (meaning the
Executioner) call him to me; when he came and asked him forgiveness, he told
him, he forgave him and all the World. Then kneeling down by the Block, he went
to Prayer again himself, the Primate of Ireland kneeling on the one side, and
the Minister on the other: To the which Minister, after Prayer, he turned
himself, having done Prayer, and spoke some few words softly, having his hands
lifted up; and closed with the Minister's hands.

Then bowing himself to lay his Head upon the Block, he told the Executioner,
That he would first lay down his Head to try the fitness of the Block, and take
it up again before he would lay it down for good and all; and so he did: And
before he laid it down again, he told the Executioner, That he would give him
warning when to strike by stretching forth his hands; and presently laying down
his Neck upon the Block, and stretching forth his hands, the Executioner struck
off his Head at one blow, and taking it up in his hand, showed it to all the
People, and said, God save the King.

His Body was afterward Embalmed, and appoined to be carried into Yorkshire,
there to be buried amongst his Ancestors.

He left these three Instructions for his Son in Writing.
First, That he should continue still to be brought up under those Governors
to whom he had committed him; as being the best he could pick out of all those
within his knowledge, and that be should not change them, unless they were
weary of him; that he should rather want himself, than they should want any
thing they could desire.

Secondly, He charged him, as he would answer it at the last day, not to put
himself upon any public Employments, 'till he was thirty years of Age at least:
And then if his Prince should ^all him to public Service, he should carefully
undertake it, to testify his Obedience; and withal to be faithful and sincere
to his Master, though he should come to the same end that himself did.

Thirdly, That he should never lay any hand upon any thing that belonged to the
Church. He foresaw that Ruin was like to come upon the Revenues of the Church,
and that perhaps they might be shared amongst the Nobility and Gentry: But if
his Son meddled with any of it, he wished the Curse of God might follow him, and
all them, to the Destruction of the most Apostolical Church upon Earth.

FINIS.

