A DECLARATION OF THE General Convention, OF IRELAND, WITH The late proceedings
there, Newly brought over by a Gentleman, to the COUNCIL OF STATE IN ENGLAND.

LONDON; Printed for Henry Crips, in Pope's Head- Alley, 1660.

A DECLARATION OF THE General Convention OF IRELAND.
WHereas the high extremities of Ireland necessarily requiring it, this General
Convention is assembled to consider of and apply remedies to redeem the Nation
from those extremities; And whereas it is visible to all the Kingdoms and
Nations throughout Christendom, and most lamentably felt by the three Nations
of England, Ireland and Scotland, that the horrid violence offered to the
authority and dignity of the Parliament of England in December, 1648. did let
in all the miseries and calamities in Church and State, which have ever since
afflicted and distracted these Nations, and have plunged them in a gulf of
sorrows and confusion, under which they have long suffered, and that not
without secret designs and great endeavors utterly to extinguish the true
reformed Protestant Religion, to eradicate Parliaments, to subvert the
fundamental Laws of the Land, to take away the Rights, Liberties, Freedom and
Propertyes of the people, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government over these Nations.

And whereas the just consideration of those sad confusion brought upon these
Nations, moved the Council of Officers of the Army in Ireland, by their
Declaration Dated the sixteenth day of February 1659. to Declare for a Full and
Free Parliament in England, wherein they have since had the General concurrence
of all the Army in Ireland, This General Convention does not only approve of
the said Declaration of the Council of Officers of the Army, but does also
Declare that this Nation is resolved (by the blessing of God,) to join with the
said Council of Officers and Army in Ireland, and with their brethren in
England and Scotland, who have joined or shall join, for the accomplishment of
the good and public ends therein expressed, and to con^ribute cheerfully and
readily to the charges requisite thereunto by all good and Lawful ways, hoping
by the mercy of God to be no less prosperous in this undertaking then the cause
is just.

And whereas (after the said Declaration of the Council of Officers of the Army
in Ireland, and since the assembling of this Convention,) there came
advertisement of the sitting of the late excluded Members at Westminster, for
which this General Convention, does most humbly and thankfully acknowledge the
great and extraordinary Providence of God, and his Mercies therein to these
Nations; And does Declare that this Nation does Resolve (by the blessing of
God) constantly to adhere to the present Parliament, and future Parliaments of
England in the preservation of them in Fullness and Freedom.

And this Convention does also Declare and assert, that as for several hundreds
of years last past, by the Laws and laudable Custom and constitution of this
Narion, Parliaments have been usually held in Ireland, and that in those
Parliaments Laws have been Enacted, and Laws repealed, and Subsidyes granted,
as the public occasions required, So that Right of having Parliaments held in
Ireland, is still justly and Lawfully due and belonging to Ireland, and that
the Parliament of England never charged Ireland in any Age with any Subsidyes,
or other public Taxes or Assesments, until after the violence offered to the
Parliament of England in December 1648. since which time; they who invaded he
Rights of the Parliaments of England, Invaded also the Rights of the Parliament
of Ireland by imposing Taxes and Assesments upon Ireland.

And because some of those who have been instrumental in drawing on and
increa^ng the Miseries, Calamities, and Desolations of these Nations,
particularly, the late Lt: Genesis Edmond Ludlow, Col. John Jones, Miles Corbet
Esquire and Col. Matthew Thomlinson, and others of turbulent spirits, have
labored, and do labor to asperse this Nation falsely and scandalously, as if
the people of Ireland did by their necessitated proceedings intend to divide or
separate from England, Therefore this Convention for vindicating this Nation
from that fowl and unjust calumny and aspersion, and for satisfaction as well of
our brethren in England, as of all the World, does surther Declare, That the
People of Ireland, are so far from designing or intending to divide or separate
from England, as that they conclude such a Division or Separation would be
absolutely destructive to the Nation, and is that, then which there is nothing
that Ireland more abhorres, they being Generally bone of their bone, and flesh
of their flesh, and therefore that they do Resolve (by the Mercy of God) for
ever to adhere to England, as that Nation which has derived to Ireland such
and so great Comforts, Benefits and Advantages, and all in so high a degree, as
the welfare and Interests of England and Ireland are so infeparably interwoven
as the good or evil of either, must necessarily become common to both.

And this Convention does also Declare, That they will use their best endeavor,
that a Pious, Learned and Orthodox Preaching Ministry of the Gospel and no
other, may be settled throughout Ireland, and that only in a Parochial way, and
encouraged and supported by Tithes and other Legal maintenance, and
Universities and Schools of Learning countenanced and cherished; And that all
Arrears of the Army, as well those due to such as have been Officers or
Soldiers of the Army of Ireland before the fifth of June 1649. as those since,
may be satisfied; And that all the Estates and Interests of all Adventures,
their Heirs and Assign's, who by virtue of the Act of 17. Carol, fot
satisfaction of Adventurers, have had forfeited Lands assigned to them by Lot,
and possessed by them accordingly, may be confirmed to them; and that care be
had for the just satisfaction of Adventurers, who have not yet had satisfaction
pursuant to the said Act; and that such Officers and Soldiers as are or have
been of the army in Ireland, heirs their Executors, administrators and assigns,
and have had forfeited Lands ordered or set forth unto them, and possessed by
them accordingly, may have the same confirmed to them.

And this General Convention having discharged their duty herein to God, and to
their Country, do in the greatest humility Implore almighty God so to guide and
dispose all things as may tend to the Glory of his Name, the advancement of the
true Reformed Protestant Religion, and the Unity, Peace and Tranquillity of the
three Nations of England, Ireland and Scotland.

Dated at Dublin the 8. of March 1659. The 12. of March, 1659.

Ordered by the General Convention of Ireland that this Declarabe forthwith
Printed and Published.


Mat. Barry, Clerk of the General Convention of Ireland.

An account of the chief Occurrences of Ireland.
Wednesday, Feb. 22.
THe womb of this day, no less then others, was pregnant with joyful tidings:
nor was there ever more reason for the whole Nation to congratulate one another
with Songs of Thanksgiving, there being so sweet a harmony of many prosperous
events tuned by the Almighty hand of Providence: so that we are are confident
ere long the world will see a good Account of Gods me^cifull dispensations
about the ways and ands for which we have lately engaged. Nor despair we of
convincing if not satisfying our very enemies, being men many of them, in whose
Ignorance, the world may read in legible characters, the hatred of
Universities: in their avarice and self-giftedness, the extirpation of
Ministers and Ministry: and in a strange complication of ambition and fear,
rightly apprehending that Justice never dies, their implacable malice against a
Free Parliament.

The most rem^rkable chractey of this day was given by Sir Hardress Wallers
departure, whose pretty affronts by the private Soldiers were highly redeemed
by the civility of the superior. Officers: and so he was conveyed away to
Athlone.

A Letter from W. Lord Caulfield to the right Honorable Sir Charles Coot, dated
at Charlemount, Feb. 20. 1659.
May it please your Lordship,
AT my coming to this place, I immediately acquainted the Officers and
Soldiers here with your Lordships and the Armies Proceedings and Declaration,
whose general concurrence I had both from the Horse and Foot, with great
rejoycings and acclamation; and this day the chief Gentlemen of the Country do
meet here, from whom I hope your Lordship will receive a speedy Address and
congratulation for that most acceptable service your Lordship has been pleased
to enterprise, and which hitherto God has blessed with success. Before I came
down, the Anabaptists party were very high, and spoke big words, being
confident of a sudden change for their advantage: but now they are more
dejected then ever. I beseech your Lordship think upon settling the Militia,
which if it be placed under the charge of faithful men, would by the blessing
of God be as considerable a strengthening to your Lordships hands as the whose
Army. If any thing shall occur in these parts worthy of your Lordships
knowledge, I shall not fail in my duty to your Lordship, in the mean time I
beseech your Lordship impose your commands upon

Your Lordships most humble and most faithful servant, W. CAVLFIELD.

Friday, Feb. 24.
Another Letter to the right Honorable Sir Charles Coot, etc. From Capt. Whaley,
Dated at Nenaugh, Feb. 22. 1659.
THe sum of it is to declare, how himself and others were always ready to
observe his Lordships commands, and in perfect obedience to his late
declaration signed by the Council of Officers at Dublin. the rest may be
omitted about his judhement of the Anabaptists, and some wholesome reflections
on the tyranny of the Quakers. Thus without determining which is a greater
preparative to the common destruction, their first Tyranny, or their fifth
Monarchy, he tells his Lordship in have, that he remains his Lordships most
humble and faithful servant, etc.

A Letter from the Mayor of Droghedah to Sir Charles Coot.
Right Honorable;
IN Answer to your Honors Letters and Declaration to the Mayor of this Town
directed, which came to his hands on Lord's Day in the morning last, which on
Monday being the Nineteenth instant about Eight of the Clock in the Morning,
was Proclaimed in three several places of this Town by beat of Drum; And this
day all the Inhabitants of the said Town being Summoned, did Meet, and
unanimously did own the same, and the said Declaration is Ordered by the said
Assembly to be Registered in the Assembly book of the said Town, as a Record for
future Ages of your Honors, and the rest of the Officers Care and Pains
therein, and the Town in their Names desire me to return Your Lordship thanks.

Droghedagh the 21. of February 1659. ED. MARTIN Mayor.

Monday, Feb. 27.
THursday much joy was occasioned among us by the Lord Broghils coming to
Dublin: he having first been complemented by the Lord President and other
persons of quality meeting him on the way. This day the convention met at the
Tholsell, but nothing was done but to adjourne the Convention to Friday next
ensuing, in expectation of a full confluence of all the Members.

Wednesday, Feb. 29.
Among all the days since the first stone laid in Ireland the testimony of Gods
mercy has not revealed it self to this Nation, than in the news of this day
sent from England. For we shall ever acknowledge. That the birth day of the
English liberty in readmitting the excluded Members to sit in Parliament; and
the Christning of it in committing the military affairs of the three nations to
the valor and fidelity of General Monk, is a blessing, of which we have
nothing to complain, but our unworthiness to receive it.

This evening was ended with abundance of bonfires ringing of bells,
acclamations of joy throughout the whole City of London.

Friday, March 2.
This day being the second Session of the Convention at Dublin, after the
adjournment. First the Members in great solemnity met at Christs-Church, to lay
the foundation of their future councils inconsulting with the Oracle. Here M.
Cox an eminent P^eacher of the City, entertained them with a Sermon full of
piety and discretion; neither forgetting the Magistrate in laying his duty
before him, nor himself, in running beyond the bounds of the Gospel, to plunge
himself over head and ears in matters of State, or another cognizance. He was
observed to have many Lessons and two Whips. First for buyers and sellers,
turning all mechanical and unordained Preachers out of the Temple: and then,
for another sort of men, who more desparately whip the Temple it self out of
the Temple, by gethering Churches out of Churches. So that after much
winnowing, nothing is, lest the poor Parish but the windy chaff and excrements
of Christianity; the good grain being purified keeps close together in a
comfortable private combination. Thus the Preacher. He having with great
approbation concluded, the honorable Members of the Convention departed to the
place of their Meeting, and there fell upon the necessary work of their
Generation.

This day Sir James Barry was much talked of for a noble speech made by him in
the Convention, which is elsewhere to be Printed; it being thought worthy to
stand alone, that it may receive the admiration of the eye in a single
encounter, which is lost in a crowd of other businesses.

After this Speech of Sir James Barry, many others inflamed with the success of
his fortunate eloquence have since played the good Orators in the Convention,
where without popularity aiming only at the good of the people, (the natural
end of artificial speaking) they all as it were with one spirit, showed the
various perfections of their art, in beautifying one common Theme, to wit, That
the benefit of Ireland is chiefly contained in a subordination to the authority
of Parliament now sitting in England. This argument is further confirmed by the
greatest Topic of the nation, the authority of the Convention; by whose Order
a Declaration is already prepared to be made public. Note also, that the late
Declaration of Sir Charles Coot and the rest of the Officers of the Army,
instead of a laurel, the trivial ensign of out forefathers glory, has been
more remarkably crowned with a full and ample approbation from the House.

Saturday, March 3.
Devotion opened the womb of this morning, and the first thing it was delivered
of, was Prayer: which duty was performed by Mr. Cox, and afterward the first
thing ordered was, That thanks be given Mr. Cox for his great pains in the
Friday Sermon, desiring that he would constantly perform the duty of Prayer in
the House every morning: and Ordered that Sir Theo. Jones, Col. Ar. Hill and
Dr. Loftus repair unto him with the thanks of the House, and signify their
desires that he would print this Sermon.

Ordered, That the Lord Broghil, Dr. Jones, Sir Paul Davis, Sir William Bury,
Dr. Loftus, Major Aston, Mr. Recorder Byss, Mr John Temple, and Sir John
Clotworthy or any four or more of them, be and are appointed a committee of
this convention to prepare a draught of a Declaration for a day of Humiliation
to be kept in the City and Suburbs of Dublin on Friday next being the 9. of
this instant March, and in the other parts of the Nation on Friday three weeks
next, being the 30 of this instant March.

Ordered, That Mr. Cox and Mr. Charnock be and are desired by this Convention
to preach in Christ-Church on the said Humiliation day.

Ordered, That every Wednesday at two of the clock in the afternoon, the House
do resolve into a grand Committee, to consider of the maintenance of Ministers,
and the University and Schools.

Ordered, That the House be resolved into a grand Committee every Thursday at
two of the clock in the afternoon, to consider of the matters relating to trade.

At the General CONVENTION of IRELAND
Monday, March 5.
Lord Broghil being returned for the University of Dublin, and County of
Waterford, his Lordship made election to serve for the University.

William Hancock Esquire being returned for the County of Westmeath, and Borough
of Athlone, he made election to serve for the County. Sir George Atcheson
Knight and Baronet being returned for the County of Ardmagh and Borough of
Ardmagh; he made election to serve for the County.

Ordered, That new Orders do issue for electing new Members in such places
where the Members of the Convention, being doubly returned, have refused to
serve for; and that it be intimated under the Clerks hand, to those places that
have not yet returned members to this Convention to make their rerurns with
speed.

Tuesday, March 6.
Ordered, That the Declaration for the day of Humiliation being read with the
Amendments, do pass as the Act of the House, and be forthwith printed and
published.

Ordered, That M. Patrick Adare and M. Bains be and are added to M. Cox, and M.
Charnock in carrying on the work of the day appointed for the City of Dublin,
by the Declaration of this Convention for days of public Humiliation and
Fasting, to be observed throughout Ireland.

Ordered, That it be recommended to the Committee appointed to consider of the
maintenance of Ministers, and the Universities and Schools of Learning, to send
for Ministers out of all parts of the Nation to advise with.

Ordered, That directions issue for a new election for the Borough of Cavan
instead of Richard Aylet Esquire who is lately deceased.

March 8.
The Committee appointed to consider of the Declaration in the name of the
General Convention of Ireland, make report by Sir Paul Davis. Resolved, That
the Declaration do pass as the Declaration of the Convention.

Friday, March 9.
This being the day publicly set apart, and for six hours together in
Christ-Church, solemnly spent in the exercise of Humiliation. First, Mr. Cox in
a Sermon never to be forgotten, discharges his conscience, and finding in the
whole Scripture no words more agreeable to his principles against
Church-separation, he takes the 19 Verse of Judes Epistle for his Text, Thus,
These be the who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

At the naming of the words, presently there fell a kind of spirit of
Prophecy upon all the Auditors, supposing by the very bending of his bow in
the text, what the mark was, at present, and partly present, at which he
principally aimed. And so he proceeded to discover the naked beauty of truth so
long concealed. After many judicious and pious Observations about the
circumstances of his Text, he fell plainly to work, telling us that in the
notorious and general iniquity of separation, the people of God were extremely
guilty, and how that the gatherings of Churches out of Churches, under the
fantastic notion of non-communion with the unregenerate, had in it, not so
much of Serpents head, it being against all reason, as of his tail, in the
oblique windings of avarice, pride and indiscretion, the counterfeit champions
of Devotion. Then he informs, when this sin of Separation took beginning, and
putting a disparagement upon its pedigree, he quarters it with the Levitical
coat of Corah, and the rest of his damnable Separatists. But with some supposed
differences: they only aiming at equality among their brethren, these at
superiority. They devoured by the earth, these in their large possessions,
devouring more earth then indeed the moderation of the former Ecclesiastical
Laws, allowed to be Canonical.

After this he descends to his Exhortations of the Magistrate, and the
concerned people. The Magistrate to pluck the branches of Separation out of the
fire, (a work to be done rather then spoken of.) Then the concerned people,
that they endeavor to quench the flames, upon a double account: for first,
they are generally branded, besides this, which will be matter of amazement in
settled times, these fires are of their own particular kindling, exclusively to
the public authority of the Magistrate. And to speak plainly, without a
complement to Church Interest, the fire of martyrdom, this directed to the
communion, the other to the division of the Church, is in conscience more
capable of election, supposing that Christ and Mammon are two distinct persons.

When Mr. Cox had run his race in this present occasion, the work of
Humiliation was carried on by Mr. Adare in prayer, with much ardency of zeal
effectually to Gods Glory.

After him Mr. Charnock ascends, who after the sweet incense of his prayer to
God, turned himself upon the Auditors in the oblation of this Text, viz,
Isaiah 1.25, 26.

After many holy observations, the principal part of his devotion, agreeable
to the nature of the times, was to affert the necessity of a fixed and standing
magistracy, since the houour of public authority is never less triumphant
than when it rides in a chariot whose wheels being always turning, the people
find nothing but over-turnings, in the predominant resolutions of sundry
factions; Here he inserted many documents, as to the spiritual interest of
Church and State. Then applying himself to the Learned Universities of our
Nations, (they being as the fountains of the deep and the windows of Heaven) he
seemed to ground on their corruption, an unavoydable danger, that a deluge of
error may overwhelme the face of our Nations, especially in these times, where
there is more danger threatened by the overflowing of the waters, then care
taken in the building of an Ark for the preservation of common interest.

To this exercise of Humiliation, the sacred Seal was affixed by Mr. Bains in
prayer, of whose words the best account that can be given, will manifest it
self in the heavenly blessings of our proceedings. Only thus is noted of him,
that in the Pillar of the wilderness, when nothing but the cloud appears, he
follows his conscience. But when the other face is turned, with light he
follows reason.

March 9. Ordered, That Sir John Clotworthy, Dr. Jones, and Col. Hill be and
are hereby appointed a Committee to return the thanks of this Convention to M.
Cox, M. Charnock, M. Adare and M. Bains, for their pains in carrying on the
work of this day in Christchurch, Dublin: and that M. Cox and M. Charnock be
desired to print their respective Sermons this day by them delivered before the
Convention.

March 10. Ordered that the Committee appointed to consider of the maintenance
for Ministers, Universities and Schools, do meet on Monday in the afternoon.

FINIS.

