C2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL. A PROCLAMATION FOR A Thanksgiving for the late
Victory by His Majesty's Naval Forces.
OSSORY.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God in his late Providence toward His
Majesty and His people, to manifest at once the glory both of his power and
mercy, in giving His Majesty a happy Victory over His Adversaries at Sea,
filling the hearts of His Majesty and His people as full of joy and
thankfulness, as becomes so transcendent a Mercy: We cannot upon due
consideration thereof, but with all humility admire and adore the Mercy and
Goodness of God in this His Signal manifestation thereof. And We look upon it
as an invitation from Heaven to His Majesty and all His people unto most
entire thankfulness for the same. And to the end some solemn time may be set
apart for the public performance of this Duty; and that We and all His
Majesty's Subjects throughout this Kingdom, may pay our just tribute of praise
and thanksgiving to Almighty God; We do hereby publish and declare, and also
strictly charge and command, That Tuesday the Fourth day of July next, be set
apart and observed as a day of public Thanksgiving, in and throughout this His
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland. And We do also direct and appoint, That this Our
Proclamation be publicly read in all Churches and Chapels on the Lords Day
precedent to the said day of Thanksgiving hereby appointed; to the end that
notice may be taken thereof, and due thanks and praise may upon the said day be
offered unto Almighty God. And that humble supplications be poured out before
him, for his continual assistance and improvement of this, and all his mercies
to the honor of his great Name, and the peace and benefit of His Majesty and
His people, willing and strictly commanding all persons within this His
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, with all sobriety, reverence and thankfulness to
observe that day, as becomes so solemn an occasion.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin; the two and twentieth day of June,
1665. Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Arran. Dungannon. Hen. Midensis.
Massareene. Santry. Jo. Bysse. Paul Davis. Robert Byron. G. Wentworth. Ja.
Ware. Robert Meredith.

GOD Save the KING.
DVBLIN: Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet. 1665.


