C2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant. A PROCLAMATION Appointing the Time for putting in of
CLAIMS.
ORMONDE.

Where Is by an Act of this present Parliament [Intituled, An Act for the better
Execution of His Majesty's Gracious Declaration for the Settlement of His
Kingdom of Ireland, and Satisfaction of the several Interests of Adventurers,
Soldiers, and other His Subjects there,] It is Enacted, That all persons,
Bodies Politic and Corporate, who have not already put in their Claims before
the Commissioners heretofore appointed for execution of the said Declaration,
do put in the same within the space of One and Thirty days next and immediately
after the day which shall be appointed by a Proclamation made or caused to be
made in the City of Dublin by the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland for the time being; and that after the said time shall be
expired, no Claim shall be received, but the Parties left without Remedy, and
debarred for ever, without His Majesty's special Order in that behalf, upon
Accidents or Emergencies where Justice shall require the same: In pursuance of
the said Act, We do by this Proclamation appoint Monday the Sixth day of
October, One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty and Two, to be the day next and
immediately after which, all and every the said persons are to put in their
Claims according to the Tenor of the said Act, before His Majesty's
Commissioners for the execution of the said Act, at the Kings Inns Dublin,
whereof all persons concerned are to take notice, to the end they may within
the space of One and Thirty days next after the said Sixth day of October
aforesaid, put in their respective Claims accordingly.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 23. Day of September, 1662. GOD
SAVE THE KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty;
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller, in Castle-street, 1662.


