By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.
Upon consideration of the annexed Instrument, whereby it is concluded and
accorded that there be a further continuation of the Cessation of Arms, and of
all Acts of hostility in this Kingdom, until the last day of July, 1645. at
the hour of twelve of the clock the same day. We the Lord Lieutenant and
Council do by this Proclamation in His Majesty's Name, Ratify, confirm and
publish the same, And do require all His Majesty's Subjects whom it may
concern by Sea and by Land to take notice thereof, and yield all due obedience
thereunto in all the parts thereof.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 24. July, 1645. Geo. Cloyne. Cha.
Lambart. Arthur Chichester. Fr. Willoughby. Tho. Lucas. Robert Forth. G.
Wentworth.

WHEREAS Articles of Cessation of Arms were agreed and concluded on at
Sigginstowne in the County of Kildare, the fifteenth day of September, in the
nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, By and between Us the Lord Lieutenant
by the name of JAMES Marquis of Ormonde, Lieutenant General of His Majesty's
Army in the Kingdom of Ireland, For and in the Name of our Gracious
Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France,
and Ireland, etc. By virtue of His Majesty's Commission bearing date at Dublin,
the last day of August, in the said nineteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, of
the one part, And Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, and others authorized by His
Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects then in Arms in the said Kingdom, etc. of
the other part: Which Cessation of Arms was by the said Articles to continue
for one whole year, beginning the 15. of September, 1643. at the hour of
twelve of the clock of the said day. And whereas by His Majesty's Commission
under the Great Seal of England, dated the four and twentieth day of June
1644. We the Lord Lieutenant are authorized to Treat concerning the settling and
establishing of a firm and perfect Peace within this Kingdom. And whereas We
the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as
His Lieutenant General, and General Governor of this His Kingdom, and by
advice of the Council, and For and in the Name of His Majesty on the one part,
And he said Lord Visc. Muskery, and others deputed and Authorized in that
behalf by His Majesty's said Subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom,
of the other part, did on the fifth day of September last conclude, and accord
that there should be a further Cessation of Arms, and of all Acts of Hostility
in this Kingdom, until the first day of December then next, at the hour of
twelve of the clock of the said day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by
virtue of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as His Lieutenant General
and General Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and
For, and in the Name of His Majesty on the one part, And the said Lord Viscount
Muskery. and others Deputed and authorized in that behalf by His Majesty's
said Subjects now, or late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on
the 11 day of November last, conclude and accord that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of Hostility in
this Kingdom, until the last day of January, then next, at the hour of twelve
of the clock of the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of
His Majesty's authority entrusted with Us, as His Lieutenant General and
General Governor of this his Kingdom and by advice of the Counsel and for
and in the Name of his Majesty of the one part, and the said Lord Viscount
Muskery and others deputed and authorized in that behalf by his Majesty's said
Subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom, of the other part, did on the
last day of December last conclude and accord that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of Hostility in
this Kingdom until the last day of March then next at the hour of twelve of
the clock of the said day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of His
Majesty's authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and General
Governor of this His Kingdom and by advice of the Council and for and in the
Name of his Majesty on the one part, And the said Lord viscount Muskery and
others deputed and authorized in that behalf by His Majesty's said Subjects
now or late in Arms in this Kingdom on the other part, did on the first day
of March last, conclude and accord that there should be a further continuation
of the said Cessation of Arms and of all acts of Hostility in this Kingdom
until the last day of April then next, at the hour of twelve of the clock of
the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant, by virtue of His Majesty's
Authority entrusted with Us, as His Lieutenant General and General Governor
of this His Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and For and in the Name of
His Majesty of the one part, and the said Lo. Viscount Muskery, and others
deputed and authorized in that behalf, by His Majesty's said Subjects now or
late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on the one and twentieth
day of April last conclude and accord, that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of hostility in
this Kingdom, until the twentieth day of May then next, at the hour of
twelve of the clock the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue
of his Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and
General Governor of this his Kingdom and by advice of the Council, and for
and in the name of his Majesty of the one part, and the said Lord Visc.
Muskery, and others deputed and authorized in that behalf, by his Majesty's
said Subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on
the sixteenth day of May last 1645. conclude and accord that there should be a
further continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of
hostility in this Kingdom until the fourth day of June then next, at the hour
of 12. of the clock the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue
of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and
General Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and for
and in the Name of his Majesty of the one part, And the said Lord visc.
Muskery, and others deputed and authorized in that behalf, by his Majesty's
said Subjects now or late in arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on
the first day of June 1645. conclude and accord that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all Acts of Hostility in
this Kingdom until the eighteenth day of June one thousand six hundred forty
and five, at the hour of twelve of the clock the same day. And whereas We the
Lord Lieutenant by virtue of his Majesty's authority entrusted with Us as his
Lieutenant General and General Governor of this his Kingdom and by advice of
the Council, and for and in the name of His Majesty of the one part and the
said Lord Viscount Muskery and others deputed and authorized in that behalf by
his Majesty's said subjects now or late in arms in this Kingdom of the other
part, did on the fourteenth day of June 1645. conclude and accord that there
should be a further continuation of the said Cessation of Arms and of all acts
of hostility in this Kingdom, until the fourth day of July 1645. at the hour
of 12 of the clock the same day. And whereas We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue
of His Majesty's Authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and
General Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, And For
and in the Name of his Majesty of the one part, And Patrick Darcy, and
Geffrey Brown, Esquires. deputed and authorized by his Majesty's said Subjects
now or late in Arms in this Kingdom of the other part, did on the thirtieth
day of June, 1645. conclude and accord that there should be a further
continuation of the said Cessation of Arms, and of all Acts of hostility in
this Kingdom, until the 18th day of July, 1645. at the hour of 12 of the
clock the same day. And in regard We desire to prevent any inconvenience that
may happen by a too late continuing of the present Cessation for such a longer
time as may in likelihood give the freer and better opportunity toward
facilitating the expected peace. We the Lord Lieutenant by virtue of his
Majesty's authority entrusted with Us as his Lieutenant General and General
Governor of this his Kingdom, and by advice of the Council, and For and in
the Name of his Majesty of the one part, and we the said Lord visc. Muskery,
Nicholas Plunket Esquire. Sir Rob. Talbot Barronet. Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy,
and Geffrey Brown, Esquires. Deputed and Authorized in that behalf by his
Majesty's said subjects now or late in Arms in this Kingdom etc. of the other
part, have concluded and accorded, and it is accordingly hereby concluded and
accorded that there be a further continuation of said Cessation of Arms and of
all Acts of Hostility in this Kingdom, until the last day of July, 1645. at
the hour of twelve of the clock the same day, upon the like Articles and
agreements, to all intents and purposes as are expressed in the said former
Articles of Cessation, concluded on at Sigginstown, on the 15 of September,
1643. And as if the said Cessation first agreed on had continuance until the
last day of July, 1645. at the hour of twelve of the clock the same day. In
witness whereof, the said Lord Lieutenant to that part of this agreement which
remains with the Lord visc. Muskery, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot,
Dermot o Bryen, Patrick Darcy, and Geffrey Brown, has put his hand and seal,
and the said Lord visc. Muskery, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot o
Bryen, Patrick Darcy, and Geffrey Brown, to that part of this agreement which
remains with the said Lord Lieutenant, have put their hands and seals the
fifteenth day of July, 1645. and in the one and twentieth peace of His
Majesty's Reign.

Muskery. N. Plunket. Rob. Talbot. Dermot o Bryen. Geffr. Brown.


