C2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

WE the Lord Lieutenant and Council considering the Duty incumbent on Us to
give a right Representation of His Majesty's great Care of and Indulgence to
His people, and to make the Execution of the Laws as easy and safe to His
Subjects, as the Exigencie of the Times and necessity of Affairs may possibly
admit: And taking notice that many of His good Subjects who attend the
confirmation of their Estates in this Kingdom, graciously intended them by His
Majesty, according to the Act for the better Execution of His Majesty's
Gracious Declaration, etc. may by reason of the great scarcity of Coin, be in
present disabled, and through the expectation of a Return of a Commission for
valuing the Estates of Adventurers, Soldiers and others, that are by the said
Act to pay half a year or a years Rent to His Majesty according to the value of
the said Estates in the Year One thousand six hundred Fifty nine, may have
unwarily taken up Hopes that upon the application of the House of Commons to
this Board, the time of payment would be enlarged, which His Majesty's pressing
occasions would not then permit, and that upon some or all of these Grounds,
many persons may not only have neglected to provide moneys, but also may lie
under the trouble of misapprehensions that Advantage will be taken by His
Majesty for their failers in payment by the Fifteenth of this month of
December: Upon deliberate consideration hereof, and of what has further
occurred unto Us, upon this occasion though the said moneys have not been paid
in proportionably to what was requisite and reasonably by Us expected, so that
the wilful and total Failers deserved no enlargement of Time, yet many having
done their part with great Duty and Readiness, so that the present exigencie of
His Majesty's Affairs has been in some degree supplied thereby, and many as We
understand being upon the way with their money: We therefore to manifest to the
whole Kingdom that His Majesty takes more satisfaction in the Happiness and
Contentment of His people, than in any Advantage to Himself, have thought fit
(according to the power entrusted with Us by an Act of Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for the Enlargement of the Periods of Time limited in an Act for the
better Execution of His Majesty's Gracious Declaration for the Settlement of
His Kingdom of IRELAND, etc.) and do by this Our Act of Council enlarge the
time for the payment of the first half years value payable out of the Estates
of Adventurers, Soldiers and others, unto His Majesty, unto the Third day of
February next ensuing the date hereof, before or on which day all persons
concerned are hereby required to make the said several payments due from them
by the said Act, according to the truest estimate they can make of their Lands,
as the same yielded in the year One thousand Six hundred Fifty nine; and
whenever the Commissions that have issued, or shall issue for the valuing of
the said Lands as aforesaid, shall be returned, in case any person shall have
paid more than by the return of such Commissions shall appear to have been due
from him, an Allowance shall be made to him of such Overplus, upon return of
the said Commissions. And this readiness of Ours to give full satisfaction in
this particular, will We hope quicken all persons concerned in Subsidies,
Quit-Rents and other payments to his Majesty, to answer the same duly at the
Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, that His Majesty's Occasions being supplied
by His own Dues, the people may with more assurance enjoy the Tranquillity,
Happiness and Protection of His Government, the Contentment whereof is the
chief advantage His Majesty draws at present from this Kingdom.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the Thirteenth day of December, 1662.
GOD Save the KING. Jo. Armachanus, Mau. Eustace Canc. Ja. Dublin, Ossory,
Barrymore, Drogheda, Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Shannon, Massereene, Hen.
Midensis, Mich. Cork, Fran. Aungier, Tho. Pigot, Jo. Bysse, J. Temple, Paul
Davys, Fra. Hamilton, Robert Forth, Ja. Ware, Rob. Meredith, Theo. Jones.


DVBLIN, Printed by JOHN CROOK, Printer to the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller, in Castle-street, 1662.


