royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
By His Majesty's Commissioners, Appointed for putting in Execution An ACT of
PARLIAMENT, ENTITLED An Act for the better Execution of His Majesty's Gracious
Declaration for the Settlement of His Kingdom of IRELAND, and Satisfaction of
the several Interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other His Subjects there.
WHEREAS by a Proclamation bearing Date the Twenty third of September now last
past, caused to be made in the City of Dublin by His Grace the Lord Lieutenant
General, and General Governor of this Kingdom (according to the said Act) all
Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, who have not already put in their
Claims before the Commissioners heretofore appointed for execution of the said
Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland, are required to put in the same
before Us within Thirty one days next and immediately after Monday the Sixth
day of this present October: And whereas we judge it very conduceable, to the
due execution of the great Trust in Us reposed, for settling all Interests,
according to the said Act, that a fitting and regular course be observed in the
forming of Claims which shall be exhibited before us: To the end therefore that
all persons who are concerned in the putting in of Claims before Us, their
Council, Atturneys, Solicitors and Agents, may have timely Notice of what is
expected from them in this behalf, We do declare and publish, That the Claims
which are or shall be exhibited to be proceeded upon by Us, shall be in such
manner and form as is herein after by Us directed, which We do require to be
observed and performed accordingly: That is to say, That all Adventurers, their
Heirs, Executors or Assigns, and every of them, who shall claim to be confirmed
by the said Act in any Houses, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, allotted to
them for their adventures, whereof they were possessed the Seventh day of May,
1659. shall by themselves, or by their Agents thereunto sufficiently authorized
in their Claims to be exhibited before Us (within the time prefixed by the said
Proclamation) under their respective Hands and Seals, fairly written, express
and set down the Original and other sum or sums of Money, and by whom, and at
what time or times subscribed; for which satisfaction is demanded by way of
adventure, and a particular of the Houses, Lands or Tenements to the said
Adventurers, their Heirs or Assigns, or to their uses, respectively set out in
satisfaction thereof, with the content and number of Acres, with distinction
how many of them were set out for profitable, and how many for unprofitable in
each Town-Land, Village, Ballyboe, or Quarter of Land, as the same were to them
set out, or for their uses; together with the County, Barony and Parish wherein
the same lie, and that they insert therein the Denominations of the same Lands
or Tenements expressed in the Survey called, The Down Admeasurement; in the first
place, with Additions of such other Denominations afterward (if they think
fit) as they have been or are usually known by, together with the Name or Names
of the former Proprietor or Proprietors of the said Houses or Lands: And if
such adventures be for-Houses in any City or Corporation that they deliver in,
not only the particulars of the Houses by them possessed, but also the value
of the same respectively, as they were set out to them or to their uses.

And that all Officers and Soldiers, their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, and
every of them, who shall claim to be established by the said Act in any Houses,
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, to them set out for Arrears or Debentures
respectively, whereof they were possessed the said Seventh day of May, 1659.
shall by themselves, or their Agents sufficiently authorized in their Claims to
be before Us exhibited (within the said prefixed time) under their Hands and
Seals, express and set forth the Debenture or Debentures, for which
Satisfaction was given in Houses, Lands or Tenements, and for what Service the
same were so set out, and how much for English and how much for Irish Arrears,
and at what time or times the same were satisfied, and with what Regiment or
Company, and at what Rate, as also a particular of the Houses, Lands or
Tenements, which they so claim to be confirmed in, inserting therein the
content and number of Acres, and where lying, the Denominations thereof in the
said Down admeasurement expressed; together with such other particulars as are
herein before by Us directed to be contained in Claims to be made by
Adventurers.

And that all Protestants, Papists, or other Proprietors, and every of them,
who have either entered upon, or are to be by the said Act restored unto their
former Estates, do in their Claims to be exhibited before Us (within the said
prefixed time) under their Hands and Seals, or under the Hands and Seals of
their Agent or Agents Lawfully authorized, express and set forth what benefit
they or any of them claim by the said Act, and the ground or grounds upon which
they claim the same, together with a particular of their respective Houses,
Lands or Tenements, which they or any of them do respectively claim, and what
estate they claim therein, whether in Fee-simple, Fee-Tail, or any other
Estate, and how they derive their Right or Title to the same, and who was in
possession thereof the 22 of October, 1641. and to whom the same were set out,
and who are now in possession thereof; and they are likewise to claim their
said Estates by apt Denominations and Descriptions, expressing also the
Counties, Baronies and Parishes where such Houses and Lands do lie respectively.

And that such Transplanted persons as do claim Lands in the Province of
Connaught and County of Clare, their heirs or assigns, and every of them, do in
their respective Claims under their Hands and Seals, or under the Hands and
Seals of their agent or agents, Lawfully authorized to be exhibited before Us
(within the said prefixed time) set forth, the substance of the respective
Decrees of the late pretended Court of Claims sitting at Athlone, made on their
behalfs, and of the final Settlement of the late pretended Commissioners at
Loghreagh thereupon, together with a particular of the Lands and Tenements in
Lieu and Right whereof the said Lands were so set out unto them, or to those
under whom they derive their Titles; as also a particular of the Lands and
Tenements so to them respectively set out, by apt Denominations and
Descriptions, with the Content and Number of Acres, with a Distinction how many
were set out for profitable and how many for unprofitable in each Town-Land,
Village, Ballyboe or Quarter of Land; and also what Estates the persons so
Transplanted respectively had in the Lands from which they were removed,
whether in Fee-simple or for any lesser Estate, and how and by what Title they
claim the same.

And We do further Declare, That We require and expect that all other persons
(besides those herein by Us mentioned) their Heirs, Executors or Assigns, and
every of them, who shall make their Claims, shall in their respective Claims to
be exhibited before Us, clearly and certainly set forth what they claim, and
upon what grounds, and under whom, and in what manner they derive their Rights
and Titles unto that which they claim, and that they conform their Claims in
all other particulars to such of the Rules and Directions before by Us given
for the Claims of others, which shall be apt and fitting for their respective
cases.

And forasmuch as many of the persons who have already put in their Claims
before the said late Commissioners may find it to be fit for them, to alter
their said Claims for the making them conformable to the Directions abovesaid,
or to withdraw their former Claims and to put in new Ones, which may better
suit with their cases in relation to the said Act: To the end therefore that
there may be no surprise in either of these particulars, We do hereby further
Declare, That all persons who are concerned may be at liberty either to amend
their Claims put in before the former Commissioners, for the making them
agreeable and conformable to Our Directions abovesaid, or else to Endorse a
Retraxit on their said former Claims, and to put in such new Claims
(conformable to Our said Directions) as they think fit and will stand unto,
provided that they do the same within the abovesaid time prefixed for putting
in of Claims before Us.

And for the prevention of unnecessary trouble, which may arise by multiplicity
of Claims to be made by one and the same person, We do declare and publish,
That every Proprietor shall comprehend all the Houses, Lands or Tenements,
which he shall claim to be restored or confirmed unto him in one only Claim,
with the ground or grounds thereof, in such manner and form in all particulars
as the Claims of Protestants or Papists are before by Us directed to be made.

And We do hereby further declare, That for Our more Orderly proceedings upon
Claims brought in before the said former Commissioners or Our selves, We have
nominated and appointed certain persons, viz. Ralph Merry, Samuel Bull, Walter
Scudamore, Robert Golborne, George Lambert, George Ryder, John Humphrey, John
Coghlan, Dominick Dean, Gilbert Fitch, Tho. Heron, George Milner, Tho. Lloyd,
Robert Pain, Samuel Mosely, John Brampton, Robert Pugh, John Moland, John
Barber, Scarning Phillips, William Westley, Gentlemen; who (and no other)
without Our Special Order to the contrary, shall be Atturneys in the Court for
Adjudication of Claims to be held before Us, and that We have agreed and
ordered that every person which shall stand unto or amend his Claim brought in
before the said former Commissioners, or which shall bring in any Claim before
Us, shall elect or retain one of the said persons to be his Attorney in the
said Cause, and that the Name of the said person so elected be Endorsed upon
the said Claim as his Attorney, and that every person which shall put in an
answer before Us unto any Claim, or if more persons than one shall put in a
Ioynt-answer, that he or they shall likewise elect and retain one of the said
persons to be his or their Attorney in the said Cause, and that the Name of the
said person so elected be Endorsed upon the said answer as his or their
Attorney.

Given at the KINGS-INNS Dublin, the Second day of October, in the Fourteenth
Year of His Majesty's Reign.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
Henry Coventry, Edward Dering, Ri. Raynsford, Tho. Beverley, Edward Smith,
Edward Cook, W. Churchil.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty;
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller, in Castle-street, 1662.


