royal English blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Deputy and Council.
ARRAN.

IT Having pleased Almighty God by his wonderful Providence, and out of his
unspeakable Mercy, in a most extraordinary manner to deliver His Majesty from a
late horrid and damnable Conspiracy of bloody men; and His Majesty out of a
deep sense thereof, having been pleased by his Declaration dated the 28th. of
July 1683. to appoint a day of Public Thanksgiving to be observed and solemnly
kept throughout the Kingdom of England, and Principality of Wales, upon the
ninth of September next; and by His Letters to Us, the Lord Deputy, has
signified his pleasure, that the like be done in his Kingdom of Ireland, either
upon the said ninth of September, or some other convenient day, as We should
direct. Now We, the Lord Deputy and Council, in Obedience to His Majesty's said
Command, and to the end a particular time may be set apart for a public
performance of this Duty, and that there may be an entire Uniformity of both
Churches and Kingdoms in their Public Thanksgiving to God for so great a
Deliverance, do hereby Publish and Declare, and also strictly Charge and
Command that the said ninth day of September next be set a part, and observed
as a day of Public Thanksgiving in and throughout His Majesty's Kingdom of
Ireland. And We do direct and appoint that His Majesty's said Declaration,
together with this Our Proclamation, be publicly read in all Churches and
Chapels, as well on Sunday the second of September next, as upon the day of
Thanksgiving aforesaid; and that the same form of P^ayer, with Thanksgiving,
prepared in England for that occasion (which We have ordered to be printed
here) be also on the said ninth day of September made use of in the public
Service and Worship of God.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 13 th. day of August 1683. Mich.
Armach, C. Lanesborough, Will Kildare, Ca. Dillon, Gha. Feilding, H. Boil,
Will, Days, John Keating, John D^vys, Tho Newcomen.

God Save the king.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crock, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook and Andrew Crook at His
Majesty's Printing House on Ormond-Hey, 1683.


