DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

HIs Majesty's Chief Commissioners and Governors of his Revenue in this
Kingdom, having informed Us, That several Branches of the said Revenue are
likely to become much impaired by the negligence or connivance of several
Justices of the Peace, and other Magistrates, and the great discouragement and
obstruction given by some of them to his Majesty's Officers and their Deputies,
in the improvement and Collection of the Revenue arising as well by Hearths,
and other firing places, as by the Excise of B^er and Ale, and Ale Licenses,
and also by Countenanceing, and refuseing to punish according to Law, such
persons as do commit Outrages in making Rescues of distresses legally taken by
his Majesty's Officers, and such as Defraud his Majesty by concealing the said
duties, and by selling B^er and Ale, by Retail without License, as also by
suppressing or not Returning of Recognizances taken for the appearance of
persons who upon complaint or suspicion of Misdemeanors are bound to appear at
the General Assizes or Sessions, or by taking insolvent security for the
appearance of such persons so bound over, And We being desirous to Redress the
aforesaid Abuses and for the time to come, to remove all Impediments to the
improving Leavying, and Collecting of the said Revenue. Do hereby Strictly
Charge and Command all Justices of the Peace, Chief Magistrates and other his
Majesty's Officers, and Ministers whom it does or may concern. That upon pain
of being proceeded against as contemners of his Majesty's Authority, and as
persons ill affected to the Peace and safety of his Kingdom; That they and
every of them, do from time to time, for the future give their vigorous and
effectual assistance to his Majesty's said Officers, and their Deputies, as
well in the improvement as in the Collecting of the said several Branches of
his Majesty's Revenue; And Likewise in the speedy prosecution and punishing
according to Law, all such persons as shall by any Illegal or Undue practices
labor to substract, or impair any Branch of the said Revenue: And likewise
that they do henceforth take special care that in all such Recognizances to be
taken as aforesaid, for the appearance of any person or persons, there be some
solvent or Responsible person Bound, and that such Recognizances be duly
returned according to Law.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 22d day of August, 1684, Mich:
Armach. C. Franc. Dublin. Arran, Longford, Granard. Anth. Midensis. William
Kildare. Cha. Feilding. Rich. Coote. He. Hene. Ol. St. George* Tho. Newcomen.
Lem. Kingdon.


DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellant Majesty,
and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's Printing House, on
Ormonde-Key. 1684


