An Impartial ACCOUNT Of some of the TRANSACTIONS IN SCOTLAND, Concerning the
Earl of Broadalban, Viscount and Master of Stair, Glenco-Men, Bishop of
Galloway, And Mr. Duncan Robertson.

In a LETTER from a Friend.

LONDON: Printed, And Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1695.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 6. read Eustick. l. 24. r. and that some men suffer. p. 5. l. 1. r.
this simple Discourse. l. 4. r. tenendae. l. 7. r. Corvis and Columbas. l. 15.
for was, r. there were. p. 8. l. 6. and 7. r. the great men then. l. 8. r. did
intend to leave the Bench, and to Travel abroad. p. 12. l. 30. r. bailiary. p.
28. l. 31. r. of all men in Scotland. p. 29. l. 12. r. if he were really
guilty. l. 17. r. bias or interest. p. 30. l. 34. leave out, I hope. l. 36.
effectual and supply.

An Impartial Account of some of the Transactions in Scotland concerning the
Earl of Broadalban, Viscount and Master of Stair, Glenco-Men, Bishop of
Galloway, and Mr. Duncan Robertson. In a Letter from a Friend.
SIR,
THOUGH I be none of the most Curious to pry into Foreign Matters, yet the
various Reports we have had of the Proceedings of, and Contests betwixt some of
the Members of the Scots Parliament, prompted me to desire the Favor of you
(as a Person I believe not much concerned in Factions or Parties) to let me
know something of the Matters of Fact were in agitation there: As also who
these Persons are, and their Actions have been, occasioned such great Heats
concerning them, at such a Juncture, when all good men ought to be cemented for
the good of the Public, and ought to stand by one another, as one man, to
oppose the Evil Designs of the Common Enemy. For my part, I find in ordinary
Conversation, that both good and bad People speak generally of these matters,
as they affect such Men and Parties, etc.

Sir, I will avouch that my steadfastness to the present Government is known by
good men to be such, that I cannot in Justice be termed disaffected; and my
Interest is so little with particular Parties, that I dare tell so much of the
truth to the Government's Friends, and my own also, as is convenient: Will
therefore strain my Inclinations to give you a succinct Account of some Matters
of Fact; as also what I could learn concerning these men you writ of, which can
give no Offense: And though my Obligations to Great Men (since the late Happy
Revolution) be little, yet will do them all the Justice imaginable. But before
I come to answer your Expectation in Particulars, will take the freedom (by way
of a Rustical Preamble) to Paraphrase a little upon some Wise Men's Sentences.
Seneca said, That the most Universal Vice in the World was Ingratitude, because
Punishable by no Statute Law, but by Public Hatred and the Discourse of the
Schools, which is said to be the greatest Punishment; yea, Ingratitude sways
the Scepter in most places, as well in private as in public men. Some men were
ungrateful to their Countries, (of whom we could name several) and some
Countries were ungrateful to their own Worthy, Loving, and Affectionate
Children: Pride, Contempt, Avarice, and Envy, are said to be the chief Reasons,
and seldom all these concur without Malice and height of Rigor: But I suppose
that that part of a Nation is either the Indocile, Ignorant, or Vicious.
Socrates suffered for doing good to his Country, even whilst he was doing good
to his Countrymen in Prison; they condemned, and put him to Death. Some will
Object, That there is some secret Crime brings on a Punishment, and suffers for
Crimes they may not be guilty of; and so it is their Judgment. But be it so or
not, that is neither Argument nor Excuse for the Instrument's being Cruel or
Ungrateful, to Punish by guess, without a fair Trial, and Conscientious Jury,
in Estate, Fame, or Body; for he who makes no scruple to take away a man's Good
Name, will make no steps to take his Life also if he can.

Philosophers as well as Historians declare, That the Epicureans denied a
Providence, but that the Stoics asserted it; whatever might be in that Contest
amongst the Ancient Heathens and Modern pretended Atheists, yet we, who assume
the name of Christians, must not only own a Providence, that it overrules all
Actions, Motions, and Events, exalts one, and pulls down another; but also
creates Friends and Enemies, and that a Society of good as well as of bad Men
may differ in Opinion, which oftentimes occasions not only Jealousies,
Emulations, and Debates, but also Strifes, Contentions, Threats, Persecutions,
War, and the Death of many well and evil designing Men. Cato struggled long
before the People of Rome could understand his Counsels to be for their Good
and Safety; he was affronted and contemned by them, nor did they ever consider
his worth till they lost him. Scipio was dismissed, Cicero exiled, and Seneca
destroyed, he by a Tyrannical Prince only for his goodness. Paul suffered as an
evil doer; yea, our Savior himself was contemned, set at naught, and condemned
to the shameful Cross by his Countrymen, out of Pride and Ignorance, for his
kindness and goodness to them. So it is no new thing for good and bad Men to be
mistaken, and others to be mistaken of them. It is an Ancient saying, That
Loyalty often suffers the Punishment due to Rebels, and Treason receives the
Reward of Fidelity. There may be two principal Reasons for this; Ignorance, and
Depravity of men's Natures. Ignorants not being Judges of Men fit for
Government, nor the Governor's Actions, or Secrets of State, which is
generally the failure or mistakes of the Populace. Here you will always find
Improbarum Duces, who influences the blind Populace vela dare suae fortunae, to
accomplish their Designs, though it were upon the Ruins of the Commonwealth.
And under the Second may be comprehended all the Vices of the Mind, which would
be too long to be named here; only this one observed by the wise, That we have
the Wickedness of other men always in our Eyes, but cast our own over our
shoulders Lintae foris talpae domi.
. This confirms all the Proofs of the former Reasons of Ingratitude. Whence it
comes to pass, that a Peasant would be a Tribune, a Tribune a Praetor, a
Praetor a Consul (as the Philosopher said) never minding what he had been in a
little time before, but looking still forwards to what he would be Fortuna non
mutat genus.
. I know not but Brutus thought (that when he had destroyed Caesar) to have
been Caesar himself; but he had only in place thereof, Remorse left with him,
(with, Et tu mi fili Brute) for his great Expectations. Both good and great Men
we see are subject to Envy; for some People never think themselves happy, till
such and such Men be out of their way, as in the case of Haman and Mordecai;
but neither they, nor the Commonwealth can well know the want of such Men till
they be gone, when there is no retrieving: For in what sad condition had Esther
and the poor Jews been, if Haman had conquered Mordecai? And it had been better
for Haman he had let Mordecai alone. Upon which Considerations, it were very
advisable for Societies, if they be any ways split in Parties, to take the Wise
Man's Advice, before they Accuse or Prosecute, and to consider three things:
First, their Strength whom they Accuse* Secondly, the Enterprise and Merit of
the Cause. And Thirdly, the Person or Persons they have to do withal; and that
in respect of their Superiors, Equals, or Inferiors, etc. For as no good
Music, so no good Government or Society without Concord, which cannot well be
without bearing of Injuries. And Epicurus said, That Wise Men will bear with
all Injuries, Ardua res haec est, where the Public is concerned. I will
therefore conclude this Point with a Sentence of Seneca's, when in an Epistle
to his Friend he was condemning Anger and Choler, he adds a But. But (says he)
in case of exemplary and prostitute dissolution of Manners, when Clodius shall
be preferred, and Cicero rejected; when Loyalty shall be broken upon the Wheel,
and Treason shall sit Triumphant upon the Bench. Is not this a Subject to move
the Choler of any Virtuous Man? Now, lest I should weary you too much with a
simple Discourse (yet knows it is to my Friend only) I come to satisfy so much
your Curiosity as is in my Power, without Reflection or Bias: Nam pacis mihi
cura temendae.

Illud amicitiae Sanctum and venerabile nomen

Sed

Dat veniam corvus vexat Censura Columbis,

Hoc Impedit, etc.

As for the Bishop of Galloway, being first in view. In the Year 1686. The late
King James having sent the Earl of Morray his High Commissioner to Scotland,
with Instructions to Repeal the Penal Laws against Papists; the aforesaid
Bishop stood firm to the Protestant Religion, and though very infirm, went
every day to the Meetings of Parliament, to give his Testimony against the
Courses then in hand; for which there was Evil Designs against him, but that
God removed him in great Age and Peace a little time after the Adjourning of
that Parliament. He being a Pious, Hospital, and Generous Man, left his Lady
(being upwards of Eighty Years old) but poor: His Eldest Daughter was married
to one Mr. Patrick Smith, Advocate, many Years before his Decease. His Second
Daughter was married to a Parson; and the Third was Run away with, a little
time before his Death, by the aforesaid Mr. Duncan Robertson, without the
Bishop's or any other Friend's knowledge, the said Robertson judging her to be
a great Prize, the other two Daughters being married, and she being then the
only Child in Familia.

The aforesaid Mr. Duncan Robertson was a High-land Gentleman's Son, bordering
upon Athol and Lochquhaber, bred up something to the Law at Edinburgh, became a
Solicitor that way, and practiced that Employ when he Run away with, and
married the aforesaid Bishop's Daughter.

When the last Earl of Argile was forfeited in those days, (and his Children
scattered here and there, and the Estate being sequestered by the then Public
Authority; and all Argile's Officers and Friends in his vast Dominions being
laid aside) he, the said Robertson, what by Money and Interest he made in those
days, stepped into the Clerkship of the Sheriff-ship of Argile; but upon the late
Happy Revolution, Argile being restored to his Estate, the said Robertson was
justly excluded from the said Office of Clerkship; the same being Heritable in
the Earl of Argile and his Families Gift, past memory of Man.

The Lord Viscount Stair, he is the Representative of the ancient Family of the
Dalrymples of Stair, a Barony in the County of Kyle in the West of Scotland, he
being educated in, and endowed with all manner of Learning and Sciences of our
Horizon, was received into the faculty of A Counselor at Law.
Advocates, in the year 1648. having before had (when but very young) a
considerable Post in the Army, verifying Ovid's Phrase in him, Pace data terris
ad civilia, etc.

In the year 1650. he was made choice of by the then Parliament, to be Clerk or
Secretary to the Committee of the Parliament, and Ministers went for King
Charles II. to Holland, where he not only gave great Satisfaction by his
behavior to the Committee of Parliament, and all concerned in the said
Transaction, but likewise King Charles took particular notice of him, etc.

Upon the Restoration of King Charles II. he was Created Knight and Baronet,
and advanced to be one of the Lords of Or one of the 15 Judges
Session, at which time he began to observe and write the Cases.
Decisions of the Lord of the Session, and afterward digested them with former
and after Observations of his own and others, in a System or Body, these being
Presidents or Rules to Decree by, (afterward) in parallel Cases.

In the year 1662. The Presbyterian Government being abolished, and the
Episcopal Government established in Scotland, there was a Declaration formed,
abjuring the Presbyterian Government, all its consequences, and all the Oaths
formerly taken: Which Declaration he not being clear to take, left the Bench,
traveled abroad, and coming to Court after his Travels, King Charles Excused
and Restored him to his Place again, dispatching a Letter to the Lords of the
Session, (signifying that Sir James Dalrimple of Stair, having given him full
satisfaction in relation to the said Declaration) required them to receive him
again to the Bench, without signing the same. Thus I find it marked in the
Books of Sederunt of the Lords of the Session, Anno 1664. (c) Journal.
Then it was that he began to compose a System of the Civil Law, intermixed with
the Law of Scotland, and Practices and Presidents of that Sovereign Court,
which makes the Law intelligible and known to all the King's Subjects there,
who can read English.

When Sir John Gilmor (being then Or Lord Chief Justice.
President of the Session) was called up to Court to draw up the Contract (or
Articles) of Marriage between the Duke and Duchess of Monmouth, the Lord Stair
was chosen vice Praeses of the Session, as he was several times afterward,
when Sir John Gilmor turned infirm. And all along when the said Lord Stair was
a single Lord of the Session, and sitting by turns on the Bench in the outer
house, where most of the Cases and Processes are heard and decreed in the first
instance by a single Lord, and where the Judges as to their parts, Judgment,
Justice, or Injustice, are mostly known, having none other of the Lords Votes
to interfere with their Judgment. He had the greatest Character of Dispatch and
Justice of any Man that ever sat upon that Bench; all Men being desirous to
have their Cases brought and tried before him Qui vindice nullo sponte sua sine
lege fidem rectumque colebat.
.

In the year 1670. he was one of the Lords who went up to Court about the
Union, designed then between England and Scotland: at which time Sir John
Gilmore (the then President of the Session) died, and he was advanced to be
President of the Session. Upon this step some envied him.

The Lord President was sent for to Court in March, 1676. to have some
differences composed, when he was offered to be Chancellor, which he declined.
But seeing great Men turning into Factions, and fearing the thing which came
afterward to pass, intend to go abroad and to desert the Bench Beatus ille qui
procul a negotii, etc. Horat. car. 5.
.

In Winter 1679. The Duke of York being sent to Scotland, ('it was thought, by
advice of the Duke of Lauderdale for his Safety) the President would not
adjourn the Session, to meet him upon the Road toward Edinburg, (in Procession
with all the Lords of Session) as was expected; (and as most of the Nobility
and Gentry of Scotland did) giving for his reason in his Speech, (when he, and
the rest of the Lords of Session went in their formalities to wait upon the
Duke, as a Prince of the Blood, at the King's Palace of Holyroodhouse, the next
day after his arrival) that the Session could not adjourn themselves (being a
Constituted Sovereign Court, instituted by King and Parliament) without the
King and Parliament, which gave offense; as did also another Expression in his
said Speech, against Popery and Bigotry; the Duke then masked, and not going
publicly to Mass.

In the Spring, 1681. the Duke of Rothes Chancellor dying, (when there was a
Commission given by King Charles to the Duke of York, to be his High
Commissioner for Scotland) 'twas mightily talked then, that the Lord President
would be made Chancellor. But in that Parliament 1681. the designing Party of
the Nobility and Clergy flattering the Duke of York, that all would be as he
wished; matters looked with a very bad aspect, the President could expect no
good. Yet as God said to the Prophet, (that there were 7000 in Israel, who had
not bowed their Knees to Baal) there was some of the Clergy, many of the
Nobility, and most of the Gentry, who did foresee the Torrent) they laid aside
their Private Heats and Emulations, joined Hands to stop the Current, and by
Plurality of Votes, (though some things did pass current in that Parliament
before that time, would have been prevented, if some Men had not been lulled
asleep,) they did stop more mischief.

For the President had drawn up a Test for preservation of Religion, Liberty
and Property, (too long to be inserted here) made a Speech in Parliament to
that purpose, and, though seconded by very many, was thrown out, but some of
the then Court-Party drew up another Test to their purpose, which was carried
the very next Morning into the The Articles was a Committee of Parliament then
in use, made up of the 8 Statesmen, 8 Noblemen, and so many Bishops, and 8
Burgers, and the Commissioner and Statesmen ruled all there.
Articles, and past current there.

At the Meeting of the Parliament that Morning the Court Test was presented and
read, whereupon the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Argile, Haddington, etc. The
Bishop of Dunkell, (Bruce) the Lord Stair, President, Sir George Lockhart, Sir
John Cunningham, and many others of the several States, stood up to oppose the
said Test, but would not do; and all they could gain by the Arguments used, was
to get the Confession of Faith (made concerning the Protestant Religion,
mentioned in King James the Sixth's Acts of Parliament) insert in their Test.
The inserting of which Confession of Faith (the Intriguing Party then not
understanding the thing, being fond to pass their own Test with any quality
without Examination) was the very thing made some of the Bishops, Nobility, and
Gentry stand firm against taking away the Penal Laws in the Parliament 1686.
(They and all the Members of that Parliament having taken the said Test.) But
when the Bishops and others of the then Court-Party (after the Adjourning of
the Parliament that Evening) had met together, and considered what they had
done, in Voting the said Whiggish Confession of Faith (as they called it then)
and procured the Royal Assent thereto, went in a Body to the Duke of York, and
exclaimed against the Lord Stair, President, as the only Man who had wheedled
them in the matter, by surprise; but were told, the thing could not be helped
then, being it was past the Royal Assent, but that the Contrivers should be
Animadverted upon; and in some few days that Parliament being adjourned, and
the President in disgrace, he retired to the Country, sent his Son, Sir John
Dalrymple, now Master of Stair, to the Duke, to signify, that seeing his
Father was not pleasing to his Royal Highness, he intended to go to Court, and
give up his Commission to the King his Master, who gave it to him. Upon the
Delivery of which Message, the Duke of York (being surprised) dispatched Coll.
Graham (then his Privy Purse) Post to the King, to give Account of the Lord
President's Behavior, which was the occasion the President had no Access to
the King when he went to Court; but the King desired to tell him, that he might
live at home privately under his Protection: Upon which Assurance he went to
his Country House in Scotland, did not live there long without an Alarm, which
obliged him to repair privately to Edinburgh to advise his Safety; nor was he
long there, when there was a Warrant to seize him, upon which he went incognito
to Holland: For certainly his Fate had been the same which was the late
Argile's if he had staid at home, when in Holland there were Ruffians sent to
seize him, but by Providence made his escape to corners, diverting himself
there with the Conversation of the Schoolmen and Scholars of the two Famous
Universities of Leyden and Vtricht, and then writ a System of Natural
Philosophy. His Lady was harrass'd, and forced to fly to Holland also. His
Houses made a Receptacle of Soldiers, His Heritable Office taken from him, and
his Tenants spoiled.

The then Government raised Process of Treason several times against him, But
they could not reach his Estate, by all the stretches of Law were made.

In the Year 1687. King James sent him a Or Pardon.
Remission to Holland, which he slighted, judging himself guilty of no Crime
deserving a Remission, and being safe under the Protection of the Prince of
Orange and the States of Holland, rested satisfied.

In November 1688. He, the said President, came over with the Prince of Orange
(now our Gracious King) His Majesty being pleased to communicate his
Resolutions to him, as a Man fit to give, and keep Counsel.

Sir George Lockhart being President of the Session when the King came over
(but being unfortunately murdered in March 1689. by a base Ruffian, for
pronouncing an Unjust Sentence against him (as he alleged) though no such
thing) my Lord Stair was re-established in the President's Chair again.

In the Year 1690. he is created Viscount of Stair, Lord Dalrymple and
Glenluce. And though this has been an Age, where meaner Men were ashamed to
serve God in their Families, I will add this one good Quality more to him, that
he (besides his Private Devotion) was never a day in the worst of Times but he
read the Scripture, and prayed himself twice in his Family, were there never so
great or many strangers present, which might be a Reflection in these days, but
I hope not now, and to tell the truth, I dare give no worse Character of him.
As for his Behavior in Matters of State, these are Matters I do not meddle
with, let him put his misbehaviour in Public who will venture to do it, if
they can, but I judge it will puzzle any to do it; and Rational Men will Judge,
that he who Rules his Family best at home, is the fittest to Rule in Public,
and I pray God long may such Men Rule amongst us. I will not say, but the Lord
Viscount Stair is envied by some People for his Parts and growing Greatness,
but that should be no Argument with Rational good Men, being that men's Virtues
ought not to be accounted their Crimes. And I believe he may say in his Old
Age, Whose Ox, or whose Ass have I taken Hic murus aheneus esto, nil conscire
sibi nulla palescere culpa.
?

The Master of Stair is the foresaid Viscount's Eldest Son, liberally Educated
and bred to the Law, being upon his Travels in the time of the Dutch War, he
and one Ramsay, Son of Sir Andrew Ramsay, of Abbots-Hall, being intimate
Companions, happened to be at Chatham, and, as I am informed, preserved one of
the King's Men of War from being blown up by the Dutch, with the hazard of
their own Lives; for which brave Action (when they were but very young) King
Charles Knighted them, before he knew who they were, thus I heard it.

In the Year 1672. Sir John was admitted, after his Trials, to be an Advocate,
which Employ he followed for several Years, being of the first Rank.

In the Year 1683. when the said Viscount (his Father) was forced to abscond in
Holland, as is said before, the Lord of Claverhouse (afterward Viscount
Dundee) having the Command of the Army, which was sent to the West Country to
Spoil and Dragoon the Dissenting Party (not without our Scots Bishops consent)
did attempt to possess himself of the Office of the Baily of Regality of the
Lordship of Glenluce (which did Heritably belong to the said Sir John, and the
Viscount of Stair his Father) Sir John, now Master of Stair (by Creation of his
Father Lord, Baron, and Peer of the Realm) did oppose the Lord Dundee, and beat
him off, for which he was convened before the Council, and fined in 500l. which
he paid.

In the Year 1684. The said Master was seized at his own house, when his Lady
was just to lie in, and made Prisoner, being suspected, it seems, by the then
Government to have Correspondence from Holland, and to have carried on
intrigues against the Government; and being brought to Edinburgh, was carried
from the Palace of Holyrood-house (where he was examined by the Ministers of
State) as a Trophe (it seems to disgrace him) between the common Soldiers,
along the public Streets, to the common Prison) more than half a Miles
distance; was kept close Prisoner there for several Months, not knowing for
what Crime, (but as himself then said) for the Original sin of the Father. At
last, after many Petitions, he had the favor granted him by the Council, to be
enlarged to the Castle Prison, where he lay a long time, till the Government
was ashamed they could not fix a Crime upon him, set him at Liberty.

In the Year 1687. there being none of the Advocates (but these who were
advanced to be Lords of the Session, for their then Zeal and Loyalty to the
Cause in hand) (fit to be the King's Advocate Attorney General.
the Court (hoping to gain him to their Party, and to wheedle his Father over
from Holland) made the Master King's Advocate, (that being the time of the
Toleration) and during a whole year he continued King's Advocate, there was
none Prosecuted to death, but one Man, upon the score of Nonconformity. The
Court perceiving the Master's behavior in that Post that year, and intending
to take another course, by the Dispensing Power; and finding him not to be a
fit tool for their purpose, brought in Sir George Mckhenzie again, to be King's
Advocate, and they degraded the Master to be Justice Clerk; then they found out
he was the Man saved the Bishop of Ross, in Anno 1686. by advising him to
appeal from the Bishops Court to the Parliament.

Upon the Revolution, the Earl of Perth (then Chancellor, fearing the just
indignation of the enraged Mob) taking his flight, the said Master (and some
others of the Privy Counselors) taking care first of keeping things in order,
and distributing (so far as was then in their power) the Government in the best
hands; went up to wait upon the Prince of Orange in December, 1688. concurred
in making the address to the Prince, for taking on the Administration of the
Government, assisted in the Convention 1689. as a chosen Member thereof; was
the Man chiefly (with the indefatigable pains and endeavors of the late Duke
of Hamilton, chosen President of the Convention) who concerted the Resolution,
and stated the vote of forfeiting King James, and Proclaiming his Majesty and
the late Queen, King and Queen of Scotland. The Master of Stair in conjunction
with the Earl of Argile, and Sir James Montgomry were voted, and sent up
Commissioners from the Three Estates of Scotland, to make offer of the Crown to
their Majesty's, when our Gracious King was pleased to make the Master his
Advocate again, and Lord Melvil Secretary of State, etc.

The foresaid Convention being turned into a Parliament (The Duke of Hamilton
made Lord High Commissioner) some People (who pretended great matters for
Religion, Liberty and Property, being displeased, it seems, that they were not
advanced instantly to some places of high dignity and trust in the Government,
recoiled: And then it was that we unhappily turned into Parties, which put the
Subjects in a ferment, made our Proceedings uneasy ever since at home, and
makes the King's Affairs sometimes to be retarded both here and abroad, thus by
our Divisions, giving too much encouragement to the disaffected Party.

In the Winter, 1690. The Master of Stair was advanced to be conjunct Secretary
of State with the Earl of Melvil, who, upon the Revolution, was made sole
Secretary of State for Scotland, as aforesaid, which he did merit as (formerly)
a great Sufferer, and always a true common weals Man.

In the year 1692. Mr. James Johnson was made Conjunct Secretary of State with
the Master of Stair, and the Earl of Melvil sent to Scotland, to be Lord Privy
Seal: And as to these Three Persons they continue in the same Stations and
Offices still.

The Earl of Broadalban, who was formerly called Sir John Campbell of
Glenorchy, an ancient family in the Highlands, a Cadent of the family of
Argile, when he married the late Earl of Argile's Sister, (Countess Dowager of
the late Earl of Caithnes, who died without issue Male) he the said Sir John
was created Earl of Caithnes in the year 1677. or 1678. and brought several
debts upon the Earldom of Caithnes, and made use of force to possess himself of
the Estate; which created him Enemies afterward, an Heir Male and of Tail
appearing to the deceased Earl of Caithnes, he the said Sir John Campbell took
a new Patent to be Earl of Brodalban.

In the year 1677. by order of Council he sent a double Regiment of his Tenants
and Vassals, in conjunction with the Marquis of Athol, Earl of Perth, and
several other Noblemen and Gentlemen to the West Country (which was then called
the Highland Host) there was a Commission of the Council sent along with them
to try the Dissenters; this created the Earl of Broadalban Enemies also. Upon
the Revolution he stood out, but being convinced of his error as to the
alteration from that of Arbitrary and dispotick power, to that of a mild,
merciful and peaceable Government, tracing the true Constitution and
fundamental Laws of the Nation; he joined forces, and offered his Service to
the Government, by bringing in of the Highland Clans and Rebels by fair means,
or necessary stratagems to make the effects answer the end.

As for the Glenco-men, the truth is, hic labor, hoc opus est, to describe them
without reflection upon my Countrymen, which I would willingly avoid; but the
real truth is, they were a branch of the Mc. Donnels (who were a brave
courageous People always) seated amongst the Campbells, who (I mean Glenco-men)
are all Papists, if they have any Religion; were always counted a People given
to Rapine and Plunder, (or Sorners) as we call it, and much of a piece with
your Highway-men in England: Several Governments designed to bring them to
condign Punishment, but their Purses, it seems found them out Protectors, and
their Country was inaccessable to any small Parties; and though I dare not
approve of the method taken in January and February, 1692. by killing them
under trust, and in cold Blood, yet at the same time they deserved the heavy
hand of Justice, in a regular and legal manner, which would have made their
Neighbors live in more peace and tranquillity. I do remember when I first heard
then of the matter; I said to some great Persons, that the best method would be
to make these Men Prisoners, and send them abroad to be Soldiers, or to the
Plantations, and wishes it had been so.

Now that I have given you a Historical account of these Persons in as brief
terms as I could, to make you understand the Men, and the relation of matters
afterward. I begin again with the Bishop of Galloway, Mr. Robertson, and the
Lord Viscount Stair's affair.

The Viscount of Stair is by his own, his Author's and Predecessors Charters,
Heretable Bailly or Judge of the Royalty or Regality of the Lordship of
Glenluce, within the Bishopric of Galloway for which the Bishop is obliged,
and was constantly in use to pay him 20l. sterling yearly of fee (or Sallary)
in Money or value, besides the perquisites of the Court, which is allowed to
the Deputy always.

The Bishop of Galloway died, as was mentioned: The three Daughters and their
Husbands did contend about proving the Will of the Deceased, the Bishop's Widow
being poor, and detained from what effects the Bishop left, by the contention
and tedious unnatural Law Debates of her Children: Mr. Hugh Dalrymple (the Lord
Stair's Son) being Factor for uplisting of his Father's Rents, the time of his
Father's Exile, as abovesaid, and the Viscount himself likewise after his
return home, did support her with Money, that she might not starve, during the
Law debates; for which they took security, both from her self and Mr. Patrick
Smyth her Eldest Daughter's Husband to repay them.

After long and litigious Debates, the Lords of the Session pronounced a a
Decree.
Decree in favor of Mr. Patrick Smyth, being found to have the best right,
and who supported the Mother by his Credit.

This Mr. Duncan Robertson, encouraged sic stetit sententia.
by some Persons (not well inclined to the Lord Stair, to be sure) presented a
Petition to the Parliament upon the 3d day of June last, complaining, that the
said Viscount had pronounced an unjust Sentence against him. It would be
needless, and not to your purpose, to repeat all the said Complaint, and the
great and long Debates followed thereupon; so I only give you the substance,
and the most material points in the Complaint; ( viz) That the President in the
Debate betwixt the said Robertson and Mr. Patrick Smith, should have done
Injustice by making up himself (or by his Influence) a Debate, or Minutes and
Interloquitor subjoyned thereto upon the 29th. of July, 1692. and signed the
same privately in the Vacation.

2. That after there was a Decree pronounced in favor of Mr. Smith against Mr.
Robertson (against which Decree Mr. Robertson gave in a Bill of Suspension)
upon which Bill the Clerk of the Bills refused to write a A Sist is a stop of
Execution of a Decree by a Judge for a certain limited time.
Sist, by the President's Order, thereby stopping the ordinary course of the
Law.

3. That the President Transacted during the Dependence of the Plea with Mr.
Smith, as Executor to the Bishop, for a Debt due by the President to the late
Biship, Lord Stair pay Tithes to the Bishop.
and had an An Abatement.
Ease from Mr. Patrick of the Debt, and took Allowance of 20l. Sterling of
Baily Fee, which the Bishop would never have paid.

The Answer made to the first was, That if Mr. Robertson, or any other could
prove against the President, that he did sign any Interloquitor or Debates
privately, but what was the meaning of the rest of the Lords In Presence of,
and by the unanimous consent of all the Lords.
in praesentia, as well as his own Opinion, he were most unjustifiable; but
nothing at all thereof was proved: On the contrary, one Smyth, a Witness
Produced.
adduced by Robertson himself, Deposed, that the King's Advocate did Dictate
them, who is a Man of great Honor and Integrity, and owned the same. The Clerk
also deposed the same, and Mr. John Frank, Robertson's own Advocate, Deposed,
that the Point mentioned in these Minutes, was stated by the President, which
should have been debated, Mr. Robertson's Advocates declined to Debate, and Mr.
Patrick Smith craving a Decree, and that the same was pronounced in Mr.
Frank's own hearing and others, so not done privately. Two of the Lords of
Session, Halcraig and Crosrig, deposed to the same purpose, and one of these
Lords does exactly remember, that before the Cause was called, the Lords
Resolved, that the Parties should Debate the very Points mentioned in the
minutes, which was stated truly by the President, as all the Lords resolved.
And it is further cleared (the aforesaid Interloquitor being res gesta, known
to, and authorized by all the Lords) by a subsequent Decree of Suspension
which followed thereupon the first of February, 1693.

It was answered to the Second, That the Clerk of the Bills, James Nicolson,
did refuse to receive or write upon the Bill of Suspension, because Mr.
Robertson was litigious, and after two Decreets in foro, he offered a third
Bill, and Mr. Patrick Smith having found Caution or Surety to Relieve Mr.
Duncan Robertson and his Wife of any Process might be intended against them, as
Executors to the Bishop, (which was the Pretense or Reasons of his last Bill of
Suspension) and all the Lords rejected the Bill, and discharged the Clerk of
the Bills to receive any other Bill of Suspension from Mr. Robertson, except
upon Obedience, he having refused to Debate before; which Deliverance was shown
and duly intimated to the Clerk of the Bills, which is his Warrant: And that
the President never spoke directly nor indirectly to him about the same. The
Lord Aberuchill also ordinary deposed, that the Clerk did refuse to write a
Sist by reason of the said Deliverance of the Lords in praesentia.

It was answered to the Third, That, as was said before, Mr. Hugh Dalrymple, by
his Father's Orders, (when in Exile) and the President himself when he came
home, advanced money to the Bishop's poor Widow, to save her from starving,
during the dependency of the Plea, for which they took Bond, to be repaid as
aforesaid, which was a Security to them in omnem eventum, without any
dependence upon the Event of that Plea of Law: For though Mr. Robertson's Title
had been just, and sustained by the Lords, the President's Security was good
beyond exception.

1. Because the Widow was provided to a considerable Or Annuity.
Life-Rent by her Husband, which was a Debt undeniably preferrable to the
Interest of either Party, Smith or Robertson; and the Advancement to her being
less than her Provision, the President could have no bias that way; besides
that Mr. Patrick Smith also had an unquestionable Interest in the Dead's part,
and the Legittim, and had acquired the Interest of a third Sister, as Mr.
Robertson's own Bill to the Parliament does acknowledge. So there was no Hazard
to, or Injustice in the President, though he had advanced more to Mr. Patrick
or the Widow, which he never did, and made no other Transaction, but as
aforesaid.

And as to the other member of that Allegation, That the President got an Ease
from Mr. Patrick Smith of the Debt due by him to the Bishop.

It was Answered, That it was a very false Allegation: For by the Discharge
granted to the President, it will appear, that the several and particular Sums
paid, are Instructed either paid by the President himself, or Mr. Hugh
Dalrymple in his absence; that the President had no Advantage by it, nor was
the President concerned what Mr. Duncan's Claim was against the Bishop, or his
Executors, seeing the President was not obliged to pay any more to the Bishop,
or any claiming Right to his Estate, but what was truly due, and to them who
had the best Right.

As to that, That the President should have taken an Allowance of 20l. Sterling
to himself Yearly of Baily Fee. The President owns he did take the same, and
Instructs his Right by an Original Charter Anno 1560. And by another Charter
under the Great Seal, Anno 1618. both Charters bearing an Heritable Office of
Bailiary, and a Fee of Three Chalders of Meal out of the first and readiest of
the Fruits and Emoluments of the Lordship of Glenluce, which three Chalders of
the Measure of Wigton (which is the Measure of that Country) will be four
Chalders and a half of Linlithgow Measure, and which would be worth more than
30l. Sterling Yearly; yet the President being only in use to receive an
Allowance of 20l. Sterling, he exacted no more. And as the said President's
Right was Instructed by his Charters, so the use of Payment appeared by two
several Agreements, one with Bishop Hamiltoun, Anno 1666. who preceded Bishop
Aitkin, and another, Anno 1688. with Bishop Gordon, who succeeded him, both
stating the Baily Fee at 20l. Sterling Yearly. After debating of these Points
before the Parliament, it was moved, that the Affair should be committed to a
Committee chosen for that particular Case, but it was carried by Plurality of
Voices, that it should be committed to the Committee of Safety, who were
appointed to give their Report thereof in open Parliament upon the Tenth day of
the said Month of June. And the Committee having accordingly examined many
Witnesses upon the most material Articles of the Complaint, viz. The alleged
Injustice of the Sentence, nothing was proved as I can see against the Viscount
of Stair by Robertson; on the contrary, it was proved by the Depositions of the
Lords of Session, Mr. Robertson's own Advocate, and several other Evidences, as
abovesaid, that the President's Transactions were fair, and the Sentence just;
so that Mr. Robertson did not think it advisable to insist upon the other
Articles of the Complaint. Upon the Tenth of June it was moved, I hear, in
behalf of the Lord President, that the Parliament would call for the Report of
the Committee, and either declare the President Guilty, or if nothing of the
Complaint should be proved against him, that they would Acquit the Lord
President, and appoint a suitable Punishment upon the Libeller for so impudent
a Calumny; but the Motion was not favored, there being matters of greater
Importance in hand. However the President's Friends say, they are glad (that
even now in his Lordship's absence) there are no greater matters of Complaint
or Accusation found against him through the whole course of his Life, being
sufficiently vindicated of this Accusation by these and other grounds
represented, judging there is enough known (and will be justified by all good
unbyassed men) of his long Service in the Public, Integrity of Life, firmness
of Principles, his and his Families Sufferings in dubious and dangerous Times,
and Dutiful Adherence to His Majesty's Interest, before and since the late
Happy Revoluton: And that they do confidently hope that His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament will sometime or other
find the Justice of the Nation interested to see the Laws and Acts of
Parliament for Securing, Maintaining, and Defending the Honor and Reputation
of Judges (who do Represent His Majesty's Person and his Authority) fully and
effectually executed by the Exemplary Punishment of the malicious Libeller, so
as Judges in all time coming may be fenced and secured from such bold and
insolent Attempts. And upon the whole matter, the President's Friends say
further, that he lost 100l. Sterling by these Transactions concerning the
Bishop's Affair, which he never expects again; so that according to the Wise
Man's saying, As it is a hard matter to be both Popular and Just, so to strike,
and not wound, is Anger lost, for he is invulnerable, and not hurt, who is
struck.

As for the matter of the Indictment against the Earl of Broadalban, in so far
as I can learn, the matter is thus: That the Earl, Anno 1691. promised to the
King to reclaim the High-land Rebels, which way he did it, is in Public now;
but Mac Donnel of Glengary (who is the most sensible, and of greatest Probity
amongst them) came in, and deposed before the Parliament, That the Earl did, by
Articles agreed upon betwixt him and them, engage, that if King William could
not condescend to such and such Articles, he, the said Earl, should with all
his Friends and Followers, join the Highland Army. The said Deposition being
read, it was moved that the King's Advocate should be ordered to Commence a
Process of High Treason against his Lordship, and that he in the mean time
should be committed Prisoner to the Castle of Edinburgh. And 'twas pleaded for
the Earl, that he might have time to deliberate his Answer before Impeachment,
this being a Surprise to him, and doubted not but he would make it appear to
the Parliament there was no ground for the Impeachment.

It was further pleaded for the Earl, That Glengary, not being summoned by a
Judge to come in as a Witness against him, and especially considered that he
was a Roman Catholic, had been in Rebellion against the King, and never knew
he had submitted to the Government, unless done privately at this time, and
carrying an inveterate Enmity to the Earl's Family, he hoped the Parliament
would not found a Process of High Treason against him upon his Deposition.
These Arguments did not prevail.

It was further pleaded by the Earl, That he had an Ample Commission from the
King to do in that Affair all that he should think fit for effectuating his
Design: That as well His Majesty as all the World knew that in such
Negotiations there must be Allowances for men Commissioned to go, or at least
pretend to go great lengths, and to yield to such Condescendencies as they find
most taking for accomplishing the Design. That the Effect and Consequence had
justified the Methods he had taken. That not only they there sitting, and their
Constituents at home, who suffered most in that unnatural and cruel War, but
also the Kingdom of England (who for its own Safety was obliged to maintain
some Regiments here in Scotland) yea, and all the Confederacy had reaped
Advantage by his Conduct in that Treaty, many Troops and much Money being now
employed against the Common Enemy abroad, which that troublesome War had
exhausted for several Years here at home. That seeing the thing it self was
good and advantageous for the Nation, he wondered Persons should take Exception
against the particular Methods which in Prudence he was obliged to take in
carrying it on; however that he had made it known to Their Majesty's, whatever
he had said or done in that Affair, and had their Approbation since.

It was alleged, that things now Libelled, were not then known. It was
answered, that upon a Complaint given against the Earl for these very things he
is now accused of, His Majesty recommended to the Privy Council here to make
Enquiry into the matter, which was done accordingly, and transmitted to the
King; that the minutes of Council would clearly show the same, and desired that
the minutes might be called for, but the Parliament did not think fit to call
for them. The Earl of Melvil, then Secretary of State, and now Lord Privy Seal,
it is said, rose up, and avouched the truth of what had been said, and asserted,
that the Precognition taken bo the Council, was upon a Complaint (if not in the
same words, yet at at least to same purpose) with what was contained in
Glengary's Depositions, was sent by the Council to him, as Secretary of State
then; That he showed it to the Queen (the King being then in Flanders) who kept
it a whole Night by her, that the next day he transmitted it to the King, who
(he knew by the Returns he got from Flanders) received and perused it. The Duke
of Queensbury did declare likewise, that it consisted with his knowledge, that
His Majesty received the same, he being then in Flanders with the King, and
heard his Majesty Discourse of the matter very often.

Upon this some Person moved, That seeing His Majesty had taken the Earl's
Behavior to his own Consideration, and had been informed of all the Methods of
his Proceedings in the matter, and had shown a satisfaction with the Earl's
Conduct, by preferring him at that time to several Places of Honor and Trust,
The Parliament would please not to proceed in an Affair of such Importance
against one of His Majesty's Ministers of State, until he was first acquainted
with it. But this being refused, it was desired in behalf of the Earl, they
would delay their Proceedings at least until the next Meeting; but it was voted
and carried, that the King's Advocate proceeded immediately against him; and an
Order of Parliament was signed for Committing him to the Castle, where his
Lordship was carried immediately after the rising of the Parliament. The Lord
Advocate sent him a Copy of his Indictment, and he was ordered to give in his
Answer thereto by the First of July instant. Upon the First instant the Earl
desired an Exculpation, which was granted to him. Upon Adjourning of the
Parliament to the Seventh of November next, the Prosecution of the Earl is
delayed till that time.

As for the matter of the Glenco-men, made so much ado, we are something in the
dark as yet, nor will I meddle to speak, much less to write of any Point the
Parliament have Voted, only the Historical part of that matter is this.

That when the Earl of Broadalban did undertake to cause the Highlanders to lay
down their Arms, give over Hostility, and to give Passive Obedience to the
present Government, by taking of the Oaths (which was very well done, whoever
did it) before they laid down their Arms, there were two or three Indemnities
issued forth by His Majesty, encouraging them to come in; and they did come all
in by the prefixed Diet signifies the day appointed in the Indemnity to come in
by.
Diet in the last Indemnity, except the Glenco-men, who it seems finding
themselves without Help or Support by the other Chieftains and Clans coming in,
Old Mac Kean of Glenco himself only (as I am informed, as ad aram ultimam) went
to, and prevailed with Campbel of Ardkinglass, Sheriff-Deputy of Argile-shire
(a very worthy honest Gentlemen, and formerly a great Sufferer) six days after
the Diet was elapsed, who received him, and Mac Kean took the Oaths; though at
the same time it was, and is still the Opinion of many good men, that to
confide in these men, or to bring them to Conformity to the Government, were
Penelope's telam texere.

Nor did the taking of the Oaths after the Diet prefixed was elapsed, save or
protect them or him from the lash of the Law (not having come in, in the terms
of the Law) the mercy tendered in the Indemnity being Conditional, in case they
came in, and submitted before, or upon such a day; but was a ground for mercy
and mollification of the rigor of the Law, supposing him or them to have taken
the Oaths bono animo, and upon true Repentance. I do not hear the rest of his
Followers came in, and took the Oaths, judging, it is like, he and they were
safe by his only taking of the Oaths, though post meridiem diei. The Court (it
seems) not knowing of these Transactions at a great distance of Four or Five
Hundred Miles (and being informed by all hands that they were Nests of Thieves
and Robbers) His Majesty, after refusal of many offered mercies, sent to treat
them as Enemies and Rebels: Yet at the same time His Majesty, by his
Instructions, as I am Informed, left room for Mercy to them, according to
Discretion, and Circumstances of Time and Affairs, which is all could be
expected in Reason from His Majesty.

The Master of Stair, Secretary of State, writ Letters, it seems, likewise at
the same time to the Government, or Officers of the Army there, much to the
same purpose, but (it is said) in severer terms, and exceeding His Majesty's
Instructions, to treat them like the men they were represented. What may be in
this, we know not, not having seen the Master's Letters; but many wish that
they, and all the Instructions relating to that matter of the Glenco-men, had
been Printed, to undeceive the generality of good men, who speak as they
affect, but could make no true Judgment of the matter as it then stood, only
this, That the Parliament has been very Zealous to discover at whose Door the
fault (in killing the Glenco men) lies. That they were killed in cold Blood,
and under Trust Faber est quisque fortunae suae.
, judging themselves secure and safe (with their Thirteen days Guests or
Lodgers) is undeniable. But in fine, The Parliament, as you have it in Public,
finds that His Majesty's Orders and Instructions had Mercy in graemio, so that
it cannot lodge there, and God forbid it should. They have likewise voted Sir
Thomas Livingstoun, Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Forces in Scotland (who
sent the Orders to Col. Hill, Governor of Fort William, and Hamilton, his
Lieutenant Colonel) clear of it, as also Col. Hill, have summoned
Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton to appear before them, to Answer concerning the
said matter; and upon further Scrutiny where the said Murder will fix, I know
not ( Grammatici certant, and adhuc sub judice, lis est) for the common
Soldiers will readily say, that they obeyed but their Superior Officer's
Command; and the Master of Stair's Friends here say, that they desire the
Master's Letters to be Printed, that the World may judge of them; and if he be
judged to have exceeded Bounds, or His Majesty's Instructions, it was his Zeal
for the Government, but never intended at the same time that these men should
be killed in cold Blood; and that he did not at all know that any of the
Glenco-men had taken the Oaths, (either before or after the Diet) when he writ
these Letters, being at Court Four or Five Hundred miles distant, as said is;
so it is wished the men, who had the Trust of the Execution of the matter upon
the spot, had acquainted the Court or our Government of these unhappy men's then
Circumstances, before they went so far on, in which case I doubt whether any of
them had been killed or murdered, and consequently no Reflection had been upon
any part of the Government, or any ever mentioned in the Affair. It Is an old
saying, That the Counsels of Wise Men are certain, but Events uncertain.

As for my own part, I know nothing of it, but God in Heaven, and the Master of
Stair himself knows best if he be guilty of a designed murder of these men,
or any others: Nor will I Argue about any Point such a Wise, Loyal Parliament
have voted or found. But this I may say, That I do not understand where the
Master of Stair's Interest lay to destroy the Glenco men, for if he be any ways
suspected to be a Jacobite, it was not his Interest upon that score to destroy
them by any means in Scotland, their Religion and blind Zeal bending them then
altogether that way, whatever new Light these who are living of them have found
of late, and if he be thought to be a Church of England man (though that be
against our present Constitution, yet no man in his right Wits will call it a
Crime.) These men were not Presbyterians, to be destroyed upon that score; nor
do I think any man would be so mad as to bribe him to kill them by Authority,
without the Hand of Justice going along with it. Some good-natured People may
say, out of good will to the Master, that they were Idle men, Robbers, Thieves,
and Telluris inutile pondus, Granting all that yet a Statesman's Interest was,
to make their Young men Soldiers, or to send them to the Plantations, which
had been to good purpose. But a man of his Trust, Capacity, and Reason, to be
Accessory to their Destruction in cold Blood, is unaccountable. And being the
Honorable Parliament has found that Slaughter a Murder (as no doubt it was) in
the manner it was done, and that the Master exceeded His Majesty's
Instructions, it were a very pertinent Question to ask, What under God's
Heavens, was the Master's Bias in the matter? I can imagine none. There was an
Information Printed and dispersed (as you heard formerly) by Commissary
Dalrymple (hearing that his Brother, the Master of Stair, and his Letters were
made mention of in the Commission appointed for Examining the Glenco Business)
in Vindication of his Brother's Behavior and Conduct, as Secretary of State,
in the said Affair; Representing, That if People did Construct some Paragraphs,
Sentences, or Periods of his Brother's Letters so and so, without connection of
other Sentences, etc. without hearing (in his own absence) they did not know
what to say of it. But if one Sentence, etc. were connected with others, the
whole would not bear the Commentaries the People might put upon them separatim,
It Is a saying of the great Seneca. That the best way to help every thing by a
fair Interpretation, and where there is a doubt, is, to allow it the most
favorable Construction.
and several other Arguments to this purpose. The dispersing of which
Informations, after the Commission's Sentiment (and they being ready to report
their Opinion in open Parliament) gave Offense to the Parliament. He said, his
Printing and Dispersing of them, was before the Vote of Parliament, and said,
he intended to give no Offense, mean time he was reprimanded, and was obliged
to beg Pardon.

The Parliament since Summoning of Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, have declared
him Fugitive, for not appearing, he is gone since into Flanders, as we hear, to
wait upon His Majesty. The Parliament have likewise made an Address to the
King, to send Persons home, who may be found Guilty, to be prosecuted for the
said Murder, or not, as His Majesty thinks fit.

Sir, This Parliament have done great things for His Majesty's Service, and
Safety of the Public: For though there might have been some misunderstandings
between some of the Members, yet all concurred unanimously to serve the King
and the Country. You know what was said concerning the Nation and Commonwealth
of the Romans,

Tantae molis erat, Romanam condere gentem.
For great matters take up much time to effectuate the ends proposed; so as we
have had good beginnings, good proceedings, hopes all our matters will end
well; for though the almost desperate and uneasy Jacobites (who but fish in
muddy Waters) should vaunt upon the occasion of some Accidents, (as to see some
honest, well-meaning men differ only in Points of Opinion,) they being a People
soon elevated to Castles of the Air, and soon cast down to the Dust, yet all
the bustle they make, comes to nothing at last, but exposes themselves the more
to folly. And I am very apt to believe, that all our seeming Differences would
evanish upon the sight of our most Gracious King's Presence, upon his Throne in
our Parliament; so will conclude with a great Moralist's saying, or to this
purpose, That by the two Blessings of Reason and Union, we might secure and
defend our selves against the violence of Fortune; Sense and Reason we have
enough, and what is wanting of the latter, I hope the Defeat of Lewis Le Grand,
and our most Gracious King's (I mean King William's) Presence once here in our
Parliament, would, I am certain, effectuate. I long to see His Majesty here.
Vale, and been valeat and Vivat Rex noster Gulielmus.

FINIS.

