A Declaration of the General Convention of IRELAND, Expressing their
Detestation of the unjust Proceedings against the late KING, in a pretended
HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE in ENGLAND.
WHereas by the contrivances of some self designing persons, a sinful and
unexemplary force was put upon the Parliament of England in the year 1648.
Those persons having cause to despair of the Parliaments compliance with their
horrid and destructive Principles, though never so artificially and plausibly
heldforth: Which single act in it self though it was a transcendent violation
of that Kingdoms Birth right, yet it seemed too cheap and vile a Sacrifice to
their ambition, except they mingled with it the Blood of their and our Lawful
Sovereign; In Order whereunto, They presumed to Erect A COURT called by
themselves A HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE, where, by an Ugly and Execrable Sentence
they Condemned him to death, which was Executed under all the circumstantial
aggravations of Barbarism. Since which time, the People of this Kingdom
having not had opportunity of assembling themselves in Ireland until the
meeting of this General Convention; And being by the blessing of God now met,
We judge it our duty to Declare, and do hereby Declare to the whole World Our
unsained and hearty detestation of, and Our Protestation against those most
Inhumane, Unparalelld and Barbarous Proceedings against the late KING: which by
true Protestants can be termed no other, Then the foulest Murder, and Highest
Assassination that Sacred or Profane Story has Recorded: being perpretated by
the said persons in a Kingdom where the true Reformed Religion eminently
flourisht, and being contrary to that Solemn League and Covenant which they
themselves had taken, and all this countenanct under a pretext of public
Justice.

And We heartily beg of God, that he would silence the Cry of that innocent
Blood, and not further punish these Nations for the same, by continnueing them
in Confusions and Unsettlements, but in the Riches of his Mercy Restore them to
Peace upon the sure Foundations of Truth and Righteousness.

1. of May 1660
Ordered that this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Mat. Barry Cl. of (...) General Convention of Ireland.

Imprinted at Dublin by William Bladen Anno Domini 1660.


