C2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMOND.

WHEREAS a most barbarous and outrageous Murder and Robbery was committed, on
Sunday the seventh day of this instant October in the Evening, in the Town of
Radr^m in the County of Wicklow, by several Traitorous and Rebellious persons
then assembled together in Arms to the great terror of his Majesty's good
Subjects, and the disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, and whereas some of
the said Offenders, being since apprehended, and committed to his Majesty's
Goal at Wicklow, We have caused a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer to be
issued, for the speedy Trial, and bringing to just punishment, the said persons
so apprehended, and such others who shall be found to have been guilty of the
said Crimes, but diverse of the persons who were Actors therein having not as
yet been discovered or taken; We think fit hereby, in his Majesty's name
straightly to charge and command, all his Majesty's loyal Subjects, upon their
duty and allegiance to his Majesty, not only to forbear to receive, or
relieve, any the persons who were Actors in the sai^ Murder or Robbery, but
also to make diligent search and Enquiry after the said persons, and by all
means possible, to apprehend and take the bodies of them, and them to bring or
cause to be brought, under safe custody, to the High Sherriffs of the
respective Counties, where they shall be apprehended to be by such Sheriffs,
safely conveyed to the said Goal of Wicklow, to the end they may be there
legally proceeded against, and tried for their said offenses.

And we do hereby further declare, that whatsoever person or persons shall
knowingly comfort, relieve or abet, the said Offenders, or any of them, they
are and shall be reputed, deemed and adjudged Traitors, in like degree, with
the Offenders themselves, and to be proceeded against according to Law; And we
do hereby also declare, that whosoever shall discover and apprehend, or cause
to be apprehended, any of the persons, who were Actors in the said Murder or
Robbery, and are not yet in custody, shall upon conviction of any such persons,
have for a reward for his said discovery and apprehension of any such
Malefactors, for each Person so discovered and brought in, Ten pounds, for
payment whereof, we will give Warrant as occasion shall require.

And whosoever of the said Offenders, not yet seized upon, shall first
discover, ^ither to us the Lord Lieutenant, or any of his Majesty's Privy
Council, or Judges in this Kingdom, the whole plot and Conspiracy entered into,
for Committing the said Robbery, and the several persons engaged therein, or
shall at any time hereafter, bring unto the High Sheriff of any Country in this
Kingdom, any of the said other persons, who were guilty of the said Crimes, and
are not yet in Custody, he shall upon such his discovery, or the Conviction of
such person so brought in by him, together with his said reward, receive his
Pardon, and toward the speedy effecting of this service, all Commanders of
Horse, and Foot, and all other his Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects are
to be Aiding and Assisting as they and every of them will Answer the contrary
at their Perils. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 19th. day of
October 1677.

Ja: Armachanus. Mich: Dublin. Cance. Blesinton. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis R:
Coot. To: Booth: J: Temple John Cole. Ja: Hayes. Tho: Radcliffe.



