DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL YP PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

UPon Consideration had of a Petition Presented unto Us, by the Officers of the
Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, and the answer of the Farmers of His
Majesty's Revenue thereunto, as also of the Provision made by His Majesty for
and in behalf of the said Officers expressed in His Majesty's Grant to the said
Farmers for and concerning the Just and Usual Fees due and accruing to the said
Officers upon the Payments of His Majesty's Revenue Arising out of Quitt-Rents,
Crown-Rents, and Composition-Rents within this Kingdom, by His Majesty's
Ter-Tenants, We Judge it expedient, and it is accordingly by and with the
unanimous consent of the said Farmers and Officers, Ordered, that the said
Farmers and Commissioners of His Majesty's Revenue, do forthwith give Notice by
Printed copies of this Order to all and every of the Collectors, or Receivers
that have been or are employed by them in this Kingdom, for the receipt of His
Majesty's said Quit-Rents, Crown-Rents and Composition-Rents, since the
Commencement of the present Farm, that they do within the space of one and
twenty days after notice aforesaid, give and deliver in writing a full and
just Account of all the Fees to the said Officers of his Majesty's Receipt,
which they the said Collectors and their Agents under and by them severally
employed have received from his Majesty's said Ter-Tenants to the 29 th. day of
September last past, which said Account is to be such, as they will give upon
Oath to be made before any one or more of the Barons of his Majesty's Courts of
Exchequer aforesaid, wherein they are to express the Denominations of such
Lands, and the Ter-Tenants names within their respective Districts, for which
they have received the said Fees as aforesaid, to the end the said Officers may
know for what Lands they the said Collectors have, and for what Lands they have
not received Fees; and the said Collectors or Receivers are hereby required to
pay or cause to be paid all the moneys they have received for Fees as
aforesaid, within forty days after they shall receive such Notice of this our
Order as aforesaid, to such person or persons as the said Commissioners and
Officers shall Nominate and Appoint to receive the same, for the Use of the
said Officers; and to the end every such person or persons as are herein
concerned may be proceeded against that shall not punctually Comply with this
our Order, the Farmers and Commissioners of his Majesty's said Revenue are
hereby required to give Notice to this Board of every particular person
employed by them for receiving of the Rents aforesaid, that shall not
punctually Comply with this our Order.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 10th. day of December1679. Much.
Armach, C. Arran. Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Ranelagh. Hen. Midensis. R.
Coote. To. Booth. John Keatinge. Jo. Davys. Theo. Jones. Wm. Flower.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Dublin, Printed By Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesty's
Printing House, in Skinner Row. 1679.


