By The SVPREAME COUNCIL OF THE CONFEDERAT CATHOLICS OF IRELAND
ALthough we find our selves much afflicted, for the expressions we are
forced to make, of the Lord Nuncio his violent proceedings, against the
government of the Kingdom, and the just liberties of the Nation; yet being
obliged to render an account to God and man, of the trust reposed in us, and
seeing his Lopp: squares his actions by principles, apparently contrary to the
intrest of this Nation: We must (in opposition to the Course he steeres)
manifest to the world our dislike of his actions, and express some part of
those Iellousies and distrusts, which (upon just grounds) we have entertained
of his proceedings, in the ensuing reasons, by which we are induced at present
to inhibitt the meeting of a National Synod appointed by his Lopp:to be held
at Galway the fifteenth of August next.

1. First, it is not unknown, that the Lord Nuncio has made such use of a
declaration drawn from a few Prelates against the Cessation concluded with the
Lord Barton of Inchiquin, and of the unjust Censurs temerariously issued there
upon, that he has introduced a Civil ^ar among the Confederatts, and thereby
exposed the Catholic Religion and this Kingdom to apparent hazard of
destruction. And now observing many Prelatts, all the Nobility and men of
intrest, and all the Cities and Towns Corporat with in our Quarters, resolved
with us to suppress those in Arms opposing the Government, who are supported by
his Countenance, and the ayds sent for maintenance of our cause, which
(contrary to his Holiness pious intentions) are applied to foment and increase
dissentions, he (by the assistance of a few seditious persons) calls this
National Synod, intending [by that unlimited power which he assumes unto
himselfe] and the terror of his Judgments, which are already extended [to the
uttermost of severity on the persons of Father George Dillon, and Father
Valentine Brown, for no other reason, then that they are not of his opinion,
concearning the Cessation; to force an approbation of his most unjust and
unexampled procedings against those adhering to the Government, and to
anticipat [asmuch as in him lies) his Holiness, [to whom we have appealed)
his judgment of our Cause. 2. Secondly, he conuenes it at Galway, a place
inconvenient, as being seated in a remote part of the Kingdom, unsafe in the
way to it, and in a Province, which is now made the seat of war: A place
where inuectiues, against authority, are frequently preached by his allowance,
where his Lopp:by his, and the influence of some seditious Cleargymen, upon a
part of the ignorant and misled multitude, have already affronted the
Magistrate, and best men of that Town. 3. T^^^dly, we have just cause to fear
some practice for surprizall of the Town, at such a time, when some ill
affected persons in the neighborhood of it, have rebelliously taken arms, in
opposition to our authority; and are countenaced in it, and (already by seizing
and piladging some Castles belonging to men of Gallway) do express their
disaffection to the inhabitants, and their inclinations to the plunder of that
Town. What opportunity will such a meeting (to which all men are
promisscuously invited by offer of safe Conduct, in the summons) affoard to
such a design in these distracted times, when perhapps the Town may be
declared to have incurred the Censures, because it submitts to our authority;
and the act of plundering it, therefore esteemed meritorious. 4. Fowrthly, the
Lord Nuntio, haueing made himself a party, and adhereing to Own o Neill, now
actually in Arms against the authority established by the Confederat
Catholics, what indifferency can be expected by the Nation, in a Synod wherein
he is to praeside? 5. It is improper a Synod, should be called at such atyme,
when noe corner of the Kingdom is freed from the horrid effects of war, and
all places are full of inexpressable distractions, and none exempt from the
misery of famine wherein that Town, and the adioyneing Country, suffer in a
high measure. 6. The General Assembly (the hig hest authority among the
Confederat Catholics) being now conuen'd, and the body of the Kingdom being
to meet, the fowrth of September next, we hold it necessary they should be
first consulted with, in so great an affair. 7. Wherefore, It is ordered, and
(by virtue of their oath of Association) it is straightly charged and enjoined,
that no Confederat Catholic, either of the Clergy or of the Layety, of what
degree, quaility, or Condition souer, do repair to the Synod or meeting,
summoned by the Lord Nuncio, to be held at Gallway the fifteenth of August
next, or shall remain there (if already gone thither, but shall depart thence
imediatly, and shall not send his, or their Proxies thither; and shall revoke
his or their said Proxy ((...) already sent) upon pain of being putt out of
the protection of the Confederat Catholics, and further proceeded against, as
fallen from our union and oath of Association: Whereof the General Commanders,
Mayors, Magistrates, and other Officers, subject to authority, are to take
notice, and proceed accordingly in interrupting and stopping all and every
person and persons, going to any such meeting or Synod, at the place or time
aforesaid, as they will answer the contrary.
Given at Kilkenny ^astle the 28 day of July 1648, and in the 24. year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lo: Charles by the grace of ^od King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland. Dounboyn, Lucas Dillon, Richard Blake, Richard
Bellings, Gerald Fenell, John Walsh, Patrick Bryan, Robert Deuereux,

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Printed at Kilkenny in the Year of our Lord, 1648.


