royal blazon or coat of armsBY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS His Majesty by His Letters, bearing Date the Fourteenth Day of this
instant January, to Us the Lord Lieutenant directed, taking notice of a
malicious suggestion, diffused amongst His Subjects of this Kingdom, as if His
Majesty did desire to infringe or weaken the late Acts of Settlement and
Explanation passed in this Kingdom; has been pleased by His Letters, to
command Us, by all the ways and means that We shall judge most proper, to
extinguish and suppress the same; and thereby has also Declared, That it never
entered into His heart, either by the Late Commissions granted in England, for
inspection into the Affairs of this Kingdom, or by any indulgence lately
granted to His Roman Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom, to live in
Corporations to infringe, or any ways weaken the said Arts. And has required
Us the Lord Lieutenant, to make known His Majesty's mind therein. We the Lord
Lieutenant and Council, for the better suppressing of such malicious
suggestions, and Declaring His Majesty's gracious intentions, have thought fit
by this Our Proclamation, to give public notice of His Majesty's said Letters,
to all His Majesty's good Subjects of this Kingdom. And We do hereby strictly
charge and require all persons whatsoever, That they do hereafter forbear
either raising such Reports, or diffusing such Suggestions amongst any of His
Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom; and that they do as becomes good Subjects,
dispose themselves to live, both dutifully toward His Majesty and His
Government, and peaceably with one another.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 24th Day of January, 1672. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin. Canc. Thomond. Donegall. Conway and Kilulta. Hen:
Midensis. Fran: Aungier. Jo: Bysse. J: Temple. H: Ingoldesby. Theo: Jones. W:
Flower. Ed: Massey. A: Chichester. Char: Meredith. Hen: Ford.

God Save the King.
DVBLIN; Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be Sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street.
M.DC.LXXII.


