royal blazon or coat of arms J2 R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
BY THE Lord Deputy and Council A PROCLAMATION,
WHEREAS several Persons disaffected to His Majesty's most Serene and
Auspirious Government, have of late in a riotous and warlike manner assembled
together in several parts of this his Kingdom, and have contrived and entered
into several Associations, which they have most industriously endeavored to
spread and divulge amongst His Majesty's Liege People in diverse parts of the
Kingdom, which We must conclude to have been made and procured by Persons who
desire to disturb the peaceable and established Government thereof; and which
contain, as We conceive, no less offense than that of High Treason, to which We
are the more induced t^^ give credit, in regard they have proceeded so far in
their Insolences, as that by fresh Informations which We the Lord Deputy have
received, they ha^^ taken upon them to fortify themselves, by possessing of
places of strength, and dividing themselves into Troops and Companies,
providing themselves of Arms and Ammunition in manifest breach of the Laws, and
to the great Terror of His Majesty's Liege People. And because We are assured
that several well-meaning Persons amongst them have been seduced upon pretense
of groundless Fears and Iealousies by fiery Spirits that are Ringleaders of
those Factions, who being broken in their Fortunes as well as their
Reputations, may occasion the ruin of many harmless and well-meaning Men, by
involving them in their own Treasonable Designs, and making them partakers of
the Crimes that they themselves are guilty of. And We being very sensible of
the Misfortune that these Men are like to bring themselves further into, which
can be no less than the Forfeiture of their Lives and Estates for Rebellion and
Treason, which we are willing to prevent as much as in Us lies. And in order
thereunto, and to settle the Peace of this Kingdom, and to prevent the effusion
of Christian Blood, which We the Lord Deputy of this Kingdom have hitherto
endeavored to prevent with all the Care and Industry Imaginable,
notwithstanding the many Affronts of late offered to His Majesty's Government.

And to quiet the minds of the People, We the Lord Deputy and Council have
thought fit, and do hereby in His Majesty's Name strictly Charge and Command
all the said Persons so Assembled within this Kingdom, forthwith to disperse
and withdraw themselves from those Rebellious Meetings, by repairing to their
respective Habitations, and to betake themselves to their several Occupations
and Callings as formerly, upon the doing whereof, We do in His Majesty's behalf
hereby assure them, and every of them, of His Majesty's Protection and Pardon
for their Persons and Estates for any the Offenses before said, and while they
continue within the Bounds of their Allegiance and Duty to His Majesty; but in
case they shall still persevere in their said Crimes, and fail to give due
Obedience to these our Commands, We do hereby Declare that we will give
direction to His Majesty's Attorney General to proceed against them and every
of them according to Law, as in cases of High Treason has been always used,
And whereas from these irregular and unwarranted Proceedings of the Associators
aforesaid, manifold and great Inconveniences already have and more are daily
like to ensue by several Thieves and Robbers, who in confidence of Impunity, do
frequently despoil and Rob His Majesty's Subjects, by stealing their Cattle in
greater numbers than for many years last past have been known. We do hereby
publish and declare, that we will use our utmost endeavors, by all Legal ways
and means, to bring the said Thieves and Robbers to condign Punishment. And We
do hereby require all Justices of the Peace, Magistrates, Sheriffs, High and
Petty Constables, and all other His Majesty's Loving Subjects, to use their
utmost endeavors to discover and bring to Justice the said Malefactors, hereby
charging and commanding all His Majesty's Military Officers and Soldiers of
this Kingdom, to be Aiding and Assisting to them in so doing: And we do further
recommend to all His Majesty's Subjects of this Realm, to lay aside all Fears
and Apprehensions of any Violence to be used to them; We firmly assuring all
His Majesty's Subjects, of what Persuasion soever, that to the utmost of our
Power, they and every of them demeaning themselves peaceably and quietly, shall
be Protected by his Majesty's Government here both in their Persons and
Estates, against all Violences and Attempts whatsoever.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 25th. day of January 1688/9. A.
Fytton, C. Galmoy, T. Nugent, John Keating, Jo. Davys, De. Daly, Rich.
Hamilton, Tho. Newcomen, Garett Moore.

GOD Save the KING.
(...) by ^^ndrew Crock and Samuel Helsham: And Reprinted at London, by George
Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street. 1689.


