C2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices and Council.
MAV. EVSTACE Canc. ORRERY.


WHEREAS at the Parliament holden in this Kingdom in the Twelfth year of the
Reign of King Edward the Fourth, It was Enacted as follows, viz. Item, at the
request of the Commons, for that there is so great lack of Money in this Land,
and also the Grain are inhaunsed to a great price, because of great loading
from day to day used and continued within this Realm, by the which great dearth
is like to be of Grains, without some remedy be ordained in the said
Parliament, whereupon the Premises considered, It is Ordained, Enacted, and
Established by Authority of the said Parliament, That no person or persons lade
no Grain out of the said Land to no other parts without (if one Peck of the
said Grains exceed the price of Ten pence) upon pain of forfeiture of the said
Grain, or the value thereof; And also the Owner of the Ship within which the
said Grains are laden, shall forfeit the said Ship, (that is to say) the one
moiety of the said Ship and Grains to the King, and the other moiety to the
party that seiz or take the said Grains and Ship: And to the end that no person
may for the future pretend ignorance hereof, We think fit to publish and
declare, and We do hereby publish and declare, That We do expect due obedience
and conformity to be given unto the foresaid Law. And We do hereby straictly
charge and command all persons of what degree or quality soever he or they be
of, to yield their ready obedience thereunto, and that no Grain be henceforth
transported out of this Kingdom, other than into the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Dominions of Wales, without special License to that purpose first
had and obtained from Us, the Lords Justices, or other thief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom for the time being. Provided, That such person or
persons who shall transport any Grain into the said Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, or Dominion of Wales, do first enter into Bond with good Sureties to
the Collector of the Customs in any Port where the said Grain shall be laden
respectively to his Majesty's use, in double the value of such Grain as shall
be so transported by them, with Condition that the said Grain shall be landed
in some certain Port of England, Scotland or Wales, to be named in the
Condition of the said Bond, and shall within Six Months after return
Certificate of landing the said Corn accordingly.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 24. day of March, 1661. GOD SAVE
THE KING. Jo. Armachanus. Massereene. Hen. Midensis. R. Coote. Santry. Hen.
Tichborne. Ja. Donelan. J. Temple. Art. Forbes. Ja. Ware. Rob. Meredith. Theo.
Jones.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castle-street, Anno Dom. 1661.


