royal blazon or coat of armsBY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS His Majesty by his Letters, under his Royal Signet, and Sign Manual,
bearing Date at His Court at Whitehall, the sixth day of September 1672. has
signified unto us the Lord Lieutenant and Council, That His Majesty by Letters
Patents, under His Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Eighth day of May,
in the Thirteenth year of His Reign, had nominated, constituted and ordained
His Trusty and well-beloved John Ogleby Esquire Master of the Rebels and Masks in
this Kingdom, and by his said Letters Patents empowered the said John Ogleby,
or his lawful Deputy or Deputies, to erect and keep an Office, to be known and
called by the name of The Revells Office, Impowring the said John Ogleby, or
his Assigns, to tolerate and admit any other person or persons, by his or their
Order under Hand and Seal, to Travel and Go, to Act and Show all Tragedies,
Comedies, Opera's and Interludes whatsoever, in all Cities, Buroughs, Towns
Corporate, and other place and places whatsoever, within this His Majesty's
Kingdom of Ireland. Provided the said Comedies, Tragedies Opera's Interludes,
or other Shows whatsoever be decent, or becoming, and not profane, or
obnoxious;; And that His Majesty by the said Letters Patents did strictly
charge and command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Head-Burroughs, and all
other His Officers and Ministers within this Kingdom, to suppress from time to
time all Plays and Interluds whatsoever, that should be presented, contrary to
the meaning and intent of His Majesty's said Letters Patents, and also that all
Mayors etc. should be aiding, helping and assisting to the said John Ogleby,
his heirs and Assigns, in the suppressing thereof, and the apprehending of all
such Common Players and others, as shall presume to Act any Stage Plays or
Interludes whatsoever, without License as aforesaid. And whereas His Majesty
in and by His said Letters, has further signified unto Us, That complaint has
been made unto His Majesty by the said John Ogleby, That several persons of
good behavior, traveling with Monsters, Motions, Shows, and other Plays and
Interludes in and through this Kingdom, (Notwithstanding they are Licenced in
pursuance of His Majesty's said Letters Patents) upon their application to the
Mayors, Sovereigns, Bailiffs, Provosts, Portreeves, and other chief Magistrate
or Magistrates of the Cities, Towns, Buroughs, and other Places within this
Kingdom, they the said Magistrates have, and still do persist in imprisoning
the said Persons during their pleasure, notwithstanding the said Persons are
Licenced as aforesaid, and that afterward the said Mayors, Sovereigns,
Bailiffs, Provosts, Portreeves, or other the Chief Magistrate or Magistrates in
contempt of His Majesty's Prerogative, and the Power by his Majesty, given to
the said Master of the Revels, do of themselves Tolerate, Allow, and Justify
the same Persons with the same Monsters, Shows, Opera's, Interludes, and
Plays, and countenance and encourage Dancers on the Ropes, and others, to Act,
Play, and Show in the Cities, Towns, Buroughs and other Places in this
Kingdom, without being Examined and Licenced by His Majesty's said Master of
the Revels, or his Assigns as aforesaid, to the prejudice of His Majesty's
Royal Prerogative, and Loss of the Advantages and benefits intended by His
Majesty, to the said Master of the Revels. And whereas His Majesty in and by
His said Letters, have thought fit to Will and Require Us, forthwith to Issue
out a Proclamation to all Cities, Towns, Buroughs, and other Places, Requiring
all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, portreeves, and other Officer or Officers
whatsoever to be Aiding and Assisting unto ^he said Master of the Revels, or
his Assigns, and not Infringe or Trespass on His Privileges and Authority,
according to His Majesty's said Letters Patents. These are therefore in His
Majesty's Name, according to the Tenor of His Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure
signified unto Us, in and by His Majesty's said Letters, to Command and Require
all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Porteeves, Sovereigns, and other Magistrates,
Officers, and Ministers whom it may concern, to take due notice of His
Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure herein made known to them, and that they be
Aiding and Assisting to he said Master of the Revels, or his Assigns, and do
not Infring or Trespass upon any the Piviledges or Authorities granted unto
him, in and by His Majesty's said Letters Patents, as they will answer the
contrary at their Perils.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the Seventh day of February 1672. And
in the Five and Twentieth Year of His Majesty's Reign. Thomond. H: Ingoldesby.
Theo: Jones. A. Chichester. Mau: Eustace. Char: Meredyth.

GOD Save the KING.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's Most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild. Bookseller in Castle-street, 1672.


