BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS His Majesty by Letters Patents under His Great Seal of Ireland,
bearing Date the Eighteenth day of May in the Two and thirtieth year of His
Reign, has been graciously pleased to grant unto Sir Thomas Armestrong Knight,
and Colonel George Leg, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, full,
free and absolute License, power and authority, That they by themselves, or by
their sufficient Deputy or Deputies, Workmen and Servants, should [during the
term of One and twenty years, to commence from the Date of the said Letters
Patents] make in some convenient place or places, at his and their and every of
their pleasures and appointment such quantity of Halfpence of Copper as might
by them be issued amongst His Majesty's Subjects in this His Majesty's Realm of
Ireland during the time aforesaid, and them to utter, issue, disperse and
dispose of within and throughout this Kingdom. And to the intent the said
Copper Halfpence might be distinguished from any other, which have been made,
or might happen to be made in any other place or places whatsoever, has
declared his Royal will and pleasure, and commanded that the said Halfpence
should be made of Copper, having on the one side the Figure or Effigies of His
Majesty's Head stamped in Copper, and on the other side the stamp or impress of
an Harp Crowned, with this Inscription round before and on the Reverse side,
Carolus Secundus Dei gratia, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex.

And whereas His Majesty in and by His said Letters Patents, has willed and
ordained that the said Copper Halfpence so made should weigh each Halfpeny One
hundred and ten grains Troy weight, and that the same should be generally used
by all His Subjects, and others in this His Kingdom of Ireland as Tokens of the
value of Halfpence within this Kingdom; and to the intent that the said Sir
Thomas Armestrong and George Leg, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns
respectively might have and enjoy the full advantage, benefit and profit
intended them by His Majesty's said Grant, His Majesty has been graciously
pleased in and by His said Letters Patents, straightly to forbid and prohibit
all and every person and persons whatsoever, other than the said Sir Thomas
Armestrong and the said George Leg, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, their Deputies, Agents and Servants, to make or counterfeit any such
Copper Halfpence, or to make or use any Engines, Stamps or Instruments, whereby
they may be made, or to make or use any other Tokens, Engines, Stamps or
Instruments in resemblance of them, or any other Tokens whatsoever, or to use
or utter any other Halfpenny-tokens, Pence, or Farthing-tokens, or
Copper-pieces, or Brass-pieces, or pieces of any other Metal which have been or
shall be made for Tokens for the use of any part of His Majesty's Dominions, or
any the parts beyond the Seas, or which have been made either before, or shall
be made after the Date of His Majesty's said Letters Patents, within this His
Majesty's said Kingdom of Ireland, or in any other parts, or to import or bring
into this His Majesty's Realm of Ireland any Halfpence, Pence, or
Farthing-tokens, or Copper or Brass-pieces, or pieces of any other Metal which
have been or shall be made in any parts beyond the Seas to be used as Tokens,
upon pain of Forfeiture of all such Halfpenny-tokens, Farthing-tokens, or other
Tokens, or pieces of Copper or Brass or other Metal which has been or shall be
made and used as Tokens, and of all such Engines, Stamps and Instruments as
should be so made, used or found contrary to His Majesty's said Letters
Patents, and upon such further pains, penalties and imprisonments as by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and His Majesty's Prerogative Royal may be
inflicted upon such persons for their contempt and breach of His Majesty's
Royal Commands in this behalf, the one moiety of all such Forfeitures to be to
His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and the other moiety to the said Sir
Thomas Armestrong and George Leg, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns
respectively.

And whereas His Majesty in and by His said Letters Patents has further
granted unto the said Sir Thomas Armestrong and George Leg, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns respectively, that they by themselves, their
Deputies, Servants and Agents, or any of them, may from time to time, and at
all times during the said term of Twenty one years [calling a Constable or
other Officer with him or them] enter into any Ship, Bottom, Vessel or Boat, or
into any House, Shop, Cellar, Warehouse, or any other place whatsoever within
this Kingdom, where they or any of them shall have cause to make search by
water or land (as well within Liberties as without) and there to try and search
by all ways and means for all Counterfeit Halfpence, Farthing-tokens, and
Pence, and other Tokens of Brass or Copper, or other Metal whatsoever, which
have been made, or shall be used as Tokens, or any Engines, Stamps or
Instruments, that are already made, or shall at any time after the date of His
Majesty's said Letters Patents be made, for the making, coining, stamping or
casting of any Farthing-tokens, Halfpence or Pence whatsoever, or as shall be
brought from other parts of His Majesty's Dominions, or the parts beyond the
Seas, or found to be made within His Majesty's said Realm of Ireland, contrary
to the meaning of His Majesty's said Letters Patents, and that finding any such
Tokens, Copper and Brass pieces, Instruments, Stamps or Engines, to arrest,
seize, carry away and detain the same to the uses in His Majesty's Letters
Patents before mentioned.

These are therefore in His Majesty's Name, straightly to command and forbid
all manner of persons whatsoever, that they and every of them do forbear to
import, make, stamp, cast, coin, utter or receive any Copper-halfpence, or
Copper-pence, or Farthing-tokens, or any other Tokens whatsoever of any sort of
metal, or pieces of Copper or Brass by way of Change or otherwise, or to have
or use any Engines, Stamps or Instruments, whereby such Copper-halfpence, or
Pence, or Farthing-tokens, or other pieces of Copper or Brass may be stamped,
coined, made or uttered, or used amongst His Majesty's Subjects in this
Kingdom, contrary to his Majesty's will and pleasure declared in and by his
Majesty's said Letters Patents, as they will answer the contrary at their
utmost perils, save only the said Sir Thomas Armestrong and the said Colonel
George Leg, their Deputies, Agents and Servants, who are hereby required to
make such a convenient quantity of the said Copper-halfpence for the use of his
Majesty's Subjects, and to take care that each of them do weigh One hundred and
ten grains Troy weight, as in his Majesty's said Letters Patents are directed,
and to send such proportions of them into as many Cities, Buroughs, Corporate
and Market towns of this Kingdom, as they shall think convenient for the use of
his Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom, the same to be left in the hands of
some discreet person or persons whom they shall appoint, to be vended and
uttered amongst the Inhabitants of the respective Cities, Buroughs, Counties
and places of this Realm; and in case any of his Majesty's Subjects shall
happen to be surcharged in the course of their Trades with more of the said
Copper-halfpence, then they can utter, then the said Sir Thomas Armestrong and
the said Colonel George Leg their Deputies, Agents and Servants are in
pursuance of his Majesty's said Letters Patents hereby required to deliver at
any time during the term aforesaid, the sum of Twenty shillings current
moneys, for every sum of Twenty one shillings returned in the same Copper
halfpence unto such person and persons who shall so happen to be surcharged,
and so after that rate for all greater sums.

And we do further in his Majesty's Name straightly command and require, That
the aforesaid Copper-halfpence which have been and shall be made by his
Majesty's Royal Authority according to his Majesty's said Grant (and no other
Token whatsoever) be uttered, used, received, accepted and taken in all
Dealings whereby Exchange of small Money is necessary between man and man, as
current Moneys, according to the value of Halfpence within this Kingdom, yet so
as none of his Majesty's Subjects are hereby compelled to receive of the said
Copper-halfpence in any payment of Money above Five shillings in One hundred
pounds, and so proportionably in all greater or lesser sums: and the chief
Officers and Governors, with the Ministers and Constables of all places within
this Realm respectively, and also the Farmers, Collectors and Receivers of his
Majesty's Revenue of this Kingdom for the time being, are hereby required to
endeavor that the said Copper-halfpence may be uttered and dispersed
throughout the Kingdom, and that they be freely received and pass in use
betwixt man and man for the value of Halfpence in the way of Exchange as is
before expressed.

And we do further in his Majesty's Name straightly charge and command all and
singular Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, Headborroughs,
Controllers, Customers and Searchers, and all other his Majesty's Officers and
Ministers to whom it shall or may appertain to be aiding and assisting in all
lawful and convenient manner unto the said Sir Thomas Armestrong and Colonel
George Leg, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and their and every
of their Deputies, Factors, Agents and Servants in the due Execution of the
Premises upon pain of his Majesty's high Displeasure, and such punishments and
Imprisonments as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and his Majesty's
Prerogative Royal, can or may be inflicted upon them for their contempt in that
behalf.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 19th day of July, 1680. Mich:
Armach: C. Hen: Midensis. Jo: Davys. Arran. Ca: Dillon. Wm: Flower. Blesinton.
John Keatinge. Lanesborough. He: Hene.


God save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, at His Majesty's Printing House in Skinner-row. 1680.


