DIEV ET MON DROIT*
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL.
ARRAN*

WHEREAS Robert Robinson late of Clanculgg, in the County of Fermanagh Yeoman,
John Irwin alias John Irwin Bowshane of the same in the same County Yeoman,
Archibald Noble Junior late of Lisnaskea in the same County Yeoman, Arthur
Noble late of the same in the same County Yeoman, Tirlagh Oge Mac Shane Mac
Guire of Desternan in the same County yeoman* Kuogher Mac Shane Mac Guire of
the same yeoman, Robert Graham of Legin in the same County yeoman, Arthur
Graham of the same yeomam, Hubert Terr^^l late of Ballanenagh in the County of
Cavan yeoman, Walter Bourk late of the same yeoman, William Armstrong alias
Neddies Will, late of the same yeoman, Rory Duff Mac Guire of Bally Mac
Illchony in the County of Fermanagh yeoman, Cahill Mac Rory Oge Mac Guire of
the same yeoman, Donn Mac Guire of the same yeoman, Phelemy Mac Gawran of Carne
in the same County Yeoman, Tirlagh Mac Hugh of the same yeoman, Flertagh Mac
Guire late of Garrison in the said County yeoman, Rory Keigh Mac Gowan late of
Sleiverosiell in the said County yeoman, Donoghy Mac ^igea late of the same
yeoman, Laughlin Mac Murry late of the same yeoman, Lodowig Irwin alias
Lodewick Irwin of Lisnaskea in the County of Fermanagh yeomen, Cormuck Mac
Cormuck late of the same yeoman, and John Jemison of the same yeoman, have of
late Committed several Burglaries, Roberies and Stealths, in several parts
within this Kingdom, besides diverse other Outrages, to the terror and annoyance
of His Majesty's loyal and good Subjects, and to the disturbance of the Peace
of the Kingdom, upon which misdemeanors and Crimes, being pursued by some of
his Majesty's good Subjects, they the aforesaid persons, are fled to the Woods
and Mountains, where they stand upon their keeping, so as they are not
answerable or ameasnable to Law, but wilful contemners of the same; And for
as much as the Actors of these disorders and offenses, cannot as yet be
apprehended whereby they may be punished by the Ordinary course of Law, whence
We may justly be moved according to the former Usage and Custom in this
Kingdom, in cases of like nature, to cause them to be forthwith Proclaimed
Revels and Traitors, yet in mercy to them we think fit hereby to Charge and
Command t^^m upon (...) Duty and Allegiance to His Majesty, that they and every
of them (...) the First day of August next, render their persons to any of His
Majesti^s Justices of the Peace, and Submit themselves to His Majesty's
Justice, to be Tried for their Offenses according to the Laws of the Land,
wherein if they or any of them do fail, we do hereby publish and declare* That
he or they so failing are from, and immediately after the said first day of
August next to be called, reputed and taken for Notorious Rebels and Traitors
against his Majesty, and accordingly to be prosecuted by all his Majesty's
Loving and good Subjects in all Hostile manner, And we declare farther that
whatsoever person or persons shall comfort relieve or Abet them, or any of
them, they are and shall be reputed, deemed and adjudged Traitors in like
degree with the fore named Rebels and Traitors themselves, and to be proceeded
against according to Law; And we do in his Majesty's Name straightly Charge and
Command all His Majesty's Loyal Subjects upon their Duty of Allegiance to His
Majesty, not only to forbear to receive or relieve the persons aforesaid or any
of them, but also to make diligent search and enquiry, in what place or places
the said persons shall from time to time lurk or be relieved, and by all means
possible to prosecute, apprehend and take the Bodies of them, and them to bring
or cause to be brought under safe custody unto the high Sheriffs of the
respective Counties where any of them shall be apprehended, to be by such
Sheriffs kept in strict and safe custody till we upon notice thereof, shall
give further direction concerning them or resisting or refusing to be taken to
Kill them or any of them. And we ^o hereby declare that whosoever shall after
the said first day of August next b^ing unto any Sheriff the Body of the said
Robert Robinson John Irwin alias John Irwin Bowshane, Archibald Noble Junior,
Arthur Noble, Tirlagh Oge Mac Shan Mac Guire, Knogher Mac Shane Mac Guire,
Robert Graham, Arthur Graham, Hubert Terrill, Walter Bourk William Armstrong
alias Neddies Will, Rory Duff mac Guire, Cahill Mac Rory Oge Mac Guire, Donn
Mac Guire, Phelemy Mac Gawran, Tirlagh Mac Hugh Flertagh mac Gaire, Rory Teigh
mac Gowan, Donoghy mac Ligea, Laughlin mac Murry, Lodowick Irwin alias Lodowick
Irwin of Lisnaskea, Cormuck mac Cormuck and John J^mison, or any of them alive,
or kill any of them and bring his head to the Sheriff of the County where he
shall be Killed, to be by such Sheriff set up in some public place in that
County, shall have for his reward for each person so brought in or his head,
Ten pounds, for payment whereof we will give warrant as occasion shall require,
and whosoever of the said Proclaimed persons or any other shall after the said
first day of August next* Apprehend and being unto the High Sheriff of the
County where such person shall be apprehended, or resisting shall Kill any of
the said Rebels and Traitors particularly named as aforesaid, he shall
together with his said reward, receive his pardon And toward the speedy
effecting of this service, all Commanders of horse and foot, and all other his
Majesty's Officers and Loving Subjects are to be aiding and asisting as they
and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils,

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the second day of July 1683. Grenard:
Longford: Lanesborough* Ed: Brabazon: Ol: St: George. John Keating, He: Hene.
Ric* Reynells, Theo. Jones.

God Save The King
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty and are to be sold by Mary Crook and Andrew Crook at His
Majesty's Printing House one Ormond-Key, 1683.


