AN Impartial Relation OF JOHN KELLY's Services IN THE VICTUALLING-OFFICE. WITH
AN ACCOUNT of the great ABUSES he has met with from his OPPOSERS. Likewise his
Necessary VINDICATION Occasioned by their REPORT TO THE LORDS of the ADMIRALTY.

LONDON; Printed for the Author, who is an Advocate for the Sailors, MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
HONORED GENTLEMEN,
HAving done considerable Services relating to the Victualling, Mr. Agar being
dead (for whose Memory I shall always have a Veneration); and it being
confidently spread abroad that Mr. Papillion was laying down, and Capt. Ails
to be removed, which would have made way for new Comissioners; being sensible
of my Loss in the former, who had constantly given me Encouragement in what I
offered for the Public; and that Mr. Main who was to succeed Him as First
Commissioner would be my violent Opposer. Upon this I resolved and accordingly
applied my self to the Admiralty (Recommended by His Grace the Duke of Ormond)
for a Settlement and Compensation, for Performances laid before Them; which the
following Prints present the Reader with. Their Lordships sent my Allegations
down to the Commissioners for Victualling, with a Command of a Report
concerning me, which They made, and I have published from a Copy granted me
after it was sent up. This was soon replied to by me, and only given in to
Them. I now likewise print it. Paragraph to Paragraph to Their Report, that in
one single view the Reader may see and judge of both. From that time Mr.
Papillion has made me hope the Gentlemen might be brought over to do me Right,
yea even after the Lords of the Admiralty had writ to Them in Words of a harsh
Sound about me, occasioned by the Severity of their Report. Several Months
being spent in fruitless Attendance, Capt. Ails since dead, and Mr. Burlington
were prevailed with, by Mr. Papillion, upon Proposals here to be seen of
eminent Advantage to the Government, to Contract with me. Mr. Burlington
recedes and leaves me all in Ruins, Mr. Main is what he ever was, and nothing
less than a Miracle can change him. The Letters I likewise set forth, to show I
have used my utmost Endeavors to soften them to a Compliance with me: All
being successless, I became desperate, as may appear by my Farewel-Letter, of
such a strain nothing could justify it but such a Treatment; especially when at
that very Instant the King was abused in His Subjects, the Commissioners in
their Honor, and I with a Numerous Family exposed to a Jail and Starving. Who
could have done more to have prevented this Publication? Or who would silently
perish in complaisance to such unrelenting Tempers?

An Account of the Transactions between John Kelly and the Commissioners for
Victualling, since their coming in and his first being employed by them.
BEing heartily affected to the present Government, I very early devoted my
thoughts to the Service of it. I well knew that there might be Baked in the
Kings Ovens larger quantities of durable Biscuit than custom, that common plea
for all that is Ill, would ever admit of; and that the Town Bakers in Contract
required an Overseer as much as formerly. I was recommended to the
Commissioners for the Victualling by Persons of so extraordinary a Character,
that they soon received me to regulate their own Bakehouse, and to see the
Bakers abroad performed their part. In this Trust I was for six Months, I
challenge my Enemies to prove upon me the least failure in my duty. All that
space I Baked in my own House, and sold to the Commissioners, being under the
daily view of such who (if they had found any thing to my disparagement) would
loudly have proclaimed it. At the foresaid Expiration, Mr. M^ne at the Board
demanded my Warrant, telling me, They had no farther Occasion for me; and when
they had, they would send for me: Which some intended they never should, as by
the sequel will easily be discerned. This was the deep Contrivance of Capt.
Bolt, whose private Interest justling with the Public and Mine, is the Source
of all my Misfortunes. Not long after D^^^^^ was taken into my Place on
Laborers pay, one of no judgment, and whose mean allowance might be foreseen a
temptation to (...) I detected: He does his utmost to blast my Reputation,
thereby to prevent my re entry whence I was dispossessed. The Commissioners
having occasion for great quantities of Biscuit bought 3000 Bags of me. I had
just taken a new built House, which I had a prospect would prejudice my Bread
if it continued with me; I acquainted the Gentlemen with it, they promised to
take it as fast as baked: This not being done, I renewed my application; they
told me the Ships were not ready; with these Delays I had 1500 Bags of Biscuit
so damnified (though very good in it self) that it was left on my hands, which
I was forced to cull, and sold to those of the Trade who sold part of it to the
Commissioners, as I proved before them. Dampness of Ships spoiled some Men's
Bread while in the River, yet they sustained no loss by it.

Note, The sending for Biscuit was Capt. Bolt's business. At the same time two
others baked Horse-Beans in their Bread, and was accepted, by the favor of Mr.
Main who sold a Horse, Capt. Bolt who had the Present of a Silver-heated Cain,
and Dodson who had 10 l. lent him on a Note, which was to be delivered up when
the Biscuit went to Sea. This I made out against Dodson, for which he was
discharged.

Thence forward such Grain was made use of in Biscuit for the Navy, as never had
been known. Mr. G. bought 130 Quarter of dammag'd Pease out of the
Victualling-Office, baked it into Biscuit, and sold it to the Commissioners. I
asked him how he thought to get clear of it? He told me I might go with him and
see: he buys a Horse of Mr. Main, who challenges him for 10 s. remaining for
the former in my hearing.

I baked 500 Bags of Biscuit with some Pease in it, to see how they would pass
from me: They were refused, and after six Months keeping, sold by another to
the Office, for more than I would have parted with them for at first.

The Town-Bakers were in Confederacy to fix an extravagant Price on the Biscuit,
they knew the Commissioners were in urgency for; after all these
Discouragements I resolved to appear, and as I happily baffled their Designs, I
made then Three Proposals to the Commissioners. 1st. To prevent mixtures. 2dly.
To carry on Baking in their own Office, as before done by me. 3ly. By baking in
my own House the Kings Stuff. The latter they soon complied with me in, and
contracted with me for, the Two former was to be colored over as I shall
presently relate. The Proposal they closed with me in, was to be defeated as
far as possible. Mr. Main set himself against my payment according to
Contract, which Mr. Papillon was for, yet it was carried against me. Nor did I
bake what I could have baked, though I might have Goods sent into me on the
Office credit: This was to my great Injury, and the Public too, and Gain to
none I know of, but the Purveyor. The Commissioners ordered the clearing of my
House of the Biscuit I had in it, before I baked for them; which I did, and
after sold it to them. Dodson was again brought in, he surveyed it, and reports
it, as handling cold; when I came to take out my Warrants, Mr. Main cries out
we'll amerce him, Mr. Papillon asked how much? Mr. Main said 3 l. per C. which
came to 45 l. Dodson seemed concerned at it, and told me, he thought 1 s. per
C. would have been as much as they would have laid on it. This was the first
Amercement ever was made, as I knew of; and by Mr. Mayne's good will it should
be the only one, as will appear by an Article in the Report about Amercement,
which was what he openly expressed at the Board against me to have brought them
off; which taking Air the Bakers Petitioned for Remission, but Mr. Papillon
resolved it should not go unpunished, and carried it.

The Commissioners Shipped great quantities of Biscuit for the Streights There
was sent to Sea as I proved upon Dodson by Three Witnesses such Biscuit it was
ashame it should pass; upon this he was again thrown out, Mr. Papillon
declaring he must never expect to be employed more in the Office.

For all this the Commissioners accepted not of my two former Proposals till
some time after, as the succeeding Papers will manifest.

I Will put an end to this account, acquainting only after all the Services my
Reply to the Report will make out, with the brightest Evidence, at the moment
it was rumored Mr. Papillon had resigned, there having been a Drip in my House
that had damaged some Cakes; the whole Lost of Biscuit, was given out for such
to Capt. Ails, which he so resented, he resolved I should turn out before
himself, so forbid me any more Meal. This Inspiration from the Father of Lies
was to render me odious to the New Commissioners, Mr. Maine to be Chairman.
While my Enemies were flusht with this Imaginary Victory they flattered
themselves they had obtained, and looking on themselves as rid on me forever.
The Almighty Patron of the Oppressed infuses new Courage into me; and bold as
Innocence I attended the Duke of Ormond with my Case, who was nobly pleased to
send me in his Great Name to the Admiralty; to whom I presented what follows.

I must only detain the Reader while I do justice to their Lordships, for their
most obliging Reception of me. I should be guilty of the blackest Ingratitude,
did I not make an honorable mention of what was so deserving it. I return
likewise the Gentlemen of the Navy my acknowledgment for their dispatch in my
Affair. How pleased should I be to celebrate the Praises of those, whose
goodness has been flowing to me, while I Am all in torture now, I am forced to
appear a rude ill-natured Satyrist, in making the iustest Reflections on those
who have been otherwise.

The Case of John Kelly of St. Paul's Shadwell, His Majesty's Bisket-Baker, and
Supervisor of the Victualling-Office on Tower Hill.
I. THat the said John Kelly for many Years has followed his Calling of a
Bisket-Baker, but in November 95, the Commissioners for victualling the Navy
contracted with him wholly to serve the King, and to quit all Merchants and
other Services, and to bake all he could in his own House on Wapping-Wall, and
make it of the King's Stuff, which he did perform with all Faithfulness
according to his Contract.

II. That being zealous to serve His Majesty and his Seamen, and he did in
several Letters inform the said Commissioners, that other Bakers who were in
Contract to deliver Bread made all of sound and sweet Wheat at a certain Price,
did defraud the King, and abuse the Seamen by mixing Meal made of Rye, Barley
and Pease, which would not keep any considerable time Water-born, nor was
wholesome for the Seamen.

III. That such Practices was the occasion that so much Bread was so frequently
returned, and particularly betwixt November 96, and May 97, vast Quantities
were returned at one time, for which the King paid 20 s. per C. and was sold
for 4 s. per C. and there went away as good Bread with it for want of being
culled, as the King gave 20 s. per C. for at that time; and I did propose a
Method to the Commissioners to prevent such Evils (as had long rained) for the
future; provided they would empower me so to do, and that I was informed by R.
S. that some part was sold to the Transport-Office for 12 s. per C. and some to
Newfound-Land for 45 s. per C. by R. B.

IV. That the 10th of May 97, he received a Warrant under the Seal of the
Office requiring and impowering him to supervise all the Bakers in Contract
with the Office, and to inspect what Stuff they made their Biskket of, and if
not according to Contract to report the same in order to their Abatement and
Punishment.

V. That in the beginning of July 97, the Commissioners being in a great Strait
for want of Bread, the Bakers understanding it, they would have imposed upon
them as to Price and Payment. I acquainted Mr. Mitchell how they might raise
more Bread in the Office, and my House, by setting the Ovens to work
Night-work, which he acquainted the Commissioners with; upon which I was sent
for to the Board, and was ordered to do as I proposed (being introduced by Mr.
Green into the Bake-house) which I so well performed, that they baked there,
and at my House, a sufficient Quantity of Bread from the King's Stuff.

VI. That Kelly Pursuant to the Warrant to him directed, did inspect the Bakers
in Contract, and through many Difficulties did discover such notorious Abuses
in their mixing undue Grains with Wheat, that the Commissioners amerced 10 of
them in proportion to their Offenses.

VII. That Kelly acquainted the Commissioners, that he had considered of such
Methods that would save the King Thousands, and to have always good and wholesome
Bread; and in order thereto did propose that His Majesty should purchase Mills
and grind all their own Wheat that they made into Biscuit; by which all Frauds
and Abuses to His Majesty's Subjects, and Losses by bad Bread, which had for
many Years been practiced would utterly cease; and accordingly Kelly did
further propose the purchasing Mr. Mayhew's Mills at Rotherhith, which upon
survey of Kelly, he found it accommodated with four pair of Stones, and all
other Conveniences ready fixed with large Grainerys, and a Killn for drying of
Wheat, in order to dress their Flower, which will make it keep three times
longer at Sea than without drying.

VIII. That the King with those Mills might grind 180 Quarters of Wheat, a
Week, which is as much as would supply the Victualling-Office and the said
Kelly's House, and be a sufficient Supply, and likewise prevent all the
Mischiefs that have hitherto attended the buying of Biscuit, and that none is
used in the Biscuit they buy for the Navy.

Here follows a Copy of the Letter sent to the Commissioners, upon which they
granted me their Warrant.

Henoured Gentlemen, May the 3d 97.
ONce more I must give you to understand, that I see daily Abuses put upon you
by one and another, in a mere Combination to distress you as much as they can,
without any restraint. I am the Butt into which the Arrows of their Malice are
Shot. I have labored to open your Eyes, but you seem as tho you had no Eyes; I
assure you, you have not the same Goods you buy, so that the Government pays
for that it has not, and the Subjects abused by it, who will reflect on you.
Nothing is more common than to sell you by Sample that which you have not in
Parcel. I am sure there is 10 s. per Quarter difference in some sort of Goods
that come to me; and you buy Bread to be made of good Wheat, whereas it is made
of Barley, Rye and Pease, and coarse Midlings, which makes Bread four Shillings
in the Hundred worse than you buy it for. This I can make appear, and will when
I am impowerd from you, but not before. I can save the Government much more
than 500 l. per Ann. as I have said I could. Pray Gentlemen take me right, and
don't do by me as you have formerly. I have done my duty as a faithful Servant,
and I Am sorry my H^e been bound behind the back of my Endeavors. I Will assure
you (...) will not credit this, it shall be the last I shall trouble you with.
(...), Gentlemen,

Your Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY.


By the Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy.
WHEREAS Information has been given to us, that several of the Bakers, that
contracted to deliver Bread for His Majesty's Service, all made of good sound
sweet Wheat, have notwithstanding contrary to their said Agreements, put in
Meal of Rye, Barley and Pease, which may be very prejudicial to His Majesty's
Service, and the health of the Men. These are therefore to require, and empower
you to visit the several Bakers that bake Bread for this Office, and to examine
what Stuff they bake their Biscuit of, and to give Information to us when you
find any Abuse, that upon examination thereof, such Abatement may be made, or
such other Courses taken, for the Punishment of the said Abuses, as shall be
directed according to Justice and Equity.

Dated at the Victualling-Office, London the 10th of May, 1697. To Mr. John
Kelly, These. Tho. Papillon. Simon Main. J. Barrington.


This Letter was sent to the Commissioners after the Reception of their Warrant.

Honored Gentlemen, June the 14th 1697.
IN pursuance of your Warrant to me directed, wherein you empowered me to visit
the several Bakers in contract with you, which accordingly I have, and do find
your Honors very much abused by the Generality of them, as will appear by the
Stuff and Bread they bake, which I can produce, and will when you order me. I
do not know how to proceed any further, till you have seen what has been made
thus far. I doubt not but your Honors will see a necessity for an Alteration,
or else you cannot be safe in what you buy to send abroad, if it be Water-born
any considerable time it will not hold, and that is the reason you have so much
returned Bread, because the nature of the Stuff will not hold, it being made of
Rye, Barley, Pease, coarse Midlings and some Wheat, more or less, in the most
of the Bread I have seen you have. I remain

Your Honors Humble Servant JOHN KELLY.


Their Answer was,

THat they had so much occasion for Bread at that time, that they ordered me to
refuse none but what was moldy; and that they would take another Opportunity
to treat with them that offended.

Honored Gentlemen, May the 18th School.
I Have obeyed your Commands, in comparing the Produce of your Meal in the
Office with that in my House, and they both yield but poorly; how far they
agree, wherein they differ, and why they do so, Mr. Green (who has the Account)
will acquaint you. I am sorry to see you so far abused as you have been and
are; do hope you will strengthen my Hands, who can by Power from you not only
prevent these for the future, but may do that which was never performed, nor I
believe can be exceeded hereafter, in that which I profess to undertake. As I
have left all business to serve the Government (under you) so I would fain do
it, not by keeping you in the dark, but by bringing hidden things to light,
carrying on the working, grinding and baking your Wheats, that you shall
clearly discern wherein they differ, whether in kind or grinding; that ye may
know a true estimate of the Produce of any parcel of Meal, or Meal and
Midlings, whenever you require it; whereby you may know the prime cost of the
Bread to the King. If your Honors would amerce the present Wheats, which ye
are sensible vary so much from what you bought them for, with submission it
seems equally just to amerce Wheat as Biscuit, and perhaps may be the best way
to deter from such practices hereafter. Your accepting or refusing this Motion,
as well as Reward for what is past, I willingly leave to your Wisdoms; and do
remain,

Your Honors most Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY.


This Letter was sent in obedience to the Commissioners Commands, after I had
lent the 400 Bags of Bread, for which I took Receipts, as follows.

I Promise to deliver unto Mr. John Kelly, or his Order, two hundred Bags of
Biscuit, for the use of His Majesty's Navy, containing one hundred and twelve
Pound each Bag.

Witness my Hand, this Fifteenth Day of December, 1697 Richard Salter.

I Promise to deliver unto Mr. John Kelly, or his Order, two hundred Bags of
Bread, for the use of His Majesty's Navy, containing one hundred and twelve
Pounds each Bag.

Witness my Hand, this Fifteenth day of December, 1697. Edward Lodge.

These two Letters were sent to the Commissioners, in relation to the taking
Mills, and the Advantages that would accrue thereby.

Honored Gentlemen, May the 20th School.
I Have made several Essays in my way to serve the Government, and for the most
part I have been unhappily understood and bauk'd; however, seeing there is one
way more very providentially falls out, and perhaps it is the greatest from me
of any. I know a Person that has Mills, with large Grainaries, four pair of
Stones, with all moveable Conveniences, which he will let the King have for two
hundred and fifty Pounds, the standing Rent is 135 l. per Ann. and there is as
much to be let as will yield 50 l. per Ann. so that the standing Rent will be
85 l. per Ann. These Mills (...) 180 Quarter per Week, if fully employed, which
is as much as the Office and my House can bake in that time. The Toles thereof
is 115 Bushel, which at 5 s. per Bushel, is 28 l. 15 s. per Week, and at 8 s.
per Bushel, as it is now current is 46 l. per Week. These Mills at the utmost
cannot stand the King in more than 500 l. per Ann. it is certain this will be of
great advantage to the King, if you do but compute it according to what Wheat
has been, and must be spent in the Office and my House, besides the innumerable
Evils and chargeable Practices; this very thing will prevent too many here to
be enumerated. The Sense you have of the whole I wait for, and am

Your Honors humble Servant.


Honored Gentlemen, May the 24th School.
THE other Day I hinted the great Profit in taking Mills for the King's Use, if
it needs urging, I can do it from the many Abuses it will prevent, and the bare
naming them, I am persuaded will be enough to satisfy you.

I. By those that sold you Wheat, who have not delivered the the same according
to Sample into the Mills, nor have sent in the full Quantity which they have
sold at that time, and yet the Millers have given a Receipt for the full
Proportion of what has been ordered them to receive, and has taken a Note from
under the Factors Hand to make good the full Complement.

II. Another great Evil was your sending your Wheat to so many Mills at such
distances, and has been proved upon some of the Millers to have gone there
good, but have come home bad, besides the power of Sacks you have lost every
Year; these have been reigning Evils along time: when they began I do not
know, but hope you will put an end to them now, by setting up a better way for
the Public Good, and your Honors. What I have said is true, and not to be
slighted.

If it be demanded, that seeing these things are so momentous, why (...) not
let you know them sooner; to that I will return these two Answers. 1st. That I
have met with so much Opposition in lesser Matters, which yet were as true,
that I have been afraid to meddle with so great a one. 2dly. For me to discover
those evils that were in such high Practice, and which could not be removed by
a bare discovery. I thought therein I should have done more hurt than good; but
now when such a singular opportunity is put into my Hands to cut off all these,
and without which you can never do it. I was encouraged to present it to you,
being

Your humble Servant, JOHN KELLY.


The Commissioners Report to the Lords of the Admiralty, in Relation to his
Petition and Case, together with his Reply to them, and what is since added.
Honored Gentlemen,
WE received your Honors Letter of the first of August last, accompanying the
Petition and Case of John Kelly, calling himself His Majesty's Bisket-Baker,
and Supervisor in the Victualling-Office, transmitted to you from the Right
Honorable the Lords of the Admiralty, which you send us, and desire us to
inform you what we know of his Allegations, and whether we think it fit for His
Majesty's Service to continue him as he desires, with such other Matters as we
should think proper for their Lordship's knowledge.

We have for some time deferred the answering your Honors said Letter, in
regard of the Absence of some of our Board, desiring that the said Matter might
be examined in a full Board, which having now been done, we crave leave to
acquaint your Honors with the state of that Matter.

Report. We cannot allow of the Title he gives himself of his Majesty's Master
Bisket-Baker, and Supervisor in the Victualling-Office, nor that ever we
contracted with him wholly to serve the King, and quit all other Services.

Honored Gentlemen,
I Beg leave to reply to your Honors Report, whereby I intend to set things in
a clearer Light before you. The Title of Master-Baker I Will drop, but desire to
be your humble Remembrancer, that Mr. Green by your verbal Order, introduced me
into the Office of inspecting your own Bakers, who ever since have constantly
observed my Directions, and in particular my commanding them Night-work,
whereby more Biscuit than ordinary being raised, it occasioned the Town-Bakers
who were then caballing to advance their Price, to lower it (as Capt. Bolt then
owned to me.) I sometime after put things into such a method, you might always
be ascertained of the actual Produce of Biscuit from Meal, whereby you might
discover the Quality of the Stuff (which before had a Cloud cast over it.) I
discovered likewise the excessive charge you were at in repair of your Ovens,
and would have demonstrated, by what might have been done for the future, the
shameful Management for the past.

I add, I would have ordered the dressing your Bran to a considerabler
Advantage than at present: I offered it, but it was neglected, as was likewise
the dressing your own Flower. I do not see how a Master-Baker becomes so
unallowed a Title, when a Master-Cooper is so granted a one; in baking there
seems to be more of Mystery, and so one to guide and govern it seems to be as
necessary: and Names are only for Distinction. I once oppposed Capt. Bolt's
Judgment, recommending such Stuff to be baked into Biscuit, to be sent with
Capt. Warren to the Indies, as I am certain would have failed, and preferred
other which lasted the Voyage out and Home, as I received account from Mr.
Edward Wilks Clerk to Capt. Warren.

As to your signifying your not contracting with me wholly to serve the King, I
with due submission rejoin, the very nature of the thing implies it; otherwise
I might have been under continual Suspicion (blow up by those whose Interest it
interfer'd with) of changing the King's Goods for worse of my own, having no
Eye of yours over me, I suppose because you knew me only employed for the King,
therefore there was none. I add, my former Papers puts this out of doubt,
relating such Circumstances about it I shall neve forget.

Report. It Is true that the 10 th of May 97, having Information of the Abuses
of some Bakers then in contract, we did give him a Warrant to visit and examine
with what Stuff the several Bakers we were in contract with did bake their
Bread, and wherein he found abuse to give us an account thereof, and at the
same time we did employ him to bake Bread for His Majesty's Service, and
furnished him with Stuff for the same rate of 2 s. per C. weight, for his Care
of inspecting the other Bakers, he demanded no Allowance in regard he was
employed by us to bake Bread himself.

The said Kelly in answer to the said Warrant, did give Information against
several Bakers; and upon hearing and examining the Matter, there has been
between 2 and 300 l. stopped and allowed for the Abuses they had been guilty of.
The said Kelly's Informations being not given unto our Board, until the Bread
was delivered and gone.

We knew of no expense of Time and Money that the said Kelly has been at,
otherwise then before expressed, nor ever understood of any contrivance he made
for the Retrenchment of the Charge in the Office, or that he expected any
Compensation or Salary for his Service, otherways than the due Payment of him
for the Bread he baked.

Reply. I was above a Year in baking for you, before I proved upon Dodson his
Connivance at the Bakers, for which he was a second time discharged; soon after
you gave me a Warrant to the purpose you express it. Mr. Agur gave it as his
Sense at the Board, and none of you contradicted it, that half of the
Amercement should be my Encouragement. I am ready to give Oath I made Complaint
against them with all imaginable Candor, to avoid the Clamor I expected upon
it. The receiving of the Biscuit mulcted by them was by the Appointment of the
Board, notwithstanding Mr. Maine's asserting differently. Mr. Agur had the
several Samples at delivery handed to him, by Mr. Warren who is ready to attest
it. I could never have imagined your Honors could have thought all the
forementioned Services to be done, only for the good done by them, or that it
could be expensless, or that I would create Legions of Enemies only for the
pleasure of engaging them.

I add, I had a Salary for executing my former Warrant, though I baked my own
Stuff, and might have gained sufficiently, as all did except my self, for the
Reasons before-given.

Report. That whereas he suggests in the third Article in his Case, That
Quantities of returned Bread from the Ships of War, were sold at 4 S. per Cent.
and afterward by the Person that bought it, sold to the Commissioners of the
Transport for 12 s. per C. etc. all the Contents of the said Article (except
only that the said defective Bread was sold at 4 s. per C.) is altogether false
and scandalous, and upon the Examination in his own Presence, all the said
Particulars has been owned by him to be utterly false, and all his Pretenses
of excuse, asserting such untruth, was that some body or other told him so.

Reply. As to the returned Biscuit sold to Capt. Clerk, he frankly owned the
culling it; but said it came to a bad Market. William Railton one of the
Furners, justified some of it as good as what you bought, which was no great
Credit to the Purveyor.

I add, what I said about selling to the Transport-Office, which is so
aggravated, I had it from R. S. I invented it not, nor ever designed to
scandalize you by it, but to expose the buying of no better Bread than sold for
damaged.

They Report. We own it to be true, that the said Kelly did Inform them of the
Mills at Rotherith were to be sold; and that it would be for the King's Service
to buy the same, to prevent the Abuses that had been formerly committed by the
Millers; which we upon consideration, hoping it might prove to His Majesty's
Advantage, did apply to the Right Honorable the Lords of the Admirality, for
their Lordships Direction in the Case; and upon their Lordships Approval, did
buy the Lease of the said Mills: We think Mr. Kelly therein did a good Service,
but we never heard that he expected any Bounty for the same.

Reply. For the Mills which Providence proposed I laid hold on, and your
Honors Embraced, as the great Remedy for so many Evils the Office labored
under; to your Fame be it spoke, with a Generosity worthy of you: You despised
all the Artifices made use of to hinder your taking of them. And my possessing
my self of Mahew's Papers somewhat contributed to. I pay you, Gentlemen, my
sincerest Acknowledment for owning me as an Instrument about them.

Report. As to the Prayer of his Petition, That he might be continued
Master-Baker in the Victualling-Office, and Empowered Supervisor of all dry
Provisions, etc. We crave leave to certify your Honors, That we cannot think
him a fit Person for such a Trust, not only because before he was Employed to
Bake the King's Meal, when he was in Contract for delivering of Bread, we found
him as Culpable as any of the other Bakers; but that also since he was Employed
to Bake for the King, he did dispose of 400 Bags of Bread for his own use, for
the Payment of his Private Debts, without the Knowledge or Allowance of the
Board, and in a time when there was great Scarcity of Bread for their Service;
and though the same has since been supplied by other Bread, which was not so
good as that of the King's; yet we humbly conceive, a Person that has been
Guilty of such a Breach of Trust, and in a time when the King's Affairs might
have suffered exceedingly for want of the Bread, is not fit for such an Employ
and Trust as is in his Petition desired. We are,

Gentlemen, your Honors most Humble, etc.

Reply. I come now to the concluding Paragraph about my Contrivances, etc. I
pray with more fervency than ever, that since I have acted so (as the Paper
demonstrates) for the Common Good, you would not suffer me, as you are
Gentlemen, and more as you are Christians, to fall into Ruin, to the Triumph of
those that hate me, and the disheartning all who shall serve the Public
against the Selfishness of them that oppose it.

As to your representing me as unqualify'd, from undue Baking whilst in
Contract, it should seem more an Objection against using me formerly, than at
present; and what gave satisfaction then, will, I trust, continue it now.
Though I must needs say, that Eye was sharp as an Eagles, that could disern
Pease in Biscuit while it was mine, and therefore rejected it; and as soon as it
came to be Mr. (...) became blind as a Mole (or the Pease vanished) and
accepted it.

The 400 Bags of Biscuit disposed of by me, was such a fault, nothing less than
Necessity can Apologize for: But your Honors have been misinformed about
paying my Debts with the Sale of them. I have their Note to show it otherwise:
As it is not out of your Power, or unreasonable to forgive it, seeing it has
been made good; so let it not be against your Inclinations, but let my
Services, with the State of a poor Family in the depth of Misery, move your
Compassion; and may I upon a Second Commission of that kind, fall under the
severest Justice, as now I hope to become an Object of your Mercy. And so
remain,

Your Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY.

I add, I assume the Boldness to assert, I have abundantly Refuted your
charging me, when in Contract, with delivering as bad Bread as others; I wish
both that and what I have returned to it, had never seen the Sun. The Services
about the Mills alone in the full extent of their usefulness, are of that
consequence, the consideration of them might have prevailed with you to have
buried the 400 Lent Bags in Everlasting Oblivion: I must be free with you,
Gentlemen, you had no other way of intercepting the Lords of the Admiralty's
Bounty to me, and preventing their Settling me (upon Petitioning them)
according as I requested them, but with blackening me with that unhappy Fact.

I am sorry for you, that your Prejudices should not rest here, and though I have
declined the Matter of my Petition, and only Crave to live by Serving the
Government, and that only because I can live no otherwise, having disobliged
almost all others, by my Serving the Government in opposition to them. I must
be denied this, though I give in Security; and nothing will satisfy, but to
abandon me to all that is Miserable, as if I had been one of the Vilest of
Criminals. The Touch about Biscuit supplied, being not so good, I can only say
to it, Captain Ails might have refused it, I could have compelled them to send
in better, as I might sooner, had I known your Scarcity, the Notes running to
answer it on Demand.

I cannot take my leave of the last Article, (that gives such a wound to my
Reputation, I and all mine are threatened to bleed to Death by it) without
making two Observations upon it.

First, As to what you term the Prayer of my Petition, my Answer to the first
Article, and the Amercement; I think, clears it up to a Demonstration, that my
Conduct has been unexceptionable in both Parts; and that is more than I shall
grant that of my Adversaries to have been.

Secondly, Neither can that far fetched Argument against me, nor your nearer
ones (all so weakened (as I humbly conceive) by my Reply to them) I verily
think, conclude against me even in that, unless my Faults, different from all
Mankind, admit of no Extenuations; and what would be a Virtue in others, is
demerit in me. Much less for ever to shut me out of Employ under the King, when
I have given in Security.

The Account of the first Years Work, wherein I was concerned in buying part of
the Goods.
1695. Nov. 11. TO Meal, for 100 Qr. bought of Mr. Holloway 56 s. per Qr.
December. 5. To ditto for 50 quart. of the said Holloway. at 50 s. 5. To Midling,
for 9 quart. bought of Geo. Hubert, at 48 s. December. 9. Produce, by Biscuit
Bread 528 Bags Jan. 22. Delivered, by Providence-Hoy, James Pearse Master, 320
Bags. Ditto 25. Deliv. by a Hoy called the William, W. Phillpot Master, 208
Bags. 1695 and 96. December. 16. To Meal for 150 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway at
54 s. To Midling for 13 quart. of Geor. Hubart. at 48 s. To Midling, for 8
quart. 4 bush. of Geo. Staples, at 35 s. Januar. 27. Produce, by Biscuit Bread
582 Bags. Januar. 25. Delivered, By William Hoy, Phillpot Master, 104 Bags. 28.
Deliv. by the William and Thomas, John Long Master, 358 Bags. Deliv. by the
Friendship, 120 Bags. Januar. 9. To Meal, for 150 quart. bought of Mr.
Holloway, at 54 s. 28. Produce, by Bisket-bread 493 Bags. 30. Deliv. by the
William and Thomas, John Long Master, 453 Bags. Deliv. by The. Hermond, 40
Bags. Januar. 28. To Meal, for 150 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway, at 54 s.
Febr. 10. Produce, by Biscuit Bread 489 Bags. Febr. 3. Deliv. by Wherry for the
William and Thomas, 20 Bags. 11. Deliv. by the Success, J. Sauly Master, 196
Bags. Deliv. by Wherries in 100 Punchins, 200 Bags. March 2. Deliv. by the
James Hoy, John Litchfield Master, 73 Bags. I would have given you the whole of
the Deliveries, but it would have been too large for this Book, as well as too
chargable for me. This I think is sufficient to show my Method, and the
constant Attendance of me and my Servants. Febru. 15. To Meal for 250 quart.
bought of Mr. Holloway, at 54 s. To Midling, for 10 quart. 5 bush. of Mr.
Broxwel, at 47 s. To Midling, for 21 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Holloway, at 36 s.
To Midling for 12 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Meagor, at 48 s. To Meddling, for 2
quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Tho. Clark, at 48 s. To Midling, for 16 quart. 4 bush. of
Mr. Hubbart, at 48 s. Produce, by Biscuit Bread, 1042 Bags. March 24. To Meal
for 220 quart. bought of Mr. Holloway at 48 s. To Midling, for 19 quart. 4
bush. of Geor. Hubbart, at 48 s. To Midling, for 40 quart. of Mr. Holloway at
36 s. To Midling for 12. quart. 4 bush. of Meagor, at 48 s. To Midling, for 3
quart. 1 bush. of Tho. Clark, at 48 s. To Midling, for 12 quart. 4 bush. Rich.
Rountree at 44 s. Produce, by Biket, 978 Bags. May 4. For Meal, 210 quart. of
Mr. Holloway at sundry Prices. To Meal, for 30 quart. of Mr. Moore, at 42 s. To
Midling, for 36 quart. 5 bush. R. Rountree. at 44 s. To Midling, for 15 quart.
5 bush. ditto Rountree, at 40 s. To Midling, for 5 quart. 3 bush. Edw. Davis at
40 s. To Midling, for 5 quart. 7 bush. ditto Davis at 36 s. To Midling, for 4
quart. 3 bush. James Kenfield at 33 s. 6d. To Midling, for 14 quart. Mr. Geor.
Hubbart, at 32 s. Produce, by Biscuit Bread, 1034 Bags. June 15 To Meal, for 100
quart. bought of Mr. Holloway at 40 s. To Midling, for 6 quart. 2 bush. of Ja.
Norwood at 32 s. To Midling, for 28 quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Holloway at 29 s.
Produce, by Biscuit Bread, 445 Bags. 1696. July 2. To Meal, for 145 quart,
bought of Mr. Holloway at 40 s. To Midling, for 6 quart. 4 bush. bought ditto
Holloway at 30 s. To Midling, for 22 quart. of Holloway or Rich Rountrees 29 s.
To Midling, for 5 quart. 5 bush. of Edw. Davis 28 s. To Midling, for 11 quart.
7 bush. Mary Tillard 32 s. Produce, by Biscuit Bread, 649. July 30. To Meal, for
137 quart. 4 bush. at 40 s. To Midling, for 9 quart. bought of Mr. Gallaway at
28 s. To Midling, for 11 quart. of Mr. Bedwel, at 28 s. To Midling, for 12
quart. 4 bush. of Mr. Davis at 30 s. To Midling, for 8 quart. of Mr. Holloway
at 29 s. September. 21. Produce, by Biscuit Bread, 600 Bags. September. 21. To Meal,
for 100 quart. at 38 s. To Midling, for 4 quart. 2 bush. of Mr. Holloway, at 26
s. To Midling, for 16 quart. 6 bush. of Ja. Norvood, at 28 s. 6 d. October 9.
To Midling, for 6 quart. 3 bush. of Jos. Shepard, at 26 s. October 9. Produce,
by Biscuit Bread, 449 Bags.

Honored Sirs, October the 13th 1696.
I Have delivered the Account of the two last Parcels which have been in hand
since the 2d. of July, the neat produce of the former, was 600 Bags of Biscuit
at 13 s. per Bag, and the other 449 Bags at 12 s. per Bag, I could have baked
twice as much in the time or more; and considering how cheap I work, and the
great Charge I am at, it is hard with me, for want of Money for what I have
done, as well as for want of what I could have done; so that set my Working
time and my Playing time together, I have got nothing by Serving you this Year,
for I have Three Ovens which draw 200 and a half per Shute, which comes but to
5 s. and the Wood and Wages of that is 4 s. 7 d. whence it appears my Profit is
very small, to pay House-Rent and Taxes, and maintain my great Family, for whom
I have no other way to get Bread; having, as you know, thrown off all my other
Concerns (as you obliged me) to serve the Government, which has Created me many
Enemies, who labor industriously to overthrow all my Endeavors, which is to
me a great Trouble, and especially from those who should have been one with me:
They are the great Tools made use of by my Enemies (within) though, I thank
God, they cannot charge me with the least unfaithfulness to my Trust, and all
the former I could much better bear, had I but the Countenance and
Encouragement from your Honors, as my Readiness and Fidelity might obtain,
were not your Honors possessed with contrary Sentiments, all which, I hope,
Time will change into favonrable ones concerning

Your Honors most Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY.


Note, The Commissioners contradicted not my asserting throwing off all my
other Concerns, as they obliged me, etc. The first of that kind I met with in
the Report.

Honored Sirs, February the 5th 1696.
I Am constrained to give you the trouble of these, because your Delays to pay
me my Wages for my last Years Work, lays me under such Necessities, that I can
no longer stand under the same, unless you pay me. What I have done, is cheaper
than any other Man could do it, or than it is done in the Office by 5 per Cent.
from November 1695, to November 1696; and if you please to compute it, you will
find it so, or pretty near it. One thing more I can prove, that if you would
have let me Bake what I would have Baked from June to November last, I had
saved the King 35 per Cent. of what you give now; which is 926 l. 9 s. on the
2647 Bags of Bread which I could have Baked more than I had. The Meal, etc. to
have made it of, I could have had of such as would have Credited the Office at
that time, which are as follows; Mr. Francis Hollaway, Mr. George Hubart, Mr.
Megar, Mr. Edward Davis, Mr. James Norwood, Mrs. Mary Tillard, etc. For the
Truth of what I say in this particular, please to review your own Agreement
with Mr. Hollaway, September last, for 100 Quarters, as it stands in your
Minute Book, and 'twill appear true; all which, when entertained in your
Honors serious Consideration, undoubtedly will prevail with you to take some
effectual Course for my Payment, and further oblige

Your Honors most Humble Servant, JOHN KELLY.


Honored Gentlemen, February the 10th 1697.
I Conclude by your Carriage to me, and your not paying of me according to
Contract, that you think I get greatly by Baking for you; If I had been fully
Employed all the Year, I could have cleared about 100 l. per Annum. I have
acted with that plainness and clearness in my Accounts, which proves me to be
otherwise than was thought by some of you when I first proposed this
Undertaking, and others which was then offered; which would have been as
advantageous to the Government as this, and altogether for the Saylors Good: I
know the Suspicions which some of you have of me, were suggested to your
Honors by some in your Office, as well as without, whose Interest these
Proposals of mine interfere with, and some of them have been heard to say, That
they had better given me a Thousand Pounds, than I should have done what I did,
for it was, and it would be, much out of their way. Gentlemen, I hope you will
not take my Addressing you amiss, for is there not a Cause? I find you slight
me, and all I do for you, as if I were not faithful to you, when no Man could
have done more to Serve you than I have; I have obeyed your Orders punctually,
have given you an Account justly, have been diligent in finding out all
Irregular Practices that were prejudicial to the Subject, or reflect dishonor
on you: I have spent both my Time and Money to serve you, and had I had the
Encouragement I deserved from you, things might have been so managed, that none
of your Successors should be able to find fault in these Species: I humbly
remain,

Gentlemen, your Faithful Servant, JOHN KELLY.


IT was not my first Intention to print the Transcript out of the Books, and
the Three Letters that accompany it, which I am sensible in the order of Things
should be in another more proper place: But this being an After-Thought, I must
acquaint you they have a double Face, looking backward and forward, and are so
serviceable to my main Design, I cannot without Injury to my self omit them.

First, The Transcript proves what I assert in my foregoing Reply to the the
Commissioners, that I was employed by them in baking, long before they gave me
the Warrant they specify the Date of, viz. May 97. I leave it to all who are
impartial, whether love of Trouble and fierce Opposition only, could be a
reasonable Motive to pay further Services to the Government, without respect to
the Rewards of it; I am sure I cannot pretend to so elevated a Virtue, and
never thought any would have fastened it upon me.

Secondly, They show from the ample Produce the goodness of the Stuff then
used; which failing afterward, the then Accomptant Mr. Lillburne, since
deceased that examined it, finding the same Deficiency in the King's own
Bake-house. It a wakened to the Consideration of the Abuses at the Mills, as
the true Causes of it, which made way for the purchasing of them, and like a
Torrent bore down all Arguments against them, and will be a standing
Demonstration the Victualling-Office can never be without them.

Lastly, They with a Glance of the Eye discover the frequent compleatings of
Parcels, and the natural Consequences to me seems my Payment ought to have kept
pace with them; and that they did not, I feelingly express in my Letters, where
I likewise manifest I might and ought to have had constanter Work, for the
Public Advantage and my own, which evinces what the last Page will present you
with about my Losses: All Men will easily be satisfied the Prepossession
against me was long before the 400 Bags, and guess at the Quiver whence so many
Arrows have been shot at me; though I am certain the Government has been
wounded through my Sides.

A LETTER to the BOARD.
Gentlemen,
I With profound Respects to your Honors, and equal Sincerity, expressed my
self in words you ordered Minuting, and ever since with a Patience only Heaven
could inspire me with, have been Echoing to them. Were your generous Natures
sensible of half my Sufferings, they long e're this had period put unto them.
I Am pleased with nothing more, than the Proposal now before you; wherein no
Man's Interest is interfer'd with; the King's secured, and I not named. This
carries such Demonstration with it, I presume to believe, were proper for their
Lordships of the Admiralty's Cognizance, that they would approve it, as I
humbly suppose your Great Judgments do. And yet at the same time, out of the
Abyss of Misery I court your Affection, to a speedy embracing it. My Case
looked on as Desperate, and reported such as to your Office, reached the Ears
of some who about a Week since, engaged me on Saturday next to meet them, in
order to the transmitting it to the Parliament. I wish and heartily entreat your

Honors to prevent that Assignation. By such Benificence you will disperse the
Clouds have so long hung ore a distressed Family, give Light and Life unto
them, and your selves taste surely the Satisfaction the Divnity it self is
blessed in, viz. that of being and doing good.

ILLUSTRATIONS.
First, The Words minuted were, That my Design was to serve the Government, in
doing what might be to their Honor.

Secondly, By no Man's Interest interfered with; I had an Eye to the Small-Coal
and Bran, that they should be disposed of by the usual Hands, I designing only
their frequent payment of that Money to me for my present supply: and my
Modesty was such (the Lords having writ concerning not employing me as
Master-Baker and Supervisor) I proposed the Contract might run in another Name.

Thirdly, My Invitotion to Parliament was Fact; supposing it such, could it
have been expressed softer? Upon this Letter Mr. Barrington and Capt. Ails
told one, who immediately imparted it to me, they thought they should comply
with me, Mr. Papillon being for it: without this Intimation I had gone up
according to the appointment.

The PROPOSALS of JOHN KELLY.
THE third of April last, I laid before the Commissioners the advantage 'twould
be to the King, in employing my House in baking the overplus of what their
Mills could grind, over and above what they could bake at their Office.

I. That it is more consistent with the Interest of the Government, to employ my
House with your Office, because your Office cannot bake all the Bread you have
occasion for, as appears by your buying Bread.

II. Your Office cannot bake all the Wheat your Mills can grind; therefore the
Mills do not answer the Ends for which they were taken for.

III. The Mills will grind as much Wheat as your Office and my House can bake
in a Week, and therein they fully answer the End for which they were taken for.

IV. The Tolls of the overplus of what the Mills can grind over and above what
the Office can bake, will come to Ten Pounds a Week, which will pay the Rents
of the Mills, and the Servants Wages belonging thereto.

V. That I will make Bread of all Wheat, as cheap to the King (all things
considered, and far better for the Subject that eats it) than that which you
buy of the Bakers and Mealmen, made of Barley, Rye, and Midlings of Bran ground
over again, which is improper for the Navy's use, and contrary to your
Instructions.

VI. The Employing of my House has been of great Advantage to the Government,
it being a Check to them that sold Bread to the Office, who would have made
greater Advantage to themselves, had it not been for me; and likewise that I
gave them to understand the true Produce of the Stuff I received, made out; and
what the Bread laid the King in, clear of all Charge.

Upon these Articles I founded these Proposals.

First, To give Security to Satisfaction.

Secondly, to bake the Stuff for Eight Shillings the Quarter. And,

Thirdly, To be paid Quarterly, and that the Money that arises from the Bran
and Small-Coal Weekly, be paid to me, from the Hands of them that receive it,
and to be discounted out of the Eight Shillings per Quarter.

April the 4th the Commissioners sent for me, in pursuance to my Proposals,
upon which we entered into Contract: The Commissioners present at the Contract,
was,

Mr. Thomas Papillon, Mr. Humph. Ails, Mr. John Barrington.

The Contract is as follows, ( viz.)

April the 4th 1699.
THE Commissioners are content to Employ Mr. John Kelly, for Baking of Biscuit
at the Price of Eight Shillings per Quarter, and that the Money that shall be
Weekly received for Bran and Small-Coal, be paid to him on Account, to be
cleared and made up; and that he give Security to Satisfaction for the Faithful
Performance, and that he will not Sell or Dispose of any of the King's Goods,
and will make good the Money he shall receive for the Small-Coal and Bran upon
Account.

This is a true Copy of the Contract taken by Mr. Charles Mitchel, Secretary to
the Commissioners of the Victualling.

And I have fully Complied on my Part, which was to give Security to
Satisfaction.

A LETTER to Mr. BARRINGTON.
SIR,
I Had but one Plank left to escape Shipwreck by, and that was the
Commissioners Contract with me. -- Transported that I had any thing to offer my
Creditors, I immediately founded an Instrument on it: The fairness of which
prevailed with them to a compliance with me. Without it I had been remanded to
a Goal, and 7 Children, and a Wife big with another, had all perished. I am
stabbed to the Heart to find fresh Differences to arise among your Honors about
me. By all that is gentle in human Nature, and merciful in the most charitable
Religion in the World, be won over to Mr. Papillon's Sense of that Expression
of the Lords of the Admiralty concerning me, should it be a mistaken one, all
that shall hear of my deplorable Circumstance, would applaud and justify you in
it. And give me leave, Sir, to hope your Goodness may carry you so far, as to
influence even Mr. Main to the same Nobleness of Spirit with your self: This
would be Heroic. May he that has the Hearts even of Kings in his hands, affect
both yours with a Case, one of the most compassionable the heart of man was
ever addressed to withal. May you both resemble the best of Beings, in giving
and forgiving, is the Prayer of your humble Supplicant and Servant,

JOHN KELLY.

NOverint Vniversi per presents nos, Johannem Ke lly, de Parcch St. Paul's
Shadwel, in Com' Mid' Pistor; Georgium Hubbard, de Paroch' Hillington in Com'
Mid' Millar, and Thomum Goldsmith, Civem and Mason de London, teneri and
firmiter obligar' Dom' nost' Guilielmo Tertio, Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex; Fidei Defensor, etc. in Mill Libris, bonae and
legalis monetae Anglia, Solvend' eidem Dom' nost' Guilielmo Tertio Dei Gratia,
aut sic certo Attornet' Successor' vel Assignat' suis, ad quamquidem solutionem
been and fideliter faciend' Obligamus, nos and quemlibet nostrum per se pro
toto in solido, Hered' Executores and Administratores, nostres and Cujuslibet
nostrum firmiter, per presents, sigillis nost' sigilat' dat' secundo Maii,
Anno Regni Dom' nost' Guilielmo Tertii Dei Gratia, nunc Angliae, etc. Fidei
Defensoris, Vndecimo Anno Dom' 1699.

WHEREAS the Honorable Commissioners of His Majesty's Victualing-Office, are
content to Employ the above-bounden John Kelly, for the Baking of Biscuit, at
the Price of Eight Shilling per Quarter; and that the Money that shall be
Weekly received for Bran and Small-Coal, be paid to him on Account, and every
Month the Account to be cleared and made up. NOW THE CONDITION of this
Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden John Kelly, shall, and do from
time to time, Faithfully perform the said Agreement and Trust Reposed in him,
and no ways Imbezel or Dispose of the King's Goods to his own Use; but from
time to time, Monthly as aforesaid, out of the said Eight Shillings per
Quarter, Deduct, and make good unto the said Commissioners, or their Order, all
such Moneys he shall receive for the Small-Coal and Bran upon Account as
aforesaid, without Fraud or further Delay; then this present Obligation to be
void, and of no effect; or else to remain in full Force and Virtue.

Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of us, it being first Stamped with the
double Six Penny Stamp, according to Act of Parliament,

John Kelly.

George Hubbard.

Tho. Goldsmith.

By the above-bounden John Kelly, and Thomas Goldsmith,

Charles Michel.

Robert Stepens.

Sprig Manistie.

John Woodward.

Hugh Haworth.

To the Honorable Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy. The Humble
Petition of John Kelly
Shows,
THat your Petitioner having contracted with the Board on the 4th of April
last; being thereby obliged to give Security to Satisfaction for his faithful
Performance, which he has accordingly done; did thereupon propose to his
Creditors to pay them a part of his Earnings in the Service, which they
accepted, and accordingly a part of them have signed an Instrument, which
obliges them to forbear giving your Petitioner trouble, so long as employed in
your Service, till the whole be paid.

Therefore humbly prays (in Consideration of the great Detriment, it will be to
your Petitioner, the making void the aforesaid Instrument and the loss of what
he expended in preparing for the Work,) your Honors would take the Matter into
your serious Considerations, and not suffer his sole Dependence to be
frustrated, to the prejudice of his Creditors, and the utter ruin of him and
his Family.

And he shall ever pray.

A Letter to his Grace the Duke of Ormond.
May it please your Grace, May the 29th, 1699.
WIth the most profound Acknowledgment ever paid to mortal Greatness, I address
your Grace, with a Nobleness peculiarly your own, recommended me to the
Admiralty, they in course to the Navy, who transmitted it to the Victuallers;
their Report made upon it, which consisted partly of Criminations, partly of
owning Services I have done the Government. I had a Copy of it granted me from
Mr. Papillon unhappily after it was sent up, I rejoined to it, and have by the
encouragement of that good Man, from the Reasonableness of what I then offered,
both which I lay before your own Judicious Eye; I attended nine Months in hopes
of Success given me by him; he has brought it even to a contract with me upon
Proposals of demonstrable Advantages to the King and the Subjects good, which
one of them present at it flies from; upon the Truth of this Amazement of
opposition, I cast my self at your Grace's Feet, imploring your acquainting His
Majesty therewith, that he in his princely Wisdom alone, or in Council, as his
Royal Pleasure shall be, give speedy Justice to me; I perish without it, as I
shall deserve to perish, if Mr. Papillon appear not in my Righteous Cause with
the same Freedom as he did at the Board, where he precides: this will prevent
my ruin, with seven Children, and a Wife big with another, and enable me to pay
some hundreds of Pounds of just Debts contracted by Losses I have sustained by
the Public Service,

And your Supplicant, as in Duty bound, shall ever pray. JOHN KELLY.

A Letter to the Commissioners.
Honored Gentlemen, June the 5th 1699.
MAY the 29th I waited on his Grace the Duke of Ormond, with my Case,
Proposals, and Contract, I put all into his Grace's Hands providentially, when
he was in the Coach with His Majesty, in whose Presence I am certain he read
them: on my Attendance to receive his Answer, at Kinsington, he with a
Generosity truly Illustrious, asked me what I would desire from him that he
could serve me in? I said only that his Grace would Espouse the Justice of my
Cause. Having moved him in my Address, to use his Powerful Interest, to
Influence His Majesty, either alone, or in Council, as his Princely Wisdom
should order it, to the hearing me. His Grace told me I had deserr'd it too
long, the King being just upon going; his Grace's Advice to me was, to tender
my Bond to you Gentlemen, as I now do, in expectation of your Signing the
Contract, in failure thereof to Petition the Privy Council, where I shall have
Justice done me. I do beseech you to be no longer divided, but unite in serving
the Public, as the Papers now before you carry their Demonstrations with them;
and to prevent the Ruin of him and his Family, who has laid aside all other
Business to Serve the Public Interest; and your Compliance therewith, will
enable me to pay my Just Debts, which I have Contracted by my Losses in the
Public Service under you. Who am

Your Honors Humble Servant to Command, JOHN KELLY.


Note, Mr. Papillon's answer to me was, That he was for it, and if I could
prevail with Mr. Barrington, and Mr. Maine, it should be complied with. Their
not complying occasioned the writing this Farewell Letter following.

HOUOURED GENTLEMEN, From Wapping-wall; June 8. 1699.
I AM Ruined by your Service, and have the Demonstration of it in several
Articles, it is fit the World should know it. A truly Virtuous Man were he to
make his choice would rather be as I, one of the most distressed Men living,
than one of my Oppressors in all his Flourish. The Justice of the Nation shall
hear my Cry; and I cannot entertain so reflecting a Thought on it, as to
question its relieving me. I am at an end of all my Humble Melting Addresses to
you; I will be trampled on no more for casting my self at your Feet, by some of
you, nor once again pierce the tenderer Heart of one of you, by the sight of
it. I now take my Farewell of you, by giving you to understand your Old
Conjurers have raised a New Mist to continue you in Darkness. I Am sorry I must
say your constant encouraging them (and to use a Silken Expression for what
deserves a rougher one) your different treating me emboldens them. Your Warrant
to me, and my last Proposals to you, agreeable to your own Instructions from
Above, are to prevent the Sailors being abused by mixed Grains: To evade this,
Artists are started up (beyond me, for I have tried in vain) who have succeeded
in an Experiment of grinding over Bran, mixing it with other Stuff and Baking
it: You may fancy this Biscake hearty as you please, blow up your Mills, beat
down your Ovens, and lay me aside altogether in Complement to the Cheapness of
it. This is the happy Project some Men's Wits have hit upon, to gratify their
Interest and Malice in my Destruction. I have had my Brains near dashed out for
once writing you had no Eyes, but all Men will say they are strange Ones, that
shall hear of their magnifying Mole-hills into Mountains in me, and dwindling
Mountains into Nothing in my Enemies. They of you who are against employing me,
from the Admiralty's Command about me, I must say I think are egregiously
mistaken. I request only their Review of my modest Reply, to that Report which
occasioned it; and then I dare leave it to the Judgment they will be of about
it in their Dying Hours, when they may be perplexed with the Remembrance of my
Usage, on their going to a Place where all that is past will appear in a better
Light to Angels and Men than ever it has yet done: Then I should not have been,
as I am, one of the greatest Objects of Compassion that ever was by them
unpittied,

JOHN KELLY.


When I sent this in Writing with a Postscript, I mentioned my design of
printing it, with many other Papers; this I did hoping they would excuse me so
ungrateful a Trouble.

I shall according to my last farewell Letter to the Commissioners, give my
demonstrations of my ruin by these several Articles.

By Abatement upon 300 Bags of Biscuit which I sold into the Office, sometime
after I contracted to bake the King's Stuff. l. s. 45 Lost upon the discount of
the Warrant. 55 Lost upon discount of a Warrant of 150 l. and Interest. 45 Lost
upon a Warrant of 45 l. 06 10 Lost upon a Warrant of 208 l. 31 04 Lost by a
Warrant of 100 l. 15 Lost by a Warrant of 44 l. 06 02 Lost by a Warrant of 78
l. 11 14 Lost by a Warrant of 68 l. 10 04 This besides my Loss upon
Chequer-Bills, amounts to 225 14 By lost time whilst in contract to bake the
King's Stuff, 44 Weeks, at 3 l. per Week, comes to 132 By the Repairs of my
Ovens whilst in contract, and a part of a Loft broken down by the over-wait of
Bread 36 By rebuilding of my Ovens, and the fitting up of my House for to
comply with the last Contract, comes to 105 By being out of Employment 12
Months, with a House of 50 l a Year, and a great Family to maintain. 152 The
great Oppression I met with from many of my Creditors, because I could not pay
them, for want of having my Money paid me from the Office in due time, I was
forced to pay double, which I am sure amounts (since I have been concerned to
bake the King's Stuff in my House on Wapping-Wall) to 152

The occasion of all these Losses has been from their not employing me as I
might have been, and their not paying me as they ought, and the Loss the
Government has sustained hereby is very great also.

I Will wind up all with this one Offer more. I am ready to make out before
proper Judges, to save the Government in baking in their own Office, and my
House, and in their dry Provisions, in proportion to 1000 l. per Ann. for the
future. By the truth of this I desire to stand, or fall into all the Contempt
Malice it self can procure upon me.

FINIS.
ERRATA
IN the Preface, line 15 for to read of. Page 1 line 35 for heated read headed.
Page 9 line 40 for Contrivances read Continuance. Page 18 line 2 after Grace,
read who. Line 4 read transmitted my Case to the Victuallers; they made Report
upon it. Line 17 for precides read presides.


