DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant. AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHereas by Our Proclamation, bearing date the Sixteenth day of October last,
All Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars General, Abbots, and other
Dignitaries of the Church of Rome, and all others exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, or who have exercised any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this
Kingdom by any Authority derived from the Pope or See of Rome; and also all
Jesuits and other Regular Priests were required by or before the Twentieth day
of November then next ensuing to depart out of this Kingdom of Ireland; And We
did thereby also charge and command all Mayors, Sovereigns, Bailiffs,
Portreeffs, and all other Chief Magistrates and Officers of the several and
respective Counties and Towns Corporate of this Kingdom, and all and every the
Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and all others his Majesty's good
and loyal subjects, That they and every of them from and immediately after the
said Twentieth day of November next, do make strict and diligent search and
enquiry after all such Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, and other persons
thereby required to depart out of this Realm, and to apprehend them and commit
them and every of them into safe custody, and to certify Us thereof with all
convenient speed.

And We being informed, That notwithstanding our said Proclamation, several of
the said Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops. and other persons thereby
required to depart out of this Realm, have in contempt of our said
Proclamation, neglected to transport themselves beyond the Seas, and do still
continue concealed in several parts of this Realm.

We have thought fit hereby to publish and declare, That in case any person or
persons shall at any time hereafter apprehend and bring before any Chief
Magistrate of any City or Town Corporate, or before any Sheriff or Justice of
Peace of any County in this Realm, any such Titular Popish Archbishop, Bishop,
Vicar General, Abbot, Dignitary, or other person exercising or who has
exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Kingdom by any Authority derived
from the Pope or See of Rome, or any Jesuit or other Regular priest, upon
producing a Certificate from the Chief Magistrate, Sheriff or Justice of peace
before whom such person shall be brought, and put in safe custody, shall
receive the Reward following (that is to say) For every such Titular Archbishop
or Bishop, and for every such Jesuit the sum of Ten pounds, and for every other
such person as by the aforesaid Proclamation was commanded to depart out of
this Kingdom, the sum of Five pounds, which said several sums upon sending up
such Certificates to Us, We shall take care shall be paid to the several
persons producing the same, by the Farmers of His Majesty's Revenue, or their
Officers in the several Counties of this Kingdom, where the said persons do
respectively reside. Provided that nothing herein contained, shall be construed
to extend to any of the aforesaid persons, whose departure out of this Kingdom,
by reason of their age or sickness, or for other reasons has been by any Order
of this Board dispensed with.

Given at the Council-Chamberin Dublin the 26. day of March1679. Mich: Armach:
C. Jo: Dublin. Arran, Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Ca.
Dillon. Char: Meredith. Jo: Davys. Ol: St George. Geo: Rawdon. Ric: Gethin.
Theo: Jones. Wm Flower. Will: Hill.


Dublin Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesty's Printing House in
^kinner-row. 1679.


