blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT

BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT AND COUNCIL.
JO: BERKELEY.

WHEREAS by the ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, great and heavy
penalties are Inflicted upon all such as shall be found to be spreaders of
false News, or Promoters of any Malicious Slanders and Calumnies in their
ordinary and common Discourses. Notwithstanding all which Laws and Statutes,
there have been of late more bold and Licentious Discourses then formerly; and
men have assumed to themselves a Liberty, not only in Coffee-houses, but in
other Places and Meetings, both public and private, to censure and defame the
Proceedings of State, by speaking evil of things they understand not; and
endeavoring to create and nourish an universal jealousy and Dissatisfaction
in the minds of all His Majesty's good Subjects: We the Lord Lieutenant and
Council considering that Offenses of this nature, cannot proceed from want or
Ignorance of Laws to Restrain and Punnish them, but must of necessity proceed
from the r^^tless malice of some, whose Seditious ends and aims are already too
well known, or from the careless demeanor of others who presume too much upon
His Majesty's accustomed Clemency and Goodness, have thought fit by this Our
Proclamation to forewarn, and straightly command all His Majesty's Subjects, of
what state or condition soever they be, from the highest to the lowest, that
they presume not henceforth by writing or speaking, to Utter or publish any
false News or Reports, or to intermeddle with the Affairs of State and
Government or with the persons of any His Majesty's Counselors or Ministers,
in their common and ordinary discourses, as they will answer the contrary at
their utmost perils. And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching
matters of this high nature are Punnishable, not only in the speakers, but in
the hearers also, unless they do speedily reveal the same unto some of His
Majesty's Privy Council, or some other His Majesty's Judges or Justices of the
Peace, therefore that all men may be left without excuse, who shall not
hereafter contain themselves within that modest and dutiful regard which
becomes them We do further declare, that we will proceed with all severity
against all manner of persons who shall use any bold or unlawful speeches of
this nature, or be present at any Coffee-house, or other public or Private
meeting where such speeches are used without revealing the same in due time, we
being resolved to suppress this unlawful and undutiful kind of discourse by a
most strict and exemplary punishment of all such offenders as shall be
hereafter discovered.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 9th day of July 1672. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich Dublin Canc. O: Bryen. Art. Forbese. To: Booth. J: Temple.
Paul Davys. H: Ingoldsby Char: Meredyth.

God Save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street, 1672.


