DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE

Whereas it appears by the Examination of John Totty, one of Officers at Mace
in the City of Dublin, taken upon Oath before the Lord Mayor of the said City,
That on the first day of this instant April, the Examinant being commanded,
went with the Magistrates and other Officers, pursuant to an Order of this
Board to a Mass house on the Merchants-Key in this City, where they found a
Priest and many People assembled together, and that the Lord Mayor of this City
ordered them to forbear their Meetings, or having any Public Mass, for that We
the Lord Lieutenant and Council had given Diverse to the contrary, and that the
Examinant taking the said Priest by the shoulder, and pulling him away, the
said Priest cried out, that he would be revenged for it. And that the same
night betwixt nine and ten of the Clock, the Examinant was met near the
Thollsel in this City by two men whose names the Examinant knows not, who
forcibly seized on him, and took him by the throat, and there almost strangled
him, and that immediately after, three or four men more came with Clubs, and
there with knocked him on the head with several blows, whereby he fell flat to
the Ground, and left the Examinant on the Ground for Dead, one of them stamping
on the Examinants face with his foot, after he had received many bruises, and
that one of them with his Rapier run the Examinant into his left side, and
said, you Son of a whore, you rogue, will you pull down the Holy Altar. And
whereas We conceive it necessary, that diligent and strict enquiry should be
made after the persons who committed the said outrage, whose insolence therein,
We cannot but look upon, not only as a high breach of the Peace, but also as a
heinous contempt of his Majesty's Authority. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council
have therefore thought fit hereby to publish and declare, That in case any
person shall at any time within the space of three Months after the date
hereof, discover to Us the Lord Leiutenant, or to any the Members of this
Board, or to the Lord Mayor, or any of the Justices of Peace, of this City, any
of the said offenders who so beat or abused the said John-Totty, so as they may
be apprehended and brought to justice, such person making such discovery, shall
upon conviction of the said persons so discovered by him for the said offenses,
receive for his reward the sum of Twenty pounds; and if any of the persons
who were guilty of the said offense, shall make the like discovery of any other
of the said offenders, he shall likewise receive the said reward of Twenty
pounds for such his discovery, together also with his Majesty's pardon for the
said offense by him therein committed.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 14th day of April 1679. Mich:
Armarch: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran, Blesinton. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. To:
Fitzgerald. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. Jo: Davys. Ol: St. George. John Cole.


Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, and John Crook, Printers to the King's Most
Excellent Majesty's; And are to be sold by Mary Crook, at His Majesty's
Printing house in Skinner-row 1679.


