C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE,

WHereas by a Clause in the Act entitled, And Act for explaining of some
doubts arising upon an Act, entitled, An Act for the better execution of His
Majesty's gracious Declaration for the settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland,
and satisfaction of the several interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other
His Subjects there, and for making some alterations of, and additions unto the
said Act, for the more speedy and effectual settlement of the said Kingdom, one
years Rent of all the Lands in Ireland, which were returned by the Civil Survey
to belong to any Irish Papist, Popish Recusant, or Roman Catholic, and of all
other the Lands wherein any Adventurer or Soldier, His Heirs, Executors or
Assigns has any benefit of settlement, or confirmation by virtue of the said
Act, was to be raised and paid unto the Receivers therein appointed, by two
even and equal payments, the first payment whereof was to have been upon the
first day February, which was in the year, of our Lord, 1665. and the second
payment on the first day of February, which was in the year, 1666. under the
penalty in the said Act mentioned; And whereas His Majesty in pursuance of the
said Act by His Letters Patent under the Great-Seal of this Kingdom, bearing
date the 17 day of January, in the Eighteenth year of His Reign, has
constituted and appointed Commissioners to ascertain the said years Rent, And
the said Commissioners have informed Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council, that
they have already ascertained the said years rent of the greatest part of the
Lands, which by the said Act are charged therewith, and that the valuation of
the said years Rent, does at present remain in the hands of Matthew Barry Esquire
Secretary to the said Commissioners: And that when the said Commissioners shall
have finished that work, a Duplicate thereof is to be returned into His
Majesty's Court of Exchequer, as by the said Act is directed, there to remain a
charge upon Record, upon all and every the Messuages, Lands and Tenements
therein mentioned, whereupon Process will issue out of the said Court for
levying the same, which may prove inconvenient to several of His Majesty's
Subjects, in case timely notice be not given unto them of the days of payment
of the several sums of money, whereunto by the said Act the said Lands are
liable: To the end therefore the persons concerned in the said payments, may
not be surprised, We have thought fit hereby to declare and appoint, That the
said ye^rs Rent, as the same is and shall be ascertained by the said
Commissioners, is to be paid unto John Bence, and Alexander Bence Esquires,
Receivers by the Act appointed, or one of them, by two even and equal portions,
The first payment thereof to be on or before the 24 day of June, which shall be
in the year of our Lord, 1668. and the second payment thereof to be on or
before the 24 day of June, which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1669. out of
which second payment, all and every the sums of money formerly paid to the Earl
of Orrery, and Lord Viscount Massereene, in pursuance of the Act of Settlement,
are to be allowed to the person and persons who have paid the same, his and
their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, in full discharge of so much of their Rent
payable by the said Act of Explanation, as the moneys so as aforesaid paid do
amount unto.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 15 day of October, 1667. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Roscommon. Drogheda. Dungannon. Fran. Aungier.
Heugh Glenaully. Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbess.


DVBLIN: Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castle-street, 1667.


