J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL.
TYRCONNELL.

WHEREAS several persons of wicked and restless Spirits have industriously gone
about to spread false News, and to promote malicious Slanders and Calumnies,
with an intention to raise Divisions amongst His Majesty's Good and Loyal
Subjects of this Kingdom. And whereas We the Lord Deputy and Council, in order
to suppress these unlawful and malicious practices, have by a late Proclamation
forewarned, and strictly Commanded all His Majesty's Subjects, that they should
not presume by writing or speaking, to utter or publish any such false News or
Reports, thereby declaring that such as should offend therein, should be
Prosecuted according to the utmost Rigor of the Law. And though We have caused
the said Proclamation to be published in all the parts of this Kingdom, and so
might have justly Expected a full Compliance thereunto from all His Majesty's
Subjects, yet such is the perverse humor and continuing malice of some
restless spirits, that in contempt of Our said Proclamation, and of the known
Laws of this Realm, they make it their constant practice by Writing and
Speaking, to Publish and spread False News and Reports, and their Iniquity have
so far prevailed upon them, that they have raised a most scandalous, impious,
and false Calumny and Report, as if His Majesty's Protestant Subjects here were
to be Massacred by His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom;
Which Report was so Industriously improved, as that not only an Account thereof
was sent into England and several there persuaded that a Massacre was actually
(...) upon many of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects; but that several persons
in this City, either out of fear and apprehension, or out of some evil Design
to disturb the Peace, have met and assembled together at an unseasonable time
of the night, in a riotous and warlike manner to the great Terror of His
Majesty's people; and of the other hand, several other persons endowed with the
same spirit, have maliciously and scandalously given out, as if His Majesty's
Roman Catholic Subjects here were to be killed and Massacred by His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects of this Realm. All which Contrivances are set on foot in
this time of Invasion by Factious and Rebellious Spirits, with an intention to
prejudice His Majesty's Affairs by raising and fomenting Animosities between
His Majesty's People.

We the Lord Deputy and Council in order to obviate the intended Designs of
such malicious Contrivances and unjust practices do hereby Recommend Earnestly
to all His Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, of what persuasion soever they
be in point of Religion, to rest assured of his Majesty's Protection without
the least apprehension: And that as the Government for the time past has taken
effectual care for preserving his Majesty's Peace within his Realm in so for
the time to come will take the like care to preserve and Protest all His
Majesty's Subjects within this Kingdom without any distinction, in their
persons, Liberty and Properties while they continue steady and firm in their
Duty and Allegiance to His Majesty, And do further in His Majesty's behalf
conjure all His Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, to lay aside all manner of
Animosities and Jelousies and Cheerfully to Unite together in the defense of
His Majesty and their Country against all Foreign Invasion, and to look upon
the spreaders of those malicious reports to be Enemies to their King and
Country, And we do further strictly Charge and command all His Majesty's
Subjects of this Realm, that they presume not henceforth to meet at
unseasonable times with fire Arms in great numbers, or in a tumultuous manner
to the Terror of His Majesty's People, as they shall answer the same at their
peril, We being resolved to take such measurs for the preservation of the Peace
of this Kingdom as shall be thought needful upon such occasion: And we do also
strictly Command that the said former Proclamation against the spreaders of
false News and Reports be put in due Execution against all Offenders in that
Kind according to the utmost Rigor of the Law, And we do hereby will and
require all and every his Majesty's Judges and Justices of the Peace, and all
other his Majesty's Magistrates and Ministers in their several Stations, that
they take special care to have the Laws put in due Execution against all such
as have Offended or shall hereafter Offend in the matters aforesaid.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 7th. day of December 1688. A.
Fytton, C. Granard, P. Roscomon, Lymerick, Gormanston, Mountjoy, Bellewe, J.
Macartie, T. Newgent, John Keating, Stephen Rice, John Davys, D. Daly, Tho.
Newcomen, N. Poursell.

GOD Save the KING.
DUBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook and Samuel Helsham: And Reprinted at London,
by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street. 1688.


