An Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE MISFORTUNE That lately happened to The RIGHT
HONORABLE PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke AND MONTGOMERY.

Together with A true and just Relation taken not only from the Constable that
was then upon the Watch, but from sober and eminent Citizens of London that
went down on purpose to know the bottom of that barbarous Injury.

Odi Prophanum Vulgus. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Miller. 1680:

An Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE MISFORTUNE That lately happened to the Right
Honorable PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery.
IT is certainly very difficult to judge whether the scurrilous Language of our
Modern-sawcy-Pamphlet-Scriblers (who write any thing so they may come first to
get the Penny) or the insolent behavior of an ignorant Constable, and his
worse than High-way-men Watch, are less tolerable; the former either mistakes
or magnifies that Crime which his Brother Coxcomb (if not altogether the Cause)
is sure to have the greatest share in: as in the particular Case of this Noble
Lord, is too plainly demonstrable, a Person of that admirable goodness,
Affability, and Generosity, that Nature was obliged to throw in somewhat more
of humane frailty, lest his more Eminent Virtues should render him almost the
Envy of Mankind; one that is never mentioned but with Respect and Honor by all
that know him, and reputed ill by only such as are not worthy his
Acquaintance. Who going on Wednesday last, as well to take the Air as his leave
of the Lords D. and C. intending then suddenly for Wilton, was espied by one
Smeethe a Gentleman, some say, and belonging to the Court, others no better
than a Prize-Player; but what e're he was, he was heard to say, these words:
Yonder goes the mad Peer; we shall have him come back again drunk at Twelve of
the clock; but I Will be upon the Watch my self to night, and see what Mettle
he is made of; I Will see if I can tame him. And indeed he had like to have been
as good as his word, for his Lordship coming back, though not in drink as Mr.
Smeethe before surmiz'd, was rudely set upon by the said Smeethe, who before
had taken the Constables Staff from him, because he was unwilling to interrupt
my Lord in his going home, and persuaded Smeethe likewise not to disturb him.
Notwithstanding this, Smeethe commands the Coach to stop, my Lord to drive on;
upon that, Smeethe and his Accomplices knock the Postillian and Coachman down;
and then with rough and unmannerly Language, demands of his Lordship where he
had been, and whither going? who made no other Answer but that he was PEMBROKE,
and going home; but Smeethe persisting in his impertinent Questions, my Lord
cried out, What ails these fellows, do ye intend to rob me? upon which Smeethe
and the rest pusht at my Lord and his Company with their Staves, so that my
Lord was obliged to quit his Coach: which he had no sooner done, but Smeethe
was so near taming of him, as he called it, that he knocked his Lordship flat on
the ground; who endeavoring to get up, and draw his Sword (still staggering
with the blow) reeled upon Smeethe; and Providence at the same time turning the
Tables, brought that fate upon Smeethe, which unquestionably he intended to his
Lordship. Nor had this Quarrel gone so far, if his Lordship had condescended to
give them that Money to drink which they so impudently demanded. As for the
other person, by name Mr. Halfpenny, who in truth is a Constable; it may be
said of him as it was of a much better man who lost his Life at Maestricht out
of his Post, What made him there? When according to his Duty and Oath he ought
to be taking care of his own Watch, and not drinking with another Constable
upon his. All this while there was only his Lordship and one Gentleman that
endeavored to defend themselves; another and his Lordships servants being
wholly employed in persuading and begging of the Savage Watchmen to spare his
Lordship and his generous Assistant: which they were so far from granting, that
the very Supplicants themselves, who endeavored all they could to preserve the
peace, shared in his Lordships Fortune, and were all knocked down, and his
Lordship seized, and hurried to a little house on Turnham-Green; from whence
about one of the clock his Lordship came for London.

This is the real Truth of the whole Action, and will be attested by several
People of Worth and Quality, whenever his Lordship shall be called to his Trial.

And now it may be necessary to undeceive the world, and let them know, that
this is not the twenty sixth man my Lord of Pembrooke has killed, as has been
impudently asserted in Coffee-houses since this Accident; when in truth every
sensible man is, or may be easily assured, that his Lordship was never taxed
with any thing of this nature, but that of Mr. Coney: And then besides the
Acquittal of his Peers, there were some Physicians did assert, that Mr. Coney
did not die of the Bruise given by my Lord of Pembrooke, but of an inward Cause
acquired by himself.

This Relation had never come forth, but to satisfy the tender Consciences of
the People, who after such an Accident (though never so unavoidable) are always
talking and often dreaming of Murder and Destruction. And to assure them that
his Lordship is no Monster, has no Cloven-feet, no Sawcer-eyes, but is even
just such another Man as their own Relations; only with this difference, That
he has more Gallantry and Honor, and cannot bear the insolent Affronts of the
MOBILE without Resentment.

FINIS.

