AN Impartial Account OF THE NATURE and TENDENCY Of the Late ADDRESSES, IN A
LETTER TO A Gentleman in the COUNTRY.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwyn, 1681.

An Impartial Account, of the Nature and Tendency, of the late ADDRESSES; in a
Letter to a Gentleman in the Country.
SECT. I.
SIR,
YOU are not mistaken in taking it for granted, that I have read the several
late Addresses to His Majesty, for being the Subject of the chief diversion of
the Town, I should have been unfit for conversation, had I not so far consulted
them, as to be able, as well as others, to make them the matter of discourse
and entertainment among my Friends. But whereas you are further pleased to
require my inward and serious thoughts concerning them, I must crave liberty to
tell you, That notwithstanding all your Interest in, and Authority over me, you
should never have been able to have extorted from me what you desire, did not
the Service which I owe His Majesty, and the Government, command more at my
hands, than the friendship and deference which I pay you, could have obliged me
unto. So that you are to ascribe my compliance with your request, to its
falling in with the Fealty and Allegiance which I render my Prince. And the
more Freedom, and less Reserve, you find me to use upon this Subject, you are
entirely to resolve it into the Love and Compassion which I bear for the King,
who I fear, is not only industriously deluded, but woefully betrayed, by the
judgment which some about him pretend to make of the sense and inclination of
the People from these Addresses.

SECT. II.
For no Applications of this nature to the Regnant person are to be esteemed of
any great weight or significancy, if you do but consider the Result of the many
Addresses Three and twenty year ago to Richard Cromwell, and how they only
served to render him secure till he was undermined and supplanted. For of all
the Sixteen hundred thousand that vowed to Live and Dye by him, not so much as
one man drew a Sword in his favor when he came to be laid aside. I acknowledge,
that there is a great difference betwixt an Usurper and a Rightful Sovereign;
yet that detracts very little in the present case from the importance of the
consideration which I have suggested: seeing the least that we are to gather
from it, is this, That no Addresses contrary to the interest and general humor
of the Nation, are to be accounted of any value for a Prince to sustain himself
upon. And if there be nothing else to secure our late Addressers to His
Majesty's service, but there Promises and Protestations in those Papers, he may
be as much disappointed should he have occasion to trust to them; as the former
Gentleman after the like security was.

SECT. III.
It is astonishing as well as surprising, that when Petitions had been not only
discountenanced but forbidden by Proclamation, Addresses should so soon after
be encouraged and promoted! And our amasement is greatly heightened, when we
consider that the Petitions were in reference to matters which every body
understood, and in relation to such things wherein the Law justified the
Petitioners; whereas the Addresses respect matters which very few understand,
and which the Law noways authoriseth private men to meddle with, and which none
save a Parliament have Power or Ability to decide and determine. For though men
are to be esteemed capable of knowing their own wants, fears and dangers, and
ought to be justified in begging those means of Relief and Redress which the
Law has provided for them; yet every one is not to be accounted sufficiently
qualified to determine concerning the Reasonableness and Legality of
Parliamentary Proceedings and Resolves; nor is any number of men whatsoever,
empowered to Umpire differences between His Majesty and His great Council. And
whereas those very Petitions which seemed most peremptory, did nevertheless,
with all due resignation reserve to His Majesty his full Prerogative, many of
the Addresses import no less than the Robbing the Parliament, not only of their
Right and Authority to Impeach Criminals, censure Offenders, withhold, as well
as give supplies, but of their most essential Privilege, viz. freedom of
Debates*

SECT. IV.
Nor does it appear to considering Persons, that any advantage can arrive to
the King or Government by them; whereas the mischiefs and inconveniences which
do attend them, are obvious to every one. For what else do they tend unto, or
can they be supposed calculated for, but to divide the Nation into factions and
parties, and to foment those heats and animosities among His Majesty's Liege
people, Which are already too great to need to be farther heightened and
enflamed. It Is His Majesty's desire, as well as his interest and duty, to be
equally esteemed the Father and Defender of all his people; but these
Addressers would possess the Nation, that they only are to be accounted His
Loyal Subjects; and that all His favors are only due, and ought to be confined
to them: And by threatening the generality of people, that they have forfeited
His Majesty's affection and care, by refusing to act as they do; they
insensibly lessen the love which His Majesty ought to have in the hearts of all
His Subjects, and wonderfully abate the zeal which they would otherwise have
for his Service. Nor can any say that Petitions have the same Effects, seeing
amongst Persons in the same circumstances, some may represent their wants and
grievances, without prejudicing or giving offense to those who choose silently
to undergo them. And who knows, but that whilst some think they are to seek
their Relief by humble Applications unto, and fervent Importunities of their
Prince; there may be others who hope, that their Sovereign may from the sense
which he has of their Calamities, afford them, at last, all the succor he
can, without the solicitation of their cries? But the nature of these Addresses
being to commend and applaud the present posture of affairs, and to justify
most of the steps and councels by which we have been reduced into this doleful
condition; they do in effect declare every one to be peevish and clamorous,
that cannot acquiesce and rejoice in this state of things under which we groan
and labor. And as they hereby render all those enemies unto them, whose safety
and happiness they are conceived, not only to abandon, but destroy; so the very
Government, through the characters of Grace and Favor which it places upon
their Applications, runs a hazard of losing much of its respect and veneration.

SECT. V.
And besides this and many other mischiefs, which they do naturally involve the
Government and the Kingdom under; they will be found prejudicial and
inconvenient to the King, in the tendency which they have to deceive and abuse
him. For whereas they are designed to persuade His Majesty, that what they
represent and suggest, is the common and universal sense of his people, and
that he may accordingly take his measures; it is both evident in it self, and
will be found so in the issue, that they contain and express only the
sentiments of a few persons of little interest, and most of them of a very
small and mean figure in the Nation. For if Elections of Members to serve in
Parliament, be the best standard to judge the disposition of the Kingdom by, it
is not so long since we had an opportunity of feeling the Pulse of the Nation;
but that we may reasonably conclude, that all other things remaining as they
did, the temper and complexion of the generality of the people, is also much
the same. And whenever His Majesty shall either find himself obliged from the
necessity of His Affairs, or from the goodness of His Inclinations be pleased,
to call a Parliament, How little will he, upon a disappointment of what he is
made to believe and expect, judge himself indebted to those who have so
industriously deluded him?

SECT. VI.
And as they are no ways subservient to His Majesty's profit or service; so
neither will they in the event prove so useful either to a Popish or Arbitrary
Design as some do apprehend. Not that any think the King knows of such a Design
promoted by them; but there are those who may have ends in this, as in the
Dutch-War and Black-Heath-Army, which His Majesty was not aware of. But though
some little creatures may have ultimately aimed at some such thing, by
promoting of them; yet such villainous designs are, in charity, to be supposed
far from the intentions of most that have subscribed them. And accordingly,
when diverse of the most zealous Actors in the carrying them on, have been
calmly told what were the natural and ill tendencies of them, they have
solemnly professed, that they would sooner be hanged at their own doors, than
be intentionally accessory to the establishing a Despotical Rule over the
Nation, or the enslaving the Kingdom to Popery again. Nay, it is to be hoped,
that should either or both these, at any time hereafter, more nearly and
visibly threaten England, that many of the present Addressers will, in their
lawful stations, be amongst the most forward and zealous to withstand them. Nor
will they in such a case find any way to expiate their indiscretion, and atone
for their present folly, but by thus demonstrating, that it was no part of
their intention hereby to contribute to these things. And should any in the
List of the late Thanksgivers, be hereafter found to have promoted Addresses
with a prospect of introducing either Tyranny or the Papal worship, the names
and pretenses of Law and the Protestant Religion, which they have not only
flourished their Papers with, but made His Majesty's promise of preserving them
the ground of their acknowledgments, and the foundation of the Tenders which
they have made of their Lives and Fortunes, will entail an everlasting infamy
upon them, and render them the objects of all men's contempt and indignation.
And in the mean time, the jealousies and fears which some are said to have
conceived of a Popish and Arbitrary design at the bottom of the Addresses, do
by quickening the watchfulness of the Nation, serve not only to countermine, but
to give them a total disapointment therein.

SECT. VII.
Nor yet in the next place, is the number of the Subscribers so considerable,
as to bear any proportion to those who are against them. For though a few busy
people have made a great noise and buz in several places of the Kingdom, yet
all of them put together* make not so great a number as we have seen not long
since to one Petition for a Parliamant. So that it is matter of wonder, that
the Government for its own reputation has not in some public way prohibited
and forbid them, and especially when it finds, that after all the neglect and
scorn which the Addressers are exposed unto for their paucity and fewness, yet
they have not the discretion to forbear and desist. Sir, you must needs have
observed by reading the Gazett's, where you have the Inventory of them, that
almost all the Counties, and the most principal Cities, such as London and
York, and the chiefest Towns and Corporations have forbore and declined
presenting any. And I may add, that even where they have been obtained, not One
in Ten, and in some places not One in a Hundred had any hand in, or gave
concurrence to them. For if it be allowed, as in justice as well as modesty it
ought, that whosoever have either avoided or refused subscribing, are as truly
to be judged against them, as they who have positively withstood, or directly
opposed them, then the Tale of the Addressers will make but a very small show
and appearance in the muster Roll of the Nation.

SECT. VIII.
And this is the rather to be taken notice of, and does the better evidence
what opinion the people have of them, if you consider the means, ways, arts and
methods that have been used and taken to advance and promote them. For besides
that most of the Clergy, and many in the present Commissions both Civil and
Military, as well as several of the Magistrates of Corporations, have not only
interested themselves in countenancing, but been sticklers for them, as for the
great Charter or Petition of Right: The Grace and Favor with which they have
been received, and the marks and characters of honor which have been conferred
upon diverse that presented them, who for ought the world knows, had no signal
matter else to recommend them* were very proper means to have procured an
universal and national application. And yet neither the influence of those who
pretend to prescribe unto the understandings, as well as to direct and conduct
the Consciences of men; nor the authority and advice of those, to whom all are
willing to pay a respect and obedience, in whatsoever their Interest, Religion,
and the Law will suffer them; nor yet the hopes of Titles and Honors, which
some merely for that service have, in the truest sense, been loaded with, have
been effectual to prevail with, or bring over any great or valuable number to
join in them. And should I tell you what other Arts have been pursued to obtain
men to Address, you would say, that either a sullen crosness, or some more
generous principle had possessed the Nation, that persons should every where so
generally refuse and withstand them.

SECT. IX.
And if you more narrowly enquire into the condition of those that are engaged
in the Addresses, you will find their quality for the most part as
inconsiderable as their number. The greatest part of those who have given
thanks for Dissolving Parliaments, are such as either for want of years, or
poverty, were never capable of giving a Vote in Election of Members to sit in
them. Setting aside Two or Three, or a few more in a Town or Corporation that
have embark't in them, the greatest part are made up of the scum and refuse of
the places where they live. Norwich, whence we have been alarmed with the
greatest noise, yields but a small number of persons either of estate or
usefulness, whose hands were annexed to the Paper which was sent up.

SECT. X.
Nor is the moral condition of the Addressers, dissagreeable to their civil:
For not to mention, that those who are most Popishly inclined, have enrolled
themselves among the first in the respective Lists and Subscriptions, several
others of them are such who were formerly either in the number of Abhorrers of
Petitions, or guilty of one offense or another which the last Parliaments were
about calling them to an account for. And wheresoever there is either a little
bankrupt Tradesman, a scandalous and disgraced Attorney, one whose necessity
exposes him to be biased by Crusts of Bread and Pots of Ale, any whose folly
makes them pragmatical and impertinent, or whose prodigality and ambition
forces them to look for preferment beyond their merit, these are infallibly in
the front of the Addressers, and the unwearied and industrious procurers of
thanks to His Majesty for Dissolving Parliaments. So that for many of them,
their manners are such, that did the King but truly understand what Character
they pass under where they are known, he would esteem it a reflection upon His
Honor, and and an aspersion upon the wisdom and equity of His proceedings, to
be either approached or thanked by them.

SECT. XI.
And for their Politics, they are in most of them proportionate to their
morals, and agreeable to the condition which their birth, education and fortune
have stated them in. For can any man believe that the Mayors, Headboroughs,
Aldermen, Bailiffs, Burgesses and Freemen of Rippon, Wigan, Windsor, Chatham,
Haslemere, New* Sarum, etc. are competent judges of what the late Houses of
Commons did legally or illegally? of what is according or contrary to the Laws
and Customs of Parliament? or what is agreeable or disagreable to the
fundamental constitution of the Land, which as well limits the Prerogative of
the King, as fixes the Rights, Liberties, and Authority of Lords and Commons;
when almost all the Ancients and Benchers, and most of the Barristers, as well
as Students of the several Inns of Court have declared that they are things
above them* and which they have neither power nor ability to make a
determination concerning? Surely the Learned Gentlemen of the Gown are at least
as well qualified to give their sense and opinion about these matters, as
Country Mercers, Innkeepers, Taylers and Thatchers are; and yet those refuse to
meddle with Addresses, as referring to things which appertain not unto them,
whilst the latter make themselves Arbitrators between the King and Two
Parliaments, and from their profound wisdom pass sentence against their
Representatives* The Gentlemen of the Long Robe have besides their Loyalty,
wherein none dare pretend to outstrip an exceed them, as great obligations
arising from interest to have swayed them to accommodate themselves to the
wishes and desires of the Court in this matter, as any persons in the Nation
have; and therefore it can be nothing but their knowledge of, and their value
for the Laws of the Kingdom, with the Reverence which they are ever resolved to
maintain for Parliaments, that could have made them oppose Addresses, and
thereby venture the displeasing those, to whom they owe, and from whom they
expect so much. Nor will Twenty thousand Hands to Addresses from Country
Corporations, make that impression upon the minds of modest and thinking men,
as their being cast out and refused by the Benchers and Barristers of the Inns
of Court.

SECT. XII.
Having thus far acquainted you with my freest and most Natural thoughts in
General about them, it is time now that we more nearly inspect and pass our
Judgment upon the matter of them: And if I mistake not, the Presuming to give
His Majesty Thanks for his Promising to Govern by Law, is no less than a
Disloyal and gross Reflection upon him. For will not some men hereupon think
that he has Administered some just ground of fear or Belief, as if he intended
to govern Arbitrarily* Or does it not insinuate* that he is so unconfined, that
if he please he may do so? Or may we not say, that it plainly Intimates, that
the best security which we have to rely upon why he will not, is His Royal Word
in his Late Declaration? It does unbecome English Subjects to thank their
Prince for Promising to Govern by Law, seeing as he never did, so he cannot do
otherwise. His Ministers may act illegally* and they are Liable to answer for
it; but he can do nothing but what the Law Directs and Justifies* Nor is he
only bound to this by his Coronation Oath, which is however a more Sacred and
Solemn tie than a Promise in a Declaration; but his own Greatness, and his very
Prerogative, as having their own Foundations in the Law, oblige him to it. For
as Bracton says, Rex habet superiorem Legem per quam factus est Rex, Lib. 3. de
Action. Cap. 9. Sect. 3. And therefore that Lex froenum est Regis potentiae,
The Law bounds and limits the King's Power. Nor can he, says Fortescue De Leg.
Angl. Govern his People by any other Power, than the Law. And as Bracton
expresses it, (ubi supra) Rex nihil potest, nisi id solum quod de jure potest;
The King can do nothing, but what he can do by Law.

SECT. XIII.
But you will the less marvel at their returning His Majesty thanks for
promising to Govern by Law, seeing the Tenor of all the Addresses is to
intimate. That all the Right or Claim which we have by Law, in our Lives,
Liberties, or Estates, is dependent upon His Majesty's Will and Pleasure. This
all of them suggest and insinuate, and some of them do very fully express. What
else can be meant by their thanking His Majesty, For his unparalleled Grace,
Favor and Goodness, in purposing to continue to them their just Rights,
Address from Chatham. Address from Darby. Addr. from Barnstable. Addr. from
Haslemere.
Liberties and Properties. And for His Resolution, that (notwithstanding many
Provocations) yet His Majesty will Govern in all things according to the Laws
of the Kingdom. And for his Princely Purpose, never to invade the Liberties of
his Subjects. And that he has declared, He will never use Arbitrary
Government. Do not these and all the other Addresses imply, That though the Laws
speak of Rights, Liberties, and Properties which belong unto us; yet they are
not so secured unto us, but that His Majesty, were it not for the just and
gracious Temper of his Nature, might invade and destroy them? And is not this
to sacrifice, as far as in them lies, Magna Charta, Petition of Right, and our
Statute and Common-Laws, to the Sovereign Will and Arbitrary pleasure of the
Prince? Whereas, thanks be to God, the King can neither disseise a man of his
Liberty, nor break in upon his Property; but we are enabled to relieve our
selves in His Majesty's Courts. Nor are these men, for all their seeming to
abandon Themselves, Lives, Liberties and Properties to His Majesty's Will, to
be too much trusted or relied upon by His Majesty, should he be tempted
contrary to his Duty and Inclination, to offer at any thing Illegal,
considering how unjustly clamorous Addr. from the Western Division of Sussex.
Addr. from Exon. Addr. from Norwich.
they have been against the House of Commons, For their Illegal Votes and
Orders, and usurping upon their Persons and Estates. For Tyrannizing over their
Fellow Subjects. For their Arbitrary Proceedings in the two last Parliaments,
and their Unlimited and Illegal Im-Imprisonments, and their Messengers
exorbitant, exacting, pretended fees contrary to Magna Charta. For if they be
so heated and transported against their own and the Kingdoms Representatives,
when very many wise, learned, and indifferent persons, and who are as jealous
of the least invasion upon the liberty and property of the Subject, as any in
the Nation, think that the House of Commons did nothing in all the Cases that
are with so much warmth and resentment reflected upon, but what they both might
and ought to do by the Laws of the Land and Parliamentary Presidents; Is it to
be imagined, that they would very tamely loose their Lives, or suffer
themselves to be silently dispossessed of their Estates, at the sole and
indisputable pleasure of the Prince?

SECT. XIV.
And whereas by all the Addresses they testify with what approbation they have
received His Majesty's late Declaration; it is too plain, that thereby they
intimate their Satisfaction in the Dissolution of so many Parliaments. Nay some
of them expressly publish their Addr. from Bristol. Addr. from Norwich.
unanimous consent and delight therein. And others return His Majesty solemn
thanks for giving his two last Parliaments such timely Dissolutions. Had these
people the discretion and modesty which might become them, they would have
esteemed themselves very improper and unsufficient Judges of the prudentialness
of that exercise of Royal Power. And this is the first president that ever
England saw, of any Commoners giving His Majesty thanks for dismissing
Parliaments. For though some of our former Kings have, upon Misunderstandings
arisen between them and their Parliaments, abruptly Dissolved them, and
Published very weighty Declarations in Justification of what they did; yet
whatever Submission the people yielded to what these Princes had done, or how
seasonable and justifiable soever they in their own minds believed it, they
never Addressed these Monarchs in a way of Thanks for doing of it. And tho*
possibly the last Long Parliament, was through its long Sitting, esteemed a
great grievance to the Nation, and too many of its Members judged easily
manageable for betraying the liberty of the Subject, had they been powerfully
tempted thereunto, and though His Majesty's Dissolving them was entertained with
an Universal joy, yet none had the folly to thank him for it, as knowing of
what fatal consequence such an action might afterward prove. And whether the
many acknowledgments which some have returned the King for Dissolving Two such
Parliaments, that for what appears by their Printed Votes and Debates, were
filled with Men of as great integrity and ability, as well as Gentlemen of as
great Estates, as have in any age met together in the great Council and Senate
of the Kingdom; do become those that are well-wishers to the Protestant
Religion either at home or abroad, or such as have duly considered the present
state of the Nation, and the many dangers with which it is encompassed, may be
worthy of their most serious thoughts, when they are at leisure to look back
upon, and examine what they have done. Surely those men, who at the same time
thank the King for promising to Govern by Law, never considered that it is both
a fundamental Law of the Kingdom, and much of the soul and life of all our
Laws, not only to have frequent Parliaments, but have them permitted to sit to
dispatch the affairs of the Nation. Nor can they be supposed to have seriously
weighed how when the Kingdom seems in so much danger from an aspiring and
formidable Neighbor, our Religion and Lives so greatly in hazard by the
hellish conspiracies of the Papists, our Allies in so much need of countenance
and assistance, that the King, though never so well inclined, as we will always
believe His Majesty to be, cannot without the concurrence, aid and advice of a
Parliament, do any thing that may effectually answer those weighty, importunate
and loud calls. For what can His Majesty be conceived able to do in such
circumstances, when he has neither power over the Purses of his people, nor
can so much as command the Militia of the Nation to march out of their
respective Counties? But that which these Addresses imply, which is yet of more
dangerous importance, is that the very Being of Parliaments does wholly depend
upon the will and pleasure of the King. Whereas such a supposal is inconsistent
with the constitution of the Kingdom, does noway comport with the ends of our
Government, and might prove very dangerous to the safety and happiness of the
Nation, in case we should hereafter have a King void of compassion to, and
regardless of the interest of his people. For though it be left to the Wisdom of
the Sovereign where he will have Parliaments to Assemble, and belongs to His
Prerogative to call them when his own Princely occasions, or the necessities of
his people do require; yet the Law which His Majesty is sworn to observe, it
being a part of His Coronation Oath, Tenere Leges and consuetudines Regni, does
both provide that 4 Ed. 3. cap. 14. 36. Ed. 3. cap. 10.
we shall have Annual Parliaments, and by directing the ends for, and the
affairs about which they are to meet, does at least imply something of their
continuing to sit till those affairs be accomplished, and the said ends
compassed and obtained. Nor will His Majesty be ever induced to believe that he
can be thought to Govern according to Law, without calling Parliaments
whenever the distresses and grievances of His people bespeak and require
them. Neither is it to be imagined that he should long harbor any such thought
in His Royal breast, That he can answer the directions and ends of the Law,
without permitting Parliaments to sit such a convenient season, as that they
may in conjunction with His Majesty, relieve the people from their manifold
fears, redress the numerous and sore grievances of the Nation, and provide for
the safety, strength, and honor of the Kingdom.

SECT. XV.
In the next place, All the Addresses seem to be framed toward the expressing
a willingness in the People, that the Duke of York should succeed his Majesty.
And this they insinuate a readiness in the Addressers to further, without the
least desire to have any provision made beforehand for the Security of the
Protestant Religion, or Save guarding the Lives of such as prosess it, under
the Reign of one that is a known and violent Papist. For whilst the Addressers
are pleased Addr. from the County of Somerset. Addr. from Cambridge, Ripon,
Western Division of Surrey.
to say, That it is the Kingdoms Interest to continue the Succession in its Due
and Right Line; And take upon them to thank his Majesty, For his unalterable
Resolutions to preserve the Crown in its due and Legal course of Descent; and
undertake to sacrifice their Lives to preserve the Kings Heirs and lawful
Successors. And offer Addr. from Hertford. Addr. from Monmouth.
their Lives and Fortunes to his Majesty's Disposal for this purpose; All
people do sufficiently understand what they aim at, and that the meaning of all
this is, That they would have the Duke of York come to the Throne* But I wish
they had shown so much Ingenuity and Candor, as to have taken notice and
acknowledged, that all His Majesty's Subjects are as tender of the Preservation
of the Monarchy, and as zealous to have it continued in the Royal Line, as any
of themselves dare pretend to be. For it is more than probable, that nothing so
much influenced the bringing and pressing the Bill of Exclusion, as a regard to
the Preservation of the Monarchy; which some of the best, wisest, and most
Loyal of His Majesty's Subjects think the coming to have a Popish King may
shake and endanger; especially considering what this Nation felt from the last
Papist that possessed the Throne; and how it has been of late, and still is
threatened by the Bloody Conspiracies of the Romish Party. Besides, it had not
been amiss, if our late Addressers had owned, that the King, Lords and Commons
have a Power to dispose of the Succession; as they shall judge most conducible
to the Safety, Interest and Happiness of the Kingdom; and that he is His
Majesty's Heir and Successor, upon whom the whole Legislative Power shall think
meet to settle the Inheritance of the Crown. Nor would it have misbecome men
professing the Protestant Religion, and tender of English Liberties, to have
recommended to His Majesty's second Thoughts and maturer Advice, what three
several Parliaments have with so much strength of Reason insisted upon, and
with so much earnestness pursued and desired. And I wish they were able to tell
us what they mean, when at the same time that they engage to defend the
Protestant Religion, they vow, to the last drop of their Blood, to stand by the
next Successor; And the rather, because there is some reason to believe, that
many of them will not be over-forward to dye Martyrs. It would be also some
satisfaction to be instructed, how they think to defend the Crown* in the
Preservation whereof they pretend to be ready To sacrifice themselves and all
they have; seeing by being willing to admit a Papist to be King, they consent
to the robbing it of the Supremacy, which is one of the brightest Jewels in it.
However it is some comfort, that one end of setting on foot and carrying on
these Addresses, being to make a Survey and obtain a List of all that were for
the Duke of York, they do not upon the Muster-Rolls appear so many as to
endanger the Nation in a Civil War, in case the King should hereafter so far
comply with the humble Requests of his People, as to be willing to pass the
Bill of Exclusion, if tendered to him by a future Parliament.

SECT. XVI.
But besides what is already said concerning the Quality and Design of the said
Addresses, there is this farther tendency in them all, namely, to insinuate to
the Nation, that we have and enjoy a sufficient Security for our Religion,
Lives and Liberties. For as if it were not enough to acknowledge, as all His
Majesty's Liege-people do, His Majesty's Easy, Just, and Addr. from Derby, and
from the Military Officers of Surrey Addr. from Bristol, and from Derset. Addr.
from Lynn Regis, Clifton, Dartmouth, Harness; Grand Inquest of the County of
Oxon, Bristol, etc.
most Gracious Government since His Restoration; and to testify their sense of
the Felicity and Happiness which all His Majesty's Subjects have most
comfortably enjoyed under a most Regular, Gracious and Peaceful Government:
They are pleased further to add, that His Majesty's Promise in his late
Declaration, Of adhering to the Laws of the Land, and making them the Rule of
his Government, is not only sufficient to allay all men's Fears and Jealousies,
remove the Misunderstandings of all well-meaning and reasonable People, and
give us all possible assurance of enjoying the greatest Liberty and best
Religion, that any people in the world have; but that no greater Security can
be had or hoped for, in order to the enjoying our Religion* Liberties and
Properties, than His Majesty's Royal Word to Govern by the Laws. Whereas not
only four Parliaments have represented and declared the manifold Dangers by
which our Religion, Lives and Properties, are threatened and encompassed; and
how difficult, if not impossible it is, to preserve and secure them from the
Designs that are laid against them; but the King also has been pleased to
signify the same, and that as well in several Proclamations published for the
informing of His People, as in diverse Speeches to His two Houses of Parliament,
whose Advice He both thereupon required; and also that effectual Laws might be
made for the obviating and preventing those many Mischiefs and Dangers that are
impending over us. And if the King's hitherto governing by Law, has not been
sufficient to discourage our Popish Enemies from Conspiring our Destruction;
Can it be apprehended, That His Majesty's adherence to the Laws for the future,
will remove the Jealousies, and allay the Fears which we have of the Papists?
Besides, though His Majesty is always to be supposed resolved and inclined to
Govern by Law, yet there want not too many Instances, wherein His Ministers
that are trusted with the Administration of Justice, have to the great
prejudice of the Subject, and the Alarming the whole Nation, failed in their
Duty. Our dreadful Apprehensions do not proceed from any ill Opinion which we
have of the King, but from the implacable Hatred which the Romish Faction bear
as well against Him, as His Protestant Subjects; and from the Corruption of
those Officers of Justice, who do either abuse or pervert the Law to base Ends,
or hinder its due and Legal Execution. Nor is it our having good Laws, but
their being truly executed, that will advantage and relieve us; and therefore
we are to be pardoned though we profess our selves doubtful of our security by
them, whilst some that have been entrusted with the administration of them, are
suffered to escape the punishments which they have deserved for obstructing
their course, and for perverting of them. And what if we should with all
thankfulness acknowledge, that we are in some security during His Majesty's
Life, will the Laws which we have, without some farther and more effectual
provision before His Majesty's Death, contribute much to our safety, when we
shall hereafter have a Popish King to Reign over us? But can these men be
supposed in earnest, when they tell us that the Nation is in no danger, while
the Papists continue so active to extirpate the Northern Heresy, and are in a
more hopeful way to effect it than ever? Alas! the Popish Plot, instead of
being defeated, is not so much as yet thoroughly detected: And instead of the
Papists being dismayed by that discovery which has been made, or by the
justice which has been inflicted upon some of the Criminals, they are only
enflamed to prosecute their divelish conspiracy with the greater vigor, and to
execute what they intend with more bloody rage. Can any man that is not void of
common sense believe, that we are safe and out of danger, when every true
Protestant is in daily hazard through their Sham-plots, and by their hiring and
suborning vile and execrable Villains to Swear Treason against those that have
any zeal for our Religion and Civil Liberties? How can we be supposed arrived
at any measure of Safety, when there are an Hundred things absolutely necessary
to be done toward our preservation, wherein the King though fully disposed to
adhere to the Laws, is in no capacity to meddle, without the assistance and
concurrence of his Parliament? And therefore if men will after all that they
have seen, felt, heard and read of a damnable Popish Plot to destroy the person
of the King, overthrow the established Religion, and enslave the Nation to an
Antichristian foreign Power, flatter themselves upon a bare Declaration, that
His Majesty will Govern by Law, that thereupon all is safe and secure, they
must not take it ill if they be thought accessory to their own and the Kingdoms
ruin through their dull and blockish incredulity, to say no worse.

SECT. XVII.
Another ill tendency of most, if not all the Addresses, is the reviving the
memory of the late unhappy troubles, which is the interest both of His Majesty
and the whole Kingdom to have buried in perpetual oblivion. For the mentioning
of that War with reflection and bitterness, serves only to make men remember
three hasty Dissolutions of Parliaments, and Twelve years want of one, with
some other things which fell out in that space, all which both preceded and had
too great an influence toward the causing of it. Besides, there was a Massacre
of the Protestants in Ireland by the Papists there, and a bloody War commenced
for the extirpation of the English Government in that Kingdom; which as it too
much exasperated the minds of men toward that unhappy War which begun here, so
I fear the upbraiding men too much with their concern in those troubles, will
not prove very useful to the party that appears most forward in it. Nor is it
easy to be imagined how the mention of the late War comes to be brought upon
the Stage at this time of day, seeing most that were believed either the first
fomenters of, or proved afterward Actors in it, are dead and gone; and for
their Children (witness many of the most violent and high flown Clergy) they
are commonly found to be of Principles directly contrary to what they were.
Nay, that which renders all reproachful Discourse of that War at this juncture
still more strange, is that the ignominy and odium of it is designed to fall
upon many of the chiefest of those that served under the Banners of the late
King, or upon such who sprung from them that did, and have their Fathers
loyalty mixed with their blood. And to deal plainly, I know nothing that can so
plausibly justify the Parliaments Cause in that War, as the telling the World
that there was little or no difference betwixt their Principles and the
Principles of those that set in the Two last Parliaments, whose actings the
Addressers do with so much indecency brand and asperse. And the language that
is daily bestowed upon the Members of these late Parliaments, as being men of
the same complexion that they of the Parliament Forty one were, will, instead
of leaving any reproach upon them on whom it is intended to be fastened, beget a
better opinion of those to whom they are compared, than the Addressers would be
willing that they of this Age should find reason to entertain. I may add, that
none have lived more peaceably, and with better submission, under His Majesty's
Government, than they who were engaged on the Parliaments side in that unhappy
War; and therefore it does not seem an act of any great prudence to discourage
them in their obedience, by upbraiding them with that, which the Law has not
only pardoned, but which they have expiated by their loyalty since. Nor do I
think that when the Parliament, after the Kings Restoration, made the Act of
Indemnity, wherein among other things enacted which they judged necessary
toward the Settlement of the Nation, they prohibited, under a Penalty, one
man's reproaching another with his being concerned in that War, during the
space of three years after the date of the said Act, that ever they intended,
that men should afterward with the greatest Licenciousness and Scurrility
upbraid one another with it. Nay, they hoped, that if the Spirits and Tongues
of men were so long bridled and restrained, their Animosities would be wholly
extinguished before the expiration of that time. And none but men of very
implacable Spirits would call over, and with so much Satyr asperse men for
these things; especially when there has not been the least cause administered
for it: unless it be, that such have a greater tenderness and value for the
Protestant Religion and English Liberties, than to desire they should come to
lie at the discretion of a Popish Prince, as the Addressers plainly wish they
may.

SECT. XVIII.
As our Affairs are now circumstanced, and as the state of the Protestant
Religion stands at present in England, the Addresses carry another ill Design
in them, which is, to inflame differences further among our selves, and thereby
betray us into the hands of Popish Adversaries. For as if the principal thing
we were to aim at, were not the preserving our Religion against the
Conspiracies of the Papists, and as if the united strength of all Protestants
were not little enough to effect and obtain it; no less will serve most, if not
all of the late Addressers, than the Executing the Laws with the utmost
Severity against Protestant Dissenters. And as if there very thinking of a
Phanatick had made them delirous, they will not allow the Parliament to make
the least abatement in the terms of Conformity, or to give Indulgence in, or
dispense with one Ceremony; though all the Ceremonies, and the present Form of
Worship, and the very Hierarchy it self, can plead no other Authority by which
they are enjoined, or by which the Subjects of this Land are bound to comply
with and submit to them, but some Acts of Parliament. Nay, so little do the
persons, that have Subscibed the Addresses, understand the Interest of the
Protestant Religion, as now by Law established, that they would not have an Act
to be repealed, which may under a Popish Prince, and in case Popery come to be
set up, prove as fatal and mischivous to them that are at this time the
Conformable Clergy, as it will to the Dissenters; though at present it do only
reach and be applied to the latter. And that I may not seem to impose upon
them, Is not all this the full and plain import of their joining Popish
Recusants and Seditious Address from Ripon. Addr. from Salisbury. Address from
Clifton, Dartmouth, Harness, etc. Addr. from Norwich. Addr from the Western
Division of Surrey. Address from Norwich. Address from Ripon.
Sectaries all along together? Of their affirming Fanatical Parties to be as
dangerous as Popish? Of reckoning up the pernicious endeavors of the
Sectaries, in consort with the Devilish Designs of the Papists? And as if this
were not sufficient to declare what they mean, they not only take upon them to
thank His Majesty, For not passing Limitations or Nullifications of such
wholesome Acts as were designed for Preservation of the Reformed Religion,
especially the 35th of Queen Elizabeth, and for not suffering that Law, and
others made against Conventicles to be Repealed: but they humbly pray His
Majesty, that those Laws now in force, may vigorously, speedily and equally be
put in Execution against all Papists and Protestant Dissenters; And
particularly, that the Statutes of the third of King James, and the five and
thirtieth of Queen Elizabeth may be put and continued in their due Execution.
It is something strange to find a company of men so zealous for the Protestant
Religion, when diverse of them are the Disgrace and Reproach of any Religion
which they take upon them to profess. But can we believe that they are
Protestants, or at least that they understand the Protestant Interest, who
represent Dissenters as equally dangerous to the Government and Established
Religion, as the Papists are? It would administer a ground of too ill an
Opinion of our Supreme Rulers and Public Ministers, should they allow and
approve what these men have suggested. For are there any among the Dissenters,
that have sworn Obedience to a Foreign Power, that they should be thus put
into the same List of dangerous persons to the Government with the Papists? Or
is there any Security that the Legislative Power can require of them for their
Peaceableness, that they are not willing and ready to give? Yea, Is not the
Religion of the Dissenters established by Law, as well as that of the
Conformists, though there be some things Ordained, as the Accoutrements and Modes
of the National Religion, which the Non-Conformists cannot submit unto? For as
the only Foundation upon which the Dissenters go, is that their Faith and
Worship are agreeable and according to the Scripture, which is the alone Rule
of the mind of God to all his People, in what they are to believe and perform:
So from the Authority which the Scripture has allowed unto it by the Law of
this Land, and by the Consonancy of their Doctrine to the Established* Articles
of Faith, they humbly conceive that they have the countenance and warranty of
the Law for their Religion. Nor does the Law disallow or forbid any thing which
they profess; it only enjoins some further things, which they cannot come up
to. And as the Dissenters do not oppose any one Doctrinal Article of the Church
of England, so they blame and judge no man for the Canonical Obedience that
they promise to the Bishops, or their Conformity to the Ceremonies* but merely
beg that themselves may be excused. And should they be gratified as to all
which in our present circumstances they do desire, it would amount only to
this, That they may Preach the Gospel without being liable to Imprisonment,
Fines, and Banishment. Nor do they covet Ecclesiastical Preferments, or
Parochial Maintenance; though were it not for some things, which are made the
Tests to those Places and Advantages, and which without any Inconveniency might
be laid aside, there are many of them that are as worthy of them as others.
Neither can that which is styled the Church of England suffer any diminution in
the number of its Members by an Indulgence to Protestant Dissenters, having
both this will I give thee, and thus says the Migistrate on their side, unless
the Clergy should fall short in Abilities for their Function, and in having
Thus says the Lord to plead for them. But how dare these persons, who have
subscribed the Addresses, assume the confidence to censure Parliaments, for
going about to repeal Laws, which by woeful Experience have been found not only
useless, but inconvenient, both to the Protestant Religion, and the Safety of
the Kingdom? For as Parliaments have Power to Enact Laws, so they have the same
Power to Abolish them, whenever they find, that instead of answering the Ends
which they were made for, they have proved prejudicial to the Common Good. And
surely one may humbly say, and that without the least Reflection upon the Grace
and Favor with which the Addresses have been received, that two Parliaments,
so fairly and unanimosly chosen, and consisting of Gentlemen of the Chiefest
Quality, best Parts, greatest Wisdom, most plentiful Estates, and firmest
Integrity to the Interest of Religion and the Nation, and all, except a very
few, Zealous Sons of the Church, and unfeigned Defenders of the present
Hierarchy, Discipline, Forms and Rites of Worship; were in all probability as
able and likely to know what will let in or keep out Popery, what will preserve
us from, or betray us into the hands and power of the Papists, as Twenty or
Thirty persons in a County or Corporation, most of whom are not worth Forty
Shillings Freehold a year, and many of them not able to speak Ten words of
sense together. But it is easy to conjecture who in diverse places set these
Addressers at work, and who put that in reference to Protestant Dissenters into
so many Addresses, namely, either persons Popishly inclined, that they might
thereby continue and heighten our differences, and make us the more easily a
prey to Rome; or some ignorant Clergymen, who besides their enmity at
Phanaticks, have little else to recommend them to the obtaining a common and
civil respect, but their Cassock and their Surplice.

SECT. XIX.
And as if all this that I have with the greatest sincerity and justice
represented unto you, were not enough to blast the credit of the Addresses, and
to oppose the weakness and folly of such as have subscribed them; there is
something yet further, and which is infinitely more pernicious that they pursue
and aim at, namely, to possess His Majesty and the World with a belief, that
there is a design carried on by Protestants against the King and the
Government. Hence they not only thank His Majesty For recollecting the several
steps and advances Addr. from Southwark.
by which we were betrayed into our former confusions; but take upon them to
observe, that there are some ill men who labor the subversion of our Religion,
Liberties and Addr. from Bristol.
Properties, under the specious pretense of Reformation, being the same method
that they brought to pass all the miseries Addr. from Reading.
of Usurpation and Tyranny that this Kingdom lately groaned under; and that
being seasoned with the old leaven of Commonwealth Addr. from Derby. Addr.
from Monmouth.
Principles, they have endeavored to make a misunderstanding betwixt His
Majesty and his people, and to throw us back into the same confusion we were
delivered from by His Majesty's happy Restoration; and that not only the good
order and quiet of the Government has been most wickedly Addr. from Ludlow.
attempted to be disturbed and shaken, but to be overthrown and utterly
subverted, and the very Monarchy it self to be destroyed. Surely had these
persons who presume to suggest this unto His Majesty, known any Republicans
Addr. from some in the Middle Temple. Addr. from the Deputy-Lieuten. etc. of
Somorset.
or Fanatics, who by possessing the people with groundless fears and
jealousies, would bring us into Anarchy and confusion, or that would subvert
the known Laws of the Land, wherein our Religion, Liberty and Property are
wound up; they ought by their Allegiance to have deposed against them, and
given in their names, that they might be prosecuted and come to suffer
according to the greatness and quality of their Crimes. But alas! this was a
Province they durst not undertake, and the attempting it would have too
palpably laid open their Folly, and exposed their malice. And because many have
been drawn to set their hands to Addresses, who do not well understand whence
this clamor of a Presbyterian Plot proceeds, I shall briefly unfold the
mystery that lies at the bottom of all this loud and groundless noise. The
Papists being charged with a Hellish conspiracy against the person of the King,
our Religion, Government, and the lives of all His Majesty's Protestant
Subjects; and this being proved against them to the satisfaction of all the
rational part of mankind, as well by their own Papers, as by the Testimonies of
many unquestionable Witnesses; and finding that neither their impudent denying
it, nor their falsely scandalizing some, and endeavoring to debauch and
corrupt others of the Kings Evidence, could either bring them off from the
Scandal of this Plot, or free them from the Punishment, which were a Parliament
permitted to Sit, more of them must undergo; they retreat to this as their last
refuge, namely, the amusing the Nation with the Buz of a Presbyterian and
Phanatick Plot, carried on to overthrow the Government, and destroy the
Monarchy, under pretense of prosecuting a Popish Conspiracy. And toward the
obtaining credit to this, they not only formed the Intrigue of the Meal-Tnb,
but invented the Shams of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey's murdering himself, and my
Lord Howard's penning Fitz-Harris's Libel; which though they have shamefully
redounded upon themselves, yet having no other game to play, they are still
laboring, partly by suborning Witnesses, and hiring impudent Rascals to swear
Treason against Protestants, and partly by a groundless and impudent clamor,
to infect unwary and heedless persons with the persuasion of such a design. And
it is from the Papists that weak and credulous people have taken the scent of a
Presbyterian Plot, and ascribe it to His Majesty's Wisdom and Sovereign Addr.
from Eye in Suffolk.
authority, that we are not relapsing into the miseries and confusions of
Tyranny and Usurpation, by the subtle artifice and cunning contrivances of the
old enemies of the Monarchy and the Church, who by the insinuations of
Religion, Liberty and Property, prevail, upon weak and unwary men to make them
subservient to their factious and ambitious designs. Surely, these men never
considered what a notorious scandal they have hereby endeavored to fasten, not
only upon many of His Majesty's peaceable, best and most loyal Subjects, but
what a vile aspersion they have cast upon the whole Kingdom, which greatly
suffers in its honor, by standing represented in the face of all the World, as
broken and divided within it self, and sinking back again into all confusion:
Nor have they duly weighed what a Reflection they lodge upon the Kings
Government and Conduct, that He who was so lately Restored by the unanimous
Consent, and with the universal Joy of all his People, should in so few years
have lost the Love and Reverence of so great a number of His Subjects, as are
intended here to be be accused. Can there be any thing vented to the
diminishing His Majesty's Reputation more abroad, and for discouraging Foreign
Princes and States from entering into those Alliances which are necessary for
the good, as well of His Majesty's Kingdoms, as of Christendom, and for the
lessening the expectation and confidence which those with whom we are in
League, ought to remain possessed with* of our being able to answer the ends of
them, than this account which these men present His Majesty with, of the
posture of the Nation, and temper of his People, and which our Gazettes have
diffused into all Countries? And does not this also directly tend to the
filling His Majesty's Protestant Subjects with Jealousies one of another,
thereby to take them off from their watchfulness over, and to weaken their
endeavors against the Papists, who labor no less to destroy the Dissenters*
than those that Conform to the National Form of Worship, and to the Established
Discipline and Ceremonies* and for the withstanding of whose Bloody Designs,
and saving our Religion and the Nation from the effects of their malicious and
desperate Conspiracies, the united Hearts and Hands of all true Protestants
will be found little enough? And will not this Character, which the Addresses
are pleased to give of the state of England, wonderfully embolden that aspiring
Monarch, the French King, to proceed in his encroachments upon the Dominions of
his Neighbors, as judging himself secure from any check which the King of
Great Britain can give him? For as His Majesty can be in no capacity to
discourage him from further Attempts against the Peace of Europe, or to hinder
his Conquest, but by being great in the Hearts of all his own People, and in a
happy Correspondence and Conjunction with his Parliament; so we have reason to
fear, that they who endeavor to beget Misunderstandings betwixt His Majesty
and his Subjects, and to create in them mutual Distrusts each of other, are
either Pensioners to France, or under the Conduct and Influence of them that
are.

SECT. XX.
But as if it were not enough for those persons, who have subscribed the
Addresses, to fasten so vile a charge as you have heard, upon many of the
people, whom the better to reconcile credit to what they say, they are pleased
to call Republicans and Fanatics, they have also taken the boldness to involve
the Two last Parliaments under the guilt of the same crimes and accusations.
Accordingly they tell His Majesty, with what an infinite patience and
condescension, he did submit to hear unreasonable Addr. from Okehampton.
jealousies promoted in them, illegal courses and proceedings vindicated, and
all the great and most benign Indulgences of their Sovereigns goodness
misrepresented. And they thank the King, for His steady resolutions of
maintaining the Rights of the Crown, etc. against the Arbitrary Proceedings of
the Addr. from Norwich.
House of Commons in the two last Parliaments; And for not Signing such Bills
as were prepared for His Majesty's Subjects to associate to destroy the
Succession, and extirpate Monarchy. Yea, they profess Their Admiration of His
Majesty's Princely Wisdom and Council in the conduct of his Affairs, in
obviating (viz. by Dissolving Parliaments) the Designs of the pernicious
Enemies of the Church and State. And declare, That they cannot but admire His
Majesty's Transcendent and Sacred Wisdom, which in that dangerous and confused
Juncture, did so seas^nably interpose, and so calmly suppress the threatening
Flames which were breaking forth. And thereupon they present their
Acknowledgments to His Majesty, For timely preventing (by Dissolving those
Parliaments) the Designs of Ill men, who in the same Age were a second Time
attempting by the same Methods as formerly, the destruction of His Loyal
Subjects, the diminution of his Lawful Power, and the debasing the Grandeur of
the English Throne. I know not by what Name these false and slanderous
Accusations charged upon two Parliaments, ought to be called* but it is to be
hop*d, that the next Parliament will at once tell the Nation, by what name the
Law styles them, and what Punishment it has allotted for those that have made
themselves Guilty of so (...) and scandalous an Aspersion, as that two
Parliaments had gone about to destroy the Protestant Religion, as Legally
established, and to extirpate Monarchy. Whereas these excellent persons, of
which the two last Houses of Commons consisted, had many of them ventured their
Lives, and lost their Estates for the Monarchy; and all of them were such, as
upon Principles of Reason and from Inclination are true Lovers of it. They not
only had too late and sad Experience of a Commonwealth, to be fond of returning
to it again; but they know, that no other Government can agree with the Genius
of the People, and suit the balance of the Nation, but a well-Regulated
Monarchy, such as ours is by the Laws of our Constitution. Nor can His Majesty
be supposed to believe, that ever they will prove true to the Monarchy, who are
not true to the Rights and Privileges of Parliament* For they who can revile
and despise one Essential part of the Constitution, have nothing to oblige them
to adhere to the other, but the prospect of Preferment, or worldly Gain. And to
see men countenanced; that revile any one part of the Legislative Authority,
may be too ill a president, and which His Majesty is obliged to see redressed,
from the Love that he bears to the Crown. For whosoever strikes at
Parliaments, does by undermining the Government as by Law Established, shake
the very Pillars of the Throne.

SECT. XXI.
Nor do they only intimate a Design carried on against the Government, but they
insinuate a Change to be made by Force; and upon that supposal, while we are
in, and to the apprehensions of all sober persons, likely to continue in
perfect Peace, they offer their Lives and Fortunes to the disposal of one part
of our Legislative Constitution and Power, in opposition to another. We yield,
say they, our Lives and Fortunes at Your Addr. from Winchester. Addr. from
Bristol. Addr. from Cardiffe. Addr. from Monmouth.
Majesty's Command, and will to the last drop of our Blood, and Penny of our
Fortunes, stand by your Majesty in the Defense of Your Royal Person, Crown and
Government, and Lawful Successors. So that by reading the Addresses, one would
be inclined to think, that these men construe the King's Declaration, as the
Erection of the Royal Standard; and that they intend these Papers for the
Muster-Rolls of those that are to fight under His Majesty's Ensigns: But as we
hope that His Majesty will never have occasion for War, unless it be in
relieving his Allies abroad against the Ambition of France, who to all his
other Invasions upon the Dominions of his Neighbors, is at this time about
employing his Forces against the Subjects of His Majesty's Kinsman, the Prince
Palatine; so we hope, that both in that Case, and in any other, wherein His
Wisdom and Justice will suffer Him to engage, He shall not only have the
Treasure of all his People, through the Gift of a Parliament, at His Command;
but all their Persons and Lives ready to be Sacrificed in His Service. It is no
marvel that such thirst after War, who have little to live upon in Time of
Peace, and who may expect to be Gainers by Troubles: But His Majesty, who
besides the care He is to to have of the Lives and Estates of all his Subjects,
has more to lose Himself alone, than all his People, will not, I judge, be
prevailed upon to hearken to rash and heady Councels. And how unequal ought
they to apprehend themselves to the Body of the Nation, who when they have had
the Folly and Confidence to present an Address in the Name of a whole County,
have at the same time acknowledged, That they were not able to carry it for any
that His Majesty might be inclined Addr. from Bedford-shire*
to recommend, to serve in the next Parliament for the Shire.

SECT. XXII.
The last thing I would observe concerning the Addresses, is their making small
numbers of men without previous advice had with each other, and without being
authorized or entrusted, to judge of the State of the Kingdom. For though it be
lawful for any one man, and much more for any number of men, to represent to
His Majesty their own wants and dangers, and accordingly beg redress and
relief; yet to declare the State of the Nation, belongs to no number of private
persons whatsoever, but appertains only to the Parliament, as being the
Representative of the whole Kingdom. And therefore the Addressers, by assuming
to themselves a Right and Authority to determine about the State of the Nation,
and to judge concerning those things which the Trustees of all the people met
in the great Council, are only proper and by Law allowed to meddle with, have
in my apprehension made too near an approach to the altering the whole
Government. And as they must expect that the judgment which they have passed
upon persons and things will at one time or another come under a review; so
matters which have either been misrepresented by them, or in reference to which
Parliaments have been arraigned, may before then, come to be so well understood
by His Majesty, and all things so well adjusted between him and his people,
that the Addressers may neither find themselves able to decline, nor be in a
condition to control the jurisdiction of the next Parliament, to which we
shall at present leave them.

SECT. XXIII.
But whereas you may be ready to enquire, that if the Addresses be so
pernicious, both in the subject matter and tendency of them, and so contrary to
the general sense of the Nation, as I have declared; why the people do not by
Petitions from all parts of the Kingdom let the King know so much? This I shall
return you a just and true answer unto, and then discharge you from any further
trouble.

1st. It is the nature and temper of some men most to disserve the cause, and
prejudice the interest which they have espoused, when they are quietly let
alone to run their course and to take their full swing. For according to the
old Proverb, Give some People Rope enough and they will Hang themselves. The
only way to know what they would be at, was for others to look silently on a
while. And through giving them scope, their own madness and folly has made
them more ridiculous, than any opposition whatsoever from others could have
rendered them.

2dly, The Petition first from my Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, and the
Common Counsel of London* and then from the Common Hall, is a Copy of what all
the Nation would say. In London, as in a Glass, we see the face of the whole
Kingdom: For being the Epitome as well as Metropolis of the Nation, whatsoever
it says, is a compendious expressing of the sense of England.

3dly, Men have been willing to forbear Petitioning, lest by the disparity in
the numbers to Petitions and to Addresses, some* thinking all safe through the
consideration of the multitude that aim*d at what themselves did, might grow
more secure than their dangers will well allow; and lest others upon the same
inducement might have taken occasion to grow more insolent than their duty and
interest obliges them unto.

4thly, His Majesty having received the Addresses with that favor which he
did, wise men thought it best not to administer occasion of his refusing
Petitions that they foresaw would come accompanied with more hands. It is good
manners in Subjects not to grate too hard upon their Prince; but if he have
done any thing wherein they can*t acquiesce with that contentment which they
desire, to give him time and liberty to recollect himself.

5thly, If Petitions shall be judged either necessary or convenient, it is not
so late but that they may be yet set on foot. And if it should prove uneasy
for any to find it so, they must blame themselves, who by their unwearied
carrying on of Addresses, make it needful for His Majesty's good Subjects at
last to undeceive him, which they can no other way do, at least till a
Parliament come, but by Petitions. I am,

June 28. 81. SIR, Your most ready and Humble Servant.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 19. for was, r. is. p. 9. l. 3. del. that. p. 14. for an, r. and.
p. 21. l. 12. after bringing, add in. p. 32. l. 24. for oppose, r. expose


