By the Lords Justices and Council.
MAV. EVSTACE Canc. ORRERY.

WHEREAS there was an Ordinance made by the late General Convention of this
Kingdom, assembled by His Majesty's authority, entitled, An Ordinance for the
speedy raising of Moneys for His Majesty's Service, and Dated the first day of
March 1660; which Ordinance was for raising a double Pole; And whereas We have
received information that in the leavying of the Moneys charged by the said
Ordinance, there have been great Misdemeanors in the Collectors and
Sub-Collectors thereof in several Counties, by charging the people with more
Money than in the Books of Assesments delivered to the Collectors were charged
on them, exacting in some cases double, and in some cases treble the sums
charged on them, and in exacting Moneys toward payment of the said double Pole
from others who were not charged in the said Books of Assesments; which Moneys
so unduly received, the said Collectors and Sub-Collectors have taken and
converted to their own private uses, without rendering any Account for the same
to His Majesty; by which misdemeanors in the said Collectors and
Sub-Collectors, his Majesty has been abused, and his Subjects oppressed: We
therefore (who have it in charge from his Majesty to preserve his Subjects from
wrongs and oppressions) being abundantly sensible of those miscarriages, and
being desirous to apply such remedy thereunto, as may tend not only to the
just punishment of the Offenders, but also to the relief of those who have been
oppressed; do in Order thereunto, by this Proclamation in his Majesty's Name
strictly charge and command, all and every the Commissioners appointed for
taxing the said double Pole in all and every the Counties of this Kingdom, That
where they have not as yet returned to his Majesty's Receiver General or his
Deputy, Duplicates of the Books delivered to the Collectors of the said Moneys,
that they do forthwith cause the said Duplicates to be returned to His
Majesty's said Receiver General or his Deputy, without referring him to the
returns of the first single Pole; wherein if they fail (it being that which
they ought long since to have done) as We may thereby have cause to suspect
that some of them have at least purposely connived at the frauds of the
Collectors or Sub-Collectors: so they may justly expect to be proceeded against
for their so long neglect in returning the said Duplicates; And the said
Commissioners of every County are to take Order that the Clerk employed by them
in transcribing the said Books, do attend the next going Judges of Assize into
the County where such Clerk was so employed, and there on the first day of the
Session of the said Judges of Assize, for that County where such Clerk was
employed, that the said Clerk do deliver to the said Judges a Duplicate of the
said Books, attested by some of the said Commissioners, and there to attend
during the Sessions of the said Judges for that County; And the said Judges of
Assize are then and there to hear and examine all complaints that shall be
exhibited unto them, against any of the said Collectors or Sub-Collectors, or
others, for or concerning any frauds or abuses committed or concerning the
levying of the said double Pole, and to proceed according to Law against such
persons, as shall be found to have misdemeaned themselves therein, and that in
such sort as may be not only for the just punishment of such Offenders, but
also exemplary for others to take warning by, that they presume not to offend
in that kind, and also for satisfaction and reparation to be made to the
persons injured; And the said Judges of Assize are at their return from the
Circuit to give an Account in writing at this Board of their proceedings
herein.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 13. day of February, 1661. GOD
SAVE THE KING. Ja. Dublin. Hen. Tichborne. Ja. Donelan. J. Temple. R. Coote.
Paul Davys. Fra. Hamilton. Robert Forth. Ja. Ware. Rob. Meredith.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer Bookseller in Castle-street, Anno Dom. 1661.


