BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE
Whereas by Proclamation, bearing date the second of November last past, We
did think fit to charge* command and require all and every the Sheriff^s and
Justices of the peace of the several and respective Counties in this Kingdom,
and all, and every the Officers of his Majesty's Army, that from and after the
expiration of twenty days next ensuing the date of the said Proclamation, they
should search for, seize upon, and secure all such Arms, as should be found to
be in the possession of, or belonging unto any person or persons of the Popish
Religion (who had not licenses from the Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, to keep, or carry the same) and that
in case they should find any person or persons (who had such Licenses) to have
or keep more, or other Arms then are Expressed in such Licenses, that they
should also seize upon, and secure the same, and take care to have such persons
in whose custody any Arms should be found, contrary to our said Proclamation,
to be bound over with sufficient security to appear at the next assizes or
sessions to be held for such Counties wherein any such Arms should be found,
and there to be prosecuted for the said offenses, and that they should also
return the names of such persons to Us, or to the Clerk of the Council, and
that all such Arms as should be so seized upon, or secured by them should be
brought into one of His Majesty's Stores of Ordnance, and Ammunition in this
Kingdom, or delivered to some of the Persons mentioned in the said
Proclamation, to receive the same together with the names of the Persons from
whom such Arms were taken.

And whereas We find that the said Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace; and also
the Officers of His Majesty's Army, have been very Remiss in Executing the
aforesaid several matters Committed to their Charge, in so much as little or
nothing has been done by either of them in obedience to the said Proclamation,
We cannot but hereby give them to understand that We do highly resent the same,
and more particularly, their great neglect in not making strict search for, and
seizing upon, all such Arms as immediately after the 22th. of November last
past might be found in the possession of, or belonging unto any person or
persons of the Popish Religion, who have not Licenses from the Lord Lieutenant
or other Chief Governor, or Governors of this Kingdom, to keep and carry the
same, and returning us an account of their proceedings therein, according to
the Tenor of the said proclamation.

Wherefore, We have thought fit in hopes and Expectation of their greater care
and diligence for the future, to declare and publish; And We do hereby in His
Majesty's name straicly Charge and require all and every the said Sheriffs and
Justices of the Peace of the several and respective Counties of this Kingdom,
and also the Officers of His Majesty's Army, that immediately after the date of
this Proclamation, they do proceed with all care, Diligence and Circumspection,
in the several Counties, Baronies, Cities, Garrisons, and Towns, where they
reside, to put the Contents of the aforesaid Proclamation in due Execution, and
to return an account of their proceedings therein, with all convenient speed
unto us, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

And We do also further in His Majesty's Name, Straightly Command and require
all and every the said Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, and also the
Officers of His Majesty's Army, that in Case any person or persons of the
Popish Religion, of what Quality soever he be, shall pretend to have License
for the keeping or carrying of any Arms, for himself or any number of Persons
of his Family or Retinue; That they take a Copy of such his or their License,
and of the Names of the persons who are by him allowed to keep, or carry any
Arms as his Servant, or of his Retinue, by Virtue, or under Color of such
License, and send the same together with the Names of the persons so allowed by
him unto Us, or to the Clerk of the Council, with all convenient speed: And
also to make strict inquiry after such Arms as they know, or shall be informed,
any person or persons of the Popish Religion had in his, or their possession
before or since the Date of our former Proclamation, which are not brought in
according to the Tenor thereof, and what is become of them, and in whose
Custody, or possession the same now are, and to take the same wherever they may
be found, and dispose of them as is directed in our said former proclamation:
And also to bind over all and every such person and persons of the Popish
Religion, whom they shall find upon diligent inquiry to have had any such Arms
in his or their Custody or possession without License at any time before the
Date of Our said Proclamation or since, which are not now to be found, and were
not delivered in according to the directions aforesaid. And that they take
special care that every such person and persons be duly prosecuted for their
respective Offenses at the next Assizes, or Quarter Sessions to be held for the
said County wherein such person or persons shall, or may be found.

And We do hereby further declare, that if the said Sheriffs, and Justices of
the Peace, or Officers of His Majesty's Army shall prove as Negligent and
Remiss, as formerly they have been, in the Execution of these Matters, which do
so nearly concern His Majesty's Service; We shall look on them, as contemners
of His Majesty's Royal Authority, and Countenancers, and Abettors, of those who
seek the Disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, and proceed against them
with all imaginable severity.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 12th. day of December, 1678. Mich:
Dublin C, Arran. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. R. Coote. R.
Fitzgerald. Ca. Dillon. Char. Meredith. To. Booth. Jo: Bysse. Jo: Davys, John
Cole, Ric: Gethin. Theo: Jones. Walter Plunkett. Tho: Radcliffe. Hans
Hamiltone. Tho: Newcomen.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's Printing House in
Skinner-Row, 1678.


