BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT AND COUNCIL:
ORMONDE,

WHEREAS by an Act made in the last Session of the late Parliament held in this
Kingdom entitled, An Act for the better ordering the selling of Wines and
Aquavitae, together with all sorts of Strongwaters by Retaile, It is Enacted,
That no person or persons whatsoever from and after the Twenty ninth day of
September in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty six, unless he
or they be licensed, and enabled in manner and form as in the said Act is
prescribed and appointed, shall sell or utter by Retaile (That is to say) by
the pint, quart, pottle, or gallon, or by any other greater or lesser retaile
measure, any kind of wine, or Wines, Aquavite, Vsquebagh, Brandy, Balkon, or
other distilled Strongwaters whatsoever to be drunck or spent within his or
their Mansion House, or Houses, or other place in his or their Tenure or
Occupation, or without such Mansion House or Houses, or such other place in his
or their Tenure or Occupation, by any Color, Craft or means whatsoever, upon
pain to forfeit for every such offense the sum of five pounds, the one Moyetie
of every such penalty to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and
Successors, the other Moyetie to him or them that will sue for the same, by
Action of Debt, Bill, plaint or Information in any of the Kings Courts of
Record, in which Action or Suite, No Essoyn, wager of Law or protection shall
be allowed; And it is further Enacted by the said Act that Commissions shall
from time to time be awarded under His Majesty's Great Seal into every County
in this Kingdom to a convenient number of Commissioners to be nominated by the
Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom and
Council for the time being, which said Commissioners or any two or more of them
shall License according to the said Act such persons as they shall think fit to
sell and utter by Retane all or any kind of Wine or Wines or Strongwaters or
any other the Liquors distilled or strrongwaters whatsoever aforesaid to be
Drunck and spent as well within the House or Houses, or oother place in the
Tenure or Occupation of the party so Licensed as aforesaid; as without in any
City, Town, or other place within the Kingdom of Ireland, for any Term not
exceeding three years from the Twenty ninth of September next preceding the
making of such License, and no longer, and that the said Commissioners by
their Commissions shall be especially authorized to make the said Licenses, and
that every such Retailer of Wine or Wines as aforesaid, shall pay to His
Majesty's use, such sum as shall be agreed to be paid for such License, so as
none do pay less than the sum of Forty shillings yearly, and that none be
compelled in the City and County of the City of Dublin to pay more than Forty
pounds yearly, and in all other Cities, Towns Corporate, and other places as
well within as without Franchises and Liberties in this Kingdom more than
Twenty pounds yearly, and that every such Retailer of Aquavite Vsquebagh or
Strongwaters, Brandy, Balkon or any other Distilled Strongwaters whatsoever as
aforesaid shall pay to His Majesty's use such sum as shall be agreed to be paid
for such License, so as none do pay less than the sum of Ten shillings yearly,
and none shall be compelled to pay more in the City and County of the City of
Dublin than Ten pounds yearly, and in all other Cities, Towns Corporate and
other places as well within as without Franchises and Liberties in this
Kingdom, than the sum of Five pounds yearly by two equal payments, the first
thereof to be made before the person so to be Licensed take out his License,
and the second payment to be made at the end of six months after the date of
such License, to the hands of Collectors to be appointed in every County for
that purpose by the said Commissioners for such County or any three or more of
them.

AND whereas in pursuance of the said Act, We the Lord Lieutenant and Council
have Nominated Sir Richard Geth^n Knight, Sir Richard Kyrle Knight, Joseph
Dean, John Stepney, and Denny Muschamp Esquiers to be added to such of the
Justices of the Peace of each County in this Kingdom as we shall hereafter
Nominate to be Commissioners in every County in this Kingdom for Executing and
performing all and every the Matters and Powers by the said Act committed to
the care of such Commissioners; we therefore do by this our Proclamation,
Declare and publish the same, whe^eof all persons wh^m it does concern, are
hereby required to take notice, and to conform themselve as well to such His
Majesty Commission as to the aforesaid Act, whereof they may not fail.

Given at Kilkenny the 17th day of September, 1666. Mead. Dungannon. Fran.
Aungier. Kingston. Jo. Bysse. Paul Davys. Art. Forbess. Rob. Meredith. Theo.
Jones.


Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-street, 1666.


