AN Impartial Survey Of such as are not, and such as are, fitly Qualified FOR
CANDIDATES For the approaching PARLIAMENT. Humbly offered to all that truly
Love their King and Country.
By a hearty well-wisher to the Prosperity of Both.

1. THE Presbyterians are such, for there is not one in forty of them (in the
Rank of Politicians) for they have their several Classes, as well as the
Priests have Orders, but will with all the force of their inexhaustible stock
of Seditious Rhetoric, justify the late Rebellion, and such without all
question will be ready to foment a new One; besides their insufferable Pride in
owning no Superiors (but themselves) in Spirituals.

2. The Independants are such, for besides their horrid and detestable
adherence to the High Court of Justice (as they Blasphemously called that
Infernal Brood) their strict Conjunction with the most Damnable Iniquities of
the twelve years Interval, they have such Democratical Principles of
Government, as is inconsistent with human Society.

3. The Anabaptists are such, and not to be trusted in any Affair that concerns
the Government, for they and the Independants are Brethren in Iniquity, and
joined Hand and Head (in all the wicked stratagems) throughout the Usurpation,
to involve the Nation in a perpetual slavery, and that (...) methods so
unconscionable and bloody, as the most Savage Barbarian would abhor.

4. The Rumpe^ are such, they having run Parallel with (if not exceeded) all the
dete^^^ble Villainies above cited.

5. All those are su^ (if any such there be) that did actually receive Pensions
with design t^ ^nflame the Nation.

6. The Worcester-Fig^ men are such, for if they had not in their hearts
approved the horrid Murder of the Father, they would not have attempted to
imbrue their h^^ds in the blood of the Son, which must be the natural result of
that ^position: For then they had laid aside their Visor and walked Barefaced,
and made use of none of those delusory pretenses of bringing him home to his
Parliament, and making him a glorious King.

7. The Papists, Quakers, Levellers, Brownists, and Fifth-Monarchy-men are all
alike obnoxious, for though they differ in themselves, yet are they
Confederated together in an inseparable Union against the Common Enemy, as they
call the Church of England, and do with the utmost of their force and skill
level their inexorable Malice against the very Root of it: and that their
Malice is as implacable against the State I refer the Reader to their former
practices (which instruct far better then Precepts) which Modern History is
pregnant with. They have deceived us once, for which God forgive them, but if
ever they deceive us more, then I say God forgive us; and if some men there be
(as I fear there are too many) of distinct Principles from the rest (guided by
their own Avaritious and Ungodly Appetites) that would build up the State on
the Ruins of the Church, be assured that God will never bless the work of such
hands, and such a Structure cannot stand. King James his Aphorism, no Bishop,
no King, we have (by a most lamentable and sad experience) found true. It is
true we cannot Divine of the future behavior of men, but when they have, like
Cain, a Mark set upon them, we ought to fly them, as we would Infection, and
let it be remembered that such as give their Votes for any under these
Circumstances, are shortsighted, wilfully blind, or of the same Leven, and do
as much as in them lies, to repeat the same Mischiefs over again.

Now to choose such as are without exception, such I say are men of good
Estates, true Sons of the Church, and of untainted Loyalty to their Prince, and
such men can have no designs apart from the good of their Country. Some of
those brave Souls are still living, that exhausted their Estates, and emptied
their Veins in the Defense of Church and State, and is it not more Rational to
think, nay is it not Irrational to think otherwise, that these men or their
Sons, will rather do the like again, than such or the Sons of such, as once
steered a quite contrary Course, till they made Shipwreck of three Kingdoms? It
is probable they may (nay, it is certain they will if permitted) again make
long harangues for the Liberty and Property of the Subject, (which they invaded
and destroyed) Redress of Grievances, which they multiplied a 1000 times over,
Reformation of Church Government, which they turned into a Chaos of Confusion;
and though they have laid aside (as a State-device out of date) their Religious
Mask, (with which they covered such multitudes of horrid Impieties, as would
make a Pagan blush to behold) yet they have found out fresh slights to debauch
the people from their Allegiance. These are, I say, our hotheaded Schismatical
Separati^ts, whose Masterpiece now is to persuade the honest and plain-hearted
Church of England man, that their Spiritual nor Secular concerns cannot be
safe, except they choose such men as may be as obnoxious to our present
Sovereign, as some others were barbarous to his Father: and the more
effectually to wheedle them into this snare, they tell the^, that it was not
they (good men!) that Murdered him, but the Papists; and if they can but
thoroughly delude the people with this Imposture, their Game will play it self
without trouble of shifting Scenes, for the Good Old Cause, which is still so
nauseous, will then have a savor Relish. True it is, the Priests and Jesuits
had their part (and acted into the life) in fomenting those unhappy and inhuman
Discords; as A^dreas ab Habernfields Discovery to Sir William Boswell, and from
him transmitted to the Archbishop of Canterbury (that Mirror of Learning and
Pious Constancy) whom they intended to have Massacre^ for being so firm a
Protestant, and the Parliament actually murdered under the false pretense of
being a Papist, do plainly demonstrate. So that we see, that as our dear Lord
and Savior was Crucified between to Thieves, so was the Lords Anointed our
dear Sovereign between the Jesuits and Phanaticks: It matters not what
Principles the High-Court of Justice were of, whether Presbyterian, Independent
(or which is most likely) Infidel, or a mixed crew made up of all sorts; but
this use may be made on it, there were and still are many thousands in this
Kingdom (and few Towns so inconsiderable as not to have some of them) that
entitled themselves the Asserters of the Protestant Religion, and were (in
their several Capacities) strenous Abettors of their most wicked and execrable
Practices, and as they did then, so they do still call themselves Protestants.
And so far are they from expressing any true signs of Repentance, that I fear
they are more ready to justify the Fact, and that for this Reason: At Crouches
Meeting House in Moor-fields, and several others about the City, where on
Sundays are eighteen hundred or two thousand Hearers, they keep the Fifth of
November mighty strict, which proves them no Papists, but on the Thirtieth of
January there is not a soul in them; and so far are some of them from keeping
it as a day of Humiliation, that they make it a day of Feasting: these are bad
signs, my Masters.

Some of the misled Flock of Presbyterians make loud boasts of the Loyalty of
their Omnipotent Doctors Love and Baxter, and how the first dyed a Martyr for
the sake and cause of the King; but to rectify that mistake, see his
Narrative, where he prays that God would redeem the King from the Iniquity of
his Fathers House. Again, It is earnestly wished that our Kings heart may be
tender and be truly humble before the Lord for the sins of his Fathers House.
And see his speech upon the Scaffold where he says, I did (it is true) oppose
in my Place and Calling, the Forces of the late King, and were he alive again,
and should I live longer, the Cause being as then it was, I should oppose him
longer. And in his Petition, he does protest in the presence of God, the
searcher of all hearts, that he knows no Plot or Design against the present
Government (the Rump) nor is he privy in the least, to any preparations for, or
intendments toward any Intestine Insurrections, or Foreign Invasions, or to
any Correspondence now held with any in or of the Scottish Nation, or any other
whatsoever. And again, He promises never to Plot, Contrive, or design any
thing to the hurt of this present Government, ( Rump) and that he is sorrowful
for his high Crimes and Offenses against the Parliament, in his late and great
miscarriages: and desires them to pass by these sundry and great Offenses. And
concludes thus, That I shall devote the remainder of my days to the Glory of
God, and good of his people, the peace and safety of this Commonwealth,
against all the Malignant Enemies and Opposers thereof. By this we may see his
Loyal Conceptions and Endeavors for the Kings Restoration; and that St.
Baxter comes not a jot short of him, see his Preface to his Holy Commonwealth,
where he says, That if the War was to begin again, he would take the
Parliaments part; If I should do otherwise, I should be guilty of Treason or
Disloyalty against the Sovereign Power of the Land, for I knew not how to
resist or disobey them, without violation of the Command of God, Romans xiii. Let
every soul be subject to the Higher Power, and without incurring the danger of
the Condemnation there threatened to Resisters. Now if these grave, prudent,
modest, sober, sincere, and unexampled Patterns of Loyalty go thus far, we may
cease to wonder, when we hear others of that Fraternity with greater boldness,
and in plain terms justify the late Rebellion: and we all know the event of
that was, of a Glorious King (as they canted it to gull the people) to make a
Royal Martyr. Nor is it any wonder, that their Allegiance should have so feeble
a tie upon them, the word of God being obligatory with them no further, than it
conduces to their design. For tell them, God Almighty by the mouth of his Holy
Prophet Samuel says, Rebellion is like the sin of Witchcraft, and the
reiterated admonition of the Apostles, Fear God, honor the King; Where the
word of a King is, there is power, and who shall say what do thou? And happy
is the man that fears the Lord and the King, Prove. xxiv. 21. A divine
sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth transgresses not in Judgment,
Prove. xiv. 10. This their Sophisters tell us, is not to be understood in the
extensive Latitude of the Word, but must admit of Construction, though we are
Commanded by the Word of God in direct terms, not to add to or diminish ought
from the Scripture. And not unlike this was their Exposition on that Clause in
the Covenant (which they so solemnly swore to adhere to) to defend the Kings
Person, which they expounded to be the Kingdom. This is true Jesuit all over,
yet that the wicked Rump Parliament, nor their Accomplices were Papists, nor
favorers of Papists, is most certain; for besides their incessant Exclamation
against them, there were no sort of people, throughout the Usurpation, that lay
under those heavy pressures that they did, as frequent Imprisonments,
Sequestrations, Fines, and Decimations: and this will be said to their Eternal
Honor (and to the unparalleled reproach of those that called themselves
Protestants, and pass for such now, had wickedly Conspired to shed their
Sovereigns blood) after that fatal defeat at Worcester, the Giffords and
Pendrels Papists, and Huddleson a Popish Priest, were the chief Instruments
(under God) of his Miraculous Deliverance. It is not meant by this to extenuate
the mischievous practices of the Papists, for their Putney-Consult and the
product of that (a Petition to Cromwell to abjure the Royal Family for a
Toleration) will proclaim their monstrous ingratitude to all Posterity; but to
show that some of that King-Killing, and detestable Race of mankind were better
principl'd, than such reputed Protestants. But I will cease to enumerate the
Slights, Cheats, and Forgeries (which are well enough known, if but half so
well considered) of an implacable Faction, who would if possible once more turn
all into Confusion, as their wishing (nay almost Praying in Public) for the
success of the Rebels in Scotland do Witness. But this is lost Labor I well
know, for their Faces are as impenetrable as the Walls of Ostend, and they will
no more recoil at the sight of ten thousand Apparitions of their horrid
Impieties, than the Mountain would remove at Mahomets call; but to the last,
like the Jesuits at Tiburn, aver themselves as innocent as the Child unborn.
These things should not now have been remembered, it being a main Principle in
the Church of England to forgive our Enemies, and forget Injuries, and
Consonant to the Great and Pious Example of our most Gracious King, who has
Converted the Act of Indemnity, into one of Oblivion; did not they themselves
with their Scurrilous and Seditious Libels hourly awake us out of our resolved
silence. I will conclude with these Divine Admonitions. These filthy dreamers
defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, Jude 8. Repent
ye for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. iii. 2. Behold the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon them all, Jude 14, 15.
My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change, Prove. xxiv. 21.

FINIS.

