BY THE LORD DEPUTY AND COUNCIL
OSSORY,
WHEREAS Rory mac Randal mac Donnel late of the Barony of Dungannon in the
County of Tyrone, Owen Do mac Donnel of the same, Tool Ballagh mac Donnel
late of Croskevenagh in the Barony and County aforesaid, Ferdarrogh mac Donnel
late of the same, Gorrhy o Cahane late of the Barony aforesaid, Gillespick mac
Donnel late of the said Barony, Bryan Roe o Cahan late of the same, Shane o
Cahan late of the same, Patrick mac Cormick o Hagan late of the Parish of
Ballynaskreen in the County of Londonderry, Patrick o Hagan late of the same,
Shane o Hagan late of the same, Robert Hamilton late of Castle Caulfield in the
County of Tyrone, William Miller late of the Parish of Carinteele in the said
County, Conn mac Neale Oge o Neale mac Art, mac Hugh Mergagh o Neale late of
the Parish of Longfield in the County of Tyrone, Thomas mac Gragh late of the
Parish of Dromore in the said County, Bryan mac Donnel Carragh mac Cawell late
of the Parish of Donagh Cavagh in the County of Tyrone, Hugh mac Murchy late of
the Parish of Aghalurgher in the County of Fermanagh, Hugh mac Mahon late of
the Barony of Dartry and County of Monaghan, and Edmond o Moylan late of the
Parish of Ba^lyneskreen in the County of Londonderry, and their Accomplices have
in the Counties of Monoghan, Antrim, Down, Tyrone and Londonderry, and other
places appeared in Arms against His Majesty's Authority, and several of them
have committed Murders, Burglaries, Robberies and Stealthes, besides diverse
other outrages to the terror and annoyance of His Majesty's loyal and good
Subjects, and to the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, upon which
misdeameanors and Crimes, being pursued by some of His Majesty's good Subjects,
assisted by some of His Majesty's Army, they the said Rory mac Randal mac
Donnel, Owen Do mac Donnel, Tool Ballagh mac Donnel, Ferdarrogh mac Donnel,
Gorrhy o Cahane, Gillespick mac Donnel, Bryan Roe o Cahan, Shane o Cahan,
Patrick mac Cormick o Haggan, Patrick o Haggan, Shane o Haggan, Robert
Hamilton, William Mi^ler, Conn mac N^ale Oge o Neale mac Art mac Hugh Mergagh o
Neale, Thomas mac Gragh, Bryan mac Donnel, Carragh mac Cawell, Hugh mac Murchy,
Hugh mac Mahon, and Edmond o Moylan and their accomplices are (...) to the Woods
and Mountains, where they stand upon their keeping so as they are not
answerable to Law, but wilful contemners of the same. And whereas Donnogh Roe
Kevannagh, Pierce Fitz Harris, alias Pierce Bane were legally convicted and
condemned at the Assizes held for the County of Wexford for a Robbery committed
on one Cubba^ge; And whereas Edmond Roe Brannagh, and Paul Murphy were also
legally convicted and condemned at the Assizes held for the said County of
Wexford for a Barbarous and inhumane act the cutting out a man's tongue, And
whereas since the said condemnation they the said Donnogh Roe Kevanagh, Pierce
Fitz Harris alias Pierce Bane, Edmond Roe Brannagh, and Paul Murphey have
broaken the Goal at Wexford, and so made their escape to the Woods and
Mountains where they stand upon their keeping, so as they are not ameanable to
Law, but wilful contemners of the same, And f^rasmuch as the actors of those
disorders and offenses cannot as yet be apprehended, whereby they may be
punished by the ordinary course of Law, whence we might justly be moved
according to the former usage and custom in this Kingdom in cases of like
nature to cause them to be fo^thwith proclaimed Rebels and Traitors, yet in
mercy to them we think fit hereby to charge and command them upon their duty of
Allegiance to His Majesty that they and every of them do before the 24th day
of this present June render their persans to any of His Majesty's Justices of
Peace, and submit themselves to His Majesty's Justice to be tried for their
offenses according to the Laws of the Land, wherein if they or any of them
shall sail, we do hereby publish and declare, that he or they so failing, and
such as shall accompany, and adhere to them after the publication of this
Proclamation, and every of them are from and immediately after the said 24th day
of this present June, to be called reputed and taken for notorious Rebels and
Traitors against His Majesty, and accordingly to be prosecuted by all His
Majesty's loving and good Subjects in all hostile manner. And we declare
further, that whatsoever person or persons shall comfort relieve or abet them,
or any of them, or any of their confederats or adherents, they are and shall be
reputed, deemed, and adjudged Traitors in like degree with the forenamed,
Traitors and Rebels themselves, and we do in His Majesty's name straightly
charge and command all His Majesty's loyal Subjects upon their duty of
allegiance to His Majesty not only to forbear to receive or relieve them, the
said Rory mac Randal mac Donnel, Owen Do mac Donnel, Tool Ballagh mac Donnel,
Ferdarrogh mac Donnel, Gorrhy o Cahane, Gillespick mac Donnel, Bryan Roe o
Cahan, Shane o Cahan, Patrick mac Cormick o Hagan, Patrick o Hagan, Shane o
Hagan, Robert Hamilton, William Miller, Conn mac Neale Oge o Neale mac Art mac
Hugh Mergagh o Neale, Thomas mac Gragh, Bryan mac Donnel, Carragh mac Cawell,
Hugh mac Murchy, Hugh mac Mahon, Edmond o Moylan, Donnogh Roe Kevanagh, Pierce
Fitz Harris alias Pierce Bane, Edmond Roe Brannagh, and Paul Murphey, or any of
them, or any of their confederats or adherents, but also to make diligent
search and inquiry in what place or places the said Rory mac Randal mac
Donnel, Owen Do mac Donnel, Tool Ballagh mac Donnel, Ferdarragh mac Donnel,
Gorrhy o Cahane, Gillespick mac Donnel, Bryan Roe o Cahan, Shane o Cahan,
Patrick mac Cormick o Hagan, Patrick o Hagan, Shane o Hagan, Robert Hamilton,
William Miller, Conn mac Neale Oge o Neale mac Art mac Hugh Mergagh o Neale,
Thomas mac Gragh, Bryan mac Donnel, Carragh mac Cawell, Hugh mac Murchy, Hugh
mac Mahon, Edmond o Moy^an, Donnogh Roe Kevannagh, Pierce Fitz Harris alias
Pierce Bane, Edmond Roe Brannagh, and Paul Murphey, or their confederats shall
from time to time lurk or be releived, and by all means possible to prosecute
apprehend and take the Bodies of them and their adherents, and them to bring or
cause to be brought under safe custody unto the High Sheriffs of the
respective Counties where any of them shall be apprehended, to be by such
Sheriffs kept in strict and safe custody till we upon notice thereof shall give
further direction concerning them, or resisting and refusing to be taken to
kill them or any of them; And we do hereby declare that whosoever shall after
the said 24th day of this present June, bring unto any Sheriff the Body of the
said Rory mac Randal mac Donnel Owen Do mac Donnel, Tool Balagh mac Donnel,
Ferdarrogh mac Donnel, Gorrhy o Cahane, Gillespick mac Donnel, Bryan Roe o
Cahan, Shane o Cahan, Patrick mac Cormick o Hagan, Patrick o Hagan, Shane o
Hagan, Robert, Hamilton, William Miller, Conn mac Neale Oge o Neale mac Art mac
Hugh Mergagh o Neale, Thomas mac Gragh, Bryan mac Donnel, Carragh mac Cawell,
Hugh mac Murchy, Hugh mac Mahon, Edmond o Moylan, Donnogh Roe Kevanagh, Pierce
Fitz Harris alias Pierce Bane, Edmund Roe Brannagh and Paul Murphey, or any of
them alive, or kill any of them, and bring his Head to the Sheriff of the
County where he shall be killed, (to be by such Sheriff set up in some public
place in that County) shall have for his reward, for each person so brought in
or his Head Ten pounds to be paid him by such Sheriff, and to be allowed to
such Sheriff upon his account to be rendered in His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, and whosoever of the accomplices of the said proclaimed persons shall
after the said 24th day of this present June apprehend or kill as aforesaid,
any of the said Rebels and Traitors particularly named he shall together with
the said reward receive his Pardon, and toward the Speedy effecting of this
Service, all Commanders and Officers of Horse and Foot, and all other His
Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects are to be aiding and assisting as they
and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the Third day of June 1668. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Donegall. Massereene. Henry Midensis. J.
Temple. Robert Forth.


GOD Save the KING.
Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1668.


