C R
DIEV ET MON (...) HONI SOIT QVI MAL (...) royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE,

WHereas in an Act passed in the late Parliament, entitled, An Act for settling
the Subsidy of Poundage, and granting a Subsidy of Tunnage, and other sums of
money, unto His Royal Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the same to be paid
upon Merchandises imported and exported into, or out of the Kingdom of Ireland,
according to a Book of Rates hereunto annexed, there are the Provisoes and
Clauses following; viz.

You are hereby required to take care that the Act passed in England,
entitled, An Act for the encouraging and increasing of Shipping and
Navigation, be from time to time duly observed and executed.

Provided always, That all Silks, and Silk Manufactures imported into this Your
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, from any Foreign parts, other than from the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, do pay one entire third part more
over and above the Rates imposed and set by the Book of Rates abovementioned,
any thing before in this Act, or in the said Book of Rates to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, That all Sugars, Indico, Ginger, Cotten-Wool, as all other
Wools, and all other commodities of the growth or Manufacture of any the
English Plantations, first imported into, and landed in England or Wales, and
afterward exported from thence into this Your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, do
pay but one half part of all such Customs and Subsidies, as according to the
said Book of Rates is imposed and set upon the said Commodities, and that all
Wines and Tobaccoes, of what sort soever, imported into this Your Majesty's
Realm of Ireland, out of your Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, do pay
so much only in Subsidy, as upon exportation of the same Wines and Tobaccoes
out of England, shall or ought to be repaid or discharged of the Subsidy of
Tunnage and Poundage, and additional duties there paid or secured for the same,
and that for all other Foreign Commodities, except Wines and Tobaccoes, and
commodities from the English Plantations abovementioned, imported into this
Your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, by any Your Majesty's Subjects, from any the
parts and places beyond the Seas, other than from Your Majesty's Realm of
England or Dominion of Wales, there shall be satisfied and paid to Your
Majesty, your Heirs and Successors for ever, one third more in Subsidies over
and above the Subsidy payable for the same, according to your Book of Rates
above mentioned, and that for all or any the Commodities or Merchandises
mentioned in this Act, or in the Book of Rates above mentioned, which shall
hereafter be imported, or exported by any Aliens or strangers born out of Your
Majesty's Allegiance, the said Aliens and strangers shall pay double the Custom
or Subsidy payable by virtue of this Act, for the same Commodities and
Merchandises imported or exported by all or any of Your Majesty's natural born
Subjects, any thing before in this Act, or in the Book of Rates to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas by Act of Council made at this Board, dated the 15 day of
September, 1662. for the reasons t^erein expressed, We did resolve and agree to
dispense with the execution of the said three several Provisoes or Clauses
contained in the said Act, for the space of six months then next ensuing, and
that the particular commodities herein hereafter mentioned, be from thence
forth during the said six months rated as follows, viz.

Iron of all sorts Twenty pound per tun, and to pay thereout Twenty shillings
per tun for Custom, and Twenty shillings per tun for Excize.

All silks wrought, and all silks manufactured, except Ribbans, to be rated at
Thirty shillings per pound, and to pay thereout Eighteen pence the pound for
Custom, and Eighteen pence the pound for Excize.

And that as all plate is freed of Custom, so it be freed of Excize also.

And whereas by Act of Council dated the 28 of January, 1662. We did resolve
and agree to dispense with the execution of the aforesaid three several
provisoes or clauses for the space of one whole year, from the expiration of
the said six months.

And whereas by Act of Council dated the 27 day of February, 1663. We did
resolve and agree to dispense with the execution of the aforesaid three several
proivsoes or clauses, for the space of one whole year from the expiration of
the said former one whole year.

And whereas by Act of Council dated the 14 day of February, 1664. We did
resolve and agree to dispense with the execution of the aforesaid three several
provisoes or clauses for the space of six months from the expiration of the
said last mentioned one whole year.

And whereas by Act of Council dated the 16 day of Aug. 1665. We did resolve
and agree to dispense with the execution of the aforesaid three several
provisoes or Clauses for the space of one whole year from the expiration of the
said last mentioned six months.

Now for special reasons of State nearly concerning His Majesty's service, and
in prevention of the inconveniences which may otherwise happen to this Kingdom
and people in General, We think sit, and so do resolve and agree by this our
Act of Council, to dispense, and do hereby accordingly dispense with the
execution of the aforesaid three several provisoes or clauses for the space of
two whole years, from the expiration of the said last mentioned one whole year.

And do hereby declare, That the particular Commodities herein formermerly
mentioned, be during the said two whole years from the expiration of the said
last mentioned one whole year as aforesaid, rated as they are formerly rated in
the said Act of Council, dated the 15 of September, 1662. and not otherwise.
And it is Ordered, That this Dispensation be made known to the Farmers of His
Majesty's Customs and Excize in this Kingdom, to be by them signified to the
Officers of all the several Ports of this Kingdom, and the several Creeks and
Members thereof, to the end that all persons concerned may conform themselves,
and yield obedience thereunto.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 23 day of January, 1666. Ja.
Armacha^us. Roscommon. Mead. Dungannon. Hen. Midensis. Heugh Glenauly. Rob.
Byron. Fra.Hamilton. Rob. Meredith. Theo. Jones.


D^bl^n, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1666.


