An Impartial Account of the present State of the HUDSON-BAY Company, as they
stand Incorporated in a CHARTER granted them by King CHARLES the Second.
THE whole Number of Adventurers are about Thirty Persons in all: Their
Original Subscriptions but Ten thousand Pounds, and that does not appear by
their Books to be half paid in.

THE Mechandize they Export are Trifles, viz. Beads, HawksBells, Brass-rings,
Combs, Jack-knives, Coblers-Awls, Hatchets, Guns, Gunpowder, Shot,
Powder-horns, Tobacco, Kettles, and a very small quantity of Duftels, and
Course Red and Blue Cloth. The Value of their whole Cargo of Merchandise (
Provisions, and Victuals, for Seamen and Servants, excepted) not exceeding Six
hundred Pounds per Annum, Communibus Annis.

FOR this inconsiderable Trade, they have a boundless Charter, not only for the
Sole-Trade of all Seas, Bays, Creeks, Rivers, Lakes etc. from the Entrance of
Hudson-Straits, with all the Lands and Territories, upon the Countries, Coasts
and Confines of the same: The Royalty of the Sea, and Propriety of the Land,
with all Mines, Royal and otherwise, but also the Sole Trade of all Havens,
Rivers, etc. into which they can find Entrance, or Passage by Land or Water,
out of these Territories aforesaid whether discovered or not discovered, and
the Natives and People Inhabiting in those Places, together with all other
Nation. Inhabiting the Coasts adjacent to those Places; Exclusive to all Others.

AS they are Boundless in their Dominion, so Sovereign in Power, having a Grant
to make Peace and War on all People, that contrary to their Charter shall
interrupt them in their Trade; to Judge and Execute Judgment on all Persons in
all Causes, whether Civil or Criminal, within any of the Countries where th^^
(...) have Places of Trade: which Power they actually Executed, (...) Charles
Boon Esquire deceased (and late a Member (...) (...)mons) destroying or
converting to their (...) the Men in her Prisoners for several Months, beca^^^
(...) Hudson's Straits, on pretense of having infringed (...) when in truth
they had not traded One Penny, nor (...)et(...) then favoring their Abuses,
did also maliciously prosecute the ^a(...) Boon and others concerned in the
Ship, in the Crown Office, where that Vexatious Suite is now depending.

NOTWITHSTANDING these their great immunities and Privileges enjoyed more than
Twenty Years, they have made no Discoveries bey^nd what they found set down in
Fox his Journals, nor any considerable Improvemen^ ^n Trade, eitheir to the
Advantage of the Nation, or themselves; but hinder al^ others so to do.

THERE is no need of a Joint Stock to carry on this Trade, nor Forts and
Castles to secure it, the Native Indians being a People timorous and more
likely to be affrighted from Trading with us, by our appearing formidable, than
to assault us, if defence-less; and the Truth is, the Nakedness of the
Country, is the greatest Security to the Trade of that Place.

THOSE Forts pretended to be built by the Hudson-Bay Company, are no better
than Pig-Sties, in England, nor of greater Strength; being a few Pine-Trees,
squared and laid one upon another, and ramm'd only with Moss, to keep out the
Wind.

THE Sum of all is this, The Hudson's Bay Company's Charter is boundless, and
so void by Law; it gives Sovereign Power, which as we humbly conceive, is not
consistent with the Wisdom of this Nation to grant. It was obtained upon a
specious pretense of discovering the North-West Passage into the South Seas,
which was never discovered. It ingrosses the greatest part of the Trade of
New York, and New England, the most advantageous Trades to this Nation of any
not Incorporated. It cramps Industry, and discourageth Ingenuity, and is in it
self of no moment to the Nation.

THAT this diminutive Company (not regarded these Twenty Years, by reason of
the little Figure it made in Trade) should now presume to Address ^^self to the
High Court of Parliament, to be Established in a boundless Charter, when (...)
Record does afford any president of any Joint Stock in this Nation, ever
Establish^^ by Law (how specious soever their Pretenses have been) is without
Parallel.


