C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE,

WHEREAS in an Act lately passed in this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for settling the Subsidy of Poundage and granting a Subsidy of Tunnage and other
sums of money unto His Royal Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the same to be
paid upon Merchandises Imported and Exported into or out of this Kingdom of
Ireland, according to a Book of Rates hereunto annexed, there are the provisoes
and clauses following, viz.

You are hereby required to take care that the Act passed in England,
Entitled, An Act for the Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation
be from time to time duly observed and executed.

Provided always, That all Silk and Silk Manufactures Imported into this your
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland from any Foreign parts, other than from the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales do pay one entire third part more
over and above the Rates imposed and set by the Book of Rates above mentioned.
Any thing before in this Act, or in the said Book of Rates to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, That all Sugars, Indicoe, Ginger, Cotten-Wool, as all other
Wools, and all other Commodities of the Growth or Manufacture of any the
English Plantations first imported into, and landed in England or Wales, and
afterward exported from thence into this your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, do
pay but one half part of all such customs and Subsidies as according to the
said Book of Rates is imposed and set upon the said Commodities, and that all
Wines and Tobaccoes of what sort soever Imported into this your Majesty's Realm
of Ireland out of your Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, do pay so much
only in Subsidy as upon Exportation of the same Wines and Tobaccoes out of
England shall or ought to be re-paid or discharged of the Subsidy of Tunnage
and Poundage, and additional duties there paid of secured for the same, and
that for all other Foreign Commodities, except Wines and Tobaccoes, and
Commodities from the English Plantations above mentioned Imported into this
your Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland by any your Majesty's Subjects from any the
parts and places beyond the Seas, other than from your Majesty's Realm of
England or Dominion of Wales, there shall be satisfied and paid to your
Majesty, your Heirs and Successors for ever, one third more in subsidies over
and above the subsidy payable for the same according to your Book of Rates
above mentioned, and that for all or any the Commodities or Merchandises
mentioned in this Act or in the Book of Rates above mentioned, which shall
hereafter be Imported, or exported by any Aliens or Strangers born out of your
Majesty's Allegiance, the said Aliens and Strangers shall pay double the
Custom or Subsidy payable by virtue of this Act for the same Commodities and
Merchandises Imported or Exported by all or any of your Majesty's Natural
Born-Subjects. Any thing before in this Act, or in the Book of Rates to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas by Act of Council made at this Board dated the 15th. day of
September 1662. for the reasons therein expressed, we did resolve and agree to
dispense with the execution of the said three several provisoes or clauses
contained in the said Act, for the space of six months then next ensuing, and
that the particular Commodities herein hereafter mentioned be from thenceforth
during the said six months rated as follows, viz.

Icon of all sorts twenty pound per tunn, and to pay thereout twenty shillings
per tunn for Custom, and twenty shillings per tunn for Excize.

All Silks wrought, and all Silks manufactured, except Ribbans, to be rated at
thirty shillings per pound, and to pay thereout eighteen pence the pound for
Excize.

And that as all plate is freed of Custom, so it be freed of Excize also.

And whereas by Act of Council dated the 28. of January 1662. We did resolve
and agree to dispense with the execution of the said three several provisoes or
claused for the space of one whole year from the expiration of the said six
months, now for special reasons of State nearly concerning His Majesty's
Service, and in prevention of the inconveniences, which may otherwise happen to
this Kingdom, and people in general, We think fit, and so do resolve and agree
by this our Act of Council to dispense, and do accordingly hereby dispense with
the execution of the aforesaid three several provisoes or clauses for the space
of one whole year from the expiration of the said former one whole year. And do
hereby declare that the particular Commodities herein formerly mentioned be
during the said one whole year from the expiration of the said former mentioned
one whole year as aforesaid, rated as they are formerly rated in the said Act
of Council, dated the 15. of September 1662. and not otherwise.

And it is ordered, That this dispensation be made known to the Farmers of His
Majesty's Customs and Excize in this Kingdom to be by them signified to the
Officers of all the several Ports of this Kingdom, and the several Creeks and
Members thereof, to the end that all Persons concerned may conform themselves
and yield obedience thereunto.

Give at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 27. day of February, 1663. Ja.
Armachanus, Mau. Eustace, Canc. Mich Dublin, Ossory, Massereene, Dungannon,
Hen. Midensis, W. Caulfield, Kingston, Santry, Hen. Tichborne, Mau. Berkeley,
Robert Ferth, G. Wentworth, Rob. Meredith, Theo. Jones.


DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet. 1663.


