C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT AND COUNCIL:
ORMONDE,

WHEREAS in the Tenth year of the Reign of his Majesty's Royal Father King
Charles the first of ever blessed Memory, there was an Act of Parliament made
and passed in this Kingdom of Ireland; which Act follows in these words:

An Act for the better preservation of fishing in the Counties of Dublin,
Wicklow, Wexford, Waterford, Cork, Kerry, Clare, Galway, Mayo, Sligo, and all
other Counties and places within the Realm of Ireland, and the Dominions
thereof adjoining to the Seacoast, and for the relief of Balkors, Condors, and
fishermen against malicious suits.

WHEREAS the Trade of fishing for Herrings, Pilchards and Sean-fish within the
counties of Dublin, Wicklow, Wexford, Waterford, Cork, Kerry, Clare, Galway,
Mayo, Sligo, and of other counties and places within the said Realm of Ireland
and the Dominions thereof, adjoining to the Seacoast, is and of late time has
been very great and profitable, as well to diverse of the fishermen as other his
Majesty's Subjects within this Realm of Ireland, and the Dominions thereof. And
whereas also for the necessary use of the taking of the said Herrings,
Pilchards, and other Sean-fish, diverse persons within the said Counties called
Balkors, Huors, Condors, directors or Guidors at the fishing time, for the said
Herrings, Pilchards, and other Sean-fish within the Counties and places, time
out of mind have used to watch, and attend upon the High Hills, and grounds
near adjoining to the Seacoasts, within the said counties and places, for the
discovery, and giving notice to the fishermen, and inhabitants near adjoining,
when the said Herrings, Pilchards, or sean-fish come toward or near the
seacoasts there; and for the guiding and directing of the Fishermen in their
boats upon the seacoasts for the taking of the said Herrings, Pilchards and
other sean-fish. And whereas also now of late diverse persons having Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments near adjoining to the seacoasts within the said
counties, or other places where the said fishing places for the taking of the
said Herrings, Pilchards and other sean-fish are, have threatened to bring their
Actions of Trespass at the Common Law, or other suits as well in the high
Courts of Record at Dublin, as in inferior Courts within the said Counties, not
only against such Balkors, Huors, Condors, directors and guidors, but also
against such fishermen and other persons, for breakeing of their close as have
attended their seans, or Netts for the drawing, and carrying of the said fish
on Land or shore, by reason whereof such watchmen, Balkors, Huors, Condors,
directors and guidors, and such other persons as heretofore have attended the
said seans and fishings, have forborne to enter into, or go upon the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, near adjoining to such fishing places within the
said counties, and places for the watching or discovery of the said Herrings,
Pilchards, and other sean-fish, or to Balke, Hue, Cond, or direct, or to attend
the seans or Netts, as heretofore they have done, and will likewise forbear the
same hereafter, if provision be not had and made, that they may lawfully enter
into and upon such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments as do lie near or
adjoining to the said seacoasts and places of fishing as aforesaid, for their
watching, balkeing, directing and attending of the seans as is aforesaid.

For Remedy whereof, and for the maintenance of the said Trade of fishing,
which does so greatly tend to the profit of many of the Inhabitants within the
said counties and others: Be it therefore Enacted and declared by our Sovereign
Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, That it is, shall, and may be lawful at all times
hereafter to and for every such Watchmen, Balkors, Huors, Condors, directors
and guidors, and all such fishermen and other persons, as shall necessarily
attend the said seanes or netts as aforesaid, at the time of fishing for
Herrings, Pilchards and other seane-fish within the said Counties and places,
where such fish shall be heareafter taken, to enter and go into, and upon any
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which do lie or adjoyn near unto any such
fishing places, fit, convenient and necessary to watch and balke in, or to draw
or carry the said fish on shore, and there to watch for the said fish, and to
balke, Hue, Conde, direct and guide the said fishermen, which shall be upon the
said Sea and Seacoasts, for the taking of the said fish, and to draw and
ca^ry the said fish on Land or shore, any law, usage, or Custom to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action of
Trespass, or other suit shall at any time hereafter happen to be attempted and
brought against any person or persons for entering or going on the Lands, for
watching of the said fish, or for Balking, Hueing, Conding, directing or
guiding of the said fishermen in their Boats upon Sea or Seacoast, for taking
of the said fish, or for landing of the said fish as aforesaid, by authority of
this present Act, the Defendant, and Defendants in any such Action or suit
shall and may plead not guilty for any thing doing, by virtue of this Act, and
upon the Trial of that Issue, the whole matter to be given on both parties in
evidence, according to the very truth of the same; And after such Issue Tried
for the Defendant or Defendants, or Non suit of the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs
after appearance, the same Defendant or Defendants to recover his or their
Damages, by reason of his or their wrongful vexation in that behalf, with Costs
also in that behalf sustained, and that to be assessed by the same Jury that
shall Try the said Issue, or else by writ to enquire of Damages as the Case
shall require, for which Costs and Damages such Defendant shall and may by
virtue of this Act take and sue forth such Execution as the Defendant in a
Replevin may do.

AND Whereas by the desolations and confusions wrought in the times of the late
Rebellions in this Kingdom, the fishing in this Kingdom intended by the said
Act to be preserved, are much decayed to the great prejudice of his Majesty
and his good Subjects: And whereas Thomas Walker and Company by their humble
Petition Exhibited at this board have declared that for the advancement of
Trade and p^eservation of fishing and supply of the City of Dublin, and other
places in this Kingdom with fish at reasonable Rates, and for Traffic beyond
the Seas, they are ready with their fishermen, Boats and nets, and other
necessaries to carry on the said work effectually without hindering any other
person or persons Licensed to fish the accustomed way if they please, whereby
his Majesty's Revenues in his Customs and Trade will be considerably increased,
the Country and Cities supplied with fish, and a considerable sum of money
kept in the Kingdom, which otherwise will be yearly carried out of the Kingdom;
And that notwithstanding the said Act so passed least some persons, either out
of ignorance or wilfulness should obstruct them in the said fishing, they
therefore by their said Petition humbly besought us to encourage them to
prosecute the said fishing without interruption or disturbance; Upon
consideration whereof We think sit by this Proclamation to declare and publish,
that the said Thomas Walker and his Company or Partners, and all other
fishermen may fish according to the said Act of Parliament without interruption
or disturbance; whereof the Judge or Judges of the Admiralty, and all other his
Majesty's Officers, and Ministers, and all others whom it may concern are to
take notice. And We require the Sheriffs of the several Counties within this
Kingdom to cause this Proclamation to be published and Proclaimed in, and
throughout all the said Counties, to the end that all persons concerned may
take notice thereof, and render obedience thereunto accordingly.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 15th day of August, 1666. Mead.
Arran. Hen. Midensis. R. Coote. Art. Forbess. Jo. Bysse. Rob. Byron. Paul.
Davys. Ja. Ware. Rob. Meredith. Theo. Jones.


Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castle-street, 1666.


