royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS by Proclamation from this Board, dated the 16th. of October 1678. 'VVe
did in His Majesty's Name Strictly Charge and Command all and every the Mayors,
Sovereigns, Bailiffs, Portrives, and all other Chief Magistrates and Officers
of the several and respective Cities and Towns Corporate of this Kingdom, and
all and every the Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Constables, and all other
His Majesty's good and Loyal Subjects; That they should make diligent Search
and Inquiry within the several and respective Cities, Towns Corporate,
Liberties, Counties, Baronies, Parishes, and places within their several
Jurisdictions, for and after all Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars
General. Abbots, Dignitaries, and all others Exercising or who had Exercised
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Kingdom by any Authority derived from the
Pope or See of Rome: And also for and after all Jesuits, and other Regular
Priests, who at any time after the Twentieth day of November next after the
date of the said Proclamation (being the time thereby Limited for their
departure out of the Kingdom) 'should continue, remain or abide therein, or
should return or come into the same; and also for and after all and every the
Receivers, Relievers and Harbourers of them or, any of them, and that upon
Discovery of any such Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, or other Persons by
the said Proclamation Required to depart out of the Realm, That they should
forthwith Apprehend and Commit them and every of them into safe Custody; And
certify Us the Lord Leiutenant and Council thereof with all convenient speed;
And were also forthwith to return unto Us the names of all their Receivers,
Relievers and Harbourers, and to take special care that the said Persons should
be prosecuted for their contempt and proceeded against according to the Laws of
the Kingdom.

And whereas We are informed, That notwithstanding the said Proclamation,
diverse of the said Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, and other persons
thereby required to depart out of the Kingdom, still remain therein concealed
in several parts thereof, which We cannot but impute to the remisness of the
said Mayors, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates and Officers
mentioned in the said Proclamation, who have not been so diligent as became
them in putting the contents of the said Proclamation in due Execution, or paid
that due obedience thereunto which thereby they were required, Notwithstanding
the encouragement given by the rewards mentioned in our Proclamation, dated the
Twenty sixth day of March One Thousand Six Hundred Seventy Nine, for the
apprehension of such Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, and other persons
required to depart as aforesaid, which Neglect and Disobedience We cannot but
let them know We do Highly resent; yet in hope and expectation of their greater
^are and Diligence for the future, We think fit hereby again in ^^s Majesty's
Name, Strictly to Charge and Command the said Mayors, Justices of Peace,
Sheriffs, and other Magistrates, (...) Officers, as aforesaid, within their
respective Limits and Pre^^^ts, not only with all Care and Diligence to make
Search for, Apprehend and Commit to safe Custody the said Popish Titular
Archbishops, Bishops, and other persons required to depart as aforesaid, ^ut
also from time to time, to Certify unto Us the Names and ^^^^^^ies of such
Person or Persons, as shall be so Apprehended and ^ted, and also do return to
Us the names of their Receivers, ^^^^^^ers, and Harbourers, with their places
of residence, and take (...) care that the said persons be forthwith prosecuted
for their contempt. And We do hereby further declare, That it the said Mayors,
Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates and Officers as aforesaid,
shall prove as negligent and remiss as hitherto they have been in the due
execution of these Our Commands, which so nearly concerns His Majesty's
Service, We shall look on them as contemners of His Majesty's Royal Authority,
and countenancers and abettors of those who seek the disturbance of the peace
of this Kingdom, and proceed against with all Severity.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 26th. day of April 1680. Mich:
Armach: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran. Longford. Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen:
Midensis. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. John Keatinge. He: Hene. Jo: Davys. Will:
Stewart. John Cole. Hans Hamilton.

God save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty's and are to be sold by Mary Crook, at his Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-row 1680.


