BY THE Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL,
ARRAN.
WHEREAS many and great Inconveniences have happened to His Majesty's Subjects
of this Kingdom, by the difference of Weights that have been of lo^^ m^^^ ^se
of, for the Weighing of such Foreign Coin, as has been made Current here by
Proclamation, As also by the bringing over into this Kingdom* great quantities
of light Peru-Pieces of Eight, which for some time did commonly pass without
any regard to their Weight, for four Shillings six pence a Piece, which was
more than their real value and of late many of them have been refused to be
taken for more than three Shillings, or three and six pence a Piece, which is
less than their real value, whereby many of His Majesty's Subjects have been at
great loss, which has been chiefly occasioned for want of taking due Notice of
the several Proclamations now in Force, whereby such Foreign Coin is made
Current, which are most of them out of Print, and not easily to be had; And We
being desirous to remedy a mischief, that may prove so prejudi^ial to the Trade
and Traffic of this Kingdom, by such incertainty in the Coin now Current
here; Have thought fit by this Our Proclamation, to Declare, at what Rates all
sorts of Foreign Coin, by the several Proclamations now in Force, are to pass
amongst His Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom which are as follows, Gold l.
s. d. The Piece, commonly called the Golden-Rider, weighing six penny weight
and twelve grains, to pass at twenty two Shillings and six pence. 01 02 06 The
Piece, commonly called the half Golden-Rider, weighing three penny weight and
six grains, to pass at Eleven shillings three pence 00 11 03 The Piece,
commonly called the Spanish Quadruple Pistol of Gold or French Quadruple Pistol
of Gold, weighing seventeen penny weight and four grains, to pass at three
pound ten shillings 03 10 00 The Piece, commonly called the Spanish Double
Pistol, or French Double Pistol of Gold, weighing Eight penny weight, and
Fourteen grains, to pass at thirty five shillings 01 15 00 The Piece, commonly
called the Spanish Single Pistol, or French single pistol of Gold, weighing
four penny weight and seven grains, to pass at seventeen shillings, six pence
00 17 06 The Piece, commonly called the Spanish half Pistol, or French half
Pistol of Gold, weighing two penny weight and three grains and half, to pass at
eight shillings nine pence 00 08 09 The Piece, commonly called the Double Ducal
of Gold, weighing four penny weight and twelve grains, to pass at Eighteen
shillings 00 18 00 The Piece, commonly called the Single Ducal of Gold,
weighing two penny weight and six grains, to pass at nine shillings 00 09 00
The piece, commonly called the Spanish suffrance of Gold, weighing seven penny
weight and two grains, to pass at twenty Eight shillings six pence 01 08 06 The
Piece commonly called the Spanish half suffrance of Gold, weighing three penny
weight and thirteen grains, to pass at fourteen shillings three pence 00 14 03
Silver The piece commonly called the Duccatoon weighing one ounce and sixteen
grains, to pass at six shillings 00 06 00 The Piece, commonly called the half
Duccatoon, weighing ten penny weight and eight grains, to pass at three
shillings 00 03 00 The Piece commonly caled the quarter Duccatoon weighing five
penny weight and four grains, to pass at one shilling six pence 00 01 06 l. s.
d. far The piece, commonly called the piece of eight of Mexico or Sevil* the
Mexico piece commonly called the Pilla piece, the Rix Dollar Cross dollar and
French Lewis, weighing seventeen penny weight, to Pass at fourshillings nine
pence 00 04 09 0 The piece, commonly called the half piece of eight of Mexico
or sevill, Pillar piece, Rix Dollar, Cross Dollar, and French Lewis, weighing
Eight penny weight and twelve grains, to pass at two shillings, four Pence half
penny 00 02 04 2 The piece, commonly called the Quarter piece of eight of
Mexico or sevill, Pillar piece, Rix Dollar, Cross Dollar, and French Lewis,
weighing four penny weight and six grains, to pass at one shilling two penny
Farthing 00 01 02 1 The piece, commonly called the half quarter piece of eight
of Mexico or sevill, Pillar piece, Rix Dollar, Cross Dollar and French Lewis,
weighing two penny weight and three grains, to pass at seven pence half
farthing 00 00 7 h.f The piece, commonly called the twelfth part of the French
Lewis weighing one penny weight and twelve grains, to pass at four pence three
farthings 00 00 04 3 The piece of eight commonly called the old Peru weighing
seventeen penny weight, to pass at four shillings six pence 00 04 06 0 The
piece commonly called the half piece of Eight of Old Peru weighing eight penny
weight and twelve grains, to pass at two shillings and three pence 00 02 3 0
The piece commonly called the quarter piece of Eight of Old Peru weighing four
penny weight and six grains, to pass at one shilling one Penny half penny 00 01
01 2 The piece commonly called the half quarter piece of Eight of Old Peru
weighing two penny weight and three grains to pass at six pence three farthings
00 00 6 3 The piece commonly called the Portugal Royal weighing Fourteen penny
weight, to pass at three shillings Eight pence 00 03 08 0 The piece, commonly
called the half Portugal Royal weighing seven penny weight to pass at one
shilling ten pence 00 01 10 0 The piece commonly called the quarter Portugal
Royal, weighing three penny weight and twelve grains to pass at Eleven pence 00
00 11 0

And in case any of the aforesaid pieces of Gold or Silver shall want of the
weight herein laid down on the said pieces respectively, then Allowance is to
be given of Two pence for each Grain so wanting in any piece of the kinds of
Gold aforesaid respectively, and three pence for each penny weight so wanting
in any piece of the kinds of Silver aforesaid respectively, and so
proportionably for greater or lesser wants of weight in the said Pieces. And in
case such defect of weight as aforesaid, shall be supplied in manner as
aforesaid, then and in such case every piece so defective in weight as
aforesaid, and that defect of weight so supplied in manner as aforesaid, is to
be allowed and to pass in all payments as well to and from His Majesty, as
otherwise howsoever as Current Money within this Kingdom as fully and freely as
if the same were sterling Money and Current of and in England.

And We do hereby also Declare, That all the aforesaid sorts of Foreign Coin
being standing weight, are to pass, and are to be paid and received at the
Rates herein above mentioned, and that any such Coyns not weighing down the
Scales in the weighing thereof, is not to be any cause for the refusal thereof
at the Rates herein above mentioned.

As also that every person receiving any money shall receive by what side of
the Scales he pleases, if he uses those of the Payer, and if he uses his own,
then he is to receive by which side the Payer shall think fit to direct.

And to the end there may be no incertainty in the weights of money, We do
hereby further declare that we have directed all the weights that are necessary
for the said Silver Coin, to be exactly made by Henry Paris, and John Cuthbeard
of the City of Dublin, the Stamp to be Flat, and the Circle to be smooth and
polished, that no dust may gather in, and each weight to be Stamped with the
number of the penny weights it bears on one side, and the Crown and Harp on the
other side, where the same may be had at reasonable Rates, not exceeding Twelve
pence for all the weights being eight in Number, viz. for the Duccatoon, half
Duccatoon, for the whole Plate and Peru pieces, and half and quarter pieces
thereof, a Two penny weight, a penny weight, an half penny weight, which are
all that will be necessary for weighing the said several sorts of Silver Coin
that do now commonly pass in this Kingdom.

And We have Ordered a Standard of all sorts of the said weights for Silver
Coin to be left in the hands of the respective Sheriffs of the several
Counties of this Kingdom, and also in the hands of the respective Mayors, and
other Chief Magistrates of the several Cities and Corporations of this Kingdom
by whom the same are to be left in succession with the next succeding Sheriff,
Mayors and other Magistrates, to the end that all differences that shall happen
about any weights for Money may thereby be either determined or prevented.

And in case any person or persons shall either pay or receive any money by any
other weights then such as shall be agreeable to the weights so to be le^t in
the said Sheriffs, Mayors, and other Chief Magistrates hands, they are to be
proceeded against and punished according to Law, as Keepers, and users of false
and unlawful weights.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 6th day of June 1683. Mich Armach.
C. Franc. Dublin* Longford. Wm. Davys. John Keating, He: Hene. Jon: Davys. Ric*
Reynells. Ol: St: George. Mau: Eustace.

God save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, and John Crook. Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty And are to be sold at His Majesty's Printing House, on
Ormonde-Key. and at Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle street, 1683.


