CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL:
ESSEX

WHEREAS in the Twenty eighth year of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, there
was one right wholesome Law made in this Realm for the suppressing, taking, and
killing of notorious Thieves and Robbers, the Tenor whereof is in these words
following. whereas Thieves, and evil Doers, increase in great store, and from
day to other do increase in malice more than they have done heretofore, and do
destroy the Commons with their Thefts, Stealings, and Manslaughters, and also
do cause the Land to fall into decay and poverty; and waste every day more and
more, and so it is like to be confounded, if there should not be remedy; It is
ordained by Authority of the said Council, That it shall be lawful to every
Liegeman of our Sovereign Lord the King, all manner notorious and known
Thieves, and Thieves found robbing, and spoiling, or breaking Houses by night
or by day, and Thieves found with the m^nner to kill them, and take them with
out Impeachment, Arraignment, or Grievance to him to be done by our Sovereign
Lord the King, his Justices, Officers, or any of his Ministers for any such
Manslaughter or Taking. And that every man that kills or takes any such
Thieves, shall have one penny of every plough, and one Farthing of every Cottage
within the Barony where the Manslaughter is done for every Thief. And that the
Town where the said Manslaughter is done, and other Four Towns next to the said
Town, which were before charged with the Escapes for such Manslaughter, shall
be quit and discharged of the said Escapes and every of them, without any
Impeachment in any Court, or payment to any Officer. And that the Sheriff of
the County shall have sufficient power to make leavy of the Money aforesaid in
the said Form, within one Month after the said Manslaughter, and shall deliver
it to him that made the said Homicide. And if the Sheriff be negligent in
lea^ying the said Money in the Form aforesaid, that he shall pay the sum of
Money to the party that has cause to have it. Now we the Lord Lieutenant and
Council considering that if the said Statute had been put in due execution,
many spoils, Thefes, and Robberies lately committed in this Kingdom had been
prevented, and most of the notorious Thieves and Robbers who have been active
therein had been e're this apprehended, and brought unto due execution.
Wherefore and for the preventing of all mischiefs of the like kind for the time
to come, And to the intent that the Prosecutors of such evil Malefactors may
receive their just reward. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council have thought fit,
and do hereby accordingly will and require, and in his Majesty's Name strictly
charge and command all, and every his Majesty's Liege people, and good Subjects
in this Kingdom, That they and every of them in their several Counties,
Baronies, Villages, Hamlets, and places of dwelling or abode in this Kingdom,
be aiding and assisting to each other in the taking, apprehending, and killing
of all such notorious Thieves, Robbers, and Spoilers of their Country, as
shall be found robbing and spoiling or breaking Houses by Night or by day,
against the force and effect of the said Statute. And we do also command and
require, That the Sheriffs of the several and respective Counties of this
Kingdom, do according to the power given unto them by the said Act, Take care
to make Leavies of the Moneys intended by the said Act to be raised for the
reward, and encouragement of such as shall take or kill any such notorious
Malefactors; And that upon the taking or killing of any such notorious Thief,
and Thieves, or Robbers, they do within one month after send unto Us the Lord
Lieutenant and Council an Account thereof, and of their proceedings therein, as
occasion shall require, whereof they may not fail at their utmost perils.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 7th day of July. 1675. Mich: Dublin
Canc. Thomond. Tyrone. Art: Forbese. To: Booth. Will: Stewart. O: St. George.
H: Ingoldesby. Hans Hamilton. Theo: Jones. VVm Flower. Char: Meredith.

GOD save the KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to besold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castle-street. 1675.


