royal blazon or coat of arms C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

By the LORDS JUSTICES and COUNCIL of Ireland.
Mich: Dublin: C. Art: Granard.
WHereas His Majesty has been graciously pleased to grant a Warrant under His
Royal Sign Manual, to prepare a Bill to pass under the Great Seal of England,
containing a Grant or Demise of all His Majesty's Revenue in this His Kingdom
of Ireland, to Sir James Shaen Knight and Baronet, Sir William Petty Knight,
William Hill, William Ryder, Robert Gorges, Thomas Hoare, Francis Soane,
William Muschamp, Edward Richbell, Stanhop Mill, Lawrence Stanyan, and William
Hanway Esquires, for the term of Seven years, from the Feast of the Nativity
of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred seventy five, and now next ensuing,
under the Rents, Covenants, Agreements, Limitations and Restrictions therein
mentioned; and has been also pleased by like Warrant, to direct a Commission
to pass under the Great Seal of England, for authorizing and appointing Sir
Charles Meredyth Knight, Chancellor of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer in this
Kingdom, Sir James Cuff Knight, John Stone Esquire Robert Wood Dr. of Laws, Thomas
Tailor Esquire Robert Gorges Dr. of Laws, Thomas Sheredan, William Hannaway, Edward
Wigg, Thomas Waller, and Murtagh Dowling Esquires, to be His Majesty's chief
Commissioners and Governors of all His Majesty's said Revenue in this Kingdom,
to prevent any loss or damage which may happen before the passing of the said
intended Grant of His Majesty's Revenue.

And whereas the said Commission with the said Warrant annexed thereunto, may
not arrive so timely out of England, as that the said Commissioners may by
virtue of their said Commission, settle and authorize the several Officers that
will be necessary to be appointed for managing of His Majesty's said Revenue,
from and after the Twenty fifth day of this instant December, when the present
Farm of the Revenue will determine: To the end therefore that His Majesty's
Revenue may front and after the said Twenty fifth day of this instant December,
be duly collected, received and answered, and all loss and damage for want of
the said Commission may be prevented.

We the Lords Justices and Council have thought fit hereby, to authorize,
constitute and appoint the said Sir James Cuff, John Stone, Robert Wood, Thomas
Sheredan, and Mortagh Dowling (being such of the said Commissioners as are now
residing in this Kingdom of Ireland) to be His Majesty's Commissioners and
Governors of His Majesty's said Revenue, until the arrival of the said
Commission out of England. And We do hereby give unto them, or any three of
them, full power and authority in the mean time, to appoint such Officers and
Ministers, upon such security and with such allowances as they shall think fit,
for receiving, collecting, answering and managing the several Branches of His
Majesty's said Revenue in the several Seaports, Cities, Counties, and Towns of
this Kingdom, that shall grow due from and after the Twenty fifth day of this
instant December, until further course shall be taken therein by the said
Commissioners, after the arrival of the said Commission.

And We do hereby also require all persons that shall be authorized or employed
by the said Sir James Cuff, John Stone, Robert Wood, Thomas Sheredan, and
Mortagh Dowling, or any three of them, before the arrival of the said
Commission out of England, or that after the arrival thereof, shall be
authorized or employed by the Commissioners in the said Commission named, That
they do diligently and faithfully execute and discharge their Offices and
Trusts respectively; and that they do from time to time give a just and true
account of all such Sums of Money, as they or any of them shall receive during
their said Employments, and of all their Actings and Proceedings therein to the
said Commissioners, so often as by them, or the major part of them, they or any
of them shall be thereunto required, any Law, Statute, matter or thing to the
contrary notwithstanding. And we do further hereby require and command all
Officers Civil and Military, to be aiding and assisting to His Majesty's said
Commissioners hereby nominated, until the arrival of the said Commission and to
His Majesty's said Commissioners named in the said Commission, from and after
the arrival thereof, and to such persons as shall be authorized and employed by
them in the execution of their respective Offices and Places as they and every
of them will answer the contrary at their utmost perils.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the Twentieth day of December, 1675.
Ja: Armachanus. Thomond. Clanbrasill. Blesinton. O: Brien. Hen: Midensis. J:
Povey. Jo: Bysse. Will: Stewart. John Cole. H: Ingoldesby. Ri: Gethin. Theo:
Jones. Wm. Flower.

GOD save the KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castlestreet. 1675.


