British royal blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT

BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS Redmond O Hanlon of Tonderegee, in the County of Armagh, Yeoman;
Laughlin mac Redmond O Hanlon of Killeany, Yeoman; Daniel mac Murphy mac
Thorlagh Roe O Murphy of the same, Yeoman; Cormuck Raver O Murphy of the same,
Yeoman; Hugh Turr O Murphy of the same, Yeoman; Bryan Moyle O Neale of the
same, Yeoman; James Roe of Ballintegart in the said County, Yeoman; Hugh mac
Shane of the same, Yeoman; Peter Pill of the same, Yeoman; James mac Nicholas O
Murphy of the same, Yeoman; Thomas Willson of Mullaghglasse of the said County,
Yeoman; and Thorlagh mac Patrick Goam O Hanlon of Aghynecloghmullen in the said
County, Yeoman; and Owen oge Carthy of the County of Kerry; Cnogher Reardane,
alias Griagh of the said County; John Howrane, and Hugh Noonane of the said
County; and Shane Kittagh O Donnel, late of Prison in the County of Mayo,
Yeoman; James Gallagher mac Edmond Dorragh late of Kilmore in the said County,
Yeoman; Donnogh Boy O Gallagher late of Coolkearny in the said County, Yeoman;
Terlagh mac Kolgeen, late of the same in the same County, Yeoman; Hugh Bane mac
Bre-houne late of Carra in the County of Sligoe, Yeoman; Donnel oge O Donnel
mac Donnel oge, late of Sligoe in the County of Sligoe aforesaid, Yeoman;
William O Keavin late of Ballyntrohan in the said County, Yeoman; Bryan mac
Donnogh late of Coppany in the said County, Yeoman; Donnogh Fitz John O Ha^t
late of Knockadooe in the said County, Yeoman; Owen O Doghertie late of
Coulkearny in the County of Mayo, Yeoman; Tirlagh mac Brehoune late of Carra in
the County of Sligoe, Yeoman; and William Gallagher late of Court in the said
County, Yeoman, have of late committed several Burglaries, Robberies, and
Stealths in the said several Counties of Armagh, Kerry, Cork, Limerick, Mayo,
Sligoe, and elsewhere within this Kingdom, besides diverse other Outrages, to
the terror and annoyance of His Majesty's Loyal and good Subjects, and to the
disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, upon which misdemeanors and crimes
being pursued by some of His Majesty's good Subjects, they the said Redmond O
Hanlon, Laughlin mac Redmond O Hanlan, Daniel mac Murphy mac Tirlagh roe O
Murphy, Cormuck Raver O Murphy, Hugh Tur^ O Murphy, Bryan Moyle O Neale, James
Roe, Hugh mac Shane, Peter Pill, James mac Nicholas O Murphy, Thomas Willson,
Tirlagh mac Patrick Goam O Hanlan, Owen oge Carthy, Cnogher Reardane, alias
Griagh, John Howrane, Hugh Noonane, Shane Kittagh O Donnell, James Gallagher
mac Edmond Dorrogh, Donnogh boy O Gallagher, Terlagh mac Kolgeen, Hugh Bane mac
Brehoune, Donnell oge O Donnell mac Donnell oge, William O Keavine, Bryan mac
Donnogh, Donnogh Fitz John O Heart, Owen O Doghertie, Terlagh mac Brehoune, and
William Gallagher, are fled to the Woods and Mountains, where they stand upon
their keeping, so as they are not answerable or ameasnable to Law, but wilful
contemners of the same. And forasmuch as the Actors of these disorders and
offenses cannot as yet be apprehended, whereby they may be punished by the
ordinary course of Law, whence We might justly be moved, according to the
former usage and custom in this Kingdom in cases of like nature, to cause them
to be forthwith proclaimed Rebels and Traitors; yet in mercy to them, We think
fit hereby to charge and command them upon their duty and allegiance to His
Majesty, that they and every of them do before the First day of February next,
render their persons to any of His Majesty's Justices of the peace, and submit
themselves to His Majesty's Justice to be tried for their offenses according to
the Laws of the Land, wherein if they or any of them do fail, We do hereby
publish and declare, that he or they so failing, are from and immediately after
the said First day of February next, to be called, reputed and taken for
notorious Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, and accordingly to be
prosecuted by all His Majesty's loving and good subjects in all hostile manner.
And We declare further, that whatsoever person or persons shall comfort,
relieve or abet them, or any of them, they are and shall be reputed, deemed and
adjudged Traitors in like degree with the forenamed Traitors and Rebels
themselves, and to be proceeded against according to Law. And We do in His
Majestis Name straightly charge and command all His Majesty's Loyal Subjects,
upon their duty of allegiance to His Majesty, not only to forbear to receive
or relieve the persons aforesaid, or any of them, but also to make diligent
search and enquiry in what place or places the said persons shall from time to
time lurk or be relieved, and by all means possible to prosecute, apprehend and
take the bodies of them, and them to bring or cause to be brought under safe
custody, unto the High Sheriffs of the respective Counties where any of them
shall be apprehended, to be by such Sheriffs kept in strict and safe custody,
till We upon notice thereof shall give further direction concerning them, or
resisting or refusing to be taken, to kill them or any of them. And We do
hereby declare, that whosoever shall after the said First day of February next,
bring unto any Sheriff the body of the said Redmond O Hanlan, Laughlin mac
Redmond O Hanlan, Daniel mac Murphy mac Tirlagh roe O Murphy, Cormuck Raver O
Murphy, Hugh Turr O Murphy, Bryan Moyle O Neale, James Roe, Hugh mac Shane,
Peter Pill, James mac Nicholas O Murphy, Thomas Wilson, Tirlagh mac Patrick
Goam O Hanlan, Owen oge Carthy, Cnogher Reardane alias Griagh, John Howrane,
Hugh Noonane, Shane Kittagh O Donnell, James Gallagher mac Edmond Dorrogh,
Donnogh Boy O Gallagher, Tirlagh mac Kolgen, Hugh Bane mac Brehoune, Donnell
oge O Donnell mac Donnell oge, William O Keavine, Bryan mac Donnogh, Donnogh
Fitz John O Heart, Owen O Doghertie, Tirlagh mac Brehoune, and William
Gallagher, or any of them alive, or kill any of them, and bring his Head to the
Sheriff of the County where he shall be killed, to be by such Sheriff set up in
some public place in that County, shall have for his reward for each person so
brought in, or his Head, Ten pounds, for payment whereof We will give warrant
as occasion shall require; and whosoever of the said proclaimed persons, or any
other, shall after the said first day of February next, apprehend and bring
unto the High Sheriff of the County where such person shall be apprehended, or
resisting, shall kill any of the said Rebels and Traitors particularly named as
aforesaid, he shall, together with his said reward, receive his pardon. And
toward the speedy effecting of this Service, all Commanders of Horse and Foot,
and all other His Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects are to be aiding and
assisting, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 14th. of December, 1674. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin. Canc. Clanbrasill Conway and Kilulta. Massereene.
Kingston. Ca: Dillon. J: Povey. Will: Stewart. Theo: Jones. Char: Meredith.


God save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Book-selelr in Castle-street. 1674.


