DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE LORD LIEUTENANT AND COUNCIL.
Jo. BERKELEY,

WHEREAS Rory mac Randall mac Donnell late of the Barony of Dungannon in the
County of Tyrone, Owen Do mac Donnell of the same, Tool Ballagh mac Donnell
late of Croskevenagh in the Barony and County aforesaid, Ferdarrogh mac Donnell
late of the same, Gorrhy o Cahane late of the Barony aforesaid, Gillespick mac
Donnell late of the said Barony, Bryan Roe o Cahan late of the same, Shane o
Cahan late of the same, Patrick mac Cormick o Hagan late of the Parish of
Ballynaskreene in the County of Londonderry, Patrick o Hagan late of the same,
Shane o Hagan late of the same, Robert Hamilton late of Castle Caulfield in the
County of Tyrone, William Miller late of the Parish of Carinteele in the said
County, Conn mac Neale Oge o Neale mac Art mac Hugh Mergagh o Neale late of the
Parish of Longfield in the County of Tyrone, Thomas mac Gragh late of the
Parish of Dromore in the said County, Bryan mac Donnell Carragh mac Cawell late
of the Parish of Donagh Cavagh in the County of Tyrone, Hugh mac Murchy late of
the Parish of Aghalurgher in the County of Fermannagh, Hugh mac Mahan late of
the Barony of Dartry and County of Monaghan, and Edmond o Moylan late of the
Parish of Ballyneskreen in the County of Londonderry, and their Accomplices had
in the Counties of Monaghan, Antrim, Down, Tyrone and Londonderry, and other
places appeared in Arms against His Majesty's Authority, and several of them
committed Murders, Burglaries, Robberies and Stealthes, besides diverse other
Outrages to the terror and annoyance of His Majesty's Loyal and good
Subjects, and to the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; Upon which
misdemeanors and crim^s being pursued by some of His Majesty's good Subjects,
assisted by some of His Majesty's Army, they the said persons and their
accomplices were fled to the Woods, and Mountains where they stood upon their
Keeping, so as they were not answerable to law, but wilful contemners of the
same: And whereas by Proclamation issued by the late Lord Deputy and Council,
dated the third day of June 1668. for the reasons in the said Proclamation
expressed, the said several persons were charged and commanded upon their
duties of allegiance to His Majesty, that they and every of them, should before
the 24th day of June aforesaid, render their persons to any of His Majesty's
Justices of Peace, and submit themselves to His Majesty's Justice to be tried
for their offenses according to the laws of the land, and that if they, or any
of them should fail therein, it was by the said Proclamation published and
declared, that he or they so failing, and such as should accompany and adhere
to them after the publication of the said Proclamation, and every of them were
from and immediately after the said 24th day of June aforesaid, to be called,
reputed and taken for notorious Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, and
accordingly to be prosecuted by all His Majesty's loving Subjects in all
hostile manner; And it was declared further that whatsoever person or persons
should comfort relieve or abett them, or any of them, or any of their
confederates or adherents, they were and should be reputed, deemed and adjudged
Traitors in like degree with the aforenamed Traitors and Rebels themselves;
And the Lord Deputy and Council did by the said Proclamation in His Majesty's
name straightly charge and command all His Majesty's loyal Subjects upon their
duty of allegiance to His Majesty, not only to forbear to receive or relieve
the said persons, or any of them, or any of their confederates or adherents,
but also to make diligent search and inquiry in what place or places the said
persons or their Confederates should from time to time lurk or be releived,
and by all means possible to prosecute, apprehend and take the bodies of them
and their adherents, and them to bring, or cause to be brought under safe
custody unto the High Sheriffs of the respective Counties where any of them
should be apprehended, to be by such Sheriffs kept in strict and safe custody
till the said Lord Deputy and Council upon notice thereof should give further
direction concerning them, or the said persons resisting and refusing to be
taken to kill them or any of them, And it was by the said Proclamation declared
that whosoever should after the said 24th day of June aforesaid bring unto any
Sheriff the body of any of the said persons alive, or kill any of them, and
bring his head to the Sheriff of the County where he should be killed, to be by
any such Sheriff set up in some public place in that County should have for
his reward for each person so brought in or his head Ten pounds to be paid him
by such Sheriff, and to be allowed to such Sheriff upon his Account to be
rendered in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and that whosoever of the
accomplices of the said proclaimed persons should after the said 24th day of June
aforesaid apprehend or kill as aforesaid any of the said Rebels and Traitors
particularly named, he should together with the said reward receive his pardon.

And whereas our very good Lord William Lord Uice-count Charlemont by authority
from the late Lord Lieutenant and Council did take into His Majesty's
protection Bryan o Cane which we conceive to be the said Bryan Roe o Cahan
named in the said Proclamation; We do reenforce the said Proclamation, as to
all the said proclaimed persons, excepting the said Bryan o Cane, protected by
the said Lord Uice-count Charlemont, and excepting Tool Ballagh mac Donnell
who is since dead, Bryan mac Donnell Carragh mac Cawell who is since killed,
Gory o Cahan who is in prison at Dungannon, and Robert Hamilton who has been
since hanged: And we do further declare that whereas the reward mentioned in
the said Proclamation was Ten pounds for every of the said persons to be
brought in or killed as aforesaid; Now it is our pleasure, and we do hereby
publish and declare that in stead of the said Ten pounds, the reward shall be
Twenty pounds. And whereas we are now informed that Kedagh Backa o Heart of the
County of Sligoe, Patrick Cambell of the County of Mayo, Edmond mac Gwire,
Connor mac Loghlin, James o Farrell, Cormock o Canane alias o Coonan, Randall
mac Donell of the County of Leitrim, and Oliver Brannagh and Shane mac Gragh
are Tories that Robb spoil and annoy His Majesty's good Subjects, we do
hereby charge and command them upon their duty of Allegiance to His Majesty,
that they and every of them do before the 24th day of May next render their
persons to any of His Majesty's Justices of Peace, and submit themselves to His
Majesty's Justice to be tried for their offenses, according to the laws of the
land, wherein if they or any of them shall fail, we do hereby publish and
declare that he or they so faileing, and such as shall accompany, and adhere to
them after the publication of this proclamation, and every of them are from and
immediately after the said 24th day of May to be called, reputed and taken for
notorious Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, and accordingly to be
prosecuted by all His Majesty's loving and good Subjects in all hostile manner;
And we declare further that whatsoever person or persons shall comfort relieve
or abett them, or any of them, or any of their confederates or adherents, they
are and shall be reputed, deemed and adjudged Traitors in like degree with the
aforenamed Traitors and Rebels themselves; And we do in His Majesty's name
straightly charge and command all His Majesty's loyal Subjects upon their duty
of allegiance to His Majesty, not only to forbear to receive or relieve them
the said Kedagh Backa o Heart Patrick Cambell Edmond mac Gwire, Connor mac
Loghlin, James o Farrell, Cormock o Cunan alias o Coonan, Randall mac Donell,
Oliver Brannagh and Shane mac Gragh or any of them, or any of their
confederates or adherents, but also to make diligent search and inquiry in
what place or places they the said last named persons or their Confederates
shall from time to time lurk or be releived, and by all means possible to
prosecute, apprehend and take the bodies of them and their adherents, and them
to bring, or cause to be brought under safe custody unto the High Sheriffs of
the respective Counties where any of them shall be apprehended, to be by such
Sheriffs kept in strict and safe custody till we upon notice thereof shall
give further direction concerning them, or resisting or refusing to be taken to
kill them or any of them, And we do hereby declared that whosoever shall after
the said 24th day of May next bring unto any Sheriff the body of the said
Kedagh Backa o Heart, Patrick Cambell, Edmond mac Gwire, Connor mac Loghlin,
James o Farrell, Cormack o Cunan alias o Coonan, Randall mac Donell,, Oliver
Brannagh and Shane mac Gragh, or any of them alive, or kill any of them, and
bring his head to the Sheriff of the County where he shall be killed, (to be by
such Sheriff set up in some public place in that County) shall have for his
reward for each person so brought in or his head Twenty pounds and whosoever of
the accomplices of the said proclaimed persons shall after the said 24th day of
May next apprehend or kill as aforesaid any of the said Rebels and Traitors
particularly named, he shall together with the said reward receive his pardon.

And whereas by the said former Proclamation the Sheriff was to pay the said
Reward of Ten pounds mentioned in the said former Proclamation; Now to make the
payment more certain and speedy to the persons deserveing it, we do hereby
declare that the Twenty pounds hereby promised as a Reward for bringing in or
killing any of the said formerly declared Rebels, or any of the now declared
Rebels shall be paid in manner following, viz. For such of the said Rebels as
shall be brought in or killed in the Province of Ulster that the same shall be
paid by our very good Lords the Earl of Donegall, or the Lord Uice-Count
Charlemont, he or they first receiving Certificate under the hand of the
Sheriff of the County where the said Service shall be performed, certifying the
Service performed and by whom, and when, And for such of the said Rebels as
shall be brought in or killed in the Province of Connaght that the same shall
be paid by our very good Lord the Lord Kingston Lord President of Connaght,
upon Certificate as aforesaid under the hand of the Sheriff of the County where
the service shall be performed, certifying the service performed and by whom,
and when, and the moneys so to be issued by the said Earl of Donegall or Lord
Uice-Count Charlemont, or Lord Kingston shall be repaid unto them out of His
Majesty's Treasure, for payment whereof we shall give Warrant as occasion
shall require, And toward the speedy effecting of this service, all Commanders
and Officers of Horse and Foot, and all other His Majesty's Officers and
Loving Subjects are to be aiding and assisting as they and every of them will
answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the twentieth ninth day of April
1670. Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Desmond. Arran. R Ranelagh. R.
lePower. R. Coote. R. Booth. Rob. Byron. Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbess. Robert
Forth. Theo. Jones. Tho. Pigott.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook, in Castlestreet, 1670.


