DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS the late horrid Plot and Conspiracy of diverse Priests and Jesuits, and
other Papists, against His Majesty's Sacred Person, and for the Subversion of
the Protestant Religion and his Majesty's Government, has been so far
discovered, that the said Effects thereof have by his Majesty's care and the
blessing of Almighty God, been hitherto prevented, and the most Notorio^s
Offenders therein brought to condign punishment in England, or are secured, or
fled from Justice. And whereas nothing would more conduce to the lasting safety
of his Majesty, his Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion therein Established,
then that there might be a full and perfect Discovery of the said Conspiracy;
and it is to be suspected, That many persons contrary to the Duty of their
Allegiance, do still conceal their Knowledge of the said Plot, and the
Conspirators therein, presuming that at any time hereafter (though never so
late) when they shall offer a Discovery, they may obtain His Majesty's Pardon
for all their offenses. NOW for the more speedy and full discovery of the said
Conspiracy, and to deter all persons whatsoever from concealing any longer
their knowledge thereof. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council by his Majesty's
Commands, do by this our Proclamation, strictly require and Command all and
every person and persons whatsoever within this Kingdom of Ireland, who know,
or can make discovery of any person or persons engaged in the said Conspiracy,
or of any matter or circumstance relating thereunto, to discover and make known
the same to Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council, or his Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State, or to the Lord Chief Justice, or one of the Justices of the
Court of Kings Bench within this Kingdom, before the last day of February next;
His Majesty having declared, that after that time his Pardon is not to be
Expected for any such Treasons or misprisions of Treason.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 10th, day of December, 1679. Mich.
Armach. C. Arran. Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen. Midensis. R. Coote.
To. Fitzgerald. Ca: ^illon. Char. Meredith. To. Booth. John Keating. Jo.
Davys. Theo. Jones. Wm. Flower Tho: Newcomen.

God save the King.
Dublin, Printed By Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers; to the King's most
Excellent Majesty and are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesty's
Printinghouse, in Skinner-Row.


