C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS by our Proclamation of the fifteenth day of August last, concerning
the' due payment of Rents, Quit-rents, and all other Moneys payable to His
Majesty, We gave such premonition to all persons concerned of the dangers that
the Failers therein would incur, as we well hoped would have freed us from
the necessity of exercising the utmost rigor against them which we have
forborn^. (...) treasure could by any means be provided for the Army and Civil
List, which in great part has been supplied out of England by His Majesty's
Care and Tenderness to His Subjects of this Kingdom; but finding that our
Lenity which should have quickened Defaulters, has rather made them
Presumptuous in detaining his Majesty's Dues, beyond what was adventured in the
late times of Usurpation, when His Majesty's Subjects lay under heavier Burdens
and Taxes Quarterly, than they do now in the whole Year; And Collectors,
Receivers and Accountants in most Counties to fail in their payments and
accounts, by means whereof the Army is now become near three months in arrear
since the landing of Us the Lord Lieutenant in this Kingdom, though there be
sufficent due to his Majesty to discharge the same. And We the Lord Lieutenant
intending that the Army shall shortly take the Field and continue abroad much
of the Summer, To the end there may be a timely provision for the Army, and all
burthening His Majesty's Subjects by Billet or freequarter prevented, and the
Civil List duly satisfied for the carrying on the Administration of Civil
Justice:

We do hereby declare that if any person or persons shall fail in payment of
their Easter Rents, quit-Rents with all Arrears of Rent and other moneys due
and payable by them at the receipt of the Exchequer, at or before the last day
of Easter Term next, or if any Farmer by Inland Excise or any person
accountable for any part of the duty of Excise, or New Impost, Customs,
Subsidies, Compositions, the money due for Fire Hearths, places used for
fireing and stoves, or other sums of money, shall fail to account for and make
due payment of what they are respectively chargeable with, at the days and
times whereon the same are or shall be due and payable, and at furthest before
the end of the said Easter Term for what shall be by that time due, and for
what shall thence forth grow due or payable at the days and times to which they
are obliged or shall be appointed by our very good Lord Arthur Earl of
Anglesey, His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer and Receiver General, or the Court of
Exchequer, they must expect, that beside the observation which we shall make of
the disaffection of such as by withholding his Majesty's Dues, do, as much as
in them lies, distress the Army and Government, they must expect the strictest
and most coercive course shall be taken with such, by sending Pursivants for
them, taking Distresses and otherwise. And We do hereby further Declare, that
we shall require from time to time from the said Vice-treasurer an account of
the vigorous Execution of this our Proclamation, to whom we shall also give
Assistance by the power of this Board, as we shall find there is occasion, and
take order for the displacing and punishing such Officers, Collectors and
others as shall be found Transgressors of their Duty and this our Proclamation.

And to the end all his Majesty's Subjects whom it may concern may take notice
hereof, and yield due and undelayed obedience thereunto, We do require the
principal Officers of every City and Town Corporate, and the High Sheriff of
every County to cause this Proclamation to be published and fixed up publicly
in the principal Shire-towns, and also at the said Sheriffs County-Courts, and
in all Cities and Market Towns, and other Public places, and parts of their
Counties, immediately after receipt thereof, and to give an account to this
Board of their so doing, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the tenth Day of April, 1663. Jo.
Armachanus. Mau. Eustace Canc. Ja. Dublin. Mount Alexander. Anglesey.
Massereene. R. Coote. Santry. Hen. Tichborne. Jo. Bysse. J. Temple, Paul Davis.
Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbes. Robert Forth. Ja. Ware.


DVBLIN, Printed by JOHN CROOK, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by SAMUEL DANCER, next door to the Bear and Ragged Staff in
Castl^stre^^, 166^.


