CR
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS by Proclamation, dated the Eighteenth of May, One thousand six hundred
seventy four, We did for the reasons therein expressed, amongst other things
therein set forth, inhibit the transportation of several sorts of Corn and
Grain mentioned in the said Proclamation, until Michaelmas then next following;
and finding that the prices of Corn do still continue very great, and that the
stock and store of all sorts of Grain is much lessened, by means whereof great
scarcity may ensue, unless the said restraint of the exportation thereof be
renewed for some longer time. We the Lord Lieutenant and Council, do therefore
hereby in His Majesty's Name, strictly charge and command all manner of persons
whatso^ver, that they do from henceforth, and until Easter next, forbear to
ship, ^^rry, or transport any Wheat, Barley, Rye, Bare, Oats, Pease, Pulse,
Meslin, or any sort of Malt or Meal out of this Realm, to any other place
whatsoever beyond the Seas, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.
And We require all His Majesty's Officers in the several and respective Ports
of this Kingdom, and the Farmers of the Great Branch of His Majesty's Revenue,
that they do seiz all such Grain, Malt, or Meal, as they shall find to be
shipped after the date of this Our Proclamation, and before Easter next, with
intent to export the same, contrary to the true meaning hereof.

And We do hereby farther require, and in His Majesty's Name straightly charge
and command all Country-Farmers and Corn masters, and all such who trade or
deal in the buying and selling of Corn, and have by them any stores of Wheat,
Barley, Rye, Beans, Oats, Pease, Pulse, or any other sort of Grain, Malt or
Meal, that they do bring, or cause to be brought such a competent part and
portion thereof into the public open Markets every Market Day weekly, as may
supply the Markets with Corn, and furnish the poor with Bread at such Rates as
the Markets shall afford.

And We do charge and command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Portreeves,
Magistrates, and all Officers whatsoever, in the several and respective Cities
and Towns Corporate of this Kingdom, that they do in their several places and
Offices make diligent search, and strict inquiry after such as are Ingrossers,
Forestallers, and Regraters within any their Cities, Liberties, or Towns
Corporate of this Kingdom, and cause them to be punished and proceeded against
according to Law. And that all His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the
several and respective Counties of this Kingdom, do in their several and
respective Counties Baronies, Parishes, and places, inquire after and find such
out as do ingross and hoard up Corn, Grain, Malt or Meal, to inhance the price
thereof, and shall not bring the same, or send competent portions thereof,
according to this Our Proclamation, every Market day weekly, into the public
open Markets, there to be sold at such rates as the Market shall afford, and
that they do advertise Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council thereof, with all
convenient speed, that thereupon such proceedings may be had against such
ill-affected persons, as shall be according to Justice, and the Laws of this
Kingdom, which we shall take special care shall be strictly put in execution
against so evil doers.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 14th. of December, 1674. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin. Canc. Conway and Kilulta Massereene. Hen: Midensis.
Ca: Dillon. J: Pove. Will: Stewart. Theo: Jones Char: Meredith.

God save the King.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Book seller in Castle street. 1674.


