royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROITBY THE
Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL
ORMONDE,

WHEREAS by occasion of the backwardness of many of His Majesty's Tenants
farmers and debtors in payment of the Rents, and other debts, due and payable
by them to His Majesty, there have been of late assignments issued out for
payment of some of his Majesty's Rents, and other debts due and payable to him;
And whereas it is observed that the way and manner of Raising the moneys upon
those assignments has been the occasion of diverse inconveniences to the
people; We therefore being desirous as far as possible we may, to prevent for
the future all such inconveniences, do to that end intend, that His Majesty's
Rents and other debts due and to be due and payable to him, shall be duly paid
into the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, as in former times before the late
Rebellion was accustomed, that so the civil and military lists may be duly
paid. And we do hereby declare that if any person or persons shall hereafter
fail in payment of their Michaelmas Rents, Quit Rents, with all arrears of
Rents and other moneys then due and payable by them, at the Receipt of the
Exchequer, at or before the last day of Michaelmas term yearly: or shall
hereafter fail in payment of their Easter Rents, Quit Rents, with all arrears
of Rents and other moneys then due and payable by them, at the Receipt of the
Exchequer, at or before the last day of Easter term yearly, or if any Farmer
of the Inland Excize or any person accomptable for any part of the duty of
Excize or new Impost, Customs, Subsidies, Compositions, the money due for fire
hearths, places used for firing and stoves: or other sums of money, shall fail
to make due payment of what they are or shall be respectively chargeable with,
at the days and times whereon the same are or shall be due and payable, they
must expect the strictest and most coercive course to be taken with such from
time to time by sending Pursuivants for them taking distresses and otherwise;
And we do hereby further declare that we shall require from time to time from
the Vice-Treasurer or his deputy Receiver General an account of the vigorous
execution of this our proclamation, to whom we shall also give assistance, by
the authority of this Board, from time to time as we shall find there is or
shall be occasion, and take order for the displacing and punishing such
Officers and others, as shall be found to fail in their duty. And to the end
all His Majesty's Subjects whom it may concern may take notice hereof, and
yield due and undelayed obedience thereunto; We do require the principal
Officers of every City and Town Corporat, and the high Sheriff of every County,
to cause this Proclamation to be published and fixed up publicly in the
principal their Towns, and also at the said Sheriffs County Courts, and in all
Cities and market Towns and other publicque places and parts of their Counties,
immediately after Receipt thereof and to give an Account to this Board of their
so doing, as they will Answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Castle of Kilkenny the 11th day of September 1667. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Charlemont. Kingston. Edw. Smythe. Jo. Bysse.
J. Temple. Rob. Byron. Paul Davys. Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbess. Edw. Massy.

Dublin, printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castle-street, 1667.


