DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant General AND General Governor OF IRELAND.
ESSEX,

WHereas we are Authorized and Required by His Majesty's Letters, bearing date
the 13th. day of February, 1676, to give such further Rules and Directions for
the better disposing and Settling the remaining part of the security of the
Commissioned Officers which served his Majesty in the wars of Ireland, before
the fifth of June, 1649. As we shall see necessary and conductng to the better
satisfaction of that interest. We have thought fit to give the following Rules
to His Majesty's Commissioners appointed for settling the undisposed part of the
said security.

First, That in case the Possessor desires to Compound for the Fee of any
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, and it does not appear (otherwise than by
his own discovery) that the Kings is Entitled to the same, that the Possessor
be Admitted to have His Majesty's Title, and be Discharged of the mean Profits,
paying one third part of the value of the said Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, the same to be valued, viz. the Inheritance of Lands at ten
Years Purchase of clear Yearly value, over and above the Quite, Rent, and of
Houses, and other Hereditaments, at eight Years purchase at the like clear
yearly value.

Secondly, That where there is an Incombrance, and the Possessor desires the
Preemption, and being his own discovery, there the inheritance of Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments to be valued as aforesaid, and the Encumbrance
being deducted, the Possessor to pay, viz. if an Encumbrance of money by
Mortgage or otherwise upon Lands or Houses, one third of the Remain of the
value, and if an Encumbrance by Lease for Term of years, the Lease to be
indifferently valued, and to pay one third of that value after deduction of the
Ineumbrance as aforesaid; And if the Encumbrance be from a Nocent, to an
Innocent, in which case the Money is only forfeited, a third part of the Money.

Thirdly, That where the possessor desires to Compound for the Fee of any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, and by the help of a discoverer the Little
already appears, in such case the Discoverer using first satisfied by the
Possessor, according to former Rules, the Possessor to pay one moiety of the
Remain according to the values aforesaid, yet no Possessor to have any benefit
of this Rule, who shall not within twenty days next after notice or warning
given him by the said Commissioners, appear before them and accept thereof,
without further suit or trouble.

Fourthly, Where the Possessor has built from the ground since November, 1660.
and himself making discovery, to Pay Ten years Purchase according to the value
of the ground as the same shall appear to be worth before the said
Improvements, and where there was any former building, upon the ground which
has been since pulled down, and New built or repaired, the said Possessor to
pay eight years purchase, according to the value of the said former building,

And we do hereby lastly order and Declare, that in all Certificates hereafter
to be passed by the aforesaid Commissioners of any Mortgaged or Encumbered
houses or Lands within the security of the said Commissioned Officers, to any
person who now is or hereafter shall be entitled to the Preemption of the
same, or that shall by Canting or giving most, come to have the Inheritance,
and Fee thereof absolutely adjudged or decreed to him, The said Commissioners
to thereupon ascertain and reserve the Quitrents payable thereout to His
Majesty, according to such proportion as the whole value of the said
Respective Houses or Lands at the rate of Ten years Purchase, shall appear to
them to exceed the unforfeiced Encumbrances thereupon, so that if such Houses
or Lands shall be of more value and near, but not a full fourth part more than
such unforfeited Encumbrances thereupon, in such case only one fourth part of
the Quitrent payable by the Acts of Settlement and Explanation shall be
Reserved to His Majesty out of such Houses or Lands, And so in like manner and
proportion where the value of such Houses or Lands shall appear in a greater or
less Proportion to exceed such unforfeited Encumbrances thereupon, Yet so as
the Rents that shall be so reserved, be not in any case less than one Fifth
Part of the nex^t Quitrents payable to His Majesty out of such Lands by the
said Arts, and that the said Rents so to be reserved, be also in all cases
something more than the Rent payable to his Majesty out of such Lands in the
year 1641. And that upon passing such Certificate, the Rents therein to be
reserved be made payable to his Majesty from the Date of such Certificate, And
whereas the present Farmers of his Majesty's Revenue, have declared their
willingness and readiness to consent and agree to the moderation and abatement
of Quitrents according to the proportion aforesaid, in all cases where the
present Proprietor or Possessor of and Mortgaged or Encumbered Lands or Houses,
within the security of the forty nine Officers, shall be willing to compound
and agree for the preemption or Redemption of the Mortgages and Encumbrances
thereon, and pass Letters Patents thereof with all convenient speed, We do
hereby further order, that in all such cases the said Commissioners do acquaint
the said Farmers of his Majesty's Revenue of such persons as they shall
thereunto Nominate or appoint, with the proceedings as for what Relates to the
Quitrent which from time to time shall be made by them with any such Proprietor
or possessor, and more especially with the value the said Commissioners shall
put upon such lands, in order to the ascertaining the Rent to be reserved
thereout, to the end the said Farmers, or the persons thereunto appointed by
them being satisfied therein, may agree and consent thereunto, or otherwise
declare rnd offer their reasons to the contrary, or causes why they do not
Consent. And in case any Difference shall happen between the said Farmers and
the said Commissioners concerning the valuation of such houses or lands, or the
due proportioning of the said Quitrents, the same is as well by the said
Farmers, or those appointed by them, as by the said Commissioners to be
certified or Represented to the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, to be finally settled and
determined, as upon due Consideration and Examination of the matter in
difference shall be by him found reasonable and just.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 16th. day of August, in the 29th.
year of His Majesty's Reign, 1677. W. Ellis.
God save the King.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Caste-street. 1677.


