DIEV ET MON DROIT (...) QVI (...) royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

Whereas by two several Proclamation, the one bearing date the 27th of October
in the year 1673; and the other bearing date the 27th day of April in the year
1674. both issued from this Board according to his Majesty's special Commands;
All Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Abbots, and all others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by any authority derided from the Pope
or See of Rome in this Kingdom, And also all Regular Priests were required by
certain days in the said several Proclamations Limited, to depart out of this
H^s Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland. And it was thereby also required and
Commanded that all Convents, Seminaries, Fryeries Nunneries and Popish Schools
in this Kingdom should be forthwith dissolded and suppressed.

And whereas We are Informed, that notwithstanding the said several
Proclamations, diverse of the said Titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops,
Vicars-General, Abbots, and others exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
authority derived from the Pope or See of Rome, and also diverse Jesuits and
other Regular Priests refusing to give obedience thereunto, do remain still in
this Kingdom; And that also several opish Societies, Convents, Seminaries,
Fryeries, Nunneries and Popish Schools are still kept up in this Kingdom in
Contempt of His Majesty's authority, and of the Laws of this Realm. So that We
might justly cause the said several persons, who contrary to the said
Proclamations do still continue in this Kingdom, to be immediately seized upon,
secured and proceeded against according to their demerits for such their wilful
disobedience; and whereas upon information given upon oath before the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council in England, touching a dangerous
Conspiracy against the life of his Sacred Majesty, and for the subversion of
the Government. It has been testified that diverse particulars of pernicious
consequence have been lately contrived and transacted in this Kingdom of
Ireland by Jesuits and others of the opish Clergy, exercising Jurisdiction in
this Kingdom by authority from the Pope or See of Rome. Whereupon His Majesty
has lately been pleased to signify His Royal will and pleasure, that We the
Lord Lieutenant should provide such speedy remedies for the obstruction of
those evils informed of, as We in Our wisdom shall think fit, and in
particular, that We should use effectual means ^o compel all the titular
Bishops, and other Dignitaries of the Church of Rome, to depart this Kingdom
with all possible speed.

We the Lord Lieutenant and Council therefore do by this Our Proclamation in
His Majesty's Name, straightly charge and Command all Titular Popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Vitars-General, Abbots and other Dignitaries of the
Church of Rome, and all others exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or who
have exercised any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Kingdom by any authority
derived from the Pope or See of Rome, and also all Jesuits and other regular
Priests, that they do by or before the twentieth day of November next, depart
out of this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland; and that all Popish Societies,
Convents, Seminaries, Fryeries, Nunneries and Popish Schools do forthwith
dissolve and separate themselves, and be henceforth utterly suppressed; And We
do expressly forbid and prohibit all and every His Majesty's Subjects within
this Realm, to receive, harbor or relieve any of the said Titular Popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Abbots, Dignitaries, Jesuits, Regular
Priests, or any of the persons aforesaid after the time hereby Limited for
their departure out of this Realm. And We do also forbid and prohibit all
manner of persons to frequent, resort unto, keep up, or by any ways support or
maintain any such Societies, Convents, Seminaries, Fryriels, Nunneries, or
Popish Schools in this Kingdom, as they weil answer the Contrary at their
perils.

And We do hereby declare and Publish, that if any of the said Titular Popish
Archbishops, Bishops, or other Persons hereby Com^^^^^^ed (...) depart out of
this Kingdom, shall at any time before t^^ (...) ^^^tieth day of November next,
resort to any Port-Town of (...) and there declare to the Chief Magistrate or
Officer of the (...) or Port that he is a person included within this Our
Proclamation, and that he is there to take shipping for his passage, they shall
suffer him or them quietly to depart, and shall see them shipped and sent away
for foreign parts, and give them their furtherance for their departure.

And We do further in His Majesty's Name straightly charge and command all and
every the Mayors, Sovereigns, Bayliffes, Portrives, and all other chief
Magistrates and officers of the several and respective Cities and Towns
Corporate of this Kingdom, and all and every the Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs, Constables, and all other His Majesty's good and Loyal Subjects, that
they be more diligent and active then formerly they have been, in putting these
commands in execution, upon pain of His Majesty's High Displeasure, and that
they and every of them from and immediately after the said twentieth day of
November next, do make strict and diligent search and enquiry within the
several and respective Cities, Towns Corporate, Liberties, Countyes, Baronies,
Parishes and places within their several Jurisdictions, for and after all such
titular Popish Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-General, Abbots, Dignitaries, and
all others exercising, or who have exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
this Kingdom by any authority derived from the Pope or See of Rome, and also
for and after all Jesuits and other regular priests, who at any time after the
said twentieth day of November next, shall continue, remain, or abide in this
Kingdom, or shall return or come into this Kingdom; And also for and after all
and every the Receivers, Relievers and harbourers of them, or any of them; And
further, that they take special care that all Societies, Convents, Seminaries,
Fryeries, Nunneries, and Popish Schools within this Kingdom, be immediately
dissolved and utterly suppressed, and that upon discovery of any such titular
Popish Archbishops, Bishops, or other persons hereby required to depart out of
this Realm, that they do forthwith apprehend them, and commit them, and every
of them into safe custody, and Certify Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council
thereof, with all convenient speed, and do also forthwith return unto Us the
names of all their Receivers, relievers and harbourers, and do take special
care that the said persons be forthwith prosecuted for their Contempt, and
proceeded against according to the Laws of this Kingdom,

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 16th. day of Octobor. 1678. Mich:
Dublin. Canc. Donegall. Blesinton. Lainsborough. Hen: Midensis. To:
Fitzgerald. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. To: Booth. J: Davys. John Cole. W:
Flowr. Mau: Eustace Tho: Newcomen.


Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Mary Crook at His Majesty's Printing House in
Skinner-Row. 1678.


