BY THE Lord Lieutenant General, AND General Governor OF IRELAND.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS Our very good Lord Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh and his Partners by
their contract with His Majesty passed under the Great Seal of England, and
bearing date the 24th day of August, in the 23th year of His Majesty's Reign,
did Covenant and grant to and with His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; That
they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, and his Partners would within the
space of four years to commence from the Twenty fifth day of December, which
was in the year 1671. fully discharge, satisfy and pay, or cause to be fully
discharged, satisfied and paid all and every the Arrears of pay, which at or
upon the 25th day of December in the year 1670. were behind and unpaid to any
person or persons comprehended in the Martial List according to the
Establishment; And also all Arrears of pay, wages, sallary or pention then due
to any persons comprehended within the civil List according to the said
Establishment, and also all Arrears whatsoever then due to His Majesty's Train
of Artillery in this Kingdom, and would cause due satisfaction and payment to
be made thereof within the time aforesaid, by even and equal portions in good
lawful and current English money, or so much lawful current money of Ireland,
as should be equivalent in Ireland to English money, without any composition,
defalcation, or other deduction whatsoever (the usual fees and cheques only
excepted) The first payment whereof was to begin at or before the 24th day of
December last past, and that His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors should be
acquitted and discharged thereof, so as such Arrears of pay then due upon the
Military Lists, and to be satisfied within the time, and according to the
proportions aforesaid, do not in the whole exceed the sum of One hundred thirty
nine thousand one pounds, Eleven shillings and four pence. Deducting the Fees
and Cheques, and so as the Arrears then due on that civil List, do not in the
whole exceed the sum of Four thousand pounds, and so as the Arrears then due to
the Train of Artillery do not in the whole exceed the sum of One thousand one
hundred forty seven pounds.

And whereas His Majesty having by his said Letters Patents covenanted, That
the said contract should be construed, adjudged, deemed and taken most
favorably and beneficially for the said Lord Ranelagh and his Partners, and
for the better enabling them to execute and perform their undertaking, and some
doubts arising concerning the said words (by even and equal portions) His
Majesty by His Letters bearing date the 26th day of November last to us
directed, was graciously pleased upon consideration thereof had before the then
Lord Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury in England, to order and declare
that the Arrears payable by the said clause, should be discharged, satisfied
and paid by twelve even and equal portions, The first portion, whereof was to
have been paid and satisfied at or before the 24th of December last past, and
so every three Calendar Months, one more till the whole should be discharged.

And His Majesty did by His said Letters Declare His further pleasure, That we
should give effectual Order for the stateing of what debts are due from the
several Officers and Soldiers concerned in the said Arrear in their respective
Quarters, that so due care may be taken for the satisfying thereof.

And whereas the said Months pay of the said Arrears, which was payable on the
24th day of December last, cannot well be paid until the said Debts be stated
and ascertained. We do therefore hereby publish and declare, That all and every
person and persons claiming any Debt or Debts to be due unto them, from any
Officers or Soldiers of the standing Troops or Companies of His Majesty's Army
now in Ireland, which have been contracted between the 28th of July in the year
1662, and the 25th day of March in the year 1670. For necessary provisions for
themselves or their Horses within their respective Quarters, shall and may by
themselves, or their Agents make proof of their said Debts before the first day
of April next, before the Commissioned Officers commanding in chief each Troop,
or Company in their several and respective Quarters, and shall also cause the
said Debts to be certified into the Office of His Majesty's Commissary General
of the Musters at Dublin, under the hands of such Commissioned Officers, and
also under the hands of the chief Magistrate of the City or Town where they are
now Quartered, or in case there be no such chief Magistrate, under the hand of
some Justice of Peace in the County where such City or Town is situated,
before the Twentieth day of April next.

And whereas several Troops and Companies have been lately either Disbanded or
Transported into England, by reason whereof the persons concerned in such
Debts, know not how or where to apply themselves to the chief Commissioned
Officers of such Troops and Companies; We do hereby further publish and
declare, That all and every person and persons to whom any such Debts are due
and owing from any Officers or Soldiers of the said Troops or Companies so
Disbanded or Transported into England, do by themselves or their Agents
sometime before the said Twentieth day of April next, make proof of their said
Debts before Sir James Cuff Knight, Joseph Dean, Griffith Bodurda, Abraham
Yarner Esquiers, and Richard Barry Gent. or before any two of them at the
Office of His Majesty's Commissary General of the Musters at Dublin. And we do
hereby empower and requier the chief Commissioned Officer residing with each
Troop or Company now of His Majesty's Army in this Kingdom, and also the
aforesaid Sir James Cuff, Joseph Dean, Griffith Bodurda, Abraham Yarner, and
Richard Barry, or any two of them as aforesaid, to examine all such Debts as
are claimed from any Officers or Soldiers, which at any time from the 28th of
July 1662. until the 25th day of December in the year 1670. were of His
Majesty's Army in Ireland, and which have grown due within the time aforesaid,
for necessary provisions for themselves or their Horses in their respective
Quarters, and to give Certificates thereof unto the person or persons unto whom
the said Debts shall appear to be due, and to return Duplicates thereof into
the Office of the said Commissary General of the Musters in Dublin, on or
before the said Twentieth day of April next ensuing, To the end that effectual
course may be taken for the satisfaction of the said Debts, in such manner, and
at such times, and (...) as the said Arrears due to the said Officers and
Soldiers shall become due and payable, and to be satisfied as aforesaid.

And whereas we are informed, That although His Majesty has taken care that
the said Twelve months Arrear shall be satisfied, and the said Lord Viscount
Ranelagh and his Partners, are and shall be ready to pay the same, at the days
and times above limited, according to their contract without any Composition,
Defalcation, or other Deduction (the usual Fees and Cheques only excepted.)
Yet some persons taking advantage of the necessities of the Officers and
Soldiers to whom the said Arrears are due, have presumed to compound with some
of them for the same, at small and inconsiderable Rates, thereby designing to
make unreasonable advantages to themselves; we do hereby declare, That no such
Compositions made with any such Officers or Soldiers for their said Arrears
shall be allowed of, but care shall be taken, that the persons who have made
any such Compositions with any such Officers or Soldiers shall be satisfied
their money, if any they have really paid, thereupon out of the first moneys of
the said Arrears, that shall be due and payable to such Officers and Soldiers,
after the Debts due from them in their respective Quarters shall be satisfied.
And we do hereby strictly charge and Command all Officers and Soldiers to whom
the said Arrears are due, That they do forbear hereafter making any such
Compositions for their said Arrears, but that they do patiently expect their
satisfaction thereof, at such times as His Majesty has appointed for the same.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the Eighteenth day of February, 1672.
The 25th the year of His Majesty's Reign. Hen: Ford.
GOD save the KING.
Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild, in Castle-street, 1672.


