blazon or coat of armsBY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL:
ESSEX.

WHEREAS Diverse Disloyal Persons, Commonly called Tories, have of Late, very
much Infested several Counties of this Kingdom And have Committed diverse
Robberies, Burglaries, and Murders, upon His Majestes good Subjects, Whereunto
(as We are Informed) they have been Encourraged, by reason of Protections, that
have been of Late, too Frequently granted, to Some of them, by some Persons,
having or Pretending Authority, from Us the Lord Lieutenant, to grant the same,
which Protections have been often much abused by those who have obtained the
same, And also, by reason, that such Persons, who have Harbored, Concealed, or
Releved, the said Tories, have not been so strictly Enquired after, Procecuted,
and Punished, as they ought to have been; For Remedy Whereof. We have thought
Fit hereby, to Publish, and Declare, that no person or persons who now have or
pretend to have any power or Authority from the Lord Lieutenant or Lord
Lieutenant and Council, of this Kingdom, to grant Protections shall from and
after the Twenty Fourth day of this instant June, grant any Protections, to any
Robbers, or Tories, And that all Protections, which after the said Twenty
Fourth day of June shall be so granted, to any such Robbers or Tories, by
virtue of any such authority, shall be of no force, validity or security, to
the persons, to whom the same shall be granted.

Provided always, and we do hereby farther declare, that such protections, as
have been already granted, or shall be granted, before the said Twenty Fourth
day of this instant June, to any such Robbers or Tories, by any person or
persons having Authority from Us the Lord Lieutenant, or the Lord Lieutenant
and Council of this Kingdom, to grant the same, shall continue of force, for
such time, as the same have been, or shall be so granted: and no longer, And in
case any person or persons, that now are, or shall be, before the said Twenty
Fourth day of this instant June protected thereby shall in respect of any
services already done, or hereafter to be done by them; expect to have their
protections continued to them, for any longer time, or to be pardoned for their
offenses heretofore committed by them, They are to make their timely
applications herein, to Us the Lord Lieutenant for the same.

And We do hereby strictly Charge and Require the High Sheriffs of the
respective Counties, wherein any such Robbers or Tories now are, or hereafter
shall be, or wherein any such Murders, Robberies or Burglaries shall be
Committed, That they do from time to time as there shall be occasion, raise the
power of the said respective Counties, for the prosecuting, apprehending, and
bringing to Justice all such Robbers and Tories, And that the Justices of the
Peace of the said respective Counties be aiding and assisting to the said High
Sheriffs herein, And do also cause examinations to be forthwith taken,
concerning such Murders, Robberies and Stealths, as have been, or shall be,
committed in the said respective Counties, to the end that the persons, who
upon taking such examinations, shall appear to be guilty thereof, may be
indicted for their said Offenses, and Outlawed for the same, in case they
shall refuse to render themselves, and abide their Trials, And that they do
also strictly, and particularly, enquire after, all such persons, as do or
shall at any time, conceal, relieve, or harbor the said Robbers or Tories, or
shall refuse or neglect to give their assistance, toward the taking, following
or apprehending of them, and to cause such persons to be bound over to the next
Assizes, to be prosecuted for their said Offenses, to the end they may be there
proceeded against, and severely punished according to their demerrits, And
toward the speedy effecting of this Service, all Commanders of Horse and Foot
and all other his Majesty's Officers and Loving Subjects are to be aiding and
assisting as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 10th day of June. 1675. Ja:
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Canc. Hen: Midensis. R: Coote. Heugh Gleneully. Art:
Forbese. Ca: Dillon. Jo. Bysse. Hans Hammilton. Will: Stewart. Char: Meredith.

GOD save the KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to besold by Joseph Wild Book seller in Castle-street. 1675.


