DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE,

WHereas We have been necessarily occasioned to take especial notice, That His
Majesty's Revenue arising by Hearths, Firing places and Stoves within this
Kingdom, has of late become very much impaired, and still continues deeply in
arrear, and unsatisfied into His Majesty's Exchequer, partly through the great
discouragement and obstructions given unto His Majesty's Officers, and their
Deputies, in the improvement and collection of the same, and the misdemeanors
of several persons who have labored to conceal many Hearthes, Firing places
and Stoves, which by the Law are chargeable, and partly by the obstinacy of
such persons of Quality, and Commanders of His Majesty's Castles and Forts, as
refuse to permit His Majesty's Officers, or their Deputies to enter into their
houses to view and number the several Hearths, Firing places and Stoves
therein, or to take Distresses for the duty arising thereout; as also through
the Combination of several Inhabitants, who purposely to defraud His Majesty,
do take upon them to shelter the Distresses of their neighbors, who by their
Delinquency are become liable thereunto; and lastly through the negligence or
counivance of several Magistrates, Ministers, Constables and other Officers,
who have given too much countenance to such undue proceedings, and too little
assistance to His Majesty's said Officers and their Deputies, in levying and
improving the said Revenue, whom they have in some places suffered to be
reproached, and violently abused, without punishing the Malefactors, although
it be the duty of all Constables and other inferior Officers, to accompany,
assist and defend His Majesty's Officers and their Deputies, as well in the
viewing and numbering of the several Hearths, Firing places and Stoves, as in
their collecting of the Revenue arising thereout, and the duty of all Justices
of Peace and chief Magistrates, in their respective places and callings, and
with the utmost of their Authority, to support His Majesty's said Revenue, so
well established by Law, and so necessary to the safety and defense of His
Majesty and His good Subjects: We therefore being resolved to redress the
aforesaid abuses, and for the time to come to remove all impediments to the
levying and collecting of the said Revenue, and to take a strict account of all
such persons as shall hereafter be found wanting in their duty to His Majesty,
and to the Laws of this Kingdom, have thought fit to publish and declare, That
all arrears of the said Revenue, as well those which were incurred from the
24th day of June, 1665. to the 25th of March 1666. as those which have accrued
since, and all future growing duties shall forthwith, and with all possible
speed, and diligence be collected and levied by and paid unto His Majesty's
respective Officers and their Deputies aforesaid, published, nominated and
appointed for that purpose by our Proclamation of the 15th of August, 1666. and
no others; And we do hereby strictly charge and command all Justices of Peace,
chief Magistrates, Constables and all other Officers and Ministers of Justice,
whom it does or may concern, that upon pain of being proceeded against as
contemners of His Majesty's authority, and as persons ill affected to the Peace
and safety of this his Kingdom, they be ayding and assisting to His Majesty's
said Officers and their Deputies, as well in viewing and numbering the said
Hearths, Firing places and Stoves, as in collecting and levying all such sum or
sums of money as is already become due, and in arrear, or which hereafter shall
become due and payable for or by reason of the duty arising out of the said
Hearths, Firing places and Stoves, And herein we do expect and require from
them, and every of them such vigorous and effectual assistance to be given to
His Majesty's said Officers and their Deputies, that all concealments of any
Hearths, Firing places and Stoves may be speedily detected, all illegal and
undue practices for exempting any persons liable, or sheltering of their
distresses prevented, all obstructions in the collecting of His Majesty's said
Revenue removed, and all persons who shall deny admission into their Houses, or
any ways affront, or abuse His Majesty's said Officers or their Deputies in
word, or deed exemplarily punished; And we do hereby will and require all
Sheriffs, Mayors and Bailiffs in the several and respective Counties, Cities
and Towns Corporate of this His Majesty's Kingdom to cause this our
Proclamation to be published in all and every the Market places within their
limits upon some Market day within fourteen days next after thereceipt hereof,
as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 21 day of March, 1666. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Canc. Ossory. R. Coote. Hen. Midensis. Kingston. Fra.
Aungier. Santry. J. Temple. Rob. Byron.


Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty,
and are to be sold by Samuel Dancer in Castlestreet. 1666.


