DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL*
ARRAN.

WHEREAS We have received information, that Connor o Dee, late of Arglin, in
the County of Tipperary yeoman, and Richard Power, late of Barlintorty in the
said County yeoman, have of late committed several Burglaries, Robberies, and
stealths (in several Counties in this Kingdom) to the terror and annoyance of
his Majesty's Loyal and good subjects, and to the disturbance of the peace of
the Kingdom, and having been lately apprehended, and committed to the Goal of
Clonmel in the County of Tipperary, and the said Connor o Dee being indicted,
arraigned, and convicted, and the said Richard Power, being arraigned,
convicted and attaint^d, have br^k^n Goal and made their escape, and fled to
the woods and mountains, where they stand upon their keeping, and that since
their escape out of the said Gaol, have committed diverse Robberies, to the
great damage of his Majesty's good subjects. Upon consideration whereof, We
think fit hereby to publish and declare that the said Connor o Dee, and Richard
Power, be henceforth called, reputed, and taken for notorious Rebels and
Traitors, against his Majesty, and accordingly to be prosecuted by all his
Majesty's Loving and good subjects, in all Hostile manner. And that whatsoever
person or persons, shall comfort believe or abett them, or either of them, they
are, and shall be reputed, deemed, and adjudged Traitors in like degree with
the aforenamed Traitors, and Rebels themselves, and be proceeded against
according to Law. And We do in his Majesty's Name, straightly charge, and
Command, all his Majesty's Loyal subjects, upon their Duty, and allegiance, to
his Majesty, not only to forbear to receive, or relieve, the persons aforesaid,
or either of them, but also to make diligent search, and inquiry in what place,
or places the said persons shall from time to time lurk, or be releived, and by
all means possible to prosecute apprehend, and take the Bodies of them, and
them to bring, or cause to be brought under safe custody, unto the High Sheriff
of the respective Counties where either of them shall be apprehended, to be by
such Sheriffs kept in strict and safe custody, and conveyed to the Goal of
Clonmell, from whence they escaped to the end they may be proceeded against
according to Law. And we do hereby declare that whosoever shall bring unto any
Sheriff, the Bodies of the said Connor o Dee, and Richard Power, or either of
them alive, or kill either of them, and bring his Head to the Sheriff of the
County, where he shall be killed, to be by such Sheriff set up, in some public
place, in that County, shall have for his reward, for each person so brought
in, or his head, twenty pounds, for payment whereof We will give warrant as
occasion shall require; And toward the speedy effecting of this service, all
Commanders of Horse and Foot, and all other his Majesty's Officers, and Loving
Subjects, are to be aiding, and assisting, as they and every of them will
answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 12 th. day of October 1683. Francis
Dublin, Massereene. Will. Kildare, Ca. Dillon, Cha. Feilding, Ed: Brabazon,
John Keating, He. Hene. John Davys, John Cole,


DVBLIN Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty And are to be sold at his Majesty's Printing House on
Ormond-Key.


