BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.
WHEREAS We are informed, that diverse Merchants, Strangers, and others, have
lately brought into this Kingdom several Pieces of Dutch Coin, commonly known
by the name of New Lion Dollars, stamped with a Lion Rampant on the one side,
and a man with an Eschutchion ^overing his lower parts, and a Lion charged in
it on the other side, Coined in the years 1674, 1675, or 1676, with this Motto
Confidens Domino non movetur, and the year of our Lord in the same round with
the Motto over the head of the Lion, and that they by themselves, their Agents
or Factors, have dispersed and uttered the same in payment amongst His
Majesty's Subjects at the rate of four shillings nine pence per Piece, as
moneys allowed to be Issued in trade and Commerce. And whereas we have caused
some of the said Pieces to be tried and Essayed by the Essay Master of this
City, and do find, that the said Pieces are worse than his Majesty's Standard
of England, by two Ounces 5 penny. weight upon the pound weight. And that these
new Dollars are intrinsically worth no more than three shillings four pence one
farthing sterling, and (in proportion to the spanish money commonly current
here) worth three shillings nine pence. And whereas none of the said Pieces,
nor any of that kind and Species have been at any time allowed by his Majesty,
or by Proclamation from us the Lord Lieutenant, or any his Majesty's Former
Chief Governors and Council of this Kingdom, to pass as current money within
this Realm, and yet are commonly paid off (as we are informed,) at the rate
aforesaid. Now we the Lord Lieutenant and Council duly weighing the premises,
and the many inconveniences which by such fraudulent Practices may befall his
Majesty's good subjects, if not timely prevented, have thought fit to publish
and make known the same by this our Proclamation, and hereby to Caution and
advise, that none of the Officers or Ministers of his Majesty's Revenue, or any
other person or persons of what nature, quality or condition soever he be, is
or are by any Law required or enforced to take or receive any of the said
Pieces, commonly called New Lion Dollars stamped in manner as aforesaid in any
payment or payments whatsoever, and hereof we require all manner of persons,
who are or shall be therein any wise concerned, to take special notice at their
Perils.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 9th. day of April 1677. Ja:
Armachanus. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. J: Povey.
To: Booth. Abrah: Yarner. Ja: Cuffe. Tho: Newcomen.

God Save the King.
DUBLIN Printed by Benjamin Took Printer to the King's Most Excelent Majesty
and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-Street. 1677.


