DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHereas We have received information, That Gerald Fitzgerald of (...) in the
County of (...) and Richard Fitzgerald Brother of the said Gerald, have of
late committed several Burglaries, Robberies and Stealths, (in several Counties
of this Kingdom) to the terror and annoyance of his Majesty's loyal and good
Subjects, and to the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; and having been
lately apprehended and committed to the Goal of Cork, and convicted for their
Offenses, have broaken Goal, and made their escape, and fled to the Woods and
Mountains, where they stand upon their keeping, so as they are not answerable
or a measuable to the Law, but wilful contemners of the same.

And forasmuch as the said persons cannot as yet be apprehended, whereby they
may be punished by the ordinary course of Law, whence We might justly be moved
according to the former usage and custom in this Kingdom in cases of like
nature, to cause them to be forthwith Proclaimed Rebels and Traitors, yet in
mercy to them, We think fit hereby to charge and command them upon their Duty
and Allegiance to his Majesty, that they and every of them do before the first
day of March next, render their Pers^ns to any of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, and submit themselves to his Majesty's Justice to be Tried for their
offenses according to the Laws of the Land, wherein if they or either of them
do fail, We do hereby Publish and Declare, that he or they so failing, are from
and immediately after the said first day of March next, to be called, reputed
and taken for notorious Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, and
accordingly to be prosecuted by all his Majesty's Loving and good Subjects in
all Hostile manner; And We declare further, that whatsoever Person or Persons
shall comfort, relieve, or abet them or either of them, they are and shall be
reputed, deemed, and adjudged Traitors in like degree with the forenamed
Traitors and Rebels themselves, and to be proceeded against according to Law.
And We do in His Majesty's Name straightly Charge and Command all His Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, upon their Duty of Allegiance to His Majesty, not only to
forbear to Receive or Relieve the Persons aforesaid, or either of them, but
also to make diligent search and enquiry in what place or places, the said
persons shall from time to time Lurk, or be relieved, and by all means possible
to prosecute, apprehend and take the bodies of them, and them to bring or cause
to be brought under safe custody unto the High Sherriffs of the respective
Counties where either of them shall be apprehended, to be by such Sheriffs kept
in strict and safe Custody, till We upon notice thereof shall give further
direction concerning them, or resisting or refusing to be taken, to kill them
or either of them. And We do hereby declare, That whosoever shall after the
said first day of March next, bring unto any Sheriff the Body of the said
Gerald Fitz Gerald, and Richard Fitz Gerald Brother of the said Gerald, or
either of them alive, or kill either of them, and bring his Head to the Sheriff
of the County where he shall be killed, to be by such Sheriff set up in some
public Place in that County, shall have for his Reward for each Person so
brought in, or his Head, Ten pounds, for Payment whereof We will give Warrant
as occasion shall require; and whosoever of the said Proclaimed Persons, or any
other, shall after the said first day of March next, apprehend and bring unto
the High Sheriff of the County where such Person shall be apprehended, or
resisting, shall kill either of the said Rebels and Traitors particularly named
as aforesaid, he shall together with his said reward receive his Pardon, and
toward the speedy effecting of this Service, all Commanders of Horse and Foot,
and all other His Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects are to be aiding and
assisting, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the Three and twentieth day of December
1679. Mich: Armach: C. Jo: Dublin. Arran. Ranelagh. Blesinton. Lanesborough.
Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. John Keatinge. Theo: Jones. VVm Flower Tho:
Newcomen.


DVBLIN. Printed By Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook at his Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-Row. 1679.


