DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL,
ORMONDE.

WHereas We are informed, That the number of Tories and Robbers in the Province
of Vlster, and some other Parts of this Kingdom is much increased,
notwithstanding many Proclamations from this Board for apprehending of diverse
Tories, and they are of late grown much more bloody than formerly they have
been, so that several Robberies, Burglaries and Murders are daily committed by
them, to the great damage of many of his Majesty's good Subjects, and terror
of others, and yet few of the said Offenders have been apprehended, or brought
unto Justice for their said offenses, which has been chiefly occasioned (as We
are informed) by means of diverse of the Inhabitants of the Country who have
complied with such malefactors, either by declining to resist, or pursue them,
or by other of their Relations and Kindred who have concealed, and secretly
relieved and succored them, or by some Popish Priests, who have wholly
neglected to make discoveries of them to the next Magistrates or Officers in
the respective Counties, Garrisons, and Parishes whither they resorted, which
(as we are credibly informed) the Popish pretended Parish Priests, where there
are any, might very easily have done, if they had minded, or intended the peace
and quiet of the respective Parishes and places wherein they live, or yielded
that due obedience unto his Majesty's Laws which in duty they ought.

Wherefore we concieve it necessary in a Case of so extraordinary a nature as
this is, wherein the lives and fortunes of many his Majesty's good Subjects are
so nearly concerned, and the peace and quiet of the Country so much disturbed,
to make use of extraordinary means to prevent the further growth of so great a
mischief.

And therefore We do hereby think fit, and accordingly order, that the Kindred
and nearest relations (that is to say) the wives, fathers, mothers, brothers,
and sons of such persons as are known Tories, and are out upon their keeping,
or shall at any time hereafter become Tories, and go out upon their keeping in
any the Counties of this Kingdom be forthwith seized upon, and committed to
close prison in the Common Goal of such County where they do reside, or shall
be apprehended, there to remain until such Tory or person, who is out upon his
keeping, and to whom they are so related shall be either killed or taken so as
to be brought to Justice, and also that where there is any Popish pretended
Parish Priest of any place wherein any Robbery, Burglary or murder shall be
hereafter committed by any such Tories or persons who are out upon their
keeping, such Popish-priest shall be also seized upon and committed to close
prison in the common Goal of such County wherein such parish does lie, and
shall be from thence transported beyond the Seas, unless within Fourteen days
after such Robbery, Burglary or murder, the persons who are guilty thereof
shall be either killed or taken, or such discovery made within that time, as
that such Offenders may be thereupon apprehended and brought unto Justice.

And We do hereby require the several Sheriffs and Justices of Peace of the
respective Counties in this Kingdom, to take care that these Our Commands be
strictly and duly executed, and also that the Laws and Statutes of this
Kingdom, and the Proclamations formerly issued from this Board concerning the
keeping of Watches, and raising the Hue and Cry be duly executed and performed.
And all Officers and Soldiers of His Majesty's Army, and of the Militia in
this Kingdom, and all other His Majesty's Officers, and other subjects
whatsoever are hereby also required to use their utmost endeavors for the
taking and apprehending all such Tories and Robbers, as they will answer the
contrary at their utmost peril

Given at the Council-Chamberin Dublin the 26. day of March1679. Mich: Armach:
C. Jo: Dublin. Blesinton. Granard. Lanesborough. Hen: Midensis. Char. Meredith*
Jo: Davys, Ol* St. George. Geo: Rawden. Ric: Gethin. Theo: Jones, Wm: Flower,
Will: Hill.


Dublin Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to King's most
Excellent Majesty; And are to be so^d by Mary Crook at his Majesty's
Printing House in Skinner-row 1679.


