DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
CR
royal blazon or coat of arms
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS We are informed, That the price of Corn, and all sorts of Grain and
Meal is grown excessive great in several parts of this Kingdom, and the same
does arise (as is conceived) not so much from the scarcity of the store, as
from the great quantities of Corn that have been of late carried out of this
Country into Foreign parts, and also from the ill disposed minds of the
Countrey-Farmers and Corn-masters at home, some whereof keep back their Corn,
and will not bring the same into the public Markets to be sold; Others some
there are, who go into the near adjacent Counties, where Corn is sold at more
moderate prices, and buy up all they can, with intention to hoard the same,
either to export or sell it at their own rates: And others some do hasten early
to meet such as are coming to the public Markets, and buy up all they can
forestall, on purpose to inhance the price thereof, and sell the same again at
their own wills and pleasures.

And whereas so great misdemeanors are not to be suffered in any well governed
Commonwealth, and are against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and the
several Magistrates and Officers in the respective Cities and Towns Corporate
of this Kingdom, and the Justices of the Peace in the counties at large ought
to be very circumspect, and active, in their several and respective places, to
discover and bring unto condign punishment all such persons as they shall find
to be guilty of any the Offenses aforesaid. To the intent and purpose
therefore, that all His Majesty's good Subjects may know that we are very
sensible of the aforesaid several misdemeanors, and intend to proceed to a
speedy and orderly reformation of the same for the relief of the poor, and the
due punishment of such as shall be found guilty of offending in that kind, and
for a timely and seasonable prevention of that great scarcity, which otherwise
may by such evil practices be brought upon this whole Kingdom; We the Lord
Lieutenant and Council do hereby in His Majesty's Name, strictly charge and
command all manner of persons whatsoever, That they do from henceforth, until
Michaelmas next, forbear to ship, carry, or transport any Wheat, Barley, Rye,
Bear, Oats, Pease, Pulse, Meslin, or any Meal out of this Realm, to any other
place whatsoever beyond the Seas, as they will answer the contrary at their
perils. And We require all His Majesty's Officers in the several and respective
Ports of this Kingdom, and the Farmers of the Great Branches of His Majesty's
Revenue, that they do seize all such Grain or Meal as they shall find to be
shipped after the Date of this Our Proclamation, and before Michaelmas next, with
intent to export the same contrary to the true meaning hereof.

And We do hereby farther require, and in His Majesty's Name straightly charge
and command all Countrey-Farmers, and Corn-Masters, and all such who Trade or
Deal in the buying and selling of Corn, and have by them any Stores of Wheat,
Barley, Rye, Beans-Oats, Pease, Pulse, or any other sort of Corn, Grain, or
Meal, that they do bring, or cause to be brought such a competent part and
portion thereof, into the public open Markets every Market Day weekly, as may
supply the Markets with Corn, and furnish the poor with Bread at such rates as
the Markets shall afford.

And We do charge and command all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Portreeves,
Magistrates, and other Officers whatsoever, in the several and respective
Cities and Towns corporate of this Kingdom, That they do in their several
places and Offices make diligent search and strict inquiry after such as are
Ingrossers, Fore-stallers, and Regraters within any their Cities, Liberties, or
Towns corporate of this Kingdom, and cause them to be punished and proceeded
against according to Law; And that all His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in
the several and respective Counties of this Kingdom, do in their several and
respective Counties, Baronies, parishes, and places, inquire after and find
such out as do ingross and hoard up Corn, Grain, or Meal to inhance the price
thereof, and shall not bring the same, or send competent portions thereof,
according to this Our* Proclamation, every Market Day weekly, into the public
open Markets, there to be sold at such rates as the Market shall afford; And
that they do advertise us the Lord Lieutenant and Council thereof with all
convenient speed, that thereupon such proceedings may be had against such
ill-affected persons as shall be according to Justice, and the Laws of this
Kingdom, which We shall take special care shall be strictly put in Execution
against so great and evil Doers.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the 18th day of May, 1674. Ja.
Armachanus. Mich: Dublin Canc. Thomond: J: Temple. Jo: Bysse. H: Ingoldesby
Geo: Rawdon.

GOD Save the KING.
DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street, 1674.


