He does my business bravely


Needs must when the devil drives


Pride Lust Hipocrysy Covetousnes



WORK FOR A COOPER. BEING AN ANSWER To a LIBEL, Written by THOMAS WIN The
COOPER, the ALE-MAN, the QUACK, AND THE SPEAKING-QUAKER. WITH A brief Account
how that Dissembling People differ at this day from what at first they were.

By one who abundantly pities their Ignorance and Folly.

ECCLUS 22.11. Weep for the Dead, for he has lost the Light: and weep for the
Fool, for he wants understanding: make little weeping for the Dead, for he is at
rest; but the life of the Fool is worse than death.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for S. C. at the Prince of Wales's Arms, near the
Royal Exchange. MDCLXXIX.

WORK FOR A COOPER.
OF all the sinners in the world, the Proud in Spirit seem to be in the most
desperate condition: and it is implied by our divine Redeemer in that saying,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven; as if
indeed the proud and the conceited of their own worth, that think themselves
more upright and more righteous than any body else, were of all other the most
unlikely to enter into that holy place. The probability of which, is
strengthened by the hardness and difficulty of reducing such vile wretches, who
under a pretense of being the inspired Children of God, and the only
inheritors of Life, yield themselves to be hurried by the spirit of Darkness
into those paths that lead to the sad and dismal Regions of eternal Death.

It Is said, the Devil seldom appears with his Horns and cloven Feet: his game
is better played when he comes like an Angel of Light. In imitation of which,
his Agents assume the same way: First proclaim their own sanctity and
familiarity with God; and then go on to despise and calumniate all that by the
grace of God are better provided with the blessing of either this world or the
other; with Health, Wealth, or Honor; with Faith, Hope, or Charity: whose
qualifications were seasonably discovered by St. Jude, when he said, These
filthy dreamers defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities; adding presently, Who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit.

Whether our Thomas and his Followers be concerned in this Description, I
humbly leave to those that have Honesty and Sense to judge; and will only
endeavor briefly to answer his Libel, and make appear what rotten and false
Foundation he has built his design upon.

First, he says, That all the writers of holy Scripture, and all the Saints of
God mentioned there, were Quakers. Page 11, and 14.

Secondly, That the present Quakers have got the Key of David, with which they
(and they only) can unlock all Mysteries. Page 11.

Thirdly, That all Scholars (especially the Priests) having quite lost this
Key, cannot tell the meaning of the Scriptures; and, that their Hearers have
not so much discretion as Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar had. Page 12.

Fourthly, That the Ministers of God, the Priests of this Church, and those
that hear them, are all running headlong to destruction. Page 14.

These are the main Pillars our Quaker superstructs all his Foolery upon; and
most justly deserves for his pains to be rewarded with a Whipping-post, that by
taking of a lawful dance about that, he might essay also to prove the antiquity
of a Lancashire Horn-pipe. Justice were Mercy, and Severity but an act of the
greatest Charity to him, who (like the Devil himself) would make it his
business to cheat men of their immortal Souls.

Had the Saints of God been ancient Quakers, (as he says they were) why should
the modern ones think themselves scofft at by being called so? Or why did not
James Naylor and some others give themselves that Name? Fear and trembling
(from whence he infers all he has the ignorance to say) were never recorded for
infallible signs of any body's being in Gods favor: 'Twas not to our first
Parents, when their fear for having sinned, pressed them upon an impossibility,
to attempt the hiding themselves from the presence of the Lord. Nor to St.
Peter, when his fear made him to deny his most holy Master. Nay, the fearful
(leading the van of an infernal Troop) and the unbelieving, the abominable, and
murderers, whoremongers, and sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars (Rev. 21.)
shall have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And St.
Paul says (2 Timothy 1.7.) God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of
power, of love, and of a sound mind; as if the fearful had not sound minds;
that is, were only a kind of a distracted people, whose not too much, but too
little Learning, had made stark Revelation-mad.

If fear and trembling were enough to prove a certainty of being beloved of
God, then Baalam's Ass, and the Daemoniacks among the Tombs, Felix the
Hypocrite, and Judas (that hanged himself for fear of seeing any more his
Innocent and Righteous Master;) yes, and the Devils themselves might put in for
a share too; for St. James does expressly say, that they also believe and
tremble.

For the Irreligious and the Profane, the Blasphemous and the Impenitent, it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: but he that was
filled with the Holy Ghost, and did prophecy (Luke 1.) said, That we being
delivered from the hands of our enemies, might serve God without fear, in
holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life. And though, till we have
mortified our sinful Affections and Lusts, we ought to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling: yet when after a most hearty and profound repentance
we humbly hope that all our past unrighteousness is forgiven, and our sins
covered, we may then, doubtless, serve the Lord with gladness, and come before
his presence with a song: And with St. Paul, (Phil. 4.4.) Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again, I say, rejoice. Or with holy David, (Psalm. 97.11, 12.) There
is sprung up a light for the righteous, and a joyful gladness to such as are
true-hearted. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, and give thanks for a
remembrance of his holiness. This was the belief of those Saints that were no
Quakers, however disgusted by those Quakers that are no Saints; who if not
illuminated to a higher pitch, and above the comprehension of holy David and
Saint Paul, might certainly humble themselves to the approbation of the same
way.

And then, (quite contrary to our Quaker's understanding) whenever God's
Servants are said to have feared or trembled, 'twas because they or their
people had offended the Almighty God, after an amazing recollection of their
former wickedness, and apprehension of some most justly expected Judgment. But
our Quakers never do it upon this account; they are too impudent to pretend it,
reporting themselves to be God's only meek and most entirely beloved people:
That they, and they only, are born of God, and consequently cannot sin. And
say, that whosoever confesses himself a sinner, pleads for sin. Though Saint
John has said expressly, If we say we have no sin, we do but deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. But if Quakers are without sin, what need
they fear? if forgiven all, or, which is much the same, have nothing to be
forgiven, what judgments can they apprehend? The very truth is, all their
pretenses about these things are but mere Traps and Gins to catch the foolish
and the silly in: and those places which our Thomas pretends to take his
pattern from, are clear to other purposes, and quite of other meanings than any
he intends them for.

And this is evidenced by his fourth Page, wherein he observes (with a world of
wit) that Isaac trembled for having mistaken Jacob for Esau; and then presently
infers, that Isaac was a Quaker! (A strange and a very choice way of arguing)
by which he makes him pay dearer for his inadvertence, than ever Esau himself
was forced to do. Whereas, in truth, holy Isaac was quite another man; was much
given to Meditation and Prayers, and so are not the Quakers: Then Isaac was not
(it seems) beyond the possibility of a mistake, which Quakers affirm they are
not subject to, as having perceptions clearer than any body else, and can most
infallibly (as the Blasphemous Muggleton was wont to say) fix Woes or Joys, a
Blessing or a Curse irreversibly to all eternity. But if Isaac was a Quaker,
and yet (nevertheless) did err in so important a business, why should it be
impossible for another Quaker to err also? Surely it much behooves our second
Tom of Bedlam to make an impartial and very strict enquiry into his own
weakness, and consider that the blindness of the understanding may be as
ruinous (at least) as that of the Body; and that it is not impossible for him,
or any other Quaker at this day, to be under the same circumstances with those
that have eyes, but will not see; that have ears, yet will not hear, nor
understand, lest they should be converted and live.

And then in his fifth Page, (by which alone we may judge equitably of all the
rest) he tells us, that those people mentioned in the ninth of Ezra, were the
Quakers Meeting, ('it is well he did not say, at Holy-well, or Caerwys.) But to
manifest his Worship's ignorance, I humbly offer this toward a proof of the
contrary: That Ezra (in the sixth Verse of the same Chapter) said, O my God, I
am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee; for our iniquities are gone
over our head, and our trespasses are grown up unto the Heavens. Now those that
know our Thomas much better than he does himself, do assure me, that Praying
and Blushing is none of his way; he never did so in all his life, much less
since first he turned his Tub into a Pulpit, and that into a Drum to beat up
for Volunteers for the Prince of the air.

But then in the next place, Ezra does most evidently acquit himself and his
people of this charge: For he arose, and made the chief Priests, the Levites,
and all Israel to swear; and they did so according to the Law; which most
sufficiently proves that they were no Quakers; and therefore our Cinque and
Cater was most woefully mistaken in his pretense to a spiritual way of
understanding, He says Ezra was a Quaker, yet dares not (forsooth) do what
that Quaker did, though but according to the Law. He would persuade us, that
all Quakers are guided by the same unerring spirit: how then come they so much
to disagree? Ezra did blush, but our Thomas cannot: Ezra did repent, our Thomas
will not: Ezra and all Israel did swear according to the Law; but our wise man of
Gotham is endued with a greater light, and knows better things. In a word, if
the Quakers will neither blush nor repent, or swear lawfully, as Israel here
did; then most certain it is, that neither those Israelites were true Quakers,
nor these Quakers true Israelites. And thus it is palpable enough, that though
our Quaker will not humble himself to the taking of a lawful Oath, yet he does
not at all boggle the telling of an untruth.

But why our Thomas should be so brisk in the false, and so dull in the true
notion of fear and trembling, I cannot imagine, unless to bubble poor weak and
simple people with the fancy of his being some mighty Hero in Divinity, and the
only Oracle of celestial mysteries. But alas poor Soul! this spiritual Bait
will not take; the poison of it has eaten quite through the Varnish, and does of
it self discover the poverty of the whole Plot. He pretends to fear, and at the
same time vouches himself above the state of a Saint Militant; which if true,
would make fear a wost unnecessary thing; for perfect love casts out fear.
The Watchmen at our Savior's Grave were afraid, and became as dead men: But
the Angel of the Lord said to the holy Women, Fear not ye, for I know that ye
seek Jesus; which most plainly shows, that the servile fear the Quakers are
possessed with, is perfectly inconsistent with the holy temper of such as in
reality, with zealous and humble confidence seek the Lord Jesus. We are bid to
come boldly to the Throne of Grace; and 'twas of the wicked only it was said,
The Lord shall laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes: But
the righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and all they that are true of heart
shall be glad, (Psalm. 64.10.) And, My soul (said David) shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness, when my mouth praises thee with joyful lips. Our
lapsed Sinner was therefore wise only in his own conceit; whom Solomon
foreseeing, gave necessary and just direction how he ought to be treated: A
whip (says he) for the horse, a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the fools
back, (Prove. 26.3.) And God himself denouncing wrath against such wicked
Impostors as the Quakers are, says, Woe to the rebellious children, that take
counsel, but not of me; that cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, (Isa.
30.1)

But farther, had he any thing of Ingenuity or Sense, he would never have been so
silly as to think that quaking or trembling (as such) could possibly be enough
to denominate a just or a good man by; yet is so fond of the Conceit, as if
there were no way possibly to Heaven but this: and might as well have affirmed,
that to be surly and churlish, ignorant and singular, envious and unmannerly,
dissembling and hypocritical, had been the only way to have pleased God, and
the certain character whereby to know the inspired, and the heavenly-minded,
from such as have only (what he thinks poor and despicable) the gifts of
Charity, Humility, and Obedience. It Is true, he that has a guilty Conscience,
or carries any sin unrepented of about him, may most reasonably fear and
tremble: And of such the holy Prophet said, ( Psalm. 9.20.) Put them in fear, O
Lord, that the Heathen (not the Israelites) may know themselves to be but men.
And he has given us a true distinction between the godly and the wicked, by
his own practice, who after his blessed recovery from his unhappy fall, said, I
will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the Name of the Lord my God.

The worst of men have commonly the greatest share of fear: The just execution
of God or Man's Laws may do this upon the most vile Transgressor, that suffers
as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters; but can never be the
better for it: And therefore it cannot be so much as a probable sign (and much
less a certain) of their being in the ways of God, or moved to such a fear by
him. Fear and trembling (at the best) are signs of grief and sorrow; not
perhaps so much for having sinned, as in dread of a most just punishment: but
the Ways, the Service, and the Laws of God are not so; His yoke is easy, and
his burden light. The Psalmist says indeed, that sorrow may continue for a
night; but immediately adds, that joy comes in the morning. If God delights
not in a sinners death, it is not likely that he does in the misery of his
life. Sorrow is but what we bring commonly upon our selves, not any thing (or
but very seldom) of God's sending.

Yet if always to hang down the head, and make a sour face; to grieve, or be
perplexed continually, were certain signs of any peoples being in God's favor
(as I am very sure they are not) wherein could this benefit the Quakers? it
being most demonstrably true, that they trouble not themselves in that kind
now, as they did in Oliver's time, (when Hell did seem to have broke loose) in
which a sort of shameless Animals (scarce in humane shapes) went naked through
Fairs and Markets by way of Masquerade, or a spiritual kind of
Morrice-dancing; boasting to have received Commissions in the third Heaven,
with full power to denounce everlasting ruin against all that had not
impudence enough to do as they did; or that would not believe they should, for
so doing, most sufficiently be covered with the righteousness of the Lamb.

And thus the Blasphemous James Nailor (one of the first Founders of that
wicked Sect) rid upon an Ass with naked Women to attend him, crying, Hosanna to
the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord; at once
abusing both those holy places ( Isa. 32.11.) Tremble, ye women, strip, and
make ye bare; and that other of our Savior's riding to Jerusalem. And many
such pranks they played in those days, as falling into Trances and most ghastly
Distortions, like Conjurers and Bell-founders, not to be spoken to till the
mystery was over; or like those among the Tombs, that were possessed with
dumb Devils; (from whom perhaps the Quakers take their president) but when they
had drawn a Crowd together as great as ever Bear-baiting could do, 'twas then
made plain as could be what kind of Spirit had been at work, by their Howling
and Whining, Groaning and Foaming, and by their woeful Quaking and Trembling,
(the only reason why they were at first called Quakers) who with a special
respect to the qualification of the Spectators, would endeavor to obtrude,
that they had been just then in a most intimate and cabinet Communion with the
great and mighty God, and had received the spirit of Prophecy in abundance,
with the gift of Miracles, and all other that God had, or could bestow: That
they could to a minute foretell the last and dreadful day of Judgment, and heal
more Diseases than all the World could possibly need help for. That they (and
they only) were those of whom 'twas said, they should lay their hands upon the
sick, and they should recover; and that God meant them, only, when he said, I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; as if of all humane Race, none had
flesh but Quakers. Though nothing is plainer than that this Prophecy was
fulfilled at Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost in a most extraordinary manner
endu'd the Disciples of our Lord with the gift of Tongues (as never were the
Quakers, nor ever will be) so that Parthians and Medes, Elamites and the
Dwellers of Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Cyrenians, Romans,
Jews, Proselytes, Cretes, and Arabians, might be taught in those very Languages
in which they were all born. And Quakers never being able to do the like, ought
in honesty to confess, that this Prophecy is not at all verified in them; it
being to be done (too) in those days, which the best Interpreters assure us was
that very Age the holy Apostles lived in.

The days of immediate Inspiration are now long since over; and our second
Oliver's Porter is described by the Wise man after a much other kind of way, (
Ecclus 19.26, 27, 28.) There is (says he) a man that hangs down the head
sadly, but inwardly he is full of deceit; casting down his countenance, and
making as if he heard not; (but) where he is not known, he will do thee a
mischief before thou be aware; and if for want of power he be hindered from
sinning, yet when he finds opportunity he will do thee evil.

It Is true, their Hocus Pocus tricks are now much laid aside; and they observe
that Legerdemain will not go off as formerly it has done: Nor do the most
sober of them deny but that they are as lame and decrepit as other sinners, in
every thing but the explanation of holy Scripture, (the Original of which our
Thomas and the Elephant are very much alike acquainted with.)

But if he thinks he has not only got the start of all other people, but even
of the Quakers too; why then should not the powerful and the unfathomable parts
he pretends to, serve to benefit honest Prester John, the Great Turk, or Cham
of Tartary? Why does he not make a serious visit into those parts? where
neither the Antiquity, nor so much as the Name of Quakers was ever yet thought
of.

But it must be confessed, their Zeal is most extremely fallen and abated
within these twelve or fourteen years; and that they have exceedingly refined
and improved their manners another way; being sensible by experience, that
Preaching and their other Trades go off best together, as the readier way to
what they mainly aim at, worldly profit and advantages: Thinking it now too
unfashionable to run madding about the streets, and sometimes into Churches, as
formerly they did; being so far from believing it any longer necessary wholly
to attend the business of the Spirit, that they as freely bestow their
observances of the World and the Flesh, (I know not how they deal with the
Devil) as any the most extravagant of sinners ever did; and differ so
abundantly from their first Founders, that they are now come much to the same
pitch with what the Presbyterians were in 47 and 48; (stand up most stiffly for
the privilege of Saints, and at the same time act like Devils incarnate;
cursing dolefully all that had either Honesty or Courage to stem or thwart the
current of their Pride and Avarice.) They use the good things of this World
with as much fondness and delight as ever other sinners did: Nor does
Righteousness alone serve to cloth them; they wear (and will do) as good
Cloth, Silks, and Camlets as the proudest of mankind can do; offering freely
to stand proof, that the sin lies only in the Color, or the broadness of the
Ribbon.

Their way of Good-fellowship is also become very fashionable; and, for their
lasting commendation, are now so conformable a people in that point, that they
very seldom or never shrink in the wetting, not much mattering what the
unsanctifi'd say of their petty deviations, of their Drunkenness, Fornication,
Adultery, Anger, Envy, Hatred, Malice, Pride, Covetousness, Vain glory, and
Hypocrisy; and that notwithstanding all these rare qualifications, they are as
pure and sufficient Saints as any the whole World affords.

This needs not be much wondered at; Experience has given all people of sense
sufficient knowledge of their baseness, who by striving to fly far enough from
all Decency and Order, are yet at last become the most formal Coxcombs
produceable in this age; crying out woefully against all external Ornaments,
whilst themselves at the same time dote most wickedly upon a Quirp-Cravat,
copi'd from a chitterling Original.

The very best of them are so far from submitting to every Ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake, that they will no so much as do it to those of God's own
appointment; of which their slighting and refusal of the holy Sacraments, may
serve as a most sufficient proof.

Nor do they stop here neither, but go on to a perfect hatred of all that have
better moral or intellectual endowments, or any more of this Worlds good than
what is unfortunately fallen to their own share. And yet our Thomas in very
many places of his Canting Interlude, would fain be thought hugely courteous
for his inviting of as many Religions as his poor Memory could hold; (to see
some rare sight no doubt) but quite forgot the Jews and the Mahometans, the
Greek and the Muscovian Churches: it is a wonder that these also had not been
bid to his intolerable Farce; wherein at once he discovers both his Malice and
his Folly too, knowing in his own Conscience (if indeed he has any) that those
people which he so promiscuously heaps together, are neither alike in
Principles nor Life, and therefore ought not to have been alike treated by him.
For what reason had he to herd Protestants among Beasts of prey? or worry us
(as much as in him lay) between the Lions and the Bears? Are these the thanks
he returns our first and best Reformers for putting the holy Scriptures into
the vulgar tongue? without which, he, undoubtedly, would have been still as
ignorant that the Word of God was ever given man, as now he is in the meaning
of it: 'Twas hardly possible for any but a beastly Quaker to make Ingratitude
his Goddess, or fall down to worship the Devil's eldest Daughter.

The holy Scriptures might still have lain dormant in their sheets of Greek and
Hebrew, for any remedy he could help us to. But if he thinks it any kindness
that they are faithfully translated, why should he abuse and vilify those that
did it, and that laid down their lives (also) to justify the truth thereof?
They upon whose very credit he (for his part at least) takes those sacred
Writings (if he thinks they are so at all) to be the revealed Will of God? They
were indeed holy and learned men, and therefore most certain it is they have
not deceived us: but sure I am it is more than he knows; nor had he ever any the
least spark of divine Revelation to ascertain their integrity: Yet still, but
for those men, or some such Pious and Learned Protestants, it is more than
probable he would at this day have taken (as some others do) the Apocryphal to
have been of equal Authority with the Canonical Scriptures.

He therefore has done extremely ill in putting Protestants amongst his
delinquent Pupils. For, if he thinks us not honest, why will he believe us? if
he does, why should he think us damned? as the inavoidable consequence of his
wicked opinion does suppose. If all that were not, are not, nor ever will be
Quakers, were, are, and will be still in darkness, and in the way to Hell, (as
fain he would have all believe) then certainly he must conclude, that not only
those learned and pious Protestants, that translated the holy Scriptures into
the vulgar Tongues; but that even the holy Prophets and Apostles, also all the
Saints and Martyrs, all the devout Confessors, Virgins, and Widows, from the
beginning of the world till James Nailor's time, have their portion only in
that woeful place. Ah most wicked Wretch! how, or when had thou authority to
exclude true Penitents from eternal life? or from the benefit of that
Redemption purchased for us by the blood of the most holy Jesus?

We Protestants are taught and enjoined by the Church of God, under pain of
everlasting ruin, most unfeignedly to repent of all our sins past, and
carefully to endeavor for the future that we sin no more. And that we pray to
God to deliver us from all blindness of heart, from Pride, Vainglory, and
Hypocrisy; from Envy, Hatred, and Malice, and all Incharitableness: From all
Sedition, privy Conspiracy and Rebellion, from all false Doctrine, Heresy and
Schism; from Hardness of heart, and Contempt of his Word and Commandment. That
he would please to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred and are
deceived: and give us all increase of Grace to hear meekly his Word, to receive
it with pure affection, and bring forth the fruit of the Spirit: And with the
holy Prophet, that God would please to make us clean Hearts, and renew right
Spirits within us: That he would not cast us away from his presence, nor take
his holy Spirit from us; but mercifully give us the continual comfort of his
help, and establish us with his free Spirit: and as a just acknowledgement of
his Goodness, endeavor all our days in our several stations, to teach his ways
unto the wicked, that sinners may be converted unto him.

And now will such a sincere course, and such humble Prayers as these stand us
in no stead, unless also we become Quakers? God forbid!

Sure I am, there will come a day in which 'twill appear, who served God, and
who served him not. When our Thomas may perhaps wish to no purpose, that he had
never spent his time so idly, in quest of nothing but incentives to Pride and
Immorality: nor had abused God's Servants, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost,
as Saint Peter said some had done Saint Paul's Epistles, In which (says he)
are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.

Thus our foolish Quaker thought that if he did but interlard his ruful
conceits with words of Holy Writ, and Hoop his leakie Vessel with that refined
Gold, 'twould certainly hold Water; that is, bring him reputation among those
of his own way, and perhaps some little profit too: which to all that have eyes
to see, cannot possibly be of any danger, the Hook being so visible
(notwithstanding all the glory of the Bait) that nothing will be caught except
some poor, contemptible, and very selly Fish indeed. So that all his trouble
was to no purpose, unless to show his fool-hardiness in giving holy Isaac and
Ezra the lie, or to insinuate this way what skill he had at Sharps, by his thus
furiously running the Bible through.

Sure he and his Fairy-crew are the very people pointed at by Saint Paul, when
he said, (in 2 Timothy 3.) Of this sort are they that creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women, laden with sin, led away with diverse lusts, etc. adding in
the very next Chapter, The time will come when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own lusts heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears, etc.

But our Quaker will not endure that this should be fulfilled by him and his
Blazing-stars; for they (if any body he so mad as to believe him) have got the
Key of David with which they can instantly unlock all mysteries. It may be so;
but I should be extremely loath to swear it. For instance, I verily believe he
knows not the meaning of, Beatus qui praestolabitur; and perveniet ad dies
mill trecentos triginta quinque: nor of (...). These are words of holy
Scripture, yet certainly neither he nor any Quaker living can tell us, (I do
not say the bare English of them, but) the true intent, meaning, and
signification thereof. Sure I am that secret things belong to God; but the
revealed to us and our Children.

Our Thomas is therefore but a false man, and a Hypocrite, boasting of skill in
those mysteries which (indeed) he knows nothing of, being wholly ignorant of
that very thing wherein he pretends his greatest, his incomparable Talent lies.
No, he is much fitter to plant Tobacco, etc. or at best to mind his Ax and Saw,
the Joynter and the Adz (alias Nedde) the Crisle and the Head-knife, the Spoak
and the Round-sheve, the Dowling and the Taper-Bitts, the Tap and the
Bung-bore, than to open intricate and abstruse places; being undoubtedly much
more dexterous and of a clearer understanding in the use of these Tools, than
in the sacred business of a divine Interpreter.

Nay, worse yet; I believe he is ignorant in his very Trade of Quack
Chyrurgery, and cannot so much as enlighten his credulous and very venturous
Patients, with the meaning of the Hypo and the Epigaster, the Medulla Spinalis,
and Pilorus; the Syncondrosis, Syndeurosis, and Synsarcosis; nor how far it is
from the Midriff to the left Ventricle of the Heart; or from his own
Metapedium's to the Subclavicular branch of his Vena Cava: He knows not what
the Thorax, the Apophysces Mamillares, the Diaphragma, the Nombril, the
Paroxysm and Prostata, Parastates, Amnios or Corion mean: Nor is he able to
acquaint them (Cacochymically) how the Placenta has to do with the Lacteal
vein, or the seat of the Vertebra's with the Os Sacrum: Or what a Cathartique
Cataplasm signifies to a Quaker that has a Windmil in his Scull: nor discover
to the World all the Distempers China-root, Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, Diapalma,
and Album Rasis, are good for. Nor how far it is from Scylla to Charybdis, or
what consanguinity there is between the Porpos and the Whale, or the Craw-fish
and the Lobster.

Now if he has but Honesty enough to confess his ignorance in these, and ten
thousand other as poor and common things, how much more easy is it for him to
be defective in far remoter undertakings?

But, notwithstanding his huffing pretense to the Key of David, he is so
conscious of somewhat ('twere well if of his own ignorance) that in the
fifteenth Page of his abominable Book, he says, As you prize the welfare of
your immortal Souls, cease from man, and man's teaching: In which (methinks)
he is guilty of Felo de Se, of having destroyed himself; for he adds, that the
true Teacher is only the anointing from within: and we all know that our
Thomas is not that anointing; therefore not fit at all (by his own confession)
to be a Teacher. And here indeed (to give the Devil his due) he was very much
in the right on it; for having no authority from either God or Man to teach, all
he ever did, or can do; will be but man's teaching, and the very worst way in
the World of teaching too. How foolish therefore was he in this way of
expressing himself? bidding people cease from doing that very thing which he at
the same time does; intimating (to such fools as will believe it) as if he were
really something more than Man; leading men to the same fatal Precipice that
Herod's Flatterers arrived at, to vouch his proud sayings, his imperious
Nonsense, to be the Voice of God, and not of man.

After which he invites us all to come and drink of the Waters of life freely;
as if he alone had had them in his keeping, not to be dispensed but when,
where, and to whom he pleased; this was very hard and strange indeed! Is it no
longer possible to partake of those blessed Springs but from his Heretical and
poisoned Cistern? God forbid! I could wish the poor wretch may be forgiven this
extravagance; for certainly he knows not so much as what those holy Waters
mean: Let us therefore most earnestly pray in the words of holy Church,

That God, who shows to them that be in error the Light of his Truth, to the
intent they may return into the way of righteousness, would mercifully grant to
all them that are admitted to the fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they
may eschew all those things that are contrary to their Profession, and follow
such good things as are agreeable to the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

But if really those holy Waters were in his keeping, and wholly at his
dispose, may we not dare to suspect his generosity? Does his own trifling
Pedlary stuff go off at that free rate? who ever has received his corruptible
things for nothing? Has he never meekly fingered Goose or Gibblets, Pig or
Pettitoes, Wine or Honey, by way of soothing, from those of his own Gang? How
then shall we believe that he will do greater and infinitely better matters
freely?

Freeness, in the best sense, is a branch of holy Charity, which he is so far
from, that he is become unjust too; a Robber upon God's Highway to Heaven;
bids us stand, and deliver up the very means of Salvation: forbids holy and
lawful Teaching, and the use of that Commission which God himself has given;
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost: And would invalidate that most gracious condescension of
our Lord in saying, As my Father sent me, so send I you. And thus be would
destroy and root up even what the Lord himself has planted.

Now, what can be said bad enough of this miserable Charon, this wicked
Ferry-man of Hell? that thus Rows one way, and looks another; that sets up a
trade of Teaching, and at the same time tells the people that they need none?
Giving us indeed (not the Waters of Life, but) a World of Nonsense, freely; and
ought certainly to be as freely chastis'd and corrected for it.

But if we look to the bottom of his wicked design, the main of his Artillery
lies levelled against those that serve at God's Altar; and is hugely ill at
ease, that God and Man has appointed such any thing to live upon; as thinking
it abundantly sitter they should be forced to beg their Bread. And this,
because he considers that some encouragement, some assistances even from this
world, are but necessary to whet the industry of the Ingenious, for their
better and more cheerful progress in true Piety and good Learning: and might
consider also, that not only for this, but likewise for our everlasting
concerns in the other world, there is an allowed respect to a recompense of
reward. But the destruction of all good, seems to be the principal thing he
aims it; knowing, that as long as ever Holiness and pious Education, Devotion
and Sincerity, have any countenance in the world, so long will the Ignorance
and the Folly, the Malice and the Hypocrisy of Quakers be discovered and
condemned. He therefore charges the main encouragers of Virtue and true
Religion, by the woeful name of Hirelings; and thinks it a most fine and glib
way to depreciate and bring disparagement upon the best of men; as if he were
infected with the Plague, and could not endure to see any body sound and well.

The Tithes (the chief cause of all his grumbling) are but a portion which God
himself, out of his own world, has given to such as minister about holy
things: And may not the Great God of Heaven and Earth do what he will with his
own? Is thy eye evil (said our Savior) because I am good? 'Twas never likely
that God would be less kind to the Servants of his own House, than he had been
to any body else; or that he meant to exclude them only from the benefit of
his good Providence. They that will not work, neither let them eat, is most
authentically true; yet not in all cases, nor of all persons, nor of any at all
times. The labor of the Body profits little; that of the Mind must of
necessity be of as much greater value, as it is of a higher importance. It Is
therefore but in vain to say, that no man works but he that goes to Plough, or
that no man is charitable but he that gives his whole Estate away. He that
watches and takes care over the Flock of Christ, that labors in the Vineyard
of the Lord, or in the work of the Ministry, may certainly with good reason be
said to work; and it is very eminently known who it was Saint Paul called, his
fellowworker in the Lord.

In Genesis 47.22. it is said The Priests had a Portion assigned them; and, that
holy Joseph (that knew better than any Quaker living both what to do, and what
to leave undone) would not meddle with any part of that Portion. And God making
a Prohibition by the Prophet, ( Hos. 4.4.) says, Let no man strive nor reprove
another; for this people are as they that strive with the Priest. And the holy
Patriarch Abraham (whose Faith, Wisdom, and Obedience did infinitely surpass
all that our Thomas is endu'd with) gave a tenth part of all that he had to the
Priest, (Hebr. 2.7.) which me thinks might be enough to stop those unhallowed
Mouths that so inveterately rail against such as they ought with humble
reverence to honor and esteem, at least for their work-sake, as being the
Ministers and the Ambassadors of God.

To which might be added, the obedience due to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake: and then, what was confirmed by Magna Charta, and by Charta de
Foresta (in the 9th year of Hen. 3.) may very reasonably take place. The words
are, We have granted to God, and by this Our present Charter have Confirmed,
for Us and our Heirs for ever, That the Church of England shall be free, and
shall have all her Holy Rights and Liberties inviolable. This stood good then,
and does so still with such as have not lost all sense of Honesty as well as of
Religion; for it is a Maxim in all Laws, Quod Nostrum est, sine facto Nostro
transferri non potest. And Solomon says to such as refuse obedience in much the
like case; He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer
shall be an abomination: nor was it ever doubted by any man of Justice and
Integrity, but that an estate in Tithes or otherwise belonging to the Church,
was as truly and justly the Right and Property of every Incumbent Canonically
Ordained, Instituted, and Inducted, as any thing an honest man lawfully enjoys,
can possibly be his. All which the holy Apostle justifies, when speaking of
what he and others might do by God's own Order, (1 Cor. 9.6, 11, 13, 14.) Have
not we (says he) power to forbear working? If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things? Do ye not know that
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and
that they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has
the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

But our Lay-preacher, this infallible Cooper, hates as well the name of Priest
as the paying of his Tithes; and shows it in saying (in his fifth Page) That
the Priests did bemoan the death of Oliver, and that this had been the manner
of the Priests of all sorts. All which is a most abominable untruth: For when
did ever any true Protestant-minister of the Church of England, make any
fawning Addresses to Richard Cromwell? or bemoan and grieve for the death of
Oliver? speak Thomas, and call thy self a Liar and a Fool; and then
peradventure God may give thee Grace to repent before it be too late. And
remember that our Blessed Lord was himself both a Bishop and a Priest; and is
said by the Author to the Hebrews to be a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedec; and in another place, to be the great Shepherd and Bishop of our
Souls.

Near the latter end of his waste Paper (which he has been taught to call
Postscript) seems to lodge the greatest Foolery of any in the whole Project:
for he calls us all his Friends, Oh his dear Friends! a mighty alteration this!
How dares he venture to call us so, whom in another place he proclaims to be
the Enemies of Christ? Our blessed Redeemer said, Ye are my friends if ye do
what I command you: but our Thomas not being willing to do that, pay Tribute to
whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom, or Honor to whom Honor's due, cannot be
Christ's friend, and therefore not fit to be supposed ours. Yet in Christian
Charity I Will most heartily recommend Saint Paul's advice ( Heb. 3.12.) not to
him, or to the Quakers only, but likewise to all those other unhappy wretches,
who from the bosom of God's Church, run greedily upon their own ruin: Take
heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God.

It Is not making of a great noise, or speaking loud and long to no purpose, nor
repeating the same words a hundred times over in the same Speech, an
impertinent Harangue of the Light, and of the Spirit, in a confused, uncouth,
and most incoherent manner, (which really and truly is the whole business of a
Preaching-Quaker) this (I say) is not the way to make our Calling and Election
sure. But the certain and safe course is, truly and most earnestly to repent
us of all our sins, to be in love and charity with our Neighbors, leading a
new life, following the Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his
holy ways; (for, without holiness no man shall see the Lord:) This (I say) is
what most certainly will stand us in good stead at the Hour of Death and Day of
Judgment. This is the Law and the Testimony, (Isa. 8.20.) according to which
whosoever speaks not, it is because there is no LIGHT in them.

Atteb i'r COWPER O GAERWYS, o'i Lythyr anraslon at y CYMRU.
YSpys oeddem er ystalm fod y Bendro arnat; and nis gwybuom die fod o'th gof,
nes gweled die bappyr anhirion. Tydi a wyddit fod y Cymru wedi eu dyscu in Ffydd
a Ffyrdd yr Arglwydd, lawer cant o flynyddoedd cyn i'r Wiber ddodwy in die
Siolyn, na bod crioed son am Gwaceriaeth in y bid; ac a wyddit ma'i and Cyscu
yr oeddem pan beraist ti inni Ddeffro.

Pa bryd y clowaist nyni'n gwadu fod dydd yr ARGLWYDD wedi gwawrio? Ma'i and
CRIST yw goleini'r bid, Neu, ma'i and Ei YSPRYD bendigedig Of, sy'n Towys, in
Cyfrwyddo, ac in Cynghori Ei holl ufydd wasanaethwyr? A phwy o Honom (trwy holl
Wynedd) a wyddost in disgwil llwyddiant Corphorol nag Ysprydol, in y bid hwn,
nag in y bid a ddaw, heb wir Edifeirwch, ac nes ufudd grefu began Dduw faddeuant
o'n holl bechodau a'n camweddau, i'r mwyn grasusol Haeddedigaethau'r JESU? Onid
ydys eusys in Ein dyscu in yr EGLWYSI, a chan Lyfrau da Ein BUGEILIAID
CYFREITHLON Ein hunain, beth a Gredwn, a pheth a Wnawn? Ma'i and Ffydd in unig,
onid hefyd fod in anghenrhaid Weithredoedd da tuag at feddianu bywyd
tragwyddol. A elli di ddyscu ffordd well, a nes i'r Nef na hon? Os medri, Dysc,
onide, Taw.

In die holl Rigwm nid oes un gair mewn Trefn, na Rhol, na Rheswn. A diammeu mae
dianghenrhaid a fuasse mined i ddywedyd (i'r mwyn lles i'r eneidiau) fod dwrf
in HAFREN a DOWRFDWY, a'i fod in ymdowallt o'r rheini i'r mor; fod Ser a
Lleuad, fod Codiad a Machlud Haul, a dymyno ar bobl goelio fod hyn in wir: ac
etto roedd die daith ynfyd ti, o efrydd in oferach.

And ymhellach i egluro die ffolineb, tydi a fynit inni gymeryd die air, ma'i
CYFLOGWYR yw'r EGLWYSWYR, ac ma'i ffo a wnant pan ddelo'r BLAIDD i blithe Eu
Defeidiau. BLAIDD diffaith distrowys wit ti, in Ein mysc er Stalm; in ceisio
gwenwyno'r Meusydd, a Sathru'r Corlennydd tan die draed: etto pa sawl un o'r
CYFLOGWYR rheini a redasant o'r Wlad o herwydd die fod ti ynddi?

Dos, gofyn i Dduw faddeuant am die holl bechodau a'th anwireddau, cyn i'r
DDRAIG Gythreilig o'r Carchardy tanllyd, die lysco in the losci in dragwyddol.

FINIS.

