DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices and Council.
Jo. Borlase. Hen. Tichborne.


Whereas We have lately seen a Printed Paper, entitled, a solemn League and
Covenant for reformation and defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of
the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms, of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, which seems to have been Printed at London, on the ninth day of
October 1643.

And forasmuch as in the said League or Covenant, there are diverse things
contained not only tending to a seditious combination against His Majesty but
also contrary to the municipall Laws of this Kingdom of Ireland, and
destructive to the Church Government established by Law in this Kingdom, And
for that by the Laws of this Kingdom, no Oath ought to be tendered to, or taken
by any person or persons whatsoever in this Kingdom, but before a Judge or
other person thereunto Lawfully Authorized by His Majesty, and for that the
said League or Covenant, is now endeavored to be set on foot in this Kingdom,
without His Majesty's Privity, Direction or Alowance. And in regard it is
directly contrary to the Liberty and freedom of the Subject, to be by any such
Oath or Covenant preengaged, And for that the setting on foot at this time in
this Kingdom the said League or Covenant, without His Majesty's Alowance, may
not only beget much distraction and unquietness amongst His Majesty's good
Subjects, but also may prove very penal to all those who shall presume to
tender or take the same: We therefore for prevention of such mischiefs, do in
His Majesty's name strictly charge and Command, all His Majesty's good Subjects
of what degree or quality soever, within this Kingdom upon their Allegiance to
His Majesty, that they presume not to enter into or take the said League
Covenant or Oath. And We do hereby likewise inhibit and forbid all His
Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom, to impose, administer, or tender the said
League Oath or Covenant. And if notwithstanding this Our Proclamation, any
person shall presume to impose tender or take the said League Oath or Covenant,
We shall proceed against him or them with all severity according to the known
Laws of the Land.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 18. day of December, 1643. Ri.
Bolton. Canc. La. Dublin. Ormonde. Roscomon. Edw. Brabazon. Ant. Midensis. Cha.
Lambart. Geo. Shurley. Gerrard Lowther. Tho. Rotherham. Fr. Willoughby. Tho.
Lucas. Ia. Ware. G. Wentworth.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Jmprinted at DUBLIN, by WILLIAM BLADEN, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1643.

Reprinted by commandment of the Lord Lieutenant at the request of the Commons
House of Parliament. 1644.


