



Titus Vespatianus Emperor of Rome, Conqueror of Jerusalem, Surnamed the
delight of mankind, w.s. sc.



THE WONDERFUL, AND MOST Deplorable HISTORY OF THE LATTER TIMES OF THE JEWS:
With the Destruction of the City of Jerusalem.

Which History begins where the Holy Scriptures do end.

By JOSEPHVS BEN GORION

Whereunto is added a Brief of the ten Captivities; with the Pourtrait of the
Roman Rams, and Engines of Battery, etc.

As also of Jerusalem; with the fearful, and presaging Apparitions that were
seen in the air before her Ruins.

Moreover there is a Parallel of the late Times and Crimes in London, with
those in Jerusalem.

London, Printed for John Sims, at the Sign of the Kings Head at Sweethings
Alley end in Cornhil, next the Royal Exchange. 1671.

To the Honorable Sir JOHN ROBINSON Knight and Baronet, Lieutenant of the
TOWER, and Alderman of the CITY of LONDON.
Honorable Sir,
THIS rare and remarkable Piece of History, as it was Dedicated before to the
City of London in general, because of the quality of the Subject; Treating of
the ruin of one of the most famous Cities upon Earth: So upon this Review, and
new Edition, I take the boldness of Dedicating it to You alone; who are one of
the Eminent Members, and Ornament thereof; as also being Governor of that
Place, wherein lies her chiefest security.

It was formerly Dedicated to this City, in the highest brunt of the late
civil Confusions. And the Noble Author of the following Epistle thought it
very seasonable to do so, out of an express design to awaken, and warn Her of
her desperate condition at that Time; And it produced so happy effects, that it
made such impressions upon the spirits of many of the best Citizens, that they
began to recollect themselves, and see their Error; The said Author
representing unto them, that the same Crimes, and Crying sins, which reigned in
Jerusalem before her last and utter destruction, were very rife then in London;
which were, the spirit of Sedition, instable and stubborn Rebellious hearts,
their murmurings at Government, and an itch after Innovations. As also the
defiling of their Temple, the Irreverence and comtempt of the Priests, the
violation of the Tombs of the dead, with other acts of Profaneness and
Sacrilege; But principally the Crucifying of the Lord of Life.

The City of London was guilty at that time, of all these ugly and enormous
Crimes, and may be said to be lead all along by a true Jewish spirit; And
concerning the last, viz. the Crucifixion of our Savior, though no Comparison
may be made without a high profaneness, yet the manner of murdering CHARLES the
first, may be humbly said to bear a kind of analogy, and resemblance with it;
Nay the Jews (whereof there are swarms now in this City) will not stick to say,
that it was a Murder beyond theirs; for, what they did, they did it out of
blindness and ignorance: for they neither knew nor acknowledged Him to be King
of the Jew: But the English did accuse, and arraign, they did condemn, and
murder King CHARLES by the name of their own King, the King of England.

God Almighty avert those further judgments which hang over us, as prays,

Honorable Sir, Your most humble servant, and Fellow-Citizen J. S.

TO Englands Imperial Chamber THE Renowned City of LONDON.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right worshipful the Sheriffs, Mr.
Recorder, with the Court of Aldermen, and Common Council, etc.
AS among men, so there is a resemblance, and a kind of affinity among Cities
which are the Mansions of men; and a reverence due to some more then to others:
Carthagena in Spain, does acknowledge old Carthage in Africa to be her Mother;
Leyden in Holland does glory that she is allied to Lions in France, both of
them bearing the name of Lugdunum; Saragosa in Aragon confesses her self
daughter to Syracusa in Sicily; and London, by some Antiquaries is called
Troynovant, as having been first founded by the Trojans; But of all the Cities
upon the earthly Globe, Jerusalem deserves most reverence, in regard our
Salvation was wrought and consummated in Her; In regard, that grand
Prepitiatory Sacrifice for hum^ne souls was offered in her: Therefore, under
favor I held it not improper to Dedicat the History of this once so famous
Metropolis, to the flourishing City of London.

In the holy Bible, the most authentic Patent of saving Faith, there is a Text
which reflected upon the ^ncient Nation of the Jews, and aimed only at their
C^ntry, viz. In Jury God is known, etc. Psalm. 76. He was known indeed in that
Land by the multitude of his Mercies, but afterward by the severity o^ his
Judgments; That race of people, partly because they were not co-labourers at
the building of that Mount of humane pride the Tower of Babel, were, for many
ages, the objects of his favor, till they made themselves afterward the
subjects of his fury. And as the Philosopher tells us Corrup^o optimi est
pessima, or as we find that the sweetest wines become the tartest vinegar; so
those heavenly indulgences turned to heavy indignations, those silver showers
of extraordinary benedictions became black sto^ms of vengeance. It is the
method of divine Justice to correct first with rods, then with scourges; and,
if that will not do, with ^corpions; The Jews felt all the three degrees; and
never was any people upon earth made greater examples of wrath the his own
chosen Inheritance, a peculiar people that mig^ have ^m'd the right hand of
primogeniture among the re^ of mankind. Now, whoso^ver desires to make
reserches into the grounds of these sad dysasters, will find, it was their
sedi^ious proud spirits, their instable and stubborn rebellious hearts, (which
did them more mischief then the Roman R^, or any other destructive Engines) the
defiling ^f their Temple, the violation of the Tombs of the dead, with other
acts of profaneness and sacriledg: but principally the rejecting and crucifying
of the Lord of life. For never any thing did thrive with them afterward;
insomuch, that, if there were no other motive for the Jews conv^sion, the
length of these beavy judgments under which they groan to this day, were enough
to do it; And it is observed the length of these judgments does often puzzle
their intellectuals and put them at a stend; F^r some of their Rabbis will
stare and shrinkin their shoulders at it, and sometimes break out into a kind
of confession, that their judgments could not last so long but for crucifying
one that was more then a man; Besides, the punctual accomplishment of our
Saviors predictions were sufficient to conv^nce any rational creature; For,
not long after, their Land became a stage of blood, and all kind of barbarisms.
Their so renowned City, their Temple and Sanctum Sanctorum so famed all the
earth over was made level to the ground: And observable it is, that these
judgments fell upon their Temple at the highest time of holiness, at their
Passover or Jubilee; so that one might say, That season which was ordained for
their salvation turned to their perdition; Moreover the very inanimate
creatures, and vegetals, the very soil of the Country became co-sufferers with
them, being forced to part with her plenty, as well as with her people ever
since.

From that time to this day, it is well known what Runagates, and Land-lopers
they have been up and down the world; For although it is known there be many
scores of thousands of them, d^spersed and squandred here and there upon the
surface of the earth, yet these straglers could never since grow to such an
unity and coalition as might form the species of any settled Government; but
they still shuffle and prog up and down, being no better then slaves
wheresoever they take footing. Moreover it is observed, that they apply
themselves to the most sordid and servile conditions; for commonly they are
either Lombardiers and Brokers for the pettiest things, as far as a blew point:
Or they are Gabeliers and Tollmen, having some inferior places in the
Custom-houses, a profession so undervalued, and held infamous by their
Ancestors: Or they serve for Spies and panders for intelligence, so that there
be few great Officers in Turkey, but have a Jew for that purpose; For they are
known to be the subtilest, and the most subdolous race of people upon earth, as
also the most fearful and pusillanimous; inso much that they are employed no
where in the wars, nor worth the making slaves of.

Now, the reason, why they are so far degenerated from their primitive
simplicity and courage, is their frequent captivities, their desperate
fortunes, the necessities and hatred they have been habituated unto from time
to time. For no Nation on earth has been so generally contemned, both by
Christians and Pagans; witness one Heathen Poet among diverse ot^ers, in these
Hexameters, wherein there is an accumulation of so many base attributes cast
upon them, Tum Judaea cohors infida, molesta, rebellis;
Perfida, dira, ferox, perjura, ingrata, superba.
Now the moralists observe, that nothing does depress and deprave ingenious
spirits, or corrupt clear wits, more then scorn, and necessity; nothing cowes
them more then wan^, and indigence; -- Virtutibus obstat
Resangusta domi --.
Touching the ten Tribes that were led Captives beyond E^phrates, the present
Jews know not what is become of them; yet they believe they never became
Apostates or Gentiles to this day. Some there are, and those of the best rank
of Learned men, who hold, that the Tartars of Scythia, who about the year 1200.
or a little before, became first known to the rest of the world by that name,
and hold at this day a great part of Asia in subjection, are of the Israelits
progeny, namely, of those ten Tribes, which were carried Captive to Assyria by
Salmanazar, and some of his Predecessors.

The first argument they pr^duce, is, that the word Tartari signifies in the
Syriak a Residue, or Remainder; such as those Tartars are supposed to be, of
those ten Tribes.

Secondly they allege, that they have always embraced the Circumcision, the
An^ent Character of Jud^ism.

Thirdly, they urge sundry Texts in E^ (...) proba^ hereof; But this opinion
has found no (...) entertainment, with the best sort of Antiquaries.

The Jews of the Tribe of Benjamin (they say) are thos^ in Italy, Poland,
Germany, the Turks dominions and all the Levantine parts; The Tribe of Judah,
they hold to be settled in Portugal, where, they will not stick to say, that
some thousands families of their race are, whom they dispense with all to make
a semblance of Christianity, as far as the taking of investitures in holy
orders.

From hence they say their Messiah is to come; of whom one may hear them
discourse with such a relish, such a self-pleasing conceit and confidence that
is wonderful. This may be the reason why they instruct their children, and
expound their law in the Lusitanian language in their Synagogues where women
are not permitted to enter; for they hold them to be of an inferior creation
to man, and made only for sensual pleasure, and propagation. They much glory
of their mysterious Cabal, wherein they make the reality of things to depend
upon letters, and words; but they hold, that the Hebrew has the sole
privilege of this. This Cabal, or kind of knowledge, which is naught else but
tradition transmitted from father to son, and so from one generation to
another, is, as they say, a reparation in some measure for the loss of our
knowledge in Adam; And, they say, it was revealed four times: First to Adam, who
being thrust out of Paradise; and sitting one day very sad, and sorrowing for
the loss he had of that dependency the creatures have upon the Creator, the
Angel Raguel was sent to comf^rt him, as also to instruct him, and repair his
lost knowledge; This they call their Cabal, which was lost the second time by
the Flood, and Babel. Then God discovered it to Moses in the bush: The third
time to Solomon in a dream, whereby he came to know the commencement, the
mediety, and consummation of times, whereof he composed many Volums which were
lost in the grand Captivity. The last time, they hold, that God restored the
Cabal to Esdras, (a book they highly value) who by Gods command withdrew
himself to the wilderness forty days attended by five Scribes, who in that
space wrote 200. and four books; whereof the first 134. were to be publicly
read; but the other seventy were to pass privately among the Levites; and those
they pretend to be Cabalisticall, and not to be all lost.

Concerning the present Religion of the Jews, there be three Sects of them. The
first, which is the greatest, are called the Talmudists, in regard that besides
the Holy Scriptures, they hold the Talmud for authentical, a book composed by
their Rabbines The second sect of Jews, receive only the Scriptures. The third,
which is called the Samaritan, and whereof there are but very few at this day,
admit only of the Pentateuch; viz. the five books of Moses, for authentic
Scripture.

As, according to my former observation, this Nation is grown cowardly, and
cunning, even to a proverb, which must be imputed to their various thraldoms,
contempt, and poverty (which though it use to dastardize, and depress the
courage, yet it whets the wit); so besides these qualities, they are commonly
leight, and gidd^-headed, much symbolizing in humor with some of the
Apocalypticall zelots of these times, and bold expounders of Daniel, with the
other Prophets; whereby they use to sooth, or rather fool, themselves into some
egregious fanaticall (...), which nevertheless passes among them for an
Illumination.

The first Christian Prince that expelled the Jews out of his Territories, was
that heroic King, our Edward the first, who was such a sore scourge also to
the Scots; and it is thought diverse families of those banish^d Jews fled then
to Scotland, where they have propaga^ed since in great numbers; witness the
aversion that Nat^on has above others to hogs-flesh. Nor was this their
extermina^ for their Religion, but for their notorious Cri^es; as (...) of
wels, ^ounterfeiting of coins, fals^fying of (...), and crucifying Christian
children, with other villainies. This happened in the year 1291. And sixteen years
after, France followed our example: It was near upon 200. years after, that
Ferdinand dis-terred them out of Spain, and five years after him, Emanuel of
Portugal did the like. But the Countries whence they were last expeld, was
Naples, and Sicily, Anno 1539. In other parts of Christendom they reside yet in
great numbers, as in Germa^y high and low, Bohemia, Lituania, Poland, and
Russia; In Italy also, they are found; but in no country which is subject to
the King of Spain; They live at Rom every quietly under the Pope's nose, and
St. Mark makes no scruple to entertain them at Venice. In sundry places of the
Ottoman Empire they are found very numerous; so that it is thought,
Constantinople and Thessalonica only, have near upon 20. thousand of them; Asia
is full of them, as Aleppo, Tripoli, Damascus, Rhodes, and indeed all places of
commerce, and traffic. There are numbers of them found also in Persia, Arabia,
and about Cranganor in India. And to come to Africa, they have their Synagogues
and Lumbards in Alexandria, the Grand Cairo; as also in Fesse, in Tremisen, and
diverse places in the Kingdom of Morocco. There are about one hundred families
yet left in Jerusalem. But that place where they are most unmingled is
Tiberias, which the Turk gave to Mendez the Jew, for some signal services;
Thither they oftentimes bring or send the bones of their dead friends, who have
left large Legacies, to be interred from other places.

Besides those various visible judgments which have fallen upon the Nation of
the Jews, as the utter subversion of their Temple, and City, with the slaughter
of above eleven hundred thousand souls during Titus siege; Besides the
degeneration of their Country, of that Land which flowed with milk and honey,
into such a barren condition; Besides their straggling confused course of life,
with the general contempt, and despicableness they fell into; Besides the
abjection (...) their spirits, and giddiness of their brains; I say, besides
all these changes upon their minds, it seems there is a kind of curse also
fallen upon their bodies; witness those uncouth looks, and odd cast of eye,
whereby they are distinguished from other people. As likewise that rankish kind
of sent no better indeed then a stinck, which is observed to be inherent, and
inseparable from most of them above all other Nations; And I wish that England
may not be troubled with that sent again.

The occasion of these sad calamities which fell down in such catarracts upon
the Jews, the discerning Reader shall discover in this ensuing story; therefore
very worthy of his perusal, in regard they may serve for cautions to all people
not to provoke the High Majesty of Heaven by such kind of sedition and
profaneness: they may serve as so many buoys to preserve them from sinking into
such gulfs of miseries; For if the natural branches were not spared, how can
the wild olive think to escape the fire of his displeasure?

So with my hearty prayers to Heaven for the prosperity and welfare of this
glorious City, and that she may take fair warning by these Judgments, I rest

Your Humble and ready Servant. JAMES HOWEL.
From the Prison of the Fleet 5. Feb. 1650.
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION of ASIA, AND The Holy Land.
ASia is twofold, the Greater, and the Less; the Less is a part of the Greater,
and is at this day called Anatolia in respect of the Eastern situation thereof
from Byzantium; the Greater, is now one of the four parts of the Earth, by
reason of the accession of America unto the former three; before, a third part,
and by the account of some, (according as Varro tells us) one of the two parts
of the same. For whereas they of late accounted Europe, Asia, and Africa, until
America or the New world was found out, others made Afric^ a part of Europe; so
the parts of the earth were Europe, one, and Asia the other, and no more. By
neither of these two accounts does Asia get, or lose, any thing from the vulgar
division; only when the division is made into two parts, Europe is a gainer.
Those which write of the name and etymology of Asia, derive the word from Asia
a woman, daughter to Oceanus and Thetis, wife to Iapetus, and mother to
Prometheus. This Genealogy if it be taken according to the letter, there is no
reason to suspect it fabulous, why any man of understanding should doubt it;
and yet if the meaning of the fable be searched into, it seems to carry in it
this appearance of truth; That Asia, was named so from Oceanus the sea, and
Thetis the water, or wife of the sea; that in this part only of the world which
before the deluge was peepled, came the flood and destroyed mankind by water,
the reason of the etymology lying hid in the name (...) which (...) moisture.
The bounds of this part of the eart^ are the Aegean sea, the Propont is, and
Black sea, Palu^ M^eotis, Tanais, Duina, which separate it from Europe^ but it
is parted from Africa by the Red sea, and Isthmus^ of Egypt. In the first ages
of the world, this part of the^ earth was more renowned then Europe, or any
part thereof; The affairs of Europe were very mean, or at least in great
obscurity, before Xerxes expedition against Greece, which was after the Baby
lonian Captivity of the Jews. But in Asia was the wonderful work of our
Creation, and of all other creatures wrought^ in thi^ part, our Savior wrought
our Redemp^on, a^ showed his miracles; here was the glorious and (...) the
Chaldoeans, signified by the Image ^ Head in Daniel, and that Monarchy of ^ by
the arms and br^t of silver ^ the Mac^donian kingdom of bras^ was (...), in the
Greater Asia, is ^uated the land of (...) (...) so from Canaan the son of Ham
the son ^ dwelt there; al^ (...) (...) (...) that peopled part of it: bu^ it
was (...) the (...) of Promise because God prom^sed tha^land u^ (...)
posterity; and the Holy Land, as the country in (...) the holy people dwelt,
which had the (...) the (...), and Priesthood. This (...) lies in 32. (...)
northward from (...) equinoct^ it is n^ (...) 2^. miles long, nor does the
bread^ exc^d 50 accou^ (...). paces to a mile; A co^ry so frui^full that the
^pture from the mouth of God ^lls us, that it was a Land which flowed with milk
and ^ney, and tha^ ^his was the glory of all Lands. Before the children of
Israel drove out the inhabitants, it was governed by 30. Kings; and afterward
it was divided into 2. Kingdoms in the days of Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
David numbering the people of the Land found the account to be thirteen ^undred
thousand men of war, excluding the Benjamites, and the tribe of Levi. The
fruits of this Land were these in special, Balm, Honey, Spices, Myrrh, Nuts,
and Almonds; nor is their Wheat to be forgotten, nor their Oil, with which they
traded in the market of Tyrus, besides the forenamed commodities, Ezech. 27.17.
That it did excel in Palm Trees Strabo tells us, and the Roman coyns which in
their reverse represent a woman sitting in the gesture of a mourner under a
Palm Tree signifying Judaea captivated. But the Almighty, as he drove out and
destroyed the Nations which dwelt in this land before; so did he afterward his
own people, because of the greatness of their sins, so that the Land (as he
tells us by his Prophet) spued them out; and turned part of this country
whereabout Sodom and Gomorrah stood into slime pits, or the dead or salt sea;
when as before it was for pleasantness like to the garden of God; even so did
God deal with his own unthankful and rebellious people: first he carried the
ten Tribes into bondage by Salmanazer, who at this day are not to be found, the
other two Tribes, were carried away into Babylon, where they endured 70. years
Captivity; and last of all for rejecting and crucifying his own son the Lord of
glory, they have been destroyed, driven out of their own Country, and continue
as vagabonds through the whole world. And the fruitfulness of this goodly
Country does scarce appear at this day; according to that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 07.33, 34. He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs
into dry ground: a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.

No man has observed the great increase of their seed, which Isaac fonnd (who
sowed in that Land, and reapt a hundred fold) at this day; the balm which
Justin the Historian writes of, brought in their treasure, was a plant, not as
some have thought, proper, or common to Arabia; but, as Pliny notes, peculiar
to the Lan^ of Judaea, or Syria, as others call it; and of that high price,
that it was valued at an equal rate, and sometimes double to silver; is now no
where to be found. Nevertheless, lest men should think in their foolish
imaginations, that this Land had never been such, as it is by the Word of God
himself commended to be, in some places there are certain marks and signs, of
the ancient fertility thereof; for in a certain Plain diverse miles long and
broad, there is found such fruitful pastures, that in so hot a Country the
gras^ is seen to grow in some places as high as a man's middle, in other places,
as high as to the breast. But though the Lord for a time has cut off this his
people, and turned their fruitful Land into barrenness; yet he has abundantly
showed, as in his word, that the fullness of the Gentiles being come in, God
will have mercy upon, and take into his favor this his Ancient people,
re-establish them in their own Land in security, and, without all doubt,
restore the Land to its former fruitfulness. All which let us humbly pray to
God the Father, that for his infinite mercies in Jesus Christ, he will speedily
accomplish, and turn the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
water-springs,

Amen.
The first Book of the WARS OF THE JEWS.
The Proeme.
IN the great Volum of Josephus, there were Historical Narrations made of
things, ^s they had reference in chief, to the Romans and other Nations: This
lesser Piece or Epitome rather, declares matters as they relate principally to
the Jews themselves, and the State of their Commonwealth, from the Macchabees
unto their final subversion; and ruin of the second House, therefore according
unto those things that we have found in the Book of Joseph the Priest, son of
Gorion, and in other books written according to most certain truth, we will
draw forth and rehearse some things for the comfort that may thence arise,
especially seeing all the Prophets have bent and directed their Prophesies and
predictions to this point, that the Kingdom of the house of David should be
restored and and flourish in time to come. Therefore if there had been any
Kings of the house of David during the time of the second Temple, then should
we have been in suspense, yea, even now already our hope had been dashed: But
there was no Kingdom of the house of David in that Age, save only a certain
Dominion that Zerrubbabel and Nehemiah had. Yea, rather the Kingdom remain at
that time in the House of the Machabees, and in such that were toward Them, and
their Servants. But now to the purpose.

CHAP. I.
When Alexander the first King of the Greeks had established his Kingdom, he
died, being yet but a young man, and his Kingdom was divided among four of his
Captains, as it is written, Whiles He is yet alive, His Kingdom shall be broken
and delivered into four coasts of the Heavens, Dan. 8. He left behind him a son
of tender years, called Archelaus, whose Tutor or Governor perceiving him to
be toward, gave him impoysoned drink, and made him away. These Captains made
war one upon another, of whom one that was named Ptolomy, procured M^ses Law to
be Translated into Greek to the intent he might find some occasion to pick a
quarrel against Israel. For by their Law he sought means to withdraw them from
their Religion, according to Psalm. 129. Many a time have they aff^cted me from
my youth up, may Israel now say. There were Seventy ancient men that Translated
the Law, whom P^olomy the King separate^ one from another, putting every man a
part in a house by himself. But they all agreed in one sense, albeit they
changed 13. places, which was not done without miracle, that they all agreed
together in the meaning and writing, as though one alone had writ it. These 13
places be these.

First, God created in the beginning. Here no word or thing is put before Name
of God, and also for that in the Greek Tongue, the thing that does is put
before, and that that is made, is placed after, least this word Ber^shith
should be taken for a ^reator, and E^him for a creature.

The second, I will make man according to the image and likeness, Genesis 1. I,
for we, that it should not be thought, as though he were one that consulted
with other therein.

The third, And God finished the sixth day and rested the seventh, Genesis 2.
(...) for seventh, least it should seem as though He had made any thing in the
seventh day, and in it ended his working.

The fourth, Go to, I will go down, and ^here will confound their Language,
Genesis 2. I, for we, least by speaking in the p^all number, He should have been
thought to be (...).

The fifth, And Sarah laughed, speaking to them that stood by her, Genesis 18.
With them that stood by her, for to her self, because Ptolomy the King should
not mock them, and say; Who showed you what she said to her self.

The sixth, Because in their fury they killed an Ox, and in their will they
brake the Crib. Genesis 29. Crib for an Ox Least the King should deride them and
ask, what has a man to do with an Ox.

The seventh, And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon that that
could bear a man, Exodus 4. That that could bear a man, for an Ass, least the
King should delude our Master Moses, because he rod on an Ass: and that he
should not say, how should an Ass bear a woman and two children? He would never
have done it, if he had not been a beggar.

The eighth, And the dwelling of the Children of Israel in Egypt, and other
lands, was 430. years, Exodus 12. Notwithstanding, they abode not in Egypt but
210. years, and that is, that their father Jacob told them: Descend ye (the
letters of the which word in Hebrew signify 210) thither. Furthermore, the
computation of 430. years, is from the year that Isaac was born, which was the
holy seed unto Abraham.

The ninth, And unto the little ones of the children of Israel stretched he not
his hand, Exodus 4. Little ones for Princes. As who would say, yea also unto
their little ones he stretched not his hand. Because he should not say, the
great men escaped, but the children of the sons of Israel escaped not.

The tenth, I took of them nothing of value, Numb. 16. Of value for an ass.
Least he should say, he took not an Ass, but he took one reward.

The eleventh, Which things thy Lord God has divided, that they may shine on
all People, Deuteronomy. 4. That they may shine is added. Least he should take an
argument thereof and say, Lo the Holy and blessed Lord has divided them to
all People, and has given them License to worship them.

The twelfth, He went and worshipped strange gods, which I commanded not to
worship, Deuteronomy. 17. To worship, is added. Least he should say, now have thou
called them to strange worshipping of gods.

The thirteenth, They Translated an Hare, Little feet, because the Kings wife
was called Hare, least he should say, the Jews mocked me.

When these Seventy elders had Translated the Law into the Greek Tougue,
Ptolomy rejoicing much in their wisdom, honored them with Princely apparel and
great rewards, brought them home again, merry and glad. Moreover he sent by
them oblations to our God. At that time there were many that condescend to
follow the Laws of the Grecians, but these Seventy refused. Not long after,
Captain Sele^cus, Ptolomyes companion in Office died, in whose stead Antiochus
reigned in Macedonia. This Antiochus making war upon Ptolomy, bereft him of all
his Dominions, and slew him. After that, he subdued the Land of Israel then
under the Regiment of Ptolomy, and waxed very proud. He hated Israel also,
because they loved Ptolomy, and aided him in the wars against him.

This is that Antiochus that builded a great City upon the sea coast, and
called it Antiochia, wherein he made a golden Idol, commanding that the
children of Israel should be brought unto it, and worship it. But some of them
chose rather to suffer death for the religion of their God, and some other fell
from the Synagogue their mother Church. Before this he took away also their
Sabbath, their New Moon, and league of Circumcision: forbidding that in any
wise they should observe these Commandments in any place throughout all his
Dominions. For the which he put many of the Israelites to death, and oppressed
them more, then did ever any of their enemies or adversaries. The second man in
honor next himself in Jerusalem, was one Polipus, he erected an Image in the
Temple, commanding the people of Israel to worship it: and whosoever was
disobedient, to be slain. Therefore he put to death Hanna and her seven
children, as it is mentioned in other places. When Antiochus perceived this, it
increased his hatred toward Israel, insomuch that he did his endeavor that
none of them should escape or be left alive, except such as would worship the
Image. Then fled many of the Israelites to the mount Modiit, and to Jericho,
because of the law of Polipus and Antiochus his lord, having to their Governor
the high Priest Mattathias son of John, otherwise called Casmoname. The Priest
enjoined them to fast, and punish themselves before the Lord with weeping
sackcloth and ashes. And after this he says unto them if ye will jeopard your
lives for the holy Lord, why dye we like women? Let us go and fight with
Polipus, and if we dye, we shall dye with honor: parad venture the Holy and
blessed God will help us, and will not root out the remnant of Israel. To this
counsel every man assembled, and made a covenant with him upon this thing.
Polipus hearing this, gathered his forces together, and made toward them to
destroy them, and what Israelite soever he found in his way, he slew him,
Mattathias the Priest, and all the remnant of Israel, understanding that
Polipus came against them, they went up the mount Modiit with their wives and
children. Then put he himself and his sons in a^or. He had five sons, Judas the
eldest, the next Johonathan, the third Joachan, the fourth Schimeen, the fifth,
Eleazar. All these were va iant men of war. When Polipus came to them, he
craftily spoke to Mattathias, saying: Thou art one of the chiefmen in Israel,
and a man of honor and estimation. Come down therefore, and all that be with
thee, worship the Image, and strive not against the King, that ye may live and
not be destroyed. Thou shall be their Prince also, if thou shall be
conformable. But the Priest in no wise would be seduced by him, but rather
cursed and reviled him. Mattathias had an Altar at the foot of the hill,
whereupon when he had offered sacrifice to the most blessed God: there came one
of the wicked Israelites out of Polipus Camp, and killed upon it a swine. This
villain was young and lusty, but the Priest was old: yet when he saw what this
lewd fellow had done, crying to his God to strengthen him, he challenged a
combat between himself and the fellow. Which thing being liked both of the
fellow, and of Polipus, with his whole army: Mattathias came down with his
drawn sword in his hand, and the fellow stood against him ready to receive him.
But the Priest rushing upon him, by the assistance of his God, overcame him,
cut off his head, and cast his carcass upon the Altar: whereat Polipus and his
whole Host were much astonished beholding one another. The Priest stood still by
the Altar, crying, which of you will come to me man for man? Then Polipus
picked out a strong champion, the best of all his army, and brought him out of
the arreis of his host, to teach him his lesson, how he should behave himself
with the Priest. The Priest therefore drew toward the camp with his naked sword
in his hand, as though he came to join with their champion: but leaving him, he
turned his sword upon Polipus, struck of his head, and fled to the hill. Then
blowing their horns, and making a shout together, they rushed down upon the
Grecians camp. But when the Grecians saw that their grand Captain was slain,
they fled, Chasmoname and his sons with all Israel followed the chase;
overthrew them, and made great slaughter.

This done, Mattathias the Priest went to Jerusalem, pu^ified the Temple,
restored the worshipping of God, and commanded all that were born during the
time of Polipus to be circumcised, for by the means of his inhibition, they
were uncircum^sed. Thus being established, he sat upon the Throne of the
Kiugdom, and drove the Greeks out of the Land of Israel. His kingdom endured
one year, which was the 212. year from the building of the second House. After
this he fell sick, and like to die, charged his sons to keep the observations
of the Lord, and to walk in his ways: also to play the men against the
Grecians, for the Religion of the Lord. Then brought he forth Judas a tall man
and a hardy, and placing him in the Sanctuary, took a horn of oil, and poured
it upon his head, whereat the Israelits clapped their hands, and gave a great
shout, saying, God save the King, God save the King.

Soon after, Judas gathered an Army of Israel, and made an expedition against
the Remnant of the Greeks that were left in the Holds of Israel, and whatsoever
he took in hand, God gave it good success, Notwithstanding, Antiochus sent
against him a Puissant Army, under the leading of one Captain Pelonius, against
whom Judas so warred, that the Grecians went to wrack, for he espied his time
when they were destitute of victuals, and speedily set upon them, beat them
down handsmooth, and approached to Captain Pelonius; slew the valiantest about
him, yea, and him also. When Antiochus heard this, he was in a great rage:
wherefore he chose out a most valiant Captain, called Lysias, and sent him
against Jerusalem, with 1000. Horsemen, and Footmen without number. Judas
having knowledge thereof, commanded a Fast throughout all Israel for three
days, and afterward took Muster of all his Army, and made over them Captains
of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens. These said to their soldiers,
Whosoever is afraid, etc. Whereupon many of the people returned home, yet there
remained 7500. of such courage all, that one would not have run away for a
hundred. Lysias divided his Host into three parts, committing them unto three
Captains, Nicanor, Bagris, and Ptolomy: But after the Israelits had once given
a great shout, the Lord beat down the Greeks, so that the Israelits destroyed
nine thousand of their enemies, and spoiled the whole Host, and they that
remained alive, took themselves to flight. The next day King Judas kept his
Sabbath, together with all Israel in the Temple, for the battle was upon the
sixth day. The morrow after, the Israelits returned to the spoil of those that
were killed, and after to pursue other that were not able to resist: but they
found none, for they were fled into Astaroth Karnaum.

During the time of these Wars, Antiochus invaded the Land of Persia, for they
had moved War against him, and done injury, wherefore he fought against him:
but having the overthrow at their hands, he returned to Antiochia with great
shame, where also he found his Armies with another dishonor and foil.
Wherewith he was in such rage, that he gathered together all the valiantest and
best Warriors in all Grecia, yea all that were able to bear weapons, swearing
he would bring with him such an Army, that all the ground about Jerusalem
should not suffice them to stand upon, whom he would have with him, even for
his footmen only: And he set forward his Horsemen, with horses and wagons laden
with all manner of munition for the Wars; as Bows, Shields, Targets, Swords,
and Spears, Brestplates, and Morions, besides a great number of Elephants, and
such, that twelve valiant men might fight upon one Elephant, the Elephants
being to them as a fortress. But King Judas taking heart to him, put his trust
in his God, and joined battle with him. At length when he with the power of
Israel approached to the Elephants, they ^lew them down right, so that the
Elephants roared, the Horses and all the beasts that drew the baggage and
furniture, were very sore afraid. King Antiochus also, being mounted upon his
Mare, and not able to sit her in her flight, was thrown down. His servants
therefore finding him, took him up, and bare him a while upon their shoulders,
and (being a corpulent and gross man) they were not able to carry him further,
but cast him down in the way. The Lord had plagued him also and his whole Host
before with a dry scab, or rotten mattier, and with other most horrible
diseases: therefore as he saw all these things, he confessed it to be the hand
of God. Whereupon he made a vow, that if he escaped, he would circumcise
himself, with all his soldiers, and would convert them to the worshipping of
the God of Israel; but God heard him not. He ^ed therefore a foot as well as he
might, and died by the way, through his grievous and sore diseases, and Opiter
his so^ reigned in his stead. King Judas with all Israel, returned with great
joy to the house of the Lord, offered sacrifice: and as they had laid wood upon
the Altar, and the sacrifice upon that, they called unto the Lord, lovingly to
accept their sacrifice, and in the mean space, fire came forth of the Altar by
its own accord, consuming the sacrifice and the wood, the like never chanced
unto them to this day. This miracle was wrought the 25. day of the month Elul,
or August.

The King made an expedition also into Arabia, to war upon the people thereof,
and made of them a great slaughter, brought them into subjection, and made them
tributaries. In his return he set upon a great City of the Greeks, wan it, and
razed it. After that, he made a road into Greece ten days journey, where came
against him with a mighty Army the chief man in King Opiters Realm, next his
person: but Judas discomfited him and all his people. From whence he went to
the City Sypolis, that was under the Romans, where came forth to meet him
Godolias with a royal Present, informing him that they had ever born the
Israelits good will, were their neighbors, and showed them pleasures. The King
examined the matter, and found their words true: so receiving their Presents,
departed thence.

After this Gorgorius a Captain of the Romans, moved War with Judas, but Judas
struck a battle with him, and destroyed his whole Army, so that none escaped.

Opiter son of Antiochus, hearing what acts Judas ^d in all Countries round
about: he mustred all his people, levied a puissant Army, wherewith he came and
besieged Bethar. Then cried Judas and all Israel to their God with fasting and
sacrifices. The night after, Judas divided his men into certain bands,
commanding them to give the Grecians a Camisado, and to enter their Camp whiles
it was dark: which they did, and slew very many of the best of the Grecians,
about 4000. preparing nevertheless for the Field against the morrow, where
also the Israelites did beat down many of the Greeks. In that Battle was slain
Eleazar son of Mattathias the Kings brother. For when he espied one with a
golden sword upon the Elephant, he thought him to be King Opiter, who had 20.
Elephants in his Army; therefore he took heart to him, and beat down the
soldiers of the Greeks on both sides were they never so strong, till he came
to the Elephant. And because the Elephant was so high that he could not reach
them that sat upon him, he thrust his sword into the belly of the beast, to
overthrow the King, whereat the Elephant shrunk together and fell upon Eleazar,
that he died there, for whose sake all Israel mourned, and made great
lamentation.

But Opiter hearing this, straightway made suite to King Judas for peace, and a
League to be made between them, which after Judas had consented unto, he
returned home into Greece again, and by the way fell into the hands of his
enemies that slew him.

After him succeeded Demetrius, his enemy, who was the cause of his death.
There were at that time, certain evil disposed persons of the Jews, that served
the King of the Grecians in his Wars, namely, one Alkimus who went to the King
of the Greeks at that time lying at Antiochia, and stirred him to move War upon
Israel, and King Judas. By whose suggestion Demetrius sent against Judas a
Captain called Nicanor, with a strong Army. H^ now coming to Jerusalem, let
Judas understand tha^ he bare him good will, and was desirous to make peace,
and to enter into a League with him. Therefore as Judas came forth accompanied
with his brethren the sons of Chasmoname, Nicanor met him in the way, embraced
him, and kissed him: after that, led him to his pavillion, and set him upon his
pavillion, and set him upon his seat of Honor. King Judas also after he
returned from the Camp, made unto N^canor a great feast, calling him and his
Noble men with him into Jerusalem, where they eat and drank at the Kings Table.
King Judas was yet unmarried, wherefore N^canor moved him to take a Wife, that
he might have issue, and not loose his succession, whose counsel Judas allowed.

This done, the ^ewd pick thank Alkimus declared to King Demetrius the League
that Nicanor had made with King Judas: whereat D^metrius being wroth, writ unto
Nicanor, that he had intel igence of his traitorous practices. Nicanor was in
Jerusalem when this Letter was delivered him. When Judas heard of the contents
of the Letter, he fled out of Jerusalem into Samaria, where he sounded a
Trumpet, and gathered Israel together.

Nicanor upon these letters entered the House of the Lord to seek Judas, but he
found him not. Then he examined the Priests, who swear they knew not what was
become of him.

After he had now sought him in every corner throughout Jerusalem, and could
not find him, in a fume he swear he would beat down the Temple: and gathering
together all his Host, He made speed against Judas.

When he heard of Nicanors coming, he issued out of Samaria to met him, and
after they had joined battle, Judas slew of the Greeks to the number of
eighteen thousand Horsemen, took Nicanor alive, and was intended to kill him.
But Nicanor besought pardon of him, alleging that the King knew well enough,
that he began not this battle with his good will, but left he should
transgress the Commandment of the King his Master. Wherefore (says he) I
humbly beseech your Majesty not to kill me, and I will swear unto you, that I
will never bear Arms against you, nor annoy you any more.

Upon this the King made a League with him, and dismissed him. So he returned
to the King his Master with shame enough. After this Demetrius died, and Lysia
his son reigned in his stead; yet the wicked men ceased not, but moved against
King Lysia to make a voyage in his own person, with a puissant Army against
Judas: but having the overthrow of King Judas, he fled unto Asdotum, till he
had strongly repaired again his Army. Then came he the second time upon Judas,
in which conflict the Israelites were put to flight. King Judas
notwithstanding, fled neither one way nor other, but called to his men, and
exhorted them to return and stick to him, yet they would not obey him.

So he abod alone with his drawn sword in his hand, unto whom none of his
enemies durst approach nigh, but with chariots and horsemen they environed him,
and Archers shot at him, wounding him sore, till he fell down dead upon the
ground, and they that were about him were taken alive. The time that he reigned
over Israel was six years. Many of the Greeks Captains were slain also in that
battle, and the King himself so wounded, that he was fain to get him into his
Country to be cured of his wounds. After he had recovered his health, he
returned again, came to Jerusalem, and to all the Cities of Israel, with the
power of the Greeks, wherewith he so afflicted them at that time for the space
of four months after the death of Judas, that the like tribulation was never
seen in Israel. In the mean season, the Israelits resorted to Ionathas the son
of Mattathias, and made him King in Iuda's stead, and were sworn unto him. This
Ionathas fought d^vers great battles against the Greeks, having the aid of one
Samnus of the kindred of Alexander the first, who had made a League with
Ionathas, and took his part against Grecia, wasted and spoiled it sore, till at
length, the King of the Grecians slew Ionathas by a train. His reign over
Israel was six years.

Then was Simeon his brother King in his stead; against him came Antiochus the
second, King of the Grecians came to war; but Simeon met him and laid first and
an ambush to entrap the Greeks, and then ordered his battle in array against
Antiochus. After that, he with his whole Host made a face, faining as they
fled, and retired, till they perceived Antiochus, who pursued them, to be
within their danger, then the ambush brake forth upon the Greeks, made a very
great slaughter. After this, Simeon returned to Jerusalem with great joy.

Then sent Ptolomee King of Egypt, an Embassage to Simeon King of Israel,
offering him his daughter in marriage. To this request when King Simeon had
consented, Ptolomee came to Jerusalem, where was made him a great Feast, and
they were allied together. Whereupon Antiochus King of the Grecians writ to
Ptolomee King of Egypt, privily to murder Simeon King of Israel. Whom Ptolomee
durst not but obey, for at that time the King of Egypt was in subjection to the
Greeks. Therefore when Simeon came into Egypt to see his father in law
Ptolomee, he was received with great feasting: but in the same time he had
poison given, that he died thereof. Besides this also, his son which came with
him, Ptolomee cast in prison. These things justly chanced unto Simeon, for that
he had transgressed the word of the Lord, that forbad all alliance with the
Gentiles. The time that he reignover Israel, was eighteen years.

Then John his son reigned in his stead, who was called Hircanus in the Greek
Tongue. The same-Ptolomy king of Egypt invaded Israel with all the power that
he could make. But John the son of Simeon met him, and the Lord overthrew
Ptolomy with his whole Host, that they were slain of the Israelites, and
pursued to the City Dagon, about which time the Israelites made trenches, and
besieged it. Now within the Town they had the mother of king Hircanus, whom
Ptolomy caused to be set upon the walls, and to be scourged with whips in the
sight of her son. When Hircanus saw the great affliction of his mother, he
would have raised his siege, and departed from Ptolomy. But his mother called
unto him, and said, My dear son John, regard not my trouble, for all
chastenings come from God. Proceed manfully with thy siege against this City,
for it is in great distress, and revenge me, thy father and brother murdered
by Ptolomy. The king followed her advise, and manfully raised a Mount, from the
which he battered the walls with Engines of Iron like Chariots, till they began
to shake. Wherefore many of the soldiers of the Town fled, and their companies
began to shatter, Ptolomy seeing this, commanded to afflict his mother yet
more, and to increase her scourgings, until the entrails of Hircanus was moved,
that he could not abide longer to see his mother so cruelly handled, but leave
the siege, and let Ptolomy escape: who nevertheless killed his mother, and
fled into Egypt.

In the fourth year of king Hircanus reign, Pius king of Greece came and
besieged Jerusalem with a great power and strength, whom Hircanus was not able
to meet and encounter withal in the field, but suffered himself to be closed up
in the City. The king of the Grecians therefore raised great towers against the
City, apart from the wall, dug a trench, and cast up a mount. Then planted
they their Engines named P^ams against the gates, so that the City was hard
besieged: for they beat down one of the Turrets that stood upon the wall,
whereat all Israel was afraid, and agreed together to issue out, and skirmish
with them, whatsoever should come thereon, life or death. Which although
Hircanus liked not, yet they did so, and slew many of their enemies, and put
them also to flight that they were constrained to encamp themselves further off
from Jerusalem. Then the Israelites came to the towers that the Greeks had
builded, and razed them to the ground. Thus they issued out daily, skirmishing
with Pius, until the Feast of the Tabernacles. Then sent Hircanus to Pius,
desiring him that he would grant them Truce, and let them be at peace while the
Feast lasted. His request Pius granted, and sent a fat Ox to be offered to the
God of Israel, covering his horns with beaten gold, and dressing him with
fillets of crystal, and other precious stones, clad also in a garment of
Purple, and diverse other precious clothes. He sent moreover plate, both of
silver, and gold, full of diverse kinds of spices, all to be offered unto the
Lord. When Hircanus saw this, he went out unto Pius, and after he had made
peace with him, he made him and his chief men of War a great Feast, and gave
him a Present of I^I C. pound weight of Gold: He went also with Pius to aid him
against the King of Persia, that at that time rebelled against him. But he
tarried there not long, because the time of Pentecost was at hand. Wherefore
Hircanus and the Host of Israel returned; but Pius and his Army of the Grecians
proceeded. Whom the king of the Persians met in the field, slew Pius himself,
and vanquished the residue, that almost none remained. Whereof when tidings
came to Hircanus he was very glad, and returned to Jerusalem with peace and joy.

After this, Hircanus made many great Battles with the Nations about him, and
had ever victory.

He also came to the Mount of Corizim, where he won a fort of the Sectaries and
Samaritans, and razed the Temple that the Sectaries had there as their house of
Sanctuary, which they builded by the license of Alexander the first king of the
Greeks. He that built it was Manasse the Priest, brother to Simeon the just.
But Hircanus the high Priest pulled it down two hundred years after that it was
builded. From thence he went to the Gity of Samaria and besieged it. This was
the m^ther City of the Samaritans, and Sectaries, which was brought to such
distress, by the long siege of Hircanus that they within were fain to eat the
carcases of Dogs.

The feast of Propitiation then at hand, Hircanus made speed to Jerusalem to
execute his office at that feast, (for he was high Priest) appointed for
Generals of his Army, Aristobulus his eldest son, and his second Antigonus.

In the mean season, they within the Town writ to the king of Greece, to come
to succor them, which he did with a great power. But these two young men the
kings sons, went to meet them with the strength of the Israelites, and gave
them the overthrow, killing them up almost every one, to the number of twenty
one thousand fighting men, and the rest fled.

That done, the young men returned to the siege of Samaria. King Hircanus their
father, had tidings of the coming of the Grecians against his sons, so that he
perceived they should have the Grecians of the one side of them, and the
Samaritans and Sectaries of the other: but he knew nothing what was happened, for
that victory chanced the ninth day of Tisre, or September. His heart therefore
was careful for his sons, and for Israel; notwithstanding he proceeded in his
office according as the feast required: as he entered into the house of Sanctum
Sanctorum, or the Most Holiest, to offer incense, and to call for mercy for his
children and for his Army, he heard a voice speaking unto him: Never trouble
thy mind with thy children, and with the Host of Israel, for yesterday the Lord
of mercy heard them, and according to the greatness of his goodness, for thy
Fathers sakes: Let thy heart therefore be right, and thy hands pure. So the
King going out of the Sanctuary, declared it to the people. Whereupon the next
day he sent post to Samaria and was assure dry certified again that this was
true. Wherefore King Hircanus was magnified greatly of all Israel, for they
knew that the blessed Lord accepted his doings, inspiring him with the holy
Ghost, and increasing his kingdom and Priesthood. After this he took journey to
Samaria, besieged it a whole year, and at length wan it, slew all also that
bare life within. He razed the walls, the palace, and burnt up the City. He had
wars also with the Romans, and the Arabians: and God prospered all that ever he
took in hand. Shortly after, God gave him rest and quietness from all that
dwelt about him, and from all his enemies, so that Israel rested boldly in
peace and tranquillity all his time.

On a time the King made a Feast to all the Sages of Israel, that they might
make cheer with him. And being pleasantly disposed, he said, I am your
Scholar, and whatsoever I do, that do I by your Authority. Wherefore I pray
you, if you see any fault in me, or if I do not as becomes me, tell me of it,
that I might reform my evil way. Then every man greatly extolled and commended
him, saying; who is like unto thee, our Lord King, so worthy of the Kingdom
(...) Priesthood, so notable in good works, whose works be done for the God of
heaven, which have also done us so much good in Israel? The King was well
pleased with their answer, and rejoiced greatly. Yet was there one among them,
an undiscreet man, called Elezaar, who spoke unadvisedly to the king. And it
please your Majesty, it were sufficient for you to have the Crown of the
Kingdom, ye might leave the Crown of the Priesthood to the seed of Aaron, for
as much as your mother was Captain in mount Modiit. Incontinent the King was
moved and sore displeased against the Sages: which certain of his servants that
hated the Sages, and smelled somewhat of Sects, perceiving one of them,
informed the King that whatsoever that undiscreet person had spoken, it was not
without the advice of the Sages.

Whereupon the King demanded of the Sages, what law shall that man have that in
despite of the King speaks things to his reproach? They made answer, he is
worthy to be whipped. Then said one of the Saducees, the matter is plain, that
according to the minds of the Sages, and at their bidding, he upbraided thee,
and therefore they would not award him to die. Whereat the King held his peace,
and gave never a word to answer: so all the joy was turned into sadness. The
next day at the commandment of the King, proclamation went to all the Cities in
the Kings Dominions, that they should stand to the ordinance of Saboch and
Bithus: and whosoever should refuse to follow their Decrees, or would observe
the Traditions of the Sages, and obey their will, should suffer death. This was
John the high Priest, which had the Priesthood forty years, and in the end
became a Saducee. Notwithstanding the Israelites obeyed not the kings
commandment, but rather privily followed the ordinances of the Sages. The king
himself and all his servants followed the Traditions of the Saducees, making
Inquisition for them that stuck to the constitutions of the Sages, and putting
to death as many as he could get knowledge of. By this means he drew much
people of Israel into this opinion. The time that Hircanus ruled over Israel,
was 31. years, and then he died.

After him reigned his son Aristobulus, for he had three sons, Aristobulus,
Antigonus, and Alexander; This Alexander was hated of his Father, and banished
out of his presence. He went therefore and made War upon Tire and Sidon,
subdued them, and compelled them to be circumcised.

Aristobulus regarded not the high Priesthood, but set light by it, wherefore
he would not execute the office thereof, but took the Kingdom upon him, and set
the Crown upon his head, and was called the great King. Besides this, he
banished his mother, and Alexander her son, his younger brother, and would not
suffer them to dwell in Jerusalem. But he loved his brother Antigonus, and made
him Lieutenant General of all his Wars, setting him forward into the Wars
against his enemies. Wherein the young man Antigonus had good fortune, and
prospered in all things that he took in hand, and returned safe to Jerusalem,
where he entered into the house of the Sanctuary to pray for his brother the
King, which at that time was grievously sick: and also to acknowledge before
the Lord God, his goodness and mercy toward him, in that he aided him against
his enemies. Then came a certain wicked person unto the King, and informed him
with this tale: Thy brother (says he) returning from the wars, inquired of thy
health, and when it was told him thou wast sick, he said, I will go to him to
day and rid him out of the world. When the King heard this, he was wroth toward
the Sages, and commanded his brother to be apprehended, and carried to the
place of Starton, there to be kept in prison, till he had made further
inquisition of this matter. In the mean space the Queen, the Kings wife,
commanded him to be put to death there, without knowledge of the Kings mind.
But when the King heard that his brother was killed, he cried out and wept
bitterly, smiting his breast in such sort with his hand, that he swouned, and
much blood issued out of his mouth. He reigned over Israel two years.

After him his brother Alexander reigned, who was also called, King Janai,
being brought out of Prison, where his brother had put him, and made King of
Israel. He was a mighty man, and valiant in all his wars against his enemies,
prevailing against them. He had wars with the Philistims namely Asam and
Ascalon, whom he put to the worse, and overcame them. This man refused not the
Priesthood, but was high Priest. It chanced on a time, when he stood at the
Altar to offer sacrifice, one of the sages cast a Cedar tree on him, whereat he
lifted up his right hand upon the Altar crying give me my sword. Then the Sages
kneeled down before him, and swear they did t not of any contempt but rather
(say they) that we thus sporting before the Lord, would be merry upon the High
solemn day. But the Kings servants answered roughly again, saying; although ye
play and rejoice, yet it is not the manner of the country to use any such
despightfull custom with the King. The contention waxed hot against them, till
at length the Sages spoke evil of the King, casting in his teeth that he was an
unhallowed and suspended person, and that his Grandmother on the fathers side
was a Captain in mount Modiit, whereby her seed was stained. The King was sore
moved at that, insomuch that he commanded all the Sages to be slain. Therefore,
wheresoever they found them, in the Sanctuary, or in the streets of Jerusalem,
they killed them forthwith. Then the King commanded that every man should obey
the governance and traditions of the Saducees. So in those days had the Sages
great tribulation, some fell on the sword, some fled away, and some tarried at
home with great dishonor.

After these matters, the King made an expedition into Arabia, entered the
country as far as the rock of the Wilderness, against Hattam King of Arabia and
subdued his land. After that, he warred on Medaba and the whole Land of Moab,
vanquished them, and bringing them under tribute, and so returned with honor to
Jerusalem. When he had after this well bethought him of his doings, it repented
him of his evil ways: wherefore he altered his mind and began to make much of
the Sages, submitting him to their ordinance, and esteemed their traditions.

There was at that time a kind of Sect that were called Pharisees, of whom such
as had escaped, the King sent to call them home again, and when they came into
his presence, he spoke unto them words of comfort saying, My brethren, ye shall
understand, that the thing which is once done, must needs be termed as it is,
and cannot be revoked. And truth it is, you cannot excuse the reproach that ye
did me, nor I cannot call again the blood that I have shed. Notwithstanding I
confess my fault unto you, and have changed my indignation to love, praying you
to put out of your heart all rancor and malice, lay away all your mourning and
sorrowfulness of your minds, rejoicing in your reconciliation and atonement
with me, and be of good cheer. But they made him answer: we will not lay away
our hatred and enmity, for thou speak but deceitfully, and we speak that is
truth. Furthermore, thou have killed our chief men and Elders, neither have
thou only done us this injury: but as Hircanus thy father began this mischief,
so thou have holden on and continued it. Wherefore this hatred between thee and
us has taken some root, neither can we leave our lamentation till thou dye,
and God take vengeance on thee for our sakes. Then shall we rejoice when we see
vengeance. So they departed from his presence, neither did the King give them
any answer at all. But when they saw the King to be incensed against them and
by that means the matter might redound to their own harm, after consultation
had, they went to the King of Greece, whose name was Demetrius, showed him what
Hircanus and Alexander his son had don to the Pharisees, and all the Israelites
that bare them good will, and followed their traditions, and how they also
hated Alexander, for the mischief that he had wrought them, so that if any man
will come and revenge the malice of Alexander, they would be ready to aid him.
Demetrius followed their advice, and assembling together all his people, to the
number of 400000. horsemen, and footmen without number, he took his journey,
and encamped against Sichem.

The King Alexander raised six thousand horsemen to aid him. But the King of
the Grecians writ privily to the Ancients of the Sectaries, that they should
not aid Alexander; to the soldiers also that Alexander had hired, he sent
rewards, gold and silver, that they returned home to their country, and aided
not Alexander, whereupon he was not able to withstand Demetrius. Therefore
hearing that Demetrius was removed from Sichem toward Jerusalem, intending to
take him in the City, he fled by night with a few of his men to the mountains,
and lurked there.

When the men of Israel that were in Judea, heard that the King was fled out of
Jerusalem, and that the City was in fear to come into the hands of the
Grecians: they gathered themselves together, and stood for their lives, as
though all had been one man, to the number of ten thousand and s^ upon
Demetrius Camp, killed all his best men of war, and spoiled all his Host, that
he fled from them, and came home into his Country with great dishonor.

This done, the King took heart to him, and returned to his Kingdom, but the
Pharisees fled to Bethshemes, fortifying themselves against the King, who
having intelligence thereof, gathered a^ Army and went against them, won the
City, and took 800, of the chiefest Pharisees, bound them in chains, and
brought them to Jerusalem.

Then banqueted he all his servants upon the roof of his Palace in a high
place, where his learned Peers did eat and drink, till they were drunk. And in
his merry mood he commanded those eight hundred Pharisees prisoners to be
fetched forth, and to be hanged every man of them upon gallowses before him, at
which sight he drunk and laughed heartily.

After this he fell sick in the four and twentieth year of his Reign, of a
grievous disease, a Quartain Ague, that held him three years; and for all this
he shrunk not nor let to go to the war to encounter and fight with his
enemies, what nation soever they were round about him, as though he had been a
whole man.

In the 27. year of his Reign, which was the third of his sickness, he made an
expedition into the Land of Moab, against a certain City called Rabaga, to get
it by force. At which time he was very sick and weak; wherefore his wife
Alexandra the Queen went with him, fearing least he should dye by the way. And
as he encamped himself against the City, and urged it sore with assaults, his
fickness increased upon him more and more. Wherefore his wife, perceiving that
he was like to dye, wept bitterly for him, and said; to whom shall I be so bold
as to show my face when thou art once dead, seeing thou have wrought such
mischief against the Pharisees, whom all the Land favors, and following
their traditions, obey their instructions? if they shall be disposed to revenge
themselves upon me and thy young children, they shall have aid of all that
dwell in the Land. The King answered, Weep not, nor show any resemblance of
pensiveness: I will tell thee what thou shall do, and if thou will follow my
counsel, thou shall prosper and Reign, thou and thy children as thou would
desire; put case I dye, there is no man in the world need know thereof: tell
thou every man therefore that ask for me that I am sick, and will not that any
man shall come at me. In the mean while anoint and season me with balms fight
with courage against this City, till thou win it, and then return to Jerusalem
with joy: and beware thou put on no mourning apparel, nor weep, but bring me
unto Jerusalem, and lay me on a bed like a sick man, and after call together
the chief of the Pharisees, bring them where I am, and speak unto them gently
in this sort: Alexander has been ever your enemy, I know it very well:
wherefore take him if ye list, and cast him into the fire, or to the dogs, or
bury him it shall be at your choice: I know well they are pitif^ll men, and so
full of mercy, that they will bury me honorably, and appoint some one of my
sons whom they like best to be King. The Queen did therefore as she was
instructed of the King. And when she had won Rabaga, she joyfully returned to
Jerusalem: after that gathered together the elders of the Pharisees, and spoke
to them as the King had advised her. The Pharisees hearing that the King was
dead, and that his body was in their hands to do withal what they list, they
answered the Queen, God forbid, we should do this unto our Lord, the anointed
of God: He was the King and high Priest; what though he were a sinner, yet his
death shall be an expiation for all his iniquities. Therefore we will bewail
him, and mourn for him, yea, we will carry his coffin our selves on our necks,
and bury him as it becomes a Kings Majesty, and so they did. The time that he
had reigned was xxvii. years; after him reigned his wife Alexandra in his
stead; for the Pharisees after they had finished the seventh day of the
morning, they committed the Kingdom unto her. She had two sons by the King: the
Elder was called Hircanus, the other Aristobulus, Hircanus was a just man and a
righteous, but Aristobulus was a Warrior and a man of courage; besides that of
a familiar and loving countenance. He favored also the learned men and
followed their instruction. But Hircanus his elder brother, loved the Pharisees.

On a time therefore when the Queen sat in the throne of her Kingdom, she
called the ancients of the Pharisees before her, honored them, and commanded to
release and set at liberty all such Pharisees as the King her husband, and her
father in Law had cast in prison, and taking the Pharisees by the hands she
commanded all Israel to obey their ordinances. Then made she Hircanus her son
high Priest, and Aristobulus Lieutenant of the Wars.

She sent also to all the Lands that her husband and father in Law had subdued,
and demanded the noble men's sons for pledges, which she kept in Jerusalem. So
the Lord gave to the Queen quietness from all that were under her subjection.
She gave also the Pharisees authority over the learned sort, putting them in
their hands to order at their will.

Whereupon straight way they found one Dogrus, a great man amongst the learned
sort, whom they slew, and much people besides of the Ancients of that Sect, so
that the Sectaries were in great distress. They gathered themselves together
therefore, and came to Aristobulus the Lieutenant of the wars, and with him
they came to the Queen, saying unto her: Thou know the enmity that is
between us and the Pharisees, which hate thy husband and father in law, yea,
and thy children also. We were his men of war that went with him in all his
affairs, aided him, now thou have given us into their hands to be murdered and
banished out of the Land: What will Hartam King of Arabia do, when he hears
this, that we shall forsake thee? He will come and revenge him of all the
battle that thy husband fought against him. Yea, the Pharisees will take his
part, and deliver thee and thy children into his hands, that there shall not be
left unto Hircanus the King, and his Son Alexander thy husband, any name or
remnant at all. The Queen gave them no word of answer; whereat Aristobulus was
angry, and let not to utter it to his mothers face, but she would not hear
him. Wherefore Aristobulus counseled the Sectaries to go their ways, and
depart out of Jerusalem, to choose them Cities in the land of Juda, where they
might dwell with their honor, and not to suffer themselves to be slain under
the Pharisees hands. Wherefore departing from Jerusalem, they dwelt in the
Cities of Juda: Not long after this, it fortuned the Queen fell fore sick, that
she was like to dye, whereof when Aristobulus heard, he feared least the
Pharisees would make his brother Hircanus King, and at length apprehends him,
wherefore he fled away by night to the Ci^y of the Saducees to be their head,
and make war upon his brother if he should presume to Reign. He came therefore
to the Prince of the Saducees called Galustius, who was a good man of war. And
after he had gathered a strong army of the Saducees, his mother the Queeen sent
unto him that he should return unto her, which he would not do, but rather went
to war with the nations that dwelt about him, where he won twenty Cities, and
got him great renown thereby.

Now as the Queen his mother waxed sicker and sicker, the chief Pharisees came
unto her, with her Son Hircanus, weeping before her, and saying, how they were
afraid of her son Aristobulus, who if he should come into Jerusalem and take
it, he would deliver them up into the hands of the Saducees. Unto whom she
answered, I am as you see at the point of death, not able to talk much with
you: there is here in my house great treasure, that my husband and my father
gathered, and their parents, Kings of the posterity of Chasmonany, take that to
you, and make my son Hircanus King over you. If Aristobulus will disturb him,
and make war against him, ye may leavy men of war therewith, and succor him as
you think good. And even with this she fainted and dyed, and was buried amongst
her people, after she had reigned nine years over Israel. The Pharisees
therefore and Priests, with all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, made Hircanus her
son King in her stead.

Aristobulus hearing tidings of these things, assembled his Army and came
toward Jerusalem, to fight against his brother. But Hircanus met him, and
encountered with him nigh unto Jordan Jericho. The Saducees of Aristobulus host
were good men of war, and too strong for the Pharisees: wherefore Hircanus and
the Pharisees, had the overthrow at Aristobulus and the Saducees hands, who
with this victory proceeded forth to Jerusalem, besiege^ it, and brought it to
great distress. Wherefore the Priests and the Ancient of the people consulted
together, and came forth to Aristobulus, fell prostrate on the earth before
him, and besought him, that he would not scatter abroad the inhabitants of the
Lord. He condescended unto their desires, upon these conditions; that he should
enter into Jerusalem with them and be King, and his Brother Hircanus should be
High Priest; whereupon they agreed. Then as Aristobulus entered into Jerusalem,
his brother came out of the Sanctuary to meet him, and with embracing he kissed
him. So Aristobulus was King, and Hircanus executed the office of the High
Priest; The Lord also gave Israel rest and peace for a while.

But afterward the Lord sent an evil spirit among them, which was the cause of
translating the Kingdom from the stock of Chasmonany, and of the destruction of
his posterity, for the sin of Hircanus the great, and the sin of Alexander his
Son, in that they shed so much innocent blood, and drew Israel from the
obedience of the Prophets, unto the lies and trifles of the Saducees. For thus
it chanced.

The Saducees beat into Aristobulus head, that as long as his Brother Hircanus
lived, he nor his Kingdom could never be established. Whereupon Aristobulus
devised how to make away Hircanus: which thing a certain man called Autipater
was aware of, a man of most power in all Israel, and thereto also a wise,
expert, and learned in all wisdom; both in the laws, and in the knowledge of
the Greek; just of his word, and prudent in any strange or new matters chanced.
His offspring was not out of the Children of Israel, but of those Romans which
chanced to be vanquished; and become subject under the dominion of the
Israelits, being but strangers, and of no Noble house in Israel. He had four
Sons, Joseph the Eldest, the next P^silus, the third Herod, and the fourth
Pheroras; these had also a sister called Salumith.

Antipater favored Hircanus so entirely for his justice, and uprightness sake,
that he opened unto him his brother Aristobulus, and the Saduces intent, giving
him counsel to fly to Hartam, King of Arabia: but Antipater himself went
before to break the matter to Hartam, of whose coming Hartam was very glad.
Then Antipater declared to him how Harcanus was in mind to fly unto him,
because of Aristobulus his Brother: If thou w^lt help him (says he) and lend
him speedy aid, thou shall easily set Aristobulus beside the Kingdom; for all
Israel is inclined to Hircanus, and favor not Aristobulus: Hartam answered, I
am afraid of the Jews, and their craftiness; Alexander his Father put me thrice
to the foil in battle by his subtilty, and took my dominions from me.

Then Antipater swore unto him, He shall be (says he) thy true and trusty
friend, to do whatsoever thy heart desires. Thus Hartam was persuaded, and
they made a league together. Then Antipater turned to Jerusalem, caused
Hircanus to fly in the night; and they both went together to the King of
Arabia, who much rejoiced at Hircanus coming, and received him honorably. When
they came together to entreat of the league, Hartam demanded restitution of
such Cities as Hircanus Father had taken from him, to whom Hircanus consented
in all things. Wherefore Hartam raised all the people of Arabia, and led them
to Jerusalem to war upon it. To Hircanus also came all the men of Juda, save
only they that dwelt at Jerusalem: so betwixt them they beset the City round
about. It fortuned that in the solemnity of the Pa^seover, they could not have
their service of the solemnity in the holy place, because of the wars;
whereupon a certain just and perfect man of the Town, called Honyauriga, brake
out privily into the Camp of Hircanus, and Antipater his counselor, and
besought them with much prayer and tears, that they would grant a truce unto
Jerusalem, while the feast of sweet bread lasted, that they might execute the
service of solemnity in the Holy place; To whom Hircanus said, Thou art a just
man, and often when thou have prayed, the Lord has heard thee, pray now
therefore unto the Lord, to deliver Aristobulus into our hands, and that Israel
may rest: Honyauriga answered, Am I a God? or able to remove battles that be
stirred up for many men's iniquities? Thus when he seemed to be unwilling to
pray, Hircanus men compelled him, drawing their swords, and saying, it thou will not pray, thou shall dye for it. Therefore as he saw his life in jeopardy,
he cried unto the Lord, O Lord everlasting, which have chosen thy people Israel
out of all people, and have set thy Name in his house, may it please thy
Majesty to plant among the children of Israel friendship and brotherhood; take
away from among them this hatred which is risen of nothing, and let not the one
of these factions, prevail against the other, seeing they all be thy Servants,
and children of thy Covenant. When the servants of Hircanus heard him say so,
they ran upon him with their swords, and killed him: But God deferred not his
vengeance, for he struck the host, as well of the Arabians, as of Hircanus,
with a grievous pestilence.

CHAP. II.
AT the same time came from Rome a famous Captain called Pompeius to war
against the country of Armenia: This Pompeius sent one of his chief men to
Damasco, of whom, as Aristobulus (thus besieged) had heard, and that an Army of
the Romans was come to Damasco, he sent him a present of four hundred pound
weight in gold, desiring him to remove the Army of the Arabians from him, and
to raise the siege.

In those days all the world obeyed the Romans. That Captain therefore writ
unto Hartam King of Arabia in this wise: Depart from Jerusalem, if not, thou
shall understand, thou have broke thy league with the Senate of Rome, and the
whole Army of the Romans shall shortly invade thy Land. Hartam on the sight of
this letter, raised his fiege, and departed from Jerusalem. Hircanus also and
Antipater departed with shame and reproach.

Aristobulus upon that gathered a power, and pursued after them, gave the
Arabians and Israelites that took Hircanus part a great overthrow and after
returned to Jerusalem with much joy.

Shortly after Pompeius came to Damasco, where Aristobulus presented him with a
Vine of gold, mavelous artificially wrought. The roots of the Vine, leaves,
clusters, and Grapes that were upon it were pure gold, the weight whereof was
five hundred pound. Pompeius was very g^ad thereof, and sent it to Rome to the
Consul. And the whole bench of the Senate, which was of the number of three
hundred and twenty Senators, wondered at the cunning and wit of him that made
it: and with great joy they bare it into the Temple of their gods, placing it
in the presence of the great Idol Jupiter, so called after the planet Jupiter.

Pompeius writ his Letters to Aristobulus, with great thanks and commendation
for the same, assuring him, how both he and the whole Senate favored him, and
that he should have a friend of him to speak in his cause as long as he lived;
Hircanus hearing of this, was clean dashed, and in despair. But Antipater
comforted him saying, let not the friendship that is betwixt Pompeius and thy
brother dismay thee: I will go to him and make him thy friend. Upon that he
went to Pompeius, and persuaded his mind to hate Aristobulus, and to favor
Hircanus, informing him thus; If thou (says he) defend Hircanus, all Israel
will be content to be under thy protection, for they love him every man; but if
thou defend Aristobulus, the people will not obey thee, for they hate him.
Pompeius charged him that no man should be made privy to their communication;
For I (quoth he) will send for Aristobulus to come to me to Damasco, and then I
will cause to be laid hands upon him, and deliver him bound to his brother,
restoring the Kingdom to him. Aristobulus upon the sight of Pompeius letters
resorted unto him: Hircanus also came from the rock of the wilderness; and as
they appeared together before Pompeius, Antipater desired him that he would do
justice betwixt Hircanus the King, and Aristobulus his brother, that rebelled
against him, and took his Kingdom from him without cause, whose sayings, a
thousand of the Elders of Israel stood up and witnessed to be true: Aristobulus
answered, I never strove with him for the Kingdom, until such time as I saw
all these that made Hircanus King, to run in great obloquie, and to sustain
much reproach, because he was so feeble a person, and of no great wit, nor
sought much the Kingdom: yea, till all nations that were about him, whose
Dominions our progenitors conquered, began now to despise him, to pass little
for offending him, to deny him tribute for his simplicity and mopishness, with
lack of courage.

When Aristobulus had said, there stood up a great multitude of goodly and
beautiful young men, apparrelled in cloth of Hyacinth and purple, with mighty
targets upon them, and other ornaments of gold, crystal, and precious stones,
affirming with one accord, that Aristobulus said the truth: namely, that
Hircanus was not favored by the kingdom. At which Pompeius marvelled, saying;
Happy is this people having so many goodly men, true in their words, and wise:
Happy also were the Senate of Rome, if they could bring to pass, that this
great Nation might be under their Governance. So he took his journey to
Jerusalem with Hircanus and Aristobulus. But after Aristobulus perceived that
Pompeius stood not to the promise he made him at the beginning or the Vine, he
set light by him, and fled from him to Alexandria in Egypt, whither Pompeius
followed with his Host and besieged Alexandria. From thence Aristobulus fled
again to Jerusalem, and Pompeius pursued him also thither, writing to
Aristobulus a letter of Truce and pardon. So Aristobulus came forth unto him,
and Pompeius did him at that time no harm, but demanded to be given unto him
all the vessels of the House of the Lord, which Aristobulus refused to do;
Pompeius in a rage, caused to lay him fast in heavy iron chains, and assaulted
Je^usalem, battering the walls very sore, till they of the town issued out
against him, and slew of his Host twelve thousand men.

After this had the Israelites civil Wars within Jerusalem, because the siege
was grevious unto them, for they were ^ivided into Factions: one part said, let
us open the Gates to Pompeius, and let him in, that we may submit our selves
under his protection. The other said, Let us fight against him unto death. But
much people disliked that, so that that side prevailed that would yield.
Wherefore Pompeius entered the Town, and the House of the Sanctuary, killed
much people of the Priests, and the people of the Land made Hircanus King of
Israel the second time, and Antipater his Counselor. Moreover, he set one
Securus a Roman in the Country, to receive the tribute and departed, leading
Aristobulus with him bound in iron. And because he took his journey toward
Arabia, Hircanus and Antipater went with him to conduct him.

Aristobulus thus being prisoner, and his two sons with him, it fortuned that
one of them (called Alexander) escaped: and having intelligence, that Hircanus
and his Counselor were gone out of Jerusalem, he came thither and rebelled
against Hircanus, made up the breaches of the wall that Pompeius had battered:
yea the Israelites resorted unto him, and made him King in Hircanus place.
Whereupon he gathered an Army, and went forth to meet with Hircanus as he came
homeward from Pompeius, where he gave Hircanus the overthrow, and Securus the
receiver of the tribute fled and escaped.

Then Alexander returned to Jerusalem, from whence shortly after, Gabianus a
Roman with a strong Army compelled him to flee to Alexandria. And being in the
same place besieged also of Gabianus, his Mother Aristobulus wife, went forth
to Gabianus weeping, and besought him that he would not destroy her Son: for
whose sake he did Alexander no harm.

Gabianus therefore having gotten all the Land of Judea, made Hircanus King of
Jerusalem now the third time: who set Roman Captains and Rulers in Jericho, and
in Zephori, and through all the Land of Israel.

It fortuned after this, that Aristobulus got out of prison at Rome, and came
into Israel; to whom on every side resorted men in such sort, that he had a
puissant Host of Israel. Whereof when he had taken Muster, he chose out eight
thousand of the best, and with them went against Gabianus, where was a sore
Battle fought between them, till the best of Aristobulus men were slain, and
only one thousand left, wherewith he fled to the Mountains. But the Romans
followed the chase, and slew them every man. Yet Aristobulus would not yield,
but fought alone, although his Helmet was broken, till he had diverse sore
wounds in his head: and then fell he to the ground, and the Romans took him yet
alive, brought him to Gabianus who comforted him, commanding his Surgeons to
heal him, and after sent him to the Consul and Senate of Rome, where he was put
in prison yet once again. And this, the Senate taking pity of Aristobulus wife,
which was reported to be a very wise woman, released her two sons out of
Prison, and set them at liberty. Alexander, the one of those, could not be
content, but rebelled once again against Hircanus, and the Romans Governors.
For he gathered together much people of Israel, encountered with one of the
Romans Governors that Gabianus had appointed, and gave him the overthrow: but
proceeding further to fight with Gabinius, had the worse and many of the
Israelites were slain, yet he escaped and fled. This done, Gabinius came to
Jerusalem, and renewed the kingdom of Israel to Hircanus the fourth time.

About this time one of the Senators Wives at Rome conceived a chi^d, and d^ed
in the birth and travel thereof: They therefore that were about her,
straightway ripped her, and got the child out alive, whom they named Julius, and
because his mother was cut, they called him Cae^ar. This child growing to great
towardness, and coming to man's estate, the Consul and Senate sent him into the
Wars, and whatsoever he did, he had go^d fortune, and prosperous success. He
deprived the Grecians of the Empire and Dominion, translating it to the Romans:
Many Provinces also besides that, he did subdue, and returning to Rome with a
power, attempted to get the Dominion, and sole power over them. But they had
made solemn statutes in the time of their progenitors, never to suffer any King
among them, or any man to have perpetual rule over them; wherefore they would
not make Julius king: Upon this rose amongst them great and mortal Wars, so
that Julius slew a great many of them, and without number. When Pompeius
understood that Caesar reigned at Rome, and had killed the Consul, and Senate,
with all the Nobility of Rome, he gathered together his whole Army out of
Arabia, and made toward him. Julius having intelligence of his coming against
him, sent for Aristobulus out of prison, spoke friendly unto him, gave him a
power, and made him grand Captain thereof, bidding him to go and encounter with
Pompeius: Indeed his Army was a strong Army, and he himself a King of no small
prowess, and valiantness. Pompeius hearing that Aristobulus came against him,
was sore afraid of his valiantness, and of his Host; wherefore he sent to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem that were under his obedience, that they should
present Aristobulus with some gift, whereby they might deceive him, and poison
him. The Inhabi ants of Jerusalem at his request, sent unto Aristobulus a
present, by certain Noble men, whereat Aristobulus was right joyful, and did
eat and banquet with them, till he was overcome with drink, then they
impoisoned him, and he died: The time that he reigned over Israel was four
years, and six months. He was a good man of War, hardy in fight, and a man of
amiable countenance.

Pompeius receiving tidings of his death, the more gladder proceeded toward
Rome to besiege it: But Julius met him in the way, and destroyed him and his
Host, whereby the Em^ire was established unto Julius: He after this, sent
Presents to the King of Syria, and into Egypt, by his Captains, to allure them
to his friendship: Antipater advised Hircanus to aid Jul^us, if perchance he
might win his favor, which Hircanus did: and Antipater was Captain of the
Host, who played the man, and found such favor with Julius, that he made him
Lieutenant of his wars; and after he had fought sundry and great Battles, he
returned to Jerusalem with great honor, and by the way prospered much more.
Hircanus after this, made Phaselus, Antipaters son, Governor of Jerusalem, and
Herod his third son President of Galilee. There was a certain young man at that
time in Jerusalem called Hizkias, a valiant man of war, to whom adhered all
such as were in any distress, and he became their Captain. These went and
ranged about in Syria, roving and murdering in such sort, that the Syrians were
weary of their lives, for fear of them. Wherefore the King of Syria sent unto
Herod Ruler of Galilee, desiring him to kill that Hizkias and his accomplices:
whereupon Herod prepared himself, and went to meet with Hizkias as he returned
from the spoil of Syria, came upon him unawares and slew him and his men.
Whereupon when the King of Syria was certified, he sent a noble reward unto
Herod, of Silver, Gold, and precious Stones; by which, and by like means, he
became very famous. The Noble men of Juda made their complaint unto Hircanus
upon Antipater, and his sons, for their sore oppressing the Land of Juda,
desiring that Herod might be summoned from Galilee, to appear in judgment and
answer with other for the killing of Hizkias. The King therefore sent for him,
and he upon that came to Jerusalem, appeared before the Judges, princely
apparelled, with a guilt sword girt about him, whose pride an ancient man
(called Samai) blamed, and reprehended also his stout heart, but he would not
give ear unto him, nor yet regard the Judges. When Hircanus perceived that the
Judges had almost determined to give judge-ment against the young man, and to
make him away, he took pity on him, and said, We will not give sentence to day,
to morrow is a new day, and by that means delivered him out of their hands:
Herod knew not before that it was a matter of life and death, that night
therefore he fled to the King of Syria, declaring all what had happened unto him.
The King of Syria let him have a strong Army, and came with him himself,
purposing to besiege Jerusalem: But his Father Antipater, and his eldest
brother Phaselus, came forth unto him, and rebuked him, saying; Is this the
reward that thou renderest unto King Hircanus, that took pity on thee, and
would not have thy blood shed? Therefore they willed him to depart from
Jerusalem, unto whom he condescended, after he had once let the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem know what he could, and had showed them his power. Julius Emperor of
Rome, about that time (as he was worshipping in the house of his God) was
murdered by the conspiration of certain of them which had served Pompeius that
was slain, as is before mentioned: The name of one of them that killed him was
Cassius, of the Country of Macedonia, who fled thither, being afraid to tarry
at Rome: this Cassius had great dominions in Macedonia. Antipater also of whom
we spoke, was a great scourge to the Noblemen of Juda, and a great d^al (...)
man than was Hircanus himself: yea, Hircanus could do nothing in comparison of
him, for he had no rule himself, but Antipater and his Sons bare all the sway
throughout all the Realm: Moreover, Antipater was in great estimation with all
the Kings of that time. And forasmuch as he so sore oppressed the Jews, they
therefore hated him, and conspired to kill him.

There was a man in great authority about Hircanus, named Malchias, by whose
means they wrought this matter. He corrupted the Kings Butler with rewards, to
put poison in Antipaters cup, which as soon as he had drunk, he died. These
things his sons Phaselus and Herod dissembled and winked at as though they knew
nothing. Notwithstanding they privily writ unto Cassius that reigned in
Macedonia, certifying him of this deed. Soon after came Cassius to Tire, from
whence he sent Messenges to Hircanus to come unto him, who came, and with him
Malchias, Phaselus, and Herod: Cassius entertaining them all in his ^odging,
willed his men, that whatsoever Herod bad them, they should do it. Herod willed
them to kill Malchias, they slew him therefore, sitting hard by Hircanus side,
Hircanus demanded of the sons of Antipater the cause hereof: who answered, Is
it not manifest that King Cassius servants slew him, and we know not why?
Therefore Hircanus stood in fear of Phaselus and Herod, being certain that this
was their deed. Wherefore he said unto them, this Malchias was worthy of such a
death, for he was a crafty man, and an Usurer.

These things done, Octavius Augustus brothers son unto Julius that was
murdered came to Rome: and the people of Rome made him their Emperor. He had
a fellow in office named Marcus Antonius his Uncle. Octavianus therefore seeing
to the Government of Rome, sent Marcus Antonius to war upon Cassius, and to
revenge Julius death. Unto him Hircanus sent a Present, a Crown of Gold, in
which were set sundry precious Stones, praying him to strengthen his Kingdom in
his hands, and to be a means of a League to be made between Octavins Augustus,
King of Kings, and him; as there was between him and Julius, which Antonius
granted. About that time Antigonus son of Aristobulus writ to Pagurus King of
the Persians, to aid him against Hircanus, to remove him, and to restore the
Kingdom to himself, promising to give him for his travel, five hundred pound
weight of Gold, and an hundred (...) Virgins. So Pagurus gathered an Host
against Israel, and Antigonus departed out of Jerusalem with much people of
Israel that took ^is part, and joined themselves to Pagurus.

These came to Jerusalem, besieged it, fought many skirmishes, and gave many
great assaults unto it, till at length they undermined the Ci^y; then took they
Hircanus, and slew Phaselus. And to the intent Hircanus might be clean removed
from the Priesthood, Antigonus that had deprived him of the Kingdom, cut off
(besides that) one of his ears. But Herod escaped and fled to Augustus,
Emperor of Rome.

Pagurus therefore having made Antigonus King of Jerusalem, returned home into
Persia, carrying Hircanus as prisoner with him. But Augustus appointed Herod to
be King over all Judah, giving to him a very strong Army of the Romans to obtain
it withal. In the way thither, Herod met with Alexandra, Hircanus daughter, and
Marimi her daughter, that she had by Alexander son of Aristobulus, and brought
them again into the Land of Israel, where he took Marimi to wife, and
solemnized the Marriage with her in the Mount of Galilee, for there the chief
of all Israel dwelt, with whom he took peace. Marcus Antonius companion in
Office with Octavian Augustus, about that time made a voyage through all the
West Countries, to subdue them to the Romans, together with Egypt, Damasco, and
Syria. Him Herod accompanied to the flood of Eupbrates, and helped him not a
little. For the Arabians lay in wait for him in the way, and intercepted all
that would aid Marcus Antonius. Herod met with them and vanquished them.
Wherefore Antonius was very glad of Herod's valiantness, and brought him again
to Israel, together with Cassius his Captain and Lieutenant of the wars, having
also his Letters to all the Captains of Syria, this tenor. Ye shall understand
that our lord and Master Octavian Augustus, King of Kings has appointed Herod
the son of Antipater, to be King of all the Land of Juda. Therefore as soon as
these Letters come unto you, ye shall with speed aid him, No man shall be
excused: all that can bear Arms shall go with him to Jerusalem, to vanguish
Antigonus the Kings adversary: whosoever refuses to go with him, it shall be (...)
for (...) to slay him forthwith. I Ma^cus (...) have sworn by my sword I will
not ^ When the Captains of (...) ^ad r^d (...) they r^orted wholly to Her^d, so
that (...) was wonderfully increased. ^, sent one Pompeius (...) of his ^ars,
against them who fought a sore (...) with them, that much people were slain on
(...) sides. (...) King (...) brother was slain in tha^ (...) No^withstanding,
at the length Antigonus Host went to the wor^t, and had the overthrow.

S^ (...) and Cassius proceeded to Jerusalem, and beseged i^ (...) third year
after Herod was made king of Israel. And when they had battered down a piece of
the wal^, Cassius with the Romans entered into the Town, and made a great
slaughter in Jerusalem. They entered also into the Sanctua^y, and attempted to
ente^ into the Sanct^m S^nctorum but Herod and his men lept between it and
them, and stood with their drawn swords in the Temple door, to withstand their
enterprises. Herod was also d^spleased with Cassius for his (...), and said, If
ye will destroy all the inhabitants of the City, upon whom shall I reign in the
kingdom that Augutus bath given me: Wherefore stra^ght-wa^ Cassius caused
proclamation to be made through all his Host, that no man, upon pain of death
should kill on Israelite more. This done, Herod apprehended Antigonus, and
delivered him bound to Cassius. He rewarded also Cassius Soldiers both with
Gold and Silver. Then Cassius offered a Present unto the Lord, a Crown of Gold,
for he was sore afraid of Gods displeasure, because he had fought against the
holy City. That done, he took his journey, and returned into Eg^pt, and
Antigonus as prisoner with him. Thither sent Herod unto him a royal reward, to
make away Antigonus, and to murder him, fearing least he should make claim unto
the Kingdom again; Whereunto Cassius consented, and slew Antigonus.

CHAP. III.
THus was the kingdom surely established to Herod. Then made he wars upon all
the Nations that were about him, constraining them to become tributaries, by
which means he grew to such power, as never any of his Predecessors were to be
compared unto him. After all this, Pagurus king of Persia released out of
prison, Hircanus son of Alexander, and promoted him to be head of all the
Israelites that were fled into the Land of Sennaar, and into the Dominion of
the Persians, and he became their King. This Hircanus had a fervent desire to
see the holy City, and the house of the Sanctuary: also how Herod (whom he took
for his son) and his kingdom did. Herod hearing that Hircanus (who had been
prisoner at Babylon) was now set at liberty, and in great honor; he was afraid
of him, mistrusting least the Israelites would restore unto themselves the
kingdom of their Fathers; wherefore he cast in his mind how to do him a
mischief: He then writ this letter unto Pagurus, the contents whereof were
such; Thou shall understand that Hircanus is he that brought me up, and used me
even as his Son; Now therefore since I came to be King in Jerusalem, I have
called to my remembrance the goodness that he has done to me, wherefore my
desire is to reward him according to his benefits; therefore I require thee to
send him to me, otherwise assure thy self of wars between thee and the
Israelites, with their confederates.

Pagurus having read this letter, sent to Hircanus, giving him to understand,
that if he would go to Herod he might; but notwithstanding Herod's threats, he
ceased not to give to Hircanus all good counsel he could, advising him to take
heed of Herod, because he is (says he) a bloodshedder, and a breaker of his
League: And he has called thee, for no love he bears thee, but because he
fears thee. As long as thou live shall he never sleep soundly, lest the
kingdom should be devolved unto thee: It is better for thee to remain here in
some honor, though it be not of such estate, than to go thither to die with
greatdispight, and end thy old age with a bloody death. Furthermore thou shall
know, such is the disposition of men's hearts; If there be two men, the one in
honor, the other in contempt; after time shall come, that the despised shall
be had in honor, and the honored be neglected; never will he that is now
honored, and before was in contempt, be content to see him that was before
honored, nor speak friendly to him: For he will think, hi herto according to
his accustomed manner he has despised me, how much more when his Dominion is
taken from him, and his servants reign in his room? Moreover, Herod knows
right well, that men's hearts are inclined to him that is the true King. And it
might be so, if thou were meet for the Priesthood, that he would promote thee
unto it, and be Governor of the kingdom himself: But seeing thou art
dismembered, having one of thy ears cut off, and thereby art unmeet for the
Priesthood; thou shall remain in Jerusalem, deprived both of kingdom and
Priesthood, which is uncomely for thee. Such counsel gave Pagurus King of the
Persians, unto Hircanus; yea, and all the Jews that were in Babylon besought
him, that he would not go unto Herod.

Notwithstanding he would not be persuaded, and why? For it was the Lords will
and his deed, that the injury done unto the Sages, whom his father and
grandfather slew, and the injury commi^ted to Honyauriga, might return upon his
head and be reyenged; so that no remnant of the house of (...), no name, no
residue, no kinsman o^ posterity should be left alive. Hircanus therefore took
his journey toward Jerusalem, and Herod came forth to meet him, e^mbraced him,
and kissed him; after brought him to his house, and feasted him da^y, calling
him his father before all men, albeit in his heart he conspired to kill him,
which Alexandra his daughter, and Mother in law to Herod knew well enough, who
opened it unto Hircanus, but he would not credit her at the first, till on a
time he perceived the matter clear to be so: then devised he how to fly to
Maloc King of Arabia, he sent therefore to Maloc to send him horses, and a
Chariot to fly withal; but the Messenger dealt unfaithfully, and lewdly with
him, for he brought Hircanus letters privily unto Herod, who rewarded him well
for his labor, and bad him go to Maloc, and to let him know what answer Maloc
gave. The Messenger upon this, went and delivered the letters to Maloc, who
fulfilled Hircanus request, sent him horses and a Charlot, writing in this
sort: I have sent thee horses and horsemen, come therefore unto me, and
whatsoever thy heart desires, I will do it for thy sake: So the Messenger
brought the answer secretly to Herod; whereupon he sent straight to the place
in which he understood Malocs men to lurk waiting for Hircanus, and caused to
apprehend them alive. Then Herod commanded to call together the Elders, before
whom he willed also Hircanus to be brought, and of him the King demanded; tell
me whither thou have written any letter to Maloc King of Arabia? he answered, I
writ none.

Then was Ristius the Messenger brought in as his acuser, and the men of war
also of Arabia that were apprehended, who declared the whole matter before the
Council, so that Hircanus was quite dashed: Then the King commanded him to be
put to death, and so was the kingdom established unto Herod. The time that
Hircanus reigned, was 40. years, and 6. months. After the death of his mother,
he reigned 3. years, and Aristobulus his brother removed him, making him
Priest: Again, 3. years after he returned to his kingdom, and reigned 40. years.

Then Antigonus son of Aristobulus deposed him, cutting off his ear, and
banished him out of the holy City. So after when Herod his servant came to the
kingdom, he returned to Jerusalem, and Herod shed his blood guiltless: yet
notwithstanding he had delivere^ Herod from the hands of the Elders, who would
have put him to death, for the death of Hizkias. From that time Hircanus
wrought no evil in the sight of the Lord, nor offended him in any great matter,
save only in this, that he bare too much with Herod in shedding the innocent
blood, wherefore his own life went for the other: Therefore happy is he that
never forgets any part of his duty. Marimi the daughter of Alexander, the
son of Aristobulus, the Wife of Herod, had a brother whose name was
Aristobulus, him Herod would in no wise promote to the high Priesthood, because
he feared the children of Chasmonany, although his wife made earnest suite, and
lay sore upon him for the matter: But the King made high Priest one that was
nothing of the kindred of Chasmonany, whose name was Haniel. Notwithstanding,
when he had once dispatched Hircanus, his wives Progenitors, father of
Alexandra, his mother in law; then he deposed Haniel the high Priest, and
preferred his wifes brother Aristobulus to the dignity, who although he were
but a child, yet he was wise, and of good understanding, and beautiful
withal, so that in all Israel was not a goodlier, nor hansomer young man than
he was: And this Haniel was the first that ever was deposed from that office of
the high priesthood; for never did King of Israel attempt the like before
Herod, who did this to quiet his wife, and to fulfill his mother in laws mind:
notwithstanding, this Alexandra his wives mother was not content, nor
satisfied, for the death of her Father was such a grief: but always spoke
snappishly to the King, that he committed her to ward. Then she writ to
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, wife unto M. Antonius, a Noble man of Rome,
declaring unto her all the mischief that Herod had done to the posterity of
Chasmonany, and desiring of her aid; to whom Cleopatra made this answer, if
thou can find the means to come to me secretly, thou shall perceive what I
shall do for thee.

When Alexandra had read the Letter she sent to Aristobulus her son the high
Priest, showing him that she would fly to the Sea Japho, and from thence would
take shipping into Egypt, persuading him also to fly with her. We will (says
she) make two Coffers, one for me, and another for thee: and we will with
rewards allure our Servants to carry out us privily, whereby we may fly to
save our lives. This their device was perceived of one of Herod's Servants, who
forthwith made the King privy unto it. The King commanded his Servant that
bewrayed them, that when they did convey the Coffers, they should bring them to
him, which the servant did. So when the Coffers were brought to the Kings
presence, he caused them to be opened, and took out Alexandra and her son
Aristobulus, to whom the King spoke sharply, and rebuked them sore. But
Alexandera answered him again as short; insomuch that the King moved with
anger, flung away from her into his chamber, saying: It is better to fit
solitary in a corner of the house, than with a brawling and scolding woman in
an open place. The King dissembled the matter, and showed no great displeasure
a year after.

As Aristobulus the high Priest, apparralled in his Pontificial vestures, stood
in the temple nigh unto the Altar to offer sacrifices, the Israelits beheld his
beauty, his wisdom, and behavior in the ministry, whereat every man rejoiced,
praising God, that had not taken all away, but left one to revenge the injuries
done to the house of Chasmonany. The King hearing this, was sore afraid, and
not a little displeased, thinking to himself the Israelits would restore the
Kingdom of their fathers unto him: He perceived every man's heart to be inclined
toward him: Wherefore he deliberated a while, and in the feast of the
Tabernacles he removed to Jericho with all his household, whereas he made a
great feast to all his nobles and servants, placing them every one after hi^
degree before him, Aristobulus the high Priest he se^ upon the right hand. And
as they eat, drank, and made merry, certain of the Kings servants were disposed
to go swim in Jordan. To these the King had given secret commandment, that they
should desire Aristobulus to go and bath with them in Jordan, and then to drown
him. So when they were going, they came to Aristobulus and moved him to keep
them company, which he would not, unless the King gave him leave: wherefore he
asked the king leave, but he denied him at the first yet at length the young
man entreated him so instantly, that the king bad him do what he would.

He went therefore with the other young men to swim. The king presently took
his horse and returned to Jericho, with all his train, leaving the young men
behind, which continued swimming till Sun setting, and as it began to be dark,
they drowned the Priest Aristobulus among them. Whereof when tidings came to the
king, and it was known that he was dead, the people wept and made great
lamentation, considering his Virtue, Nobility, and Beauty, every man was full
of sorrow that he should have so short a life: and they bewailed so much that
it was heard afar off. But Marimi chiefly, and Alexandra the young man's Mother,
could no wise be comforted. Yea, the king also wept and made great moan, for it
repented him that he had done so wicked an act; yet all the people knew well
enough that the thing was procured by the king: insomuch that Alexandra his
Mother in law, let not to tell it him to his face, that he was the murderer
of her husband, and of her father, and now last of all, of her son, to whom the
King answered neither good nor bad.

From that day forwards there was continual hatred between Alexandra and
Marimi, and Kiparim; the mother of Herod and Salumith, his Sister, that came of
base and servile blood. For Marimi cast in their teeth to their faces, that
they were not of the seed of Israel: but profane, unholy, and of base birth.
Notwithstanding Herod loved Marimi as his life, wherefore he would never
displease her as long as she lived, nor say so much to her, as why say thou
so,

These things done, Marcus Antonius a Noble man of Rome, next unto Octavian
Augustus King of Kings, being sent by Augustus to war upon the Kings of the
West Countries, reigned in Egypt, and by the provocation of his wife, rebelled
against Octavian Augustus, made war with him, both by the Sea and Land. And
forasmuch as Egypt is near adjoining to the Land of Israel, Herod joined with
him, and helped him. For Marcus Antonius had aided him before in such sort,
that no King durst meddle with him, for fear of Marcus Antonius. Whereupon when
Marcus conspired against his Prince and master, Herod aideth him with an Army,
with horsemen and with ships also against Octavian. In which wars Octavian got
the victory, slew Antony and all his people coming by ship to the I Will of
Rhodes, and so into the Land of Egypt.

Herod hearing that Marcus Antonius was slain, and that Octavian Augustus was
come into Egypt, he fainted for fear of the displeasure of Octavian. Yet at
length he took heart unto him, prepared a royal present to be carried before
him, and followed after himself to Octavian Augustus. And setting forwards, he
called Joseph the husband of Salumith his sister, whom he made chief of his
household, commanded him that if Octavian put him to death, he should poison
Marimi his wife, saying; It should not be seemly for Kings, that any mean man
should marry with a Kings widow, and sleep with her upon the Kings bed.

So then he took his journey toward Octavian Augustus, who then was at the
Rhodes, where he understood Octavian to be displeased with him, for that he had
aided Marcus Antonius, Therefore as soon as Herod came to Octavian Augustus
presence, having his crown upon his head, he took it of, and fell down
prostrate upon the ground at Octavians feet, saying: Most Noble Emperor, I
confess my trespass against your Majesty, that I loved Marcus Antonius my
companion in league, who was my neighbor and aided me: and is true that your
Majesty since the time you made me King, have heard of mine affairs that happened
unto me but never succored me. This Marcus Antonius did not so. I confess
therefore that in his wars against your Majesty, I aided him with an Army, with
Horsemen and ships: Neither went I out with him for any wars upon mine own
borders, but whenever I went with him I helped him to the uttermost of my
power. When he was falling, I bolstered him up: and when he stumbled, I raised
him again. Am^gst all these I protest also, that I would not be counted of your
Majesty a breaker of league: but now Marcus Antonius is dead Wherefore whether
that it shall please your Majesty to restore me my former estate or no,
forasmuch as I have kept touch with Marcus Antonius against your Majesty
amongst others, if you put me to death, you will do me no wrong, but justice,
because by the Law of arms I have deserved death.

When Octavian Augustus heard him speak so, he said unto him: Arise thou King
of Israel in peace, be of good comfort, and fear not, for thou art worthy to be
nigh, yea next unto my person. I know that Marcus Antonius was enticed by his
wife and would not follow thy counsel, for if he had, I dare say he would never
have conspired against me. So he commanded the Crown to be set again upon
Herod's head, and made a league with him. Then they went both together toward
Egypt, to be revenged upon Cleopatra. But that wicked woman when she saw her
City to be overcome, put on her most precious apparel, and sitting upon the
throne of her Kingdom, commanded a Viper to be brought unto her: which as soon
as she had ^uffered to sting her breast, she died. As Octavian Augustus came to
the Palace, and saw her sit there, he rejoiced that he might be revenged of
her, and commanded to thrust her from her Throne: but when they came to her,
and found her dead, it grieved Octavian very sore.

In this while Joseph Salumiths husband disclosed unto Marimi, that the King
had commanded, if it so happened to him to be put to death by Augustus, that he
should poison her. Whereupon Marimi conceived yet a greater hatred toward the
King, insomuch, that when the King was returned in safety and sound, and with
honor also from Octavian, and that all his men and whole household rejoiced
greatly, Marimi showed no countenance of gladness, no not when the King himself
told her how greatly he was magnified and honored of Octavian Augustus: but
always she was very sad. Salumith the Kings Sister perceiving that Marimi so
vexed the King, she told him how Joseph her husband had lien with Marimi whiles
he was with Augustus. But Herod (say what she could) gave no credit to her
words, knowing that she envyed Marimi, until at length he asked the cause of
Marimi, why she rejoiced not as others did, when he returned in safety from
Augustus, but was very sad, which showed her to have rancor and malice in her
heart toward him. She answered; Thou have said heretofore, that thou lovedst
me above all thy other wives and concubines; yet thou did will Joseph thy
Sisters husband to poison me. When Herod heard this, he was exceedingly
abashed, that Joseph had disclosed his secret, and began to mistrust with
himself that which Salumith had told him, that he had slept with his wife
indeed, and upon that detected that secret. Therefore he departed out of his
palace in a great anger and rage, whereby Salumith perceived that he detested
Marimi, and therefore she accused her further, suborning false accusers and
forgers of lies, to witness that Marimi would have poisoned the King, whereof
she had diverse presumptions also by her countenance. She added moreover, if
thou (says she to the King) let her escape thus, she will speedily destroy
thee, and bereave thee of thy Kingdom, the law gives a man this couns^l, If
any man go about to murder thee, prevent him, and slay him first.

With this, and such like words, she so moved the King, that he commanded to
bring Marimi forth, and to be beheaded in the high street of the City. And as
she was brought forth into the Market place of the City, all the women of the
City followed her: Alexandra her Mother also cursed and railed at her, saying,
Come out thou that have abhorred thy Husband, and conspired against thy Lord:
Alexandra wept also, as though it had been for the wickedness that her
daughter had committed, thinking surely to please the King by that means, and
to blear his eye^, if peradventure he might suffer her to live, till she might
have opportunity to poison him. Marimi thus going to execution held her peace,
and looked neither to the right hand, nor to the left, nor yet feared death any
thing, knowing that she was innocent in deed, and thought, and therefore God
would render her a good reward in the World to come; wherefore she bared her
Neck without fear, and they cut off her head, shedding the innocent blood. But
God made no delay in punishing the same, for there fell a sore plague and
pestilence in the house of Herod, so that his chief servants, his Noble women,
and Concubines died sore thereof, yea, throughout all Judea reigned vehemently;
which affl^ctions all Israel knew well enough, chanced unto them for the blood
of Marimi. They c^yed therefore unto the Lord, saying, will thou for the
offense of one man, deal so cruelly with the whole congregation? the Lord took
pity therefore upon the land, and withdrew the plague from the people. The King
repented him also, that he had shed blood without a cause; and love so grew in
his heart that he was sick, and at deaths door. Then Alexandra Marimis mother,
sought means how to poison him, which being uttered unto the King, he commanded
to apprehend her, and to kill her. In this manner dealt Herod with all the
posterity of the Machabees, leaving none alive that were called by the name:
Herod put to death also Josephat the husband of Salumith.

The King had two Sons, Alexander and Aristobulus, by Marimi his wife: They
were both at Rome when their Mother suffered, for their Father the King had
sent them thither to learn the Roman tongue: When they heard tidings of their
Mothers death, they wept and mourned for her, hating their Father for his
cruelty. Soon after the King their father recovered of his sickness, was
established in his Kingdom, builded strong Cities, and rose to great
prosperity. In the thirteenth year of his Reign, therefell a great dearth in
the land, wherefore the King took out of his treasure, much gold and silver,
and precious stones, wherewith he sent into Egypt; and procured plenty of corn,
and refreshed with bread all that lackt, and were in distress of hunger; yea,
he spared not his own proper goods: And not only to the Israelits showed he
this liberality, but also to all that came unto him out of other strange
Nations, hearing of his renown: Moreover, in all his wars he had good fortune:
Besides this, he thought it good to renew the house of the Sanctuary, whereupon
he deliberated with the Israelits, to have their advice for the building of it,
after the same quantity and measure that Solomon King of Israel had builded it.
For the Jews returning from captivity in the time of Coresch, began to build it
after the measure that Coresch prescribed them, and not as it was before. The
King of Israel hearing that the King was purposed to pull down the Temple to
the ground, and build it afresh, they made him no answer, fearing lest when he
had pulled it down, he would not be so hasty to build it up again. But the King
perceiving what they feared in their minds, said he would not slack the matter,
nor rest till he had brought it to pass. He said moreover, that he would take
out of his treasury plenty of gold and silver, and give it to graving: also
precious stones, stones of Thasies and Marble. To the Carpenters also and
Masons he would deliver Timber and Stones, Gold and Silver, Brass and Iron, to
make all things necessary to the work. Wherefore if he pulled down the House he
was able to build it straight ways again.

So he pulled down the House, and repaired it again, and finished it in length
a hundred cubits, al of white Marble so that the whole height of the stone was
in all, a hundred and twenty cubits. For the Foundation was twenty cubits
within the ground, and a hundred above. The breadth of every stone was twelve
cubits, and the thickness thereof eight cubits; every stone was of like
bigness. The gates of the House he covered with fine gold and precious Stones
finely set therein: the thresholds were of Silver, and the tops also. He made
also a Vine, of gold a mavelous cunning piece of work, the arms thereof or
bigger branches, were glittering gold, the lesser branches, slips, or latest
shoots of gold, somewhat red, and all above was yellow gold, whereupon hung
clusters of Crystal. The Vine was so great that it weighed a thousand pound
weight of pure gold. In all the world was not the like to be seen. He made also
a porch, and before the porch two walls of Silver, marvellously and cunningly
wrought. Behind the house toward the West, he made a court of a hundred fifty
cubits long, and a hundred in breadth, which was paved with pure Marble. Toward
the south and north, the length of the court was also a hundred and fifty
cubits, and a hundred in breadth. He erected in it also a hundred and fifty
Pillars of white Marble in 4 rancks. The length of one rank was forty cubics,
and every Pillar was forty cubits high, and three cubits thick.

The pillars were all of like measure, as the Court of the North side, and of
the South was also of like measure, with all the pillars thereof. Toward the
east, the court contained seven hundred and twenty cubits, even to the brook
Cedron: no man ever saw the like building in all the world. The Vine that he
made, placed he before the porch: In ^he extreme parts of the Court, he made
also walks and galleries of such height that they that walked therein, might
easily see the waters running in the brook Cedron by the space of a Cubit;
Between the porch and the house also (as though it were a vail or partition)
the King made a wall of Silver, of half an handful thick. In the which was a
door of beaten gold, and upon the gate a sword of gold of twelve pound weight.
There were certain Posies graven in the sword, as this; What stranger soever
approached nigh here, let him dye for it. So the things that Herod made in the
Temple, were wonderful: neither was there ever heard of in all the world, any
King that was able to erect such a building.

When the work was finished, the King sent to Saroas his pastures, for his
Cattle, from whence were brought him three hundred young Bullocks, and very
many sheep, according to his Princely estate. So then they dedicated and
hallowed the house with great joy and gladness.

There was one certain day in the year, when as the King was accustomed to make
a great feast to all his Court, to all his Nobles and Sages in Israel: Against
that self same day the King was minded to finish his works, which made both him
more glad, and all his people. The same also was commanded to be done in all
the Provinces of his Kingdom, sending his Letters by his Pursuivants to the
Noble men, Captains, and Presidents of the Provinces, that they would observe
that day after the same manner every year. The people also that were squandred
in their enemies countries, their head Rulers and Captains came out of every
Country, far and near, to see the House and the King, for they could never
believe it, till they had seen it: and when they had seen it, it exceeded far
that they had heard of it.

These things done, the Kings two Sons, Alexander and Aristobulus which he had
by Marimi, came home from Rome to Jerusalem in a great heat and fury, with a
strong company, yea their hearts were very heavy also; for Alexander the elder
had married the King of Capadoci as Daughter, and Aristobulus the Daughter of
Salumith the King his Fathers Sister. These coming to Jerusalem, went not to
the Court to do their duty to the King their Father, neither would they see
him: whereby the King gathered, they went devising some mischief against him:
Moreover, all his men gave him warning to take heed of them, and to keep his
power or Guard about him. He had a Wife of base stock out of the Country,
before he came to the Kingdom, by whom he had a son named Antipater. And when
he had put Marimi his beloved wife to death, he called home his wife, which he
had disdained before, to his Court.

Wherefore, now seeing the two Sons of Marimi hated him, he appointed Antipater
his son to be heir apparent, and to raise his estimation, he gave him all his
treasure, made him Lord and ruler of all that he had, affirming that he should
reign after him. This Antipater had a subtle wit, and his talk was daily to
his Father; If it like your Majesty, wherefore should you give me all these
things, when as these two Lions shall be ever in my top, and ready to destroy
me. By such surmised means he raised discord and hatred between them and their
father, albeit the King was loath to hurt his two sons.

Not long after he took his journey to Rome to Octavian, and his son Alexander
waited on him, hoping that Octavian would be a means for him to turn his
fathers hatred from him, and put all malice out of his mind. When the King was
come thither, Octavian rejoiced much at his coming, saying, I have thought long
to see thee. To whom have thou left the Land of Juda? Herod answered, for the
homage that I owe unto my Lord the Emperor, I am come to appear before him,
and to declare my chances with this my son his Servant. So he told him the
whole matter, from the beginning to the end. Then Octavian Augustus blamed the
young man, because he hated his Father. The young man answered, How can I
otherwise do? How can I forget the most chaste womb that bare me, which was the
holy stock. If I forget my mother that was slain guil^less and without crime,
then let me forget my right hand. These and such like words spoke the young
man, not without tears in the presence of Octavian; so that his bowels were
much moved, and the Noble men that were about Octavian, could not abstain from
weeping, but lamented greatly.

Octavian first reproved Herod for his great transgression and cruelty; then
labored he to pacify the young man with comfortable words, bidding him to
honor his Father, and to submit himself unto him. When he had done as he was
willed (for he would not strive against the Emperor's commandment) Octavian
took the young man by the hand, and put it into Herod's bosom. Then his Father
kissed and embraced him, so that they both wept; after that they took their
leave and departed from Octavian who comforted them, and gave them a gift,
committing it into Herod's hands.

Herod yet perceived, that the hatred of the children of Marimi would not be
appeased: whereupon when he came home to Jerusalem, he called together all the
Elders of Israel and said unto them, I had determined once to place one of my
Sons, Captain over the people of the Lord, but I might not do it without the
consent of Octavian Augustus.

Now therefore I have appointed my three Sons, and have divided my Kingdom
equally amongst them: Help ye them against their enemies, but in no wise shall
ye help one of them against another: And if ye perceive any breach of
friendship between them, do what lies in you to make it up. Whereunto he made
them swear presently in Jerusalem; and the bond being made, each man departed
home to his house.

But for all this, the hatred between Antipater and his two brethren was
nothing diminished, for he feared them, because they were of the house of
Chasmonany, and allied with Kings of great power; he suborned therefore false
accusers, to say unto the King that the young men, sons of Marimi were
determined to destroy him: Likewise he set variance between Salumith and them,
for she was in greater estimation than he, insomuch that the King did nothing
without her counsel; the same wrought he also between Pheroras the Kings
brother and them. But to Salumith he said, do thou not consider how the sons
of Marimi know that their mother was put to death by thy counsel? therefore if
they may bring to pass to make the King away, they will hew thee to pieces. But
when the young men heard this, they came before the King, and swore, they never
intended to hurt their Father, and with weep^ng they so persuaded the King that
he believed them, and they got his favor again: whereat Antipater was not a
little displeased, therefore he hired false witnesses, to say they saw
Alexander the Kings Son upon a cer^ain night, with his sword drawn before the
Kings Palace, minding to murder Antipater. He subo^ned also certain of the
Kings servants to witness against Alexander, that he should give them great
rewards to allure them to his pleasure, and to abuse them in unnatura^l venery,
which they refused. Moreover, that he desired them to poison the King, which
they would not agree also to do: Whereupon the King was sore displeased toward
him, commanding not only him, but all that took his part, or defended his
integrity to be apprehended and put in prison, that execution might be done
upon them. Then Alexander writ unto Archelaus his Father in Law, desiring him
to come to Jerusalem to his Father Herod.

This Archelaus was a very wise man, and a Noble Counselor: when he was come
to Jerusalem, Herod was very glad of his coming, and demanded what matters
brought him thither at that p^esent, he answered, I have heard that Alexander
thy Son, and my Son in law, has attempted to rebel against thee; It is not
possible but my daughter his Wife should be accessory of this thing, and yet
she has not showed it unto thee, wherefore ^utterly detest her, as one that
has conspired against thee; yet nevertheless, I know well, that for the love
thou bear unto me, thou would spare her; for this cause I am come unto
thee, that when thou have put him to death, I also may slay my Daughter; for it
is better that we should make them away, than they us.

Herod hearing this, was very glad, and gave credit to his friendship: when
Archelaus perceived that Herod had a good opinion of him, he altered his
communication, saying to the King; First let us diligently examine, and well
try the cause, forasmuch as there are many false witnesses, and lying persons
in the world, and let us not shed innocent blood upon any uncertainty: For
Archelaus had a great suspi^ion that Herod had given too leight credit, knowing
how ready he was to hear an evil tale, which was the cause of the mischief,
that befell upon the people of his house: Well, Herod thought his counsel good.
One of them that accused the kings children, was Pheroras the kings brother;
and to say the truth, he was the chief of all. Herod loved Archelaus, the king
of Cappadocia as himself. Archelaus perceiving, turned his tale to rebuke the
king, saying. Thou art now waxen old, and well stricken in years, thou
suffer these backbiters to rule thee, who stir thee to work all these
mischiefs in thy house; yea, Pheroras thy brother has falsely provoked thee
against thy sons. When Pheroras heard these words, he was sore afraid, for
indeed he had seduced the king. Therefore came Pheroras to Archelaus, and
besought him to save his life. Archelaus answered him, If thou will obtain
pardon for thy wickedness, come and fall before his feet, and confess that thou
have spoken falsely against his sons, then will I promise thee that he shall be
merciful un^o thee, and to his sons; Pheroras did so, confessed that he had
falsely accused the kings Sons: Then Archelaus besought the king for pardon,
and he granted it; after that, he entreated him that the young men might be
delivered out of prison, which the king also commanded to be done. The young
men therefore came before the king, and fell down at his feet, and the king was
loving to them, and embraced them kindly. He made great joy also, that
Archelaus came in so good an hour unto him; to whom he gave for a gift seven
hundred pound weight of Gold, with many precious Stones, and Concubines, and
dismissed him. But Antipater again suborned false accusers, and writ
counterfeit letters in the name of the kings sons, to one of the Captains,
declaring how they would conspire and kill the king; and by such means he
increased the enmities between them and their father many ways that the king
commanded them to be put in prison and most strong irons to be laid upon them.
Besides this, Antipater had surprised and won the hearts of the kings chief
Rulers, and servants, that they procured his Barber to bear false witness
against Alexander, how he hired him to kill the king, at such time as he should
shave his beard. When the king heard his Barber speak, he was much troubled in
his mind, insomuch that he said, I am weary of my life, to hear these
pickthanks that open my ears to fill my head with tales, I can do no way
better than to give charge, that whosoever brings me any such accusations
hereafter of any body, he shall suffer death for it, wherefore he commanded the
Barber to be slain, and his two sons to be brought forth and hanged upon
Gallowses, shedding their innocent blood.

Then rejoiced Antipater, supposing himself to be as sure of the kingdom, as
though it were in his hands, when he was not aware, that although he were never
so high aloft, yet was there one higher than he who considered his doings.
Alexander had two sons, Thigarus and Aristobulus: And Aristobulus had three
sons, Herod, Agrippa, and Alexander.

When the King returned to Jerusalem (for he was in Samaria by the Lake side,
when his sons were put to death) he commanded that his nephews should be
brought to the Court, and taking pity on them, embraced and kissed them,
weeping very sore, both he and all his servants: for it greatly repented him
for the heinous deed that he had done. But when the time of mourning was past,
he called the chief of Israel together, and said unto them, I am now grown in
age, and waxen grayheaded, uncertain how shortly I shall die, I see here before
me these little fatherless children, which I never can behold without great
anguish of mind; for when I look upon them, I call to remembrance what great
damage I have done unto their father in my furious outragiousnesse. Now
therefore I would commit them to the tuition and custody of some man that might
be a Patron and as a Father unto them, to succor them continually to his
power. All the people answered that he had well spoken. He spoke therefore unto
his brother Pheroras: Thou shall be their Patron and Defender, and shall give
thy Daughter to Thigarus, Alexanders Son. He also commanded his Son Antipater
to give his Daughter to Herod, Son of Aristobulus. And the Marriages were knit,
and composition made in the Kings presence.

When Antipater marked the love that the King bare toward the Nephews, he
began to be in great care, for Thigarus, Alexanders Son, had a Grandfather by
the Mothers side, a King of great power, namely Archelaus, King of Capadocia.

He falls down therefore at the Kings feet, to dissolve and break the
friendship that he bare toward his Nephews, and to leave speaking in their
cause as he had done, but he prevailed not. Therefore he left his father, and
went to Pheroras the kings brother, made a confederacy with him, and desired
him to frustrat the bond that was between himself and Herod, and also between
him and Thigarus the Son of Alexander that was hanged. So Pheroras came to the
king, turned his mind, and dissolved the covenant of Marriage. This done,
Pheroras and Antipater (that sat upon the kings Throne) were become great
friends, banqueting one another, day and night, and discoursing of their
affairs.

When this came to the kings ear, he was sore afraid of their combinings, and
commanded that his Brother Pheroras should for evermore be banished the Court:
Antipater his Son was sent to Octavian Augustus; to establish the kingdom
unto him, and to enter in League with him: For Herod was so old, that he could
not go.

Antipater journeying toward Rome, passed thorough Egypt, desirous to see it
before the death of his Uncle Pheroras: And as he traveled by the highways
of Egypt, there came a certain Merchant with a vial in his hand close covered,
which cried, saying; Who will buy a thing of great price before he see it?
Antipater marvelled at his words, and ask't him what was in the vial: But the
Seller told him not what it was before he had bought it, and paid dear for it:
Then whispered he in his ear, telling him that it was a strong poison that
would kill one out of hand. This vial Antipater sent to Pheroras, to be kept
until he returned from Rome; In the mean season Pheroras died, and his Wife hid
the vial. After when Antipater came home again from Rome, Pheroras Wife and he
fell at striffe, insomuch that she objected unto him, that he was the cause
Pheroras was banished the Kings presence, the sorrow whereof was his death. On
the other side Antipater went about to accuse her, sowing discord between her
and the King, to stir him against her. He suborned also a certain Eunuch or
gelded person, to go to the King and enform him how that at what time as he
took displeasure with Pheroras his brother, and banished him his presence,
Pheroras procured a strong poison and gave it to his Wife, commanding her to
destroy the King therewith: The king hearing this, was wroth with the Eunuch,
and said, I searched for that venom long ago, when it was noised that thy
household servants would give it me to drink, but I could not find the thing to
be true; yea, I have been too rash in such matters for I put my Wife Marimi to
death without cause, and Alexandra my Mother in law with my two children: When
Antipater heard that the king credited not the Eunuch, he made suite to the
king to send him to Octavian the second time, for he was afraid of the Vial
that was in Pheroras Wifes house. He had writ also with his hand, how that he
sent it, intending therewith to poison the kings Sons Children; But he that
prepares a pit for another, oftimes falls into it himself. So desiring the
king to send him, he let him go.

After this, the king commanded to make search, if the Eunuchs words were true
or no, he sent first for Pheroras household servants, and examined them whether
ever they could perceive that Pheroras was in mind to hurt him. They all swear,
No.

Then the king commanded to scourge them very sore, but they confessed nothing
although some died under their hands in the examination: Some he ordered with
many kind of torments; of some he caused to pluck out their teeth; and as he
had scourged a cer^ain woman servant, which had been very trusty to Pheroras,
at the length when she could no longer stand for strokes, she cried out and
said, The holy and blessed God revenge us of Rostios the kings Wife, Antipaters
Mother, which is the cause of this. The king hearing these words, bad let her
alone, she will disclose all: Then spoke she, Antipater made Feasts every foot
for the brother Pheroras and himself, and as they eat and drank, they devised
how to poison thee, especially when as Antipater was going to Octavian; for
they said, except we destroy him, he will destroy us, as he has done all the
children of his house. Moreover, he lo^eth the children of his sons that were
put to death, which grow a pace, and it is possible he may change his mind, and
make one of them king. Antipater, also said to thy Brother, The king makes as
though he were much my friend, but I trust him not; he gave me (says he) a
hundred pound weight in Gold, but all that satisfies not me. When the king
heard this, he told how he had given Antipater this Gold secretly: And the
woman said moreover, There is a vial of strong poison in Pheroras house, that
thy Son sent out of Egypt; straightway the king sent to Pheroras Wife, that she
should bring him the vial of poison her own self; when she saw the kings
Eunuchs com^ to fetch her whether she would or no, she go (...) up to the top
of her house, and cast her self down headlong to kill her self, because she
would not see the king, nor abide his torments: but the died not thereof,
whereupon the kings Messengers brought her in a Horse litter, and set her
before the King; Then she confessed to him, how Antipater his Son had conspired
with Pheroras to kill him, with a poison that he had bought in Egypt, and sent
it to Pheroras when he went to Octavian; and how Pheroras being at the point of
death, repented him thereof, charging that we should never give that venom to
Antipater, but pour it upon the ground, that the king might not be poisoned
therewith; And I did as he bad me, cast it out all, save a little that I kept
in the glasse-bottom, for I ever feared that which is now come to pa^se.

Then at the Kings commandment the Vial was brought forth before him and there
was a little of the venom left, wheresore they gave better credit to her
words; so that the King was content with her and bad his Physician heal her;
and she recovered.

This done the King writ to Antipater to come home with speed, because I am old
(says he) and weak, uncertain how shortly I shall die.

CHAP. IIII.
THe King had also two other sons at Rome, Archelaus and P^lemus: So when
Antipater writ to answer his father's letters, he signified unto him, that his
two sons had defamed the King, and slandered him unto Octavian. But the King
answered him, Come and bring them with thee, and I will order them as thou
think good. Notwithstanding, Antipater lingered for the space of six months,
to see if he might learn somewhat of his father's doings, but he could hear
nothing: The messengers his father had sent, lay upon him every day and urged
him to make haste: Therefore at the seven months end, he took his journey
toward Judea, and came to Caesarea. There heard he ^is father had taken
displeasure with his Mother, and banished her the Court, but he could not learn
what should be the cause, therefore he was stricken with such fear, that he
would have gone back again. But they that waited upon him, being desirous to go
home to their houses, and families, dealt crastily with him, and persuaded him,
that if he should now turn back out of his way, he should justify his enemies
words to be true; but if thou come once to thy fathers presence (say they) who
loves thee so entirely, thou shall prevail against thy foes, and get the upper
hand of them that trouble thee.

So he followed their counsel, and came to Jerusalem. When he entered into the
City, no man came forth to meet him, nor once to bid him welcome home: For all
the people hated him for his lies, slanders, perverse and wicked counsel, but
chiefly for fear of the King. Yet went he forward to the Court, although with a
fearful heart: When he came to the King's presence, he fell down and did his
duty: but the king turned away his face, and could not abide to look upon him.
He went home therefore unto his house with a heavy heart, hanging down his
head, and hiding his face. There his mother told him how their counsel
concerning the vial of poison was bewrayed, and how, the king was wonderfully
incensed toward him: that increased his fear more and more. The next day by the
kings command he was brought forth, and, before all the chief of Israel
assembled together, the king sat to judge Antipater's cause: There the king
rehearsed unto them, his sons lewdness and lies, how he had seduced him, and
incited him to kill his children that were of the kings blood, far better and
more virtuous than he; insomuch that with a loud voice the king burst out, and
bewailed his Wife Marimi whom he put to death without a cause, and his two
sons, that they that were far off might hear him.

Then Antipater lift up his head and began to speak craftily and subtly.
First he forgot not to give gen^le words to pacify his father's wrath (but
that he could not do;) after, he fell to entreaty in such sort, that all the
Nobles were moved to pity, and bewailed his evil Fortune, not without tears,
save only Niraleus the kings Secretary, who loved the kings children that were
put to death. He rebuked them all that were sorry for the calamity of
Antipater, crying with all his might; Where are ye Alexander and Aristobulus
that were slain guiltless? Lift up your heads and behold this wicked man fall
into the pit that he himself made; see how his foot is catched in the net, that
he laid himself for others. Mark you no^, how your Maker revengeth your death,
and requires your blood at his hand in the time of his destruction? For the
wicked man is spared until the t^me ^f his death. So the King himself very much
incensed, sent to fetch a condemned person ou^ of prison, who being brought
before them, and (...) a li^ of the poison in the V^al, fell down (...)
therewi^h.

Then the King commanded Antipater to be carried to prison, and to be laid in
strong irons. The fortieth year of hi^ re^n, which was the seventy year of his
age, King Herod fell sick, and no remedy, no Physic could be found to help
him, neither his servants nor Physicians could procure him any rest, so
grievously came his disease upon him, with shortness of his breath, and
through the anguish of the manifold evils that had happened upon him by his own
folk: Whereupon he cried out, saying, Woe may he be, that has none left to
succeed him in his Kingdom, nor none to go before his Coffin, and mourn for him
at his death. Then called he to his remembrance his wife Marimi, and his two
sons, rehearsing them by name, howling and weeping still continually. Upon a
certain day when his sickness came sore upon him, he called to his servants to
fetch him some pleasant Apple, to see if it might comfort his heart; and when
they had brought it, he asked for a knife to cut it, and one was brought him.
Then he gathered his strength unto him, and reared himself up upon his left
arm, and perceiving his life to be full of sorrow, and lamentation, he took the
knif with his right hand, and fetched his sway to thrust it into his belly; but
his servants stepped to him and caught his arm, holding his hands, and would not
suffer him to do it: then wept he sore, and all his servants, that their voice
was heard out of the Court, and shortly all the City was in an uprore, saying,
The King is dead, the King is dead. Antipater being in the prison, heard the
noise, and asked, What business is this? they answered him, The King is dead.
Then he rejoiced wonderfully, saying unto the Jaylors, Strike off my irons, and
let me out, that I may go to the Palace, and I will remember thee with a good
turn; the Keeper answered, I fear lest the King be yet alive, I will go
therefore and know the truth, and come again by and by Antipater seeing he
could not get loose, wept for anger at the keeper: So the keeper came to the
Court, which being told to the King, he commanded him to be brought before him;
then the King asked him, What did Antipater (I pray thee) when he heard this
mourning, and that I was dead? The keeper answered, He was very glad thereof,
and when I would not smite off his irons and let him out, he wept for anger:
The King cried unto his Lords, See how he hates me, being yet in prison, if he
were here, he would do what he could to kill me; he would not do as my servants
did, make haste to wrest the knife out of my hand. As true as God lives, he
shall never have that which he gapeth for, so the King commanded he should be
put to death: and there was not one that would entreat for him, or desire the
King to the contrary, but every man was glad of his destruction.

The King commanded the keeper to bring him forth to the Marketplace; which
done, his head was cut off, and so he missed of his purpose: Moreover the King
commanded his body to be taken and carried to the City of Ankalia, there to be
buried, but not in the City: That done, and the people being returned from the
burial, the King sent to call all the Nobles of Israel together, and enforcing
his strength, he sat up in his bed, and commanded to call his son Archelaus, on
whom he laid his hands, and made him King over Israel; then shouted every man,
God save the King. The King lived five days after the execution of Antipater,
then he fainted and died. He reigned over Israel 40. years; he was a worthy
Warrior, a wise and prudent man, a goodly man of person, having God on his
side. He ever loved the Sages Hillel, and Samai, with their companions: he
enriched the second House, more than all other Kings, and was more liberal than
all the Kings that were before him. His gifts and rewards were rich, for he
counted Gold and Silver, as chafe and stones: he kept Israel in peace from all
his enemies: he bui^ded also a fairer Temple than King Solomon; but he made the
yoke of tribute and exaction in Israel more heavy, and gave open ear to ev^l
tongues. He was a cruel blood-shedder of poor and innocent persons, and
Archelaus his son reigned in his room. He willed, before his death, that they
should bury him in the City of Erodion, two days journey and a half from
Jerusalem: So they put him in a Coffin covered with Gold, set here and there
with precious stones. The Bed under him was wrought with Gold, and full of
precious stones; likewise upon his head was a cloth of Rays powdered with
precious stones, and upon that a Royal Crown, made fast to the left side of the
Coffin, and on the right side was a Regal Scepter; upon the Bier was also a
cloth of Rays, very thick powdered with precious stones, Crystal, Amethysts,
and very many ^aphirs. Then all the chief men of War went about him in their
coats of fence, and drawn swords in their hands, with helmets on their heads as
in the time of war. After them came Archelaus his son that was made King; then
followed him all the people: There were fifty of his servants that went about
the Bier, every one having a chaffindish of Gold in his hand, wherein they
burnt sweet woods, and perfumes continually; as many as went about him, casting
upon the Hearse pure Myrrh. He was born by certain great Lords, and Noblemen
of Israel, upon their shouldders, going leisurely, and with a majesty, till
they came to Erodion; where they buried him with great honor, the like was
never done to any King. These things done, there resorted together such as
hated Herod, and were weary of their own lives whiles he lived, rejoicing that
they had escaped his hands, saying; We have looked till our eyes bleared,
waiting for the death of Herod that Tyrant and bloodshedder, that oppressed us
with such heavy yokes; that left us nothing to live on, for the tributes and
taxes that he laid upon us; yet now Archelaus his son is worse than he:
Wherefore they consulted together, and cast their minds and good will toward
Antipater the son of Salumith, the Kings Sister, one of the blood of
Chasmonany, and went with him to Octavian Augustus, requesting him to translate
the kingdom from Archelaus to Antipater; but he would not grant them their
suite: yea, he rather confirmed and assured the kingdom to Archelaus, who
wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord; for he married his brother
Alexanders Wife, that had children by Alexander, and committed many great
offenses.

The ninth year of Archelaus's reign, it chanced upon a night he dreamed a
dream, He thought he saw nine ears of corn, very good and full grown upon one
stalk; then came a great Ox and did eat them up all at one bit, by and by he
awaked and perceived it was a dream; therefore calling one of the Sages of
Israel unto him, he showed him his dream: The wise man said, this is the
interpretation of it; The 9. ears fresh and full, be the 9 years which thou
have reigned; The great Ox is the great King Octavian Augustus; This year thou
sha^t be removed from thy kingdom, because thou have neglected the word of God,
and have married thy brothers wife; to this Archelaus answered him neither good
nor bad. Within five days after, Octavian came toward Jerusalem; and when
Archelaus wen^ to meet him, he put him in prison, deposed him from the kingdom
of Israel, and made Antipas his brother King in his stead; he turned his name
also and called him Herod; that done, he returned to Rome: Whiles Antipater was
King, died the Emperor Octavian Augustus, the 56. year of his reign, and
Tiberius Caesar succeeded him.

This Antipas also wrought wickedness, and sundry abominations more than any
that was before him: for he took his brother Philips Wife from him, which had
already children by Philip; for this shameful deed, Rabbi John Baptist the high
Priest rebuked him, wherefore Antipas put him to death.

There was at that time one Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a
Man, for he was a worker of wonderful works, and a teacher of such men as
gladly did hear the truth; and had many Disciples, both of the Jews, and also
of the Gentiles. This man was Christ. who, after he was accused of the chief
Rulers of our Nation, and condemned by Pilate to be crucified, was nevertheless
much beloved by them, who loved him even from the beginning. To these he
appeared the third day alive, according as the Prophets by Divine inspiration
had told before, as well of this, as also of many other things, which should be
done by him. And even to this day the Christian sect, which took their name of
him, continues.

Against this man Antipas before named, came Tiberius Emperor of Rome; to whom
when Antipas repaired, he apprehended him, la^d him in irons, and sent him into
Spain, where he died: Archelaus also that was deposed before, died in the time
of this Tiberius reign. Then Tiberius made Agrippa (the son of Aristobulus whom
Herod put to death,) Antipas brother, King in his stead. The time that Antipas
reigned over Israel, was 11. years. In Agrippas time died Tiberius Caesar, and
Caius succeeded him: This Caius called himself a God, and would suffer no man
to worship any thing in his Empire but himself: he continued not long in this
dignity, but decayed and died. After him succeeded Claudius.

Claudius being dead, Nero Caesar was Emperor. Agrippa reigned over Israel 23
years. In his time Nero sore oppressed Israel, by setting cruel presidents over
them, which left them nothing to live upon; and besides that, he punished them
with diverse torments, until at length they were constrained to rebel against
the Roman Empire, and Nero Caesar; to rid themselves from under his subjection.
And above all other, one Florus president and Captain of the Roman Army, most
grievously oppressed the Jews, and had done many things very wickedly. For not
only he shed innocent blood, ravishing at his pleasure, wives, and deflouring
maids in the Cities of Juda, but also robbed with great cruelty, every man of
his goods; he polluted the Temple, and upon the beams thereof, he hung those
that he took displeasure at.

It chanced that Beronice, King Agrippa's sister, came at that time to
Jerusalem out of devotion to vifit the holy place. She seeing Florus violently
oppress the people, and for payment of exactions and tallage to slay many of
them, even at the entrance of the Temple, she came forth weeping unto Florus,
beseeching him to spare the people; for she pitied them very greatly: Yet
Florus relented nothing; but when she was departed from him he flouted and
mocked her, though she were the Kings sister, and that in the Temple of the Lord.

There was present at that time a valiant young man, Eleasar the son of Anani
the high Priest. He while his father was executing his office, could not abide
to see the ^raelites so misused at Florus hands, but being kindled with a
fervent zeal, sounded a Trumpet, whereby there assembled about him forthwith
diverse companies of young men, goodly warriors, by whose aid he raised a great
commotion, and encountered with Florus and the Roman soldiers, of whom he made
a great slaughter, prevailing much; and, getting at length the upper hand of
Florus, overthrew all the host, so that Florus was constrained to fly alone out
of Jerusalem unto Egypt. In the way as he fled, he chanced to meet with King
Agrippa coming from Rome, from Nero Caesar, and going home into Judea, to whom
Florus declared what had happened him through the youth of the Jews at Jerusalem:
And as Agrippa had passed Egypt, and drew toward Jerusalem, his sister Beronice
directed her letters unto him, moving him to rejoyn with the Jews, and to aid
them: the people also came wholly the space of forty miles out of the City of
Jerusalem to meet him, and fell down flat before him, crying, God save our King
Agrippa. But the King studied all he might to procure quietness and peace to
the City and people: So he entered into Jerusalem, accompanied with two Noble
men of Rome, worthy Captains, whom he brought with him in his train; And when
he came into the midst of the City, the people cried mainly out upon him,
saying, Deliver us, O King, and let thy hand and help be on our side, to
succor us, for we will never more be under the Roman subjection. The King
hearing this, pityed the people very much; notwithstanding, he was not content
that they were minded to Rebel against the Roman Empire. Wherefore he called
the people together at the entrance of the Court of the Temple, where were
present the Elders of Israel, and all the chief men, with the high Priest
Anani, and declared unto them the power of the Romans, the strength of their
Kingdom, and what Nations round about them they had subdued, in such sort, as
no remainder of them was left: Wherefore he besought them not to provoke the
Romans, nor to destroy the people remaining in Israel.

He added moreover, If ye will give ear to mine advice (says he) I know it
well dear breathren, that there rests in your hearts a great grief, and I my
self am full of sorrow and anguish, that we are not of power to withstand the
Romans; albeit, if you will be ruled by my Counsel, ye shall find a redress for
this matter. For where Counsel is, and good deliberation, there is safety, and
things come to prosperous success; ye shall sustain for a while the yoke of the
Roman Captains, till I may certify Nero of the matter by my Letters, and
entreat him to rid us of these Rulers; I beseech you, be not hasty of Liberty:
Many seeking liberty, have fallen into further captivity and greater bondage;
there be among our people many evil disposed persons, whose delight is in wars,
for it is their whole study; amongst whom many good men do also perish;
wherefore hear my words: as for them that be wise, they may perceive the matter
themselves; they that lack experience, let them learn wisdom at my sayings.
Keep therefore silence, which shall be as well to mine, as to your own
commodity, for I shall not need to strain my self, but speak the softlier
withless pain; and ye on the other side may the better hear and understand what
I say. If ye hold not your peace, ye shall have two discommodities; ye shall
interrupt my com munication, and hinder your selves from hearing. But now to
the purpose: Ye shall be content, and suffer till I write to Rome of these
matters, that Caesar may remove these evil Rulers, and send us them that be
more human, and gentle; If ye may have such a one, then shall ye not think your
selves in bondage, but in liberty; and worthily, for then only is servitude
grievous, when as the Ruler is an unjust man, and wicked. Now therefore stay
your selves, quarrel not with them; for although they be wicked, yet will they
be ashamed to do wrong openly, for what they do, they do it secretly; but if ye
should accuse them too much, they would rub their foreheads, and do it openly
without all shame; so should you make of your Judges, and Rulers, your open
Enemies: But it were far better to suffer an unjust governor, then a just
enemy; for the one robs men privily, the other is an open destroyer; provoke
them not therefore. Consider the wild beasts that be under men's power, and kept
in chains, as Lions, Bears, and Leopards: if a man let them alone, they are
quiet and harm no man; but if a man go to their dens and anger them, they will
fly upon him, and worry him, and others too that be present: The same ye may
perceive in a fever, and an ague, which if a man will go about to cure at the
beginning, he shall make it more grievous, but if he will remedy it by leisure,
the fervency of it will easily be quenched. Now therefore refrain your selves,
and take heed that you draw not Caesar upon your heads, and the whole Roman
Empire: Caesar coveteth not your harm, neither sent he unto you these Rulers to
hurt you; his eyes cannot see from East to West, nor his hand reach from Rome
hither, for it is flesh and blood; but if you will abide, till I may send
Ambassadors to Caesar, I doubt not but I shall remove these Rulers, and rid you
of them peaceably, without any war, or blood shed. If ye be utterly determined
to resist the Roman Empire, you shall understand, you be in no wise able to do
it, for God is every where on their side, so that they be Lords throughout all
the world, and all people serve them, and shall do so till their end shall
come: But if ye will not do this for your own sakes, yet do it for your own
Countries sake, your children, and wives, the Sanctuary and Priests, whom ye
are bound to love and spare, lest ye cast away and undo them all at once. I
beseech you take my words in good part, for I have spoken nothing but that is
for your good, and that may further our peace with the Romans, which I most
wish: If you will be ruled and choose peace, I will take your part, and do the
best I can for you; but if you will needs have wars, ye shall have it alone for
me, I will not meddle with you.

With this Agrippa fell on weeping, and so did also all the Elders with him,
and the men of most wisdom, the chief in all Israel; yea Anani the high Priest
also could not refrain from tears: Notwithstanding, Eleazer his stout son, with
his routs of warlike young men about him, they wept not at all, nor would
hearken or give any ear to wholesome Counsel, but all at once with their drawn
swords, violently rushed upon the Roman Caprains that came with Agrippa and
slew them, their men, and all the multitude that was with him in Jerusalem, and
Judea. The Elders in Judea, with the wisest and goodliest Israelites, seeing
what was done, departed from Jerusalem, fearing Nero, and the cruelty of the
Romans: therefore they took the Town of Sion, and remained there; for they
would not be taken of the Romans to be of the same confederacy with the other:
The seditious hearing that, took the Temple of the Lord; so sedition and civil
wars fell between the Seditious, and the Ancients: For when Eleasar heard, that
the Elders and the heads of the people were fled to the Mount Sion, he and his
company set upon them, prevailed against them, and slew a great many of them.
Agrippa perceiving the power of the seditious grew apace, he sent out of his
camp, where he lay without the Town, two valiant Captains, one named Darius,
the other Philippus, with 6000. men to succor those Elders and Sages, that
were desirous of peace: These prevailed against Eleasar, and the seditious that
took his part; made a great slaughter of them, skirmishing for the space of
seven days together, and at length put them to flight, and pursued them to the
Temple. From that time forth the wars increased more and more, between Eleasar
and his accomplices, and Agrippa with his host, and the Sages, Elders, and
Princes that took their part. Upon a time when the Captains of Agrippa entered
the Temple, certain cutthroat murderers, raised by the seditious, mixed
themselves amongst the Kings bands, and getting behind their backs, wounded
them with daggers that they had under their kets; so that the Kings soldiers
having Lances, and great arming swords in their hands, such as they use in the
wars, could not wield them in the press; by this means many of them were slain,
and the seditious got the victory. Thus Darius and Philippus with the Roman
Army were put to flight, and the Elders with the Sages that were desirous of
peace, departed out of town, and fled to King Agrippa. Then had Eleasar and the
seditious the whole rule of the City, and all to their great damage; for the
fury of the seditious increased to such outragiousness, that they set a fire
King Agrippa's house that he had in Jerusalem, spoiled all his treasure, and
all that was any thing worth they divided amongst themselves, They burnt the
books of accounts, and bills of debts, every one that were in his Palace.
Beronice's house also the Kings sister they set on fire; and they slew all the
cunning Artificers that were Masters of the Kings works; so their rule and
power in the City, grew every day more and more grievous then other.

CHAP. V.
IN those days dwelt the Jews and Aramites together in all the Cities of
Syria, amongst whom also was war waged: for the Caesarians brought the Romans
into the Town against the Jews, and slew them as many as they could find in the
Town. The Damascians also conspired together to destroy all the Jews that dwelt
amongst them, which thing they kept secret from their wives, because for the
most part they favored the Jews religion. Therefore the Aramites upon a
certain night armed for the purpose, beset all the ways and entrances into the
Town, and houses also, and slew about ten thousand of the Jews, coming upon
them unawares, when they were in their beds, nothing mistrusting any such
matter. When the Jews of Jerusalem heard how the Aramites had dealt with the
Jews in their Country, suddenly they put themselves in arms, and in a fury and
rage, like as it had been Lions and Bears that had lost their whelps, they ran
to Damasco, burnt their holds, put the Damascians to the sword, men, women, and
children, even the very sucking babes: yea, their Oxen, Sheep, Camels, and
Asses, with all other Cattle, leaving none alive. And thus they dealt with many
Cities of the Syrians, slaying and killing them, not sparing either old or
young, male or female, but destroyed all in most cruel wise; even the very
Infants and sucklings they haled from their mothers breasts, and murdered
them, insomuch that all the whole land was full of the stink of the dead bodies
that were slain, for there was no man left to bury the Carkases. So the Jews
wasted all the Land of the Aramites, and had destroyed it, had not Castius a
Captain of the Romans delivered Syria and the Country of Zapha. The people
therefore departed wholly from Aram, to return into Judea, and in the way they
came to Scithopolis a City in Syria intending to besiege it, for it was yet
left untouched, and was very strong: At that time also the Jews and Aramites
dwelt together in it. The Jews therefore that were without, offered peace to
the Jews that dwelt in the Town, but they refused it, and defied them, railing
at them, and for their friendly offer, requited them with approbrius words, and
with injuries also.

For those Jews that dwelt in the aforesaid City, with the Aramites, loved
together like brethren, and for the most part, they were of the Leviticall
tribe, stout men and hardy. The host of the Jews without the City said unto
them, We come friendly unto you, and would aid you; The other Jews within
answered: We will neither your friendship nor aid: The army of the Jews hearing
that, consented and agreed to raise their siege, to go to Jerusalem and there
to remain; for they had a great booty of Gold and Silver that they had gotten
together of the spoils of Syria.

After this the Syrians that dwelt in Sithopolis said to one another, put case
the Jews return again, and make war upon us, surely if they should so do, these
Jews that dwell among us, would join with them, and deliver up the City into
their hands, and then would they be revenged upon us, and destroy us, as they
have done the other Cities of Syria: Therefore they agreed to say unto the Jews
and inhabitants of the City with them, We understand your country men will
invade us again, and make war upon us, wherefore depart ye forth of the City
with your wives and children, and lodge in the wood nigh unto the City, till
their army be gone again, and then you shall return unto us. The Jews were
content to fulfill their minds, went out of the City, and placed themselves in
the wood.

There was amongst them a certain young man named Schimeon, a good man of war,
fierce, bigmade, and very strong withal; he in the favor of the Gentiles had
slain many Jews, and destroyed much of the people of God. For during the time
that the Jews besieged Scithopolis, he issued out continually, and skirmished
with the host of the Jews, many times putting them to flight, and never would
suffer them to waste the Town, or to do any harm to the inhabitants thereof.

Now as Schimeon with his father Saul, an honest old man, and the rest of the
people of the Jews that dwelt in Scithopolis, remained altogether bodily in the
Wood, without mistrusting any harm; the Romans joined with the Syrians in great
number, entered the Wood, and slew the Jews, all that ever they could find, to
the number of thirteen thousand: Schimeon himself with his father and their
families, had pitched their tents nigh unto a fair fountain that was in the
Wood, to whom when their enemies came to slay them, and destroy their whole
families, Schimeon ran upon them with his drawn sword, made a great slaughter
of them, and constrained them to retire: But when a great multude environed
him, and he perceived all the rest of the Jews were slain, he with the household
only remaining, neither saw he any way to escape; he stepped upon a little hill
with his naked sword, saying: Hearken unto me ye Syrians and Romans, and ye
that dwell in Scithopolis, I will speak unto you a few words full of
lamentation. Now I perceive that justly and not without a cause ye make war
against me, without any favor or consideration that I delivered you from the
hosts of the Jews, and never suffered them to do any displeasure to you, your
wives and children, nor to your City, as they had done to other Cities of
Syria. For I am he, that for your sakes have warred against my Countrymen t^
please you withal: yea, both their blood and mine have I pledged unto you, and
have kept inviolated the love of strangers, hating my own people, of whom for
your pleasures, I have slain often both the fathers and the children; and now ye
render evil for the good I have done unto you. But indeed God of his just
judgment has stirred you up to reward me in this sort, to murder me, that
has so often preserved you: Now therefore ye shall bear me witness that I
shall sufficiently and sharply enough, take vengeance of my own life, not
without rage and fury, most severely, because I have slain my fellows and
friends; I will therefore slay my self, to be avenged of my self; for my
brothers blood that I have shed, and so shall I be revenged of their blood; and
ye shall well perceive me to be of that courage, that rather than ye shall slay
me, and after boast and brag how ye have killed Schimeon, I will bereave my
self of my life, and punish the shedding of my brothers blood no otherwise,
than the Law punishes a murderer and man killer.

When he had spoken this, his eyes were filled with blood, and his face with
rage, and so inflamed with fury, laying apart all pity, ran and caught hold of
his father, haled him out of the Wood, and slew him: Then slew he his mother,
lest she should entreat him for the children, and be sorry for their sakes:
That done, his wife came running of her own accord, and held her neck down to
the sword, lest she should be constrained to see her children dye. Yea,
Schimeons children came and offered themselves to be slain, lest they should
see the death of their father, or remain after him to be delivered to the
enemies. After this he slew all his whole family that not one of his should
come into the hands of their enemies. Finally, he gathered their bodies
together into one place, like a valiant stout warrior, and then boldly goared
himself on his own sword, lest any man else should impair, his strength, or
boast that he had killed him.

All this Schimeon did with a great courage, to take punishment of himself,
because he had bestowed his love rather upon strangers, than upon his own
people, and to declare his force and manhood.

So he died an abominable and detestable death, save only it was an argument of
his haughty mind and great courage, as it is said before.

Now when the Jews had thus rebelled against the Romans, and slain their
soldiers, and Captains, King Agrippa went to Rome and recounted unto Nero
Caesar the Emperor of Rome, all that was happened; whereupon Nero sent Captain
Cassius (that was at that time in Syria, and had made war upon the King of
Persia, and vanquished him and all his power, and subdued his dominions to the
Romans;) and with him a puissant Army of the Romans, commanding him to go into
Judea, to offer peace unto the people, to comfort them, and to bring them again
into league with the Romans, if it might be. Cassius therefore took his journey
toward Judea, Agrippa met him in the way, and informed him what had happened
unto him concerning the Jews; how he had offered them peace, and they would
have none of it; how also they had burnt his Palace, and sacked it: Cassius
hearing that, was very glad that he had gotten such an occasion, to revenge the
blood of the Romans, and Syrians, which the Jews had shed: Wherefore he levied
a mighty Army and came to Caesarea, and wheresoever he did espy the goodliest
buildings, those caused he to be burnt. From thence went he to the City Japho,
which he besieged both by land and Sea, and at length wan it, where he slew in
the streets 84000 men. After that he came to Jades, where he first burnt all
the Country about it, and whomsoever he caught without the Town, he slew them:
But the Citizens of Zippory went out to meet Cassius, and besought him for
peace, whom he spared; he came not nigh their Town, nor slew any that dwelt in
their Country. The seditious Jews that were in the City of Zippory, hearing of
Cassius coming, fled unto the mountains; but in the way they lighted upon part
of Cassius Army, whereof they slew 200 men, and woun, ded their Captain
Glaphira: yet at length the seditious were put to flight, and many of
them-Glaphira with his horsemen pursued, overthrew and destroyed, the rest fled
to the mountains. Then Glaphira Captain of Cassius Army, went to Cesarea, that
was subdued to the Romans, there to cure his wounds that the Jews had given
him. Thence went he to Antipire, which as he would have assaulted, he perceived
it to be furnished with a great power of the Jews, and seditious: These hearing
Cassius also was coming, they went purposely to fight with him, but perceiving
that Cassius power was very great, they determined to encounter with him in the
plain of Gibeon, fifty miles from Jerusalem: whereupon the Jews with their
companies fained themselves to fly, to the intent they might draw the Romans
after them; And within six days they came to Gibeon, and there rested: Cassius
pursued after them with all his host, till he came to Gibeon, which he
besieged and assaulted also. It chansed then upon one of the Sabbaths in the
morning watch, the Jews (armed at all points) issued out of the Town, to give
their enemies a Camisado; so after they had given a token of war, they marched
toward the host of Cassius, whereof they slew 515 horsemen, and footmen twenty
seven thousand, with the loss of only 22. of their own company. In that battle
did well appear the valiantness of Mugbas, a Captain of the Jews Army: One
Baudius also played the man, at that same time, for at the commandment of
Eleazar the Priest, chief of the seditious, he set first foot within the Romans
camp. Then began the Jewish warriors to be famous, after they had once so
manfully incountered with the Romans: This done, Castius and Agrippa sent their
Ambassadors once again to Jerusalem, to Eleazar the son of Anani the Priest,
chief of the rebels that were in Judea, and Jerusalem, requiring peace, and to
come in league with Eleazar, lest the people of the Jews should be utterly
destroyed by the Romans incursions, and invasions on every side. But Eleazar
refused to hear the Legates, and slew one of them, because he made too many
words, in persuading the peace and league.

Upon this, Eleazar assembled the Priests and people together, to go out and
fight with Castius; Castius perceiving how Eleazar, and the people were
affected, and what minds they were of, how they had utterly conspired to
destroy the Romans that were there, and to consume them clean, having a
sufficient trial also of the force and valiantness of the rebels; he determined
fully to go to Rome, for he perceived he was not able to match with the
seditious, neither his own power to be compared with theirs. Wherefore he would
go see what end should come of the wars, and what counsel Caesar's Majesty would
give. Taking his journey therefore to the City Japho, he found there letters of
the Romans, for thither was their army come. From thence went he with them and
his own army to Rome, and made report to Caesar of such things as have chanced:
whereat Nero was much abashed, and not only he, but all the people of Rome were
sore astonished to hear of the great puissance and valiantness of the Jews: For
which cause the Wars ceased for that year, so that the Land of Judea was at
great rest, and quietness that year, through Eleazers means the head R^bel,
especially from the hands of wicked Castius, that had sworn to revenge the
Romans, to extinguish the Jews, and that he would destroy all the race of them,
as none should be left alive.

Therefore these are they that delivered Israel in the time of the second
Temple, out of the hands of their enemies; what time as wars were moved against
the Jews and their Country: what time also commotions and tumults began in
Israel. The first War was made by Antiochus the wicked King of Macedonia; who
had determined not to leave one man in Israel. His mischievousnesse proceeded
so far, that he slew the people of God, the Sages, and Wisemen, Princes,
Elders, and young men, children great and small, Israelits, Levites also, and
Priests, until all the chief men of Judea cast their heads together, and went
to Matthathias son of Jochanan the High Priest in the Mount of Modiit, where he
hid himself for the iniquity of Antiochus and his Rulers, crying upon him, and
saying, Deliver at this season the people of the Lord, and never think to
escape thy self, whiles the most wicked enemy rangeth thus, and runs upon
thy people, and sheddeth thy blood. For the blood of all Israel, What is it but
thy blood? and the eyes of every man are fixed on thee, hoping that thou
should assist and aid them in this calamity, that they may find deliverance
by thy means.

Matthathias hearing this, wept bitterly, and said, Fear ye not, nor let these
Macedonians dismay you, the Lord shall fight for you, Be ye only quiet. So then
was Matthathias stirred, and delivered Israel out of the hands of Antiochus,
and after he had overcome him, he was high Priest for one year, and then died.
In whose room succeeded Judas his son, who executed the office in the Temple
six years, and was slain in battle. Then his brother Jochanan was chief in the
Temple eight years, and died likewise in battle. Afterward his brother Simeon
was Ruler eighteen years, whom P^olomy his Wifes father poisoned at a Banquet.

Then Jochanan his son succeeded his father in the office; this is he, that was
named Hircanus, first of that name so called, because he vanquished a King of
that name: He reigned 31. years, and died.

After him reigned Aristobulus one year; he was called the great King, because
he first put the Royal Crown upon his head, and turned the dignity of the high
Priesthood into a Kingdom, unhollowing and staining the holiness thereof 480.
years, and 3. months after the returning of Israel from Babylon. He being
dead, his brother Alexander reigned 27. years: After whose death Alexandra his
wife held the kingdom nine years, and then died. In whose stead succeeded her
son Aristobulus, and reigned 3. years; In his time Pompey a Roman Captain came
against Jerusalem, wan it, and apprehended Aristobulus, bound him in irons, and
carried him captive to Rome; in whose place he ordained Hircanus his brother to
succeed, who reigned forty years. During his reign rebelled Antigonus, son of
Aristobulus, Hircanus brother, and with the aid of an Army of the Persians,
incountred with Hircanus, took him prisoner, and sent him to Babylon, cutting
off his ears, that he should never after be meet either for the Priesthood, or
for the Kingdom. Antigonus reigned three years: In his days Herod fled and
joined himself with the Romans, by whose help he slew Antigonus the third year
of his reign, and reigned after him 32. years, and then died. After Herod
succeeded Archelaus his son, who was taken by the Romans, the ninth year of his
reign, laid in bonds, and ended his life at Rome. Next to him reigned Antipater
his brother, who changed his name, and called himself Herod; he reigned full
ten years, overcame and wasted Spain, because the King of Spain had ravished
and taken away his brothers Wife, and there died.

After him followed Agrippa, son of Aristobulus, that was his brothers son; he
reigned three and twenty years, after whose death his son Agrippa reigned
twenty years. This is that Agrippa of whom we now speak of, and of the calamity
that befell in his time upon Israel. For all the while he reigned, the Wars
between the Romans and Israel never ceased, until the people of Judea were led
captive into the Province of the Romans: at that time also the Temple was
desolate, I mean the desolation of the second Temple, which we saw with our
eyes builded and destroyed.

The 20. year of the reign of King Agrippa, the 9. day of the 5. month, that
is called Ab, viz. July: Nero Caesar sent a Present for a burnt-offering, to be
offered in the Temple at Jerusalem, requiring peace of the Elders and Sages of
Judea, and Jerusalem, and that they would receive him into league with them,
saying; My request is, that you would offer my present to the Lord your God,
for his service and religion likes me very well; so that I desire you to join
in league with me, according as you have done with the Emperors of Rome my
Predecessors in time past. I have heard what Castius the Captain of mine Army
has done to you, which displeases me out of measure; wherefore I assure unto
you a faithful league, by the consent and counsel of the Senate of Rome, that
hereafter there shall never any Roman Captain stir hand or foot against you,
but rather your Chieftains, Rulers, and Judges shall be all Jews, and of
Jerusalem: Yea Agrippa your King, shall be Lord of all your Rulers, and what he
commands, you shall do it; the Romans shall only be called your Lords, and
have no more to do with you.

So when these Legates came to Jerusalem, they went and spoke with Anani the
Priest, informing him of Nero's mind, and showed him his Present, placing it
before him: The Present was this; A Bull for a burnt-offering, with a Crown of
Gold upon his head, his horns also were covered with Gold; upon him was a
cloth of purple powdered with precious stones: there went certain before him
that carried ten talents of Gold, behind followed very many Sheep for
peace offerings. When Eleazar Ananies Son heard thereof, he came and cast out
of the Temple of the Lord Nero Caesar's Presents, saying, We will not profane
and unhallaw the Sanctuary of our Lord, with the offerings of strangers; for
God will accept neither their burnt offerings, nor their peace offerings: When
he had so said, he sounded a Trumpet, set his men in array against the Host of
the Romans that kept watch and ward in the City of Jerusalem, and slew many of
them that day, with one of their Captains also, and another they took alive; He
being a valiant man, and seeing the routs of the Jews to urge him grievously,
said unto them, Save my life and I will yield; unto whom Eleazar the Rebel
swear, that he would not slay him, but spare him for his manhood (for he had
slain very many of the Jews before) whereupon he yielded himself.

Then Eleazar said unto him: Like as thy sword has made many Women childless,
so shall thy mother be made childlesse of thee above all other; and therewith
contrary to his oath, he commanded his servants to kill him. King Agrippa
seeing this, was wonderfully sorry. Therefore as he stood in one of the
streets, he cried, O thou Rebel Eleazar, I pray God that this mischief, whereof
thou art cause, and thy acts, may light upon thee, and thy fathers House^ which
when it comes to pass, we shall never be dismayed at. It appears they shall
have somewhat to do, that study to make peace and tranquillity in thy days; for
they are sure to be destroyed with thee. How long will thou continue to bring
us into the Briars, Thou enemy and hater of the Lord? Why do thou destroy
and waste the Vineyard of the Lord GOD of Hosts? Eleazar answered him, What
take thou upon thee the name of a King? if thou be a King, why command
thou not us to be punished? Where be thy valiant soldiers? Let Us see, Come
thou and they together and chasten me, that it may be tried whether thou be a
King indeed or no; Thou slandest aloof off, and when thou speak, thy feet
are ready to run away, as though a dog should set himself against an armed man,
and bark at him, bleating out his tongue. With this he winked upon the Rebels
his accomplices, to run upon Agrippa, and take him whiles he held him in talk:
but that was perceived of one of Agrippa's servants whom he had appointed for
the same purpose, to stand over against him as nigh as he might, to mark and
spy if the Rebels could make any stir toward him, and to let him have
knowledge; He therefore laying his hand upon his head, gave a sign to the king
to flee, saying, Away, away, for if thou tarry any longer, the seditious will
slay thee and us together. Agrippa perceiving that, he gat from thence with all
speed, and the Rebels pursued him, but in vain, for they could not overtake
him. So he got to Japho a Town under the Romans, where he was in safeguard.
From thence he fled to Rome, and declared to the Emperor Nero, the mischief
that besel at Jerusalem, and all that seditious Eleazar had done to his
offering; also how his commandment took no place. Wherefore Nero joined unto
him again Castius with a huge Army, wherewith they both entered Judea, and wan
many walled Towns, amongst which they razed Japho. For the Romans perceiving
the power of the Rebels to increase, were afraid lest they should get it into
their hands whereby it might be an anoyance in time to come to the Romans,
chiefly seeing it was a notable Haven for their ships to arive in Judea.

After this, both Agrippa and Castius led their Army toward Jerusalem, to war
upon the Rebels, and utterly to destroy them. Eleazar and other Priests with
much people hearing that, they issued out against them, and found them encamped
in the way, between Jerusalem and Japho; But after they had joined battle, many
of the Jews were slain by the Romans: the residue, Castius and Agrippa put to
flight, and pursued the chase unto the gates of Jerusalem, besieged also the
City for the space of three days. The fourth day the Priests and the people
issued out suddenly unawares upon the Romans, set upon their Camp, and slew
five thousand Footmen, and one thousand Horsemen. Castius seeing that he nor
his could escape, he chose out forty thousand of his best soldiers, and placed
them betwixt his Camp and the Priests, commanding them to stand all the night
sounding their Trumpets, and making of fire; that he and Agrippa might escape,
and that they should not remove out of their place till the morrow. The Jews
harkening to the sound of the Trumpets, and musing what they should mean,
pursued not the Romans: but perceiving in the morning, they were gone toward
Caesarea, three days journey off, Eleazar with the people followed, and in the
way found their baggage strayed, that the Romans had caft from them, to run the
lighter, and escape easilier, which they let alone and pursued them to the
gates of Caesarea, But Castius and Agrippa got fast within the town, and from
thence went both together to Rome; where they declared unto Nero the Emperor,
how they sped at Jerusalem: and as they were making relation of this unto the
Emperor, there came also a Post out of Persia, with tidings that the king of
Persia, was revolted from the Roman Empire. These things troubled the Emperor
^ore, to see almost all fall from him, that heretofore had obeyed the Empire of
the Romans.

At the same time returned Vespasianus, Captain of the Host, whom Nero had sent
into the West parts of the World, as Germany, Britain, and Spain, which lands
he had brought under the subjection of Nero. To him Nero declared, what
mischief the Priests had wrought to the Roman Host in Judea, how they had slain
the Romans, and so forth, as he had heard of Agrippa and Castius, which
displeased Vespasian greatly.

After this, Nero sent Vespasian, and his son Titus, to revenge the Romans on
the Persians and Jews, giving in commandment to race their walled Cities, to
beat down whatsoever they found, without sparing either man, woman, or child,
infants, sucking babes, or old folks, but to slay all. So that Vespasian and
Titus set forward with a chosen and picked Army of the Romans, passed the seas,
and came to Antiochia. The Jews having intelligence of this, chose out of their
Captains, three of the principal and most expert Warriors, of whom I Joseph
Priest that wrote this History was one, who by the divine favor am not
ignorant in feats of Arms, and famous in Acts of Chievalry; and Anani the High
Priest, and Eleazar his son. To these three they committed the whole Land of
Judea, dividing it to them by lot, and gave them a furniture of war. One third
part therefore (which was whole Galilee from the Land of Nephtali and beyond)
fell to Joseph the Priest, son of Gorion, to his honor and glory, who for his
worthiness, they named also Josephon, because he was then anointed, appointed,
and consecrated to the Wars. The second lot came forth; which fell unto Anani
the Priest, who had the City of Jerusalem, and the country about it, with a
charge to repair the walls of the City, to sustain the brunt of Vespasian if he
should come so far. The third lot fell to Eleazar the son of Anani the Priest,
to whom was joined Captain Jehoscua, and other Jewish Captain^. By the Virtue
of this (...) fell to him the whole Land of Edom, from Elat to the Red Sea. The
rest of the Land from Jericho to Euphrates, with that also that is beyond the
river, and all the Land of Mesopotamia, fell to Captain Menasches lot. To other
Princes of Judea, and to the worthiest Priest, they committed the fenced Cities
from the limits and bounds of Jerusalem to Egypt.

Vespasian taking his journey with his host from Antiochia, came and pitched
his tents in Aramzofa. For he had devised thus with his council; First to
invade Galilee, and after to try what they could do in Judea. Joseph Gorion
having intelligence of this his purpose, departed from Jerusalem to Galilee,
built up the Towns that were destroyed, and repaired their walls, gates, bars,
and palaces; ordained also Captains over the people, to lead and govern them;
some of thousands, some of hundreds, Tribunes and Decurians. He instructed the
people also in feats of Wars, what the sound of Trumpets signified, what sound
served to fall in array, what to gather the soldiers together, and what to
divide them After he had instructed them in the knowledge and feats of War, he
said unto them thus: Ye shall understand (dear Israelites) that ye go to fight
at this present against your enemies, wherefore let no fear overcome your
hearts, nor dismay you at the sight of your enemies, but play the men, and take
a good courage to you, to fight for your Cities, for your Country, and for
your selves: Be not afraid of death, but rather be stout in defense of your
Country, that ye be not led away from it, and to fight for the Sanctuary of
the Lord, that it be not stained and polluted with the uncleanness of the
Gentiles. Consider, that it is better to die in battle, than to live in
captivity and bondage; Therefore when as ye shall come to join with your
enemies, and shall see any of them beaten down, and attempt to rise again,
whosoever of you is by and sees him, remember the zeal of your God, wherewith
it becomes you to revenge his quarrel, and being moved therewith, strike him
that he never rise again; but if you shall see any of your fellows down, being
inclined with the zeal of your God, rescue him from the hands of your enemies,
and if he be not yet killed, cure him. If he be dead, ye shall do what ye can
to bury him in the Israelites burial; and so if we choose rather to die than to
live, we shall prosper in our Wars; we shall die for the Covenant of our God,
and deliver our souls, bringing them to the light of life in Heaven.

After he had said this, he chose out of the Jews 60000. footmen, and but few
horsemen: And out of these he chose ^00. of the best, such as not one of them
would shrink from ten, ten from an hundred, a hundred from a thousand, a
thousand from ten thousand. With them Joseph went to the Cities of Agrippa that
were in Judea, to win them: for Agrippa stuck to the Romans, were it right or
wrong, with all the power he could make. He went first to Tiarva, a great City
that belonged to Agrippa, whereas both his treasure and munition of War lay:
When he approached the City, he spoke to the people upon the walls, and offered
them peace, on condition that they should open the gates, and deliver unto him
all the treasure of Agrippa, and all his jewe^s; this if they would do, he then
would spare them, and kill none of them. Were it it not better for you (says
he) to take part with them that defend the Sanctuary of God and his
Inheritance, than to join your aid with Agrippa, which is confederate with your
enemies, and assaileth us, augmenting the power of them that hate us, so that
he refuses not to ^ght against the Sanctuary of the Lord, and the people of
his Inheritance? The men of the Town condescending to Joseph, opened the gates,
and he entering the Town, made peace with them, and they delivered him all the
kings treasures, for they liked Joseph's words, and consented to take such part
as he took.

CHAP. VI.
AT that time came news to Joseph, that troubled him sore; namely, that
Tiberias had rebelled and revolted from the people that dwelt in Jerusalem, and
were changed from his lot, to become Vespasians subjects, who had set a Roman
Captain over them. For reformation whereof, he left his Army at Tiarva, and
took six hundred young men with him to Tiberias, coming on it suddenly, and at
unawares: And as he stood on the banks of Genesar, he espied the Navy of the
Romans that there lay at road to aid Vespasian, which I^ charged to be broken
in pieces, and to be scattered abroad in the sea. The men of Tiberias therefore
seeing the Ships dispersed in that fashion, they conjectured it was done by
some of Joseph's host, wherefore the Romans fled to the Town, got in, and shut
the gates. Joseph notwithstanding came to one gate of the City, and cried that
the people might hear, saying; What means this conspiracy of yours against
me? ye fight not against me, but rather against the Lord God, whose Covenant ye
have transgressed, and broke the Bond that we made with him; Ye have also
violated your oath that you swear by the God of Israel, that we should fight
against our enemies to abate their pride. The people answered from the walls,
We beseech thee our Lord, hear thy servants speak; God forbid we should join
with the Romans, and not rather with the people of the Lord God of Israel, and
his Sanctuary, with the people of his Inheritance: howbeit there be amongst us
certain proud men, ungodly persons, that have made a league with Vespasian, and
have brought into the Town one of his chief Captains: wherefore and it please
thee, my Lord, to enter the City with thy soldiers, come unto us, that we may
live with thee, rather than to perish in the hands of them that hate us.

So they opened the gates, so that Joseph went in and took the Town. Then he
caused to apprehend those ungodly persons that were there, about six hundred
men, and laid them in irons, sending them to Tiarva which he had before taken:
the other wicked men that had aided Vespasian, he put to the sword. But the
chief Governor of the Town he apprehended alive, carried him out of the City,
and commanded one of his Soldiers to cut off his hands. Then the Captain
besought Joseph, saying, I beseech thee, my Lord, let one of my hands be cut
off, and leave me the other. Then Joseph and his soldiers laughed him to scorn,
judging him to be no valiant man, nor of haughty courage: Joseph bad his
soldier give him the sword in his own hand, and let him cut off which hand he
list, and leave him which he will. So the Roman Captain took the sword, and cut
off his left hand himself, leaving him the right, and so he was let go. He came
therefore unto Vespasians Camp, to show them what shame was done him.

After this, the Citizens of Zippory rebelled also, making a league with
Vespasian and the Romans host. Joseph being certified of this, made thither
with his host to besiege it, but the Town abid the brunt of the assault that
Joseph could prevail nothing against it, wherefore he besieged it a long season.

About that time, it was signified also to them of Jerusalem, that the
Askalonites had entered in friendship with the Romans. They sent therefore Neger
the Edomite, and Shiloch the Babylonian, and Iehochanan with a power of the
common people, who came to Askalon, and besieged it a great space. Within the
Town was a Roman Captain called Antonius, a valiant man, and a good Warrior:
who upon a certain night in the morning watch, issued out of the Town with his
company, to give a Camisado to the Jews that besieged the Town, entered their
camp, and made a great slaughter, continuing the same till it was daylight, so
that about 10000. of the Jews were slain, the rest never moved out of the
place, saying, It is better for us to die in this battle, than to flee from our
enemies; therefore they took a good heart unto them, and stood manfully in
their stations and places, trusting in the Lord God of Israel; and when it was
day, they also set themselves in array against Antony, slew many of his men,
not without loss also of their own part: for Shiloch the Babylonian, and
Iehochanan of Jerusalem were destroyed, by the Romans, with others of the Jews,
to the number ^f 8000. fighting men, that were under Shiloch and Iehochanan,
and never a one of the Jewish Captains escaped that conflict, save only Neger
the Edomite, who hid himself in a Sepulcher that was there in the plain, whom
the Romans in their pursuit sought, but found him not, wherefore they set on
fire the wood, that it burnt round about the Sepulcher wherein he lay hid, and
consumed all the trees, shrubs, and bushes, but came no nigh the Sepulcher; For
Neger had called to the Lord with his whole heart, to deliver him this once
from his enemies, lest he should be shamefully handled of them, promising at
another time to be ready to die valiantly in his quarrel: So Neger escaped the
Romans by the help of the God of Israel, in whom he put his trust.

Shortly after sent the Jerusolimites much people to Askal^n, to the number of
eighteen thousand good men of war, to bury the bodies of the Jews that were
slain in the conflicts by Antony. They sought also the body of Neger the
Edomite, but they found it not, till at length he cried unto them out of the
Sepulcher, saying, I am here: For God has delivered me out of the hands of
mine enemies, to the intent I may be avenged of them in the wars of the Lord.
So Neger declared unto them at large, all things how they chanced unto him:
wherefore the Jews rejoiced greatly that they had found him alive, and that he
was saved by such a miracle, and the Lord delivered him: Therefore they put
their trust in the Lord, believing that God would be present with them to aid
them, whereof this deliverance of Neger, they took for a sure token. The Romans
kept themselves within the Town for fear of the Jews that were come to bury the
bodies. So the Jews buried all the bodies of their own part that were slain in
both battles, for the Romans were not able to prohibit and let them, but held
them in the Town. And when the burial was finished, they took Neger with them
to Jernsalem, to give God thanks there for his deliverance at that present.
Then Joseph the Priest gathered his strength, aad came upon Askalon with his
whole Army, assaulted them, got the upper hand, and won the Town; after slew
Antony and all his people with the Sword, that of all the valiant men of War
that were with him, not one escaped. Besides this, also the Villages and
Hamlets that were thereabout without the Town, he burnt them all: And so served
he all the Towns thereabout, that had entered into league with the Romans,
slaying both Jews and Romans that dwelt in them with the sword, as many as he
found, and their houses he burnt.

This done, Ioesph returned again to Zippory sought with them and got the upper
hand, there shed he much blood of the people that had conspired with the
Romans, utterly destroyed them, burnt their Cities and Villages, led their
wives and children prisoners unto Jerusalem; and all the Romans he found there,
he put them to death.

When Vespasian and Titus had heard of all that Josephus had done against the
Romans, both how he slew their Garrisons as many as he could find in Galilee,
and all the Jews that had made any league with him and his sons, they were
wonderful incensed, and in agreatrage. They took therefore their journey, and
came to Apitelma, otherwise called Acho, where at that time, Agrippa King of
Judea, was abiding, and forty thousand men with him, all good men of war, and
archers every one: these joined themselves with Vespasians Army by which means
the Romans Camp became very great. Moreover, out of other Nations round about
Judea, good men of war without number, joined with Vespasian. He had aid of the
best men of war out of Mesopotamia, Aremzofa, Assure, Sinear, Persia, Chaldea,
Macedonia, and out of the Provinces of the people of the East, yea, the people
of Mizraim, Lod, Denan, and Seba, with all Provinces far and near, that were
under the subjection of the Jews, cast off the yoke from their necks, and
rebelled against the Dominion of Jerusalem, joining their power with the Roman
Army, to aid Vespasian and Titus. For these were also subjects unto the Jews
that sore had burdened them; wherefore they came to help the Romans, and to
invade Jerusalem and the people of the Jews. But the Edomites had not
associated themselves unto Vespasian and Titus, for they were in subjection to
the Jews and served them, so that not one of them aided the Romans. For long
before, they had moved war against Jerusalem, and could not get the victory,
but the Jews prevailed against them, and subdued them.

Hircanus also the first King of the Jews circumcised them. They dwelt also in
Jerusalem, kept watch and ward about the house of the Lord, and his covenant,
without all rebellion against the Jews, and Ierusolimites. And at that present
was thirty thousand of the best of the Edomites in Jerusalem, which kept the
walls, and the house of the Lord. After this, Vespasian and Titus with all
their host, took their journey from Acho, and came to Galilee, and in the mount
they pitched their tents: Wherefore when tidings was brought to Joseph, how the
host of the Romans lay upon the mount of Galilee, and how Vespasian had sent
before him a great power, to repair the broken ways, to fill the holes, and
cast down the hills; to level the way, that his people might pass the better,
for he was sore moved against the Jews: Joseph issued out of Zippory with all
his power, set upon them and slew them, taking such vengeance of them, as never
was the like before, for his God was with him: Vespasian and Titus hearing of
this, determined to set upon Joseph at unawares, and to beset all the ways,
that he should escape of no side; but Joseph had intelligence of their coming,
wherefore he left Zippory, and went to Tiberias, whither Vespasian followed:
Joseph perceiving them coming, fled from thence to Iorpata, the biggest City in
Galilee, closed up the gates, and there remained with his Army. Then sent
Vespasian certain Noble men, Ambassadors to Joseph, to debate the matter with
him in this wise: Vespasian General of the Roman Army, desires to know what
it should avail thee to be thus pend up within a walled town, he wills thee
rather to come forth to entreat of peace with him, and to enter into a league
together; for it shall be to thy avail to serve Caesar Emperor of the Romans,
that thou may live, and not be destroyed, nor any of thy people with thee.
Then Joseph sent Ambassadors again to Vespasian, demanding truce for a few
days, that he might deliberate upon the matter with the people, and let them
understand his words; Peradventure (says he) they will be persuaded to make
peace with thee, and then will we enter league with the Roman Empire. So
Vespasian ceased from fighting against Joseph, permitting him to consult of the
thing. Upon that, Joseph sent Ambassadors to all the people at Jerusalem, to
the Priests, Chief men, Rulers, and to the rest of the people, giving them to
understand Vespasians mind: Ye shall understand brethren, that Vespasian
General of the Romans, sent his Ambassadors unto me, enquiring, What it would
avail us, to be stiff against them, and not rather to come forth, and entreat
of peace, and to join in league together, that we may serve the Emperor of the
Romans, so to save our lives, and not to be destroyed: And I pray ye, why will
ye lose your lives, your wives, your sons and daughters? Why will ye all fall
together on the sword? that both they that should be left alive among you,
shall be led Captive out of your Country, to a people that they never knew,
whose language they understand not; and your Country to be made desolate, your
Sanctuary laid wast, that there shall not be so much as one man left to enter
into it. Never suffer this, you that be wise men, but rather receive my
counsel, and come hither to us, that we may deliberate together, what
conditions of peace we shall make for the safety of our lives, rather than to
be destroyed; and that we may use the commodities of your Country, being at
peace therein: For life and quietness, is to be preferred before death and
banishment.

The inhabitants therefore of Jerusalem both Priests, Chief men, Rulers, and
Noble men of Judea, with the rest of the people, sent unto Joseph, saying; Take
heed to thy self, that thou never consent to this, to receive conditions of
peace with them, but be strong to fight, till such time as thou shall consume
them, or till thou and all the people dye in battle, and so shall thou fight
the battle of the Lord, for his people and his Sanctuary, with the Cities of
our God: in the mean season, be it as it may, but let thy power not be with
them.

When Joseph heard the determination of the people of Jerusalem, how all sorts
with one consent willed by the Ambassadors the continuance of the wars; he was
wonderful wroth, and in a great fury issued out with all his people, and set
them in array against Vespasian, and the Roman host, in which conflict were
slain very many of the Jews: and from that day forward, Vespasian began
fiercely to war upon the Jews. He departed thence to the City Geerara, a great
City in the highest Galilee, besieged it, and won it; razed it, slew all the
people, Man, Woman, and Child, Oxen, Sheep, Camels, and Asses, leaving nothing
alive; And then he said, Now begin I to be revenged for the Romans, which the
Jews murdered in the land of Judea. From thence he departed, and brought his
Army to Iorpata, where Joseph remained: The first day that he encamped about
Iorpata, he relieved his soldiers with meat and drink plenty, and made them
good cheer, then furnished he every man with weapons.

So on the next morning early, the Roman Army gave a great shout, and beset the
City round about on every side. In this business Joseph stood upon a certain
Tower, from whence he beheld the huge camp of the Romans; wherefore he sounded
forth a Trumpet and gave a sign to battle, issued out with the whole power of
the Jews that he had with him, and set upon the Romans camp at the foot of the
hill, continuing the fight from morning till night; And when it began to be
dark, they ceased fighting, and departed the one from the other; the Jews to
the town, the Romans to their tents. In this battle were many slain on both
sides, as well Jews, as Romans. The Romans advancing themselves, proudly and
stoutly said, We will quickly vanquish this little Nation, as we have subdued
all other Nations that we have conquered, that they shall annoy us no more, and
afterward we shall be at rest. The Jews also on the other side encouraged
themselves against the Romans, saying; At this time we will all dye together,
for the zeal of the Sanctuary of our God, and never suffer these unclean
persons to pollute it; and having once destroyed them, we shall be quiet: So
what with the pride of the Romans on the one side, and the stiff-necked
stubbornness of the Jews on the other; much people was slain in that fight, for
it continued till the second, third, and fourth day. In this while, all the
Jews that dwelt about Iorpata, fled unto Vespasians camp, and joined themselves
to the Romans to aid them; and ever as Joseph skirmished with Vespasian without
the City, Vespasian sent a power to assault the City. So Joseph and his men
fought with Vespasian without the Town, and the Jews that were within the Town
defended the wall against the Army of the Romans, that was a lesser host made
of the main Army: but the Jews that were within the Town, began to diminish
every day, until very few were left. The hardiest also of Joseph's soldiers,
and the worthiest young men that fought without, were all slain, except a very
few, with whom Joseph fled and recovered himself into the Town, rampering up
the gates after him: but as Vespasian with all his Army besieged Iorpata a long
while, he espied at length a Conduit without, that ran into the City, where of
the Citizens drunk because the water was good and sweet; that he cut off, and
derived the waters thereof besides the City, whereby the inhabitants of the
City were destitute of beverage, having nothing left them but Wellwaters.
Joseph therefore perceiving that the conduit water whereof they were accustomed
to drink was taken away, conceived with himself; Now will the Romans brag and
boast against us, and think to take us at their pleasure, whiles we have no
water, but shall be constrained to dye for thirst: He took therefore garments,
and dipped them in the well waters that were in the Town, and hanged them here
and there over the wall, to declare to the Romans, that they had water plenty
in the Town, lest they should conceive any hope of winning the Town, thinking
they had no waters.

Then commanded Vespasian a mount to be raised nigh to the Town side, to plant
an iron Ram upon, to batter the walls with, and beat them down.

The manner of the making of an iron Ram, is thus.

First they take a great long thick beam, upon the forepart whereof they put a
great strong head, made like a Rams head, with horns, all of principal strong
iron, the weight of it is as much as half the beam, and covers the beam to
the midst. Then fasten they into the ground over against the place that they
intend to batter, two great Trees, like two masts of ships, between which they
hang the beam that is called the Ram, with strong ropes made of hemp, the best
that may be gotten, and iron wier twisted together: At the hinder part of the
beam from the wall-ward, are rings of iron surely fastened, with ropes made with
hemp and wire, tied to them: that when the assaulters will batter the walls,
they push forward the beam as though it were a spear, and fasten his strong
horns among the stones. Then hung they weights at the rings of the hinder part,
and much people a far off take hold of the ropes that come through the rings
behind, and hale that part of the beam upon the ground, and by such means they
shake the wall, that they make it quake again.

Thus in many places they did wrest, and wrench out the stones of the building,
so that afterward the wall falls down. There be also other manner of engines,
as an iron Ram upon four wheels, bound with iron and fastened with iron nails.
To this they make four feet, as has a Ram, as the bigness of the beam
requires. The biggest for the most part is thirty cubits long, and the least
is ten. And look how many feet the Ram has, so many wheels has it also, for
every wheel has his foot by him: and when they will batter the wall, certain
men appointed thereunto, draw it f^st a good way off, then a great multitude of
men take hold of the hinder part thereof, by four porters or levers of wood
that are put therein, and with all their strength shove forward the Ram to
strike the wall they will batter. The head of this iron Ram that goes upon
wheels, has no horns but is blunt, made of the strongest kind of iron, with a
wonderful thick neck: they have also upon both sides of the engine, a pentise
of wood for the safeguard of them that shove forth the Ram behind, from the
arrows or stones of them that are upon the walls. The Rams that Titus used at
Jerusalem, for the most part ran all upon wheels. Of the other sort he had only
a couple, as we shall declare in this place.

The beam of this Ram we even now described, was as thick as ten men could
fathom, and the length thereof was fifty cubits. It was also hollow within, and
filled with Oxe-hides folded and sowed toget^r. The wood served for none other
purpose t^n that the fashion of the leather might be set as upon (...) ^old.
The hinder part of the beam was cov^d over with iron plates. The leather was
put within, that the beam should not break wi^h the poise of the weights that
were hanged by the rings behind, whereas men appointed for the purpose, haled
at the ropes to draw back the ^eam. The wood therefore that went about the
leather, served to keep the leather in fashion. They covered it with an iron
plate, lest they that kept the walls should set it on fire: the horns that were
upon the head of the Ram, were as many as they listed, but never fewer than
ten, and then the beam was XX. cubits long, nor also more than fifty, and then
the beam was a hundred cubits in length. Betwixt every horn was as thick as a
man could fathom, the length was a cubit and a half at least. The wooden wall
or pentise was as long as the leather that was put in the beam, and it was set
on both sides toward the hinder part of the beam, to defend the men that
labored to batter the walls, lest they should be hurt with arrows or darts.

The Ram that Vespasian used at Jorpata, which he besieged, and me in it, was
made in this sort. The length thereof was fifty cubits: it had twenty five
horns in the head, which was as thick as ten men, every horn also was as thick
as one man, and betwixt every horn, the space of one cubit: The weight that was
hanged at the hinder part, was a thousand five hundred Talents, every Talent
was about a hundred Troy weight; the men that labored in the executing of this
Engine, were fifteen hundred. To remove it from one place to another, or from
one City to another, were appointed a hundred and fifty yoke of oxen; or else
three hundred brace of Horses and Mules: If they were to assault any Forts or
Cities that stood on hills, then they did divide it in parts, and bring it up
to the siege by piecemeal, and there it was set together again.

Now when the Romans had battered the walls of Jorpata, and Joseph perceived
them to shake, he took great sacks, filled them full of chaff, and hanged them
down by the walls, that the horns of the Ram could not come nigh the stones of
the wall, but light upon the sacks, which by reason of the softness of the
chaff, hindered and brake the stroke, that the walls were less hurt: For the
nature of soft things is, to give back to the hard, and to weaken their force.

But Vespasian seeing the subtilty of Joseph, used also policy for policy; for
he sent into the Town secretly, Jews, spies, which when the batteries should
be, might cut asunder the cords that the sacks were tied to, and with them slip
down the walls, where the Romans were ready to receive them, that they should
not hurt them in the fall; and immediately they struck the wall with the Ram.
There was at that present in the City, a certain valiant man, named Eleazer, of
the house of Anani the high Priest that then dwelt at Jerusalem: This Eleazer
perceiving the Romans to go about to batter down the wall as they did before,
plucked out of the wall a mighty stone, so that he made a great hole, or gap,
whereat he slid down the wall, and stradling did light on the Engine, made fast
an iron chain to the horns thereof, and got again up nimbly and quickly, from
the beam into the Town, with the chain in his hand, for the wall was not very
high above his head, as he stood upon the Ram; then the other tall fellows took
hold upon the chain, fastened it to the pillars and walls in the Town, that the
Romans might rather be constrained to break their Ram, than take it away from
thence.

The Priest Eleazer yet once again boldly went down and sat upon the beam, slew
fifty men that labored about the Ram, and the rest he put to flight; then
returned into the Town being drawn up again from the beam to them that were
within the Town, greatly rejoicing in his manhood. After that, he went up upon
a high Tower, from whence he tumbled down with a mighty force a great stone,
and a hard, on the head of the Ram and brake it, that both a great part of the
head and the horns fell on the ground: For the iron that it was covered withal
was old and rusty, so that it was much wasted, and eaten therewith; the ropes
were also old. After that, Eleazar went down again, took part of the head that
was broken, and hurled it into the Town; the Romans that remained, either he
slew, or put to flight. The Archers shot at him, and wounded him with five
Arrows, wherefore by the help of his fellows upon the walls he climbed up,
otherwise he had not been able for the grief of his wouuds.

The people then gave a shout for joy of the victory of the worthy Priest
Eleazar that had slain the Romans, and broke their Ram, wherein they put their
confidence, and brought part of it into the Town, and fastened it with an iron
chain, that the Romans could not pull it back again to them, nor have the use
of it afterward, wherefore diverse of the best Cities of Jorpata armed
themselves that day, being stirred with the great courage that they had seen in
Eleazar; and went down, hewed the beam to pieces, brought the poyses with the
Rings, and two masts with them into the town: and the same day died Eleazar
with great renown, as one that had fought for the Sanctuary of the Lord, and
for his people and Country of Israel, like a faithful servant and soldier of
the Lord: whom all the people mourned for, burying him in the Town, honoring
him for his death, worthiness, and faithfulness, appointing him a worthy
memory also, for that he had waged battle with the enemies of the Lord.

The young men of the Jews seeing this, and especially two of them, the one
called Nitra, the other Polipas, men of great wisdom and understanding, and
therewith expert in the Wars, being moved with zeal of the God of Israel,
opened the gates, and issued against the Romans, skirmished with them, and slew
many of them. But at length they were slain themselves in the skirmish, for the
Sanctuary of their God, for Israel, and their country.

When Joseph saw the Wars to increase more and more, he issued out, and made a
great slaughter in the Roman tents, burnt the mount and Engines of War that the
Romans had left; by which means the Wars waxed yet hotter, insomuch that Joseph
repulsed the Romans. For when they saw the Jews so desperately give their lives
for their God and Land, they would not abide their force.

Vespasian seeing his men shrink, he stood up, and encouraged them, exhorting
them with fair words and promises, as well Gold and Silver, as meat and drink,
wherewith the Romans allured, fought with Joseph that day unto the Sunsetting,
and as the battle waxed hot, the Jews wounded Vespasian with an arrow in his
right leg, which sore dismayed the Romans, when they saw the blood run down his
leg: and that day was a sore fight between the Jews and the Romans. Titus seeing
his father wounded, being sore abashed, ran to him to help him, to whom his
father said: How is it my son, that thou art thus astonished? Take heart to thee,
and with a courage revenge thy father of these Jews that have now the better
hand of us. So both Titus and Vespasian, with all their whole host, fought that
day a sore fight, and many were slain on both parts, yea, very few were left on
Joseph's part, with whom he returned into the Town.

The next day, the Romans raised a new mount, instead of that which Joseph
burned, and planted another iron-Ram thereupon, between two posts accordingly;
for Vespasian had brought four of this sort with him from Rome, but other
battering pieces upon wheels, had he with him thirty, what more what less; the
bigger sort were 30. cubits long, the lesser ten. He brought also ten Engines
to hurl great stones withal, which he had placed about the walls. The Romans
therefore renewed the assaults against the Town, as they were wont before. But
the Town was now desolate and naked of the stoutest warlike men, for they were
all slain in the fights. Albeit Joseph remained and a few with him, who went
every one, and the women also, to defend the walls, for there was almost no men
left fit for the War. Then the Romans flung, with the Engines that stood on the
mount, stones into the Town on every side. It chanced that a great stone hit a
woman with child with such violence, that it passed through her body, and
carried the child with it, by the space of half a mile. They cast up and raised
yet other Mounts also, from whence they flung stones. And another like chance
happened. A stone came and hit one of Joseph's men of war, a valiant man, in such
sort, that it divided his head from his body, and made it fly a large mile off.
At the same time, one of the Roman soldiers devised with himself, how to hit
Joseph with a venomed arrow, and gat him under a wall where Joseph was, to
accomplish his purpose; but Joseph espied him, and cried to him, Hold thy hand,
thou wicked fellow, and do not kill me: With that the fellow started somewhat
aside, being afraid at Joseph's voice, and suddenly the Jews out of the Town
poured hot Oil upon him from the wall, and his skin was scalded off, and he ran
away naked, howling, and yelling to the Romans Camp, where he died.

Vespasian and his son Titus were fully determined to continue the assault,
until the 47. day notwithstanding the walls were so high, that they could not
win the Town. Yet at length the men were so spent within the Town, that they
that remained alive, were so wearied with toyling, that they were not able any
longer to furnish theirwatch upon the wall. This, upon a certain night,
Vespasian and Titus understanding, scaled the walls at a quarter where watchmen
were lacking, and after them many more of the Roman soldiers followed, which
went down on the inside, and brake open the great gate of the Town, whereat
entered the whole Army of the Romans. And being within the Town, sounded their
Trumpets, and shouted to battle. The Jews with the alarm, tumult, and hurly
burly of the Romans, awaked out of their sleep, and were sore afraid.
Notwithstanding every man took him to his weapon, and drew to the Marketplace
as fast as they might. They had made the Marketplace of the Town so large of
purpose, that if any business should happen there might come together the
whole City if they would: and as they looked about them, they saw the Roman
Army entering in at the Town, by the way that came from the great gate. Then
fought they with the Romans, and divided even in the Marketplace where they
stood, exhorting one another, and saying, Let us die here fighting, and never
suffer our selves to be taken alive. But Joseph and forty men with him, worthy
men all, fled away into a wood, where they found a ^ain Cave, and hid
themselves therein. All the (...) of the Citizens were slain in that conflict,
for they would not yield, nor commit themselves to the Romans, they trusted
them so little. For on a time, a certain Jew besought a Roman soldier to save
his life, and the Roman swear unto him, saying, God deal thus and thus with me,
if I slay thee, therefore yield and come hither to me. The Jew required him to
give his right hand that he might trust him, and the Roman reached him his left
hand. The Jew being dismayed in that great fear marked not that it was his left
hand; But when the Roman had once hold of him, he kept him fast with that hand,
and with his right took his sword, and slew the Jew that then was naked, having
cast away his weapon, upon trust of the Roman.

When the Jews saw how the Roman regarded not his oath, but slew the Jew, that
upon the trust of his promise and oath, had yielded himself unto him; they
determined to die altogether, and never to trust the Romans: Whereupon they
resolved with themselves, utterly to die for the holiness of the Lord God of
Israel; but in so doing, they slew much people of the Romans, and far more than
they had done in any other battle, yet at length the City was taken. When
Vespasian had knowledge where Joseph and his company was, he sent Nicanor,
Pilerinus, and Callicanus with him to Joseph, to will him to come forth, and he
should have his life and not be slain; upon that Joseph debated the matter with
them that were with him in the Den, requiring their advice: For my part, (says
he) if ye will follow my counsel, I think it best we go unto them; but upon
this condition, That they will make us a formal assurance of our lives,
effectually as we shall require them; which done, I doubt not but Vespasian,
when we come unto him, will extend his favor toward us.

When these men perceived Joseph to be inclined to yield unto the Romans, they
said, We marvel at thee (O Prince Joseph) at thee, we say, that wast chosen out
of thousands of people, and promoted to the Priesthood, and Kingdom, to
sanctify and hallow the Lord God of Israel, who wast also appointed Captain
General of so great an host, and have seen with thine eyes the shameful
reproach of thy people, with the displeasures and damages of thy Sheep, that
thou have yet any desire to live in this dishonor. What see thou that thou
would desire to live? Should thou not rather desire death than life?
Peradventure thou perswadest thy self that they call unto thee to save thy
life, or for thy commodity; but without doubt this were a vain persuasion: For
they call thee for none other intent than to take thee alive, and to brag how
they took Joseph, that was consecrated and addicted to the Wars, and make it an
argument that their power prospers. Now therefore (our dear Brother and our
Prince) consider that this they will do, yea if they save thy life. But put the
case they put thee to death; Were it not better for thee to die on thine own
sword, than on theirs? yea, if it were for nothing but this, it is better for
thee to die than live; lest thou should hear their reproaches, their
upbraidings, and their quarrellings: and if they preserve thee alive, never
think they do it for thy good, but rather for thy ignominy and shame, which is
far more grievous than death it self. Wherefore, our dear Brother, and our
Prince, What comes in thy mind, that thou purposest to live, after that thou
have lost thy people, and thy brethren? And to what purpose serves thy life
after they be (...) one? Mark diligently what Moses (of worthy memory) our
Master did, how he spoke before God touching the people of Israel: O pardon
their sins (says he) or else blot me quite out of thy book which thou have
written; He would not live after the destruction of his people, although the
Almighty said unto him; Let me alone, that I may wreak mine anger upon them,
and consume them. Why do thou not call unto thy remembrance Aaron his
brother, that went betwixt life and death, in withstanding the Angel that
plagued the people, and offered himself to die for his people, that the plague
might cease from Israel? Where is King Saul, and his son Jonathan that
foughtfor the people of God, and died in the field? Could not Saul have saved
his life, and his sons both, if he had been so disposed? But he, when he saw
Israel had the overthrow in the battle, he had no desire to live longer, but
chose to die rather than to live, and would not be separated from his brethren
neither in life nor death, as well he, as Jonathan his son; these were dearly
beloved, and most amiable men, (as the Scripture terms them). Why do thou
not remember (our dear Prince) the righteousness of David, the anointed of the
Lord, who seeing a most grievous pestilence to rage upon the people of Israel,
said, Let thy hand (O Lord) I beseech thee be turned upon me and my fathers
house: For I am he that have sinned, I have transgressed: as for these thy
sheep, What have they done? What have they offended?

Where is the holy Law smothered and stifled in thy heart? Art not thou an
anointed Priest, that have declared and taught us the Holy Law, whereby we
might learn how to love our Lord GOD with all our heart, and with all our soul,
and with all our strength? If it be so that the service of God consists not in
this, that we should love him whom he loves, and die for his Covenant and
Sanctuary together with his servants that be slain for the unity of the name of
the Lord; wherein stands it then? Have not thou oft-times taught and proved
unto us, how that every man that dies in the wars for the Lord, his Sanctuary,
his people, and his Law, he is to be counted in the Lords lot, and made worthy
to go unto the great Light, and shall not see everlasting darkness? Art not
thou that Joseph the Priest, that have cried so often in battle: I am Joseph
the Priest, consecrated to battle, that have vowed my life for the people of
the Lord, his Sanctuary, and his Land? But now when thou have yielded thy self
unto them, and they order thee despitefully, What will thou say unto them? or
what amends can thou have at their hands? I, put the case they cast in thy
teeth, and say, thy words be lies: How shall thou avoid the reproach? Art thou
not he that said, that we should fight for the people of God, until we die
in the conflict, and in so doing, death should be ransom for our sins: and
that we were sure to go to that great Light, that is the light of life. Which
if it be true according as thou have said, Why then will thou shun death, and
not follow thy people that are gone before thee to that same light? Ever
hitherto thou have had the upper hand wheresoever thou came, insomuch that
they that heard of thee, trembled for fear: and now will thou yield thy life to
captivity to the Romans as a vile slave? Shall not this thy dishonor redound
also to the people of God? Thou art a Prince, a King, and a Priest, Will thou
be bound in chains? Every man shall say, This is he that gave his soldiers,
and the rest of the people to die, but saved himself, and his own life.

So when they had made an end of talk, each man drew out his sword, and came to
him in the midst of the Cave, saying: Hear thou, Joseph our Prince? if thou will be ruled by us, first we shall slay thee as a Lord and a great Prince, and
thou shall choose what death thou will die, that thou may die honorably. But
if thou refuse to die honestly, assure thy self of this, we will every man set
upon thee, and kill thee.

Joseph answered, Indeed I know, my brethren, that your words are just and
true; For who is so mad to desire to live in this hurly burly? and would God
that he would call my soul unto him, and receive it unto him also. For I am not
ignorant that it were more expedient for me to die, then to live, for the great
troubles that have passed through my heart; but he knows the secrets of men's
hearts, and it is he that gives life unto men. It is our GOD that closes
souls within the bodies, and lets them out again, because he is the living
God, in whose hands remain the souls and spirits of all living creatures: He
has left with us the spirit of life, and closed it up within our bodies. What
is he that will open that he has shut? How shall we loose that he would have
knit fast within us? Do ye not all know, how the life is a thing that he has
left us to keep, and that we are his servants? If then we cast away life before
that God take it, Shall he not worthily be displeased with us, so that we shall
not find life in the place of the living with Abraham our father of famous
memory, and with those just and godly men our forefathers? Do ye not know, that
they went not unto God before they were called; and when they were called, they
came? and so dealt God with all the holy and godly men. To Moses, our Master of
worthy memory, the elect of God; ye know that the Lord God of Israel said, Get
thee upon this mountain Abiram, and so he did; but he would not have done it of
himself, had not God called him; whereby ye may see, it is not lawful for a man
to surrender his life unto the Living GOD, except he require it again.

Take example I (pray you) of Job, what time he cursed the day that he was born
in. Might he not either have hanged himself, or have run upon a knife, or, at
the least, have followed his wife's counsel, to curse God and die?
Notwithstanding, he abode patiently in most extreme pain, waiting till God
demanded again his life, and then restored it unto his Lord God, and would not
restore it undemanded, but tarried till his appointed time came. King David
also of famous memory, said, Lead thou my life out of this pinfold and prison;
For he knew that the life was enclosed in the body, and that none might let it
forth but God: I wot well that death is a great commodity, so that the soul may
return in his due time, unto God that gave it us. I know it also, That he that
dies in the Wars of the Lord, he shall come to the great Light: But I know not
what can appease Gods wrath, toward the soul of that man that kills himself,
and makes haste to restore his soul before his time, and without the Lords
calling. Wherefore my friends, and my brethren, I would ye should know it, I am
no more coward than you, and I do not disagree with you, because I am of a
faint heart, for fear of these present calamities; but this I know, I should
commit a heinous offense against the Lord, if I should kill my self. And how
say ye (you Princes) that stick unto your God? to you I speak, Tell me, who
shall make intercession unto God for us, if we should commit this sin, and each
kill one another? Would not a man judge him a slave, a fool, a froward person,
a rebel, and a desperate man, that should be forced with any misery, to be so
mad, that because all things fall not out as he would wish, would therefore
hang, or desperately murder himself with his own hand? Such ye know the law
thus punishes: Their right hand is cut off, wherewith they forced themselves
to die, then they are left unburied, as men that have destroyed their own
souls: By what reason then shall we kill our selves? I would wish that we might
be slain of our enemies, rather than we should so shamefully murder ourselves,
whereby ever after we should be taken for man-slayers.

If any man kill himself, as Saul whom he commended, without doubt he
commits a heinous crime, and such a one as no satisfaction can be made for:
Besides that, he shall be reckoned faint-hearted, and as one that despaireth of
his recovery: wherefore our forefathers have taught us, A man ought not to
despair of his safeguard and deliverance, which comes of God, no not when the
knife is put to his throat to cut it. For King Hezekiah of famous memory, when
he heard these words of Esaias that worthy Prophet; Make thy Will, and set thy
things in order, for thou shall die, and not escape; Nevertheless he fainted
not, nor ceased not to pray to God, for the prolonging of his life in theworld,
that he might amend his life, and send a better soul unto God. Then the Lord
God of Israel, seeing his unwearied and strong hope, with his repentance,
suffered him to live fifteen years longer; But as for Saul, he was not
appointed King over Israel after the Lords mind, but only by the people that
craved of Samuel; Give us a King to rule over us: whereupon afterward God
departed from Saul, for he was not obedient to Gods will, but went about by
force to establish his kingdom. The Lord then seeing the wickedness of his
heart, gave him over, and chose him another to be King over his people;
anointing David his servant, whiles Saul was yet living; which Saul perceiving,
persecuted David, and labored with all his endeavor to destroy him, because
he knew God was with him, and prospered all that he did; whereas contrarily,
all went backward with himself.

For these causes I say, he chose rather to die than live; he also would not
live after the people of Israel were overthrown in the Mountains of Gilboa.
And, in mine opinion, he slew himself for nothing but because he was a
faint-hearted coward, and utterly despaired of his safeguard. For although he
said, Lest these uncircumcised come and run me through: Yet, if he had been of
a^valiant courage, he would have stood to his defense to the death:
Peradventure God would have delivered him: But he contrarily, all in despair,
procured both himself, and his son, a shameful death.

But ye shall consider this, he was an unmerciful King, and therefore did God
rid him out of the World. For as he did not spare his own life, nor his son's:
so did he not spare others. And whereas ye allege Aaron unto me, I would know
of you, why he put himself between the living and the dead. Was it not because
he would turn away the plague from Israel? If he had known that he himself
should have been stricken therewith, doubtless he would not have striven
against the striker; but trusting in the holiness of his righteousness, he
stood before the Angel to deliver Israel from that misery: Therefore I am not
to be compared with Aaron, albeit I am one of his children, and never yet in
all my life did I shrink to venture my life in the Wars of the Lord: And now I
am not determined to kill my self, lest I should sin against God, and spoil my
soul of hope of salvation: I know it well, and it were more expedient for me to
be slain of mine enemies, then that I should kill my self. And if ye say the
word, Let us go forth, and suddenly set upon our enemies to kill, or to be
killed, in this battle of the Lord, and so shall we do well: peradventure God
will give them into our hands; For God is able to save as well by a small Army,
as by a great. Then if ye see me to be afraid of mine enemies sword, ye shall
thereby know me to be a coward, and one that fawneth upon his enemies, and
hunteth for their favor; But ye shall see me go before you, as a valiant man,
nor once to turn my face from death. What did ye ever see in me, that you
should judge me fearful? Did ye ever know me refuse to fight? within the Town
of Jorpata I have ever kept my quarter and ward, and every day have I fought
with mine enemies, whom I have not spared, but impaired; and that not a little,
whiles I defended that little City forty eight daves against them. For I
thought with my self, peradventure I may drive away the enemies of the Lord out
of our Land, and divert them from Jerusalem, that they go not thither. And so
have I fought with them, till all my valiant soldiers be spent, and none left
but you; I could no longer withstand their force, yet I would not yield my self
as a prisoner unto them, therefore I fled hither with you into this Cave. Now
therefore, Brethren, ye shall understand, that death is commodious and good
indeed, which comes in time: But it is neither good nor godly, for a man to
kill himself and his brother, to go afterward for that deed into hell and
perdition. And what other thing can more clearly set forth a man's proud, and
haughty mind, with his hope in God, than for a man to suffer patiently,
whatsoever chances unto him, until his end come? Behold the Lions and other
Beasts, how they are wont to withstand their enemies that lie in wait for them,
to the intent they may save their lives, whose armor is in their teeth and
claws, wherewith nevertheless they hurt not themselves, but use them against
other that assault them, till they either overc^me, or be overcome. We,
although we have no warlike Weapons, yet have Nature armed us as well as them:
For albeit we be not of such strength as they, yet has we such armor, that we
may defend our selves therewith, both from man and beast; But how can we break
the band of love one to another that proceeds from God, who has chosen us
his people and inheritance to sanctify him? How then may we be enemies one
against another, and kill one another? If that be true, as ye cannot deny it,
that although we be many thousands, yet we are counted as one soul, and members
of one body: Then how can any man ever find in his heart to strike his own eyes
or feet, or any other of his members to destroy it, except he be mad, and
besides himself? Moreover, dear Brethren and Friends, consider to what end the
Master of a ship does abide the tempest of the Seas, and striveth day and night
with the floods thereof? Does he not do it to save the Ship, and his life from
death? If so it be, he should willingly for the same purpose put himself in
jeopardy of Tempest, or run on Rocks, Would not the Merchantmen say; See
yonder desperate fellow that destroys himself, his Ship, with the the
Merchants, and their riches? Suppose an earthly King should give his officers
to keep certain precious Jewels: Were it not convenient that they should keep
them till such time as he should call for them again? If they should at their
pleasure cast them away before the King call for them, Shall they not move him
to anger? And if a man come into the presence of the King uncalled, Will not
the King check him, and say unto him, What do thou here before I call thee?
So now, all the souls of Israel are the Lords, who has bestowed them unto men
according to his mercy and good pleasure, who also will receive them again when
it pleases him; and when his time is come, every soul shall depart unto his
place of rest. Therefore if a man will with his own hands, let forth his soul
out of his body before his time, God will not receive it, neither shall it find
any rest, but be destroyed, and why? Because it is expulsed, and thrust out of
his place before his time, and before God do call for it: wherefore it shall
wander inconstantly for ever. Why then (my dear Brethren and Friends) do you
advise us to kill one another, and to expel and banish our souls from us, they
being not called for? How can we put away this opprobry? How can we make amends
for this sin? Who shall pray and make intercession for us? And with this Joseph
wept abundantly, insomuch that they laughed him to scorn.

Then Joseph held up his hands to heaven, saying. Thou Lord Almighty art our
Father, thou have formed us, and by thy great mercy taken us out of the clay:
thou art he that leadest us in thy faith, and the multitude of thy mercies and
benignities toward us has not ceased. And although our sins have separated us
from thee, yet n^vertheless, we are thy handiwork every one of us, and a long
time have we been called thy people. Thou art Lord over all creatures and
souls. Thou do what thou will, and none dare say to thee, Why do thou so?
Thou art our Father, we are clay, thou have given us our shape and fashion;
therefore if it please thee to take our souls, take them by the hands of thine
Angels, that we commit no evil against them. And if these my fellows that be
present with me will not be partakers of my prayer; behold my life alone, for
the which I beseech thy benign clemency, if it please thee take it, for thou
gave it me, therefore do with it whatsoever it shall seem good unto thee: It
is in thine hands, thou lendest it me, and have preserved it within me: I will
not destroy it my self, or let it out of my prison, before thou demand it; for
thou know, that as man cannot live without thy decree and appointment, so
likewise he cannot die without the same. Unto thee therefore do I lift mine
eyes, thou that dwell in Heaven, to deal mercifully with thy servants, and
with me, to turn our hearts that we consent not unto this, to murder our
selves: If thou know any among them, that intend so wicked an Act, I beseech
thee, O Lord my God, let me find favor in thine eyes; give them an heart to
hear wholesome counsel, that I may deliver my self and mine own life, which I
commend into thine hands, that thou would receive it unto thee, for in thy
hand is the life of every living creature.

Thus when Joseph had finished his prayer, he turned him unto his fellows, and
saluted them; Then said they, Think thou therefore to move our minds,
because thou have prayed unto God for thy self, and for us? Did not we tell
thee ere while, like as we tell thee now, that we are determined to die by one
means or other? wherefore say thy mind, and tell us by what death thou will end
thy life; for we have ever known thee a just man, and a worthy Prince,
therefore art thou worthy to die first. Joseph perceiving his fellows were
utterly determined to die, and would give none ear to his persuasions, for he
could by no reasons draw them to his opinion, he went subtly to work with
them on this wise; Seeing it will be none otherwise, Brethren (quoth he) I will
show you my advice: Ye are determined to die, ye say, and that upon your own
swords, therefore there is no better way, than to do it by lot in this wise:
Let us cast lots amongst our selves, that we may be joined together by couples,
then will we cast lots which couple shall die first; afterward they two shall
cast lots between them, which of them shall kill his fellow; he that remains
shall choose him one of the second couple to kill him; likewise the second
couple shall cast lots between themselves, who shall die first, and he that is
left shall choose him one of the third couple, whom he has a fancy to be
killed of: then they shall try by lot who shall die first, who being slain, the
other may choose him one of the fourth couple to kill him, and so even till all
be slain, that we see not the captivity of our people: The last couple that
remain shall do thus; Run one upon the others sword, or else let them cast lots
between themselves, and upon whom it falls, let him die first: But forasmuch
as we are forty and one, so that we cannot be justly joined in couples; let us
cast lots first of all, and see which of us shall first be slain, and when he
is once out of the way, then let us divide the couples: He that is to be slain
first, let him choose one of the first couple, and cast lots, and do as I have
devised. Then every man liked his device (which was Gods doing who heard
Joseph's prayer) and said all with one mouth, We will do as thou have advised,
and to thee it appertains to divide the men, and to cast the lots; Joseph
answered, But let us swear by the name of the Lord, that this device shall
stand, be ratified, and performed; whereunto they accorded, and swear all by
the name of the Lord, that they would have this device to be ratified and kept,
which Joseph had invented by casting of lots. Then Joseph cast lots, who should
be the odd man, and it fell upon Jehojada, the son of Eliakim, a Galilean,
which was a valiant man, and chiefest in every counsel next to Joseph, and the
principal perswader of this wicked fact to kill themselves; After that, did he
craftily divide them into couples, so that the lot of his own couple came forth
last of all, who looked to be saved, and trusted in God, believing that he
would deliver him from this abominable deed.

Then Jehojada chose him one of the first c^uple, who slew him; That done, the
first couple cast lots, between them, so the one killed his fellow, and chose
him one of the second couple to kill him; Then they of the second couple, cast
lots between themselves in the presence of Joseph, and the one killed the
other; then he that remained, chose him one of the third couple to slay him;
And in this manner did they all, till they were all slain, and none left alive,
but Joseph and his fellow, who said unto Joseph, Go to, let us cast lots, that
we may go to our Brethren.

Joseph answered, We will do so if thou be so disposed; but first hear me, I
pray thee, speak a few things in thy ears; Tell me, Have not these sinners
rebelled against God, in this murdering of themselves so shamefully? neither
could I by any means dissuade them, nor divert them from this opinion;
Wherefore should we two fin against God so grievously, and against our own
souls? If the lot should so fall that I should kill thee, I should be counted a
manslayer, and that worthily; and it may so chance I shall escape after thee,
and save my life; but if the lot should so fall, that thou should slay me,
thou should be taken also for a murderer, and peradventure thou should
not escape after me; yea, although thou think that thou may est: But assure
thy self of this, we lose our hope in God, in as much as we sin against our own
souls. For all these men that thou see here dead, Lo, they have sinned
against their own souls, dying without discipline and good order. If thou will
say, How shall we do by reason of the oath that we have sworn? Do thou not
know, that he that breaks a wicked oath, does nothing wickedly himself
therein? For a man is not constrained to perform any oath unto God, but to the
keeping of his Laws; and hereupon is it that David says, I have sworn, and
will perform; for neither vow nor oath that is made against the Commandments of
God, can be ratified before God. And what more is, before we swear, our fathers
swear first long ago, at the Mount of Sinai, that they and their children
should keep the Law of the Lord. Moses also made a Covenant with them upon the
same, and not only with them that were there, but also with us. How then dare
we be so bold to swear, to break the Law of God, and become man-killers? Seeing
it is one of the ten Commandments expressly, Thou shall not kill. Wherefore my
Brother, thou shall understand, that we need not be solicitous, nor careful for
the oath that we have made, but rather to break it, for God will never be
displeased with us for that: For I being afraid of these wicked persons that
lie now here dead, invented this subtle means and way to swear, that I might
save my life: Now therefore, my Brother, if thou will be ruled by mine advice,
thou shall save thy life and mine, and I will cast no lots, nor perform the
oath that we made, which is no^ good in the Law; if thou will not, I will
wi^stand thee, and fight with thee, to kill thee, and spare my self: And with
this Joseph leapt back, and dr^w out his sword, standin over against him at his
defense, to see what his fellow (...) answer: His companion hearing (...), ^ed
neither hand nor foot against him, but said: Lo, I am content, do what thou
think good, because thou art a man of God. And blessed be the Lord God of
Israel that has not withdrawn his mercy from me, but made me to be in thy lot,
whereby my soul is saved from going to hell: Thy lot is a just lot: For the
Lord will not leave the scourge of sinners, upon the lot of the just. Much
besides this spoke Joseph's Companion to him, for he was sore afraid of him,
lest he should have killed him, if they had encountered together; for Joseph was
a better man of his hands, and therefore Joseph chose him into his lot, that he
might be able to make his party good with him. In this point Joseph played the
wise man's part, for he escaped by this means, both from the hands of those
wicked fools, and also from his fellow. Therefore Joseph called out of the Cave
to Captain Nicanor, and said to him in this wise: Will thou promise me, that
neither thou, nor any of thy men that be here with thee, or in the Romans Camp,
shall kill us, before thou have brought us unto Vespasian? and let him do with
us as he thinks good. Nicanor answered: So, and so, deal God with me, if I
fulfill not thy request, if so be thou will come forth unto me, together with
the men that thou have with thee. Joseph answered him, I will come forth to
thee, and so many more of us as be alive: for it is come to pass, that some of
us be dead in the Cave, wherefore, how can they come forth? Then said Nicanor,
Never think (friend Joseph) that I come to deceive thee, Come forth and trust
in thy GOD, for thou need not to fear. Joseph said: Swear unto me this, by
the God of Israel, although he be unknown to thee. Nicanor answered, I swear
unto thee by that God that made the World by his wisdom, that thou need not
to fear me, but boldly may come forth unto me. So Nicanor made a covenant
with Joseph and his fellow, confirming and ratifying it in writing, after the
manner of the Romans, and reaching it into the Cave upon a spear, holding the
point of the ^pear in his own hand. Joseph took the writing, read it, and
believed Nicanor: Then came he forth to Nicanor, and his fellow with him.

When Nicanor sitting upon his seat of State that was made him in the wood nigh
to the Cave, saw Joseph come toward him, he rose up, and embracing him, kissed
him, set him on his right hand, and wept with him abundantly: he honored his
fellow also, placing him between Pollerinus and Gallicanus, whom he had then
present with him. Then Nicanor asked him for the rest of the men that were with
him, desiring that they should come forth, and he would honor them also, and
do them no harm. Joseph declared the whole matter unto him, and told him what
was become of them.

Nicanor hearing of the pertinacious stubbornness of the Jews hearts, and their
wicked intents, was wonderful^y moved. So then he rose and went from thence,
with Joseph and his companion unto Vespasian. When the Roman Army saw Joseph,
they were greatly astonished, and gave a mighty shout; some rejoiced that Joseph
was taken, saying, This is good luck, that our eyes shall see our long expected
desire. Other lamented and let tears fall from their eyes with pensive hearts,
saying, Is not this that worthy man who made all the Roman host to quake for
fear, and whose fame and renown was known throughout all Lands? How is it come
to pass that so mighty a man is taken in his own Country, and amongst his own
people? If this chances unto such a man, to be taken in his own Land, in the
midst of his families and friends; How shall we escape in a strange Land?
Certain evil disposed persons of the Roman soldiers, went to Vespasian, and
said, Sir, you shall do well to command this man to be slain without mercy,
that has been the destruction of so many of the people of the Romans. This is
the very same, that shot the arrow and stuck you in the leg; Put him to death,
and then shall ye be sure he shall never move war more amongst you. If ye do
not, ye shall see him one day again raise an Army against us, and destroy us.
But Joseph did find friendship at Titus Vespasian son's hands, which came of
the Lord.

Therefore when he heard those wicked men's words, that desired Vespasian to put
Joseph to death, he disapproved their advice, and partly in mockage he taunted
them, saying, Will you tell my Father what he has to do? will you give him so
wicked counsel, to kill that man that yields himself to us, upon the trust of
our league and band of friendship, which you now go about to break and
frustrate? Did not Captain Nicanor in my fathers name and Caesar's, with all the
Roman host, make a Covenant with him? Take heed what you say: Is it reason to
break the Caesarean fidelity? Moreover, who can tell whether it may so happen,
that some of us be taken by the Jews, like as Joseph is prisoner herc with us?
When Vespasian heard his sons words, it pleased him, and he spared Joseph, not
suffering him to be slain, but committed him to a certain Captain of his, and
carried him about with him through the Cities, together with King Agrippa.
After this Vespasian removed his Camp to Thalmida, which also is called Acho,
and from thence he went to Caesarea, a great City.

When they of the City saw Joseph, they cried unto Vespasian, Kill him, kill
him, or else he will one day be an occasion to stir great wars against thee.
But Vespasian gave no ear to them. Whiles he was at Caesarea, tidings came to
him, that the Citizens of Papho invaded and spoiled the Isles that were subject
under his Dominions with a Navy. Vespasian hearing thereof commanded to lay
wait for them, that they might be met withal. So there was an ambush laid
wit^out the Town, and it came to pass, that when the Pirates were gone out a
roving, Vespasian entered the Town and took it without great resistance, because
their soldiers were absent.

When the Rovers therefore returned with their Navy, and saw the Romans in the
City, they labored to set a land; but suddenly a huge tempest, and a mighty
storm, drove all their ships against the rocks that were in the sea shore, (for
there was no haven for ships) and there they were lost many of them, and those
that swam to land the Romans slew: they that were drowned in the Sea, and slain
by the Romans, were in number four thousand good men of War, besides them that
were slain in the Town 40000. all Jews.

This done, Vespasian set forth Valericus and Taribus, two Roman Colonels, with
his son Titus, who went, besieged, and wan the Towns of defense that were in
Galilee; And thus did Titus use them, They that yielded unto him, he saved
their lives; and whosoever withstood him, he slew. Moreover, all the Cities
that belonged to Agrippa in Galilee, he restored them unto him again, only
Tiarva excepted, which he utterly rased, and slew all the Males, especially
such as were apt to the Wars, sold also their wives and children. And this was
the only City in all Galilee, that Titus showed such a rigor and extremity
unto.

CHAP. VII.
VEspasian departing thence, took his journey to Gamala, which is a City upon
the top of a Mountain; the name thereof is called Gamala, of an Hebrew word
Gamal, that signifies to Requite, or to do a good turn, because it is the best
City that belongs to Agrippa, and the inhabitants thereof were all very rich.
The City also, called Seleucia, was not far distant from it, a Country
replenished with good Towns, Gardens, Brooks, and all kind of fruitful
Trees; Agrippa besought Vespasian that he would not destroy this City: Let me
go first (says he) and offer them peace, peradventure they will take it, that
they may save their lives from destruction; Vespasian was entreated, saying
unto him, Go and do as thou will, for thine honor's sake I will do so much for
thee. So Agrippa went to them, and spoke friendlily and peaceably unto them,
and they received him in like manner, but they meant deceit, saying; Thou art
our Lord and King, to whom therefore does all that is of any price, or to be
desired in all Israel belong but unto thee? Therefore come near unto us, and
debate the matter with thy Servants.

Agrippa crediting these Words, came close up to the City, and as he listened to
them that talked with him, one cast a great stone from the Wall, which lighted
just between his shoulders; with such a violence, that it struck him prostrate
to the ground, and brake his back, with one of his arms also. But his Servants
stepped to him, took him up, and carried him to Vespasian; who seeing him so sore
hurt, swear he would never go from thence, till he had taken the City, and
ordered them in like manner as he did at Tiarva, to leave not a man therein.
The Roman Physicians did bestow such diligence about Agrippa, that they cured
him.

Vespasian in his rage against the Seleucians, because they had wounded their
King, besieged and assaulted them. The Jews within the Town encouraged one
another, saying, Let us stick to it now, and play the men, for we have no other
hope to save our lives, seeing we have thus used the King. Certain stout men of
them therefore issued out, and encountering with the Romans, made a great
slaughter amongst them. After that, the Romans made ready their Engines, planted
their battering Rams, playing with them against the Walls; and by that time
night came, beat so great a part thereof down to the earth, that Vespasian and
much people with him might enter at their pleasure. But Vespasian gave
commandment to his Army, that they should not enter that night into the Town,
but stand and compass the walls until the morrow, that they might the better
see how to win it. Notwithstanding, they would not be ruled by him, but entered.
Then the Jews came upon them, drew the chains cross their streets, and closing
the ways of the City, intrapped them in such sort, that they could go neither
one way nor other. After that, sett^ng upon them, beat them down even there; so
that they were all slain, save ten men that fled with Vespasian, and a Captain
named Butius, one of the best men of War in all the Roman Army, yet him the
Jews pursued and slew. But Vespasian and his, fled to the Mountains, that he
might be there in safeguard: and from thence he sent to Titus his son that was
in Syria, for the Roman Army that he had sent with him to Persia, which Titus
led into Jury.

Shortly after, Vespasian gathered soldiers, and, repairing his Army, joined
with Agrippa's company, and returning to Seleucia, wan it, and slew every man,
leaving none alive: and afterward going again to the Cities of Galilee, took
them, serving them in like sort. After that, he came to the City called
Nascela, which was a walled Town, and of all the Towns of defense throughout
all Galilee, none left but it.

This he besieged, because thither resorted many cutthroats and wicked
persons, without the fear of God, such as were robbers and rovers of the Land
of Judea. Amongst whom was a certain man named Jehochanan, learned, wise, and
prudent, especially to do mischief; a witty Counselor, and of such eloquence;
that he could persuade cunningly, and dissuade men from that they had purposed.
Besides this, he was a murderer, ready to shed blood, and to do any mischief;
a great robber, and one that ever gaped for other men's goods, by which means he
was become very rich: wherefore there resorted unto him all vain persons
man-slayers, rebels, and ruffians like himself giving them large rewards, that
they might be of his fraternity, his brethren, and adherents, and he to be
their head. Titus was sent to this City by his Father, to offer them conditions
of peace; whither when he was come, he sent his Emba^adours to the Citizens to
treat of peace with them; whereunto the Citizens accorded and were ready to
en^er into league with Titus. When as this wicked Jehochanan perceived that the
ancient men of the Town and the heads would accep^ of peace, he commanded his
companions to guard the walls, to hinder them from speaking with the Romans,
saying, that they themselves would return them an Answer: So therefore
seditious Jehochanan made answer to the Ambassadors of Titus, saying; To morrow
have we a solemn feast to the Lord God, tell thy master Titus therefore that he
grant us truce for 2 dais, and the third day we will give him answer; wherewith
Titus was content, and deferred the assault for two days. These things were
done on Whit-sun-even, which was called the Feast of weeks, and harvest. The
night before the third day appointed was come, Jehochanan and his accomplices gat
out of the Town, and fled toward Jerusalem, ere Titus knew thereof: On the
morrow he sent his Ambassadors to demand their answer, what they would do; They
answered, we desire to enter into a league with you, for we are yours, and
submit our selves to your pleasure, upon the condition, that none of the Romans
hurt us, either in our bodies or goods. Titus upon this made peace with them,
confirming it by Writing sealed, for the better assurance thereof. So they
opened the gates, and Titus came into the Town with his whole Army, and the
Jews received him with great joy, honoring him very much.

Then Titus enquired for Jehochanan and his confederates. The Citizens declared
unto him, how he fled by night with all his unto Jerusalem: Titus hearing that,
sent after to pursue him, yet they found him not, he had made such speed.
Notwithstanding, many of the people that went out of the Town with him, that
they might escape the danger, both men, women, and children, old and impotent
persons they overtook, slew them every one, and returned with a great spoil.
After this, Titus won all the Cities in Galilee, and set Rulers in them. Then
Vespasian dislodged from hence, and came to the Mount Tabor, which has snow on
it continually; the height thereof is thirty furlongs, and upon the top is a
plain twenty three furlongs long: Thither sent Vespasian one of his Captains
called Palgorus, which took the Mountain, and the Town that stood thereon.

But here I will leave off the History of the other battles that were fought in
other places in the Land of Israel, and Galilee, and speak no more of them in
this Book, for they be almost innumerable, and we have made mention of them, in
the History of the Romans.

THE SECOND BOOK, Containing The History of the siege of Jerusalem.
NOw will we describe the Batells of Jerusalem, and how the City was besieged
by the Romans; wherein we will declare all things truly, as our manner is, and
faithfully, according to the verity of that that was done.

It came to pass therefore, as Jehochanan the Galilean was fled to Jerusalem,
he found there men meet for his purpose; injurious persons, wicked men,
murderers, deceivers, blood-shedders, an infinite number. For out of all
Countries within the Land of Judea, there repaired thither all men of War, to
defend the Sanctuary of our God, and Anani the high Priest received all that
came. These, seeing Jehochanan an^ his valiantness, revolted from Anani the
high Priest, and clave to him, consulting with him concerning all their
affairs: So he conspired with these cutthroats to lay hands upon the ri^ men
of the City, and to spoil them of their goods; and this was their manner. When
they espied any notable rich man of the City, they would after this sort
quarrel with him: Art not thou he that have sent letters to the Romans, and to
Vespasian, to betray the City unto them? Thus would they examine him before the
people, and when he would answer, God forbid I should do so; then would they
bring in godless persons, limbs of the devil, of their own company to bear
false witness against him, that he might be condemned to death by the law for a
rebel.

Thus dealt they with Antipas and Lohia, both Noble men, and of the chief of
the City: and their goods, with all their jewels, the seditious seized for
themselves. They picked quarrels also with the ^igh (...), thrust them from
their chairs, that they could not execute their service. Moreover, they cast
lots, who should have the Priests office, and who should be no Priest. For they
held the Priesthood and service of God, for toys, gaudes, and trifles. So the
lot fell upon one that was called Pani the son of Peniel, a carterly
husbandman, ignorant of what belonged to the Priests office, so that he was
utterly unworthy of the Priesthood: so light a matter made they of the
Priesthood. The good and the godly men of Jerusalem, seeing the power of these
ruffians, and wicked persons bear such swinge, they stuck together and
determined to withstand them by force. The people therefore earnestly moved
with an^ger, set upon them, and encouutred with them in such sort, that the
fight was great on both sides, in the Streets, in the Marketplace, in the
Temple, and in the entrance of the Temple, till all the City was filled full of
dead bodies and slain men. For there was not so much as one street, but there
was some skirmishes in it. The people at length got the upper-hand of the
ruffians, for they were eagerly set, and earnestly bent against them. The
seditious therefore seeing themselves not able to make their party good with
the people, fled every man into the Temple of the Lord, shut it after them, and
there remained. But Anani the high Priest, seeing the wicked to be fled to the
Temple, wi^ed the people to cease their fighting with them in the Temple of the
Lord, left they should pollute it with the blood and dead ca^kasses of those
wicked persons. The people therefore left off the fight. Then Anani beset the
Temple round about with 6000. of the choicest and ablest men of the people,
well armed all of them with jackes and sallets, and as well weapon'd, with
every man a sword, a target, and a spear or pike, to keep the Temple, that they
should not come forth. Moreover, Anani cast in his mind, that besides the
invading them in the Temple, which were nowaies seemly, it should also be as
great a damage, if the people of the Lord should assault one another in that
place. For these causes, he sent Ambassadors to Jehochanan the Galilean, chief
Captain of the seditious and thieves, offering him peace; but Jehochanan
refused it: For the seditious had sent for the Edomites to come and aid them.
The Edomites had been ever from their first beginning very valiant and
warlike-men, yet they were subject to the Jews. For Hircanus King of Juda had
conquered them, and caused them to be circumcised, binding such of them as were
the best Warriors to this service, to stand in arms, and keep watch and ward
upon the walls of Jerusalem day and night, and the rest of them to pay tribute
to the Jews.

Upon a certain night came two and twenty thousand of these Edomites, all good
men of War, against Jerusalem. When Anani the Priest, and the people that were
with him, heard the noise of the Edomites Army, he went upon the walls, and
demanded of them what they were, from whence they came, and whither they would?
They answered, We are Edomites, and came out of Idumea, to visit the Lord God
and his Temple, and to see in what case his people stands: for thus we come
according to our accustomed manner as ever heretofore. Anani answered, You are
dissemblers, and not as your words do show, neither come ye to seek God and his
Sanctuary, nor yet to aid his people, but rather to the supporting of
Jehochanan grand Captain of Thieves. Were it not better for you to assist the
Sanctuary of God, than these sinful seditious persons, that covet nothing else
then to lay waste the House of God, and to destroy his People? They in the most
holy City of God, do shed the blood of Just, Godly, and Innocent men; through
whose wickedness the Romans have the upper hand of us, because we have civil
wars at home with the Seditious, and external with the Romans. Yea, the
wickedness of the Seditious is grown so far, that the most part of us had
rather be slain by the Romans, than of our brethren the Jews. If so be ye be
come to maintain them, ye shall understand that ye offend our Lord God
exceedingly, to help sinners and murderers, that tread the people of God under
their feet, like as men tread grapes in a wine press, and make the Temple of
the Lord a dewlling place of man-killers and wicked persons. Ye say, Ye come to
seek the Lord: how is it then that ye are thus in Arms, after the manner of
war? Ye shall understand, we shut not the gates of the Town because of you,
lest ye should come in, after your accustomed manner: but because of your
armor and weapons that you have with you, which are instruments of
destruction, a very unmeet fashion to come and visit the Lord; You should
rather have come^with offerings, sacrifices, confession, and praise.
Notwithstanding, if ye will enter into the Town for devotion sake, ye are
welcome: but ye must lay away your weapons and so enter in peaceably.

The Edomites answered, We marvel not a little at thee which art the high
Priest, our Lord and mediator, and at the rest of the Priests of the Lord, with
the Elders and Judges of the people that be present with thee; and your wo^ds
seem strange in our ears. For we understand you take us for your enemies, and
thereupon you stop us of our entrance into the City, to visit the Lord God
after our accustomed manner. In that we be armed as ye object unto us? Do ye
not know that Vespasian draws nigh to come to this holy City? This we hearing
of, was the cause that we took our weapons with us, to come to aid you, and
keep the Town, as we have been wont these many years. But how should ye gather
this, that we come to support the wicked and seditious that be with you: when
as from the first day that ever we and our fathers were circumcised, we never
swarved from the Law and commandments of the Lord? Tell us if there be any
commandme^t in the Law, that bids a man to strengthen and maintain the power
of the wicked, to the which we are bound to hearken, and to aid these? God
forbid we should do this, for we all both that be here, and the other Edomites
also, be servants of the Lord and his people, to maintain and defend the Law,
the people, and the house of the Lord. Whiles they were thus talking together,
there arose up a great cloud, and lightnings were seen with fire, and darkness
with mighty thunder^claps, and showers of hail, that all that saw it were
wonderfully afraid. Wherefore the people fled wholly; left not only the walls,
but Anani also: for they could not abide to tarry any longer. But Anani took
heart unto him, and abode it, to mark those horrible signs of heaven which did
appear, that he might judge what they betokened.

The Figure of a fearful Comet,


And he gave his Judgment indeed (but not according to the truth) that the
thunder and hail with darkness, signified Gods help, by the hope whereof they
should defend the Sanctuary of the Lord. So likewise judged all the Elders that
were with him, without perceiving that all these signs betokened the evils that
should come upon Jerusalem and all Israel.

When they that were shut in the Temple, perceived that they that kept the
Watch before the gate of the Temple, were fled also for fear of the tempest,
they went and opened the doors of the Temple, and in that darkness, which
although it was so great, that one could not see another for the thickness
thereof, neither durst any of the Town once look out of his doors (they were so
afraid of those terrible signs of the Element) yet came those desperate
fellows, the Seditious out of the Temple, drew toward the walls without all
fear, with saws and other instruments, to cut asunder the bars of the gates.
And when the crashing of the thunder and hail was greatest, then labored they
hardest, in wresting asunder the locks and bolts of the gates, lest they should
be perceived. And ever when the thunder clap was past then stayed they and left
off till it came again. Thus played they till they had broken and opened the
gates, and let the Edomites into the City: who being once come in, wandered here
and there, for that night, devising how they might set upon the Citizens of the
Town, and utterly destroy them.

They called out first their confederates, that remained in the Temple, brought
them thence, and joined together with the Edomites, swearing one to another,
that they should be one people and one Army. And forthwith, being so confed^ate
together, they slew the same night, 8500. of the people of God, all good men of
God, all good men of War; besides innumerable other, that they killed of the
common people. In the morning they laid hands on the rich men, haled them
before the Judges, and lxx. Elders, which otherwise is called Sanhedrim, whom
they called together: And there wicked Jehochanan the Galilean, spoke unto them
in this wise.

Why condemn ye not these rich Cobs, that have made a conspiracy with the
Romans, and determine to betray this holy City i to their hands? namely, one
Sechariahu a just man, a perfect, godly, and virtuous, one that feared the
Lord, and loved both God and man; but for his riches only which were great,
this Jehochanan (Captain of the Seditious) apprehended him, willing the Elders
to condemn him to death, for that he had joined with their enemies, (as he
said) to betray the City to them. The Priests, Elders, and Judges hearing his
words, and perceiving that both he and the rest of his bloody band, desired
nothing else than to make this man away, although they knew him to be most
innocent, they wept and fighed greatly: Jehochanan seeing them weep for
Sechariahu, and that they would not condemn him, respecting his justice and
integrity; What, quoth he, do you begin to mourn before there be any corpse
present? I would I should never come where God has to do, but if ye order it
thus in your judgments, ye shall be the first that we will lay hold of, and we
will sit in judgment our selves, to discern the matter for the people of God
according as we shall think good. Then laying apart all shame, with an
obstinate mind, the wicked sort hoysed away Sechariahu, carried him out of the
place of judgment, and brought him up to the top of a high Tower, at the East
end of the Town, from whence they cast him down headlong, and he died at the
walls side in the vale of Jehoschaphat. The Priests therefore were sore afraid
f^r their own parts, and the Judges also with the Elders, seeing the wickedness
of Jehochanan, and the rest of the Seditious: For Jehochanan had given them
warning and said, Except ye give sentence on every man that we shall bring unto
you, acco^ding to our minds, be ye assured, all ye shall go the same way that
Sechariahu is gone before you. After that, they (...) a just man, and a rich,
that was beloved of all the ^own, whose name was Gor^nian, surnamed (...), and
he was a valiant man indeed, most expert in wars, thereto wise and w^y, and a
man of a pure and perf^ct life, one that was ever the foremost in b^ell,
whenever they had any conflict against the Gentiles that be^ged Jerusalem:
And this was his accustomed manner, when the enemies ma^ched to join battle
wit^ the Jews, he would run upon them with all his might, and make such
^laughter of them, that in spigh^ of their hearts he would force them to
retire; and by that means his body was full of skars, his face and head
wonderfully mangled with the wounds that he had received in the battles, that
he had been in for the people of the Lord; yet now because he would not follow
the villainous mind of Jehochanan, and take his part, Jehochanan commanded him
to be apprehended, and brought before him, and when he was come, said thus unto
him; Make thy Will, and set thy house in order, and confess thy self unto the
Lord, for there is no way with thee but death: And so they led him out of the
Town to kill him there, lest there should be any business about his death, if
he had been put to death within the Town; for all the Citizens of Jerusalem
loved him, and he likewise loved them. When they were come to the place of
execution, Gorinian fell down before them, and besought them with tears in this
wise; Seeing ye have so determined that ye will needs slay me, when as
notwithstanding I have committed no crime, nor any offense, and that ye will in
no wise spare me although I be innocent, as you know well enough your selves;
yet I beseech you, let me obtain this one thing at your hands, that you would
do so much at least wise at my request, as to bury my body; other favor I
desire not. They made him answer, If thou had not spoken to us thereof, we
had thought to have done it, for so we were determined with our selves; but
now, seeing thou art so bold as to demand this of us, we will slay thee, but
burial gettest thou none; thy body shall be cast forth unto the beasts of the
earth, and fowls of the air. Gorinion yet besought them to the contrary,
until the most cruel Jehochanan struck him, and slew him, and after threw out
his body to the beasts of the field; This done, they returned into the City.

Vespasian in the mean season drew nigh to Jerusalem; for he had pitched his
tents at Cesarea, where he relieved his army, and paid his soldiers great
wages, wherefore they tarried in the City many days: For when Vespasian
understood of the wars in Jerusalem, he said unto his people, Let us make no
haste to besiege Jerusalem, till such time as they have slain one another among
themselves, and so at length their pride will be pulled down, when as they see
themselves waste away with cruel war, hunger, and thirst. For Vespasian was a
wonderful politic man in all feats of war, and his wisdom never turned him to
more commodity, than by this device only. So he sojourned at Cesarea, with his
men many days: In the mean season, the people of Jerusalem made war upon
Jehochanan, and his accomplices, till innumerable of them were destroyed. Some of
them were slain with swords, some the Seditious killed with short daggers. For
certain of the Seditious carried short daggers secretly under their garments,
wherewith they would come so suddenly upon an honest and just man, and thrust
him to the heart, that he should fall down dead in the place, without knowledge
who struck him: So by this means what with swords in open fraies, and what with
daggers secretly, many of the people were slain, and far more that way than by
the Romans, insomuch that now very few Citizens were left alive. Thus when
Jehochanan had gotten the upper hand of the City, he sent an Army out of
Jerusalem, to go and take the Cities that had made peace with Vespasian, which
they sacked and razed to the ground, and whomsoever they found therein, Romans,
or Jews, they slew: Yea, Jehochanan went with them himself, spoiling and
carrying away all the riches that they found in them. They took also the City
Gerara, that stood beyond Jordan, whereas they remained. The inhabitants of
Jerusalem, both Priests, Elders, and the rest of the people, sent Ambassadors
to Vespasian, to desire peace of him, and succor against Jehochanan, and his
wicked rabble, which daily in the Town slew very many of the people of God. The
Citizens also of Gerara sent Ambassadors unto Vespasian, saying; If thou will
be Lord over the Land of Judea, and the City of Jerusalem, and desire to
assure the rule thereof, and establish it unto thee, then hearken unto our
counsel, and come unto us without delay, to deliver us from the hands of
Jehochanan, and the wicked seditious persons, that with all their might
endeavor to spoil all our goods, and to get the dominion over us, our wives,
and children, to none other purpose, than by that means to destroy us utterly,
that no remnant of us should be left. If so be thou will come, and valiantly
withstand them with thy power, we will also fight against them in the Town,
till they be all slain, and then thou shall be our Lord; And that done, thou
may go to Jerusalem without any impediment, or hinderance of any man; for
they also of that City desire the same, and would gladly become subjects unto
the Romans.

When as therefore Vespasian heard the petitions of the Citizens of Gerara, he
took his journey thither to succor them, and deferred to go to Jerusalem. But
Jehochanan heard of his repair, wherefore he slew the chief Governor of
Gerara, and got him out of the Town with his companions, and took them to their
feet, determining to flee into a certain wood: Vespasian having knowledge
thereof, made after them, sending out Poligorus, who overtook them, and made a
great slaughter of them And in his return toward Gerara, upon Jordan side, he
light upon much people going to Jerusalem, that they might escape together with
the Seditious. Them Poligorus drove back to the River, where he slew 13.
thousand of them; the rest leaped into Jordan, and were drowned, to the number
of 91. thousand men, women, and children, with much Cattle that were all
drowned together in the River, insomuch that the channel of Jordan was so
stuffed, and stopped with dead bodies, that the waters rose and ran over the
banks here and there into the fields, and plains: yet at the length the waters
increased, and bare the carkases down the River, as far as the sea of Sodom,
which is the sea of Pitch, otherwise called the salt-Sea; and all the banks of
Jordan lay full of dead bodies.

After this, Vespasian took his journey from thence, and went into the land of
Edom, where he won two strong Cities, the one called Legarith, the other Cephar
Toco, and slew ten thousand of the people thereof, leading the rest away in
bondage. Thence he dislodged, and came to a Town called Chamath Gedi, which he
subdued. In this City were wel-springs of hot waters, from whence the hot baths
of Tiberias have their Original. The natural Philosophers and Astronomers of
that Country, held an opinion that these are the heads of all the hot
Wel-springs in that whole Country. Departing from thence, he came to Samaria
and won it.

Then repaired he again all the Towns that he had subdued, and made up their
walls, placing Garrisons therein, to aid him, what time he should besiege
Jerusalem. That done, he returned to Cesarea, to take muster of his whole Army,
and prepared to go to besiege Jerusalem.

But in the mean season, came Messengers from Rome, and brought him word that
Nero the Emperor was dead, and how that as he was a hunting in the Country,
the fire of the Lord came down from heaven, and fell upon him, that he died of
it.

After whom reigned Galba, not one whole year: for, before it was fully ended,
he was slain by the noble men of Rome; and Vitellius created in his stead, a
fool, yet a sore cruel man, much given to Drunkenness, so that he was in all
points unworthy of the Roman Empire.

The Noble men of Rome that were with Vespasian hearing this, greatly disdained
at that matter, and said, Was there never a Noble man in Rome left, to be
placed in the Empire, but ye must choose a drunken wine-sucker? why did ye not
rather elect the mighty Prince Vespasian that is here with us, a Sage and a
Wise man, thereto also most valiant, one that conquered many Cities, and
vanquished many Nations, and those most fierce? What puissant Kings has he
subdued under the Roman Empire? How far and wide has he enlarged the Empire of
the Romans? And now when as the Empire ought to have been bestowed upon
Vespasian, or some one like unto him, and none such could be found amongst you,
ye bestow it upon a fool, and a blowbole drunkard, wherein ye have done very
undiscreetly. Well, the Empire of Rome shall have a better Emperor one day,
and God say Amen.

Whereupon the Princes that were there, laid their heads together, and decreed
to make Vespasian Emperor. Therefore with one consent they went unto
Vespasian, and said unto him, Thou shall be our head, for the Empire belongs
to such a one, and thou shall have Dominion over us. But Vespasian refused to
take it on him, and would in no wise consent to them. Notwithstanding they
compelled him, and placed him upon the Throne of Majesty, setting an Imperial
Crown upon his head, which he would have put away, and pulled off with his hand
because he would not be Emperor. Wherefore the Roman Captains drew out their
swords and said, Thou shall be Emperor and reign over us, therefore refuse it
not: if thou do, thou shall die upon our swords. Vespasian therefore seeing
himself constrained, being afraid of his life, he was content to suffer himself
to be proclaimed Emperor. Then all the Army was sworn unto him, and he sat
upon the royal seat, as Emperor and King of Kings.

The civil wars at Jerusalem increased more and more, and much blood was shed
through the wickedness of Jehochanan, Captain of the thieves, a limb of the
devil, and through the cutthroat murderers that were with him, who had all
even sworn the utter destruction of the City of the Lord, and the deaths of the
people.

There was also another cutthroat Ruffian, of a noble house of Judea and
Jerusalem about the same time, called Schimeon, who began also to follow
Jehochanans manners in slaying innocents, and robbing and raving in Jerusalem.
For Anani the High Priest had once appointed him Prince and chief Captain of
Jerusalem: and afterward finding him an enemy, banished him the City.
Where^ore Schimeon went and ga^ him a rout of unthrifts, murderers, and
thieves, casting in his mind, and saying, Except I join my self with such good
fellows, I shall never be able to be revenged of Anani and his assistants, that
have thus banished me out of Jerusalem into exile wrongfully, unto my great
dishonor. Shall I that have been in such estate, now be cast out of my
dignity, and be constrained to wander here and there as a banished man? He went
therefore through all the Cities of Judea and Galilee, causing to be proclaimed
in the streets and market places, and sent his letters where he could not come
himself, in this manner and form: Whosoever lists to be rid from the bondage
of his master, or has had any injury in his Country, or what servant soever
desires to be set at liberty, or who so cannot abide the rule of his Father or
Master; all that be in debt, and stand in fear of their Creditors, or fear the
Jews for shedding any innocent blood, and therefore lurketh solitarily in woods
or mountains, if there be any man that is accused of any notorious crime, and
in any danger therefore; To be short, whosoever is disposed to rob and to do
injury and wrong, to haunt whores, to steal, to murder, to eat and drink at
other men's cost, without labor of his hands, let him resort to me, I will
deliver him from the yoke and danger of the laws, and will find him his fill of
booties and spoils. There assembled unto him about twenty thousand men, all
Murderers, Thieves, Rebels, Lawless persons, wicked and Seditious men.

Then began Schimeon also to vex the Israelites, to turn all upside down
wheresoever he came. When the Citizens of Jerusalem, the Priests, Elders, and
Anani heard tidings of Schimeons despightfull wickedness, how he held on still
oppressing the people of God, they were very pensive, saying: Now will this
fellow more trouble us than Jehochanan, be he never so cruel. They consulted
therefore and agreed, secretly to send a power against him, that might suddenly
fall upon him, and overthrow him. Peradventure (say they) they may slay him, or
take him alive, before this wickedness grow to further inconvenience, and join
himself with our foes; then shall they assail us both within the Town and
without.

They sent out therefore against him a great Army of Israelits and Jews, with
Chariots and Horsemen, and footmen in great number, which came where the Camp
lay, and found him in the corn fields destroying of the grain, pulling down of
barns, and burning all both ^orn and Olive trees: Then the Jerusolemites
divided their Army, and set upon Schimeons tents suddenly, smote them down, and
made a great slaughter upon the Seditious.

But shortly after, Schimeon gat the upper hand of the People of God, for he
came upon them in the night season, and made a sore slaughter amongst them;
Then they that remained, took themselves to flight toward Jerusalem, and
Schimeon pursued them, killing them unto the hard gates of Jerusalem, so that
many of them were slain in the way, and very few escaped.

After this, Schimeon went and moved war upon the Edomites, to subdue them unto
himself, which before were under the Dominion of the Jerusolemites. And first,
he came to the City Asa, otherwise called Gaza, for it was the first City
within the borders of Edom, as men came from Jerusalem. But the Edomites met
him in the field in great number, and joined battle; neither part had the
Victory, therefore at length they retired both.

Then was Schimeon in so great a rage, when as he could not overcome these
Edomites, that he wished him out of his life. So he ceased fighting a while, and
encamped himself in the borders of the Land of Edom, right against it, and
there abode, thinking to set upon them at another time. And as he was devising
how to order all things, there came unto him an Edomite called Jacob, one of
the chiefest men among them, and a Warrior. He hearing of Schimeon's
Proclamation, was moved to come and enter a League with him, and thereupon sa^d
unto him: Never let it discomfort thee, that thou could not overcome the
Edomites at the first battle: If thou will be ruled by my counsel, thou shall
win all the Cities in the whole land, and I will deliver them into thy hands

Schimeon desired to know how: therefore said he, Let us hear thy counsel, and
show us how it may be brought about, and when it is come to pass, then will we
honor thee, and regard thee accordingly.

Jacob said, Give me one half of thine Army, which I will lead with me into an
ambush: then shall thou in the morning betimes set thy men in array against the
Edomites for a stale; and when thou shall perceive them to come against thee,
then make as though thou fleddest, until thou have staled them out of the Town
into the fields to pursue thee.

Then will I with my men come out of our ambush, and make speed to the gates,
where we shall kill the Warders, and suddenly enter the Town; and killing all
that we find there, set up a flag upon the Tower of the Town. Then when the
Edomites shall see that, their hearts will be dead for sorrow; and so may
thou turn again upon them, and beat them down at thy pleasure: Or if thou like
not this device, hear yet another way. I have been a Captain against them a
long while, therefore I will return in the night season into the Town; if the
Watch examine me from whence I come, I will tell them I come from Schimeons
Camp, whither I went as a Spy; Then will I go to the Elders of the Town, and
desire them to let me have a company of the best fouldiers, and I will bring
Schimeon into their hands, if he set upon us again. For I have viewed the Camp,
and his power, and understand that he intends to morrow to fall on us, which
thou shall do indeed. And when thou see me to issue out against thee, thou
shall set thy Spear in the Rest, and come toward me; then will I take me to
flight, and cast a fear in the Edomites hearts, that they shall flee also;
which done, thou may pursue and slay them, at thy pleasure overcome them,
and enter the Town; then that Town great Asa once taken, thou shall quickly win
all the rest. When Schimeon heard this, he went and deliberated with his own
Council, and they liked the last advice best, wherefore that they concluded
upon. So Jacob the Edomite returned by night to Asa, and declared to the
Ancients of the Town, how he had been in Schimeons Camp, and had viewed his
Army, whereby he had perceived good hope, that he should deliver Schimeon into
their hands shortly. The Elders therefore made him grand Captain, and chief of
all their men of War, charging every man in this wise: Forasmuch as none of you
are so expert in the knowledge of warfare as is Jacob, therefore it behooves
you to follow him in all things. If he set forward, set ye forward; whereas he
pitcheth his tent, pitch ye also; if he stay, stay ye; if he flees, fleeye; To
be short, when he returns, then return ye, and go not one hair breadth from
that that he shall command you, neither one way nor other. Upon the next morrow
Schimeon issued out of his Camp, with all his Army, and upon that, assembled
Jacob his men, and went out to meet him; But when they came to the point ready
to join, and Schimeon with his company had charged their staves against them;
by and by Jacob left the Field, turned his back and fled, and the chief
soldiers that were about him, fled with him. The rest of the people seeing
their Captain flee, they took themselves likewise to flight every man: then
Schimeon pursuing, made a great slaughter of them, and won the Town, bringing
them under his subjection. And when he had sacked the houses of them that were
slain of the Edomites, and spoiled their goods, which was very much; the rest
that he took prisoners and kept alive, he made peace withal, and joined them
unto his own Camp.

After that, he departed from thence, accompanied with 40000. good fighting
men, part Edomites, and part Jews, and came to Chebron, which he won, and
destroyed all their grain, and corn fields: Yet after, he repaired their Walls;
and such of them as were left alive, made peace with Schimeon, who received
them into League with him, and they became his men, and followed him in all his
Wars. So he disloged from thence with all his Army, which by the accession of
the Chebronites was now wonderfully increased, and determined to invade
Jerusalem.

And when he came nigh unto the City, he ranged here and there, destroying the
fruits that were upon the ground, and also their corn.

Captain Jehochanan having intelligence of Schimeons coming to besiege the
Town, and how he had destroyed the fields, thought to have gone out of
Jerusalem, and to fight with him, but he durst not; for his Spies had told him
that he should not be able to overcome him, he had so puissant an Army, and so
well appointed. Yet nevertheless he issued out, and lay in ambush for
Schimeon. In the mean space, by chance Schimeons wife (that was fled out of
Jerusalem, with her men and women servants toward her husband, for fear lest
she should be slain for her husbands sake, if she should have tarried at
Jerusalem) passed by where he lay in his ambush: Her he took, and brought again
to Jerusalem, not a little proud of such a prey, thinking, Now we shall have
Schimeon at our pleasure, seeing we have his Wife our prisoner: he loves her
so entirely, that he will do for her sake whatsoever we will have him. This
came to Schimeons ear, who had taken that time many of Jehochanan's men, and
cut off their right hands, sending them with such shame to Jerusalem to their
master. He sent moreover Ambassadors to Jehochanan, willing him to send him
his Wife, in such sort, that she might come to him with all that was hers: or
if he refused to do it, he should be extremely handled; for he would take the
Town ere it were long, and, to Jechanan's shame, cut off the hands and legs of
all them that did inhabit it.

Jehochanan hearing this, was sore afraid, and all that were with him, and
therefore they sent him his Wife; whereupon Schimeon kept him within the Town.
And as Schimeon played the Tyrant without, so likewise did Jehochanan within.
For Jehochanan's soldiers ravished the Israelites Wives, and shed innocent
blood.

Shortly after, Schimeon left the Town for a space, and returned into Idumea;
for he had word that the men of most power, and the richest sort of that
Country rebelled. Whereupon he sacked and spoiled all the Towns of Idumea, and
left them nothing: insomuch that he was become very rich, and then returned to
Jerusalem, bringing the Edomites wholly with him, that were meet for war: and
many of the Jews resorted to him, and with his power he besieged Jerusalem,
even at the very gates. Yet the Tyranny of Jehochanan and his Accomplices ceased
not, but increased more and more daily in Jerusalem, insomuch that they taught
the Citizens of Jerusalem to murder their neighbors, and to commit adultery
with their wives: by which means fornication was rife and common in the City.
Yea, many of the people and youth shaved their beards, letting the hair of
their heads grow, and accompanied themselves with women, that they might
exercise their adultery safer, and not be espied; which sin did wonderfully
defile the City of Jerusalem, and without doubt furthered the desolation
thereof. The gates also of the Town were closed up, that no man might go in nor
out. And whosoever went out, fell into the hands of Schimeon, and was slain: they
that tarried within, were constrained to see before their faces, their shame in
every street and corner; and if any found fault, he was slain straight by
Jehochanan, that most cruel Captain of the seditious Rebels.

The Citizens therefore seeing the tyranny of Jehochanan, to be without
measure, they assembled all together, and encountered with Jehochanan, and were
slain a wonderful sort of them in that conflict. And except the Edomites that
were fled to Jerusalem from the tyranny of Schimeon, had succored the
Citizens, the whole people of Jerusalem had been utterly destroyed, and slain
every mothers son by Jehochanan; his power was so great.

Then Anani the high Priest, and the other Priests, with the ancient, faithful,
and Sages, and the rest of the people of Jerusalem; seeing the wickedness of
Jehochanan, and that they could not suffer it any longer, consulted together to
deliver the Town to Schimeon, and bring him in, and make him their King, to
help them against Jehochanan, whom they took to be far worse than Schimeon,
hoping that it might come to pass, that Schimeon should slay Jehochanan at
length. They sent therefore Amittai the high Priest to Schimeon, to bring him
into the Town; But Schimeon craftily denied it, saying; What should I come into
the Town to you that hate me, and of late banished me your Town? Yet they
ceased not, but sent the same Amittai to him again, to entreat him in the name
of all the people, to come into the City. And by this means, upon a certain
night appointed, he entered into Jerusalem with his whole Army: Notwithstanding,
he was no sooner within the Town, but he brake his promise and league that he
had made with the Citizens; and whereas he had promised to succor them, and
aid them, now he was altered, and became their enemy, joining himself with
Jehochanan: And those two Rebels reigned in the City of Jerusalem by course,
one one month, and another another. So, where before Schimeons coming, they
thought much to bear the yoke and oppression of one seditious person, now were
they constrained to hold down their shoulders, and bear the yoke of two.

Yet within two days after, there fell a variance and discord between
Jehochanan, and Schimeon, about Eleazar the Priest, the son of Anani the high
Priest. This Eleazar was the beginner, and first sower of sedition amongst the
Israelites, whom Schimeon would now have put to death, to be revenged of his
father that banished him out of Jerusalem; but Jehochanan took Eleazars part,
and defended him; For Eleazar was always Jehochanan's friend, and aided him.
His father was high Priest, and bare a great rule in Jerusalem, wherefore
Eleazar was of a great estimation and authority with the Elders, so that they
durst not apprehend him; and his father also looked negligently unto him, and
let him do what he list, because he had no more sons but him. So he was the
first that assembled naughty persons together, and held ever on Jehochanans
side, from his first coming to Jerusalem. And for his sake, fell division and
dissension between Jehochanan, and Schimeon, so that they became enemies, and
warred the one upon the other ever after, as we shall declare hereafter.

CHAP. I.
IN this while, Vespasian had sent Antony, and Mankiminus, (two Noble men, and
of his Council) to Rome against Vitellius, that they might make him out of the
way, and then would he come to Rome to receive the Imperial Crown there.

These two Captains went therefore and raised an Army, by whose aid they set
upon Vitellius, and ^w him not without much ado; for there were slain that day
at Rome, 80. thousand good men of war. When Vespasian had word that he was
dispatched, he made speed to Rome to his Coronation, dividing first his Army
into two parts; whereof he took the one with him to Rome, as a safeguard for
himself whatsoever should happen, and the other he left with Titus his son, to
besiege Jerusalem withal. So departing, he left his son Titus at Alexandria,
commanding him to remain there, till such time as he should signify unto him
otherwise by his Letters, and show him what he should do; and that in no wise
he should attempt the siege of Jerusalem in the mean space. Titus answered, I
shall do (dear Father) according unto your commandment, for to you it belongs
to command, and unto me to obey.

Vespasian took with him King Agrippa, and Munabas his son, he fearing lest
they would rebel, and me Joseph Priest and prisoner also fast bound in chains;
for so had his Council moved him, saying: We cannot say the contrary, but that
we have found no sign of rebellion in Joseph hitherto, neither think we that he
has gone about any; but, Who can tell when we are gone hence, whether he will
not flee to Jerusalem, and help ^o set them at unity and concord; then they
make him their King, and after he be the sorer enemy unto us? Besides this, you
shall have need of him in this journey, he being a man of such great prudence,
and wisdom, that whosoever follows his co^sel, shall bring his matters to
good and fortunate success. Vespasian liked well their advice, and took him
prisoner with him, together with King Agrippa and his son; albeit they had no
irons upon them, neither on hand, or foot, but only had their Keepers appointed
them, that they should not step aside.

And as Vespasian drew nigh Rome, all the Citizens came forth to meet him, and
received him with great joy, and mighty Shows. Then he commanded that I should
be put in prison, but Agrippa and his son he let go at liberty. The next day
assembled all the Senate of Rome, to create Vespasian Emperor, after the
manner of the Romans, with whom was Agrippa and his son. I also entreated the
Jailer to let me have Keepers with me, and so to bring me to the place where he
should be Crowned Caesar: which the Jailer granted me, and went with me himself
to the place, and brought me where I might see all that was done. Within few
days after, Vespasian took displeasure with Agrippa, upon the information of
certain evil disposed persons, that had slandered him, and persuaded Vespasian
that he went about to rebel, and how he had sent letters unto Jerusalem,
concerning the same matter; wherefore Vespasian put both him, and his son
Munabas, to death.

This befell three years and a half before the destruction of Jerusalem.
Moreover, before this deed, the continual Sacrifice ceased, for a thousand, two
hundred, and ninety days, as it is written in Dan. Chap. 22. And from the time
that the continual Sacrifice shall be taken away, and abomination shall be put
into desolation, a thousand two hundred and ninety days.

The same year and month that Agrippa was put to death, God moved the mind of
Vespasian to remember me with his mercy: wherefore he commanded that I should
be fetched out of prison, and brought to his presence. And as I stood in irons
before him, Caesar bad me welcome, and spoke comfortably unto me, saying, Thou
know very well that I have loved thee from the day I first saw thee, and
though I have kept thee continually in durance, do not think I did it of any
ill will or malice toward thee; but rather thou may persuade thy self, I did
it lest the Roman Princes should disdain at thee, and say: See, here is a
fellow, that in our wars has endamaged us so greatly, yet now goes he
check-mate with us, in as great favor as we: Let us kill him, and put him out
of the way. But, my friend Joseph, be of good cheer, I will deliver thee from
these iron-bands, and thou shall be with me in no worse case than one of my
chief Princes. I will send thee into Jewry to my son Titus, to whom thou shall
be as a father and a counselor.

Thou know, Titus was he that took pity on thee, and would not suffer thee
to be put to death; Yea he has sundry times moved me to release thee of thy
bonds, and to honor thee, which I have deferred to do, only for this cause
that I showed thee. I made him answer, But how can I be quiet, or in surety of
my life as long as I am in thy company and thy sons, seeing Agrippa and his
son, were suddenly put to death by you? Caesar answered, Hold thy peace Joseph,
I never looked for any goodness of Agrippa and his son. Thou know not what
they had wrought against my Majesty, and how they went about to rebel; thou
have born their bones with thy hands. Do thou not know I honored him and
his son in Jewry, how I would not suffer any of my Army to annoy any of his
Cities? I answered, Yes, I know it was so, as your Majesty says. Then said he;
But for all this has Agrippa requited me again with evil. For what time as the
Nobles of Rome in Jewry went about to make me Empeperour, thinking me somewhat
more meet to rule the Empire than Vitellius, Agrippa persuaded them that they
should not make me Emperor, affirming that there was nothing in me worthy
wherefore they should promote me to that dignity. And after when he came to
Rome, he went from one Bishop to another, and caused them to go to the Bishops,
to accuse me of such crimes as in my conscience I knew nothing at all of.

By this I perceived that Agrippa's heart was full of rancour and rebellion,
and therefore I judged him to death. For where as wickedness is, there it is
meet that condign punishment should not be lacking. And I put his son to death
likewise; For the son of a Traitor ought not to live upon the earth, because
that in his heart remains the work of his father, being conceived and born of
a rebellious seed: But I have found thee always faithful and true, and
therefore I commend my son to thy wisdom. With this, he commanded my irons to
be taken away from me, and being released and at liberty, he set me honorably
among the Princes and Senators. Then said I unto him, Is not this a great
dishonor unto me, that I should be delivered from my bonds, and nevertheless
my Countrymen that be with me to be kept in prison still? Now therefore, if I
have found favor in thy sight, and if thou will do any thing at my request,
loose the bonds likewise of all the rest of the Israelites that be with me: set
them at liberty also, and thou shall be assured that I will be thy faithful
Counselor while my life lasts, and an enemy to thy foes, to make War upon
them that assail thee.

Vespasian granted Joseph his request, and willed them to be set at liberty, as
many as were prisoners with Joseph. Shortly after sent he Joseph to his son
Titus, that abode at that present at Alexandria in Egypt, to whom he writ
concerning Joseph in this manner.

I send unto thee here (my beloved son) Joseph, a Prince of the Jews, a man of
experience, trained in war, in whom is great wisdom; he shall be thy father,
and faithful counselor, thou shall not do against his counsel, neither one
way nor other, for he is a wise man. Wherefore thou shall reverence and honor
him according as he is worthy; for the Lord God is with him, and believe not
rashly any man that defames Joseph unto thee. Yea, rather put him to death
straightway, that will accuse him: for Joseph is a faithful man, and a good
Counselor; and who is so ruled by his counsel, shall have a prosperous
success in that he goes about. Therefore when Joseph shall come unto thee,
after he has refreshed himself a few days of his labors and travels at the
Sea; then shall thou prepare thine Expedition against Jerusalem, to besiege it.
And if the Jews receive thee peaceably, and will submit themselves under the
Roman Empire, then beware thou endamage them in nothing, but rather repair
their Cities, and let them be free from all Tribute for the space of two years;
yet on this condition, that thrice every year they set a Flag with the Arms of
the Romans upon their walls; that is to say, at their three solemn Feasts,
whenas all the Israelites were wont to resort unto Jerusalem, and to appear
before the Lord their GOD. Moreover they shall offer for us every Feast a
Sacrifice, upon the most holy Altar that is in Jerusalem. And if they refuse to
make peace with thee, thou shall utterly raze their Towns; and whosoever are
left alive, and escape the sword, those shall thou lead away captive. If they
desire to have Joseph to be their King, we are coutent therewith. In any wise
remember to be ruled by Joseph's counsel; he shall be thy father, and thou his
son.

After this, Joseph departed from Rome, and came to Alexandria to Titus, who
hearing of Joseph's arrival, was wondrous glad, and all the Ancient wise men,
with him; For Joseph was full of the spirit of wisdom, understanding, counsel,
valiantness, knowledge, and fear of God.

Wherefore we went forth to meet him, accompanied with the Captains of the
Romans Army, and received him with great honor. Then Joseph delivered to Titus
his fathers Letters: which Titus having read, said unto Joseph, Whatsoever my
father has written in these Letters, I would have done no less by mine own
accord: but since my father has admonished me of the same, I ought to do it the
more. Wherefore remain here with me, and I will be thy son, and thou shall be
my father, to rule and govern me with thy counsel.

So Joseph abode with Titus at Alexandria a whole month after he came from
Rome. Then consulted they together to go to Jerusalem and besiege it; for
Joseph understood well enough, That this came of the Lord, and that his word
could not be let, or hindered. Titus therefore and Joseph with him, departed
from A^exandria with all their Army, and pitched their tents at Nicopolis; from
thence they came by water to Thanisa, so forth to Iraclea, and leaving that,
came to Pelisis; from thence they traveled through the Desert to Baale Javin,
after that to Dicron, so to Gaza, next to Askalon, then to Jabuam, after to
Japho, and so to Cesarea. In these journies he won Asam, Askalon, and Japho,
with all their Towns, and Castles lying about them.

The first year of the reign of Vespasian, the 10. month, and the 7. day of the
same, came Titus with Joseph and his Army to Cesarea, a famous City built by
King Herod. In this City he sojourned until his whole Host were come together,
as well of Romans, as of other Nations that were under the dominion of the
Romans, and came to aid them in the siege of Jerusalem. Therefore Titus Army
was wonderfully huge and puissant, wherewith he abode at Cesarea, till the cold
of winter was past, and the month of July drew nigh: The same years the civil
wars grew and increased in Jerusalem; for the Citizens slew one another without
any truce, rest, or quiet^ess no not in winter, when as wars were wont to
cease; but summer and winter both, the wars never stinted between Schimeon,
Iehochanan, and Eleazar. For the Lord that year had sent amongst them of
Jerusalem, a vertigin^us spirit of giddiness, that the people were divided into
three parts: whereof the first and best followed Anani the Priest, who at that
time had stained, unhallowed, and suspended his office of Priesthood. Another
part followed seditious Iehochanan; the third was for Schimeon. So that in the
midst of Jerusalem was civil wars, and without the same, the Roman Army made
roads from Cesarea, even to Jerusalem, by the means whereof no man durst go
forth, lest he should fall into the enemies hands, nor enter into the Town to
bring any necessaries thither. Anani being a perfect godly man, and seeing the
commonwealth of Jerusalem governed by the pleasure of the Seditious, gave over
his third part that stuck to him, to Eleazar his son, which was the first
author of sedition, and he that gave the first occasion, and the cause of all
the mischief that befell in Jerusalem, and in the whole Land of Judea. For he
began a conspiracy against the Roman Garrisons, and provoked Israel to Rebel
against the Romans, and to lay hands upon them.

Wherefore there assembled unto the seditious Eleazar, Jehudah, Chezron,
Schimeon, and Chiskihu, young men of the Nobles of Jerusalem. Eleazar with his
company took the Temple, and the Courts about it, appointing of his men, some
to be spies, and some to keep watch and ward about the Temple of the Lord.

But Jehochanan, who because of the great resort of the people unto him, was
stronger than Eleazar, he took the market place and streets, and the lower part
of the City.

Then Schimeon the Jerusolemite, took the highest part of the Town: wherefore
his men annoyed Jehochanans part sore with Slings and Cross-bows.

Between these three there was also most cru. el battles in Jerusalem for the
space of four days, without ceasing or any breathing, and every day were very
many slain, so that the blood of the Jews that were then slain, ran in every
place most abundantly, through the Marketplaces and streets, yea even to the
Temple of the Lord, like unto a flood that had come of great showers; and unto
the thresholds of the gates of the Temple, the dead bodies overwhelmed one
another by heaps, for no man buried them. Jehochanan having the middle part of
the Town, had Schimeon on the one side of him, and Eleazar on the other.

But Schimeon had the best place; from whence he might annoy both Jehochanan
and Eleazar. Eleazar did also what he could to endamage Schimeon. And
Jehochanan that was in the midst, encombered them both, notwithstanding to
little purpose. For Schimeons company flung stones, and shot at them sore: but
when as Jehochanans part flung likewise at them, the stones rebounded back upon
themselves. Thus amongst these three the battle was sore, and increased every
day, that all men were in great terror and fear thereof.

Then assembled to the Temple much people of the Priests and Elders, beseeching
these Intestine and Domestical enemies, not to pollute and defile the Temple
with their slaughters, and were almost all slain for their labor. The same day
was slain the Priest Anani, and Joshua a Priest, both of the chiefest Priests.
Sechariahu also the most faithful Prophet of the Lord.

Then had the continual Sacrifice ceased 36. days: for ever until that time,
was there some good men or other of Jerusalem, that offered always sacrifice to
the Lord.

But now when they would have continued it, and the Priests laid the sacrifice
upon the Altar, the Seditious would run upon them and kill them, so that the
Priests bodies and their cattle that they would have sacrificed, should fall
dead to the ground together. They that resorted also out of the Country of
Jerusalem for devotions sake, the Seditious slew, and utterly destroyed them,
that almost no one of them was left alive.

Moreover, the dead bodies of men lay cast in the Temple, and that without
number troad under feet: yea, the dead body of the Priest that was offering
sacrifice, lay upon the earth together with his offering. And when any man
would offer any sacrifice, straight way one or other of the Seditious would
step to him and kill him, that the blood of the sac^ifice and sacrificer,
should be mingled together; In so much that the pavement of the Temple being all
of marble, was made so slippery with the blood and fat of them that were slain,
that no man could go upon it without falling. And the Priest should no sooner
lay hands on the sacrifice, but he was slain, and straight another dead body
should fall upon him stranger or other, they spared none: So thus the dead
bodies of the good and bad, clean and unclean, wicked and virtuous, thief and
true man, lay one upon another, and their blood mixed together in the midst of
the Temple, without respect of any man, of what degree or condition soever he
were: Wherefore the fight and slaughter waxt great, both in the Town, and in
the Temple. Nay, whomsoever the Seditious overcame, they set fire on their
houses also; whereby the fire took into the great men's houses that were nigh
the Temple, and into the storehouses, whereas against times of necessity, and
besieging of the Town, were laid up in store, corn, wine, and oil, to the
number of a thousand and four hundred storehouses, all filled full of
victuals. For the Elders and other godly men, what time as Vespasian was in
Galilee, they made up the doors of those Garnerhouses, and laid in victuals
into them, sufficient for two hundred thousand men twenty years, and now in
this one battle of the Seditious they were burnt every one, stick and stone,
which was a speedy cause of famine, and hurger in Jerusalem.

At the same time also, the Seditious pulled down and razed all the fair
houses, and goodly buildings, that there should be no monument of any noble
house, left to any in the City of Jerusalem. So thus you see at that time the
Lord visited the Citizens of Jerusalem with four kind of plagues, sword,
pestilence, hunger, and fire: besides this, a fifth was added, the ruin and
decay of all beautiful and glorious buildings. And wheresoever a man turned
him, there was nothing but desolation, pollution, (namely of the Temple and all
holy things) uproars, without all rest and refuge; no help, no succor, but
every corner of Jerusalem was full of howling, and yelling, wailing and
weeping, sobbing and sighing of women, and children. Here should ye hear the
roaring and groaning of wounded men, not yet thorough-dead; there the mourning
and lamentation of the Elders, younger children crying out for hunger; to be
short, most sorrowful oppression of them that lived, done by the Seditious:
Such lamentations were made every where, that happy and fortunate was he that
before this day died, and unhappy and in a woeful case were all such as
remained alive to see this day.

All these things when I Joseph heard tidings of, I tore my hair with my hands,
and cast ashes on my beard, sitting in great sorrow on the ground, bewailing
the misery and calamity of Jerusalem. And this lamentation made Joseph upon
Jerusalem: How is the City (quoth he) laid wast, that was wont to be more happy
and more renowned than all the Provinces upon the earth? How is the City that
was heretofore in such highness and dignity, now brought under the foot,
through the sons of the Citizens thereof? Whereas sometime was the dwelling
place of the faithful, now bear rule there such men as provoke and stir Gods
wrath against it, and turn it away from their God, wasting it as thieves. In
the which sometime remained the brightness of the Godhead, it is now become a
byword, and mocking-stock to the enemies, replenished with blood of wounded
and slain men. Instead of mirth, gladness, rejoicing, harps and psalteries; is
sorrow, sighing, heart-breaks, mourning, and pensiveness come in place. Even as
heretofore the priests executed the service of the Lord in offering sacrifices;
so likewise now, seditious persons murdered godly and faithful men: where was
wont to be the dwelling place of most wise and prudent men, now it is made a
common hostry of wicked murderers and thieves. O Lord God of Israel, have not
Angels in time past come down from heaven to earth to fight thy battles? Have
not the floods of the seas persecuted them, that persecuted thee? Has not the
earth swallowed up them that despised thee, and the winds scattered them a-
sunder that made insurrections against thee? has not thunder from heaven
destroyed thine enemies, and stars fought against thy foes? What means this
therefore? and how comes it to pass, that thou hidest thy face from us? to
whom have thou delivered the sheep of thy pasture? Look upon us our God, and
behold thy people and inheritance, that thou broughtest out of Egypt with a
mighty power, and a strong hand, with wonders and signs, leading them until
this day in thy faith; take pity upon them in thy mercy, and extend not thy
wrath against thy servants.

Where art thou Moses the son of Amram? stand up and see thy people and flock
of sheep, which thou feedest all thy life with thy wisdom; see how Wolves and
Lions tear them; see how the Israelites are become foes to their own lives and
souls; yea wasters and destroyers are sprung up of their own selves. Behold the
people of GOD, for whose sake thou lifted'st up thy staff over the sea,
wherewith thou struckest and dividest it, that it was made dry ground, so the
Israelites passed through, and escaped their enemies. Remember thy prayer, when
as in time of famine, and lack of food, thou obtaindft for them meat from
heaven; and at the same time when they were weary of their lives for thirst,
thou broughtest water out of the most hard rock.

Come forth Aaron most holy Priest of God, that did put thy self between the
living and the dead, to turn away the plague from Israel, and staydest the
destroyer that he should not come ^igh the living. Arise out of thy grave thou
Phineas, that moved with such fervency, did revenge the glory and majesty of
the Lord God of Israel; come and run through the Seditious in thy fury, which
murder the people of God and his Priests. Awake thou Joshua, that did throw
down the walls of Jericho, with the sound and shout of thy Trumpets that the
holy Priests held in their hands. Come now and see thy people that thou made
to inherit many Nations, and to conquer most puissant Kings, how they kill one
another, how they further and help forward the Idolater to rule and have the
Dominion of the holy Land, that thou gave thy people Israel to inherit. Why
sleep thou, King David? Awake, and come with the sound of thy Psaltery and
Harp, sing to thy holy Psalms too. Ask account of thy sweet words that are
ceased from the mouths of this people, and out of all men's mouths, because of
the maliciousness thereof. See how their Princes be transformed into enemies
and destroyers: and do as thou did (good King David) that did give thine
own life for theirs, saying, Let thy hand, O Lord, be turned against me, and
against the house of my father, and do not fall upon thy people to destroy them.

Where art thou Elizeus? Come and see what thou can do, if thou can rescue
the remnant of Israel, and find them any gap to escape at. Did not thou by
thy prayer bring the power of the Syrians to a Town of defense, and prevailedst
against them without dint of sword or battle, and broughtest them down, smiting
them with blindness, that they turned their enmity toward Israel into love?
Indeed, thou wast he^that vanquishedst the Syrians by thy prayer, that they
fled for fear of the same.

Now therefore ye heard-men of Israel, assemble together, and listen with
(...), and hear my words that I will speak in your ears this day. Tell me, What
is become of your prayers that ye have made for the people of Israel, to defed
and turn away from them a I wrath, indignation, tribulation, fury, and
inmissions of evil spirits? How is it that now ye see not the Sanctuary turned
into a vile sink of blood? for the dead bodies of Priests lie in midst of it.
The holy City Jerusalem is become a strange City, as though the name of the
Lord had never been in it: and the Sanctuary of the Lord is in that case at
this present, as though the Godhead had never dwelt therein: for the Temple is
turned into a den of thieves, a lodging of Seditious persons, a tabernacle of
cruel murderers. And who so flies thither for refuge, there they be slain: as
the Seditious have murdered in the midst thereof Anani the high Priest, and
Joshua a Priest also, that were Princes and chief Priests, the most reverend
amongst the people of God; whom ere this, Kings and Nations had sued to, and
desired their favor, but never cast their slain bodies in the midst of the
Temple. The Nobility also of Jerusalem, the Elders of Juda, the Sages of
Israel, whose friendship Kings and Nations have sought after, and desired to
make peace with: they lie now slain here and there in the midst of Jerusalem,
are meat for the fouls of the air, and beasts of the field, to dogs and
ravens, because there is no man to bury them.

These died not for their offenses, but because they found fault with the
Israelites when they sinned. How are they slain in thee (O Jerusalem thou holy
City, renowned throughout the whole earth) all just men, all holy men? whom the
Seditious have overcome, those helhounds, and blood-suckers, that have brought
all these evils upon thee? how are the Priests of the Lord, and his Prophets
slain, amongst those holy men? For, before the holy Temple, was the Prophet
Sechariahu that just and holy man, butchered and murdered, yea, without all
burial, neither was his blood covered with earth, but yet still wandreth about
and cries in thee. The blood of Anani also and Joshua the chief Priests, was
yet never covered, which were both slain in thy Temple, as men be wont to kill
thieves: yea, the blood of the godly young men, and valiant, that would have
revenged them, was shed also by the Seditious, like floods of water. How are
the hearts of the people turned so aukwardly, that they will bear no admonition
of just men? but are like unto blockish Images, that neither see, nor hear, nor
yet understand any thing. All beasts be they never so brutish, all plants, and
things that grow upon the earth, withstand them that invade them to do them
injury, and endeavor to avoid the force of their enemy: but thy children that
thou keep within thee, are changed into enemies, and one brother murthereth
another with the sword. Where is now thy valiantness, thou that never would
bow to bear the yoke of the Gentiles upon thy shoulders, but have cast away the
bondage of the Egyptians, Philistines, Aramites, Assyrians, Chaldees, Persians,
and Medes? Where is the strength that God gave to the Chasmonanites, that with
a very small company defended thee, and prevailed against the great and
puissant Army of the Greeks, destroyed the stout soldiers of Babylon,
vanquished the mighty Army of the Persians, slew Kamitiatus and Antiochus, and
pursued their Armies, making great slaughters of them, filling all places full
of dead carcases of the Gentiles? They would not be ruled by sinners, but
ventured themselves to die, offering their lives, not for their sous and
daughters, but for the Sanctuary of the Lord and his Temple, left it should be
polluted with the Idols of the Gentiles. Where remains now the rod of God,
that holy rod that budded and blossomed in the days of gladness? Now is both
the spring withered, and the rod it self also. The rod of faith is withered,
the rod of the Kingdom, the rod also of thy people, whence the holy Law is
taken away; neither is there any man that can tell where to draw any waters of
thy Heavenly mercy. Alas, the merciful men that have been in times past to
their brethren, both alive and dead; how are they now turned into most cruel
tyrants, and have mercy of no man? Where is the multitude of their mercies,
wherewith they were wont honorably to bury their dead? Now the corses of their
dead bodies cover the face of the whole earth, and there is no body will
vouchsafe to bury them: yea, they that would cannot be suffered, but
straightwaies come others to them that kill them before they can do it, so that
they also die and lie unburied, and are strewed about here and there in the
fields. Such is the guise in thee now adays, neither the father to bury the
son, nor the son the father; the Seditious watch so diligently those that be
dead, lest any man should bury them, which if they do, they are also slain by
them, and lie unburied themselves. The Temple of the Lord that is in thee,
which was wont to smell sweetly of spices, anointings, and perfumes, how is it
now choked with carriondung, and most pestilent stinch of dead bodies, and
blood of the wounded? Thy streets are strowed full of dead men, some
run-through with glaves and javelins, and other dead for hunger: yea, they that
remain yet alive in the City are as good as dead also, and may be taken for no
less: For they are weary of their lives, because of the pestilent damp of the
dead bodies, the outragiousness whereof, has cast many into most dangerous
diseases, and has been the death of numbers already.

This may worthily seem to be it, that David the anointed of the God of Jacob,
the pleasant and sweet musical Poet of Israel, speaks o^; Lord, the Gentiles
are come into thine inheritance, they have polluted the Temple of thy holiness.
And would to God it had been the Gentiles only that had exalted themselves
against thee, and polluted thus the holy Temple that is in thee: For in the
maliciousness of an enemy, a man finds the half of his comfort; but in the
malice of a friend there is no comfort at all. Yea, the very children that thou
have bred, brought up and promoted, the self same have stuffed the Temple of
the Lord that is in thee, with unburied carcases, every man killing his
neighbor, and the Seditious suffering no man to bury them, but slaying all
that attempt to bestow any such work of mercy upon the dead, in such sort, that
they fall dead upon the corpses which they would have buried; and by that means
both the corpses lie cast out into the field, no better than the carcases of
brute beasts that be found in desert places. Yea, the iniquity and cruelty of
thy Citizens (O Jerusalem) is grown so far, that they were not content only to
kill their neighbors, but they must also hew their miserable limbs in pieces,
for else they thought they were not sufficiently revenged; although that in so
doing many times the stinch of the dead, took worthy vengeance again of the
living, by casting them into incurable diseases. All these evils are come upon
thy people, because they have forsaken the law of the Lord, and have
transgressed the Covenant that he made with their brethren; because also they
have sinned against the Lord God of their fathers, in shedding the blood of
just men, and innocents that were within thee, even in the Temple of the Lord.
And therefore are our sorrowful sighings multiplied, and our weepings daily
increased, for that we have been the cause of all these evils that are befallen
us, and are not yet ended. O Lord our God, our sins are gone over our heads,
and the wicked acts that we have committed in thy sight are innumerable. The
Lord our God is righteous, it is we that have rebelled against his will; we
have profaned and unhallowed his Law, we have broken his Covenant, and ever
the more that his wrath kindled against us, the more have we transgressed
against him. Wherefore to him belongs justice and judgment, he has worthily
powered the fury of his displeasure on us; to us only belongs shame, as we
have abundantly at this day: But he will once turn again and have mercy upon
us, vanquish all our fins, and cast them all into the deep bottom of the sea,
so be it.

After these things, the third day of the first month, in the first year of the
reign of Vespasian, Titus his son took muster of his men in the plain of
Cesarea, to know the certain number of them, which he had not done before, since
his fathers departure; and he found them very many, insomuch that they seemed
almost to cover the earth. This done, he took his journey from Cesarea with his
people, and came to Samaria, where the Citizens received him with great joy,
and much honored him, wherefore he spared them, and did them no harm.

From thence he came to Ajelona, thirty furlongs from Jerusalem, there he
pitched his tents, and leaving them there, took six hundred horsemen with him,
and came to Jerusalem to view the Town, to know of what height the walls were
of, what strength there was in the Town, especially of the Seditious, of whom
every where great rumor was; finally to receive peaceably all such as were
desirous of peace. So when he came to the wa^l he saw no man, neither to go out
nor in; for the gates were shut up, and the Seditious had laid an ambush
without the Town to trap Titus, who went somewhat before accompanied with a
few, the rest following a pretty way behind. Whiles therefore he was in viewing
the walls, the Seditious issued out of their ambush that they had laid nigh
unto Ajelona, and set upon the back of Titus men behind. Then issued another
Party out of the Town, so that they had Titus between them, and running upon
him, separated him from his men, and environed him on every side; where they
slew sixty of his men, and might have slain him also, save that they coveted to
take him alive. Titus seeing himself beset, and forsaken of his own men, that
thought it was impossible for him to escape, perceiving also that they went not
about to kill him but to take him alive; moreover, that he could in no wise
escape, except he would make an irruption and run through their bands; he took
a good heart unto him, and valiantly brake through, slaying whomsoever came in
his way to lay hands on him, and so he escaped. If they had intended to have
slain him, they might have done it, but being desirous to take him alive (as he
said) they abstained from striking him, and so they lost him: And God did not
deliver him into their hands, that by him he might scourge Israel. But the Jews
seeing him to be thus escaped, repented sore that they had not killed him;
saying one to another, What meant we that we killed him not while we might? it
was ill done of us. Therefore they pursued him, hu^ling and shooting after him
with Engines of war, but they could not overtake him, for God preserved him,
that he might afterward deliver Jerusalem into his hands. So he returned to
Ajelona, and perceived the hearts of Kings to be in the hands of God.

The next morning brought Titus all his Army to Jerusalem, determining to
encamp himself upon the Mount Olivet: wherefore he first spoke unto his
soldiers in this wise. This day ye go to fight against a mighty Nation, whose
warriors be as strong as Lions, valiant as Libards, and nimble as Fawns that
run in the Mountains, to overturn Chariots, and such as sit upon them. Now
therefore take good hearts unto you, and be courageous, for it behooves you. Do
not think them to be like the Nations that heretofore ye have had to do
withal: I my self have experience otherwise of their valiantness and sleights
of war.

This said, he marched in array most strongly, that they should not be scattered
asunder, and gave them charge, especially to the Vangard, to take heed of
stumbling upon Wells and Cisterns, whereby they might be hindered, for as yet
the day was scarce broken: and besides this, Titus had knowledge how the Jews
fearing of his coming had dug secret trenches and pitfalls. Wherefore to
avoid them, he led his host to Mount Olivet, in which place it never came in
their minds to dig.

Therefore when he came to the Mount Olivet, he encamped there against
Jerusalem right over against the Brook Cedron, that ran between the City and
the Hill, and many times ran very ^hallow. Titus Camp was about six furlongs
from the Town.

The next morning they of the Town seeing Titus to be encamped on the Mount
Olivet, the Captains of the Seditious with their Companies assembled together,
and fell to agreement every man with another, intending to turn their cruelty
upon the Romans, confirming and ratifying the same atonement and purpose, by
swearing one to another, and so there was peace amongst them. Wherefore,
joining together, that before were three several parts, they set open the
gates, and all the best of them issued out with an horrible noise and shout,
that they made the Romans afraid withal, in such wise, that they fled before
the Seditious, which suddenly did set upon them at unawares. But Titus seeing
his men flee, rebuked them, saying, Are ye not ashamed of this timourous
cowardliness, when ye are so many, and a hundred for one of them? Whar ignominy
is it, so many to be repulsed of so few? Wherewithal Titus stayed them, and
brought them manfully to withstand the Jews, so that very many were slain on
both sides. But the Romans were not able long to abide the force of the Jews,
albeit that Titus with his choi^est and most valiant soldiers did manfully
keep their ground, and never retreated. Titus also labored and encouraged the
rest to sight: but they were so dismayed, that they wist not what to do. For to
forsake Titus they were ashamed, and to resist the violence of the Jews, they
were not able. Notwithstanding Titus and all his Company made his party good
against the Jews, who at length left the field, and withdrew themselves toward
the Town. Then Titus being wroth with his soldiers, that they had fled from
the Jews, said unto them: Shall I not be revenged of these Jews? Shall so few
of them put us to flight, not able to stand in their hands? and will ye flee or
retreat, seeing me abide by it?

The next day Titus took all his Army, save a few that he left in his Camp to
keep his baggage, and went down the Mount Olivet, setting his men in battle
array, even against the gates of the City.

Then exhorted he them to play the men, and although they were come down the
hill, yet they should not fear the Jews concerning their Camp that they had
left behind them, for the Brook Cedron (says he) is between our Camp and the
Israelites. With these words they were encouraged, and determined to encounter
with the Jews under the walls hard to the gates of the City, trusting to the
safeguard and defense of the Brook Cedron.

The Captains of the Seditious likewise used policy: for they dividing their
men, sent one company to pass suddenly the Brook Cedron to invade and spoil
the Roman Camp that was left in the Mount Olivet. These therefore went and
fought with the Romans upon the Mount, and drove them out of their Camp.

Titus looking behind him, and perceiving that the Jews had gotten over the
Brook, and were in hand with his men, he was wonderfully afraid, seeing himself
environed with battles on every side.

They within the Town, when they saw their fellows once at the Mount Olivet,
they opened the gates, issued out with all their power that was left in the
Town, and encountered with Titus, where he had set his men in array over against
the gate, where they made a great slaughter of the Romans, which (desirous to
avenge the shame gotten the day before) fled not, but stoutly withstood their
force. Also the Jews took heart to them, fought manfully, and beat down the
Romans, so that at length they betook them to flight toward Mount Olivet, and
in their flight many of them were slain by the Jews that pursued the chase.
Upon this, diverse of Titus soldiers (seeing themselves beset both before and
behind) counseled Titus to flee with them to the Mountains to save his life,
lest he should be slain by the Jews, and they all together with ^m. For thou
(say they) art a great Lord of many Kingdoms, and God shall one day bring thee
to the Imperial Crown of our Lord thy father: Now therefore if thou should
be slain of the Jews, we are all but dead; and what good should thy death do,
either to thy self, or to others, to be slain like one of us? Titus would not
be ruled by them, nor receive their counsel, but kept his ground boldly,
without once turning his face, saying, I will choose rather to die with honor,
than to live with shame: And with that he rushed upon the Jews that were nigh
him, and compelled them to recoyl.

When the Jews that had environed the Roman Camp, saw that, they left the
Romans, and came flocking about Titus by routs, assailing him on every side,
endeavoring also with all their might to overcharge him; Where in that place
was a sore and vehement fight, and much people slain on both sides; yea, Titus
escaped narrowly from being slain in that fight, and had died indeed, if
certain of his valiant soldiers had not returned unto him, and rescued him out
of the Jews hands. That day were the chief of Titus soldiers slain: Then the
Jews retired to their place at the walls side.

They also who went to the Mount Olivet, returned homeward by the Brook Cedron:
the Romans seeing that, pursued them; whereupon the Jews returned again upon
the Romans, who fled by and by: Thus the Jews put the Romans to flight thrice
upon one day.

It came to pass then, that the external wars paused, and intestine civil wars
returned most terribly amongst the Seditious at Jerusalem. For upon the first
day of the high solemn Feast of Passover, Captain Jehochanan and his men came
into the Temple of the Lord, where he was honorably received of the Priests
and Elders, with the rest of the commonalty. And when they were within, they
cast off their upper garments, under which they were armed with coats of fence,
and swords tied to their thighs. After that they beset the doors, and laid hold
of the Priests, slew them and the people also, their hearts were so cruelly
bent against their brethren; neither regarding the reverent countenances of old
men, nor inclining to the prayers of them that besought them, without sparing
women or children, no not the sucking babes.

This done, Jehochanan stood up, and openly protested, that neither Schimeon
nor Eleazar, nor any of the rest of the Captains of the Seditious, nor any man
else, should have the sovereignty in that City but he. The other hearing that
Jehochanan had wrought such displeasure to the people of God in the Temple,
rose together, and slew very many of Jehochanans part; but in the mean season,
what of the one part, and what of the other, the Israelites went to wrack, and
were slain in great number.

Tidings came to Titus, how the Jews were at odds among themselves, and slew
one another daily; whereat he rejoiced greatly, and came with his whole host to
the Town, where he found certain Jews without, that had fled, because of the
rage of the civil wars. When they saw Titus, they came and besought him to
enter the Town, and deliver them from the cruelty of the Seditious, and they
would be his servants, for these wars had made them almost weary of their
lives. Yet Titus gave little credit to their tale, although they used many
words to pe^swade him that it was true. For he remembered that within three
days before, he saw the Jews fight against him eagerly, all with one accord, so
earnestly one rescuing and defending another, that no discord appeared to be
amongst them: Wherefore he would not trust their words, in that they required
succor, and offered to yield. And as they were thusdebating the matter,
suddenly they heard an uprore in the Town, and wonderful hurly burly; some
crying, Open the gates, and let Titus come in, other cried, Shut the gates, and
let not the Romans come in. Then certain upon the walls called to the Romans,
speedily to come unto the Town, and they would then open the gates, that they
might enter in; requesting the Romans to deliver them from the tyranny of the
Seditious, lest (say they) we should be a^l slain by the hands of these
ravinous, and cruel Seditious persons. The Romans therefore ran to the gates,
and when they approached nigh to the walls, and were come within danger, the
Jews hurled stones from the walls, and shot arrows at them, slaying very many
of the Romans. The other Jews also that were without the Town, and had besought
Titus to deliver them from the hands of the Seditious, began again to assail
the Romans that were gone to the walls, with much force, that many of them they
slew, the residue they put to flight, and the Jews followed the chase almost to
Ajelona.

Then the Jews mocked and flouted the Romans, calling them fresh water
soldiers, men of no experience, and innocent fools, that never saw the trains
of war before; clapping also their targets, and shaking their swords against
them in mockage. The Roman Captains seeing these things, they took great
disdain at the matter, and in great ire would have turned back upon the Jews
again, had not Titus caused the retreat to be sounded. Upon this, Titus
assembled all his Counselors, Capta^ns, and Soldiers together, and said unto
them in this wise. I have a sufficient trial, and understand well enough your
valiantness and courage (most worthy men and soldiers) which far passes the
strength and manhood of all other Nations, and not only in this most excellent
virtue do ye excel, but also in knowledge and sleights of war, in wisdom and
forecast ye have been chief of all other; Now therefore, brethren and friends,
I marvel not so greatly at the Jews subtilty and craft in their swearing to
you, for the persuading of a thing, and after keep not their oath: but this
seems wonderful unto me, that ye suffer your selves still to be deceived of
them, and to be slain by their wiles. For all the wit ye have, could not
deliver you out of their snares, but now yet again the third time ye have
approached the walls, and this is the third time ye have been put to the foyl
for your labors. And all this comes, because ye will not be ruled by me, but
transgress your General and Lords commandment. But now, my Brethren, take heed
what ye do hereafter, it becomes you not to disobey my words, which ye have
done often times. Do you not remember a certain Nobleman of our Country, in the
wars of Augustus Caesar against the Persians, how he put his own son to death
because that contrary to his Fathers commandment (who was grand Captain of the
Army under Augustus) he had fought with his enemies, yea although he killed
three Persians. But what speak I of once? Ye have oftentimes set light by my
commandments, skirmishing daily with the Jews, and that without all discre^on,
rashly and out of orde^: whereby you may gather, your enterprises have no good
success. If you continue these manners, it shall redound unto your own
dishonours. Wherefore it were better for you to leave off these doings, and lay
away your pride, contumacy, and stubbornness: which if ye do, things shall be
in better safeguard.

Much more spoke Titus to his men, rebuking them sharply, not mentioned here,
but declared at large in the Volume that we writ unto the Romans. When he had
said these words, his Princes and Captains fell every one prostrate to the
earth, and besought pardon of him for their rashness, in that they had so
unadvisedly, and without order against his mind, encountered with the Jews.

Then Titus taking pity of them, pardoned them, requestin^ them to beware
hereafter that they commit nothing against his commandment, neither in word nor
deed, and so doing, they should have his favor, and avoid his displeasure, and
danger of death for the contrary; but if they refused to do it, he would not
spare any man whatsoever he were that should transgress his commandment, but
put him to death, and give his body to be eaten of the fowls of the air. They
answered with one voice, We are content with these conditions, and will do
whatsoever thou shall command us.

After this, Titus considering how earnestly the Jerusolemites were set one
against another, how they were become such cruel enemies, that each of them
conspired others death, he caused the pits, cisterns, and trenches that were
about Jerusalem, to be damned up, and stopped with earth, that the ways might be
levelled for his Army. This done, he encampt himself nearer the walls. Against
which attempt the Jews issued not out of the City after their accustomed
manner, to put them back from the walls. For Schimeon was otherwise busied, he
had entertained ten thousand men of the best of the Seditious Jews, and joined
himself to Jacob the Edomite, Captain of nine thousand Edomites, with whom he
had made a conspiracy, utterly to destroy Captain Jehochanan. And setting upon
him, they compelled him to flee into the court of the Temple, where he remained
in the gate of the entrance of the Temple, with eight thousand and four hundred
good men of war, all well appointed in jacks.

Eleazar also was against him, and joined with Schimeon, becoming an enemy to
him that before had saved his life, and so they both together assailed
Jehochanan, neglecting the defense of the Town. By this means the Romans
encamped themselves about the walls at their pleasure, raising Towers, and
casting Trenches to plant their battering-Rams to beat down the walls.

The common people of the Jews, that were under the rule and Government of the
three Seditious Captains, namely Schimeon, Eleazar, and Jehochanan, (which
although they were ill enough all, yet the tyranny of Jehochanan far passed
Schimeon, and Schimeon was far worse than Eleazar, though Eleazar was the head
Author and first beginner of sedition in all Israel,) were amongst them as
sheep ready to be killed. For the foresaid seditious Captains, ^lew the people
at their pleasure, and divided them into bands, casting lots upon them Who
should have which; so that one had another men, and another man his. And this
did they not only with their own men, but also with all the rest of the people,
in such wise, that when the Romans made any assault, then joined they together
as one man to resist the Romans; to whom when they had given a repulse, then
would they return to their civil wars, and fall together by the ears among
themselves.

Extreme and dreadful was the civil conflict at that season, between the
foresaid Captains, and so sore, that the blood streamed down the channel out of
the gates of Jerusalem, like as a brook that runs out of a fountain and
welspring. The Romans seeing it, were moved with much pity, so that they wept
bitterly. But Joseph that was among them was stricken with so great heaviness,
that he burst out into a sorrowful lamentation, lifting up his woeful voice in
this wise.

Alas, alas, Jerusalem, the city of the great King, How shall I now call thee
at this day? or what name shall I give thee? Sometimes thou wa^ cal^ed Jebus of
Jebusaeus, that builded thee first in all this Land. After that thy name was
Zedek, that is, Justice; whereupon King Jehoram was called Melchizedek, for he
was a righteous King, and because he reigned in thee with justice, therefore
was thy name Zedek: Then righteousness had abiding in thee, and thy bright
star that shined in thee was Zedek. Moreover in his time wast thou called
Schalem, as the Scripture witnesses, and Melchizedek King of Schalem; and that
because the equity of the people that dwelt in thee was then fulfilled. For at
that time Abraham our father of worthy memory, fell to worship God in thee,
and to take thee to his inheritance, to plant in thee the root of good works:
Whereupon the Tabernacle of God remains in thee to this day, as it was
revealed unto the same our father Abraham; In thee (say I) is the Sanctuary of
the Lord. For in that place did Abraham bind his only son upon the top of one
of the hills that is called Mount Moriah, holy and hallowed; and therefore art
thou called Jerusalem, because our father Abraham (of famous memory) called the
place of the Sanctuary Adonajureth, The Lord shall see; then thy late name
being Schalem, this joined to it, made it Jiereshalem. For the Lord God shall
behold the place of thy Sanctuary, at what time it shall be Schalem, that is,
pure, incorrupt, without black, or spot; but whenever it is polluted or
defiled as it is at this day, then will he turn away his face from it.

Furthermore, thou art called Jerushalem therefore, because that whosoever
understands the dignity, and worthiness of the place wherein thy Sanctuary
is, shall bid the Angels of heaven to teach in it the doctrines of the holy
Ghost, and the spirit of wisdom and understanding, wherewith little children,
and the unlearned in thy Land, may be made wise. He also that ministereth in
the Temple, had ^n a garment of four colors, Scarlet, Violet, B^sse, and
Purple. Scarlet in respect of the heavens that be above the firmament. Violet
and Bysse colors (which he made of flax) because of the earth of which they
came. Finally Purple, in respect of the sea where Purple is gotten.

Therefore when as the Priest came into the Temple to minister, apparelled in
these four colors, he said before the Almighty God; I am come to present my
self here in thy sight (O Lord of the world) in four kinds of colors, that
represent the parts of thy world, and in such wise do I appear before thee, as
though I should bring all the whole world into thy sight: Moreover, the
aforesaid apparel was garnished with pure gold, and precious stones, after the
likeness of the Tribes of the sons of Jacob, who was called Israel; that in
that garment, he might have the sovereignty before the Angels that be above,
and by them prevail to bring the virtue of the holy Ghost; by the which they
should obtain wisdom that dwell in thee, and prosper in their study, and faith,
that they might have wisdom and understanding together: His loins also were
girded with linen flops, wherewith he covered his secret parts (for it
becomes Priests most of all other persons to be shamefaced and bashful)
especially when he should minister in the two Sanctuaries, the outer, and the
inner, which is the Sanctum Sanctorum, or holiest of all. In the outer, the
Priests minister as the High Priest commands them: but in the inner, that is
the Sanctum Sanctorum, enters no man save the High Priest only, and that but
once a year. For in it was the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, in which were
laid up the two Tables of the Covenant that God made with the people in Mount
Sinai. There is also the Rod of Aaron, that flourished and brought forth
leaves. All these were in the Temple whiles it was yet standing. Over against
the Sanctuary, were fourteen stairs or steps, upon the which appeared the
miracle to King Ceskiahu.

And thou Jerusalem at that time wast stronger than other Cities, Lady of
Provinces; for great Kings and Princes builded thee. King Herod much exalted
thee, raising thy walls high; and besides that also, defended thee with other
walls, that he named Antochia, of Antochias a Roman, who gave liberally much
money toward the repairing of the ruins and decays that were in thee. How
comes it to pass therefore that thou art brought thus low? and the Gentiles
have the rule over thee now, and besiege thee, rasing thee, and casting thee
down? yea, they are now in the midst of thee. Woe be to us for our sins: for,
the heaviness of thy strength is dashed, thy Sanctuary is trodden under foot,
and made a sink of the blood of slain persons. Drink now off thy cup (O
Jerusalem) with thy Daughter Sion, drink I say, the cup of vexation and grief
together with her, for yet the time shall come, that visions shall be revealed,
and redemption also it self, that thy Children shall return to their Coasts,
with the health of their Redeemer. Then shall be the time of friendship, and
then shall thou drink the cup of health and consolation.

After that, Titus went to view what way he might best assault the City, and as
he devised with himself, he espied a plain on that side where the Sepulc^er of
Jehochanan the high Priest was. Where he stayed a while, and sent one of his
Captains that were there with him, called Nicanor, to parley with the Jews, that
were upon the walls, to move them to peace, willing him to say thus unto them;
Friends, my Lord Titus is desirous to spare you, and to make a League with you,
that you might be at quiet, and out of this danger of destruction; and if you
be so disposed to confent thereunto, Titus shall make a League with you before
it be yet night. Nicanor went and spoke with the people in such wise, as Titus
had willed him. The Jews gave him no word of answer, but held their peace;
wherefore Nicanor spoke to them again, and as he was talking to them, one from
the walls shot him with an arrow, and killed him. Whereat Titus was exceeding
wroth, that they should shoot at his Captain offering them peace, and his death
grieved him marvellously: Wherefore he commanded Ladders, Brakes, Slings,
battering-Rams, and other Engines of War, to be brought to assault the Town. So
the soldiers brought a battering R^n to batter the walls, and planted it upon
a Mount accordingly.

The J^ws, seeing tha^, were sore afraid; wherefore the three Seditious
Captains joined themselves in friendsh^ and forthwith opening the gates, issued
out, and beat the Romans from their Pieces and Engines, that were now ready
addressed, setting fire on the Ram, slings, and all the other engines, a few
excepted, which Titus and his men saved from the fire.

In this conflict, the men of Alexandria that served Titus, behaved themselves
like tall fellows, in the rescuing of the slings from the Jews; yet the Jews
prevailed, and got the upper hand of them, till Titus came with a strong power
of choice men to succor the Alexanderians, where twelve of the stoutest Jews
were slain.

In the same skirmish Jehochanan a Captain of the Edomites that came to aid the
Jews, was slain by an Arabian that came behind him, and shot him with an
arrow, whiles he was talking with the Romans that entreated him to come to
them: For whom the Edomites mourned and lamented sore, for he was a good man of
war. The next night certain of the Seditious, chiefly of Jehochanans and
Schimeons company, issued out, and came to the three wooden Towers that Titus
had erected before the walls, to view out of them the Town, and to see what the
Jews did: within which, were placed, and without also, a strong party of able
soldiers for their defense; Upon those without fell the Jews, and slew many;
the other fled to Titus Camp. The Romans that were in the Towers, knowing
nothing of the matter, and trusting to them that were set about the Towers for
their safe-gard, slept all the night: After the Jews had thus slain the Romans
watch, and put them to flight, they came to the Towers with saws, and cut the
feet asunder, so that they fell suddenly together with them that were within,
which were very many, and slew them every one; Titus hearing the alarm, and
the crashing of the falling of the Towers, was sore afraid, and all the whole
Army; and not knowing what the matter was they durst not stir toward it, so the
Jews returned safe into the Town.

On the morrow, Titus brought his whole power to the walls, and while the Jews
were at contention in the Town, he addressed another Ram, wherewith he suddenly
struck the outer wall, and battered it through: whereupon the people that
warded that wall, were forced to withdraw themselves within the safe-gard of
the second wall. Then Titus commanded his soldiers to raze to the ground that
wall that he had pierced, and to carry away the stones thereof, that there
should be no let nor hinderance to his men; This was the most substantial and
strongest wall of all, thicker than both the other, and was builded by Herod:
The Romans laboring earnestly in the defacing of the outer wall, were slain in
great number by the Jews from the middle wall, before they could finish their
purpose. The chief of the Jews perceiving that Titus had not only taken, but
also quite pulled down the utter wall, and how there was now but two walls left
about the Town, it went to their hearts, and made them look about them:
Therefore the Seditious began now earnestly to think of unity, and concord
among themselves, so that they divided the Town amongst them into three wards.
Jehochanan was appointed to that ward that is on the North part of the Temple,
beside the Antochia; that part of the Town that was toward the Tomb of
Jehochanan the high Priest, was assigned to Schimeon; to Eleazar was committed
the keeping of the wall. These exhorting one another to play the men, did
valiantly resist the Romans, so that the conflicts then began to be sore and
hard. The Romans for their renown and fame, laid on stoutly, and the Jews again
stuck stiffely to their defense, seeing their end at hand if they were slack.
Titus now and then exhorting his soldiers to play the men, promising them that
would valiantly make any enterprise upon the Jews, abundance of gold and
silver, and much honor withal. Then stepped forth one of his soldiers named
Longinus, and put himself amongst the routs of the Jews, that were issued out
of the Town, where he slew a couple of the chief of them, and presently
recovered himself again within the array of the Romans; but the Jews shrunk not
from the Romans, for they were in a fervent rage and wonderful disdain; and to
further their courage, Schimeon came to his men, and cried unto them with a
loud voice saying; For the reverence of God (friends) flee not this day;
whosoever does flee, let him be sure he shall dye for it, and his house be
destroyed.

Titus also admonished his to keep their array, and not to give back to
Schimeon. Then went he himself to that part of the Town where Jehochanans ward
was; there he caused a battering Ram to be planted, and bent against the wall,
(for there was a very large Plain.) There was at that time in Jerusalem one
called Kantor, who got to him a company of the Seditious, and shot from the
walls into the Romans Army, where he slew very many, and compelled the rest to
retire. This Kantor, with nine other tall fellows, whereof he was the Decurion,
defended one part of the Town: Now as the Romans bended the Ram to batter the
wall, Kantor cried unto Titus, I beseech thee, my Lord Titus, be merciful unto
this most famous City, that is almost beaten down already, do not deface it
utterly, but take pity of the Sanctuary that is in it, and destroy not the
habitation of the Lord God: Titus at his request commanded his men to stay, and
to leave off battering the wall; Then said he to Kantor, Come forth hither to
me, and thou shall save thy self, I will pardon thee, thou shall not be
destroyed; Kantor answered, I will see if I can persuade these my fellows to
come with me. But he did it upon color, for none other cause than craftily to
trifle out time, whereby he mi^ht cause Titus to leave off the assault for a
while; So he spoke unto his fellows which knew his mind, that the Romans might
hear, Let us go down and flee to the Roman Army; Then they drew out their
swords as though they would kill him, and striking upon his harness, he fell
down to the ground in the sight of the Romans, which were ignorant of his
deceit. Then one of the Romans let fly an arrow, that wounded Kantor upon the
face, and glauncing from him, slew another that stood by him: Then Kantor cried
out, What do ye? will ye shoot at us that desire to be at peace with you, which
ye granted your selves, and now will break your promise that ye made unto us?
Is this the reward, my Lord Titus, that thou renderest me, for going about to
flee unto thee, that thy soldiers should shoot at me, hearing me require
conditions of peace? Now therefore, my Lord, may it please thee to send hither
some man of honor, to whom I may come down and receive assurance of thy
promise, to be as one of thine own men: Titus thinking he meant good faith,
spoke unto Joseph, willing him to go and make peace with the Jews in his name,
then to bring him unto him, that he might find safe-gard of his life, from the
common destruction; Joseph answered, Why will thou send me? What have I offended
thee? Have I not ever done thee true and faithful service? Therefore if thou
bear me any good will or favor, send me not unto him whom I cannot trust. For
Joseph mistrusted some subtilty, knowing Kantor before. So Titus sent one
Captain Jiarus, who said unto Kantor, Come down and let us go together to
Caesar's son.

Kantor desired him to hold abroad his cloak lap, that he might hurl him down
his money that he had there, (lest the Jews perceiving it, would take it from
him) and then he would come down. And as Jiarus held up his lap to receive the
money that Kantor spoke of, Kantor with all his might cast down a great stone,
which Jiarus espying, lept aside and avoided: but it lighted upon one of his
fellows, and slew him. Titus was wonderful wroth at this, and forthwith
planted yet another Ram against the wall, and at length laid it flat upon the
ground.

Then commanded Titus to make fires about the Wall, where the Jews should think
to escape; Kantor seeing that, would have fled, and as he made haste to escape
the fires, the weight of his armor bare him down into the fire, and there he
died, more desirous of death than life.

Then entered the Romans within the second wall, against whom the Seditious
issued, and ^ought with such vehement fo^ce that they prevailed against their
enemies, slew many of the Romans, and forced the rest to retire unto the first
wall that they had beaten down before.

In this skirmish Titus himself took a bow, and shot at the Jews in such wise,
that not one of his arrows were spent in vain, but that it did some annoyance
unto the Jews. The Jews notwithstanding gave them the repulse from the Town,
and they were not able to make their party good with them. Within four days
after, came unto Titus a new supply of soldiers out of all quarters for aid to
the Romans, by whose help they prevailed against the Jews, at such time as they
issued out of the Town, and constrained them to withdraw themselves within the
walls.

Yet Titus pitying the miserable state of the City, Temple, and People of the
Lord, at that time commanded his people to withdraw themselves from the walls,
and to leave off the assault for a while, that he might offer peace to the
Jews, to see if they would now be content to submit themselves unto the Romans,
to have quietness and rest without danger of destruction. Wherefore he gave
them truce for five days: and upon the fifth day he came to the gate of the
City, where he straightway espied Schimeon and Jehochanan together preparing
fire to destroy the Romans Engines of war: for all the Jews had agreed together
with one mind, still to withstand the Romans. Wherefore Titus perceiving the
Jews to be so desperately bent that they had even vowed their lives to death,
he began to offer and propose unto them conditions of peace, and sharply to
reprove and blame their obstinate stubborness: saying, I have now won two of
your walls, and ye have but one left. Therefore, if ye^ will continue still in
this self willed frowardness, what will ye do (most miserable creatures) when
as I shall gain also the third wall, and quite destroy your City, pulling down
your Temple and all? Why do ye not rather favor and spare your own lives, your
wives and children? But the Jews, set upon a sullen obstinacy, would in no wise
hear Titus speak.

Therefore Titus sent Joseph to declare his mind unto them in Hebrew, that they
might safely credit his promises, and the peace that was offered. Joseph
therefore went and stood over against the gate, keeping himself aloof off, for
he was afraid to come nigh the wall, knowing that the people hated him, because
he had yielded himself to the Romans; He called therefore unto them aloud:
Hearken all ye Hebrews and Jews, I will declare unto you that which shall be to
your commodity; Then the people gave ear unto Joseph, who spoke unto them in
this wise.

AN Oration of Josephus to the Citizens of Jerusalem.
YOu should ere this (good people of Jerusalem) have fought so earnestly,
whiles your Cities were yet standing, and your Land replenished with people,
ere ever this mischief had lighted upon you: Now that with murders and
slaughters amongst your selves having destroyed one another, and polluted the
Temple of the Sanctuary with the blood of the murdered, and not spared your
own lives, you are become few in number, a small sort of you left, What hope
have you to prevail? Again, you have provoked a valiant Nation, which is ruler
over all people, and has subdued all other Lands, which also has those
Nations in subjection under him, which sometimes reigned over you; besides
this, you wage battle with the Romans without all discretion and wisdom,
without any remorse of this famous City, without any regard of the Sanctuary of
the Lord, without any compassion of your own lives. Neither yet do ye forsake
your purpose, for I perceive you continue in this self-will to withstand the
Romans still, which is nothing else than to spread abroad this calamity
further, both on the people of God, and on his holy Temple. Albeit, I am not
afraid only for this holy Temple, and most renowned City, lest it should be
razed and destroyed, but for the Sacrifices and burnt offerings, lest they
should cease, as the daily sacrifice is ceased; And why? because we have sinned
against our Lord God. Wherefore is his shadow departed from us; Because that
in this same Temple we have kept wars, making it an habitation for the wicked,
a tabernacle of seditious persons: yea, even the Ministers and Holy men of God
have ye murdered, and within the walls of the Temple have ye shed innocent
blood without measure. See now (dear brethren,) and mark what Ordnance, what
Engines, what Instruments of destruction, are prepared to beat down the Temple,
the fire is already kindled to set a fire the Sanctuary, and lo, even your
very enemies are so pitiful of your Temple, that they would not have it
defaced.

But you (dear brethren and friends) why are ye led with no remorse of your
selves, that your enemies may once remove from you these Engines of war? What
have you now left to trust unto, when as two of your walls are already battered
down, and one only remains? You will say peradventure, we put not our trust
in our walls, but in our God: Are ye not aware that your God has long agone
given you over, and has turned him to your enemies, because they have with
greater honor and reverence worshipped his name, than we which rebelliously are
fallen away from him? Wherefore God assisteth not us, but our enemies:
insomuch, that except it be in such countries, whereas either for extreme cold
of the one side, or exceeding heat on the other, no man is able to abide, all
Lands, all Nations are under their Dominion. Tell me, I pray you, what hope
have you, seeing God has made them a terror unto all Nations upon the earth,
who serves them? Why will not you obey them, that you may live and not perish?
Do ye not consider it is come to their turn to rule over all, that God has
committed Dominion unto them, and aided them with his assistance?

Remember you not how God in times past aided the Egyptians, insomuch that they
obtained the dominion over all the whole world? but afterward departed from
them, and assisted you to get the Sovereignty over other Nations: After that
forsook you again, and gave the Empire to the Chaldeans, Assyrians, and
Persians, which reigned far and wide over many countries: Now also has he
given them over, and helps the Romans these many years, so that they bear
rule over all. If you will object and say, To what intent should God give the
dominion unto the Romans, or other Nations over the world, and over his
inheritance and people also, which is an holy people, a peculiar and special
Nation of all the earth? Should ye not be ashamed to say this? With what
discretion can you wonder at this, knowing that all mankind one or other, are
the handiwork of God, who exalts whom he list, and whom he lists he
thrusts down? Ye say, Ye be the children of God, and his proper possession,
and ye aspire to the Sovereignty; therefore it cannot be that God should
determine any thing upon you by chance, fortune, or sudden anger and
displeasure. I grant: But wot ye what? The shadow or protection of the Lord
has forsaken you, because of your sins and transgressions against the Temple
and his holy ministers. How can you stay upon his help, when as he has
withdrawn his loving countenance from you, and your sins have made a divorce
between you and him? O my dear children and brethren, let never this
imagination enter into your hearts, for it shall nothing avail you! Why will
you, my dear brethren and friends, make war upon the Romans, when as they are
Lords over Nations, and pierced the streets of India, and all the Isles of the
Sea, even to the great Ocean-Sea; and from thence to all the parts of the East,
whose dominion extends to the extreme parts of the earth? Yea even to
Britain, which is environed on every side with seas, whose people are huge like
Giants, of a big stature, and of mighty courage, most expert archers, and
valiant soldiers in battle; To whom when the Captain of the Romans came, they
gave him the repulse, and would not be subdued; but when the Princes of the
Romans came, they brought them into subjection and se^itude under the Romans.

But you say (my brethren and friends) you will rather all dye, than serve the
Prince of the Gentiles, and that death is better for you than life, to be
driven to see with your eyes, the calamities of the sanctuary of the people of
God. Search the Histories and Chronicles from the time of your Ancestors; When
was there any time wherein you were free from the yoke of the Gentiles? Do you
not know that Jacob our father of worthy memory, who was always with God, took
his journey into Egypt, to be a stranger in a strange land amongst a proud kind
of people, left he, his children, household, and cattle, should perish with
hunger? There he had with him his twelve sons which he had begotten, and dwelt
there also with his small family, for fear of the grievous famine that was at
that time. Remember you not, when that Judas with his brethren went down into
Egypt, how Joseph was moved as a stranger, to pick a quarrel against his
brethren to bring them into bondage, bearing yet in his mind what injury they
had done unto him? Wherefore some of them he cast in prison, and hanged them at
his pleasure with crafty accusations; especially Judas, who was the chief
amongst them, of whom all the Jews took their name, who if he had been so
disposed, had been able to lay Joseph at his foot a thousand times, not knowing
him to be Joseph: Wherefore when he was so roughly and so sharply taunted of
him, he might have killed him in his rage: for he was a very Bold man, and a
hardy, and of a very Noble courage, who surely would not have counted it
nothing to have slain the Egyptian, and many more of them. Notwithstanding he
did not so, but contrary submitting himself under the yoke of Joseph, called
him his Lord and good Master; and supposing him to be some Egyptian, he humbled
himself before him, to obtain his petition, and to get Corn, least his father,
his brethren, and their family should die for hunger.

What should I say of Joseph, so beautiful, so wise, and witty a man? Was not
he fain to serve in Pharaohs house; wherein although his wisdom was well known,
insomuch that Pharaoh set more by him, than by all the Noble men that were then
alive; He was also called Lord, great Master, and Pharaohs Father; Nevertheless
he humbly besought Pharaoh, that he might sustain his Father and Brethren with
bread, knowing at that time the dominion belonged unto Pharaoh and his people,
being given them of God. And although Joseph had list to return into the Land
of Canaan, with all his fathers whole household without Pharaohs leave; no man
could have let him to do it, for he bare the greatest rule at that time in
Egypt, yet he did not so. Benjamin also was likened to a ravening wolf for his
fierceness, when he was fetched again by force of Joseph's steward, faining a
lie upon him: how chanced he did not kill him? Or else when he alone pursued
Benjamin and his other brethren; could not he if he had list have slain the
man, and buried him, so that the matter should never have come to light?
Notwithstanding they did nothing so, nor so: but Judas wisely weighing the
exaltations, and directions, the promotions, and disgraces, with the common
courses of the world, returned again with his brethren into the City, went to
Joseph and besought him, until his bowels were moved to pity, and he was known
of his brethren.

All these things does the most holy law of the Lord rehearse unto us, and
puts us in mind of, for this intent, that we may learn to bear for
necessities sake, the yoke of him that has the pre-eminence and rule for his
time. Neither let any judge or think that Joseph offended God, in that he
submitted himself under the yoke of Pharaoh; for it is no shame for a wise man
to crouch unto him, whose help he stands in need of, whatsoever it be, much
more if he be a King, or a Lord; know ye not that our fathers were in bondage
to King Pharaoh in Egypt? But after the Lord remembered the covenant that he
made with our fathers, and had determined to lead them out of Egypt; he sent
Moses our master of famous memory, his Angel, his chosen, who knew the Lo^d to
be with him, whereby he was able to destroy whosoever did rise against him:
Nevertheless when he came to Pharaohs presence, who then bare rule in Egypt, he
showed not himself in arms, but rather with thunder and hail, that Pharaoh
might well perceive and know God was the Lord. But at what time as Pharaoh
oppressed the Israelites too sore, our master Moses (by Gods help) brought them
out of Egypt, with a strong hand and stretched forth arm, against the
Egyptians, whom he punished with continual plagues; by that means delivering
the Israelites out of the hands of their Lords and Masters, and bringing them
to the mount of God, made them heirs full of all goodness; that is to say, of
the most holy law of God.

And after Joshua had subdued the holy land to the Israelites, and that they
inhabited it, there chanced unto our fathers, times of adversities, as is
mentioned in the books of the Prophets, so that they were constrained to serve
the King of Ashur a long season, and the Kings of Persia; To the Chaldees also
were we in bondage, although not very grievous, but tolerable. Moreover with
other Kings of the Gentiles we had wars, and sometimes we were put to foils,
sometimes we had the upper-hand.

Now therefore, my brethren, tell me, What shame were it to you, if ye were
subject unto the Romans? Or what are you to be compared to other Nations that
be under their Dominion? Do you not see that the Romans reign over your
enemies, and bear rule over them that sometimes were your Masters, and hate us?
Were it not reason that you should love them, which have brought down your
enemies, and revenged you of them? Which notwithstanding you have nothing at
all done, but rather have hated them, as men void of all perceivance, without
weighing and considering, that since the time you were under them, ye have
always lived in much peace. And I my self, when I withstood the Romans in
Galilee, knew very well that I should be overcome at length, but I could do
nothing because of the seditious persons that were with me, which would in no
wise follow my counsel: Yea, it stood me in hand to have a care of mine own
person, that I were not killed of them, after I had once counseled and moved
them to give up the Town. Wherefore seeing the matter stood so, and God knew my
heart, I thought best to fight against the Romans as I might and when occasion
served to escape to the Romans, to take it. Further, when I was in the Cave
with my forty companions, I had been lost and perished, had not God given me
counsel, making me a way to escape and save my life. For they had almost slain
me, because I gave them counsel to yield themselves to the Romans, and obey
them. For I saw this was the time of the Romans to bear rule, and that God had
appointed them to be Lords over all Nations. For this is his manner, like as
above he has made some to be rulers over othersome; even so beneath also he
has set Rulers over the Kings of the Earth. Who can control him that is
stronger then he? The Romans at this present, have the Dominion over all Lands
and People, over the Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, and Chaldees, (to every
one of these you have been in bondage) and over other Nations also, which
nevertheless do till their ground, sow, mow, plant, and gather in their
fruits: and who has the profit of these goods and labor but the Romans? who
whiles the other toil and travel, do live in peace and rest themselves.

Wherefore mark this also my brethren, the Kings of Macedonia once had the rule
of the whole World, specially in the time of Alexander of Macedonia, but at
this day their Empire is taken from them, and they are become subjects to the
Romans. They when the Romans first set upon them, were very haughty and
stubborn, determining to resist the Romans: notwithstanding they were overcome
of the Romans, and are under their subjection at this day. What should I speak
of the people of the Philistines, which heretofore always have vexed and
annoyed you? Does not the meanest amongst all the Princes of the Romans bear
rule over them?

What hope then have you to escape, when ye know the Philistines were ever
stronger than you, and you were oftentimes overcome of them? As for example,
Saul your King was slain by them. But you will say, David the anointed of the
Lord of Israel, pulled them down, and brought them into subjection. Wot ye
what? then God looked upon you with a favorable countenance, and fought your
battles Himself: but at this day, He is in no wise present with you, for he
has turned away his countenance of salvation from you, Because ye have sinned
against him. And which of you can say, he has intelligence of the secret of
the Lord, or has received any such watchword as God gave at that time unto
David? When thou shall hear a sound of mourning in the tops of Mulbery-trees,
then shall thou set forward, for then shall the Lord go before thy face, smite
the Tents and Camps of the Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. Whosoever (I say) has
knowledge of any such token, let him reveal it to his neighbor, and I could
well consent to follow it. But seeing there is no such thing, hearken unto me,
my dear brethren, Come and serve the Romans in peace and tranquillity. It shall
be no dishonesty for you, with the Kings of Persia, to be subject to the
Romans: they that sometime were your Masters, shall be now your fellows and
companions. But if you will persevere, and stand in your opinion still, I will
enter into this discourse with you: Tell me, I pray you, when were ever your
ancestors free, and when were they not entangled with the wars of the
Gentiles, and the Dominion of other Nations? Had you not ever the victory from
the time you came out of Egypt, until the reign of Saul the son of Cis? So long
as the Lord was your King, you were in bondage to no man, you served God as
your only King. But after that your evil and corrupt desire stirred you to be
irksome to the Lord, and, lest he should reign alone, to choose a man to have
the Dominion over you, according as the custom was in other Nations (I mean
Saul the son of Cis, and the other Kings every one) then served you him, you
and your sons, and the chiefest of you became his servants, your goodliest
daughters were made his Confectionaries, his Cooks, and his Bakers. After Saul,
reigned David, of worthy memory, who ruled over many Nations: But he also
brought you into bondage, and put diverse of you to death, to satisfy his
pleasure withal. He being dead, you served Solomon his son, who no less than
the other, even as he listed, exercised Dominion over you: he also took up your
sons and daughters, and made them his slaves.

After this, succeeded other most wicked Kings: so that from that time your
Country began to go to wrack, and he that was the best amongst them was
Rehoboam, which said unto you, My father corrected you with whips, but I will
scourge you with Scorpions. And so did the rest of the Kings, which reigned
after him; very few of them pleased God. All the other wrought abomination, not
one of them did any good, or reigned in the fear of the Lord.

And in this manner remained the Empire long time with you, until the Kings of
Chaldea came and led you Captive into Babylon, where you were kept until Cyrus
time, King of Persia, who sent you again into your own Country with a wonderful
deal of gold and silver, with great honor, which was counted unto him for
righteousness.

After Cyrus death, there rose against you the most wicked Kings of Greece, who
warring upon you, gave you great overthrows, until God stirred up the spirits
of certain Sage Priests of the stock of Chasmonani, that revenged your
injuries. At that time you were Brethren and Friends with the Romans, and
friendship grew betwixt you many years.

After that, you fell from the stock of Chasmonani, which had delivered you,
and chose one whose name was Herod, who oppressed you grievously.

After him succeeded Archelaus his son, he yet laid a sorer yoke upon you;
wherefore falling upon him, ye protested never hereafter to serve the Kings of
Juda. So going to the Romans, willingly ye submitted your selves under their
subjection, to serve Augustus the Emperor, who ordered you gently. Him you
served as other Nations did, and it was to your praise, because ye were under a
good Governor.

Therefore, now my Brethren, and Children of my people, What mean you at this
present, that you have determined to die, and do not rather spare your selves
and your children? Consider I beseech you, the things that grow upon the earth,
and all living creatures; beasts, worms that creep upon the ground, fowls of
the air, and fishes of the sea; Do you not see that ever the stronger has the
Dominion over the weaker; neither is it any rebuke or shame for the weaker, to
give place and obey that which is stronger: For the Ox and the Goat are in awe
of the Lion, the Ram and the Ewe of the Woolfe, the Cow and the Lamb fear the
Bear, the Goat, the Liberd, the Hawk, is afraid of the Eagle, the Dove of the
Hawk. Weigh the manner of beasts and birds amongst their own kind, you shall
see ever the bigger and stronger, to be master over the less and weaker: And
so in all other things, the stronger set themselves before the weaker always.

Wherefore ye mortal men, learn by me: Did not one God make all things, and He
himself has Dominion over them all? Notwithstanding, all things are so knit
together amongst themselves, that no one thing can stand without another. But
he that holds up all things, is the Blessed God, who if he list, can bring them
all into dust again, His Name be extolled for ever.

Take example, I pray you, from the parts of the whole World; you shall see one
part to be in subjection, another to bear rule. Be not then too stiff-necked
to pervert the natural courses of the World, but rather let your election
follow the causes and events of the same, which if you do, you shall be
esteemed wise men.

Now my dear Countrymen, never think it shame for you to serve the Romans; it
is time for you now to turn to the Lord with your whole heart, and then you
shall have the dominion over other Nations, according to your desire: this
shall then come to pass, when you follow your Lord God with all your strength.
Therefore never think that the Romans, which have rule over you at this day,
are of less power than other people, that heretofore have had dominion over
you. For they are a mighty Nation, their Empire and rule over other people they
have from above, as I have proved to you by the similitudes of brute beasts,
which according to nature bear rule one over another: Notwithstanding, in
mankind it should never have come to pass, that the bigger should so have
dominion over the less, unless for their sins; for the the which they are so
punished, that one is compelled to bow his neck under another yoke.

Now therefore, my dear people, take humility and meekness unto you, never
covet to alter the law of Nature, but rather receive my words, and follow my
counsel; Obey the Romans, prepared and ready to make league with you,
according to their bountifulness, that ye may live and do full well.

CHAP. II.
WHen Joseph had spoken these things, in the hearing of the Citizens of
Jerusalem, they burst out and wept, gnashing with their teeth, and railed at
Joseph over the walls, hurling stones and darts at him, to have killed him.
Therefore when Joseph saw they would not follow his counsel, butwere so
stiff-necked, he began to rebuke them, crying unto them in this wise; Woe to
all froward people, and such as rebel against the Lord God! What mean ye you
wretches? what have ye to lean unto, that ye are so stubborn, when
nevertheless the Lord is gone from you? For you are wicked people, and have
sinned against him. How can your sins be purged which you have committed in the
Temple of the Lord, by shedding of innocent blood, without all mercy? Ye are
most guilty, for ye have fought in the Temple and Sanctuary of the Lord, ye
have defiled it with dead bodies of them which ye have slain in the very midst
thereof. Besides, ye have profaned and unhallowed the Name of the Lord with
making of Wars upon the Sabbath day, and upon your solemn and festival da^es.
Tell me now, ye froward rebels, whether did ever your forefathers prevail
against their enemies, with spear and shield, but rather with prayer, penance,
and pureness of heart, wherewith they served God, and again he delivered them?
But you, what have you to trust unto, when as ye are unfaithful? Your shelter
and protection is departed from you, and your Lord God aideth your enemies,
whose power he maintains to destroy you; if you ima^ine to be delivered with
your swords and spears, you are foully deceived, whereas God would not that ye
should escape the hands of your enemies. Open your eyes, and see what David the
anointed of the Lord said: For the Lord will save neither by sword nor spear.
Call to your remembrance (ye very fools) Abraham your father which begot you,
by what means he overcame Pharaoh the King of Egypt, who violently had taken
away Sarah his wife from him: surely none other way did he obtain the victory
then by prayer to the Lord, who stirred the spirit of Pharaoh, and put him in
mind to restore his wife Sarah, clean and undefiled. Abraham was quiet in his
bed, and at rest from all troubles; but Pharaoh that great Lord and Ruler, was
punished in the mean season with great plagues, because of Sarah whom he had
taken to him by violence, to deflower her, which God would not suffer, but
rather uncovered Pharaohs flesh, that he was fain to show the secret parts of
his body to Physicians, to see if they could heal them. But who can cure the
infirmities which God sends? or who knows his intents? For who knew that
Hezekiahs biles could be healed with a plaster of figs? or Naman the Syrian's
leprosy, with the w^ter of Jordan? or the bitter water with wormwood?
Wherefore when as no man could cure Pharaoh, he was fain to speak Abraham fair,
and to entreat him to pray to God to take away from him his plague, and so by
his prayer Pharaoh recovered.

Then Pharaoh apparelled Sarah in precious garments, gave her gifts of Gold and
Silver, and precious Stones, and sent her home honest, pure, and holy, to
Abraham, living then at his own house. ^saac when he was driven out by
Abimelech King of the Philistines, and had with him the bond servants of his
fathers household, to the number of 800. and 18. with whom Abraham had
discomfited five Kings, beside many other more of his family, so that he had
been strong enough to have invad^ the Philistines; yet he would not do it, but
with all meekness and humil^ty, he used himself toward the King of that
Country. Notwithstanding, after he was driven out of the Land, the Philistines
came unto him, and entreated him, saying, We perceive the Lord God is with
thee, etc. as it is written in the Scripture. What shall we say of Jacob, when
he f^ed from the presence of his brother Esau, he carried nothing with him but
a bare staff, wherewith he passed ov^r the River Jordan, as it is w^itten:
With my staff passed I this Jordan. His Ammunition that he took with him for
his journey, was pray^r, wherewith he made all his wars. That was it for the
which God assisted him, when he went away to Laban, and when he returned from
him, when also he was delivered out of the hands of his brother Esau who sought
to kill him. And this also he did b^ the way as he returned, when he wrestled
with a certain man that overcame him.

O Lord, Who is able to number the mercies of the Lord, and the marvels which
he wrought with our fathers of worthy memory, Abraham, Isaac, and Jac^b? What
should I speak of Moses our shepherd, the man of God, that feared the cruelty
of Pharaoh, until he writ in the Law, that he had called the name of his son
Eleazar: for he said the God of his father helped him, and delivered him out of
the hands of Pharaoh. And when he came before Pharaoh to deliver Israel out of
his hands, and to lead them out of Egypt: With what things else overcame he the
Tyrant withal, then with prayer? Did he not overthrow the pride of Pharaoh and
his Charmers, only with the Rod of the Lord which he had with him? Wherewith
also he smote Egypt with ten plagues, and divided the Sea into twelve parts.
And at the red Sea Moses resisted not Pharaoh and his host with force of Arms,
but with p^ayer: wherefore Pharaoh and all his were drowned in the bottom of
the Sea. But Moses sung a song of praise unto our God while the soldiers of
the Egyptians perished, that came against Moses and the people of Israel with
weapons, horses, and chariots.

Notwithstandiug, by Moses prayer they we^e overwhelmed all in the Sea, so that
not one of them escaped Who is ignoraut of this, that prayer is of more force
than all instruments of war: that it speedeth and hasteneth the help of the
Lord; and his saving health? Do you not know, when Joshua the minister of
Moses, passed over Jordan, that he was a warlike man, and had with him very
many most valiant soldiers; nevertheless, he destroyed not the seven walls of
Jericho by force of War, but only with prayer, and with shouts and noise of the
Priests of the Lord, our forefathers? Know ye not that prayer availed ^ideon,
when as he with three hundred men, vanquished the whole host of Midian, Amalek,
and the people of the East? If prayer had not helped him, I pray you, what had
three hundred men been able to do against so great a multitude? Mark (yefond
people) what chanced in the Covenant of the Lord, that the Philistines took
away.

Our fathers truly were not ab^e to recover it by their swords and force of
Arms: but with that Prayer that the just men of that Age made, the Ark was
brought again unto his place. Consider the times of Hezekiah King of Juda, when
as (...) King of Ashur came up b^aspheming and railing upon the Sanctuary of
the Lord our God of Hosts, breathing out the pride and malice of his heart. By
what means was he overthrown? Did our fathers overcome him ^y fo^ce of Arms?
No, without doubt: but with prayer and supplication.

For Hezekiah the King went and put on apparel meet for prayer; instead of a
shield, he took sackcloth; for a helmet, he cast dust on his head; and instead
of arrows and a sword, he made use of prayer and supplication. And the prayer
that Hezekiah made, mounted so far as an arrow was never able to flee; so that
his petition and prayer, overthrew 185. thousand most valiant men of the host
of Senacherib. Furthermore, the King of Juda, and King of Israel, and King of
Edom, joining their powers together, invaded the M^abites, and in a wilderness
and unoccupied and barren dry land, they we^e in great peril and thirst; what
profited them t^eir artillery and furniture of war? Did there not issue out for
them at the instant prayer of Elisha, a Prophet and man of God, plenty of wa^er
in the Desert, a Brook in the Wilderness? Came it not to pass also by the
prayer of the same Elisha, that a wonderful hurly burly, a ^umbling and ra^ing
of Chariots of War, and of Horses, was h^ard in the Camps of the Syrians,
besieging the City of Samaria, with the which noise the Syrians being afraid,
fled, no man pu^uing, nor following them? Ye know also, that by the prayer of
the aforesaid Prophet, the famine and lack of victuals that was in the Town of
Samaria, was turned into great abundance and plenty, insomuch that thirty
Epha's, or measure of fine meal, were sold for one piece of Silver. Do ye not
see (most foolish men) how our forefathers had the victory ever by prayer?

But let us come to the beginning again, and speak of Moses. What time as he
held up his hands toward heaven; had not Israel the upper-hand of the
Amalekites by his prayer? Joshua also by his prayer, stayed the Sun and Moon in
the sight of the people of Israel; and the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the
Moon in the valley of Ajalon, that the evening was changed into noon day, and
so Israel vanquished their enemies.

Sampson also, that most valiant Giant, until such time as he had sinned, did
not God evermore hear his prayer, and ever he gat the victory thereby? After he
had once sinned, he decayed as any other mean person.

Likewise King Saul, all the while he walked perfectly and purely, his prayer
increased his valiantness and strength, but after he had once sinned, God left
him, and gave him over.

David also, King of Israel, of famous memory, from the time of his youth, till
his last end, his valiantness never failed him; and why? because he always
was helped by his prayer; neither would he ever fight against his Countrymen
and native people, when as Saul persecuted him. Wherefore he prevailed against
his enemies; and because he abstained to lay his hands upon his brethren,
therefore afterward all Nations feared him.

Did not Asa King of Juda, accompanied with a small number of men, make an
Expedition against the Ethiopians? and praying to the Lord God, said on this
wise; We indeed know not what to do, but our eyes are bent upon thee, etc.
Which prayer the Almighty did hear, and the Victory followed, so that Asa slew
in the Camp of the Ethiopians, ten hundred thousand men Deborah a Prophetess
by her prayer, brought to pass great health in Israel.

What shall I tell of diverse other just and godly women, which by their prayers
obtained many things? Tell me (ye mad men) know ye not what Amaziah King of
Juda did? he having wars with the Edomites, vanquished them, and led them
prisoners with their wives and children, and Idols also, to Jerusalem; and then
fell to worshipping of the same Idols, that he had taken from the Edomites,
saying unto them, Ye are they that have saved me, therefore do I worship you,
and by you have I overcome the Edomites. To whom when a Prophet of the Lord
came and asked him, Why seek thou, and servest the gods of that people, that
were not able to deliver them out of thy hand? By and by he taunted the Prophet
again, saying, Who made thee of the King's Counsel? wherefore after that, he
was no more reprehended of the Prophet; for the Lord had determined to destroy
him, as it is written in the books of the Chronicles of the Kings of Juda.
Therefore he was taken prisoner afterward like a fox, when he had fought
against Joas King of Israel in Bethshemeth; and so was he compared to a low and
vile thorn or shrub, and Joas unto the Noble and high Cedar-tree. Yea, all the
evils that ever happened unto us in any age, it came of our selves, for our Lord
God is righteous in all his works, that ever he wrought upon us: Our enemies
never did us so much harm, as we our selves did, unto our selves. Ye wot, the
Gentiles took the precious vessels of our sanctuary away to Babel, and brought
us them again undefiled; but we polluted and defiled them our selves, and the
Temple also with innocent blood, which we shed abundantly within it, adding
sins to sins evermore and more, breaking the Law with our evil acts.

For who brought the Romans first against the City of Jerusalem, but Hircanus
and Aristobulus? For they being at dissension betwixt themselves, and one
hating the other, called the Romans against this City. Who brought Antonius and
Sosius, Princes of the Romans, against Jerusalem, but Herod being at variance
for the Kingdom with the house of the Chasmonanites? Who also called Nero
Caesar to reign over us? Did you it not your selves? Now therefore why rebel ye
against the Empire and Dominion of the Romans? If you will say, Because the
Roman President Edomeus ordered you too bad: had it not been meet rather to
complain of him to the Emperor, then to rebel against the Romans, and to make
war against them? But you will say, We rebelled against Nero Caesar, because he
did us too much wrong. Wherefore then rebel ye now against Vespasian Caesar, a
most merciful man, and one which never hurt you? Or, why make ye not peace
with his son to be under him, according as other Nations be, that ye might
live, and not perish?

Have ye not a sufficient proof of his clemency and mercifulness, when as he
had cause to be cruel upon no man so much as upon me, which drew out my sword
against the Romans, and killed many of them?

Notwithstanding, neither he nor the rest of the Romans have done me any harm.
Yea, rather they have bestowed many benefits upon me: and although I was in
their hands, yet they have saved my life. I confess, that before they had me
prisoner, I would gladly many times have fled to them, but I could never do it,
for (...) was ever afraid of my wicked companions, ^t they should have killed
me, and so my death had been to no purpose. But now I praise the Lord Go^
without ceasing, because that for his unmeasurable mercies sake, he would not
su^fer me to be entangled in the same mischiefs that you be in. Neither would
I wish to be companion of such lost unthrifts and cast-awaies as you be, which
have shed the blood of innocents in the Temple of the Lord.

Indeed if I had been with you, I should have been void of all hope as ye be,
seeing ye spare not your own ^ives, and your own contumacy and stubborness is
made snare a for you. See I pray you, with how great mischiefs you are laden.
First, the Lord is not amongst you, insomuch that through the tumults which you
have made amongst your selves, almost the waters of Shiloa are dried up, which
heretofore when the Nations made war against you, flowed in great abundance,
and ran over the banks on both sides. But you are contumacious rebels, that
ever provoked the Lord God unto wrath, you have made slaughters one upon
another, in the midst of the Temple of the Lord: how can then the glory of the
Lord dwell amongst you? Know ye not because of Korah and his Congregation, the
Lord said unto Moses and to his people: Separate your selves from among this
congregation, and I shall consume them in the twinkling of an eye.

But you are far worse than they. For without all remorse or pity, ye pull down
the Temple of the Lord with your own hands, and your selves set fire on the
Sanctuary, which most noble Kings, and most holy Prophets builded: and besides
all this, ye neither spare your sons nor daughters. And although I be in the
Romans Camp, yet I am not absent from you, for my most dearly beloved wife is
present with you, the wife o^ my youth, whom I cannot set lightly by at this
present, although I never had children by her: but rather love her most
entirely, because she came of a most honest and godly house. My dear Father and
Mother are also with you, very aged persons: for my Father is at this day a
hundred and three years old, and my Mother fourscore and five: but the years of
my life are very few, evil, and full of tribulation and sorrow, about
threescore and seven, neither have I lived yet so long that according to Nature
I should desire to die.

Now therefore, if so be you trust not me, but suppose I have proposed these
things to you deceitfully, and that there is no trust of Titus Covenant and
bond, or that his league should be to your hindrance and discommodity: Go to,
if it come to pass, it shall be lawful for you to kill my Father and Mother,
and my Wife. Yea, I swear unto you by the Lord our God, that I shall deliver my
life also into your hands, that you may do with me what ye list: and by that
means shall the blood of my Parents, my Wives, and mine, be in pledge.

Therefore let the Ancients of the City come forth, and I will make a league
betwixt them and our Lord Titus. And doubt ye not, but as hitherto the Lord God
would you should be (...) and punished by the Government of the Romans: so
hereafter, he shall benefit you thereby, and do you good, if so be you will
once acknowledge and confess that all Dominion is changed and altered at his
commandment, and that God humbles whom he lists, and again whom he list he
se^teth aloft. But persuade your selves of this, that as long as ye refuse to
be subject unto the Romans, so long you stir, against your selves, Gods wrath
and high displeasure: and besides that, you do defer the longer, and prolong
your redemption and deliverance not only to your selves, but also to your
posterity.

Now therefore my brethren, I thought it my part to declare all these things to
you, and it is in your power to choose whether you list: for who so will, let
him give ear unto me; and who not, let him abstain from my counsel.

The people hearing these words and sayings of Joseph the Priest, wept
wonderfully, for they could have been concent to have followed his counsel. At
this time Titus, gave commandment to all the Romans, to send again the Jews
that were prisoners, and the slaves into the City: By what means he shifted
from himself the blood of the Jews, and laid it upon the necks of their
Masters; for Titus took pity of them through Joseph's Oration, and his good
counsel. The common people of the Jews desired nothing more, then to have come
forth, and to fall to an agreement, to make peace with Titus; but Schimeon,
Eleazar, and Jehochanan, Captains of the Seditious, set strong watch and ward
at every gate, charging them to kill all that should go forth: Thus were many
killed which would have fled forth to Titus, and the City of Jerusalem was
closed up, and no man could get out nor in. In the mean season fell a great
dearth and famine in Jerusalem, insomuch that the Seditious searched every man's
house and cellar for food.

And because a certain householder withstood them, they killed him. Thus they
dealt with all them that dwelled at Jerusalem, till the victuals in the Town
was all spent, that men began to seek dung and even man's excrements to eat, by
which means much of the people died for hunger. Whosoever at that time could
get any herbs or roots, mice, serpents, or other creeping worms (whatsoever
they were) to eat, he was counted happy, because he had found meat to sustain
and save his life withal, in that hard famine, and terrible hunger. Moreover,
whosoever had any corn in store that no man knew of, he was afraid to send it
to the mill, or bake it, because of the wickedness of the Seditious, lest they
should take away from them their sustenance; wherefore many did eat the dry
co^n unground in their cellars privily.

At that time also were many exceeding rich men in Jerusalem, which stole meat
one from another; so that the father snatched meat from the son, and the son
from the father; the mother snatched from her children, the children likewise
from their mother; and such as fled out of the gates, or otherwise, let
themselves down over the walls in the night season, who being suspected be to
the Seditious persons, the Romans killed them without. This evil therefore and
distress increased so long, that the people had devoured all that ever crept on
the earth, from the mouse to the spider, from the newt to the weesell; whereby
a most grievous pestilence followed, that innumerable of the people of the Land
died, and there was no man to bury them.

When they chanced to find any dead horse, or other beast in the Town, a man
should see many Israelites strive and fight for it; in all points like to
famished Ravens lighting upon a dead carcass, so that in such contentions very
many were slain. Therefore when diverse men with their wives and children, gat
out of the City to gather herbs to eat, and chanced among the Romans, the
Romans laid hold of the little children, and killed them; saying, We will
dispatch these, left when they grow once to man's state, they make war upon us
as their fathers do at this day. So many as came out of the gates of the City
now and then, the Romans killed and hanged them upon gallowses, over against
the gates of Jerusalem, to the number of five hundred: After the same manner
Schimeon, Jehochanan, and Eleazar dealt with those Romans, whom they could by
any train catch, and hanged them up upon the walls. Whosoever also they could
perceive would flee unto the Romans, they hanged them likewise over the walls
to the number of 500. But Titus gave commandment to all his soldiers, that no
man, upon pain of death, should kill any of them that fled out of Jerusalem.
For he took pity of the Israelites, and ceased not to speak friendly, and
lovingly to the Jerosolemites; so that he went yet once again to the walls, and
spoke unto the Jews in this sort.

Hear I beseech you the counsel of Joseph, and come unto me that you may live,
and not perish utterly. Spare your people: why will you oppress them vexed with
hunger, thirst, pestilence, and besieging? But the Seditious hearing Titus
speak, were wonderfully incensed, and intended to add mischief upon mischief,
handling yet more cruelly the people of God. Moreover, they railed at Titus ^o
provoke him to anger, that he might leave off speaking to the people, which had
now almost lost their obedience and fear of the Seditious.

Wherefore the Seditious spoke unto the Romans, It is better for us to dye with
hunger, and to be killed in this affliction, so to come to the bliss, and light
we hope for, than to ^ive, and see the most holy Temple of God defiled and
destroyed. When Titus saw this, he commanded an iron-Ram to be set to the wall
to batter it, that he might deliver those poor wretches out of Schimeon,
Eleazar, and Jehochanans hands, who held them in as Captives.

At the same time as they erected that Engine to the wall, it happened there was
in the Camp a certain young man whose name was Memaganin, son of Antiochus of
Macedonia, one of the Kings of the Grecians, who came at Vespasians commandment
to aid Titus. The same young man was very swift, a good runner, and a hardy
soldier, but he lacked discretion. He came to Titus and said, I cannot but
marvel at thy soldiers that vanquish all Nations, and dare not set upon the
Jews to kill them.

Titus hearing the young King say so, smiled and said; How chances it, that
being of this judgment, thou armest not thy self, and make thee ready to do
like as thou say? Why drawest thou not out thy sword to declare thy manhood
upon them?

Wherefore the young King encouraged himself, and called together all his
Macedonian soldiers, then approached to the Jews, and began to skirmish with
them, shooting with their bows and arrows apace. But at length the Jews handled
them so, that not one of the Macedonians escaped, save only the young King,
which by his good foot-manship and swift running, gat away, and returned to
Titus.

This Memaganin was of the kindred of Alexander the great, King of Macedonia,
which had the Dominion of the whole world, and whom all Nations and people
stood in awe of. Josephus the Priest demanded of him whose son he was? He
answered, I came of the seed of Alexander, I am the tenth from him. Joseph
said, It may well be as thou have said, that thou art of the succession of
Alexander, for the valiantness of thy heart that thou have showed declares no
less. Howbeit thou shall understand that the Romans have done wisely to abstain
from the assault at this time, because they knew they should have to do with a
most valiant Nation, which thou having so well tried, may report and testify
when thou art asked the question.

After this, Titus divided his whole Army, and laid them privily in ambushes
round about the walls. He prepared moreover Rams of Iron to batter the walls.
Of these four, one he planted upon the side of the place called Antochia; the
Engine was thirty cubits long. The same night Captain Jehochanan with his
company issued forth, and undermined the ground under the wheels of the wagons
that bare the Rams, putting pitched boards, oyled, and done over with
brimstone, in the trenches under the wheels; and under the boards, they spread
leather, which likewise was smeared and done over with pitch, oil, and
brimstone.

Then they set fire upon the boards, which burnt till they came to the feet of
the Rams: and they being set on fire and burnt, the Engines fell upon the Watch
that was appointed to keep it being asleep, and killed them. Whereat the Romans
were much dismayed, and said, It is not possible we should assault this City
hereafter: for they have burnt all our Engines of war, wherewith we have subdued
all other Kingdoms: so that now of fifty iron Rams which we brought with us, we
have but six left, and the Seditious Jews have burnt three of them, what shall
we now do? How shall we batter the walls hereafter? The Jews upon the walls
hearing their words flouted them, and laughed them to scorn. Wherefore Titus
incensed with anger, commanded the other three Rams to be addressed in the
place of those which were burnt. In the mean season, while the Romans were at
work, four young men moved with great zeal, whose names were, first Thopatius
Galileus, then Magarus Chebronita, the third Jorminus Schomronita, the fourth
Arius Jerosolymita. These all armed, issued out of the Camp of the Romans, that
then stood about their three Engines and iron Rams, devising how to batter the
walls of the City; of whom, some these young men killed, the other fled. Then
two of them stood at defense to keep off all them that approached nigh the
Engines, whilethe other two, Jerusolymitanus and Schomronita daubed the timber,
with a certain matter which they had prepared to make it take fire, and
straightway set fire upon them, so that suddenly the Rams were on a light fire,
Then they all four joining together withstood the Romans, that they should not
come at the Engines to quench the fire. Shortly the Rams fell down, and the
Romans stood aloof, hurling stones and shooting thick at them: for they were
afraid to come nigh them, because of their great fierceness, although they were
three thousand men that kept the Rams. Yet these four set nothing by them, nor
yet never went off the ground, till the Rams were clean burnt up, shot the
Romans never so thick at them. Titus hearing the valiantness of these young
men, and the harms they had done unto the Romans, made speed with his whole
Host to save the Rams from the fire, and to apprehend those young men. Then
forthwith issued out Schimeon, Jehochanan, and Eleazar, Captains of the
Seditious, with their soldiers, sounding their Trumpets, and made the Romans
retire, that they could not come nigh the fire, and so rescued the four young
men from the Romans that had environed them round about.

In that skirmish were killed ten thousand and five hundred men. Then gathered
together all the whole Army of the Romans to assault the Jews at once,
approaching hard to the walls of Jerusalem, where they cried unto the Jews,
saying; What, are you Oxen or Goats, that you fight on this fashion upon the
Walls? Will you be taken in the midst of the City, like as Oxen and Goats are
taken in their folds? If ye be men, come forth and let us try our manhood here
in this Plain. But you by stealth and at unawares set upon them that keep our
Engines, snatching them up like as it were wolves should snatch sheep, then run
away into the Town, as the wolves run into the Wood, If there be any manhood in
you, behold we are ready here, come forth to us, so many for so many, and then
we shall see what end will come thereof. When the Captains of the Seditious
heard that, they spoke unto the warriors that were in Jerusalem; Which of you
will go out with us to these dogs, to show our force and stomachs, for the
Sanctuary and City of the Lord? Then five hundred tall fellows of their own
accord, issued out upon the Romans suddenly, and slew eight thousand men, and
compelled the rest to retreat from the walls. The Romans then felt what
valiantness the Jews had; for the Romans were in number forty thousand
fighting men, and the Jews were only five hundred, whereof not one of them was
killed in that skirmish.

The Romans a far off shot at the Jews, and hurled stones; to whom the Jews
said; Come hither to us, are you not they that called us forth, and provoked us
to come to you? why come ye not now nearer? you go about to drive us away with
arrows and stones. What do you think us to be dogs, and that we are afraid of
your stones? Are we not men, yea, we are your Masters and betters, for you r^n
away from us as servants flee from their Masters, when they follow them to beat
them. Titus seeing his army to be part of them fled, and part to be slain, he
cried to his people, saying: Is it not a shame for you, ye Romans, and a
wonderful great dishonor, to flee from the Jews, so hunger beaten, famished,
almost dead for thirst, and besieged? Alas, how shall ye put away this your
rebuke, and ignominy? When as all Nations, which heretofore ye have most
valiantly subdued, shall hear that ye flee from these dead Jews, whose whole
Land we h^ve in possession; so that they have nothing left but this only Town,
which we have all battered, that they have but one only wall to defend
themselves. Besides this, they are very few, we are innumerable; they have no
Nation to aid them, we have help of all Lands: Why then do ye flee from their
sight, like as small impotent birds flee from the Eagle. What though the Jews
vow and hazard themselves desperately for their Temple and Land; why do you not
the same also in these wars, to get you a renown of valiantness.

But the Jews prevailed that day, and had the upper hand; wherefore they
returned into the Town with great glory, having put the Romans to so great a
foil. Titus commanded his to address and prepare the other two Rams that were
left, to batter the walls of Jerusalem withal: Wherefore the Roman Carpenters
cast a trench, to prepare and set up the Rams in such places as Titus had
assigned them.

The Jews were aware of it well enough, but winked at that matter as yet,
until they had planted the master beams between the standing posts. So when
the work was finished, even to the hanging up of the Engines betwixt the
standing posts ^o shake the wall withal; the Romans being secure and void of
care, nothing mistrusting that the Jews would stir, because they had been quiet
a few nights, and never issued forth of the City: Upon a certain night, a
pretty while before day, the three principal Captains of the Seditious, came
and cast their heads together, to devise what they should do. Eleazar gave this
counsel, and said; You two the last time issued out, and burnt three Rams, and
got you renown, and I kept the gates the while; now keep ye the gates, and I
will issue out with my men against the Romans to get me a name also.

The other answered, Go then on Gods name unto them, the Lord God of the
Sanctuary which is in Jerusalem shall be present with thee, but beware thou be
not slain, and in any wise thou be not taken alive; to whom he answered, The
Lord God shall keep me, for upon the trust of the righteousness of my father
Ananias the high Priest, and his sincere service unto God, I will set upon them.

Eleazar therefore chose 100. valiant soldiers, and with them he issued out of
the Town before day: The same night the Romans had made fires about their
Engines where they watched, because of the cold: The Artificers and soldiers
that kept the watch and ward about the Romans, were in number a hundred and
fifty. The day was the 27. of the month of September, which was the ninth month
that Titus had besieged Jerusalem. Eleazar and his company thus being issued
out, came and found some of the Romans snorting about the fires, other watching
in their wards, and killed them all, that not one remained. Then some of
Eleazars Company set fire upon the Rams, burnt the standing posts, ropes,
chains, and other instruments of war; the Artificers that were there, they
apprehended alive and burnt them, so that no man escaped.

When it was day, Titus observed the smoke of the fire, mounting up very foul,
and stinking of the wood and men together; he drew toward the place therefore
with his Host, to see what the matter was: Eleazar in the mean season, and his
company, took as they might get, every man a piece of the Engines out of the
fire, or some of their heads that they had killed, and returned with great joy,
flouting the Romans, and laughing them to scorn by the way, till they came to
the gates of Jerusalem, where they were received of Schimeon, and Jehochanan
with great honor.

Soon after this, came many soldiers and great bands of men out of all
Nations, that were subject to the Empire of the Romans, to aid Titus; to whom
Titus declared what had happened him in that siege, the stoutness of the Jews,
and how they had annoyed many ways the Roman army, adding moreover and asking
them; Did you ever see four men withstand ten thousand, and five hundred, so
that they being all together, could neither overthrow them, nor take them
prisoners? but the four slew them, like as it had been tops of Coucumbers
smitten off with most sharp swords? When they heard this, they wondered all very
much. Then Titus spoke unto his host, and to them which were newly repaired
unto him, to show their advice and best counsel what was to be done, lest we
should be ashamed (says he) before all them that shall hereafter hear of our
Wars.

The gravest and most ancient of the Nations that were newly come to his aid,
answered; If it please your Majesty, let the Romans breath a while and take
their rest, which are now wearied with the sundry battles of the Jews: and we,
who are not so broken with labor, but fresh and lusty, shall try what the Jews
can do; we cannot think that they are able to withstand so great a multitude.

But the Princes of the Romans desired Titus that he should not permit them
this, lest he should increase their own sorrows, if peradventure they should be
discomfited (say they) of the Jews, and the matter redound unto their own
shame. For if we which are acquainted with them, and know their manner of
fight, cannot sustain their violence, How shall they do it that never had proof
of the strength and force of the Jews? They shall be to them like Hyssop which
grows upon the walls, in comparison of the Cedar-trees of Libanus.

The other said, nay, they should do well enough with them. And they urged
Titus so instantly, that they constrained him to grant them their desire. Then
Titus gave them leave to set upon the Jews, thinking with himself, peradventure
the Jews may be put to the worse of these men that will fight without fear, not
knowing the force of the Jews: for the Romans that have had trial of their
strength, fight fearfully and warily. So the Lords of the strange Nations,
chose out of their Armies eighty thousand men; Ten thousand Macedonians, twenty
thousand Britains, five thousand Aramites, ten thousand Africans, ten thousand
valiant Burgundians, five thousand Redarans; last of all, ten thousand Persians
and Chaldeans. These therefore went into the Plain which is by the Sepulcher of
Jehochanan the high Priest, and from thence made an assault upon the Jews that
were upon the Walls, setting up their scaling ladders. Jehochanan said to
Schimeon and Eleazar, his two Companions; If you think good, I will issue
forth, and skirmish with these uncircumcised, to let them see what I can do.
Schimeon answered, Let two of us do it, and the third keep the gates and walls;
for thou alone art able to do nothing against them, they are so many. Eleazar
allowed this advice, offering himself to bear Jehochanan company. Schimeon bad
them go, saying, The Lord of the Sanctuary give them into your hands, and deal
not with you at this time according to your works.

Then Jehochanan and Eleazar issued with one thousand five hundred good men of
War, the ninth day of the month Tebeth, which was the tenth month that Titus
had besieged Jerusalem, and overthrew of the Gentiles of that host fifty seven
thousand and five hundred men, besides three thousand whom they took prisoners:
but of the Jews were no more slain in that fight than only seven, whose bodies
with much rejoicing and great triumph they carried with them into the Town, and
buried them there, lest peradventure the uncircumcised should have misordered
them. The Gentiles that were left, with great shame and dishonor returned unto
Titus, who reprehended them because they would not believe the Romans. The next
day following, the Jews brought forth the three thousand Nobles and Gentlemen
that they had taken prisoners, and plucked out of every one of them an eye, and
cut off every man the one hand, after sent them back with shame and reproach to
Titus's Camp.

Then Titus consulted with all his Princes what were best to do with the
Israelites: and when every man had said his mind, he liked never a man's
counsel, but said unto them; Well, I have devised this with my self, which I
will follow, and no man shall bring me from my purpose: we will keep the siege
without any assault or skirmish, for their victuals failed them long ago, and
so they shall be famished. Besides this, when they shall see us cease to fight
with them, they will fall at variance amongst themselves, and kill one another.

This counsel was thought good of all Titus's Princes, wherefore they besieged
the Town as Titus commanded, and closed up all the ways of the City round
about, lest the Jews should as they had done before, come upon them unawares.
They appointed moreover, watch day and night, to take heed that no man should
come out of the Town to gather herbs for their sustenance.

Then increased the hunger in Jerusalem, which if it had not been so grievous,
the City had never been won: for the soldiers of the Town were lighter than
Eagles, and fiercer than Lions. There died therefore of the famine wonderful
many of the Jerusolemites, so that the Jews could not find place to bury them
in, they were so many in every place of the Town. Many cast their dead folks
into their Wells, and tumbled afterward in themselves and died. Many also made
themselves graves, and went into them alive, where they tarried day and night
and died unmourned-for. For all mourning and accustomed lamentation for the
dead was left off, because of the unmeasurable famine, which was so great that
it cannot be told, and I cannot relate the thousandth part of the mischief that
followed of the hunger. Titus seeing the innumerable carkases of the dead that
were cast into the Brook Cedron like dung, was wonderfully amazed with fear,
and stretched out his hands toward heaven, saying, Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, whom the Israelites believe in, cleanse me from this sin, which surely I
am not the cause of: for I required peace of them, but they refused it, and
they themselves are cause of this mischief, they have sinned against their own
souls and lives: I beseech thee, impute it not to me for a sin, that the Jews
die on this manner.

At that time, certain wicked persons of Jerusalem slandered Amittai the Priest
falsely, saying to Captain Schimeon, Behold, Amittai the high Priest, which did
let thee into the City, goes about to flee to the Tents of the Romans. Thou
have experience of his great wit and wisdom, how he also knows all the secret
ways into the Town, Temple, and Sanctuary; and who can tell whether he will
bring the Romans some night at midnight into the City? Therefore Schimeon sent
certain to fetch Amittai and his four sons unto him.

They that were sent, brought Amittai and but three of his sons, for one was
fled to the Romans, and came to Joseph. When Amittai with the other were
brought to Schimeons presence, he besought him he might not live, but to be put
to death by and by, lest (says he) I should live to see the death of my
children. But Schimeon was hard-hearted, and would not be entreated: for it was
Gods will that Amittai should be punished, because he was the bringer of
Schimeon into Jerusalem; and therefore fell he into his hands, which for good
rewarded him with evil. Schimeon commanded a sort of murderers to place Amittai
upon the walls in the sight of the Romans, and said unto him; See thou,
Amittai? Why do not the Romans deliver and rescue thee out of my hands? thee I
say, which would have fled away unto them? Amittai answered nothing to this,
but still besought him before his death, he might kiss his sons, and bid them
farewell; but Schimeon utterly denied him.

Wherefore Amittai wept aloud, saying to his sons; I brought (dear children), I
brought this thief into this Town^, wherefore I am counted now for a thief my
self: All the mischief which is come upon me, and you, it is mine own doing,
because I have brought this seditious villain into this holy City; I thought
then, Peradventure he will be a help to the Town, but it is proved contrary;
for he has been a most cruel enemy to the same. It was not enough for us to
keep one seditious person, Jehochanan, I mean, which took unto him Eleazar, the
first beginner of sedition; but I must bring in also this wicked Schimeon,
which is joined to our foes to destroy us. Indeed I never brought him in for
any love that I bare unto him, but all the Priests and the whole multitude of
the people sent me to fetch him; notwithstanding, I am worthy of this just
judgment of God, because I took upon me such an embassage.

What should I speak of thee, thou most wicked Schimeon, for whithersoever thou
turnest thee, thou bring all things out of frame: Indeed, thou dea^est
justly with me, because I have sinned unto God, to his people, and his City, in
that I have brought thee in, to be a plague to it; wherefore I am worthy to be
stoned. Notwithstanding, it had been thy part, thou wicked murderer, to deliver
me and my sons from the hands of the other Seditious, for I have wrought them
displeasure; but to thee have I done good: Howbeit our God will not alter, nor
change his judgments, which is, that I should fall into the sword of thy hand,
for that I made thee to enter into this City, wherein I offended God
grievously. If I had purposed to flee unto the Romans, could I not have done it
before I brought in thee? for at that time bearedst thou no rule over us, and
before we called in thee, Jehochanan with his sedition, was an offense unto
this City; Wherefore we persuaded all the Ancients of the Town, that thou
should be an aid unto us, to drive out our foes: but thou in whom we put our
trust, art become our enemy: yea, thou have been worse than they; for the other
put men to death privily, thou do it openly. Who is he that has strengthened
the power of the Romans? Art not thou he which have killed the Soldiers of God
in the midst of the City of Jerusalem? for few have been slain without. Titus
would have made peace with us, taking pity upon us, but thou did let and
hinder it, every day moving new Wars, and stirring new battles.

Titus gave charge to his soldiers, to lay no hand upon the Temple; but thou
have polluted and defiled the Temple of the Lord, shedding blood without
measure in the midst thereof. Titus went back from us upon the holy day of the
Lord, and ceased from fighting; saying, Go and observe your holy Feasts in
peace: but thou unhallowedst the Feasts of the Lord, and puttedst out the
continual fire with innocent blood? All these evils which thou have committed
(thou murderer) are imputed unto me, because I brought thee into the Town: Now
therefore this vengeance is appointed to mine age by the Lord God, and by thy
hands shall I go to my grave with sorrow, because I by my foolishness was an
actor in this mischief that is wrought by thee. Albeit now, thou wicked
Schimeon, in this that thou killest me, ere that mine eyes may see the burning
of the Temple, it pleases me very well. But what need thou, murderer, to
put my sons to death before my face? Why do thou not spare mine age? would
God that as I shall not see the burning of the Temple, so also I might not see
the blood of my children shed before my face. But what shall I do, when God
has delivered me into the hands of a most wicked man? We that were the
ancients of Jerusalem, abhorred Jehochanan because he murdered old men without
all reverence, but he slew no young men; thou destroyest old and young, great
and small, without any pity or mercy: Jehochanan mourned for the dead, and
buried them also; but thou playest upon instruments at their burials, singest
to the Lute, and soundest the Trumpet.

Then spoke he to Schimeons servant, who was ready with a sword in his hand,
and an axe, to kill him, and to cut off his head; s^ying, Go to now, and
execute Schimeon thy Master's commandment; Behead the sons in the sight of
their father, and let me hear the voice of thy cruelty in my sons, which
notwithstanding I forgive thee; for as I shall hear and see that, against my
will; so, I dare say, thou killest them not willingly. Would God that Schimeon
would suffer me to kiss my sons, and whiles I am yet living to embrace them
ere they die. But thou, gentle minister, in one thing show thy pity toward me,
that when thou have put my sons and me to Execution, separate not our bodies,
neither lay their corpse asunder from mine, but so, that my body may lie
uppermost and cover theirs, to defend them from the fowls of the air, lest they
devour my sons bodies; for it so may come to pass, that they may be buried: I
beseech thee also, that my mouth and lips when I am dead, may touch my sons
faces, that so I may both embrace and kiss them.

But what do I delay, or linger any longer, seeing the enemies deny me this, to
kiss them vvhiles we are yet alive? See thou therefore that our bodies be not
severed, and if Schimeon will not permit this, that our bodies may be joined in
this world, yet can he not let our Souls to be joined; for after I shall be
once dead, I doubt not but I shall see the Light of the Lord. His sons hearing
their fathers words, began to weep very sore with their father, who said unto
them, Alas my sons! Why weepye? What avail tears? Why do ye not rather go
before me, and I will follow as I may? For, what should I do now, seeing God
has given me into the hands of a most cruel Tyrant, who spares neither mine
age, nor your youth? But I trust we shall live together in the Light of the
Lord: And although I cannot be suffered now to see you enough, yet when we
shall come thither, we shall be satisfied with beholding one another.

Go ye therefore, my dear sons, and prepare us a place. O that I might go
before you: the Lord knows I would do it gladly. But ye my sons, marvel not
at this that is chanced unto us, for it is no new thing. The like happened before
this, in the time of the Chasmonanites, when as Antiochus by his wickedness
put to death the seven brethren, young men, in the sight of their mother, which
was a righteous and godly woman, who chanced to find this mercy at the Lords
hands, that she might ^sse her sons and embrace them, as they also kissed one
another before they died. Although they were put to death by the cruelty of the
uncircumcised King of the Macedonians: yet obtained they that, which is denied
at this day to us that are put to death by Schimeon, who ha^h ^he name of an
^sraelite, who bears also the Covenant of our father Abraham in his flesh.
And would to God that we might live in their ^nne or place of rest, which
albeit it will not be granted, yet we shall be their neighbors, seeing that we
also die for the Law of the Lord.

Therefore be of good comfort (my sons,) and lament not for my sake. For I
judge this my misery easier, and not so great as the calamity of Zedekiah,
whose sons were first killed, then his eyes put out by the King of Chaldea, and
he lived many years after: we are so much the more happy in my mind, because
we shall die together.

Then said Amittai to Schimeons servant which should kill him, Make speed, I
pray thee, and kill me first before my children die, then after kill them also,
that we may die together: for it is more expedient for us, than to see the
Temple of the Lord turned into a butchery or slaughterhouse to slay men in.

After cried he to God, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord God most High, which
dwell in the Highest, judge this Schimeon according to his works, reward him
according to his deservings. For thou art the God Almighty and dreadful, Let
not this Destroyer die therefore among the people of thy pasture: but that his
death may be severed from the death of other men, Let him die a horrible and
sudden death, Let him have no time to confess his sins, and to return himself
to thee, that thou may receive him (for thou were wont to receive them which
turn to thee by repentance): for he is not worthy of repentance, which has
spoiled and wasted many goodly things in thy Temple; besides that, has
murdered most holy men in the same.

To the intent therefore that thy judgments may be declared in him, I beseech
thee, make him to be taken Captive of his enemies, together with his wife,
children, and family, and all that ever love him. Neither give unto his soul
any part with the people of God; nor let his portion be with the just men in
thy Sanctuary; for he is unworthy of them, because he has not only sinned
himself, but has caused Israel to sin. Wherefore let his judgment and
sentence go forth from thy sight, that he may see his Wife, Children, and his
whole House, led into captivity and bondage before his face. Afterward, let him
die a strange death, such as never man heard of: Let him be killed by most
cruel men, which, when they have smitten him, may after quarter him also whiles
he is yet alive, and that he may see his children go into bondage. Let him also
be a curse before all that shall see him. Moreover, Let him perceive that my
words and destiny is better than his, when as I go unto Thee, in that great
Light which he shall be deprived of.

After these words, Amittai said to the servant who was appointed to kill him:
I beseech thee, Let me find so much favor at thy hands, that when thou have
slain my sons, thou would kill me with the same sword, while it is yet wet
with the blood of my sons, that our blood may be mingled; and this may be a
recreation to my soul. Kill me also in the fight of the Romans, that they may
avenge me and my sons, upon this most cruel Schimeon; they shall be witnesses
against him, that I was not their friend. But would God my affairs were all in
that state as they were before; for then should they perceive me to be an enemy
of Schimeons, and a friend of theirs. Would God I had withstood Schimeon at the
first earnestly, as I made War upon the Romans, that I might have avoided his
cruelty from the people of God. When he had said all these things, he prayed
before God Almighty, saying, O God which dwell in the Highest, thou only art
most mighty and fearful, open now the eyes of thy judgments, consider and
judge betwixt me and seditious Schimeon, whose malice is become unmeasurable
upon the people of GOD, that he which sheddeth the blood of them that fear thee
in the midst of the Temple, may be rebuked of thee with rebukings, according to
his works: make speedy vengeance and prolong not, and that for the deaths sake
of thy Saints; for thy judgments are the judgments of truth.

Then Schimeon gave commandment to four Cutthroats of his, that three of them
should kill Amittai's three sons before their Fathers face, and the fourth
should kill Amittai himself, and so the blood of the sons was mixed with the
blood of their father. Afterward Schimeons servant took the body of Amittai,
and laid it upon the bodies of his sons, as his desire was, then tumbled them
over the Walls: After that, Schimeon commanded that Chanacus the high Priest
should be put to death, whose body was cast unto the bodies of Amittai and his
Sons.

Aristus also the Scribe, one of the Noble men of Jerusalem, was killed at the
same time, and ^en just men more of his kindred and house, because the^ mourned
for the death of Aristus. It happened while Schimeon was killing of those ten,
certain substantial rich men passed by, and were wonderfully amazed when they
saw the thing, saying one to another, How long will God suffer the malice of
Schimeon, and will not search out the blood of just men, nor revenge them?
Certain seditious persons hearing this, told it unto Schimeon, who commanded
them to be apprehended, and murdered the same day.

After this, there passed by eleven of the Noble men of Jerusalem, which seeing
forty two innocents to be put to death by Schimeon, they lift up their eyes to
the heavens, and said, O Lord God of Israel, How long will thou hold thy hand,
and not execute thine anger against these transgressors of thy will? which
when Schimeon heard of, he commanded them to be apprehended, and killed them
with his own hands.

Eleazar the son of Anani the Priest, seeing the malice and wickedness of
Schimeon to be great, and that he destroyed the just and godly men of the City,
and that there was no hope left, he betook himself to the Tower of Jerusalem,
remained in it, and kept it with his. Jehudas also, a Captain over a thousand
men, which kept a Turret that Schimeon had made to put just and good men in,
got him upon the top of the walls, and cried to the Romans, if peradventure
they would deliver him, and the rest that were at Jerusalem. Wherefore he went
about to escape with his one thousand men that he had with him, and came
toward the Romans. But the Romans trusted them not, thinking he had spoken
this for deceit, wherefore they came not to help him. Schimeon upon this killed
Jehudas, and the thousand men which he had with him, and commanded their bodies
to be tumbled over the walls, in the sight of the Romans.

Then Schimeon cried to the Princes and Captains of the Romans, saying: Lo,
these are Jehudas company, these would have come forth unto you, take their
carcases to you, and revive them again if you can, or else deliver the rest
which yet live, out of our hands.

Gorion the Priest, father of Joseph the Priest, who wrote this Book to the
Israelites, was at that time in bonds and prison, in a certain Turret, a man of
great age, being a hundred and thirty, and no man could come unto him, nor from
him; Joseph therefore went to the Turret where his father was kept, to
understand how he did. He beheld also the Turret afar off, if he might espv his
father, and comfort him. And as he passed by looking up to the Turret, the
Seditious hurled a stone at him, which hit him on the head, that it overthrew
him. The Seditious seeing Joseph cast out of his Chariot, determined to go down
unto him; but when Titus had knowledge thereof, he sent a great strength to
help him up again, and to defend him, that his enemies did him no wrong.

The Seditious, going about to take Joseph, sounded a Trumpet very loud, which
when Joseph's mother that was kept in Schimeons house heard, being now 87 years
of age, asked what was the cause of the hurly burly; they told her that the
Seditious issued out at that shout against Joseph to take him: When she heard
that, by and by she run out of the house that she was kept in, and climbed up
the walls, as lustily as th^ugh she had been a young girl of 14 years old,
^ore her hair, and cried out, weeping, and saying before all them that were
present; Is my hope then come to this? Could I ever have looked that I should
have overlived my son, and that I should not be suffered to see him, and to
bury him? I had trusted he should have buried me, and that he should have been
a help to me in mine age; and when my whole Family by the Seditious was almost
made away, and extinguished, yet I said, This shall comfort me. Now therefore,
what shall I do, when I have none left to comfort me, of all my children that I
bare; for between the Seditious and the Gentiles our enemies, they have slain
18. sons that I had; and what shall I do now from henceforth, but covet death,
for I desire not to live now any longer? And how should I receive any
consolation, when I see my son dead, and I cannot bury him? Lord! that I might
dye by and by, for I cannot live any longer, since my son Joseph is now dead.

She went up yet further upon the walls, till she came to the Turret where her
husband was in prison, and stretched out her hands toward heaven, crying with
a loud voice, O my son Joseph, my son, Where art thou? come and speak unto me,
and comfort me. The Seditious hearing her, laughed her to scorn; but the Romans
when they heard her, and understood by Joseph that it was his mother, they wept
and lamented her case, and many of the Jews also that were in Jerusalem; but
they were fain to refrain it, lest they should be perceived of Schimeons cruel
cutthroats.

Then Joseph's mother said to the Seditious that were with her upon the walls,
Why do ye not kill me also, which bare Joseph my son, and nursed him with these
breasts? Ye enemies of the Lord have murdered him with other just men; Why kill
ye not me also? God be Judge betwixt me and you, who have killed my son
gui^tlesse: The Seditious answered her, Can thou not if thou list, tumble
down over the wall and die? we will give thee leave; When thou have done so,
the Romans shall take thee up, and bury thee honorably, because that thou art
Joseph's Mother, who is their friend. She answered, How shall I do this evil
unto my self, to kill my self, and constrain my soul to go forth of my body,
before that ^od does call it? if I should do so, I should have no hope left in
the World to come; for no body will bury them, whom they perceive to have
killed themselves.

These, and such like, while she reasoned wisely, the Seditious heard, and
mocked her: wherefore she wept the more abundantly, so that the Romans, and
some godly men, hearing her wisdom, could not abstain from weeping.

Joseph when he heard the voice of his Mother, got on armor, and approached to
the wall, accompanied with most valiant Romans, to defend him from the arrows
of the Jews, and spoke to his Mother.

Fear not, my dear Mother, nor take any thought for me, for I have escaped the
hands of the Seditious, God has not suffered me to come into their hands:
wherefore I have heard the words of these wicked counselors, that advised
thee to kill thy self, and thine answer to them, which before thou gave them
I knew thou would answer: God forbid, say I, God forbid, that Joseph's Mother
and the Wife of Gorion, should consent to the counsel of the wicked. Wherefore,
(my dear Mother) be content, and bear the yoke of the Seditious patiently, and
humble thy self before them: Neither strive against the miseries and calamities
of this time, which thou caust not alter, nor remedy. For they shall perish,
but we shall stand and continue.

There were certain men of Jerusalem at that time, that came to the Gates,
overcame the Ward, and got out with their Wives and Children, and so escaped to
the Romans, because they could no longer abide the famine, and the iniquity of
the Seditious. They were faithful Citizens, and of great authority; whom when
Joseph heard of, he so prevailed, that Titus spared them, and received them to
mercy.

For Joseph bare witness, and reported of them, that they were Noble men of
Jerusalem; wherefore the Romans received them, and gave them food and
sustenance; but certain of them could not brook nor take it, because of their
great hunger wherewith they had been long pined, and when the meat descended
down into their bellies, they died straight. Their little Children also, when
they saw bread, they fell upon it, and received it indeed with their teeth, but
they were not able to chew it, and died holding the bread between their teeth.

Titus seeing them die when they tasted the meat, had pity and compassion upon
them, and was very sorry, saying unto Joseph, What shall I do for thy people,
which as soon as they begin to eat, die straightway? Joseph answered, My Lord, I
remember I have seen this experience, that they which fast long, and after
would take meat, first they must drink a little sodden milk, or else eat of a
certain corn called Simel, sodden in milk, wherewith they strengthen their
bowels before they take meat; especially such as walked through wildernesses,
whose bowels were long empty, when they came to places inhabited and found
meat, they were wont to use this means.

Therefore Titus commanded his men to do as Joseph bad them, whereby many of
the Jews recovered, and many died of the flux. These Jews which escaped thus
out of Jerusalem to the Camps of the Romans had swallowed their Gold, Silver,
and precious Stones, to hide them, lest they should be found of the Seditious.

They therefore which recovered and brooked meat, when they would satisfy
Nature, they went alone out of the Camp, and after sought their Gold and Silver
and precious Stones, which were digested in their excrements, and so did they
every day. At length certain Aramites and Arabians, espying the Jews to use
this fashion, told it amongst their fellows, one to another, and made a
conspiracy to lay wait for the Jews, and whomsoever they got, they ripped their
bellies, to find the Gold and other Jewels which the Jews had hid there. And by
this means the Aramites and Arabians had murdered two thousand Jews. But when
Titus heard of this he was wonderful wroth, and commanded them to be
apprehended that had done this wicked deed, and to be put to death, whose goods
were given to the Jews that remained alive. They that were put to death for
this fact, were two thousand Aramites and Arabians together.

After this, Titus espied the Princes and Captains to have decked their Armor
with Gold and Silver, some of them also to wear Golden Scepters, and some
Scepters of Silver, with other Ornaments upon their heads: he called them
together, and said unto them, Lay away this vain ostentation, these things are
they that provoked the Aramites and Arabians to work this wickedness, against
these poor miserable Jews which fled forth unto us, that they might live under
our protection. The captains therefore and Princes of the Romans hearing Titus
commandment were obedient, and straight laid away from them those Ornaments of
Gold and Silver. Titus also gave commandment, that the rest of the Arabians and
Aramites shou d be banished the Camp, and that no man hereafter should commit
any such heinous deed against the Jews. Notwithstanding, when as any Aramite or
Arabian could get any Jew far out of the Camp that no man might see it, he
killed him.

Of the Romans in the Camp, no man either did, or said, any evil unto the Jews,
save certain ungodly Ruffians, which had learned of the Aramites and Arabians,
those evil and wicked pranks: for they also when they chanced to meet with any
Jew out of the Camp, if there were no man by, they killed him, and took away
his Gold and Silver that lay hid in his bowels.

When this came to Titus's ear, he commanded to make Proclamation in this wise:
Whosoever he be that has seen, heard, or known any thing of this horrible
deed, which is committed of certain Romans upon the Jews; or whosoever has
done any such thing himself, let him come and make relation unto Titus, which
if he do, the matter shall be forgiven him, if not, he shall bear the burden of
his own wickedness, and stand at his peril, if any thing be proved against him
hereafter.

Therefore certain Romans who were conscious to themselves that they had
committed the deed, and being afraid of Titus, reasoned with themselves thus:
If we do not confess unto him the truth, he will by his wisdom search out
these offenders, and punish them to death; Wherefore trusting unto Titus's
words of the Proclamation, they came all, whosoever had either done it himself,
or known other to do it; and declared it to Titus, saying, This have I done,
This have I known, This was I accessory unto, and have not hitherto made thee
privy thereunto. There were of them in number 320^ men, that made this
Confession; All those Titus commanded to be cast into hot Ovens, and to be
burned. This done, the Jews were more safe ever after in the Romans Camp
without any jeopardy, no man hurting them, either in word or deed; yea, if any
Roman found a Jew abroad wandering, he conducted him gently and peaceably into
the Camp.

There was a certain Scribe of Jerusalem at that time, a faithful man, whose
name was Menachen, son of Seruk the Scribe, whose Ancestors had served Esdras
the Scribe of worthy memory, in Babylon; and being a keeper of the East gate
which was in Jerusalem, upon that side toward the Brook Kidron, noted the
number of the dead that were carried forth to burying by that Gate, and found
they came to 115. thousand, eight hundred and eight persons, which were all of
the Nobles and Gentlemen; or, at least, of the substantiallest men of the Jews.

Titus upon a time ( Joseph being present) asked the question of those Princes
of the Jews which were fled unto him, saying, I charge you upon your fidelity,
to show me how many Jews be dead in the Town, since the time I besieged it to
this day. They gave him the number therefore, every man as far as they knew, of
the dead that were carried forth at all the gates to be buried, and the sum
amounted to 700575. besides them that every where lay dead in the houses and
streets; and besides them also that were slain in the Temple, and they that lay
here and there unburied: Which when Titus heard, he marvelled greatly, and
said, It is well known to the Lord God of heaven, that I am not the cause of
these evils, for I desired to be at peace with them oftener than once, but the
Seditious evermore would have nothing but War War.

CHAP. III.
AT that time the hunger began to wax very great in the Town', amongst the
Seditious, who never lackt before, for they took it always from other men by
force, till now at length they were distressed with hunger themselves, so that
after they had eaten up all their horses, they ate also their dung, and the
leather of the Chariots; neither was there left any green Boughs on the trees,
nor any herbs, that the Seditious might get to eat.

For the Romans had hewed down all the trees, and cut down all the bushes round
about Jerusalem, by the space of thirteen miles, so that the whole field and
territory of Jerusalem was spoiled, which heretofore was replenished with
mavelous goodly gardens, and most pleasant Paradises.

After that the Romans made up another Iron Ram, very terrible; this they
bended against the walls, to see if there were any soldiers left in the Town,
so stout as they were in times past: When the Captains of the Seditious saw
that, they issued out with their companies against the Romans, and slew very
many of them in that skirmish. Wherefore Titus said, It is not wisdom to fight
with them any more, but rather with the Rams to shake and batter the wall, for
they have no more but this wall left, and so we may bring our whole Army at
once upon them, and subdue the Seditious.

This counsel of Titus was liked of all the Princes and people. The Captains
of the Seditious mistrusting what the Romans intended, that they would be
occupied hereafter in battering the wall, began to build a countermure within,
overgainst the place where the Romans wrought with their Ram, which was in the
Plain by the Tomb of Jochanan the high Priest, for there was none other place
besides, that they might approach unto with their Rams; and there the Rams had
m^de two breaches in the two other walls before

The Seditious made this Countermure, because they were not able to burn the
Iron Ram as they had done before, being now almost famished, and so pined away,
that they could scarce stand upon their Legs. For if they had been so lusty as
they were before, and able to set the Engines on fire, the Romans had never
been able to win the Town, but should have been compelled to leave the assault,
as they were constrained to give over skirmishing and fighting. On a certain
time, when the Romans fled, the Seditious, pursuing and killing many of them,
said, The Romans will be weary, leave off their siege, and go their ways, that
we may dwell at liberty, and turn to the Lord our ^od. And when they returned
at this time (or at any other time) prosperously into the Town, they oppressed
the people more cruelly, exacting food of them, and saying, Give us meat, if ye
will not, we will eat your flesh, and your sons. But the Romans took courage to
themselves to fight stoutly, and said one to another; Let us stick to it hard,
and be valiant in our fights: it shall be a shame for us to flee from these
feeble and hunger-starved Jews, which are more like dead Images, than living
persons. Therefore they began most earnestly to set upon the walls, and to make
a battery: suddenly, they beat down a great part of that inner wall which the
Jews had newly erected, and gave a great shout, saying, Jerusalem is won, we
have gotten the Town. But when they looked a little further, they espied
another countermure raised over against the breach: Wherefore the Jews through
the Town gave also a great shout, and sounded their Trumpets, rejoicing that
they had another new Countermure for that which was battered down. The same was
in Captains Jehochanans Ward. The Romans seeing the countermure, and hearing
the Jews make such triumphs in the Town, were much astonished, all their joy was
dashed and turned into dumps, so that they could not tell what they should do
with that stubborn people of Jerusalem, which had done them such damages. The
Romans set upon the Town again another way, whom Titus willed to remove the
Engine, and to bend it to the new wall, whiles it was yet green and unsettled,
saying; Let us batter it and we shall see it fall by and by, and then shall we
enter the Town. The Roman Captains followed not Titus counsel, but scaled the
walls which they had battered. The Jews therefore defending their Countermure
^ought with the Romans within the breach, repulsed them from the wall and the
Town; and so having abated much the strength of the Romans, returned to their
quarters.

Then said some of the Romans, We will never besiege this Town any longer, for
we shall not be able to get it while we live. And therefore let us break up and
depart, before we be all destroyed with this siege: for except we do so, we
shall be consumed therein. Titus seei^g his soldiers to make so hard a matter
of the winning of the Town, called them all together, and said unto them; Tell
me now, ye Roman Captains, do ye not know that all wars and other business
whatsoever they be, are more hard, and require greater diligence in the end,
then in the beginning? In which who so travel, if they faint in the end, do
they not labor in vain? Even as your labor shall be in vain, if ye give over
the siege now.

Consider a Ship, when it has compassed the whole Sea, and is now ready to
arrive at the shore, being troubled with a Tempest, if the Mariners should then
be negligent, the Ship may be easily lost, and all they which are in it perish,
the Mariners disappointed of their purpose, in that they shall not attain unto
the place which they coveted to come unto.

Likewise builders, if they finish not their work, but leave off before they
make an end, is not all their labor lost and spent in vain? Husbandmen also,
if they till their ground, and then sow it with seed, shall they not lose their
pains, unless they will also mow it?

In like manner, you have fought very long against this City, many valiant
Captains and worthy men have been slain, and now you may see the strongest
walls of the Town are broken and made equal with the earth, the people your
adversaries consumed with hunger, pestilence and sword: what shall it then
avail you all that ever you have done, if you slack your diligence, and will
not finish the work of the siege? Have ye not then employed your labor in
vain? And why should this new wall so dismay you? Yea, why do you not prepare
your selves to beat down this new Wall, which yet is slenderer then the other
three that ye have cast down? If so be ye would determine to leave off the
siege, had it not been better for you to have done it at the beginning, whiles
your Army was yet whole? Now, when as you are few, and your most valiant
Soldiers slain, why do you not rather choose to dye then to live?

Did not you once enter this Town, in the time of Nero Caesar, and defend the
honor of his name? now therefore when Vespasian my father reigns, who is not
only of greater power then Nero, but also more gentle toward you then ever was
Nero, If you should abate and slack your endeavor and diligence, it should be
to your great shame and reproach.

Why take ye not example of these Jews valiantness, whom now already, sword,
pestilence, and famine bath wasted, so that they have no hope left:
nevertheless, they fight still, and never give over. Do you not see every day,
how some of them issue out of their Town, and boldly assail you, not without
jeopardy of their lives, insomuch that oftentimes they die for it? Which things
they do for none other cause, then to get them praise and renown for their
great prowess.

When Titus had well debated these and such like things, in the ears of his
soldiers, a certain valiant man named Sabianus, said unto his fellows, Who so
dare go to assault these Jews, let him come hither to me, that we may fulfill
the Command of Caesar's Son our Lord and Captain. And forthwith he took his
Target, and his drawn Sword in his hand, made toward the Town with a eleven
tall fellows following him, whose valiantness and courage Titus wondered at
greatly.

The Jews kept their ward upon that part of the wall, where the Romans had a
repulse of late: so when they saw Sabianus and his company draw fast toward
them, they began to assail them with stones and arrows; but Sabianus setting
light at them, charged home upon the Jews. Shortly one of the Jews met with
him, and gave him such a blow, that he felled him to the ground; yet he gat up
again, and fought for all that manfully; and, as one that had rather leave his
life, than the reputation of his valor, he did fight till another Israelite
came and ^lew him outright. Three also of his fellows were killed fighting
valiantly in that place; the other 8. returned to the Camp, so sore wounded,
that they died the next day every one. Further, other Romans seeing Sabianus
act, and studying to do the like: the next night they took counsel about 20. of
them, and agreed to assault the Town.

This their enterprise when they declared to the Standard Bearer of Titus, he
and many other of the Romans went with them. They all scaling together, and
clammering up the breaches, gat up upon the wall, sounding a Trumpet, and gave
a great shout. The Jews being at their rest, as men oppressed with hunger and
weariness; and hearing this Alarm and shout of the Romans, were wonderfully
amazed, not knowing what the matter was, or how they should defend themselves.
Titus also heard the shout: and when he had enquired the matter, he chose out
certain valiant men, and drew toward the breaches with them. In the mean
season, the day was broken, and the Jews rising from their sleep, espied Titus,
upon the walls, and marvelled thereat greatly. The Romans therefore gathering
toward Titus, came very thick into the Town, some by the breaches of the wall,
and other some through the vault, whereby the Jews were wont now and then to
make irruptions, and to recover themselves within the Town again. The Jews set
themselves in array against the Romans in the very entry of the Temple: upon
whom the Romans ran with their drawn swords; for they had no other armor, nor
the Jews neither, being so hastily taken at such a sudden. The battle waxed
very hard, and wonderful vehement on both parties, the like was never seen in
Jerusalem, nor heard of, in any time: for every man clave hard to his next
fellow, and no man could flee on any side. Wherefore the battle waxt strong,
with clamours and shouts on both parties: now the joyful shouts of the
vanquishers, now the wailings on the other side, of them that were put to the
worse. The Romans encouraged and exhorted one another to fight, saying, This is
the day which we have long looked for. The Jews again took heart unto them,
saying, It boots not to flee hence; but, for the glory of the Lord and his
Temple, let us die ^anfully, as necessity constrains us: and so doing, we
shall be counted for sacrifices and offerings. Which earnestness on both
sides, filled the entry of the Court of the Lord with blood, that it stood like
unto a pool or pond. And that fight continued from the morning, till that time
four days.

Then a certain soldier of Titus's, whose name was Golinus, a valiant man, as
was ever amongst all the company of Kurtus, seeing the Jews prevail, and to
have the upper-hand of the Romans, which now had left off fighting, and fled,
the Jews pursuing them: in a rage he ran against them, and met them at the wall
which Herod builded, called Antochia, drove them back, and made them to take
the entrance of the Temple again, where, preasing into the forces of the Jews,
he was wounded of a certain Jew. And when he perceived himself wounded, he
would have lept back, but stumbled at a slone in the pavement of the Court of
the Temple, and fell down, where he fought yet still, till a certain Jew killed
him outright. He fought indeed very boldly and valiantly, but unwarily; for he
considered not his ground wherein he had to do with the Jews.

Titus waiting for Golinus return, and hearing him to be slain, would have gone
himself to rescue the rest of his that were with him: but his men would not
suffer him, fearing lest he himself should be slain. The Jews therefore got the
upper hand that day, and slew very many Romans in that battle, spoiling them
also (which were killed) of their armor.

These were the names of the Jews that made the skirmish: Of the Company of
Captain Jehochanan, Elasa, and Iphtach; of Schimeons Company, Malchiah, and
Jaicob, a Prince of the Edomites; and Arsimon and Jehuda, of the Company of
Eleazar, the son of Anani. These with their Companies made this slaughter of
the Romans in the entrance of the Temple, and drove them back to Antochia,
where they kept them up that they could not get out. Wherefore when Titus
perceived that the Antochia was in the Romans way, and hindered them, he caused
it to be razed and pulled down to the ground; These things were done upon the
fifth day of May, the third month, upon the even of the solemn Festival day of
weeks, which otherwise is called Pentecost, and that was the 14th month from
the beginning of Titus's siege against this City.

Shortly after, upon the third day of the Feast of weeks, the Jews as many as
were at Jerusalem, kept holy days, and celebrated the Feast. Titus taking with
him Joseph the son of Gorion, went into the house of the Sanctuary, where the
Seditious and soldiers of the Jews were gathered together; and called unto
Jehochanan, and the rest of the Captains of the Seditious, to whom he spoke by
the means of Joseph, being his Interpreter, in this wise.

What has this Temple offended thee (thou seditious Jehochanan?) Why have thou
brought upon it this great evil and mischief? If so be thou trust so much to
thy strength, Come forth to us with thy men into the fields, and we shall fight
with thee thy fill. Is not this your solemn Festival Day? Why then will ye
fight in the place where ye should offer your sacrifice? Ye pollute and defile
the Sanctuary of your God, and his Name, and we spare it, knowing it is the
House of God: And the only cause why we make War upon you, is your stubborn
stiffe-neckednesse, that you will not submit your selves to us, whom God has
given the Dominion unto, whose will ye labor in vain to disappoint. Either
therefore if ye will fight no more, humble your selves under our subjection,
that ye may save your lives: or else, if ye be determined still desperately to
fight with us, then get you forth from hence, and let us go into the fields,
there to set our battles in array. Why will you defile your Sanctuary, and
hinder the worshipping of your God?

Much more besides this spoke Titus, partly blaming their stubbornness, in
that they had defiled their Temple, and yet ceased not to pollute it more and
more; partly with fair words and gentleness, exhorting them to yield,
admonishing them not to resist so mighty an Army, when as they could not do it
without danger of utter destruction.

These and many other things Joseph expressed in Hebrew to the people, as Titus
willed him, but the Jews answered never a word; for Jehochanan had given
charge, that no man should speak.

Then Captain Jehochanan answered Titus himself, saying, We can offer no kind
of sacrifice more acceptable to God, than to devote, hazard, and abandon our
own bodies and blood, for his Names sake: Wherefore we will die freemen in
this our Town, and will never come in bondage to serve you.

Titus made him answer by Joseph, saying, This your City, I grant, is a holy
City, and your Temple is most holy, which no man does deny: but ye have
grievously sinned, in that ye have polluted the Temple of the Lord your God, by
shedding in it innocent blood of Saints, and the Priests of God, with other
most godly and holy men.

By what reason can ye then say, that ye shall be accepted for sacrifices, and
offerings before God? yea rather, God abhors and detesteth you utterly; when
as he requires in his sacrifices, that they should have no default nor spot:
but ye are all bespotted, so that no sound place is left in you.

For tell me, (I pray you) if there be any more abominable spot in man, than
sin, when he transgresses the Law of God, as ye have done; Neither is there
any wisdom or intelligence in you. For wise men would wisely bear with the
calamities of times, and know the courses of things. How then are ye so foolish
to say that ye are an acceptable and well pleasing sacrifice to God, when as ye
resist the will of God so proudly? But thou Jehochanan, and the rest of the
Seditious Captains that are with thee. Tell me, Art thou not a mortal man,
subject unto the griefs and vexations of this life, and worms meat as we be?
Should he not displease thee, that should take away and violate a Table or such
like thing, prepared to the honor of thee? and would thou take it in good
part, and hold him excused that should so do unto thee? Why then have thou
taken away the sacrifices of thy God out of his Temple, and have stuffed it
with innumerable dead bodies? Who can see or hear this, and abstain from
weeping, when he shall know so many Israelites to have suffered death by thee,
and Schimeon, and Eleazar thy fellows? Neither can thou yet apply thy mind to
cease and leave off thy malice, and yet nevertheless perswadest thy self, that
God is with thee, and that thou with thy fellows, art an acceptable and
well-pleasing sacrifice unto God, nothing perceiving that your sins separate
you, and keep you asunder more strongly than any brazen wall.

It is true, I confess, that it becomes every valiant man, to stand stoutly
in the defense of his people, City, and Country. For it is better to die
valiantly, than to come into the subjection of his enemy that goes about to
pluck him from his Religion, and drive him out of his Country. But I came not
hither for that intent, to draw you from your Religion, nor to banish you out
of your Land, or else to destroy it and your Cities: but this is the cause of
my coming hither, to offer you peace, and to make a League with you, that ye
should take upon you our yoke, and be our subjects as ye were before. Where did
you ever hear of a people in all the World, that has showed themselves so
merciful and gentle, both toward other, and toward you, as we have done?

Hannibal the Captain of the Carthaginians, after he had wasted our Country,
and at length was taken by us, Was he not had in great honor and reputation of
us, and with such civility handled, that we made him King of his people? And so
dealt we with Antiocbus the Macedonian, and other Kings that we took prisoners.
Ye brag that ye keep the Vigils and Feasts of your God: Why then follow ye not
the example of Jechoniah your King? who to save the Temple of your God from
destruction, and lest your people also should be led away into bondage, or be
destroyed with the sword, yielded himself and his house into the hands of the
King of the Chaldeos. Why spare you not your own lives, your City, and
Sanctuary?

Now therefore hearken unto me, and I will make a League with you before the
God of this House, who shall be a witness betwixt me and you; by whom I swear,
that I will never break this League, neither do you any harm, nor spoil your
goods, nor lead you away captive, nor yet constitute any Ruler over you, but a
Jew of your own Nation; even Joseph the Priest which is with me, shall be your
Prince, if you think it good; and all the faithful men also which are with me,
shall return home again; ye shall inhabit your own Land, ye shall have the use
of the fruits thereof with peace and quietness, without any corruption, or
alteration of the service of your God; wherefore credit me, and make a League
with me. And that you may trust me the better, ye shall have pledges, Joseph a
Nobleman of your own Country, and other Princes and Noblemen of the Romans.
Come forth therefore and treat a peace with us, bow your shoulders, and humble
your necks to serve us, like as all other Nations do, and as you have done your
selves in the time of Nero Caesar, that ye may live and not be destroyed
keeping your Religion safe and sincere.

Joseph the Priest hearing the words of Titus and his clemency, in that he was
minded to spare the Jews, burst out aloud and wept in the presence of the
Captains, and of the Seditious very bitterly: but they nothing regarded it.

Joseph therefore seeing that Titus could do nothing with the Seditious, said
unto their Princes, I marvel nothing that this City tends to desolation, and
destruction, for I know the end of it is at hand. But this is it that I marvel
most, that ye have read in the Book of Daniel, and understand it not, which is
now fulfilled in all points, and yet never a one of you does mark it: The
continual sacrifice is already ceased a good while ago, the anointed Priest is
cut away, and put down. These things though they be most manifest, yet your
hearts cannot believe them.

And many other words spoke Joseph, full of admonition and consolation, but the
Jews refused to hear him: When he had made an end therefore, and the Seditious
had so hardened their necks, Titus turned him, and departed out of Jerusalem,
saying, Let us go hence, lest their sins destroy us. Wherefore he pitched his
Tents without the City, in the same place where he encamped at first. For he
was afraid both for himself and his Army, lest they should be circumvented and
closed in, and slain cruelly in so great City as that was.

Certain of the Priests of that time, and of the Nobles of the Town, with other
godly men, did wisely provide for themselves, and came forth to Titus,
submitting themselves to his mercy, and were received of him peaceably with
great honor; whom Titus commanded to be conducted into the land of Goshen,
where in times past the Israelites dwelt in the days of Jacob their Father,
and Joseph Lord of Egypt.

Thither sent he them, and gave it them in possession, to them and to their
heirs for ever after; commanding a company of the Chaldees safely to conduct
them, till they came to the land of Goshen.

Titus directed his letter also to the Roman President which was set over
Egypt, to take pity of the Jews that he had placed in the land of Goshen, to
sustain and succor them, and to see that no Roman nor other should do them
harm, or annoy them by any manner of means. Many other also of the Jews coveted
to go forth of Jerusalem, but they were disappointed by the Seditious, that
they could not do as they intended. And who can tell whether they were
entangled with their own sins, and destined to destruction with their seditious
brethren, when as their hands also were polluted with the cruelty and iniquity
of the Seditious? Wherefore the Seditious closed up all the walls about the
Temple, that none of the Jews which were in Jerusalem might get out to Titus.

When Titus knew that many of the Jews were desirous to flee unto him, and
could not because of the Seditious, he went again to the place where he was
before, and Joseph with him: Whom when the people saw to be there with Titus,
they fell a weeping, and said unto him, We acknowledge our sins, and the
transgression of our fathers, we have swerved out of the way, against the Lord
our God; for we see now the mercy and gentleness of Titus, the son of Caesar,
and that he takes pity upon us; but what can we do, when it is not in our
power to flee unto him, because of the cruelty of the Seditious? The Se^itious
hearing them talking with Joseph, in the presence of Titus, and that they spoke
reveren^ly of him, and honored his father, calling him Lord, they ran upon
them with their drawn swords to kill them; Then cr^ed they unto Titus, Dear
Lord and Master, rescue us: The Romans therefore, made speed to deliver them
out of the hands of the Se^itious; So rose there a fray in the midst of the
Temple, between the Romans, and the Jews; The Romans fled into the place called
Sanctum Sanctorum, which was the holiest of all, and the Jews followed after,
and slew them even there.

Titus standing without, cried unto Jehochanan, and said unto him: Hear
thou, Jehochanan, I^ not thy (...) yet great enough? Wilt thou never make an
end of mischief? Where is the honor of thy God? Is it not written in the Law
of thy God, of the Sanctum Sanctorum, that no Stranger ought to come at it, but
only the high Priest, and that but once a year, because it is the holiest of
all? And now, how dare thou be s^ bold to kill those that are escaped unto
it? And how dare you ^ed the blood of the uncircumcised therein, whom ye abhor,
and yet mix their blood with yours? The Lord your GOD is my witness^, that I
would not have this House destroyed; but your own wicked works, and your own
hands do pull it d^wn. And would God you would receive your peace, which if it
were once done, we would honor this House of the Sanctuary and Temple of the
Lord: yea, we would depart away from you. But your hearts are hardened like
Iron, and your necks and foreheads, are become obstinate as Brass, to your own
undoing. For ye shall carry your own sins, and die in the Land of the Romans;
I and my fathers house are innocent and guiltless of your death; as the Lord
and his Temple, in whose presence we stand, shall bear us witness this day.

But when he saw that none of the Seditious gave any regard to his words, he
chose out of the Romans, thirty thousand valiant fighting men, and gave them
commandment to take and occupy the entry of the Temple, which is a holy Court,
and determined to go with them himself; but his Nobles would not suffer him,
but willed him to remain upon a high place, where he might behold his soldiers
fight: and when they see thee afar off, their hearts shall be comforted, and
they shall fight according as thou will wish them: but come not at the entry of
the Temple thy self, lest thou be destroyed amongst other.

Titus followed the counsel of his Captains, and went not out at that time with
his men to the battle. He made chief Captains of that host of thirty thousand,
one Karilus and Rostius, two great Commanders, who had order to set upon the
Jews that night, when they should be asleep with weariness.

The Romans therefore doing after his commandment set upon the Jews, but the
Jews having intelligence of the matter, kept diligent watch, and withstood the
Romans all the night. But the Romans were not hasty to fight in the dark,
fearing lest it might turn to their own harm. As soon therefore as it was day,
the Jews divided themselves, and bestowed their Companies at the gates of the
entrance, and fought like men.

Karilus and Rostius beset the Temple round about, that not one of the Jews
might escape out, and so the battle increased between them for the space of
seven days; sometimes the Romans getting the upper hand of the Jews, driving
them within the entrance: sometime the Jews encouraging themselves, made the
Romans retire, and pursued them to the walls of the Antochia: in this manner
fought they these seven days.

Afterward the Romans turned back from the Jews, and would not fight hand to
hand with them any more. Then Titus commanded, the walls of the Antochia to be
pulled down further, that there might be place for all his host to enter.

The famine in the mean season grew more grievous, so that no food was left.
For the Jews began now to issue out, and steal Horses, Asses, and other beasts,
whatsoever they could catch, even out of the Romans Camp, that they might
dress them some meat, and sustain their lives; which they doing oftentimes, at
length the Romans perceived it, and were wonderfully displeased at the matter,
wherefore they set Watch and Ward round about the Camp, lest by the deceit of
the Jews, they should be spoiled of their cattle. So after that, the Jews could
steal no more thence.

Afterward notwithstanding, they armed themselves, and issued out at the East
Gate, and brake the Wall that Titus had raised for his own safety, lest the
Jews should issue out upon a sudden, and come upon him at unawares. A sort of
tall fellows therefore of the youth of the Jews, i^ued out at the breaches of
the wall, and got up quickly to the Mount Olivet, where they found Horses,
Mules, Asses, and much other cattle; and slaying their Keepers, they drove them
before them with great shouts into the Town. The Romans perceiving it, pursued
them. Wherefore the young men divided themselves into two Bands: the one to
drive the booty, and the other to resist the Romans. So there was a sore fight
between them; but the Jews got the upper-hand, and went their ways clear with
the prey toward Jerusalem.

For the Jews came forth, constrained by the necessity of hunger, and fought
for their living: the Romans had no cause to fight, save only for shame, to see
their cattle driven away before their eyes; for otherwise they put not their
lives in jeopardy to fight unto death, as the Jews did, yet there was many of
the Romans slain in that fight.

The Jews while the Romans pursued them in vain, got into the Town with their
spoil and prey, and straightway turned upon the Romans, and drove them back,
pursuing them again till they came almost to Titus's Camp, which when the other
Romans saw, they iss^ed forth to the rescue of their fellows, and pursued those
young men, either to kill them, or take them, albeit they escaped to the ^own
without any harm, save that they took a Boy, and brought him unto Titus. He
that took this Lad, was called Pornus.

So the Romans prevailed against the Jews at that time, and for a certain token
of the Victory, they had this young Jew prisoner. Pornus that took him, was had
in great estimation for that act, of Titus and all the Romans.

Titus apparrelled the boy, and committed him to Josephus to keep. This boy had
a brother amongst them that escaped into the Town, a vile personage,
evil-favoured, and of a low stature, his name was Jonathan. He seeing his
brother taken prisoner, comes forth of the Tomb of Jochanan the High Priest
over against the Romans, and cried unto Titus, and to all the Army, saying, If
there be ever a man among you, let him come forth unto me, here will I abide
him, and fight with him upon this ground: and ye shall know this day, whether
the Romans or the Jews be the better men.

The Romans despised him, yet d^st they not meddle with him, but said, ^f we
kill him, we shall never be counted the better men for such an act, and if he
should kill any of us, it should be a great dishonor to be slain of a wretched
captive. Jonathan said to the Romans, How much is the manhood of the Romans to
be regarded in our eyes? Have not you been slain and put to flig^t by us? What
were you then if bands and companies of the Gentiles came not every day to aid
you? If they had not refreshed you, we had long ago eaten you up. We have
destroyed our selves, one another, with civil Wars, so that we are but few
left; but what are you? Who is so hardy of the best of you all, to come and
declare his strength, and to fight with me? I am one of the meanest, and
outcasts of the Jews: Pick you out the chiefest and valiantest man amongst you
all, and you shall know by and by, whether part is more valiant. When Jonathan
had spoken thus proudly, there came forth one of the most valiantest soldiers
of the Romans, whose name was Pornus the same that had taken the brother of
this Jonathan, and brought him to Titus; he came no sooner at Jonathan, but he
was killed of him straightway, leaving behind him a double and differing
inheritance to Jonathan, and the Romans; to Jonathan a same of fortitude and
valiantness, to the Romans of shame and reproach.

When Jonathan had slain the Roman, the Jews changed his name, and called him
Jehonathan, by an honorable name, and gave him a Scept^r of dominion in his
hand: But Jehonathan when he had gotten the victory, gave not the power to God,
but ascribed it to his own prowess, and became very proud withal; he was not
content with one victory, but would yet provoke the Romans, railing at them,
and calling for another valiant Champion to be sent him, that I may kill him
(says he) and declare my force upon him; and even as he said so, one of the
Romans whose name was Pornan, struck him through with an arrow at unawares, and
killed him; by whose example ye may perceive, It is every man's part chiefly to
take heed, that when they overcome their enemies, they rejoice not overmuch,
nor wax proud for the matter; for, who knows what end they shall have
themselves?

These things done, the Jews seeing the walls of the Temple, and three walls
that compassed the Town, to be razed and pulled down, knowing also that they
had no help left, nor any thing to trust unto, they consulted what was best to
be done. There was a great house joining upon the side of the Temple, that King
Solomon had builded, of a great height, whose walls also the Kings of the
second Temple had raised on height, and had decked it with Timber of Fur, and
Cedar-trees. The Jews went and anointed every where the Cedar Timber of the
house with brimstone and pitch abundantly: So when the Romans came again to the
Temple to assault the Jews, and pursued them unto that Palace: They entered the
Palace after the Jews, who went out again another way, and some climbed up to
the battlements of the house, others set up ladders to scale it: Then rejoiced
they wonderfully, saying, The Palace is taken, now have the Jews no pla^e left
to flee unto for refuge. Thus when the Romans had gotten the Palace, and the
h^use was full of them, a certain Jew a young man, vow^ng himself deserately to
die, went and shut up the Palace, and set fire on the gates anointed before
with brimstone and pitch, and straightway side-walls of the house, and the
whole building began to be on a light fire, so that the Romans had no way to
escape, because the fire compassed the house on every side.

The Jews also stood in harness round about the House, le^t any of the Romans
should escape. Wherefore so many of the Romans as entered into the House, were
destroyed with the fire, which was twenty two thousand men of war. Titus
hearing the cry of the Romans that perished in the fire, made speed with all
his men to come and rescue them, but he could not deliver them out of the fi^e,
it burnt so vehemently; wherefore Titus and his men wept bi^terly. The Romans
that were above upon the House, when they saw their Master Titus weep, and the
fire to be between them, that neither could come to o^e another, they cast
themselves down head^ong from the battlements of the house, which was very
high, and died, saying, We will die in Titus's presence, to get us a name
thereby.

The Jews kept the gates of the Palace, and if they perceived any man go about
to escape out of the fire, or to come down off the battlements, them they
killed with their swords.

In that fire was a certain great Commander, of the stock of Kings, whose name
was Longinus, to whom the Jews cried, and flouted him, saying, ^ome hither unto
us, that thou mayes^ save thy life, and not be destroyed: but he durst not go
out at the gate, fearing lest the Jews would kill him. Wherefore he drew out
his sword, and thrust himself through before their faces.

Another great Commander also was in that fire, whose name was Artorius, who
looking forth from the top of the house, saw one of his dear friends by Titus,
which was called Lucius, to whom Artorius called, saying, My dear friend
Lucius, get on thy Armor and come hither, that I may leap down upon thee, and
thou may receive me. If I dye, I make thee my heir, if thou dye, thy
children shall inherit my goods. Wherefore Lucius ran and held his lap open at
the house side, and Artorius leapt down, and light upon him with such weight,
that they both died therewith. Titus commanded the covenant that they two made
before their death, to be written on a sword with blood, and their friendship
to be noted in the Chronicles of the Romans, that it might be an example to all
men to learn true friendship by: At that time therefore the Jews revenged
themselves meetly well upon the Romans. The fire burnt till it came to the
Chiskijahu King of J^hudah; and had almost taken the Temple of the Lord, which
the Romans seeing, fled out of the Town, and got them to their tents, a great
part of them being destroyed by the cruelty of the Jews, so that few of them
remained. The rest therefore lay still in their siege round about the Town,
saying, We shall not be able to win the Town by the sword, but rather we must
be fain to drive them to yield by famine, wherefore they compassed it on every
side: In the Town was now no victuals left.

There was a certain rich woman at Jerusalem, of a Noble House also, whose Name
was Miriam. Her dwelling was beyond Jordan; but when she perceived the wars to
grow more and more in the time of Vespasian, she came up with her neighbors to
Jerusalem, bringing with her not only her men servants, and women servants, and
all her whole family, but also her goods and riches, which were very great.

When the hunger was grievous at Jerusalem, and the Seditious went from house
to house to seek meat; they came also to this woman's house, and took away from
her by force, all that ever she had, and left her nothing remaining. By this
means she was oppressed with very great hunger, so that she wished her self out
of the world, but her time was not yet come to die: wherefore that she might
slack her hunger, and sustain her self, she began to scrape in the chafe and
dust for beasts dung, but could find none. She had one son, and when she saw
the famine wax greater and greater upon her, she laid aside all woman-hood and
mercy, and took upon her an horrible cruelty: For when she heard her boy weep,
and ask for meat, which she had not to give him, she said unto him, What shall
I do my son? For the wrath of God has environed the whole City, in every
corner thereof famine reigns; without the City the sword kills up all,
within we stand in fear of the Seditious; our enemies prevail without, in the
Town are fires, burnings, and ruins of houses, famine, pestilence, spoiling
and destroying, so that I cannot feed thee my son. Now therefore my son, if I
should die for hunger, to whom should I leave thee being yet a child? I hoped
once that when thou should come to man's estate, thou should have
sustained mine age with meat, drink, and cloth, and after when I should die, to
bury me honorably, like as I was minded to bury thee, if thou should have
died before me. But now my son, thou art as good as dead already, for I have no
meat to bring thee up withal, because of this great famine, and cruelty of the
enemies, both within and without: If thou should die now amongst others,
thou should have no good nor honorable Tomb, as I would wish thee: wherefore
I have thought good to choose thee a sepulcher, even mine own body lest thou
should die, and dogs eat thee in the streets; I will therefore be thy grave,
and thou shall be my food: And for that, that if thou had lived and grown to
man's estate, thou ought by right to have nourished me, and fed me with thy
flesh, and with it sustain mine age, before that famine devour thee and thy
body be consumed, render unto thy mother, that which she gave unto thee, for
thou came of her, and thou shall return into her. For I will bring thee into
the self same shop, in the which the breath of life was breathed into thy
nostrils; forasmuch as thou art my well beloved son, whom I have loved always
with all my strength: Be therefore meat for thy mother, and ignominy and
reproach to the Seditious, that by violence have taken away our food. Wherefore
my son hear my voice, and sustain my soul and my life, and go to the end that
is determined for thee by my hands, thy lot be in the garden of Eden, and
Paradise; be thou meat for me, and a rebuke and shame to the Seditious, that
they may be compelled to say, Lo, a woman has killed her son, and has eaten
him.

So when she had thus spoken to her son, she took the child, and turning her
face away lest she should see him dye^ she killed him with a sword, and after
cut his body into certain pieces, whereof some she roasted, some she sod, and
when she had eaten of them, she laid up the rest to keep.

The savor of the flesh roasted, when it came out in^o the streets to the
people they said one to another: See, here is the smell of roast meat. Which
thing came to the know edg of the Seditious at length, who went into the house
of the woman, and (...) roughly u^o her, Why should thou have meat to live
with, and we dye for hunger? The woman made them answer, and said unto them, Be
not displeased, I beseech you, with your handmaid for this, for you shall see I
have reserved part for you. Si^ you down therefore, and I will bring it you,
that ye may taste thereof, for it is very good meat. And by and by she covered
the table, and set before them part of the child's flesh, saying, Eat I pray
you, here is a child's hand, see here is his foo^ and other parts, and never
report that it is another Woman's Child, but my own only Son that ye knew with
me; him I bare, and also have eaten part, and part I have kept for you. When
she had spoken, she burst out and wept, saying, O my Son my Son, how sweet wast
thou to me whiles thou yet livedst, and now at thy death also thou a^t sweeter
to me than honey. For thou have not only fed me in this most grievous famine,
but have defended me from the wrath of the Seditious, wherewith they were
incensed toward me, when the smell of the meat brought them into my house. Now
therefore are they become my friends, for they sit at my Table, and I have made
them a feast with thy flesh.

After she turned her to the Seditious, and bad them eat, and satisfy
themselves: for why (says she) should ye abhor my meat which I have set before
you: I have satisfied my self therewith, why therefore do you not eat of the
flesh of my son? Taste and see how sweet my sons flesh is, I dare say ye will
say, It is good meat. What needs pity? Ought ye to be more moved therewith
then a Woman? If ye will in no wise eat of the sacrifice of my son, when as I
have eaten thereof my self, shall not this be a shame for you, that I should
have a better heart, and greater courage then you? Behold, I have prepared a
fair Table for you, most valiant men, why eat ye not? Is it not a good feast
that I have dressed for you? and it is your will that I should make you this
feast. It had been my part rather to have been moved with pity of my Son, then
yours: and how chances it therefore that you are more merciful than I? Are ye
not they that spoiled my house, and left me no kind of food, for me and my Son?
Are ye not they that constrained me to make you this Feast, notwithstanding the
greater hunger that I have? Why then eat ye not thereof, when as ye were the
Authors and causers that I did this deed? The Jews hearing this matter, were
wonderfully ^mitten in sadness; yea, even the Governors of the Seditious began
to stoop when they heard of this, so that they all in a manner desired death,
they were so amazed at this horrible Act. Many therefore of the common people
stole out in the night forth of Jerusalem with all their substance to the
Romans Camp, and showed Titus of this. Who wept thereat, and was sorry for the
matter exceedingly, holding up his hands to Heaven, and crying, Thou Lord God
of the world, God of this house, to whom all secrets are known, which also
know my heart, that I came not against this City as desirous of Wars, but
rather of Peace, which I ever offered them; but yet the Citizens thereof
evermore refused it, although I oftentimes entreated them. And when they
destroyed one another by their civil dissension, I would have delivered them,
but I found them always like most fierce and cruel beasts, nothing sparing
themselves. And this mischief is come now so far, that a woman has eaten her
own flesh, being driven thereunto by most extreme necessity. I have heard, and
my forefathers have told me, of all the power that thou have exercised in times
past toward them and their Fathers, how thy Name dwelt amongst them. For thou
broughtest them out of Egypt, with a strong hand, and a str^tched forth Arm,
out of the House of bondage, to whom also thou dividedst the Sea, leadest them
through it dry, and drownedst their Enemies in the water; after conductedst thy
people through the wilderness, and fed'st them with bread from Heaven, thou
causedst Quails to fly unto them, and broughtest out water out of the rock for
them. At length thou broughtest them into this holy Land by great and terrible
Miracles and Wonders: For thou dryedst up the water of Jordan, and made them
stand up in a heap, till they were passed over: Thou did cause the Sun and
Moon also to stay their course for thy peoples sake, til they might vanquish
their enemies. Thou would that thy Name should dwell amongst them, and thou
gave them this City by inheritance: Some of them thou did choose for thy
self to be Prophets, which might conduct thy people, teach them, and lead them
into the right way, to give them warning of future miseries, that they might
take heed, and beware of them. Moreover, thou did choose of them Priests to
serve thee, and to bless thy people Israel; certain godly men amongst them thou
drewest unto thee, and in a fiery Chariot thou did carry them up to Heaven;
Thou smotest the tents of the King of As^ur, and killedst in them 8718 men.
These and diverse other things have I heard of my forefathers, yea, and of
Joseph the Priest a very wise man: And now, Lord God, this people which I have
striven against I would have saved, had they trust edin thee, but thou see
they trust not in thy saving health, but in their own Sword.

When Titus had said all these things, he commanded to bring an iron Ram, and
to bend it against the new wall which the Sedi^ious had raised, that they might
batter it down; but many of the Nobles among the Seditious came forth unto
Titus, and made peace with him, whom he placed among his chief men.

Shortly after the Romans set on fire one of the Gates of the Temple that was
shut, whose door was covered over with silver, and while the timber of it
burnt, the silver melted, and ran upon the ground; so when the Gate was open,
the way appeared which leads to the Sanctum Sanctorum.

As soon as Titus saw it, he honored it with great reverence, and fo^bad his
people that none should come ni^ i^; Wherefore he commanded a Proclamation to
be published throughout all his Camp to this tenor; Wh^soever comes near the
Sanctuary, shall suffer death for it.

He appointed also a strong band of men to keep the Temple, that it might not
be profaned and unhallowed by any of his: But his Princes and Captains
answered; Unless this House be set on fire, thou shall never subdue this
people, in regard that to preserve it, they vow to die.

Notwithstanding Titus would not hearken to their counsel, but appointed some
of his own soldiers, and such Jews as had come in to him to keep Ward, giving
them charge to preserve the Temple and Sanctum Sanctorum, lest it should be
polluted.

The Seditious Jews that remained in Jerusalem seeing the Romans depart from
the Temple, and leaving Guards behind, they ran upon them with their swords
drawn, and slew every foul of them: Which Titus hearing, he brought his whole
Army thither against the Seditious, and killed many of them, the rest fled to
Mount Sinai.

The next day the Romans set fire on the Sanctum Sanctorum, laying Wood to the
doors that were covered over with gold, and then firing it; so after the gold
waxed hot, and the timber burnt, the Sanctum Sanctorum was open, that all men
might see it in the ninth day of the filth month, which was the very same day
that it was open also in the time of the Chaldees: The Romans therefore rushing
into the Sanctum Sanctorum, gave a great shout while it burnt, which when Titus
heard, he hastened to quench the fire, and save the Sanctum Sanctorum, but he
could not do it, because it was set on fire in so many places: thereupon Titus
cried unto them, that they should forbear, but they would not hear him: For as
a vehement flood of Waters breaks through all things, and drives them down
before it; with such a furious violence the Gentiles rushed upon the Lords
Temple, the fire flaming every where out of mea^ure.

When Titus saw he could not restrain them from the Sanctum Sanctorum with
words, he drew out his Sword, blaming the Captains of his own people, and
others that were not Romans he killed; and he cried out so long and so loud
upon them, that he was grown hoarse.

The Priests that were within the Sanctum Sanctorum withstood the Romans
stoutly, till they were able no longer to lift up their hands: Wherefore when
they saw there was no other safeguard left, they leaped into the fire, and
diverse other Jews with them, and so burnt all together, saying, What should we
live any longer now there is no Temple? Yet Titus ceased not to strike the
people, and chase them from the Temple, and being grown so weary, that all his
strength failed him, he fell upon the ground, and forbore crying upon them any
further.

After that the Sanctum Sanctorum was burnt, Titus arose, and entering
therein^o, he saw the glory and magnificence thereof, and believed it was the
house of the Lord; for as yet the fire had not consumed all, therefore he said:

Now I well perceive that this is no other then the House of God, and the
dwelling of the King of Heaven, neither was it for naught that the Jews stood
so earnestly in defense thereof; nor did the Gentiles also without good cause
send gold and silver to this Temple from the farthest parts of the World; for
great is the glory of it, and it surpasses all the Roman, and Temples of the
Gentiles that ever I saw. The God of Heaven, who is the God of this House take
vengeance of the Seditious, whose mischiev^us and heinous deeds have brought
this evil upon them.

CHAP. IV.
THe Seditious that yet remained at Jerusalem, seeing the Sanctum Sanctorum to
be burnt, they set the rest of the Temple a fire themselves, with all the
houses that were filled with treasure, and all sorts of precious jewels; and
where they knew there remained yet some victuals, they set it also on fire,
lest the Romans should receive benefit thereby.

After this the Romans quenched the fire, and set up their Idols and images in
the Temple, offering burnt offerings unto them, and blaspheming, mocking, and
railing at the Jews, and their laws, in presence of their Idols. About that
time arose one who (...) a lie unto the Seditious that remained yet in
Jerusalem, exhorting them to play the men, and oppose their enemies; for now,
says he, shall the Temple be built by it self, without humane hands, that God
may declare his power un^o the Romans, who now glory in themselves, to have
overcome the Jews; therefore if you fight stoutly this day the Temple shall
erect it self; hereupon the Seditious set furiously upon the Romans, and slew
many of them, which made the Romans who had favored them formerly, to kill
them like sheep.

These things happened, because they gave credit to a false Prophet, and marked
not the signs that appeared formerly: For the year next before the coming of
Vespasian, there was seen a star on the Temple so bright, as if a man had so
many drawn swords in his hands; And the same time this Star appeared, which was
at the solemn passover, that whole night the Temple was light and clear as
midday, and continued so seven nights together. Understanding men knew well
enough that this was an ill augury, though others thought it good. The same
time also they brought a heifer for a sacrifice, which when she was knocked
down, she calved a Lamb.

Besides, there was a certain gate called the East gate, that was never opened
nor shut, but twenty men had enough to do about it, and the creaking of the
hinges might be heard a far off; This gate was found open without any man's
help, and they could not shut it, till a great number joined their strength.

Moreover there was discerned on the Sanctum Sanctorum, a whole night long the
face of a man wonderful terrible.

There appeared also the same time, four Chariots with horsemen, and great
blasts in the sky, coming toward Jerusalem. In the feast of the weeks, the
Priest likewise heard a man walking in the Temple, and saying with a great and
wonderful terrible voice, Come let us go away out of this Temple, let us hence
away.

But especially there was one surpassed all these; a certain man in the City,
of a base degree, called Joshua, began to cry upon the feast of Tabernacles, in
this wise; A voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four
winds of the Heavens, a voice against Jerusalem, a voice against the Temple, a
voice against the bridegroom, a voice against the bride, and a voice against
the whole people.

Thus he cried very often, so that they of Jerusalem hated him, and said unto
him, Why criest thou always this cry; But the Governor of the City for bad
them to wrong him, supposing he was mad: Therefore for four years space he
never left crying out, Woe to Jerusalem, and to the Sanctuary thereof.

When the wars had begun, and the Town was besieged, it fortuned as he wandered
upon the walls, he added this also unto his cry, Woe unto my self, and with
that a stone came out of an Engine from the Camp, that dashed out his brains.

At that time also there was a Writing found graven in an old stone; What time
the building of the Temple shall be brought to a four square then it shall be
destroyed: Now when the Antochia was taken and razed by the Romans, and the
Walls of the Temple were all bruised, the Jews making speed to repair the
ruins and dilapidations, without remembrance of the old Writing, they made the
Temple four square. Besides, these words were found in the Walls of the Sanctum
Sanctorum, When the whole building of the Temple shall be four square, then
shall a King reign over Israel, and that King and Ruler shall reign over all
the Land of Israel. Some interpre^ed this of the King of Israel; but the
Priests said, It is the King of the Romans.

The whole Roman Army being now come into the Temple, and the Jews fled to
Mo^nt Sion, the Romans set up their ^dols in the Lords Temple, and railed at
the Jews; It happened, that there came down to the Romans a little boy of the
Priests from Mount Sion to a Captain of the Wall, Keeper of the Temple,
desiring him to give him some water; he taking pity on the boy, gave him some;
the boy taking the vessel the water was in, first drank himself, then ran away
with the rest: the Captain made show to run after him, but let him go of
pu^pose.

Once when the Romans were at their sacrifice with Titus, some Priests came and
besought him, that he would not kill them, he answered, Why do you wish to live
now, and not rather dye with your brethren who have suffered death for Gods
sake, and for the sake of this House, whereupon he commanded they should be all
slain.

After Schimeon and Jehochanan sent to Titus for peace: he answered, This thing
ye seek too late; but how comes it to pass, that you beg your lives now being
so few, and that ye have wasted all things so desperately: ye desire life and
yet persevere in your malice, still holding your swords in your hands; have we
not now taken your City, Temple, and the Sanctum Sanctorum. What is there left
for you to put hope in? Therefore cast away your swords, and lay down your
armor; and then if you come to me, I know what I h^ve to do, peradventure I
shall be gracious unto you.

Schimeon and Jehochanan answered; We have sworn by the Lord our God, who is
God of Heaven and Earth that we will never bear thy yoke nor serve thee, or
make any peace to be subject to thee; therefore if it be thy pleasure to show
us mercy, we will take our journey into the wilderness: in granting this, we
will report to have found favor; if not, we will remain in this place to see
what manner of death we shall dye.

Titus hearing this, was much incensed and said, remains the pride of your
hearts, and the hardness of your neck still with you, though ye be Captives?
dare ye yet be so bold as to say, ye have sworn not to endure our yoke!

Then Titus gave commandment to the Romans not to omit any opportunity to set
upon the Seditious, and by one means or other, to destroy Schimeon and
Jehochanan. There was at that time, a certain man of the Royal Blood, whose
name was Serach: he accompanied with all his brethren and Sons that were there
with him of the Kings blood, came down from the Mo^nt Sion ^o Titus, who
received them honorably, and gently ordered them.

When Jehochanan and Schimeon understood that Serach and the re^t were gone,
and had yielded themselves to Titus, they went and set fire upon all ^at was in
the Kings Palace, that the Romans should have no ^modity thereby.

From thence they went to the Temple, where they found certain Commanders, and
Captains, whom Titus had put in authority about the Temple, of whom th^ee were
chief: one Captain of the ho^semen, the second of the Chariots, and the third
of the footm^n, him they killed and took h^s companion, alive. One of them
besought them that had taken him, that he might be b^ought to Schimeon their
Captain: Let him (says he) do with me as he list, and in this one thing let me
fin^ favor at your hands. They agreed and brought him to Schimeon, who
commanded his servants, as soon as he was come to slay him. But while he that
was appointed to this business made delay, and killed him not by and by, he
whipped down off the hill, escaped, and came to Titus: who commanded him out of
his sight, being wroth with him, that he had not fought unto death, rather then
to be taken alive.

But with the Jews was he wonderfully displeased, that they had so despigh^ully
ordered his men: wherefore he commanded to kill all the Jews, as many as could
be found, in the ^ets of the City, whom he would have spared before, and caused
proclamation to be made throughout all his Camp for their safety. Then died
many of the Jews, ^o that every place was full of dead bodies. The men of War
of the Edom^tes which were with Schimeon, perceiving how the matter went, sent
Ambassadors to Titus to desire p^ace, and to save their lives: which when it
came to Schimeons ear, he went unto them, and slew the chief of them, and their
Noblemen: the rest of the people of the Edomites fled unto Titus. From that
time forth, Titus commanded his men to use no more cruelty to the Jews. Soon
after fled Jehochanan and S^himeon, and hid themselves in certain caves. The
rest of the chief men of the Jews that were with them, seeing them now to be
fled, came down from the Mount to Titus, and fell down upon their faces before
him upon the ground, whom Titus received gently; As for the Seditious that were
wit^ Schimeon and Jehochanan, they fought till they all died together.

Then came forth unto Titus one Joshua a Priest, son of Schaftai, the High
Priest bringing with him two Candlesticks of gold which were in the Sanctuary,
and the Tables of gold, with other vessels of silver and gold, and also the
holy vestures decked with gold and precious stones; all those he gave to Titus,
who made him chief Priest over them that remained, next unto Joseph the Priest:
for Titus gave Joseph authority as well over the Priests and Levi^es, as over
the whole people o^ the Jews. Then was Gorion the Father of Joseph that writ
this History, brought out of prison, with his wife and children; among whom was
one Bonian, Joseph's younger brother; he was a very wise and godly Priest, by
whom God bestowed many benefits upon ^e Israelites: for Titus left him at
Jerusalem, and took him not with him, as he did Joseph. Joseph's father lived
after the City was taken, twenty months, and died. They took also one Phineas
a Priest, who was keeper of the treasure-house: he bewrayed and detected to the
Romans, all the Treasures of the Priests, and their Vestments; He gave also
unto Titus a most precious oil, with sweet odours, and perfumes, and garments
also of purple, which the Kings of the second Temple had given. Wherefore both
this Phineas, and Joshua whom we mentioned before, transgressed the Covenant of
the Lord, and offended God, in that they de^ivered his Jewels to the enemies of
his people, which they ought not to have done, but rather to have died for the
glory of the Lord, as the other Priests did, which cast themselves into the
fire.

Thus was the City of Jerusalem taken, with all the precious things that were
therein: And Ti^us went up to Mount Sion, took it, and razed the walls thereof.
Three days after, Jehochanan sore vexed with hunger, left his place where he
lurked, and came to Titus, fell down before him, and kissed his feet, saying,
Save me O Lord King. Titus commanded him to be fet^ered with iron chains, and
when he had caused him to be carried about the Camp, so bound, and to be m^cked
of all men, by the space of seven days, he commanded to hang him, and so got
he a just end, and fit reward for his cruelty.

Afterward came Schimeon also forth of his den, being driven to it with famine.
He had put on Kingly apparel, and showed himself afar off, to the Roman host;
who seeing him, were afraid to go to him; but he called unto them, and asked for
some Captain: Then one came forth and said unto Schimeon, Tell me who thou art,
and I will not kill thee; Schimeon answered therefore, and told him; I am
Schimeon, that Seditious Cap-tain of the. Jews, which have made you so much
ado; now I beseech thee, show me so much favor as to b^ing me to Titus thy
Master, which he did: Titus therefore when he saw Schimeon, he commanded him to
be fast bound, and to be led about the whole host, that he might be derided and
mocked: Afterward, he was put to a sore death; first his head was stricken off,
then he was cut in many pieces, and cast unto dogs; So he died an abominable
death, being punished for his iniquity.

The number of the Jews, as well Citizens as others, that came unto the Feast
to Jerusalem, which were slain, partly by the Romans, partly by the Seditious,
during the whole time of these Wars, was known to be eleven hundred thousand,
besides them whose number was not known; only they were counted which were
slain and buried: Besides them, they also were not reckoned, that after the
death of Jehochanan and Schimeon, died with Eleazar the son of Anani the
Priest: They that were led prisoners by Titus to Rome, were sixteen thousand
men.

So Titus with Joseph went to Rome, leaving Bonian, Joseph's brother at
Jerusalem, who was appointed to be the chief Priest of them that abode there;
for Joseph did request it of Titus, which he performed. The Seditious were all
slain, in the battle which they took in hand for the peoples sake, and the
Temple of the Lord: those also that Titus took prisoners, were put to vile
deaths; for he reserved many to be mocking stocks in every City, where he
passed by in the way to Rome; and in every Town he commanded some of them to be
brought forth, and cast unto the Lions, till they were all consumed.

CHAP. V.
THere were certain people at that time, dwelling amongst the Mountains of
Ararat, that were called Alanites, whose power Alexander King of Macedonia
fearing, closed them on every side. This people although they had no knowledge
of the use of Iron, nor Armor; yet this was their manner, That one of them
with a great pole burnt a little at the end, would put to flight a hundred good
soldiers, were they never so well appointed, and armed. Until this year they
were always shut in, but now being oppressed with a great dearth and famine
throughout all the land, they sent Ambassadors to the people of Hurkan their
neighbors, requiring them that they would open thestraights of the Mountains,
that they might come forth with their wives and children, to seek them food.

The Hurkans granted their requests, and opened them the entrances of the
Mountains; So they came forth, wandering here and there, spoiling diverse
Countries, till at length they took their journey toward the Mountains of the
Land of Madai, where they found horses, namely in the Desert of Madai, amongst
the people of Ararat; They got those horses, leapt upon them and ^ntred the
land of Madai. The President o^ Ruler of the Country hearing thereof, fled into
the highest hills, leaving his wife and children behind him for haste, he was
so afraid of the Alanites, knowing their valiantness. Straightway he sent unto
them Ambassadors to make peace with them, and he would let them have victuals
upon this condition, that they would not spoil his Country: They made answer,
If so be he would maintain them, and let them have food for the space of one
month, till the corn in their own Country were ripe, they would return home
again at the months end; for we desire not (say they) thy gold or silver,
being men separa^ from all intercourse in traffic wi^h other people, nor any
thing else than food do we seek.

This their request the Ruler granted them, and let them have a certain Grain
called Mill, sodden with one kind of flesh or other. The number of them was
seven thousand one hundred and fifty, and five thousand one hundred and forty
persons. When the month was ended, and the A^anites understood the corn in
their own Country was ripe, they departed out of the land of Madai, according
as they had sworn, and returned toward their own Country.

And as they were in their way homeward, Mithridates King of A^arat came
against them to annoy them, minding to drive them from his coasts, lest they
should waste his Country. Therefore while they marched through this Country
going toward their own, Mithridates made War upon them, but his men were beaten
down by the Alanites, like as grass falls upon the ground when a strong man
treads upon it. Then one of the young men of the Alanites, in despite, put a
rope about Mithridates's neck, and drew him after him, unto his great shame.
Mithridates gat out his sword, and cut asunder the rope and fled. To whom the
Alanites looking back, said, Go thy way, get thee home and make no more war
upon us hereafter; for we were not minded to waste thy Land, ^or yet to kill
thy people. For if we had ever intended it, Could we not have done it long ago
when as nothing is betwixt us and you, but the Mountains of Ararat? But we were
of this mind, that we should greatly offend to kill men of our own shape and
likeness. See now how Alexander, which went about to subdue the whole earth,
and to declare his power, closed us up within our land, Why? because he was
afraid we should come out upon him. But we laughed him to scorn when he did it.
If we had listed, we could have let him from shu^ting us in, and to make no
peace with him: but we made no reckonin^ of his doings. For it is our custom to
keep us within our own Country, we seek no other Land, when as our own Land is
better than any other. It pleased us well that he enclosed us, that the cruel
wild beasts which are in the Mountains of Ararat, could have no passage to us.
The cause we came out now, was nothing else, then that we were oppressed with a
great dearth, and we determined to be no longer from home, then till our own
fruits were ripe, and then to return, as you see we do. If we had been minded
to win your Land, had we not been able utterly to have overcome you, and to
have gotten the dominion over you? But neither ye nor your Country did ever
delight us greatly; for our manners differ far from yours.

Behold, the King of Madai, when he had kept us for a month, we harmed him
not, we are not wont to hur^ men as ye are, that cannot be content with your
own state, but must desire other men's inheri^ance. Now therefore go and return
to your own Country, and so will we to ours, without doing you any more hurt:
wherefore ye need not be afraid of us. So the Alanites went home to their own
Countries, having slain of Mithridates people, three hundred thousand men, and
never a one of their own was killed.

Titus hearing of this, was desirous to go unto them, to let them understand
his valiantness; but he could not compass it, because all his best men were
spent in the Wa^ at Jerusalem. Wherefore he determined to retu^n to Rome, after
he had taken Jerusalem, where he abode as yet besides the Antochia. There he
had intelligence that diverse of the Jews were gathered together, with whom was
Eleazar the son of Anani the Priest, who during the siege, fled unto a certain
Hold, called Mezira, whereupon many of the Jews resorted to him.

Titus hearing this, that many had joined themselves to Eleazar, feared lest
after his departure, Eleazar^ might from thence make an inrode, and take
Jerusalem, and destroy the Romans, which should be no small damage to the Roman
Empire. Wherefore he made out against him, and sent thither one Silcham a Noble
man of Rome, with a great host to besiege Mezira; but he could not get it.

Wherefore he sent unto Titus for an Iron Ram, to batter the Walls withal;
which after he had received it, he beat down the walls of Mezira therewith. The
Jews seeing that, raised a great Countermure within of Wood and Timber, which
the Romans set on fire and burnt. After that, they assaulted the Town from
morning till night, at what time the Romans le^ off, supposing they were not
able to prevail against Eleazars defense in the dark.

Eleazar in the mean season, called an assembly of all the chief men of the
Jews that were with him, and said unto them in this wise:

Come hither ye seed of Abraham, and Kingly Priesthood, which have until this
day ever prevailed against the enemies of God; Let us hear your advice what is
best to be done against this multitude that is come upon us at unawares. Ye see
that at this time chiefly it becomes us to follow the courage and valiantness
of our forefathers, wherewith they were in time past endued: Consider moreover,
that every thing has his end, and there are some times in War, when as men are
wont to follow the pursuit, sometimes to flee from the same whom they pursued,
and to humble themselve before them. And it is no shame to be humbled and
disgraced, when as all things have their determin^te end. Albeit, whosoever is of
an haughty courage, he must so establish his heart, that he quail not with
fear; then shall he be deemed a valiant man. If ye therefore be of that courage
that ye fear not death, then will I call ^ou valiant men and worthy. Consider
the fortitude of Abraham our father, and the fact that he did: for having but
one only son, whom Sarah bare unto him in her age, he never staggered nor
stayed at it to offer him up to the Lord God for a burnt-offering: for he
thought not that he should kill him, but persuaded himself most certainly, that
he should promote him to the life and light of the Lord, forasmuch as for ^he
love of God, and at his commandment, he should have killed him. Weigh the thing
that Josiah the just King did, who setting at naught this wretched life, and
aspiring to everlasting felicity, would not avoid the jeopardy of his life,
when as he might have done it. For although Pharaoh Necho said, He came not
against him, but against the King of the Chaldees, yet would not Josiah hear
him, but rather proceeding against Pharaoh in arms, was slain in the battle,
and went unto that great Light in the Garden of Paradise, which is the lot and
inheritance of the just. We know that in this world no man receives the reward
of his righteousness, but it is laid up for him in the other world: where he
shall reap the fruit of his righteousness, that he has sown in this world.
Neither does long life in this world profit a man to the attaining of
everlasting bliss, except he work righteousness, and lead his soul forth of
darkness, into light: like as contrariwise, shortness of life hinders no man
from everlasting happiness, if so be it, his soul have no defect in those
things that pertain to the world to come. For Abel which was slain of his
brother, lived no long life: yet when he had ended it, he obtained everlasting
rest: but Cain that lived long in the world, was a wanderer and a runagate in
this earth; and after this life, went to perpetual misery. Now therefore, my
Brethren, if we also shall live any longer, our life shall be a miserable life,
and our days, days of vanity and travel: yea, our soul as long as it shall
remain in this body, it shall be tossed with great tribulation: but if it once
go forth then shall it rejoice, and never be afraid. And all the days that it
is in the body, it never leaves weeping and mourning: for it is the Spirit of
life, which is hedged within the body, by ^inewes, and bones, none otherwise
then if it were bound with chains. The spirit is also that which quickneth the
flesh, that is taken of the dust of the earth, for flesh cannot quicken the
spirit. Besides this, the spirit is that which observes and marketh the flesh,
and searches the works thereof, so long as it is in the body; yea, the flesh
cannot see the spirit, but the spir^t sees the flesh always, neither is there
any member of the body hid from it. The eyes also of the body, cannot perceive
what time the spirit resorteth to the flesh, and departs from the same; for
the spirit of man which is his soul, is from heaven, but the flesh is taken
from the earth. Wherefore the soul may ^main without the body, but not likewise
(...) body without the soul; and when the spirit comes to the flesh, it
visits it as a neighbor is wont to go and see his neighbor, and quickens
it; and when again it departs from it, the flesh dies, and if the soul will
follow the desires of the flesh, then this is the death of the soul, but if it
give no ear unto the flesh, then shall the soul come to the light of life, and
the flesh shall die.

Wherefore the soul is glad when it departs out of the body, like as one that
has been bound, is well contented when he (...) dismissed out of prison. For
all the while that the soul is kept closed in the flesh, it is as it were a
slave, in most hard and grievous bondage under a hard Master. Therefore when it
departs from the body, it is glad, because it must go to the Garden of
Paradise Thus ye see that in this life, the soul is compared to a bond servant
and slave.

Much more than this, did he discourse of the immortality and blessedness of
the Soul before them, which we have omitted here. And making then a Digression
from that, he lamented and wept most bitterly for the case of the City of
Jerusalem, saying:

Where is now ^e City of Jerusalem, that great and populous City? Where is that
most beautiful City of Sion, and that holy City which rejoices the whole
Earth? O thou worship of Israel, the mi^h of our hearts, whither is thy glory
come? Where is thy magnificence, O Jerusalem? Where be the hill^ of the
daughter of Sion? Where be her Kings and Princes? Where be the King^ that were
accustomed to come to enquire of her welfare in her gates? Where are her Sages
and Elders, her young and most valiant men, which were jocund and merry in her
streets upon her Sabbaths and Festival days? Where is her famous Sanctuary,
the Dwelling of the Almighty God? Where is the House of Sanctum Sanctorum, the
habitation of holiness, wherein no man might set his foot but the high Priest,
which he never but once a year entered into, but in thee? O Jerusalem, thou
wa'st once replenished with people, and renow^ed amongst Kings, beloved of God;
in thee was established the seat of the Kingdom of Justice and Judgment, whose
Streets were paved with most precious Marble, whose walls glistred and shine^
with the same Stone; whose Gates were every one plated with Gold and Silver,
whose Walls were builded with great S^ones most honourabl^, whose Priests in
the midst of the Sanctuary, (like to Angels of God, and Princes of Holiness,
with Sacrifices and burnt-offerings) made the Lord loving to thee and thy
people. How art thou now full of slain men, and carc^ses which have perished,
some by the sword, some by famine? and how are thy sons that dwelt in thee, and
the strangers also that resorted to thee, to honor thy Feasts, brought to
ruin now in thee? How art thou fallen from the height of thy pride, and how
art thou set afire and burnt even unto thy foundations, and art left desolate
and solitary? What eye is so hard that can behold thee? What heart so stony
that can endure to see thee? How art thou become a burying place of carcases?
and how are thy streets made void and destitute of living creatures? and they
which heretofore were replenished with living, are now stuffed with dead? How
has the ashes of the fire covered thee, that the Sun cannot come at thee? How
do the ancient men, which in times past did fit in midst of thee, in the seat
of wisdom, judgment, and justice, now fit by the carcases of their children,
to drive away Crows and beasts from them, having their hoary heads besprinkled
with dust and ashes, instead of their glory? and those women, thy daughters
that are left, they remain in the houses of them that made thee desolate, not
that they may live, but be unhallowed and polluted? Who shall see all these
things in thee, and shall desire to live, rather than to die? Who, knowing the
magnificence thou had of la^e, and now shall see thine ignominy and dishonor
of the same, will not choose to die? And would God we had been dead before, that
we might not have seen in thee this thy reproach: O that we were without eyes,
that we might not be compelled to see these mischiefs that are in the midst of
thee! And behold we live a most sorrowful life; for our enemies even now before
we be dead, cast lots for ou^ sons and daughters, to divide them amongst them
to be their servants and handmaids.

When Eleazar had ended this lamentation, he spoke to the people that was with
him^ thus:

Now therefore, Brethren and friends, take comp^ssion of your selves, your
wives, and children, with the old men which be with you: Let them not be led
into bondage without all mercy, that they be not constrained to mourn under the
hands of their enemies. For if you do this, ye lose without doubt all places
that are prepared for you in the world of righteousness^, neither shall ye have
any part in the light of li^e. Y^a rather with your own hands kill t^m: For if
^e will do so, they shall be counted as sacrifi^s most acceptable unto God. And
that done, we will, after, issue out upon our enemies, and fight against them
till we die valiantly for the glory of the Lord. For we will never suffer them
to bind us with bonds and chains, as bondslaves in the hands of the
uncircumcised. Neither will we see our ancient men to be haled by the beards
before our eyes most miserably, nor yet our maids, wives, and daughters, to be
profaned, unhallowed, and defloured, nor our sons crying to us, and we cannot
help them. Forwhat shall our life avail us, after that our land is desolate,
our Sanctuary razed, the Romans will ravish our wives, and daughters before our
eyes; and oppress our sons with a most grievous and hard yoke? Now therefore it
is better for us all to kill our wives and children, whose blood God shall
accept thankfully as the blood of burnt offerings, and after we will issue out
upon the Romans, fight till we be all destroyed, and die for the glory of the
Lord our God.

These men therefore went and gathered together their wives and daughters,
embraced them, and kissed them saying; Is it not better for you to die in your
holy Country honorably, than to be led away into bondage with great ignominy
and shame into the Land of your enemies, and be compelled to die before the
Idols of the Gentiles? These sayings when the people had heard, they broke
forth that night in to great sorrow, and pensiveness, weeping and making great
lamentation; but they all confessed with one accord, that they had rather die
than live. Therefore as soon as it was day, Eleazars companions killed their
wives and children, and cast their bodies into cesterns and wells that were in
Mezirah, covering and stopping them with earth. Afterward issued E^eazar the
Priest forth of the Town, with all his men, and forced a battle upon the
Romans, of whom the Jews killed a great n^mber, and fought so long, till they
all died m^nfully for the Lord God.

But Titus left a remnant of Israel in the City Jafnah, and the villages
thereabout, and in the City Bitter, and A^ssa, and their villages; in which
place Rabby Jochanan, son of Sakkai, was appointed chief. Bonian the Priest,
younger b^other to J^seph the Priest, was put in authority by Titus for Joseph's
sake, over all the Jews which were at Jerusalem. At the same time was (...) a
Prince of Israel put to death, and Ischmael son of Elischa ^he high Priest:
M^reover Titus was minded to have put Rabby Gamaliel, father of R^hbag to
death; but Rabby Joch^ son of (...) made suice for him and obtained pardon for
his life. This R^bby Jochanan was he that came forth of Jerusalem in the
beginning, when V^spasian, father of Titus, came first against Jerusalem, whom
Vespasian honored greatly; insomuch that when he returned to Rome, he
commended this R^bby Jochanan to his son Titus, commanding him to honor him;
for he perceived he was a wise man.

Titus r^igned two years after he had taken Jerusalem, an^ died. He was a very
eloquent (...), expert in the La^ne and Greek Tongue, and writ diverse Works in
both Tongues. He loved most entirely, justice and equity; for he wasted the
City of Jerusalem against his will, and being compelled thereunto; ^ea all the
mischief that came upon it, happened through the malice and naug^ness of the
Seditious, as we have touched before.

THE Ten Captivities, OF THE JEWS.
THe Israelites were Ten times led into Captivity: Four times by the hands of
Sanherib, and Four times by Nabuchadnezzar, Once by Vespasian, and Once by
superstitious Adrian.

First invaded them Sanherib, and transporthe Rubenites, the Gadites, and the
half tribe of Manosseh. He took away also the golden Calf, which Jeroboam the
son of Nebat had made: He led them into Helah Habor, to the River of Gozan, and
to the ^ities of the Medes. This Captivity was in the time of Pekah, the son of
Remaliah.

The second Captivity: Hosea the son of Ela remained, and slew Pekah the son of
Remal^h. After he became the servant and subject of Sanherib seven years: Then
came Sanherib the second time, and carried away the tribes of Asar, Isachar,
Zebulon, and Nephtali, of whom he let go free only one of every eight; He took
away also another ^alf that was in Bethel.

After the death of Ahaz, reigned Zedekia his son in his stead four years. The
fourth year of whose reign, Sanherib came and entrenched about Samar^a,
besieging it three years, and at length took it, in the sixth year of the reign
of Hizkiahu. So led he away the Israelites that were in Samaria, the tribe of
Ephraim and Mannasse; This is the third Captivity.

When Nebuchadnezzar had reigned eight years, he made wars against Jerusalem,
bringing with him the Chutean Heretics out of Babylon, Ethiopia, Hemates,
Avim, and Sepharvavim; and as he warred upon Judea, he took in that Country a
hundred and fifty Cities, in the which there were two tribes, Juda, and Simeon,
whom he took with him, and caused them forthwith to be led into Halah, and
Habar, until the King of the Ethiopians rebelled against him, whose kingdom
was on the hinder parts of Egypt. Then taking Juda and Simeon with him, he made
war with the King of Ethiopia. So the holy and blessed God placed them in the
dark mountains. Here was four Captivities, whereby ten tribes went into exile
by Sanherib. There remained yet of Juda one hundred and ten thousand, and of
Benjamin, one hundred and thirty thousand in the City of Jerusalem, over whom
reigned Hizkiahu. Moreover Sanherib came out of Ethiopia, against Jerusalem
again, leading with him one hundred and ten thousand; but the holy Lord
overthrew him there, as it is written, And the Angel of the Lord issuing forth,
smote in the house of Asar 175 thousand men. His people therefore was slain,
and no man left but Sanherib and his two sons, and Nebuchadnezzar, and
Nebuzaraden; this slaughter was in the fourteenth year of Hizk^: From which
overthrow until the time that Nebuchadnezzar invaded the Jews, in the reign of
Jehojakim, were a hundred and seven years,

The fourth year of Jehojakim, came Nebuchadnezzar the first time, and carried
away three thousand, and twenty and three, of the tribes of Juda and Benjamin,
and of other tribes seven thousand, all the able men, and all their power,
binding them with chains; This is the fifth captivity.

Seven years after this Captivity, came Nebuchadnezzar another time unto Dophna
a City of Antioch, from whence he led four thousand and six hundred of the
tribe of Juda, and of Benjamin fifty thousand, of the other tribes seven
thousand.

This transmigration made he in Babylon, which is the sixth Captivity.

Furthermore, betwixt the sixth bondage and the seventh, were nine years of the
reign of Zidkiahu. When Nebuchadnezzar had reigned nineteen years, he came the
third time unto Jerusalem, and overcoming Zidkiahu; he burnt the Temple, and
took away the Pillars, the brazen Sea, and the furnitures that Solomon made,
and all the vessels of the house of the Lord, and the ^reasures of the house of
the King which was in Jerusalem; all the vessels he sent to Babylon. He slew
also of the Israelites, nine hundred and one thousand, besides them that were
slain to revenge the blood of Zacharias. The Levites stood singing a song,
whiles ^laughter was made of them; but they were not able to finish it, before
the enemies entered the Temple, and found them standing in their place, with
harps in their hands. Therefore he carried away in this Captivity, the Levites
which were of the seed of Moses, six hundred thousand, whom when the Gentiles
had brought unto the Rivers of Babylon, they demanded of the Jews, Sing us a
song of Sion: And by and by they gnawed off the tops of their fingers with
their teeth, saying, How shall we sing the song of the Lord in a strange Land?
And the blessed Lord seeing that they would not sing a song, he enlarged them,
and placed them on the further side of Sambatia. Moreover he translated and
carried away eight hundred, and thirty two thousand, which were all of the
tribe of Juda, and Benjamin, whereof he left in Jerusalem six thousand, setting
over them for their Ruler, Gedalia the son of Ahikam, who was slain after by
Ishmael the son of Natania, whereupon the Isr^elites being afraid, fled from
their Country into Egypt. This is the seventh transmigration and (...).

The 27. year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, he ^ook Egypt and Tire, drowned
the Jews that were therein, and the Nations which descended of Amon and Moab,
and of the Land bordering upon Israel, and led Jeremy and Baruch with them into
Egypt: This is the eighth Captivity.

Then the Israelites that remained alive in Egypt, departed unto Alexandria,
and remained in it until they grew and increased unto many thousands; and who
so saw not their glory, saw no glory in his time. For there was in it the
Sanctuary, the Altar, the offerings, incenses, the ordinance of bread, of
faces, the houses of studies, and schools without number, men of great
substance, riches, and power But wicked Troganus made war upon them, and slew
very many of them: After came Alexander against them, who slew also many of
them. These are the eight Captivities or bondages, which befell in the first
House, and time of the first Temple.

After the desolation of the first House seventy years, Cyrus the son of
Esther, sent unto Nehemiah, Zerubbabel, Baruch, and his whole society, and they
builded the second House. Then after four years, of the reign of Cyrus, after
the House was destroyed, Ezra went from Babylon, with forty thousand in his
company, and the Israelites were afflicted and vexed under Cyrus for the space
of 33. years.

Then came Alexander the King of Macedonia, and slew Cy^us, and when he had
reigned twelve years, he died. After him came four Usurpers, which af^licted
the Israelites 158. years. But after that, the sons of Hasmonani came, and
slew those Usurpers, and taking the Dominion from them, reigned themselves
103. years.

Then reigned one Herod, the Servant to Chasmonani, who killed his Masters,
and their whole family, save one Ma^d whom he loved. But she climbed up to
the top of an house, and said, There is no body left alive of my fathers house
but I alone: so she cast her self headlong from the top of the house, and died.
Herod did lay her in hone^, and preserved her for the space of seven years;
There were that said, he had carnal copulation with her after she was dead.

Herod and Agrippa his son, and Monazab his nephew, possessed the Kingdom one
hundred and three years. So have thou four hundred and three years of the
second House.

Then came Vespasian Caesar, and Titus his wives son, and wasted the second
House, carrying away Israel unto Rome. This is the ninth transmigration.
Moreover, Bitter remained after the desolation and wasting of the Temple fifty
two years.

After that, A^rianus who used superstition with bones, made wars upon them,
and transported Israel from their Country after he had spoiled it, conveying
them into Spain. This is the tenth Captivity.

This Adrian vanquished the Jews, (which rebelled the second time against the
Romans) with a final and utter destruction, forbidding and not suffering them,
in any wise to enter into Jerusalem, which he had began to fortify with very
strong walls, and caused it to be called Helius after his own name. He caused
also a Sow to be graven over the chief gate of the City, and a Jew under her
feet, carved in stone, in token of their subjection.

A Corollary.
THus the ancient Nation of the Jews, which in former times might have been
called the Favorite of God Almighty, was utterly destroyed, and their City
demollished; the famous City of J^rusalem, which had been five times surprised
and sacked before.

First, Asocheus King of Egypt, after him Antiochus, then Pompey: And after him
Herod with Sosius took it, yet did they not dismantle, much less destroy it.
But before them the Kings of Babylon ruined it after they had possessed it 1300
years eight months and ^ix days after the building of it. The first founder of
it was one of the Princes of the Cananites, ^called in his own Language the
just King: and indeed he was so, for he was the first Priest that sacrificed to
God, and dedicated a Temple there, calling the City Solyma: But David King of
the Jews having driven out the Cananites gave it unto his people to be
inhabited, and after 464 years and 3. months, it was destroyed by the
Baby^nians. And from King David who was the first Jew that reigned there un^ill
the time that Titus destroyed it, were 1179 years. And from the time that it
was first Erected un^ill it was thus r^ed, were 2177 years; yet neither the
Antiqui^y, nor riches, nor fame thereof then spread over the world, nor the
glory of Religion, did any thing avail to hinder this hard destiny.

Such was the end of besieging Jerusalem, when there were none left to kill
more, or any thing remaining for the soldiers to get, or whereon they should
exercise their courage, for they would have spared nothing that they could have
spoiled; Titus c^mmanded them to destroy the City and Temple, only leaving
standing certain Towers that were more beautiful and stronger then the rest,
viz: Phasclus, Hippi^os, and Mariamne, with the wall that stood on the west
side, intending to keep a Garrison there, and these were left to stand for
Monuments of their strength, and the Roman valor, which had overcome a City so
well fortified; All the rest of the City they so flatted, that they who had not
seen it before would not believe it had ever been inhabited.

Eheu quam tenui pendent Mortalia fil^!

And now for an upshot of all that has been said, take a short view of the
whole Matter:

Together with a true Character of the JEWS, as they are at this day; With the
hopes and desires of all good Men for their Conversion.

WHen the Jews had made the full measure of their sins run over by putting to
death the LORD of LIFE, Gods judgments (as they deserved, and our Savior
foretold) quickly overtook them: For, a mighty Army of the Romans be^ieged and
sacked the City of Jerusalem, wherein by Fire, Famine, Sword, Civil discord, and
Foreign force, eleven hundred thousand were put to death. An incredible number
it seeme^; yet it comes within the compass of our belief, if we consider that
the siege began at the time of the Pass^over, when in a manner, all J^ea was
enclosed in Jerusalem, all private Synagogues doing then their duties to the
Mother-Temple; so that the City then had more guests than Inhabitants. Thus the
Passover, first instituted by God in mercy, to save the Israelites from death,
was now used by Him in justice, to hasten their destruction, and to gather the
Nation into a bundle to be cast into the fire of his anger. Besides those who
were slain, ninety seven thousand were taken captives; And they who had bought
our Savior for thirty pence, were themselves sold thirty for a penny.

The General of the Romans in this action, was Titus, son to Vespasian the
Emperor; A Prince so good, that he was styled the Darling of mankind, for his
sweet and loving nature; (and pity it was, that so good a stock had not been
better grafted!). So virtuously disposed, that he may justly be counted the
glory of all Pagans, and shame of most Christians. He labored what lay in his
power, to have saved the Temple, and many therein; but the Jews, by their
obstinacy and desperateness, made themselves incapable of any mercy.

Then was the Temple it self made a Sacrifice, and burnt to ashes. And of that
stately Structure which drew the Apostles admiration, not a stone left upon a
stone. The walls of the City (more shaken with the sins of the Jews de^ending
them, than with the ba^tering Ra^s of the Romans assaulting them) were levelled
to the ground; only three Towers left standing to witness the great strength
of the place, and greater valor of the Romans who conquered it. But whilst
this storm fell on the unbelieving Jews, it was calm amongst the Chrians; who,
warned by Christ's predictions, and many other prodigies, fled betimes out of
the City to P^lla (a private place beyond Jordan) which served them instead of
a little Z^ar, to save them from the imminent destruction.

Threescore years after, Adrian the Emperor re-bu^lt the City of Jerusalem,
changing the situation somewhat ^westward, and the name thereof to Aeli^. To
despite the Christians, he built a Temple over our Saviors grave, with the
Images of Jupiter and Venus: another at Bethlehem, to Adonis her Minion; An^,
to enrage the Jews, did engrave Swine over the Gates of the City. Who storming
at the pro^ation of their Land, brake ^o open Rebellion: but were subdued by
Julius Severus the Emperor's Lieutenant, an experienced Captain, and many
thousands slain with Bencochab their counterfeit Messiah (for so he termed
himself) that is, the son of a Star; usurping that Prophecy, Out of Jacob
shall a Star arise; thoug^ he proved but a fading Comet, whose Blazing
portended the ruin of that Nation.

The Captives, by order from Adrian, were transported into Spain; the Country
laid waste, which parted with her people, and fruitfulness, both together.

Indeed, Pilgrims, to this day, here and there, light on parcells of rich
ground in Palestine, which God may seem to have left, that men may taste the
former sweetness of the Land, before it was soured for the peoples sins; and
that they may guess the goodness of the cloth, by the ^inenesse of the shreds.
But it is barren for the generality; The streams of Milk and Honey wherewith
once it flowed, are now drained dry; and the whole face of the Land looks
sad, not so much for want of dressing, as because God has frowned on it.

Yet great was the oversight of Adrian, thus totally to unpeople a Province,
and to beque^th it to Foxes and Leopards. Though his memory was excellent, yet
here he forgot the old-(...) ^le; who to prevent desolations, where they ^ooted
out the Natives, planted i^ Colonies of their own people. And surely the
Country recovered not a competency of Inhabitants for some hundred years after.

For, though many Pilgrims came thither in after-ages, yet they came rather to
visi^, than to dwell. And such as remained there, mo^ embracing single live^,
were no breeders for posterity. If any say, that Adrian did wilfully neglect
this Land, and prostitute it to ruin for the rebellion of the people; yet all
account it small policy in him, in punishing the Jews, to hurt his own Empire;
and by his vastation to leave fair and clear footing for foreign enemies to
fasten on this Country, and from thence to invade the neighboring Dominions:
as after, the Persians and Saracens easily over ran and dispeopled Palestine.
And no wonder, if a thick Meadow were quickly mown.

But to return to the Jews; Such stragglers of them, not considerable in
number, asescaped this banishment into Spain (for few hands reap so clean as to
leave no gleanings) were forbidden to enter into Jerusalem, or so much as to
behold it from any rise or advantage of ground. Yet they obtained of the
after-Emperours, once a year (namely on the tenth of August, whereon their City
was taken) to go in and bewail the destruction of their Temple and people;
bargaining with the Soldiers, who waited on them, to give so much for so long
abiding there; and if they exceeded the time they conditioned for, they must
stretch their purses to a higher rate: So (what St. Hierom notes) they who
bought Christ's blood, were then glad to buy their own tears.

Thus the main Body of the Jews was brought into Spain, and yet they stretched
their out-limbs into every Country: So that it was as hard to find a populous
City without a common sink, as without a company of Jews. They grew fat on the
barest pasture by Usury and Brokage; though often squeezed by those Christians
amongst whom they lived, counting them Dogs, and therefore easily finding a
stick to beat them. And always in any tum^lt, when any fence of order was
broken, the Jews ^ay next harms; as at the (...) of Richard the first, when
the E^ ^de great Feasts, but the pillaged Jews paid the shot. At last for their
many villainies (as fal^fying of ^oin, poisoning of Springs, crucifying of
Christian children) they were slain in some places, and finally banished out of
others.

Out of England Anno 1291. by Edward the First; France 1307. by Philip the
Fair; Spain, 1492. by Ferdinand; Portugal 1497. by Emmanuel. But had these two
later Kings banished all Jewish blood out of their Countries, they must have
emptied the veins of their best Subjects as descended^ from them. Still they
are found in great numbers in Turkey; chiefly in Salomi^i, where they enjoy the
freest slavery: and they who in our Saviors time, so scorned Publicans, are
now most employed in that offi^ to be the Turks Toll-gatherers. Likewise i^ the
Popish parts of Germany; in Pola^d (...) Pantheon of all Religions; and
Amsterdan may be forfeited to the King of Spain, when she cannot show a pattern
of this, as of all other Sects. Lastly, they are thick in the Pope^ Dominions,
where they are kept as a ^estimony of the truth of the Scriptures, and foyl to
Christianity; but chiefly in pretense to convert them. But his Holinesse's
converting faculty, works the strongest at the greatest distance: For the
Indians he turns to his Religion, and these Jews he converteth to his Profit.
Some are of opinion of the general Calling of the Jews; And no doubt, those
that dissent from them in their judgments, concur in their wishes and desires.
Yet are there three grand hindrances of their Conversion.

First, the offense taken and given by the Papists, amongst whom they live, by
their worshipping of Images; the Jews being zelots of the second Commandment.

Secondly, because on their conversion they must renounce all their goods as
ill gotten; and they will scarce enter in at the door of our Church, when first
they are to climb over so high a threshold.

Lastly, they are debarred from the use of the new Testament, the means of
their salvation. And thus we leave them in a state most pitiful, and little
pitied.

To give you then a right Character in brief; They are a people that know how
to comply with the times, and the condition which they live in: especially if
their profit be concerned in it; reviled like dogs, and used like slaves, yet
never show so much as an angry countenance. A Nation which will thrive
wheresoever they come; yet most by Usury and Brokage; not lending any thing,
but on pawns, and those once forfeited, never more redeemable. The best of both
Sexes, are said to have an unsavor^ rankness, not incident (if not caused by
(...)) ^o other people, from whom they are as different in their habit, as in
their Religion. And ^s or that, they retain still Circumcision, as the badg and
^gnisance of their Nation; but m^ngled with many Ceremonies not prescribed by
the Law, nor observed by the Ancients; placing a void chair for the Prophet
Elias, whom they believe to be present, though unseen, at the Solemnity. And
upon this they are so besotted, that they conceive the Female Sex incapable of
eternal life, because not capable of Circumcision. And therefore use to name
them with no other Ceremony, then at the six weeks end, to have some young
wenches lift up the Cradle with the child in it, which she that stands at the
head, gives the name unto. Of their Sabbath, so extreaml^ doting, that they
have added to the superstitions left them by the Pharisees. And herein they are
so precise, that if a J^w travel on the Friday, and in the evening fall so
short of his journey's end, that it amounts to m^re than 2000. cubits, or six
furlongs, which they account a Sabbath-dayes journey, there must he sit him
down, and keep his Sabbath, though in a Wood, or Field, or the Highway side,
without fear of wind or weather, of Thieves or Robbers, or without taking order
for meat or drink; And so far have they gone in despite of Christ, as to
declare it unlawful to lift the Ox or Ass out of a ditch, permitted in the
strictest times of Pharisaical rigor; So pertinacious in retaining the
difference of meats and drinks, that they will by no means sit at the same
Table with other men: and so precise in the dressing of it, that they will eat
of no flesh, but of their own killing only; and that too, with such cautions,
and reservations, that if any of the entrails be corrupt or dislocated, they
will sell the whole beast to the Christians for a very trifle; beneficial in
that only to the neighboring Christians.

Wine they forbear, except it be of their own planting, not so much out of
dislike of that liquor; for they are generally good fellows, and love their
bellies, as for fear the wine should be baptized: A Ceremony much used in the
Eastern parts. Of the coming of their Messiah so full of hopes, that there is
no great Warrior stirring, but they look upon him as the man, till some sad
Tragedy or other which suffer under that persuasion, makes them see their
error; promising to themselves whenever he comes, a restitution of their
Kingdom, and such felicities therein, in the literal sense of some Texts of
Scripture, which carry in them a more mystical and sacred meaning. That in good
time (but Gods, not theirs) they shall be made partakers of the several
blessings which those Texts do speak of, is both the hope and wish of all pious
men; who cannot choose but grieve, to behold the natural branches so long
dismembered, and cut off from the Tree of Life. And this they neither hope nor
wish for; but on some fair grounds presented to them by St. Paul, who said
expressly, that when the fullness of the Gentiles is once come in, that then
all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 25, 26. The words are so plainly positive,
that they need no Commentary: Or, if they did, we have the general consent of
the Ancients; Besides the constant current of most Modern Writers, who cherish
the glad hopes of their Conversion to the Gospel; which the Apostle does there
aim at. Origin, Athanasius, Hierom, Augustine, Chrysostom, for the Primitive
times. Beda and Hugo Cardinalis, in the times succeeding. Farrara and Thomas
Aq^inas, for those of Rome. Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, and Peter Martyr, for the
Reformed Churches; besides diverse others of great note so expound that Text.
Nor want there other Texts of Scripture to affi^m as much, which he that does
desire to see, may find them with the expositions of most Christian Writers, in
a Book writ by Doctor Willet, entitled De generali and novissima Judaeorum
vocatione^ And ^hither I refer the more curious Reader. Out of all I shall take
these words, De illorum salute spes supersit. The Jews, (says he) are not so
wholly fallen from the favor of God; but that there still remain some hopes of
their salvation. Of their salvation then by the Gospel of Christ, when the
fullness of the Gentiles is once come in, we conceive good hopes: but, whether
there be any, of their restitution to their temporal Kingdom, is a farther
question; and not so clearly evidenced in the Book of God, though there be
somewhat in that Book, which may seem to intimate it.

That the opinion of being restored by the Messiah to that temporal power which
was taken from them by the Romans, was prevalent as well amongst Christ's
Disciples, as the rest of the Jews, is, as I take it, clear enough in the Holy
Gospel. In such a Kingdom, and no other, do the two sons of Zebedee desire to
sit, on both hands of their Master. And the same was it, and no other, which
all of them expected, as appears by the words of Cleophas, Luke 24. 21. that
Christ should have restored unto them: We thought, said he, that This would
have proved the man, that should have redeemed, From what? from sin and Satan,
or the curse and bondage of the Law? Not so; (...), but from the yoke of
vassallage, which the Romans had so lately imposed on them, say the Fathers
rightly; Touching the same it was, that they moved him saying, Lord, will thou
at this time restore again the Kingdom of Israel? Act. 1. 6. In answer
whereunto, our Savior makes them no denial, as unto the thing, nor tells them
that they never must expect such a restoration; but only puts them off as unto
the Tim^, and bids them rest themselves on the pleasure of God the Father, in
whose hand the disposing of all Kingdoms was; It is not for you, says he, to
know the times and seasons, which the Father has in his own power. ver. 7. By
which answer, (as it seems to me) there is a possibility of restoring to their
Kingdom also; though not in the (...), at that very instant when they were most
desirous to have it done, or at any other time sit for them to know, that being
a secret which the Father has reserved to Himself alone.

A Prayer.
Let the Consideration of these things be unto us, as it was sometimes unto an
Eminent Divine Tho Fuller, D D. late Preacher at S. Mary Savoy. Westminster.
(now with God), an occasion of prayer unto God on their behalf, saying with
him in this, or to the like effect.

O Lord, who art righteous in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works, we
acknowledge and admire the justice of thy proceedings, in binding and hardening
the Jews; as for their manifold impieties, soespecially for stoning thy
Prophets, despising thy Word, and crucifying the Lord of Life. For which thou
have cursed them, according to the prediction of thy Prophet, to abide many
days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and
without an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. But thou, O Lord,
how long? How long O Lord, holy and true? How long Lord? will thou be angry
for ever? Thine anger is said to endure but a moment; but, Lord, how many
millions of millions of momeuts, are contained in sixteen hundred years, since
thou have first cast off thy first and ancient people, the Jews? Remember
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not for any merit in their persons, which was none,
but for the mercy in thy promises which is infinite, so frequently made, and so
solemnly confirmed unto them. But O! remember the Orator on thy right hand,
Christ Jesus our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh; and the Orator in thine own bosom, thine essential and innate Clemency,
and let these prevail, if it may stand with thy good will and pleasure, that
thy people the Jews may be received into the arms of thy mercy. As once by a
wilful and woeful imprecation they drew the guilt of his blood on them, and on
their children: So by thy free imputation, drop the merit of his blood on them,
and on their children. For the speeding of whose conversion, be pleased to
compose the many different judgments of Christians into one truth, to unite
their disagreeing affections in one love; that our examples may no longer
discourage, but invite them to the embracing of the true Religion. Oh mollify
the hearts, rectify the wills, unvail the eyes, unstop the ears of those thy
people, whom hitherto thou have justly hardened: Reveal to their understanding,
those Oracles which thou have committed to their keeping: That so our Savior,
who long since has been a light to lighten the Gentiles, may in thy time be
the glory of thy people Israel, that so there may be one Shepherd, and one
Sheepfold. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with Thee,
and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, now, and for ever more.

FINIS.
A Table and brief Description of the chief places mentioned in the History of
Josephus.
ACo Ptolemais, a City of Phoenicia; called so from Ptolemy King of Egypt.
Aielona, The name of a City belonging to the Levites, and of a village not far
from Nicopolis, also the place whereabout (at the prayer of Joshua) the Sun
stood still, while the Canaanites were slain. Alexandria, A City in Egypt,
built by Alexander son of Philip, King of Macedon; built in the form of a
Macedonian chlamys, or cloak. Antiochia, A City in Syria, lying on the
Seacoast, built by King Antiochus. Aossa, A Town which Alexander King of the
Jews wan, and encompassed it with a tripl^ wall. Aram, His country is at this
day called Syria; he was one of the sons of Shem, the son of Noah. Arabia, A
country lying on the East and North-East of the Holy Land, and is divided into
Fe^ix, Deserta, and Petraea or Arabia, the Happy, the Desert, and the Stony.
Ararat, A Mountain of Armenia, where Noah's Arc rested. Askalon, One of the
five principal Cities of the Philistines, built on the sea shore, distant from
Jerusalem 720. furlongs. Asdotum, A very strong City of the Philistines, where
Giants sometimes dwelt. Assure Assy^ia, A Country lying near the Holy Land, so
named from Assure, the son of Sem. Astaroth Karna^m, A City in the tribe of
Manasse, on the other side of Jordan, in the very corner of the country of
Bashan, in the confines of Arabia.
B
BEthshemesh, or Bethsemes, A city belonging to the Priest, lying in the Land
of Juda, in the lot of Dan, afterward assigned to the Levites; the people of
this City were slain by the hand of God, to the number of 50000. for looking
into the Ark. Bitter, A very strong City, not far from Jerusalem, which the
Romans took by famine.
C
CAppadocia, A little country being part of Syria, called by the Greeks
Leuco-Syria. Cedron, A Brook which runs on the East side of Jerusalem, between
the city and mount Olivet. Cephar Toco, A town in Idumaea, which Vespasian the
Emperor wan. Chaldaea, A country lying North-East from Palestina, the chief
city whereof was Babylon. Caesarea, A Town lying not far from the sea, in the
Holy Land; called also Turris Stratonis, and Flavia Colonia (...) very strong,
and re-buil^ by Herod to keep the Jews from rebellion.
D
DAmascus, a City i^ Syria, lying beyon^ mount Libanus six day^ journey from
Jerusalem, watered with two navigable Rivers, Abana, and Pharphar.
E
ELat, A City in Idumaea, upon the coast of the red sea. Edom, or Idumaea, The
country where the posterity of Esau lived, so called from Edom, the name of
Esau, signifying red. Euphrates, Called by Ezechiel, Chebar; it divides Babylon
in the midst, and runs into the Persian gulf.
G
GAlilee, A most fruitful part of the Holy land, situate betwixt mount Libanus,
and Samaria: bounded on the North with Tire, on the South, with the Samaritans
country, and the river Jordan; on the west with the territory of Ptolemais, and
mount Carmel; on the East it extends it self beyond the streams of Jordan.
Gamala, A very strong, and almost impregnable Town and Castle of Palestina,
which was built on the top of a hill, like a bunch upon a Camels back, whence
the city took its name Gamala; Gamal, in Hebrew, signifying a Camel. Gaza, One
of the five principal Cities of the Philistines, distant from the sea about two
miles; it was taken from the Canaanites by the tribe of Juda, Caleb being their
Commander. Gerarta, A City in the upper Galilee. Gilboa, The mountains upon
which Saul and Jonathan his son, were slain by the Philistines. Gomorrha, Acity
of the Canaanites near to Sodom, both which were consumed by fire from heaven.
Goschen, A part of Egypt, fruitfulin pastures, where Jacob and the Patriarchs
were placed by Pharaoh King of Egypt.
H
Jerusalem, called the Holy City, was built on mountains in the midst of
Judaea, in the Tribe of Benjamin, a place c^osen by God Himself, buil^ at first
by the Jebusites, and by them called Jebus; the king whereof Joshua slew.
Afterward David coming against it, the inhabitants were so confident of the
impregnableness of it, that in scorn they placed the lame and blind upon the
walls, as accounting them sufficient defenders of so strong a place. But David,
by the help of Almighty God, wan the city, cast out the Jebusites, ^ebuilt it
round, fortified it with a Tower, and dwelt in it, making it the chief City of
all the land of Canaan; afterward by reason of the building of Solomon's Temple
in that place, it was calle^ Hiero^osyma, that is, Solomon's Temple, from the
Greek name Next for the Idolatry and shedding innocent blood in that place and
land the Jews were carried captive into Baby^on by Nebuchadnezzar, the Temple
and City were destroyed by fire by the Cha^daeans; but seventy years after
that, according as the Lord spoke by the mouth of Jeremiah the Prophet, the
people of the Jews were by Cyrus sent out of Captivity into their own land,
with great gifts; besides gold and silver, and the vessels that had been taken
out of the house of the Lord by Nebuchadnezzar, with Zerubbabel (...) the
re-edifying of the Temple, and furnishing (...) it by Artaxerxes; aft^ ward
Nehemiah was (...) thorised for the buildi^ of the wall of the City. This being
done and (...) nished by Zerubbal and by Nehemiah, the City being magn^ cently
increased w^ buildings, afterward (...) the Machabees, and Herod, thirty eight
years after the death of Christ, Titus son to Vespasian sacked the City, and
destroyed it, leaving it only a garrison for the Roman soldiers. Sixty five
year^ after that, the Jews falling into rebellion, Hadrian the Emperor of
Rome, utterly destroyed what Titus left standing, and commanded salt to be sown
where the City stood. And thus was fulfilled what was spoken by our Savior
touching the Temple, that there should not be left one stone upon another.
Hurcan or Hurcania, a region in the greater Asia, having on the East the
Caspian sea, on the South Armenia, upon the North Albania, on the West Iberia.
I
^buam, or Jamnua, a ^illage of the upper Ga^ee, standing upon a very ^eep
ground, which Jose^hus being Governor of Galilee, fortified against the
Romans. ^ericho, A city in the south part of the Land of Canaan, situated in a
fruitful soil, where grew balm, roses, sugarcanes, and abundance of dates,
whence it was called the City of Palms. Joppe, or Japho, a sea town and port of
Judaea built on a high Promontory, from whence materials of Timber and Stones
were brought to the building of Solomon's Temple, from Mount Libanus, or
Lebanon. Jordan, in Hebrew Jorden, the fairest, and biggest river in all
Palestina, springing up at the foot of Mount Libanus, running on the South of
Canaan, passing by many famous places, at length falls into the Lake of Sodom.
Jorpata, or Jatopatae, an exceeding strong city of Jerusalem, standing all
well-nigh upon a Rock, accessible only upon the North side.
K
KAtiim, or Cittim, the Nations of the Greeks, so called in Genesis 10. and in
Balams prophecy; Kittim (says he) shall afflict Ashur and Eber.
L
LAgarith, a City of Edom, won by Vespasian.
M
MAcedonia, a Country lying in Greece in the western part of it; it was the
country of King Philip, and Alexander his son, which wan to the Greeks the
Persian Empire. Maidai, or Media, a country having upon the South P^rsia, upon
the North, the Hyrcanian-sea, on the West Armenia and Syria, on the East
Hyrcania and Par^hia; which country took its name from Madai, one of the sons
of Japhet. Mesopotamia, a Country which lies betwixt the Rivers, Tigris and
Euphrates, from which situation it was so called; as lying in the midst of
Rivers. Moriah, a Mountain joining very near to Jerusalem, upon the East side
of that City, a very steep rockie place; in this place Abraham offered to
sacrifice his son Isaac, and afterward upon this Mountain was Solomon's Temple
built. Mo^nt Olivet, So called from the plenty of Olives which grew here, lying
on the East side of Jerusalem, and separated from the higher city by the valley
of Cedron. Into this Mountain our Sav^our Christ often repaired, and offered up
his prayers here unto his Father.
N
NIcopolis, a City of the Holy Land, otherwise called Emaus.
S
SAmaria, a City standing in the tribe of Ephr^im, which after that the ten
Tribes fell off from the tribe of Judah, was made the Metropolis of the ten
revolting Tribes; called Sebaste in honor of Augustus the Emperor.
Scythopolis a city in Syria. Sennaar, The land of Chaldea, where the Tower of
Babel began to be builded Seleucia, a city on the farther side of Jordan in the
country called Gualonitis, so named from Seleucus King of Syria. Sichem, a
country near He bron, belonging to Hamo^ the Father of Sichem from whence it is
though he gave the name of h^ son, to that country of which he was Prince; and
by some it is thought to be the name of that city called in the Gospel Sichar,
a city of refuge and peculiar to the Levites; a principal City of Samaria.
Sodom, a city which stood in the Land of ^anaan, where now is the Deadsea,
destroyed by fire from heaven, for their sins. Sidon, a Haven, and Mart Town of
Phoenicia, being the border of the Land of promise toward thenorth, and in the
Lot of the tribe of Zabulon, although it was never conquered, nor possessed by
them. Sinai, The Mountain otherwise named Horeb, upon which the Almighty gave
the Law to Moses by the ministry of Angels. It was called Sinai from the word
in the Holy Tongue signifying a Bush; because God appeared there to Moses, in a
Bush, in a flame of fire; the Bush not consumed. Sion, The Hill and City built
on that Hill, called the City of David, taken by him from the Jebusites, lying
on the North side of the City of J^rusalem; upon which the Temple was built.
Siloe, a Fountain rising out at the foot of M^unt Sion, in the West part of the
valley of Jehosaphat, a very clear, sweet, and large Spring; it runs into the
brook Cedron. Schiloh, or Silo, The highest Mountain of all that are about
Jerusalem, Or higher than any other Mountain in the Holy Land; likewise the
name of the City that stands upon that Hill, where the Ark continued a long
time with the Tabernacle of the Covenant, till it was taken by the Philistines;
for which cause the people of Israel used to meet at this place and offer
sacrifices, until the time of Samuel the Prophet. Afterward for the sins of the
Israelites, the City was destroyed, and the Altar demolished.
T
TIarva, a city in Galilee which Vespasian took, razed, and put all the men to
the sword, and sold their wives and children. Tiberias, A city so named in
honor of Tiberius Caesar, by Herod the Tetrarch, standing near the Lake of
Gennezaret, called also the Sea of Tiberias; it is the utmost bound of the
lower Galilee Eastward. Tire, a city renowned in holy Scripture, built upon a
rock, and upon all sides encompassed by the sea; wherefore the Prophet calls her
the city in the heart of the sea; a city of incredible riches, by the abundance
of her merchandise; by the spe^ial appointment of God, and foretellings (...)
Prophets Isaiah and (...), made a prey to (...) King of Babylon, and afterward
to Alexander son of Philip King of Mace^ (...) of (...) in the ^ that part of
the sea which ran betwixt the mai^ land, and the city, wit^ stones, earth, and
timber and made it continent t^ the land; first Nebuchad^nezzar, but in short
tim^ after, that city was rebuilt, and the bar of the sea quite demolished, and
s^ the city restord to its former strength; but Alexander stopped up the sea
again, sacked the city, and crucified many of the chief men of the city, and t^
this day that little which remains of it, is annexed firmly to the Continent
It stood in the territory (...) the tribe of Ashur, b^ had Kings of her own,
ha^ ving never been in the hands of the Israelits.
A short view of the whole Matter. By Th. F. A true Character of the Jews, as
they are at this day; With the Hopes and Desires of all good men for their
Conversion. A Prayer unto God for their Conversion.
FINIS.

