JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE Earl of Warwick: BEING A true Relation of the taking
of two Ships that came from Denmark, laden with Ammunition and money, to the
value of an hundred thousand pound, by the Earl of Warwick for the service of
the King and Parliament.

ALSO THE SCOTS REMONSTRANCE, Declaring their fellow-feeling of the
distractions and distempers of this Kingdom, with their resolution to petition
His Majesty for an accommodation with His Parliament; and if that be rejected,
by force of arms to assist the Parliament to bring the Delinquents and
Disturbers of the State to condign punishment.

Printed for Th. Cook. October 4. 1642.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE EARL OF WARWICK: BEING A true Relation of the taking of
two ships which came from DENMARK, laden with ammunition and money, by the
Earl of Warwick, who are coming up to London.
UPon the eight and twentieth day of September, when the honorable Houses of
Parliament were assembled, they received information by Letters from the Earl
of Warwick, which was to this effect: That being resident with his charge in
the Navy, wherewith he was entrusted by the Parliament, for the security and
peace of the Kingdom, he discovered two ships afar off, which were coming
toward the coast of England from Denmark, full fraught, and when they
perceived themselves to be discovered by the English Fleet, which drew somewhat
nigh to them, and seeing it were in vain to think to save themselves by
flight, and that they were no way able to defend themselves if they should run
the hazard of an encounter with the English Fleet, without any opposition or
resistance they suffered themselves to be boarded by the Earl of Warwick, who
found them to be laden with good store of ammunition and money, which mounted
to the value of an hundred thousand pound, he seized upon them and their
treasure, that they might not be employed against the Parliament, and has sent
them guarded wi h two other of his ships up to London for the service of the
King and Parliament.

Notwithstanding these and other the like means of assistance used for the
upholding and maintaining of the malignant and ill-affected party of the
Kingdom against the Parliament, yet have we no cause of discouragement,
because of the near union between the two nations of England and Scotland,
from whom (upon Friday last) Letters were read in the House of Commons,
directed to the Lords and Commons now assembled in the high Court of Parliament
of England, in manner of a Remonstrance, wherein they did declare the sense
that they have of the great distractions and distempers of this Kingdom,
tending to the subversion of the long established government thereof, and the
confusion of the whole State, and in the end would prove the destruction of
that their Kingdom of Scotland; and therefore the Lords and Commons of that
Kingdom are resolved to present a Petition to His Majesty, with such reasons
as they conceive may move him to an accommodation of peace and agreement with
both his Houses of Parliament; but if the same should be rejected, they are
resolved to assist the Parliament with force of arms, to defend their just
cause, and to bring all delinquents and incendiaries that have disturbed the
peace of the Kingdom, and caused these troubles, to condign punishment, which
the House with great joy and much thankfulness accepted of.

On the 22. of September the great Rebel Oneal came before Munster with near
15000. men, threatening ruin and destruction to all that should any way resist
them, pretending withal, that he had the Kings authority for what he did: but
I conceive that is but a counterfeit show and false pretense, wherewith he
beguiled the ignorant Irish, taking example, as I conceive, of the malignants
of your Kingdom, who color all their wicked and malicious designs under a
pretense of standing for His Majesty, and the defense of the true Protestant
Religion, when indeed their ends are like his, tending to nothing but ruin.
But we, being acquainted with his treacherous actions, and knowing that our
chief security consisted in Gods protection and our own timely prevention,
gathered our selves together under the command of our Vice President: and
though we were but a small number in comparison of his forces, yet being put
into a martial equipage, we fronted boldly, without demanding the cause of his
present arrival.

This sudden and unexpected charge proved very advantageous to us, and
disadvantagious to them: for instead of making good their ground, they lost
their order, which by the continual motion and striving of the gross body,
was rather more disordered, then any way recovered, by which means our men did
very great execution upon the army of the Rebels, routing of their maine
Batalia. To be short, we slew above 700. Rebels, and lost not above 25.

On the first of October the Parliament received Letters from the Earl of
Bedford, informing them that the Marquess of Hartford, the Lord Pawlet, and
the rest of that company, except Sir Ralph Hopton which is departed from them,
and escaped privately (as it is thought) back again into Somersetshire, were
closely follovved by the said Earl to Minyard, where he finding of some
small Coale-ships, notvvithstanding the Earl of Bedford having used all
possible means to prevent his passage over Severne, he was gotten over the
river, and is escaped into Wales, but that the Earl of Bedford in his pursuit
after them, had taken M. Pallart, Sir Henry Berkley, and two of his brothers,
Sir Charles and Sir John Berkley, which the said Earl is sending up to the
Parliament. The Earl is now disarming of the Papists and Malignant Party of
that County, and placing sufficient Garrisons for the preservation of the peace
of that County.

FINIS.

