THE ACCOMPLISHMENT Of the SCRIPTURE PROPHECIES, OR THE Approaching Deliverance
of the CHURCH.

Proving, that the Papacy is the Antichristian Kingdom; and that that Kingdom
is not far from its Ruin. That the present Persecution may end in Three years
and half, after which the Destruction of Antichrist shall begin; which shall be
Finished in the beginning of the next Age: and then the Kingdom of Christ shall
come upon Earth.

Written in French by Mr. PETER JURIEU, one of the present Ministers of the
French Church at Rotterdam.

In two Parts.

Faithfully Englished from the New French Edition, Corrected and Enlarged by
almost a third part, with the explication of the Visions of Daniel, and the
Revelation.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1687.

TO THE NATION OF THE JEWS.
I Desire of that People, that they would please to read this book attentively,
and without prejudice; especially from the middle of the second Part to the
end; they will find nothing there that can irritate 'em. I confess the hopes
they conceive of a Kingdom of the Messiah, which shall be chiefly for them, is
built upon express and unquestionable Prophecies; that even their Jerusalem
should be rebuilt, and that they shall be again gathered together in their own
Land. And if any thing be capable to recover them from their obstinacy, for the
establishment of the Law of Moses, and against the Law of Christ; this is
certainly the most likely method, which we make use of, because it grants them
almost all the Advantages which they expect.

Advice to all Christians, concerning the approaching End of the ANTICHRISTIAN
Empire of the PAPACY, and of the coming of the Kingdom of Christ.
THE Afflicted Church seeks for consolation: where can she find it, but in the
Promises of God? when the present prospect is sad and doleful, we must search
for it in what is future. The promises of God are either General, or
Particular. The general Promises are such, as assure us in the general, that
God will not cast off his children; that this Grace shall never forsake his
Church; that he will be with them to the end of the World; that though the
mountains be overthrown, he will not depart from them. But afflicted persons
would be glad of something more particular: they would be willing to see, in
some particular Promises, near about what Time they may expect the Period of
their Calamities. Now the Promises and this insight into the future, is no
where to be had but in the Prophecies: They doubtless contain the promises
which respect the Deliverance of the Church; yea, they set forth the very Time,
and the circumstances of it. But as God has caused the Prophecies to be
written more for his own glory, than for our sakes, it is almost impossible to
dive into the meaning of them till their accomplishment. The depth of the
Prophecies.
And experience teaches us, that even after the Things are come to pass, we do
not well understand the Prophecies which foretold 'em. Insomuch, that it may be
said, that God has rather concealed Things in the Prophecies, than thereby
revealed 'em. He has reserved to himself the knowledge of Futurity; It Is his
Prerogative. Nevertheless, this is not to be taken in that strict and rigid
sense, as if we were to reckon all the Prophecies to be unintelligible to all
men, and in every age to be so. As his providence has presided in a peculiar
manner, in composing the Prophecies; so it is certain, it does perticularly
direct and govern, as to what concerns the interpretation of them. God will not
that they should be understood in every age; But from age to age, from year to
year, his Spirit discovers to Interpreters what he thinks fit; and leaves the
rest under a vail of Ignorance, till the fixed time which his wisdom has
appointed shall come, for the full and perfect revelation of it.

They are not Impenetrable.
We are not therefore to be discouraged by reason of the difficulty; we are not
to look upon the Prophecies as absolutely impenetrable. We must seek, that we
may find; we must ask, that we may receive; we must humbly and devoutly knock
at the Gate of Heaven, that it may be opened to us. We are obliged to those
Interpreters who have gone before us; for if they had discovered nothing, it
may be, no entrance being made, we should never have attained the knowledge of
these mysterious truths. But we are not to stop at their labors, and acquiesce
in what they have done, as if they had succeeded well in every thing. This is
so far from being true, that the contrary is much more so. For one Truth which
they have hit upon, they have miss't several. The misforture of other
Interpreters has not disheartn'd me, hoping that I have discovered many
things, which to them were concealed. But I may say, that I did not out of
choice apply my self to the study of the Prophecies: I found my self forced to
it by a kind of violence, which I could not resist.

Two things led me to it. 1. The cruel and horrible Persecution, which at this
day makes such terrible ravage and desolation in the Church: Endeavoring some
consolation under the deepest sorrow I ever felt, by searching into the
grounds, we may have to hope for a speedy deliverance of the Church, and not
finding them other where, I inquired after them in the Prophecies, which
foretell the destiny of the Church, and the most remarkable changes through
which she is to pass. 2. The next thing that made me resolve to dive into these
sacred Oracles, was the concurrence of so many Prophecies, (obscure indeed, and
of an uncertain and doubtful original,) which foretell a speedy and perfect
Deliverance of the Church.
For Example, The concurrence of modern Prophecies concerning the fall of
Antichrist.
the famous Prophecy of Usher Archbishop of Armagh, who fore-tells a most
terrible Persecution at hand, the most dreadful of any which the Church has
suffered hitherto; but withal, the shortest: after which shall come the fall of
the Antichristian Empire. The Prophecies of Cotterus, Christina Poniatouski,
and those of Drabitius, and several other more obscure ones, which I have heard
and considered, without giving much credit to'em.

I compared these Prophecies so universally spread, and coming from so many
several places, to the general rumors about the time of the birth of Christ,
that were every where divulged throughout the Roman Empire, of a Great King
that should be born in the East, to whom all the World should pay obeisance. I
did not find my self much disposed to give credit to those modern Prophecies.
Credulity being the ordinary source of much delusion, I always stood upon my
guard in that particular as much as possible. Nevertheless, I could not but be
touched with a secret opinion, that in all this there might be something more
then humane, something of an hand of Providence therein. As the Holy Virgin, I
kept these sayings in my heart, without passing a judgment, I waited till
farther Time, (which is the only true Touchstone) would distinguish foolish
visions from real Prophecies.

I found something surprising and extraordinary, in the Prophecies of Cotterus,
Christina, and Drabitius, which are published by Comenius. Cotterus, who is the
first of the Three, is Great and magnifick; the images of his visions have so
much majesty and grandeur, that those of the ancient Prophets have hardly more.
They are also admirably laid together, every thing supports it self, and one
part does not contradict another. I cannot conceive how a simple Artisan could
have imagined such great things without Divine assistance. The two years of the
Prophecy of Christina, are in my judgment a train of as great Miracles as have
ever been since the Apostles days, and even the Life of the Greatest Prophets
has nothing in it more miraculous, than what happened to that maid. Drabitius
has also his Heights and Excellencies, but for the most part he is obscure.
These three Prophets concur to foretell the Ruin of the Antichristian Empire,
as a thing that shall shortly come to pass; but withal they have so many things
that offend, that no man can satisfy himself to rely upon what they say.
Therefore I resolved to look into the Fountain it self of the Holy Oracles, to
see if the Holy Ghost would not teach me something more certain and more exact,
concerning the approaching ruin of the Antichristian Empire, than what other
Interpreters have discovered from thence.

I will freely acknowledge, that when I first looked into the Divine Oracles, my
opinion was in favor of what I searched for; being altogether inclined to
believe, that we were near the end of the Kingdom and Empire of Antichrist. I
was also fully persuaded of this truth, that the Papacy is the Antichristian
Empire; and that the principal Character of that Antichristianism, is the
superstition which for more than twelve hundred years has disfigured the
Church, and made her desolate. Many things, without reckoning the modern
Prophecies, made me Hope, that we were near the end of that Period of 1260
years, at the close whereof Babylon must fall, the Heathen be converted, and
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ be fully settled.

First, I reflected on the long duration of that Idolatry, which has been
established in the Christian Religion. I saw that it began about the end of the
fourth Century, that is, thirteen hundred years ago; it seemed to me, that no
instance could be given, where God suffered so great a Corruption, for so long
a time, without giving some remedy and relief. I considered farther, that in
the last age, God gave a terrible blow to the Antichristian Empire and the
Pagan Religion. The Kingdoms of England, Swede, Denmark, the Protestant States
of Germany, the United Provinces, the Switzers, and a great part of France,
broke from the Papacy all at once, appeared to me so considerable a matter,
that I could nor persuade my self, but that God had made mention of it in the
Revelations. And yet I found no such thing among the Expositors of that Book:
or I found that they had looked for it in those Places, where I saw plainly that
it was not. Hereupon I suspected, that that part of the Apocalypse, which
describes the degrees and Circumstances of the end of the Antichristian Empire,
was not well understood; and consequently, that it was much nearer than was
commonly thought.

Considering the Reformation of the last Age, as one half of the ruin of the
Kingdom of Antichrist, I supposed that the other half could not be far off,
there being already near 200 years from the one to the other. When God makes
great Empires fall, and not all at once; the distance is not commonly so great
between the first part of the Fall and the second.

After this, I considered the present posture of the World, and it seemed to
me, as if all things were prepared for some great Revolution. It Is as easy with
God to work in one moment, and without preceding dispositions, as to take time,
and prepare the matter. Nevertheless, we see that by secret methods, which men
perceive not, he opens the way to his greatest works. For Example, the Fall of
Paganism by the preaching of the Gospel, and the conversion of the Heathen
World, was a great Revolution. God prepared all things for this great Event
many ages before it came to pass, by admirable means, of which no man then knew
the tendency and design. 1. He reduced the World to two Languages, which were
almost universal, the Greek and Latin, that the knowledge of the Gospel might
the more easily be communicated; Difference of Languages being a great
hinderance of such a communication. It Is true, the Apostles had the gift of
Tongues, and could speak all Languages; but we are not to imagine, that all the
Preachers of the Gospel had the same privilege. 2. The world was almost wholly
united under one Empire, viz. the Roman: which was another means to facilitate
the Conversion of the Nations. For if the Earth had been divided into many
little Principalities, under several Soyeraigns, as the West is at this day, it
had been as it were impossible, but that diverse of them, if not the most part,
would have denied entrance to the Apostles, who were the new Preachers. Little
Lords, who have not much to do, concern themselves more particularly about
every part of their Territories, than great Emperors, who having the Government
of the whole World to mind, are forced to remit the care of less important
matters, to their Deputies and Lieutenants. 3. The dispersion of the Jews by
their frequent Captivities, was also a means which God made use of to prepare
the way for the Conversion of the Gentiles: they gave them the knowledge of the
true God. 4. Another thing which contributed very much to this design of God,
was the Translation of the Bible into the Greek Tongue; whereby the sacred
Oracles became common among the Heathens. And about the time of our Savior's
appearance in the World, there were multitudes of those Proselites, which are
called Proselites of the Gate. Such as were not really Jews, but they ceas't to
be Pagans. They renounced their Idolatry, they were present every Sabbath day
at the reading of Moses and the Prophets; they had a distinct place in the
Synagogues. It Is of them we so often read in the Book of the Acts, under the
name of devout, and such as feared God among the Gentiles: Cornelius was of
that number. It could not be difficult for them to abandon Paganism, for they
had already left it, and they could not be hindered from becoming Christians by
Judaism, for they had never embraced it; So that they became Christians without
change or violence; The greatest part of the converted Gentiles were such as
these. 5. And by the same good Providence of God, Philosophy began to flourish
among the Pagans, a little before the coming of Christ, which was of great use
to refine the minds of men, and render them capable of receiving celestial and
sublime Truths. 6. Lastly, God possessed the Heathen with a contempt of Idolatry
and Idols: They were disgusted and sick of their Gods: The false Oracles of
Demons ceas't, their Priests lost their reputation, and all the World breathed
after a change, without knowing why.


I find something like this at present. 1. Since the last Age God has revived
the Light and knowledge of the Sciences, which was almost stifled and
extinguished under the barbarism of Scholastic Learning. In the last Century,
God caused the knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues to revive, which was
of such use for the understanding of the Holy Scripture, and the confutation of
Heresy and Idolatry, that the Papists do not scruple to say, that it is that
which has undone them. In this Century the Providence of God has carried the
acuteness and delicacy of men's minds to that degree, that it may truly be said,
that the most enlightened and refined Ages past, were barbarous in comparison
with this. The speculative Sciences and true Philosophy are brought to that
Perfection, that all that we had before may be reckoned simplicity and
ignorance. This new Philosophy does open and enlarge the mind, and the light we
receive from modern Philosophers does help very much to scatter that thick
darkness, which the Philosophy of the Schools had cast upon the Doctrines of
Religion. We shall shortly know of what use the new Philosophy may be to
destroy those Monsters of Transsubstantiation and the Real Presence.

2. I look upon the long Voyages of our Europaeans, the discoveries made of new
Countries in the East and West, and the improvement of the Art of Navigation,
to be a means which God prepares for the fullfilling that great Promise that
concerns the full Conversion of the Gentiles. Why did God reserve the Invention
of the Sea Compass to these last times? why was it not known three or four
hundred years ago, what it was to sail upon the Ocean far from the shore? was
there less curiosity, covetousness, or industry among men formerly than now?
for what reason would God that one half of the World should live in ignorance
of the other for so long a time? Why has God in these latter days more visibly
favored the designs which men have always had, to enrich themselves by
Commerce and Trade, going in pursuit of riches to the end of the World? for my
own part, I cannot but look upon this as a work of a most wise Providence,
discovering to us unknown People, whose Conversion he intends to bring about
within a short Time.

3. I consider the great number of half Christians which the Popish Missions
make in the Indies, to be just as those Proselytes of the Gate, which the Jews
made; they were properly neither Jews nor Christians, but were the seed of
Christianity. These Eastern Converts, which are made by Papists, are neither
Heathens, nor Christians: but they will be the first part of the Harvest, which
God intends to have among those People; and after they are fully converted,
they will be very serviceable for the Conversion of those who as yet are
altogether Pagans.

4. I admire the depth of Divine Providence, that by insensible steps and
degrees, disposes the Mahumetan Nations for Conversion. For this we need but
consult the second Book of the Present Stave of the Ottoman Empire, Lib. 2.
Chap. 2.
by Mr. Ricaut. In that History we meet with a Sect of Mahumetans, called
Haictites; who believe that the Messiah took a true natural Body, and that
being Eternal, he became Incarnate, as the Christians believe: Wherefore they
have inserted this Article into their confession of Faith, that Christ shall
come to judge the World at the last day. For the proof whereof they cite a Text
out of the Alckoran in these words, O Mahomet! thou shall see thy Lord, who
shall come again in the Clouds. For though they dare not positively interpret
this of J. Christ, yet they boldly affirm, that this is foretold of the
Messiah; and in their ordinary discourse, they confess, that this Messiah can
be no other than Jesus, who is to return into the World with the same flesh
which he assumed.

The same Author tells us, That there is an opinion generally received among
the Turks within a few years, Chap. 12.
which is entertained by the best people of the Seraglio, and common enough at
Constantinople. They who profess to believe it, are called Chup Messahites, i.
e. the good Partisans or followers of the Messiah. They hold that Christ is
God, and that he is the Redeemer of the World. The young Scholars in the Court
of the grand Seignior are generally of this opinion: perticularly the most
polite and civilized, and well bred among them. Insomuch that it is a form of
speech very much in use among them, when they would praise any one, to say to
him, Chup Messahisen, you are very civil and obliging, as he should be who
makes profession of the service of the Messiah. There are a multitude of these
People Constantinople; and there have been some who have maintained this
Doctrine, which so much courage, that rather than quit it, they have chosen to
suffer martyrdom.

There is another Sect, called Eschrakites. P. 407.
They who profess it, addict themselves very much to the contemplation of the
Idea of the Divinity, and the numbers that are in God. For though they hold the
Unity of God, they nevertheless admit the Trinity also, as a number proceeding
from Unity. They explain that thought by the example of three Pleats, or folds
in an Handkerchief, which may be called three, though it be but one piece of
cloth when it is unfolded. These are no great Admirers of the Alchoran, they
only make use of that which they find agrees with their Principles, and reject
the rest, as if it were abolisht. Believing, that the chief Good of man
consists in the Contemplation of the Majesty of God; they despise the dreams
and gross imaginations of Mahomet, concerning the Pleasures of Paradise. All
the Schecs, and the most able Preachers of the Royal Mosques, are of this Sect.
They are very diligent in their devotions, and sober in their diet, etc. They
have also a great deal of Charity for their Neighbors, saying, they are the
Creatures of God, etc. They instruct their Scholars to be moderate, wise and
grave, in a word to abstain from all evil Actions, and to practice all Virtues.
One step farther, and these People will be much better Christians than the
Greeks, who have the name and Profession of Christians.

A general disposition in the world to despise and forsake Popery.
5. The sensible Fall and declension of the Papacy, is a fifth sign of that
great work which God is making way for. It seems to be furious, to reign, and
get ground; nevertheless, in truth it is falling; for as God discredited the
Religion of the Pagan Idols, a little before the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; so he makes this renewed Paganism of Popery, to be in less credit and
esteem than formerly. Men begin to disgust the popish superstitions. They speak
of the Invocation of Saints with contempt; and boldly condemn the excess of it,
and call it Idolatry, when they speak of it in private. They wish Images were
banished from their Churches, that it might not be a scandal and an offense to
us: They begin to confess, that there was no necessity for the taking away the
Cup. They acknowledge, that a man may be saved without Indulgencies, by the
sole merit of I. Christ. They would restore the reading of the Holy Scriptures
to the People. They suppress the Authority of the Pope, and speak of it with
scorn. They despise his Thunders; and if he begin to murmur, they talk as loud,
or louder than he: They endeavor to establish this Doctrine, that under
pretense of Religion, or for the preservation of it, it is not permitted to
subjects to take up arms: They mollify and sweeten all the Doctrines of Popery.
I have taken notice of this in another place, and again observe it, this cannot
hold long, this state and posture of the Papacy is violent. Since it is freely
confessed, that the adoration of one God is sufficient without that of Saints and
Images, they must shortly conclude, that for things unnecessary they ought not
to scandalize one half of the Christian World, and shut the Gate against the
Jews and the Mahometans. Never were there so many in the Church of Rome as now,
who acknowledge the vanity and impurity of their Superstitions. Every man has
the liberty of his own thoughts; but I profess, that to me these are great
presages of the approach of the last work of God, for the establishment of his
Kingdom, and the ruin of that of Antichrist.

My spirit was in this frame, when this last and great Persecution in France
began. I therein took notice of several Characters, that confirmed me in the
belief that we were in the last times of the Period of 1260 years, and that
this is the last Persecution spoken of in the 11th Chap. Revel. Singular
Characters in the present persecution, which presage that it shall be this last.
And when they shall have finiht their Testimony, the Beast who ascends out
of the bottomless Pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them,
and kill them. And their dead Bodies shall lie in the street of the great City
three days and a half. For there are so many things singular and irregular in
this Persecution, that without profaneness and a denial of Divine Providence, we
cannot but acknowledge the hand of God therein. It Is singular and more than
usual, whether we consider the Authors of this Persecution, and the manner of
it; or whether we consider the Subjects that suffer it, and in what manner they
suffer.

As to the Persecutors themselves, There is First a Prince, who has the
chiefest obligation to us for the Crown he wears, which entered into his Family
by the person of his Grand Father; a Prince, to whom we have always paid
obedience and submission, without the least shadow of Rebellion: a Prince for
whom we preserved the Crown in his minority, and who has not scrupled to
testify that we did so: a Prince, who is wise and understanding, as to his own
Interests, and those of the States of Europe, who yet in despite of his own
Interest, has done all that which the House of Austria would have dictated to
him to do if she had employed her Emissaries in his Council: who destroys his
own Subjects, who makes innumerable Malcontents, who throws eternal seeds of
rebellion and war in his own Dominions, who disobliges his Protestant Allies,
and alienates them in such a manner almost as never to be reconciled. The
Protestant States and Princes have been always the principal Allies of France,
Swede, Denmark, England, the Low Countries, the Switzers, and the Protestant
Princes of Germany. These are they that have supported it, when the House of
Austria threatened the liberty of all Europe. And these are they who assisted
France, to humble the House of Austria so low as now it is, and consequently
that have advanced France to that point of Grandeur she is now at. But Time
will show how great a wound France has now made in the heart of all her
ancient Allies.

We see already that this Persecution makes the discord and dissension cease
that was between the Protestants, and brings them nearer an union and
reconciliation than before. God will let us see something farther of that kind.
However, it must be confessed, that there is something therein, which is not to
be understood by man, that so wise a Court should violate all the rules of good
policy, which is the Soul of States, and the spring of all their motions.

If we look upon the Clergy, that seems to have been the Solicitor of this
Persecution, it will appear no less extraordinary. It Is not an Ignorant and
superstitious Clergy, as was that of the last Century. These are understanding
and knowing persons, Men of learning and prudence, freed from the ridiculous
affectation, and prejudice of a Monastic Spirit, who have little zeal for the
Romish Ceremonies: who flight their worship, at least for the most part of it;
who have much knowledge of the Truth, and at the bottom but very little
Religion. In a word, they are such, as know very well that we are not in the
wrong, or at least, that altogether and in every thing we are not:
Nevertheless, they persecute us more cruelly, than the most furious Monks, or
enraged Inquisitors have ever done. They act therefore against their own light,
which is so far very strange and surprising. But what is more astonishing, they
act against the most sacred Principles of their Religion. There is nothing
among them more venerable than the Sacraments, and nothing esteemed more
criminal than the violation of them. To administer the Sacrament of Penance,
to give absolution to a Sinner, to an Heretic who is not penitent, who says
and declares openly, without hiding or concealing it, that he perseveres from
his very heart in his sin and Heresy, and never renounced it, but by constraint
and violence; to give, I say, absolution to such a man, according to the
definition of their loosest Casuists; It Is Sacrilege to give the Sacrament of
the Altar to a man, that professes he believes nothing of it, and
acknowledges nothing there but mere Bread; it is a Sacrilegious Communion.
Should it not affect the Hearts, and even the Imaginations of those persecuting
Bishops and Priests, to think of the innumerable Sacriledges that by this means
are every day committed? They absolve a multitude of wretched People, who
protest that by mere force and violence, they were constrained to sign the
abjuration of their Religion, and to get out of the hands of a thousand
Executioners, who devoured and destroyed 'em, and gave them no rest day or
night. The Priests and Bishops who absolved them, know well enough that they
are Impenitent and Heretics, and persevering in their Heresy; nevertheless,
they give them absolution. Moreover, they bring them to their Altars by force
and violence; they must be confessed; they must desire the Sacraments, and they
are given them. In the mean time, they know, that they detest and abhor from
their very hearts, as a mere Idol, that which is given them to eat and worship
as a God. So that all these are Sacrilegious Communions, and in plain terms,
the most abominable Sacrilege that can be imagined: what conscience can we
suppose these men to have, who are guilty of such abominations, so directly
contrary to their own Principles?

But by what name shall we call the Oath, which they force men to take, and
which they have publicly printed; in which the new Converts swear by the name
of God, and upon the H. Evangelists, that they have willingly abjured, and
without constraint or force? And yet the Bishops know, and all the World is
acquainted with it, that they have been forced to this abjuration, by armies of
Butchers and Executioners, let loose upon them. Where are any principles of
Morality, even those of the greatest latitude, that will permit this? can there
be any more horrible profanation of an Oath? than which nothing is more sacred
and venerable.

In what a state must such men's Consciences needs be, who force these poor men
to commit so execrable a perjury, and cause the name of God to be used, for the
assuring the Truth of a Thing, which is most notoriously false? I confess, I
shall never comprehend this; and will always say, there is something in it more
than humane, that Men should make profession of a Religion, and contradict the
most inviolable rules of it, openly before all the World. But to what a pitch
of Impudence must they be arrived, who Print and publish, that no violence at
all has been employed to make these Conversions? All France abounds with
strangers, who are witnesses of it; the Ministers of the Princes of Europe
behold in; foreign Merchants see and know it; An hundred thousand witnesses,
who have themselves escapt out of the hands of these Executioners, carry
tidings of it to all the ends of the Earth; and yet there are some who have the
confidence to deny a matter of Fact, that was done in the sight of all Europe.
We read the Arrests; we see the Ordonnanees of the Intendants; we see Woods cut
down, and Houses rased; we behold twelve or fifteen thousand Prisoners in all
the Prisons of the Kingdom: and yet they tell us, there is no such thing as
Persecution. This is one thing which is very singular in this Persecution, and
which has no example. I could not read without trembling, what Mr. de Brueys
says in his last piece, that the success there has been of the Methods
employed for the Conversion of the Reformed, make it evident that they were
altogether disposed to receive the Catholic Truth. I know not what those
dispositions were as to himself: but I question not but by the same means to
make him turn Turk, and afterward Heathen, in a very little time.

What Judgment can one make of such men as Mr. Brueys, and Mr. Maimbourg, who
in the Epistle Dedicatory to the Life of Gregory I. complements and
congratulates the King to this purpose, that he sees the Period of Calvinism,
without having made use of any means to bring it about, but those of Grace and
sweetness, mild and gentle methods? It Is these kind and gracious proceedings
that has forced persons of good birth and quality, accustomed to all the best
accommodations of Life, to leave ten, twenty, thirty, forty thousand Livres per
annum, to expose themselves to all sorts of suffering and disgrace. It Is these
sweet and obliging ways, that has forced women of every age and quality to
come away, disguised in the habit of Peasants, some on foot, some on horseback,
some by Post, some who were eight or nine months with child, in the night,
through all the Fatigues of the winter. I say once more, that I cannot
understand, how men that have any honor to lose, or at least, who believe they
have, can declare that to be false, which is so evident and notorious, that
nothing is more publicly known, or more undeniable. This is a sort of Lying
that in my opinion is very particular. But it the mean while, it is an homage
paid to Truth and Justice; it is a confession, that such Actions are most black
and abominable, because though they are committed in the face of the Sun, they
dare not own them; they deny them before those who were eyewitnesses of them.
No man of honor, after the reading of Mr. Maimbourg's Epistle to the King,
prefixed to the Life of St. Gregory, but must judge him to be one of the most
base and dishonest Writers in the world. It had been more pardonable, if he had
only by the by dropped such a falsehood, without insisting on it. But to write a
large Epistle Dedicatory on that subject, to complement the King for the
Conversions he has made, without using any other means than sweetness and
Charity, this is to put the most patient Readers out of all patience.

If we consider the manner of this persecution, it is no less extraordinary;
It Is new, it is without example. It Is no new thing to condemn people to dye, or,
to offer incense to Idols, and to go to Mass, to banish Christians or massacre
them, because they will not join in with the Religion that is uppermost; this
has been seen an hundred times. But I maintain, there was never any thing seen
like this Persecution, which we see at present. They tell People, they will not
kill them; on the contrary, we will, say they, that you live, but you shall go
to Mass, or you shall be tortured; you shall be confined within the Kingdom;
you shall not be suffered to go away; if you attempt an escape, you shall be
sent to the Galleys; while you stay, you shall have fifty Soldiers, or rather
Executioners to maintain; if fifty be not sufficient, you shall have an
hundred, with express orders, not to let you alone by day or night to omit no
pillage, no blows, no punishments, no torments, till you have renounced your
Religion. This, I say, is what has never been seen before.

The success has made many believe, that this infernal method was the most
happily invented by the Clergy, that could be, to promote the design of the
Converters, and to ruin the Reformation. But I am quite of another opinion; and
it is one of the most extraordinary things which I find in this persecution,
that any persons of good sense, should believe this to be a likely method to
abolish a Religion. The persecution was well enough begun, in order to the end
and design of the Persecutors. And had they been contented by little and little
to deprive us of our Temples, to banish our Ministers, to forbid all
Assemblies, to leave us in ignorance, and deprive us of all the other
advantages which others Subjects enjoy; the Reformed Religion would have been
almost extinguished before ten years were over: such being the coldness and
declension of Piety, to which the Protestants were already come. But God, who
would not that his Truth should perish, suffered not that things should remain
in that posture. It Is well known, that humane passions are a great help to
Christian virtues; The fury which these persons are now in, who feel this
violence, the torment they suffer in their Consciences, the rage which they are
in, for being forced; do all concur to fortify the hatred they had of Idolatry,
and their love and inclination for the Truth. So that by means of these violent
Passions, the Truth makes the more indelible impressions on their hearts. He
must be very ignorant in the History of the World, and of the Heart of man, who
can think this to be a likely way to extinguish a Religion. The means to
extirpate an Heresy, pretended, or real, is to cut off the Heads, to shed a
great deal of blood, and to stifle the most zealous of them by a massacre: for
if you suffer them to live, and are content only to draw from them a feigned
abjuration, you thereby make them irreconcilable Heretics. 'Twas by fire and
sword the Albigenses were destroyed. There is yet another very effectual way of
extinguishing an Heresy, which is to take away from them all means of increase
and growth by preaching and instruction: after this manner the Arrian Heresy
was suppressed by the Emperors. This way they began to take in France for these
twenty years last past, and which could not have failed of success, as I
observed, if it had been continued. But he must be very blind that can believe,
that Persons, into whose Heads and Hearts you would force the Truth by blows
and violence, will not recover themselves again as soon as possible, and by all
manner of ways. But it will be said, there are other methods used, which you
grant to be effectual; The People are deprived of all the means of Instruction,
and so in a little time the Truth must dye. This would prove so, if their
Consciences were not under such a violence as they are; and if that posture of
things could last long, the Truth would then be extinguished by little and
little. But that state of things is too violent to continue long; and within a
few years you will see the Light of that fire, which is shut up, without being
extinguished.

There is another thing very extraordinary in this Persecution, and wherein the
finger of God does manifestly appear; that is, the way they have taken in their
dealing with the Pastors. These are the men that must be suppressed, if you would
extinguish a Religion: because they are capable of recovering it. Therefore in
all former Ages the severest part of the storm has fallen on them; and even in
this Age likewise, witness the History of the Persecutions in Hungary. But here
is the quite contrary, the People ruined, and the Ministers suffered to go
free. They must carry nothing away with them, but their Souls and Consciences
are given them as a prey: which so many Laiks would desire and rejoice to
obtain. These banished Pastors carry the account of the miseries of their
several Flocks into all parts of the World. They are in all the Protestant
Courts of Europe, the unreproveable Witnesses of the violence of the
Persecution: their miseries stir up compassion toward the afflicted, and
Indignation against their Persecutors.

Besides this, they are always ready, and kept in reserve, to return into
France, and bring back the Light of Truth again there, whenever God shall
please to open the door. This is such a thing as speaks plainly, that God
preserves them in safety, in order to his great work, and till then. This is
not the effect of the Compassion of their Persecutors; for they are destitute
of any, and are cruel to the utmost degree. It Is not a piece of policy neither;
for that would have made them secure the Pastors in such a place, wherein they
should have been condemned to an eternal silence. It Is then a secret Providence
of God, which leads persons farther than they would go, and to do that which
they would not have otherwise done: and it is observable, that Bishop Usher in
his prophecy does expressly take notice of this particular, that in this last
persecution the Pastors shall be spared, God reserving them for the Great work
he has farther to do; which makes me give the more heed to that prophecy.

Lastly, that we may see how extraordinary this persecution is in all its
Circumstances, let us consider it in its success, and with respect to those on
whom it has succeeded. I look upon that general Desertion, an whole Kingdom in
a manner changing its Religion in four months time, as a thing that cannot be
paralleled. It Is true, the Roman Empire has been seen to become Arrian in a
very little while, by the persecution of the Emperors. But Arrianism was a
speculative Heresy, and the Arrians cheated the People by equivocal Confessions
of Faith, which taken in good sense, might now be subscribed unto. And for
other things, their Worship, Prayers, Ceremonies, Altars, Bishops, Government,
'twas all alike; and so the passage from one to another was very easy. But here
is the greatest difference imaginable, in worship, the object of adoration, the
manner of it, in Ceremonies, Government, and Discipline. The Reformed Religion
and the Roman differ as Day and Night; so that there must have been a
prodigious Current, for the passage from one to another in so little time. It Is
a frightfull and surprising thing to see People make less difficulty to change
their God, than good Subjects would do to change their Prince; in case an Enemy
break into any Country, he would not find People so ready to abjure their
former Oath of Fidelity. It Is true, this kind of persecution, which is made use
of against the reformed, seems to me more cruel and more likely to overcome
their constancy, then Massacres, and Fires, Wheels, and Gibbets. When a man can
see to the end of his sufferings, though that end be death, he may be able to
stand his ground: but when he is given over to an hundred Executioners, who are
commissioned to torment him by turns, without giving him the least repose, I
confess, this is the ready way to despair. If they did nothing more than hinder
a man from sleep, it were sufficient to make him distracted, and to make him do
what ever they would have him. It Is certain then, that several of those who
have yielded, would more willingly have suffered death for their Religion, and
have earnestly and seriously desired it. But what is very strange, is that the
greatest part have not tarried for these Persecutors. At the very approach of
the Dragoons they cowardly complied, and a small number of True Believets
remained victims, exposed to the Rage of an Army of an hundred thousand men,
which were let loose upon the Kingdom.

This, I say again, is without Example in any Histsry. S. Cyprian in his
Treatise de Lapsis, seems to say that some such thing happened in the
persecution of Decius; but he himself in his Epistles makes it evident, that
the Apostasy was not so general: for he remits those who had fallen to be
judged at the return of Peace, in the Assemblics of the Faithful who
persevered; so that the number of those that persevered must have been
considerable. In our time it would be difficult out of every Flock to make up
an Assembly of such as persevere to judge the rest. It Is therefore an Event,
wherein we must admire the depth of Divine Providence. It Is a speaking Prodigy,
which tells us, we are now in those last days, when Christ should come, and not
find true Piety, or true Faith upon Earth. This is a Touchstone for all
Protestants; their Brethren of France were not more wicked than others:
Wherefore we may believe, that the same thing would happen in any other place,
on supposition of the same Circumstances; and consequently, that Christian
courage and true Faith are at this day very rare, and few Instances to be
found. Lastly, this Affair tells us, that God would melt the Heart of that
People, and suffer them to sink and be swallowed up, that he may shortly raise
to himself another, a new People. These are the Characters of this persecution,
which makes me regard it as very singular and extraordinary in its kind, and
consequently as a presage, that God will shortly finish the establishment of
his Kingdom, and the Ruin of that of Antichrist. If we only consider, how this
Persecution has been more effectual than any the Church ever suffered, it were
enough to make us judge, that the Devil now imploys his utmost force and power,
as apprehending it is the last Time, and that the ruin of his Kingdom is at
hand. When Paganism was ready to fall under Constantine, he then excited the
sharpest persecution under the Emperor Dioclesian.

These are the different Reflections that conspired to possess me, that the
coming of our Lord was near, to destroy the wicked one by the Breath of his
Mouth. I had a strong inclination to be certain and assured of the truth of
these Thoughts, which could no otherwise be done but by finding in the
Apocalypse, the accomplishment of those Circumstances, which were to precede
and accompany the fall of the Babylonish Empire. With this design I betook my
self to read over the Apocalipse, not the several Commentators on that Book,
but the Book it self, only with the Exposition of Joseph Mede, whom I formerly
looked upon as a man inspired for the Interpretation of the Prophecies. His Key
of the Apocalypse, and annexed commentary, did heretofore charm me. I could
find nothing like it in all the other Expositors. I added that of his
Chronicles, and his Book called The Apostasy of the latter Times, which is a
large Commentary on 1 Timothy Chap. 4. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. And the Spirit says
expressly, that in the last times there shall be some who shall depart from the
Faith. Besides several excellent and curious things, (a part whereof you will
find in this Treatise) I met with in that Author the thing which I so eagerly
sought for, viz. the true Epoch of the 1260 years, during which Time the
Antichristian Empire should last; he makes them to begin about the year of our
Lord 450. or 455. by dateing them from thence, they must end about the year
1710, or 1715. which agrees very well with my conjecture. But Joseph Mede, who
set me right at first in the beginning of the true path, forsook me in the
middle of the way; and when the circumstances and preliminaries of the fall of
Babylon were to be adjusted according to this Calculation, which are so exactly
described in the Apocalypse, I found no assistance at all from him; on the
contrary, he led me out of the way, wherein he himself had put me, and to make
me wander and go astray. According to the Epoch which he himself had marked,
for the beginning of the 1260 years for the reign of Antichrist, I should see
the end of it in 25 or 30 years, but according to Mr. Mede there must be many
Ages to accomplish all things which are to be fulfilled before the period of
the Kingdom of Antichrist.

In the 11th, 14th, and 16th, Chapters, we have an account of the Circumstances
and degrees of the Fall of that Empire; the Eleventh Chapter speaks of the
death of the two Witnesses for three days and half, of their Resurrection, and
of the fall of the tenth part of the City, etc. In the 14, Chap. where the Fall
of Babylon is divided into two Acts, one is called the Vintage, the other the
Harvest. In the 16th. Chap. where the seven Periods of the declension and Fall
of the Antichristian Empire, are set forth by seven viols and seven Plagues; of
all this Joseph Mede understood nothing; yea, supposing, as he does, that of
those seven Plagues not above two or three were come to pass in his Time, he
remits us far enough off for the accomplishment of the five others. The Periods
described by every Viol are each of them more than one Age: so that we should
have four or five hundred years yet to come, before the end of the Kingdom of
Antichrist. If every one of the four viols, that remain to be poured out, were
but of fifty years, we should have yet two hundred years longer to wait.

I confess, that after having read those places of the Apocalypse, and reviewed
them twenty times, I understood nothing more therein; I was only more and more
confirmed, that no man had rightly understood them. In the midst of these
distractions I yet begun my work, without knowing well where I went. But I can
say, that God so opened mine eyes in the way, that gave me unexpressible
consolation; for after having consulted the Eternal Truth above an hundred
times, with a deep Humility, and very great Attention, at length I received an
answer, at least I believe so, and think it very plain, that all that must
precede the last Fall of the Antichristian Empire, is fully accomplished. I have
no right to require the same assurance from others, neither do I require it.
But that which I demand at least, is a little of that attention, which I
employed in the meditation of those divine Oracles, and then I am persuaded,
that if you are not as fully convinced as I am, you will yet see reason enough
not to condemn me of rashness.

In the first part of this work, you will find nothing new for the substance of
it; for it is a long time that Rome has been called Babylon, and that the
Characters of the Antichristian Empire have been confessed to be found in the
Papacy. I believe nevertheless, that you will find that Truth better cleared,
and made more manifest, than hitherto it has been. This Controversy about
Antichrist has languisht for an hundred years; it has been unhappily
abandoned, on a politic account, and in obedience to Popish Princes. It Is a
wicked Complaisance, for which we are punished, and which has cost us very
dear: for if we had perpetually exposed this Great and important Truth before
the Eyes of the Protestants, that the Papacy is Antichristianism, they would
not have fallen into that degeneracy and apostasy, which we see at present. How
could they have resolved within themselves to submit to Antichrist, and return
to his Party! But it is so long since they heard it so called, that they have
forgot it. They thought it was only a transport of zeal in the first Reformers,
from which we were now come off. There was something in that neglect and
forgetfullness, which seems to discover the finger of God: He would that this
horrible catastrophe should happen, and to that end permitted that this
important Truth should be neglected, and those controversies only which were
but accessory should be minded, and that this should be passed over, that the
Papacy is the Antichristian Empire: they who for want of giving heed to that
Truth are fallen, ought now to think of it, and tremble to consider, that they
have voluntarily plunged themselves again into that Babylon, out of which God
had so wonderfully delivered them. In my opinion, this is so fundamental a
Truth, that without it a man cannot be a true Christian: to confound the
Kingdom of J. Christ with that of Antichrist is an unsufferable Fault: in some
Ages for certain God has permitted that Ignorance; but we are not now in those
times: we must now declare for one party, and stand our ground. There is no
Communion between Christ and Belial, between the Prince of light, and that
Destroyer, who is truly an Angel of Darkness; that Controversy was so much
stifled and laid asleep, that our Adversaries believed it dead, and thought
that we had renounced that Principle, and the ground of all our Reformation;
for I cannot believe the Reformation to have been on a good foundation, but on
this account. Some Protestants (the reproach and shame not only of the
Reformation but of the Christian name) have contributed to efface these Ideas
from the minds of men, by turning to another sense what the H. Ghost says of
the Antichristian Empire, making such Commentaries of the scripture, as
overthrow the design and meaning of it, forging Histories at pleasure, by that
means to find the accomplishment of S. John's Prophecies in the first ages of
the Church. At present therefore we must revive that Truth, which we had almost
suffered to dye. This is the Time when we must endeavor to open the Eyes of
the Princes and People of the Earth; for behold now is the Time when they ought
to eat the flesh of the Beast, and burn it with fire, strip naked the whore,
and tear off her ornaments, and make a full end of Babylon. Within a little
while these great Things must come to pass; it is high time then to awaken men
in order to it. This is what I attempt in the first part of this work, wherein
I discover, after another manner than has been done hitherto, the true
Characters of that Antichristian Empire. In which I must acknowledge my great
obligations to my forementioned Author, Joseph Mede; for no man has taken
pains upon that subject with so much success as he* You will see the admirable
Type of Antichrist in the famous Antiochus, carried farther than ever it has
been, and the explication of the three years and half, or 1260 days, much
clearer than ever hitherto it has been made. But I must here advertise, that
to comprehend the full force of my Arguments, to prove the Papacy to be the
Antichristian Empire, to the reading of this work, you must add that of my
Lawful Prejudices against Popery; for in that book you will find the proof of
all the Characters of the Antichristian Empire enlarged. I mean not only those
Chapters, wherein the explication of some passages in the Prophecies concerning
Antichrist, I apply them to the Pope and his Empire, I speak principally of
those Chapters where I describe the Corruption, Covetousness, Pride, Idolatry,
Paganism, the fabulous and lying Spirit of Popery, all characters of
Antichristianism, as in this work is shown. I desire all those who have any
care of their salvation to Read those two pieces, and I dare be confident that
all those who have not a seared Conscience will be sensibly affected with what
they shall there find, and conceive a just Horror for that Religion, which has
held the Truth under so long and cruel a Captivity. That I may render my
Lawful Prejudices the more useful to my design, which is to make the Papacy
appear to be the true Antichristianism, I am resolved, according to the advice
that has been given me, to abridge it; but instead of making a pure and simple
abridgment, I shall, in contracting it, change the Prejudices into so many
Characters of Antichristianism: and show, that there is no one of those
Prejudices but is a character of the Antichristian Empire. If any thing retards
this design, it will be my desire to see whether Mr. Arnaud will make good the
promise of F. Simon, and reply to that Book. So that when I Abridge that Book,
I may at the same time refute the Sophisms Mr. Arnaud is preparing. This first
part regards the Time past.

The second part contains the explication of Things Future, or rather of those
which we believe are yet to come, there are many things therein which will
certainly be surprising to you, as they were to me; and if you read with any
favorable opinion, what I say upon the 11th, 14th, and 16th. Chapters of the
Apocalypse, I cannot believe you will have much different Thoughts from mine. I
will not call them Conjectures, let them be such to others, I consent; but as
to me, there is something more; for I think I have discovered which are the two
parts of the Fall of Babylon, whereof one is called the Harvest, the other the
Vintage. I believe that I have found the seven viols of the 16th. Chap. to be
already poured out, which were supposed to be yet to come, which to me is an
argument, that the Reign of Antichrist is near its end. I know not whether
others have discovered any thing of this before me; I pretend not to have
perused all the Modern Commentators on the Apocalypse; on the Contrary I have
read very few of them, having experienced, that the diversity of Ideas that
remain in the mind, serve but to obscure the Truth, and cause one to lose it.
Some I consulted before I made this second Ediction; but I found nothing
capable to make me alter my sentiments, or that could furnish me with any new
light. Dr. Moore is one of the latest Commentators on the Apocalypse, and one
of the most esteemed. I found, that he follows Mede in every thing, save in the
explication of the Harvest and the Vintage, of the 14th. Chap. the seven viols
of the 16th, and the death of the two Witnesses of the 11th. Chap. that is,
that he had followed him in those places, wherein he had succeeded well: it is
in effect impossible to differ from him in those places. But in those places
where Mr. Mede was not Happy, Dr. Moore is no more so than he. If any other
has discovered these Truths, he will oblige me that shall let me know it. I
shall be rejoyc't to understand, that any other has made the same discoveries:
this will confirm me in the persuasion which I have, that I have found that
which I inquired after.

After having proved in this second part, that the end of the Reign of
Antichrist is at hand, I treat of that which is to follow after that Fall, viz.
the famous Reign of Christ upon Earth, which has been so often contradicted
since the Beginning of the Christian Church: I have enlarged a little upon it,
as being one of the most consolatory Truths which is in the whole Scripture, I
cannot but ascribe to a secret providence of God, that Blindness, which most
Christians have been under hitherto concerning it, for certain reasons, God
would not that they should see that Reign of Christ in the Prophecies, tho it
be there as clearly described as the Coming of the Messiah, which yet the Jews
will not see to be there, you will therein find one Chapter, for which the Jews
are indebted to me; for I re-establish them in their Rights, and in their
Hopes, farther than Christians have as yet done. Among the proofs of the Reign
of a thousand years, you will find an explication of the Type of the work of
Creation, which will not be unpleasant to those who love Mysteries. I have
nothing to say in vindication of this book. It must run the common risque, it
must be left to the Judgment of the public; a Risque so much the greater, in
that treating of Prophecies, no man thinks himself obliged to subscribe to the
thoughts of those who interpret them. I may well expect to be ill treated by
others, the learned and the wise, as they pretend to be, who mock at all
Prophecies, and all those who go about to interpret them; these men are upon
the borders of Impiety, if they are not already plunged into it. It Is not for
their sakes that I write; I despise them, at least their Judgment; but I pray
God for their salvation: it is for the comfort of the Good and upright that this
work was undertaken; God grant it may contribute to it; if I am deceived I
shall have but my common Lot with many others; nevertheless, I deserve some
thanks for my good Intentions. Let me add one word, that this is not a book to
be read Cursorily over, and that but once, I consent that it be read the first
Time as a Romance, but let such a one return to it, and lay aside his
Prejudices by little and little, and at length accustom himself to those Idea's
that at first seemed strange. This advice I give chiefly to Roman Catholics,
as soon as they perceive by the title of a Book, that the design is to persuade
them that their Religion is Antichristianism, they fall into a rage, and their
Passion blinds them. But yet for once let them take the pains to read it as a
Romance, and afterward let them think that the matter deserves at least to be
examined, because no less than their Eternal Salvation is concerned in it: I
have no design to anger them; I desire their Salvation. It Is the only end I
propose, God is my witness.

A Supplement to the Advice to all Christians.
This is what I have advertised the public in the first Ediction; in this
second I find my self obliged to remove two scandals, which I have learnt have
been taken on the account of this book. First, there are some who believe the
hopes I give of a Re-establishment, within a few years, may do much Hurt,
because all those who are thus persuaded, will suffer themselves to sleep
secure in the mean time in the Communion of the Roman Church, saying, if it be
thus, we may expect a while, and bear our Captivity as well as we can, we shall
ere long see the end of it. During which expectation they will still go to
mass, and join in the superstitions of the Church of Rome. To this I have two
things to say; First, that God's ends and ways are different from ours; at this
rate God should never have promised to deliver his Church, that men might not
grow secure in the Expectation of it. God has almost always hid Events from
us, and would not that at all times the Prophecies should be understood, lest
the knowledge and understanding of them should prejudice their accomplishment;
lest men should oppose it, and stand upon their guard in that respect. But who
knows whether God ought not at last to make the Prophecies be understood, that
they may the more easily be fulfilled? who knows, whether so many of the Romish
Communion, who are already disgusted with their Religion, may not open their
Eyes by the Light which we set before them, and resolve to become instruments
in the hand of God, for the accomplishment of this great work? it is certain
that oftentimes Prophecies, Counterfeit, or Real, have inspired those for whom
they were made, with the design to effect the things that were promised them:
after all, when God discovers any truths of this nature, he has his reasons
for doing so, and we ought not to resist it, upon pretense of some ill
Consequences that would follow. Jeremy, during the siege of Jerusalem, declared
to all the world, that the Chaldeans would take the City; should he have
forborne to speak that Truth, which God had revealed to him, because of some ill
Consequences? It Is evident, that nothing was more proper to lessen the courage
of the Inhabitants, and to promote the taking of the City of Jerusalem, than
such a discourse of the Prophet.

The other thing which I have to say on this first scandal, is this, that such
who take occasion from this Book to continue in the Roman superstition, waiting
for deliverance, have no need of this book to cherish the disposition they are
in to remain there. They are people who only search for Pretenses, to flatter
themselves in the condition they are in, and can never want them either here or
there, from this thing or another. But in truth, nothing can be more ridiculous
than to take occasion from hence, to continue in the Roman Church. In three or
four years or more there will be a great change in the Papacy, we must than
remain there, waiting till that Change happen; it is to the same effect as if I
should say, I am in an house that is on Fire, and that is ready to Fall, I have
good assurance that in three or four years it will be rebuilt, therefore
expecting that, I must suffer my self to be burned in it, or to perish under
its ruins. I am near a filthy and poisoned water, in a little time some one
will come and cleanse the fountain, and render it wholesome; in the mean time
expecting that, let us drink of it. A man must be besides himself, that should
argue after this rate; no less must he be, that shall reason as these cowards
and Apostates do. Within some years the Reformation shall revive, waiting for
that, I will continue in a wicked Religion, wherein I cannot be saved; I will
partake it its Idolatry, and basely suppress the truth of God within my breast.
A sin of a quarter of an hour is enough to destroy a man Eternally; and shall
it be thought, that the Idolatry and most shameful Hypocrisy of two or three
years are venial crimes? To betray a man's Conscience and the Truth, by one
single act, deserves Hell; and they flatter themselves, that God will Indulge
them in a treason continued in for several years: they who reason after this
manner have they any revelation from God, that they shall live three or four
years longer, or that they shall have the leisure to repent? and what will
become of them if they dye in that treasonable state? so far is the Hope that I
give from being capable to make them continue where they are, that nothing can
be more effectual to make them quit it. Their Possessions and profit is that
which retains them; could they be persuaded that in a few years they should
recover them again, it would not be so difficult to forsake them now.

The other scandal which I know has been taken, is concerning the Reign of a
thousand years; many Divines in this country have greatly murmured at it, even
so far as to threaten to complain of me. I am sorry it is so; for I should be
glad not to displease my Brethren. In the mean time, I patiently expect what
they will do in it; and by waiting, I shall know whether our Conducters intend
to make new Articles of faith, and whether Cocceanisme be become an intolerable
Heresy. M. Cocceius, upon the 11th. Chap of the Apocalypse, proves this Reign
of Christ upon earth, by the same passages and the same arguments as I do,
Except that he refers not to this the thousand years of the Dragon being bound,
in the 20th. Chap. Since my arrival in these Provinces, I have fallen in with
nothing of that famous Divine but in this article. If I should have agreed with
him in some others, I should not be a shamed of it, and I know not what trouble
any one can give me for one only article of agreement with many Able Divines,
who are Good men, and very orthodox. But I would fain know what it is in this
opinion that so much offends these Gentlemen. Is it any thing contrary to any
Doctrine of faith, and which does directly or indirectly strike at the
foundation? It is worth while to know, that such as can produce a little of
their own, and labor usefully for the glory of God, if they hate the Spirit of
Licentiousness, are not like to become slaves to certain prevailing opinions,
only on this account, because they are prevailing. I shall conclude by
advertising the Reader, that he will find this second Edition to be enlarged
throughout the whole book, especially as to what is Prophetical in the
Apocalypse, which was not explained in the first Edition. It was believed, that
by showing a complete system of all the Events foretold in that book, we should
give the more light to each of the several Visions; for we shall find that
every thing is well followed, and that the order of the Prophecies is the same
with that of the Events, or for the most part is so.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS Of the First PART.
Chap. I. OF the seven Epistles to the Seven Churches. That in all probability
they are not Prophetical. The Thoughts of Interpreters thereupon. Page 1 Chap.
II. An Explication of the Vision of the four living Creatures, and of the
twenty four Elders, contained in the fourth Chapter. Page 19 Chap. III. The Key
of the Revelation. This book is no other than a comment on what Daniel says in
the seventh Chapter of his Revelations, touching the fourth Beast, and the fourth
Monarchy. Page 28 Chap. IV. The System of the seven Seals, and the seven
Trumpets, that denote the great events, and bring the World to its end. Page 36
Chap. V. The Explication of the Vision of the six first Seals, according as it
is in the sixth Chapter of the Revelation. Page 44 Chap. VI. An Explication of
the four first Trumpets, which are the five degrees of the fall of the Roman
Empire, or the Sovereignty of Rome. Page 55 Chap. VII. An Explication of the
Visions of the fifth and sixth Trumpet, wherein are seen the Empires of the
Saracens and Turks. Page 65 Chap. VIII. The Explication of the tenth Chapter of
the Revelation. Page 76 Chap. IX. A short System of all the Events of the
Church, which are noted in the Apocalypse; and first of all, an Epitome of the
Chronology. Page 83 Chap. X. A short System of the Events foretold in the
Revelation, concerning the Church, as to the Historical part. Page 94 Chap. XI.
Several things, that all are agreed on, in reference to Antichrist, which will
serve to clear up those wherein we are not agreed. Page 101 Chap. XII. The
Characters of Antichrist, which we are not agreed about. The false Antichrist
of the Papists. Page 107 Chap. XIII. What are the true Characters of the
Antichristian Empire. They are three; Tyranny, Idolatry, and great corruption
of manners. That we must not look on Tyranny alone, as the sole Character of
Antichrist. Page 119 Chap. XIV. That the three Characters of the Antichristian
Empire do perfectly agree to the Empire of the Papism. Proofs out of History
and Prophecies. Reflections upon the Prophecy in the second Chapter of the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and upon the end of the Roman Empire. Page
127 Chap. XV. An Explication of the Vision of the thirteenth Chapter of the
Revelation, and of the two Beasts that appear therein. Page 139 Chap. XVI. The
Explication of the seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation, where the Empire of
the Papism is plainly described. Page 156 Chap. XVII. Babylon in the
seventeenth and eighteenth Chapters of the Revelation is Roman-Antichristian
and Papal, and not Rome Pagan. Page 163 Chap. XVIII. More proofs, that the
Characters of the Antichristian Empire do agree to the Papism. A Proof drawn
from the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy. The
translation of that passage amended. Page 177 Chap. XIX. That the term of
Apostasy, is not too big to express the Papism by: that Apostasy signifies
Rebellion and Idolatry: why the H. Scripture uses such high words to describe
the popish Idolatry; and higher than those it makes use of to describe the
Pagan Idolatry. Page 183 Chap. XX. The deceiving Spirits which St. Paul speaks
of, are Evil Spirits. The Doctrine of Demons is that Doctrine, that has
Demons for its Objects, and not that which has Demons for its Authors. There
is a perfect conformity between the Theology and the Religion of the Heathens
about Demons, and that of the Papism about Saints and Angels, mediatory
Spirits. Page 199 Chap. XXI. What is the Character of those, that were to
establish Idolatry in the Christian Religion. They are Priests and Monks,
Authors of the Laws of Celibacy and of Fasts. How many fables and fictions have
been invented by these men seared in their Consciences. Page 215 Chap. XXII.
The Characters of Antichrist in the Papism, confirmed by the great type of
Antichrist, Antiochus Epiphanes. That which is spoken literally of this
Antiochus, agrees mystically to the Pope and the Papism. Page 228 Chap. XXIII.
A notable Prophecy of the Mahuzim, that Antichrist was to worship. The whole
found admirably accomplished in the Papism. What is the literal sense of the
Prophecy with respect to Antiochus. An Explication of the beginning of the 12th
Chap. of Daniel applied to Antiochus and the Papism. Page 241 Chap. XXIV. In
which are gathered together 35. Characters of Antichrist, that perfectly agree
to the Papism, and cannot agree to any but it. Page 255 Chap. XXV. How
Antichrist came to be mistaken, being so well Characterised in the Prophecies.
A comparison of I. Christ and Antichrist in the accidental circumstances of
their coming. Page 263
The Table of Chapters of the Second Part.
Chap. I. OF the duration of the Kingdom of Antichrist. A refutation of that
dream, that it must last but three years and a half. Ten Arguments which
demonstrate, that that supposition is false and impossible. Page 3 Chap. II.
The last Argument against the Chimaera of three years and half, taken from the
time, during which the Temple was profaned by Antiochus. Four quite different
times set down for that in Daniels Prophecies. An Explication, and a
reconciling of those four times. An application of these four times to the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and the ruin of that Kingdom. Page 17 Chap. III. What
the last times are. It does not signify the end of the World. There are many
times with reference to the Church, and with reference to the World. If
Antichrist must reign 1260 years, he is come. Mahometanism is not
Antichristianism. Page 29 Chap. IV. Some Principles to discover, when the
Antichristian Empire began, and when it must end. Three Characters of that
Empire, Idolatry, Pride, and corruption. That these three Characters began to
appear in the fourth Age, and did infinitely increase in the fifth. Page 38
Chap. V. That we must look for the point of the birth of Antichristianism in
the fifth Age. It must end about the year 1710, or 1715. Page 48 Chap. VI. The
circumstances of the fall of Antichrist re-establisht in their order. An
Explication of the fifteenth Chapter. Principles for the right understanding
the sixteenth Chapter. Diverse interpretations given of it, and their visible
faults. Page 62 Chap. VII. An Explication of the three first VIOLS, and the
three first PLAGVES. Page 78 Chap. VIII. The fourth plague; the increase of the
heat of the Sun, denoting the increase of the Papal Authority, which had almost
utterly ruined the World and the Church: The fifth plague is the desolation of
ROME, when the Pope retreated to Avignon, and the diminution of the Papal
Authority by the grand Schism of the West. Page 87 Chap. IX. The sixth Plague
are the Turks, who pass over the Bosphorus, and invade the Greek and Latin
Empires. The three unclean spirits, which come out from the mouth of the false
Prophet, are the Papal Laws, armed with Excommunications. Page 97 Chap. X. The
seventh Plague is the preaching of Luther, and other Reformers, by which the
Latin Church was divided into three parts, Papists, Lutherans, and Reformed.
Page 216 Chap. XI. The Explication of the 14th Chapter. The vision of the
harvest, and the vintage: the harvest of the Reformation, made in the age last
past; the vintage is the Reformation, which shall be made this present age.
Page 224 Chap. XII. The Explication of that part of the 11th Chapter, where the
last persecution made by Antichrist is foretold, which is the present
persecution in France. The death of the two witnesses, who shall not be buried,
by means of the succor brought by the enemies of France. Page 236 Chap. XIII.
The resurrection of the two Witnesses. The Reformation shall within a few years
rise again in FRANCE: after that, it shall be established by Royal Authority.
FRANCE shall renounce Popery, and that Kingdom shall be converted. Page 251
Chap. XIV. Observations upon the 17, 18, 19. Chapt. of the Revelation,
concerning the fall of Antichrists Kingdom. A brief Methodizing of the events,
which the H. Ghost had displaced in the Visions. Page 270 Chap. XV. The Reason
why in this work we speak of some things so positively. The linking together of
our Principles, suffers us not to doubt, that we now are at the end of the
reign of the Papacy. Page 277 Chap. XVI. Of the thousand years reign. That in
all the past time, there is not a time to be found, wherein Satan has been
bound. Four heads of arguments to prove this reign. The first is, the fifth
Monarchy, so plainly promised to the Saints. Page 285 Chap. XVII. The second
spring of Arguments to prove the thousand years reign, is the reign promised to
the Jews. The promises made to them, have not been fulfilled, but must be. The
conversion of St. Paul is a Type of that of the whole Nation. Page 294 Chap.
XVIII. The third Head of Arguments for the future Kingdom of Christ and the
Church. So many Prophecies which concern the complete Victories of I. Christ,
the Holiness of the Church, and its perfect prosperity, which have never yet
been accomplished. Page 312 Chap. XIX. The fourth Head of Arguments, for the
reign of a thousand years, are the Types. Four Types of this Period; the
Principal is the seventh day of the Creation, which is not an immediate Type of
Eternal Rest, but of the Peace of the Church on Earth. Page 321 Chap. XX. The
Type of the Creation has not been well explained: We must make a System of it.
Principles to establish that System; the division of the duration of the Church
into seven Periods, answering to the seven days of the Creation. Page 326 Chap.
XXI. The Explication of the Mysteries signified by the Chaos, by the Creation
of Light, by the separation of the Waters, and by the Creation of the Plants.
The first days of the Creation, and the three first Periods of the Church. Page
334 Chap. XXII. Explication of the Mysteries of the four last days of the
Creation. Page 345 Chap. XXIII. A farther Confirmation of the future prosperity
of the Church upon Earth. The 21 and 22. Chap. of the Apocalypse interpreted:
that in those Chapters the Church is described as victorious upon Earth, and
not as Triumphant in Heaven. Page 357 Chap. XXIV. The Characters of the Kingdom
of the Church. Eight are certain, and five doubtful. What shall happen after
this Kingdom. What is meant by Gog and Magog. There shall probably be a lesser
kind of Antichrist a little before the end of the World. Page 375 Chap. XXV. An
Answer to the reasons of the Anti-millinaries, against the Reign of a thousand
years. Page 388
THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROPHECIES, OR THE Approaching Deliverance of the
CHURCH.
THE FIRST PART.
Of the Establishment of the Antichristian-Empire, and its Characters.
CHAP. I.
Of the Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches. That in all probability they are
not Prophetical. The Thoughts of Interpreters thereupon.

WHen I undertook this Work, I had no Design to make a complete Commentary on
that which is Prophetical in the Revelations, as did appear in the first
Edition: However, when I observed that without designing it, I had explained
almost the whole Apocalypse, I did believe that as for three or four chapters
that remained to be explained, I ought not to leave them behind, tho they had
no respect to the scope of this book, which is to find out Antichrist, and
learn when his Empire must end. When one sees a system that is very perfect,
and well attended with all the events foretold in this book, this will give
such a fair aspect of truth to all the parts of it, as will be most easily
perceived. Moreover the public may have observed, that in the pourtraiture of
Antichrist, I have referred the Reader in many chapters, as in the 13th. and
the 17th. to my Book of Prejudices. Now us I have promised to epitomize the
book of Prejudices, I thought it would be more proper to bring out of that book
into this present work all that respects the Prophecies and their Explication
on the subject of the description of Antichristianism, than to refer a part of
this to another Book. So that in this second Edition there will be found an
explication of all that is prophetical in the book of the Revelation.

We believe with the learned Joseph Mede that this book is divided into two
parts. The first is contained in the book sealed with seven seals, which is to
be seen in the beginning of the 5th. Chapter And the second in the book which the
Angel gave to St. John in the 10th. Chapter The two little books move upon the same
time; the one and the other reach even to the end of the World; but they donot
say the same thing, and have not the same object. For the first little book
that appears sealed with seven seals, principally respects the affairs and
the adventures of the first Period of the fourth Monarchy, viz. the temporal
Roman Empire. And the second book contains the destinies of the Church
corrupted during the same ages, and the same duration of time; this is what we
call the Spiritual Roman Empire. I say, that the first book contains properly
the destinies of the Empire; not but that those of the Church are included in
it too. For that which God foretold should befall the Roman Empire, was always
with respect to the Church, to its Persecutions, and the great Changes that
befall it. So that to speak properly, the whole work respects the Church. But
the second little book, which reaches from the 10th. Chapter to the end,
respects the Church, and what was to befall it, much more particularly, yea and
more clearly.

The first thing that appears in the book of the Revelation is the seven
Epistles to seven principal Churches of Asia, Q. Whether the seven Epistles are
Prophetical?
contained in the three first Chapters. It Is very much questioned whether these
Epistles are Prophetical or not. Some maintain that they are with a great deal
of heat, and others deny it. As for me, I have nothing certain to say upon it.
So that I would not raise a prejudice against any person or any opinion by my
own; tho I am much more inclined to believe that there is nothing of prophecy
in them, but that all that is said in these Epistles, refers to things that had
happened in those seven Churches. It is certain that the Revelation is nothing
but an Epistle. This is clear by its beginning and end. Now it was not usual
with the Apostles to direct their Epistles to the Universal Church in general
of all places and all times, as some would have St. John here to have done. The
Apostles were wont in their Epistles to rank in the first place what they had
which was dogmatical and Prophetical to write of; and afterward came that which
respected what was moral. This is the method of St. Paul. St. John on the
contrary in this Epistle sets that which is moral therein, before that which is
Prophetical. The reason is because he little designed to stay upon that which
is moral, and his principal aim was to relate the visions which God had given
him. Therefore he dispatcheth in the beginning that which was to make the least
part of his Epistle, and which was less important, that without diversion he
might stick to that which he principally intended therein.

I see but one thing that seems mightily to favor the opinion of those that
believe that the seven Epistles are Prophetical. Why the H. Spirit wrote but to
seven Churches.
It Is the number of seven. Why did the H. Spirit write to no more than seven
Churches? Were there not many more in Asia? Were these the only ones in which
there was any thing to be reproved, or to whom the H. Spirit had something to
say?

It seems therefore that the seven Churches are the Universal Church of all
Ages divided into seven Periods. But this reason does not appear strong enough
to me. First, because the number of seven is evidently consecrated in the
Revelation. The holy Spirit uses it in counting up all things, the seven
Spirits, seven Lamps, seven Angels, etc. Surely whatever we understand hereby,
it is certain that the number of Spirits, of Lamps and of Angels is not reduced
to the number of seven. Not but that oftentimes the number of seven in the
Revelation must be taken for a determinate number as in the seven Seals, in the
seven Trumpets, and the seven Vialls; but that is when the division of time
into Periods is treated of. Now this is that which is doubtful, that by these
seven Churches are meant seven Periods. And we shall also see hereafter that
what is said to these seven Churches does not at all agree with the events, in
what manner soever the times be divided. So that this only thing that the H.
Spirit makes here seven Churches does not prove that they are so many Period's
of the duration of the Church. It Is probable that by these he means all the
other Churches of Asia, and if any will have it so, all those that were at that
time in the world. And he chose among these seven the names of the principal
ones, intending that the other lesser Churches should reckon that as spoken
concerning their present estate, which is spoken to the seven principal ones
among them.

2dly, Who knows whether there were at that time more than seven considerable
Churches in Asia? The other were so very much below these, for Dignity,
Grandeur and Excellency, that the H. Spirit judged it not proper to make any
account of them, the Advertisements that he gives to these seven Churches being
sufficient for the Disorders which might be in all the others, which Disorders
were apparently the same. For it is usual enough for little flocks to follow
the examples of the greater ones.

Lastly, it does not appear that the holy Spirit, in what follows, has divided
the duration of the Church since J. Christ's time to the end of the world, or
to the coming of Jesus Christ's Kingdom into seven Periods. For the seven
seals, the seven Trumpets, the seven Vialls, do not each of them take up all
time. They succeed one another: The seventh seal brings forth seven Trumpets,
and the sixth Trumpet is subdivided into seven Vialls. It had been very
methodical in a Revelation, after having obscurely marked out the seven Periods
of the Church by the seven Epistles, to describe the same times by seven other
Characters more observable and more distinct. This is indeed what some modern
writers do believe that God has done; pretending that the seven seals and the
seven Trumpets are co-temporary, and divide the duration of the Christian
Church into seven Periods, as the seven Epistles to the seven Churches do. But
this opinion will not appear probable to those that study the Prophecies and
the events with any application of mind.

I look on that as nothing that is said to support the mystery of the seven
Churches, viz. that we do not see that such things happened in the seven
Churches of Asia, which are there named, as have any resemblance with what the
H. Spirit says to them. How should we see it, seeing we have not the
particular History of those Churches in that time? Besides, tho we do not know
the particulars of those events, yet there is nothing in the seven Epistles
which does not very well agree with the Estate of the Church that then was;
without any necessity to seek out events mystically meant in future ages.

The applications that are made of the seven Epistles to the seven Periods are
not happy.
The principal thing that hinders me from closing with the opinion of the
Prophetical sense of the Epistles, is that I do not find that the applications
which are made of them to the Ages that have past since the Apostles, do answer
expectation. It Is true, there are some places where the applications are not
unhappy. But seeing this is not to be met with every where, I believe that they
have hit luckily by chance. Otherwise the Prophecy should every where agree
with the events. To the end one may better judge of the force of this last
reason, I shall set down two or three of the mystical interpretations that are
given to these Epistles. This will please those who cannot or will not go to
seek them in their Springs.

I begin with that of Patrick Forbes a Scotch Divine, The explication of the
mystery of the seven Churches by Forbes.
that lived and died in the beginning of this age. According to him the Church
of Ephesus signifies the Primitive Church of the three first Ages. The Praises
which the H. Spirit gives it, I know thy works and thy labor, and how thou
can not bear them which are evil, etc. These praises I say may well agree to
the Church of the three first Ages. But those which God gives to the Church of
Thyatira afterward are greater. Yet it is certain that the fourth Period of the
Church did not come near the Church of the three first Ages in fervency and
purity. The Nicolaitans that are spoken of in this Epistle to the Church of
Ephesus, may signify all the Heretics, all the kinds being meant by one. But
seeing the Church of all Ages has had its Heretics, this character cannot
distinguish this Period from the others.

The second Epistle is to the Church of Smyrna, and Forbes would have this to
be the Period in which the Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians and Eutychians
reigned. That is to say, that this Period will comprehend the fourth, and the
fifth Age. But how can these words be applied to those Ages, I know thy works
and thy Tribulation, and thy poverty (but thou art rich) and I know the
blasphemy of those that say they are Jews but are not, but are the Synagogue of
Satan? See here are praises that are no whit inferior to those that were given
to the Church of Ephesus. Yet it is certain that the Church, in these Ages was
corrupted, and lost all the beauty it had in the three first Ages of the
Church. Its manners were corrupted, and its worship was marred by the
invocation of Saints and the worship of Relics. What will become of that
Persecution of ten days that God predicts to this Church of Smyrna? It Is true
the Church was persecuted under the Arrian Emperors; but it does not appear
very well why this is described by number of ten days.

The third Epistle is directed to the Church of Pergamus, and according to
Forbes this is the Period of the reign of Antichrist. The foregoing Periods
were but of two or three hundred years; this must be above a thousand years.
Here is found something that is pretty like this Period. I know where thou
dwell, even where Satan's seat is. To which may be added that the martyr
Antipas spoken of in this Epistle signifies Anti-papa, an Enemy opposing the
Pope; and that this signifies all those that have opposed the tyranny of
Antichrist. But the rest does by no means agree to this Period. I know thy
works, and that thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith. These
praises do by no neans belong to a Church so corrupt as was that of the third
Period under the reign of Antichrist. Thou have them that hold the Doctrine of
Balaam who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the Children of
Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols and to commit fornication. By this
must be meant those evil Christians that joined in with the Antichristian
Idolatry. Now these people are not well described by thou have them; for this
imports, that it was not the body of the Society. And on the contrary, under
the Antichristian Empire, the greatest part of men did partake of his
abominations.

The fourth Epistle is directed to the Church of Thyatira, to which the H.
Spirit gives these great praises I know thy works, and Charity, and service,
and Patience; and that thy last works are more than the first. Forbes would
have this be that Period of the Church, in which the Church began to reform her
self, and in which the good separated from the evil. i. e. the Church from the
Albigenses to Luthers time. Now I leave every wise man to judge if a small
number of Albigenses and Waldenses, that separated from the Church of Rome, and
that endured so short a time, could deserve from the whole Christian Church, so
generally corrupted, the fairest of all the praises that the H. Spirit gives to
the seven Churches.

Thou suffer that woman Jezabel that calls her self a Prophetess, to teach
and to seduce my servants to commit fornication. This Jezabel I confess very
much resembles the Antichristian Church. But Why should the Albigenses be
blamed for suffering the Roman Church? How could they destroy it, who were so
weak? Did they not cry out upon her as Babylon as much as they were able?

Sardis, is the fifth Church to which the H. Spirit writes, and according to
Forbes it is the Reformed Church, in which neither Jezabel, nor Balaam, nor the
Pope nor Popery are any longer tolerated, because she broke with the Roman
Church. But why would we have the Ages of our Reformation since Luther to be
branded with so black and fatal a Character, Thou have a name to live, but art
dead? Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, and are ready to die;
for I have not found thy works perfect before God. I think our Reformation
deserved at least as much praise as that of the Albigenses. The Zeal thereof
was great, and the Doctrine pure.

Philadelphia is the sixth Church, and signifies according to Forbes, the
Church that shall carry the Reformation to its greatest height, that shall have
but a small number of members, but they shall be very Zealous.

Laodicea is the last Church or the last Period. The Holy Spirit terribly
blames it. Thou art neither hot nor cold. Thou say I am rich, and have need
of nothing, etc. and do not know that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. According to Forbes this is those Churches that
making all their glory to consist in their having quitted Babylon do fall back,
and make Religion to consist in nothing but duties purely external. This last
Period must be placed at the end of the World. Thus you have Forbes's system.

Let us proceed to that of Cocceius.

According to this later Author, the Church of Ephesus is the Apostolical
Church, i. e. that wherein the Apostles preached. The Explication of the mystery
of the seven Churches according to Cocceius.
So that this Period must be extended to the death of St. John. The Nicolaitans
spoken of in this first Epistle, are Heretics in general. Nicolaos in Greek
signifies the Conqueror of the People. It Is the Character of Heretics to make
themselves masters of the people by seducing them.

The Church of Smyrna signifies the Church suffering in all places, and
especially that of the three first Ages. The persecution of ten Days according
to this, must signify the ten Persecutions, which the Church suffered during
those three Ages under the Pagan Emperors. This does not fall out ill; but I
fear it was chance that made this hit; for the rest does not fall out in the
same manner. The holy Spirit says, Some of you shall be cast into Prison, that
ye may be tried. This is very feebly to express the great number of Martyrs,
and the cruel Sufferings to which the Church was exposed during these three
first Ages of the Church. It Is much more probable, that this signifies some
light Persecution that was to befall Smyrna, in which Persecution the Evil
should not go beyond the imprisoning some particular Persons.

The Epistle to the Church of Pergamus is the third, and according to Cocceius,
it is the Church from Constantine's time to the birth of Antichrist. Pergamus is
the name of a famous fortress of Troy. Rome signifies strength or fortress.
It Is in Rome that satan's seat is. But why should the seat of satan be fixed in
Rome converted by Constantine? It had been much better to have fixed it in Rome
Pagan, or to reserve it for Rome Antichristian that was to follow immediately
after. Antipas the martyr signifies (says he) the Orthodox that maintained the
consubstantiality of the Son. Antipas for Antipatros, and Antipatros for
Isopatros, equal to the Father. I have nothing to say hereupon, but it does not
please me every well.

The Church of Thyatira is the fourth, and signifies according to Cocceius the
Church under the reign of Antichrist. Jezabel that appears in this Epistle is
the Antichristian Church. They that suffer Jezabel the Prophetess are the elect
mingled among the Antichristian Idolaters. That sickness that God would send on
Jezabel in casting her on her bed, are those mortifications which
Antichristianism was to receive by the several disasters that befell the Roman
Church till the Reformation. This falls out pretty well, but it is by mere
chance; for how can that magnificent Elogy be applied to this period of the
Antichristian church, I know thy works, and thy charity, and thy patience, and
that thy last works are more than the first? Never was the church so void of
saints and of good works as in this sad Period.

Sardis is the fifth Church and the fifth Period, and according to Cocceius as
well as according to Forbes it is the Reformed Church. But I say hereto as I
said before on occasion of Forbes, why should we say of our Reformation thou
have a name to live, and behold thou art dead; strengthen the things which
remain and are ready to die.

Philadelphia signifies brotherly Love, this is the sixth Church which carries
in its name the character of a Church yet to come, wherein love and charity
shall reign, but among a very small number of people. This church shall be
persecuted. Attempts will be made to shut the door against its conversions. Yet
after this the Kings of the Earth shall submit themselves to it. This is in
after ages. So that we have nothing to say about it.

Laodicea signifies the Church that shall immediately precede the time wherein
God shall pass that judgment spoken of in the 11th. chapter v. 18. i. e. when the
reign of J. Christ shall come to be established on the Earth. That is to say,
that immediately before the Kingdom of J. Christ comes on the Earth, the Church
must fall into that dreadful decay meant by these words, Thou art neither hot
nor cold, thou art poor, blind and naked. I do not well understand how all this
hangs together. The Church o^ Philadelphia, which is the sixth, after it has
been persecuted shall remain victorious over all the Kings of the Earth, which
signifies, that all the nations of the Earth shall be converted, see here the
reign of J. Christ on the Earth. And yet after this comes a seventh Period,
wherein religion shall almost entirely perish before the Kingdom of J. Christ
comes on the Earth. Besides all other inconveniences this system has this
further, viz. that besides these seven Periods an eighth must be added for the
reign of the Church on the Earth. This is a thing that was never heard of, and
the times were never in any prophecy divided into eight. The mystery of the
seven Churches according to Dr. Hen. More.


Dr. Henry More is one of the last that has spent his Labors on the
Revelation. He believes also that these seven Epistles are mystical and
prophetical, and see how he understands them.

The Church of Ephesus is the Period that ran out from J. Christ's time to the
tenth year of Nero's Empire. See here a Period short enough. There is not
usually so great an inequality between the Periods that divide the times in the
Prophecies. Moreover one may be assured that there is not so much as one word
in this Epistle, that may not as happily be applied to the two following Ages,
as to the first: so that this Application is purely Arbitrary, and without any
Ground.

The Church of Smyrna is the Period from the tenth year of Nero, to the year
324. i. e. to the Reign of Constantine and the Council of Nice. This falls in
with Cocceius's Notion; wherefore I cannot approve of it for the Reason
abovementioned.

Pergamus, according to Dr. More, signifies the Church from the year 324. to
the year 1242. during which time the Empire of Antichrist was established,
taking in the time in which the Waldenses and Albigenses appeared in the World,
and were extinguished. The Foundation of this Explication is the Seat of Satan.
I know where thou dwell, even where Satan's Seat is. And the Martyr Antipas,
that signifies, according to this Author, Antipope, or contrary to the Pope.
This is a little glittering Light, but I am much afraid it is a Deceitful one.
For First, Why should we comprehend, in this Empire of Satan, the Reigns of
Constantine and Theodosius, which were so happy for the Church? 2dly, Why
should it be said to this Antichristian Period, I know thy Good Works, and that
thou have not Denied my Name? seeing there never were fewer that made
profession of the Truth, than in this Period. If ever the Church may be accused
of having renounced the Name of Jesus Christ, it is in the time of
Antichristianism, which is called an Apostasy: so that this Article does not
hit well; but that which follows does much worse.

Thyatira, according to this Author, is the Church from the time that the
Albigenses were destroyed, to that time that entire Nations abandoned the
Communion of Rome. It Is it may be a time the most barren in Virtue, and the
most overwhelmed with Superstition, that ever was since Jesus Christ: yet must
this great Praise be attributed to it, I know thy Works, and thy Patience, and
thy Charity; and that thy last Works are more than the first. What is said to
the Church of Ephesus, which it is pretended is the Apostolical Church, is not
so honorable, nor so great; Thou suffer the Woman Iezabel, that calls her
self a Prophetess. How can this be applied to those Ages that have run out
since the Ruin of the Albigenses, to the Reformation? Jezabel, that Roman
Whore, has not only been suffered and tolerated, she has reigned with less
Contradiction than in any Age.

Sardis is the fifth Church, which signifies the fifth Period according to Dr.
More; and this Period is that of the Reformation, to the last Vial, i.e. to the
last Ruin of Antichrist. It Is to this Church that the Holy Spirit says, Thou
have a Name to live, but behold thou art dead. Can it be imagined, that God
should give such great Praises to the Church that was since the Ruin of the
Albigenses till the Reformation, and that the Holy Spirit should be made to
speak with so much Disdain of the Reformed Church? What comparison is there
between the Church in its Reformation, and that corrupted Church, wherein
hardly any was to be found that preserved himself from the mighty Corruption of
Error and Vice?

Philadelphia, which is the sixth Church, signifies a sixth Period, wherein
Antichrist shall be entirely ruined, and the Infidel Nations be converted. This
is to divine; and that which the Holy Spirit says to the sixth Church, does
not exactly import any such thing.

Lastly; Laodicea, of which the Holy Spirit speaks in such disadvantageous
terms, is the Church that must fall into decay after the Fall of Antichrist,
and the Conversion of the People. And this Decay must bring the Church to the
coming of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ on the Earth. See here a new Period, and
of which there is not the least foot-step in all the Prophecies. It Is a Period
that must run out from the Ruin of Antichrist, and the Conversion of the
People. All the Prophecies foretell, that the Reign of Jesus Christ shall come
immediately after the Fall of Babylon, and the Fullness of the Gentiles. Yet
here behold a Period, that separates these two Events, which ought to be joined
together.

Lastly; this System is subject to the same inconveniences as that of
Cocceius. There must be supposed an eighth Period for the reign of the thousand
years, which Dr. More acknowledges. Now it must be confessed, that this eighth
Period is altogether unknown to the Prophets; for we do not any where find,
that the time has been divided into Eight parts.

Those that will attentively reflect on what we have just now said, will
confess, if I am not much mistaken, either that these Epistles to the seven
Churches are not prophetical, or that the Mystery has not yet been discovered:
For nothing that has been said about them, has this certain Character of
Truth, which is obvious to every one. The Prophecies must be like Aenigma's,
which till they have been well explained, seem unintelligible; but when one
has hit right upon them, they appear so clear, that they cannot otherwise be
understood.

CHAP. II.
An Explication of the Vision of the four living Creatures, and of the twenty
four Elders, contained in the fourth Chapter.

SEeing there is nothing prophetical in the three first chapters of the
Revelation we may go on to the fourth Chapter. One may say, that this is the
opening of this great and divine Theater on which these admirable prophetical
Visions will immediately appear. The entrance is like that of the Prophet
Ezekiel. God appears in the Temple, which is in heaven, sitting on a
magnificent Throne. Round about the throne there is a Rainbow: this is the
Symbol of Peace. Before the Throne there was a Sea of Glass like to Crystal.
This may signify the Purity of the Doctrine of the Gospel, by which we are
washed and justified. It is of Glass and of Crystal, because of its firmness.
For the Gospel is an eternal Covenant, that shall not be done away by a new
covenant.

But that which is most considerable, here is the four living Creatures and the
twenty four Elders that are round about the Throne.

The explication of the vision of the twenty four Elders and the four living
Creatures*
6. And before the Throne there was a Sea of Glass like unto Crystal, and in
the midst of the Throne and round about the Throne were four Beasts full of
Eyes before and behind.

7. And the first Beast was like a Lion, and the second beast like a Calf, and
the third beast had a face as a man, and the fouth beast was like a flying
Eagle.

8. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of Eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

9. And when those Beasts give Glory, and Honor, and thanks to him that sat
on the Throne, who lives for ever and ever.

10. The twenty four Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and
worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne.

In the 4th. v. these Elders are represented sitting on twenty four seats
clothed in white Raiment, and having on their heads Crowns of Gold.

The opinion of J. Mede about these four living Creatures and the twenty four
Elders.
We must first know what these four living Creatures are, and then we shall
easily guess what the twenty four elders signify. The conjecture of jour,
Joseph Mede is ingenious and learned. He believes these four living Creatures
represent the whole Christian-Church, i. e. all the Christian People, by way of
allusion to the encampings of ancient Israel: It was, says he, distributed
into four bodies, three tribes in each body, each body had its commanding tribe
that marched in the front; and every one of these four tribes had its standard,
wherein was the figure of a living Creature. Judah marched in the front of the
First body, and had under it Issachar and Zabulon. Reuben was the second head,
and had under it Simeon and Gad. The third head was Ephraim, which had under it
Manasseh and Benjamin. The fourth head was Dan, to which were joined the tribes
of Asser and Naphtali. This is what we read in the second Chapter of Numbers. It Is
certain also that every one of these four bodies had its Banner and its Ensign.
For in the same place there is express mention of four standards. v. 3. The
standard of the company of Judah. v. 10. The Banner of the company of Reuben.
v. 18. The Banner of the company of Ephraim. and v. 25. The Banner of the
company of Dan.

But to this it is added, that these four Banners had the figure of four living
Creatures. That of Judah had the figure of a Lion; that of Ephraim of an Ox;
that of Reuben of a Man; and that of Dan of an Eagle. As for this last point
it is known only by tradition. Aben Ezra says so, Barnachman and Chaskuni all
very modern Authors, and of little authority. Wherefore this last circumstance
of these four living Creatures painted in the four banners is more than
uncertain. It is not so much as probable. For God that knew the great
inclination which this people had to Idolatry, would not have tempted them in
placing among them images in so eminent a place. Yet it is principally on this
circumstance that the conjecture is founded. For he would have these four
living Creatures of the Revelation represent all the Christian people, because
of the ancient Israel that marched under these four Banners. Supposing that
these four living Creatures signify all the faithful people, it must also be
supposed that the twenty four Elders represent the Pastors, and that they
possess that place in the vision which the Levites and Priests held in the
assembly of Israel. This also is the opinion of Joseph Mede. And he believes
that the number of twenty four refers to the twenty four Classes of Priests
which K. David made.

To find out the truth we have nothing else to do but to invert the opinion of
Joseph Mede, and say, that the twenty four Elders represent the people, and the
four living Creatures the Pastors. That the twenty four Elders and the four
living Creatures both together represent the whole body of the Church composed
of Pastors and people. This is unquestionably so, and whoever does but
carefully mind the matter, will not doubt it. But that the four living
Creatures signify the Pastors, will not be doubted neither, when the thing is
well considered.

The four living Creatures of St. John. are Esay's seraphims, and Ezekiels
Cherubims.
First, we must know, that the four living Creatures are the same as Esaias calls
Seraphims. This appears; 1st, by the six wings: 2dly, by the song Holy, Holy,
Holy; characters which agree to the living Creatures of Esaias and those of St.
John.

2ly. These also are the living Creatures of the two visions of Ezekiel in the
first and tenth Chapters. These living Creatures of Ezekiel are called
Cherubims. Each of them had four faces, that of a Lion, that of an Ox, that of
a Man and that of an Eagle. These are exactly the four faces of the four living
Creatures of St. John. with this difference, that in Ezekiel four heads are
together on each of the bodies of the four living Creatures; whereas in St.
John's Vision each living Creature has but one Head. But this difference is of
no importance. For the design of the Mystery being to represent by these four
Heads the Qualities and the Character of the Gospel Ministry, it is of very
little importance that the four heads be on the same Bodies, or on different
bodies; seeing these four living Creatures represent but only one Ministry and
not four different ministries. I will observe by the by that it is very strange,
that those that are curious search with so much labor and uncertainty what was
the figure of the Cherubims under the Law. What was the figare of Moses's
Cherubims.
For Ezekiel calling the living Creatures which he describes Cherubims in the
tenth Chapter of his Revelations, I think it cannot be doubted but that the figure
of Moses's Cherubims was such as Ezekiel represents it to us.

I say, that these four living creatures called Seraphims by Esaias, Cherubims by
Ezekiel, and only Living Creatures by St. John, represent the Ministry and the
Ministers of the Gospel. They have four different heads; the First is that of a
Lion, it is the Emblem of Strength and Courage, which the Pastors must have in
the Exercise of the Ministry. The Second is that of an Ox. This is the most
profitable and most laborious Creature; this represents the Profitableness of
the Ministry and the laborious and indefatigable Courage of the Pastors. The
Third is that of a Man. This is the Emblem of Wisdom and of Reason, this
signifies the sovereign Reason, Prudence and Wisdom of the Pastors, who must
unite that with Wisdom and Courage. The Fourth is that of an Eagle; it is the
emblem of Elevation and Penetration. There Is no bird that flies so high. The
Pastors must lift up men from Earth to Heaven, and fly up toward divine
things: The Eagle sustains the rays of the Light, and looks steadfastly on the
Sun: the Pastors of the Church are called to sustain the sight of the most
adorable mysteries. These living creatures are called Seraphims, i. e. Burning,
to express the greatness of their Zeal. Kerab in the Chaldee signifies to
labor, the true original of the word Cherubims.
They are called Cherubims a word that in the Syriack and the Chaldee signifies
Laborers. This name is given them for the same reason as the head of an Ox, to
represent that they ought to labor in manuring the field of the Lord
incessantly. They have four wings, according to Ezekiel, and six according to
Esaias and St. John, to represent their Vigilance, and the Swiftness with which
they must run to execute the commandments of God. According to Ezekiel. when
these living Creatures walk, they turn not, but every one walks to the place
with his Face forward. This is to signify that the ministers of the Gospel must
be far removed from all obliquity, and that they must go straight in their
ways. One part of their Wings serves them to cover their Bodies. i. e. their
less comely parts, as Interpreters Understand it; it is the Emblem of that
modesty that must rule in all their words and actions.

According to Ezekiel, Cap. 1.13.
the likeness of the living Creatures was like burning coals of fire, and like
the appearance of Lamps: It went up and down among the living Creatures and the
fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning. It Is a description
of the Word and of Preaching that sheds light abroad, and spreads knowledge, in
scattering darkness by the ministry of the Pastors. Is not my word as fire? Thy
word is a Lamp to my feet. Chr. 1.21, 22.
It Is a fire that sends forth the light of faith, and communicates the heat of
charity. In Ezekiel, When the living Creatures moved, the Wheels also moved;
and when the living Creatures Were lifted up from the Earth, the Wheels also
were lifted up. When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood.
These Wheels are the People, the living Creatures, i. e. the pastors, are the
Spirit of the People. The People do not go, or stand still, or lift up
themselves, or fall down, but by the inspiration of the Pastors.

In St. John the living Creatures are in the throne and round about the throne:
i. e. immediately near the throne, nearer than the Twenty four elders. It Is
because the Pastors are the mediators between God and the People. They are
nearest to God, and the People draw nigh to God by them. These living Creatures
are full of eyes within. It Is because they inwardly have the Spirit of
Penetration and Discerning; not only like Solomon's Wise Man, that has his
Eyes in his Head, but they have Eyes in their Heart; i. e. they have a
clear-sighted mind, and full of the knowledge of man.

They cease not day nor night saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. It Is the office of
the Ministry to labor without intermission about the sanctification of God's
name and the establishing his glory.

When the living Creatures gave Glory and honor and praise to him that sat on
the throne, etc. the Four and Twenty Elders cast themselves down before him.
This is the same thing that Ezekiel signified by these Wheels, that went when
the living Creatures went; the people represented by the Twenty Four Elders
follow the inspiration of the Pastors represented by the four living creatures.
When the living Creatures praise God, the elders cast themselves down. He that
will follow these four living Creatures in the Revelation will see that every
where they perform the office of Pastors and Ministers of the commands of God.

The Elders are the Christian people.
As for the Elders, I don't know how it comes to pass that they have not been
taken for the Faithful People from the very name of Elders. Some would herein
find the Pastors of the Church. It Is true, the Gospel calls Pastors so. But
here it should be remembered that the Emblems are borrowed from the Law, and not
from the Gospel. It Is agreed that in this vision the Prophet has a respect to
the distribution which the ancient Law made of its people. Now we shall no
where find that the Elders signify the Levites and Priests. On the contrary
they are always distinguished; yea, and they are opposed to the Priests as well
in the Old as in the New Testament; The Priests and the Elders of the people.
Every where the Elders signified the heads of the Tribes and Families, that
were consulted with in great affairs; they were properly the Representatives of
the people. So that the Twenty Four Elders are the new people by allusion to
ancient people. There is twenty four of them because the ancient Israel had
twelve Patriarchs and twelve Tribes; and the new Israel has twelve Apostles
which are the twelve Patriarchs and Heads of their Tribes. The twelve Elders of
the Jewish Church joined with the twelve Patriarchs of the new covenant make
twenty four in all, and these twenty four are the whole Church Representative;
i. e. the whole body of the faithful people. These Elders sit round about the
throne as Assessors, because the Saints shall judge the World says St. Paul:
They are cloathd in white Raiment: That is the habit of a Priest. And that
signifies, that the Priesthood is no longer confined to one only Tribe, that
the eleven tribes are re-entred into their ancient rights. For naturally all
the firstborn of what tribe soever they were, were Priests. This is what the
Holy Spirit means when he calls the faithful ones of the New Testament the
firstborn, Priests, and a royal Priesthood. These Elders have on their heads
crowns of Gold. It Is because every one of the faithful people is made not only
a Priest but also a King.

Wherefore they say in their s^ong, To him that has made us Kings and Priests.

This description of the Church by four living Creatures and twenty four
Elders, belongs principally to the Church reigning and glorious on the Earth,
so as it will be described to us in the last Chapters of the Revelation. For
the only the Pastors and the people shall perfectly have the qualities
represented by these Aenigma's. However it is reasonable to place them here,
because the Pastors of all ages of the Church if they have not these qualities
represented by the four living Creatures, yet at least they are obliged to have
them, and they have them in part, tho they have them not in the degree of
perfection.

CHAP. III.
The Key of the Revelation. This book is no other than a comment on what Daniel
says in the 7th. Chapter of his Revelations, touching the fourth Beast, and the
fourth Monarchy.

BEhold the Theater opened and prepared; we proceed to view the Visions that
are as so many Entrings. But I think it necessary to premise in the first place
an Observation which I call the Key of the Revelation. It Is, that this whole
Book is nothing but a Paraphrase on what Daniel says in the seventh Chapter of his
revelations touching the fourth Beast. Certainly this fourth Beast is the Roman
Empire, the fourth Monarchy. And if some great and strange events be found
therein, it is always with respect to the Roman Empire, that must endure to the
coming of the Kingdom of J. Christ on the Earth. Why God has nor taken notice
of other States in the Revelation.
The reason why God taking no notice of so many great events that happen
without the bounds of the Roman Empire, of the great Empires that are
established, the nations that are overturned, the bloody Wars that are every
where, and insists only on the fourth Monarchy, or the Roman Empire, is because
god reveals not future events but with respect to the Church which he loves,
which he conducts, and which he will instruct concerning his will. Now the
Church was to be enclosed in or very near within the bounds of the Roman
Empire. I know that there were Christian-Churches in Persia, and it may be some
in the Indies. But all this was but a small matter. Euphrates was the bounds of
Christianity; it spread it self but a little beyond it. The Church therefore had
no need to know that which should happen on the other side Euphrates, nor to
understand the foundation of the Empires of the Tartars, the Kings of Persia,
the Mogulls and the Chinois; for all this had no respect to her. Wherefore the
Revelation says not one word of them. The Spirit of God also had no intention
to instruct us in the adventures of the Empire of the Saracens and that of the
Turks, but with reference to the fourth Monarchy. Therefore we shall not see
these two Empires that of the Saracens and that of the Tarcks but only by the
by in the fifth and sixth Trumpets; and we shall not see them there but as the
Scourges of God that fall on the fourth monarchy to vex and to destroy it. This
observation is the Key of the Revelation. For first, it removes that difficulty
which many make so great a stir about, viz. that the Revelation as it is usually
explained, does not at all touch on, or if it does; it is but by the by, the
greatest Revolutions of the World, that happened in the East since 1200 years.
Yet once more, it was not the work of him who would speak of nothing but the
Church and those Events, that have in immediate reference to the Church.
Secondly, This observation will teach us rightly to divide the times of the
Revelation, and properly to apply the visions to each time, and to discover the
events that are signified by those Visions.

We must know therefore, that the fourth monarchy without comparison the
greatest, The division of the fourth Monarchy into two Periods.
and most distinguished in the Prophecies is divided into two great periods.
The first is from the birth of Rome ab urbe condita, which was the great Epoch
of the Romans, to the division of the Roman Empire into ten Kingdoms, which was
after the death of Valentinian the third about the year 455. For then the
Empire was torn in pieces between the Greeks, the Vandals, the Goths, the
Burgundians etc. it was I say divided into ten principal parts. The second
period of the fourth monarchy is since the division of the Empire among ten
Kings, and the reunion of those ten Kings under one sole head, that calls
himself the universal Bishop, to the end of this monarchy, and the coming of
the fifth, which is that of J. Christ on the Earth. These two periods are very
near of the same length, viz. 1200 years or a little more. The Lord J. Christ
came into the world Anno V. C. 754. or 752. as Dionysius the lesser pretends.
The Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms about the year of J. Christ 455. i.
e. in the year 1209 or 1207 of the city of Rome; since that time under the
Roman and Gothish Kings the counting ab urbe condita was continued till the
time of Dionysius the lesser a Roman Abbot, a Scythian by nation, who died in
the year 540 according to Baronius, and who made his Paschal cycle in the year
527. It Is about the year 530 that the Christian Era began to be in use, and the
counting by the years of J. Christ. Then men left off counting ab urbe condita
after they had used this Epoch about 1280 years. However that be, the period
from the building of Rome to the division of the Roman Empire among ten Kings
is more than 1200 years. The second period of the fourth monarchy since its
division among ten Kings to the end must be also above 1200 years. The Prophecy
makes it 1260 prophetical days, i.e. 1260 years.

Now we must observe that in the time of St. John. i. e. in the time when he
wrote the Revelation, there was above two thirds of the first period of the
fourth monarchy past and gone. For the wrote about the year 850 after the
building of the city. There remained therefore but a little more than 350 years
of this first period. But he had before him the whole entire second period of
1260 years. Wherefore it is not very strange that he enlarges himself much more
on this later part than on the former. So that we shall not find properly more
than two chapters the sixth and the eighth that respect this first period of
the fourth monarchy; and all the rest from the ninth chapter inclusively to the
20th, exclusively contains the events that belong to the period of the 1260
Years, which is the second of the fourth Monarchy. To render this truth more
plain that the Prophecy of Daniel touching the fourth Monarchy is the Text on
which the H. Spirit treats in the Revelation, we must here view the Prophecy of
Daniel and apply it to diverse parts of that of St. John.

After this I saw in the night visions, Dan. 7.7.
and behold a fourth beast dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly, and
it had great iron teeth. It devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the
residue with the feet of it, and it was diverse from all the beasts that were
before it, and it had ten horns.

Daniel having asked the explication of this vision, the Angel says to him
hereupon; The fourth beast shall be the fourth Kingdom on the Earth, v. 23.
which shall be diverse from all Kingdoms, and shall devour the whole Earth,
and tread it down and break it in pieces. This refers to the establishment of
this Empire, and its conquests, that were begun under the Consuls and
Dictators, and were finished under the Emperors; of which St. John. had seen a
part, and some followed after him; under whom also the Empire was always
enlarged, or at least preserved in its greatness even to the children of
Theodosius. It broke in pieces the whole Earth, and stamped the residue with
the feet of it. For it mortifyed all its neighbors whom it did not Subdue. The
6th. Chapter of the Revel. belongs to this first part of the Prophecy of Daniel.
The 8th. Chapter of the Revelation adds to the Prophecy of Daniel, for it shows
the degrees whereby the Roman Empire was brought to its division into ten
Kingdoms.

8. It had ten horns, and I considered the horns, and behold there came up
among them another little horn before whom three of the first horns were
plucked up by the roots; and behold in this horn were Eyes like the Eyes of a
Man, and a mouth speaking great things.

24. The Angel explaining this place says, The ten horns out of the Kingdom
are ten Kings that shall arise, and another shall arise after them, and he
shall be diverse from the first, and shall subdue three Kings.

25. And he shall speak great words against the Most High, and shall wear out
the saints of the Most High, and think to change Times and laws; and they shall
be given into his hand until a time, and times, and the dividing of time.

See the division of the fourth Monarchy into ten others, which was made after
the year 450. We shall see afterward which are these ten Kingdoms. From the
midst of these ten comes up a little horn, a Monarch that appears as nothing, a
Priest that insensibly increases his power over these ten Kings, so far as to
take away the third part of their Demains, Jurisdiction and Power. This is what
has been exactly accomplished in the Papacy, which has taken away from the
Western Kings more than a third part of their Estate, which is become Church
Lands, and dependant on the Church; more than a third of their jurisdiction by
the Tribunals of Bishops and Officials, who drew almost all causes to them,
under the pretense, that there was something mingled with them that respected
the Church, the Sacraments, or the Conscience; Lastly, more than a third part
of their Power, by the Usurpations of the Popes, who have made Kings their
Vassals a hundred ways. Besides this, the Popes have particularly overthrown
these three Kingdoms, that of the Greeks in Italy, that of the Lombards, and
that of Germany, which they have made dependant on the Roman Church. This
little horn speaks words of blasphemy against God, exalts it self above all
that is called God, and against the Kings of the Earth. It destroys the saints
of the most high. That is to say, it persecutes them even to blood. It thinks
to change the Times and the Law: it makes attempts against the divine laws: it
destroys Gods Commands, and dispenses with them. It commands the adoration of
images and Creatures, which God forbids. It permits crimes which God
abominates, and against which he has made severe laws. This also is the true
description of the Pope and the Papacy.

To this horn is given a time, and times, and the dividing or the half of a
time; one year, two years, half a year; three years and half in all; 360.
prophetical days to a year, that is to say, 1260. years. See the text on which
the 11th, 13th, and 17. Chapter of the Revel. are a comment.

I beheld till the Thrones were cast down, v. 9.
and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair
of his head like the pure wool, his throne was like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as burning fire.

A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him; v. 10.
thousand thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousands
stood before him; the judgment was set and the books were opened.

I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke; v.
11*
I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to
the burning flame.

In the explication which the Angel gives Daniel we read, But the judgment
shall sit, v. 26,
and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the
end.

And the Kingdom, and do minion, v. 27.
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the most high, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and all dominions shall serve and obey him.

The judgment here spoken of is not the last judgment; God appears sitting on a
magnificent throne, not to judge the whole world, but to judge the Empire of the
Beast, the fourth Monarchy in its Antichristian Period, and to deal forth the
various punishments that befall this Monarchy for 7 or 8 hundred years, to
bring it to its end. This Fire, these Flames, these Wheels burning like fire,
on which the throne moves, represent the greatness of those punishments. And
behold the Text of the 9th. Chapter in which St. John presents to our view the
Saracens and the Turks, that make desolate the Roman Antichristan Empire; and
of the 14th, 15th, 16th, 18th and 19th, where God in diverse visions represents
the different steps of the ruin of the Roman Antichristian Empire.

As for what is said here of the Kingdom given to the Saints, it is the matter
and Text of the end of the 11th. Chapter of the 20, 21, and 22. throughout.

So it will appear in following the path which we are entered into, that the
whole Revelation is a commentary on ten or twelve verses of the 7th. Chapter of
Daniel.

CHAP. IV.
The systems of the seven seals and the seven Trumpets, that denote the great
events, and bring the world to its end.

IN the 4th. Chapter the H. Spirit opened the scene; the 5th. is a preludium for
the vision of the seven seals which is contained in the 6. Chapter The first book
is sealed with seven seals, that is to say, it is very obscure. Indeed it is so
to that degree that never will any thing be said on this first part of the
Revelation, that goes beyond conjecture and probability. Whereas as for the
second, I hold that one may attain to the true sense of it, and certainly know
that one has found it. See what in my judgment may best be said on the seven
seals.

How far the seven seals teach.
The seven seals certainly reach to the end of the world, but not in that manner
as the greatest part of our Interpreters have imagined, in dividing the
duration of the World from J. Christ to its end into seven Periods almost
equal. The six First seals do not go beyond 300. years. But the seventh seal is
subdivided into seven Trumpets, and does produce them. Now these seven Trumpets
bring the events even to the last judgment, the first not beginning till after
the 6th. seal, So that these seven seals are as six branches, that shoot forth
from the body of a Tree, with a seventh great branch, which it self becomes a
great arm, and shoots forth seven other branches. As for this, it cannot be
doubted by any that read the beginning of the 7th. Chapter with any attention.

To find out the mystery of the seven seals and the seven Trumpets, we must
here again bring in that observation which we a little before made in the
foregoing Chapter viz. that the Revelation contains enigmatically the Epitomy of
the history of the fourth Monarchy, that is to say, of the Roman Empire; a
Monarchy which according to Daniel's Prophecy must last till the coming of the
Kingdom of J. Christ on the Earth, i. e. to the end of the reign of Antichrist.
It is clear that the Holy Spirit was to insist only on this fourth Monarchy,
without considering the other states and Empires of the world, because it is
that only that Daniel spoke of after the three first Beasts, whose reign was
certainly past in St. John's time. Moreover, it is under this fourth Monarchy,
and in the extent of its dominions, that the Christian Church has received its
seat and its rule. That Christianity that is found beyond the extent of the
Roman Empire, is almost nothing. And therefore it is that the Counsels which
were assembled from the several parts of the Roman Empire are called
Ecumenical, as representing the Universal Church. Now it is certain that all
the Prophecies have a Mediate or an immediate Relation to the Church. So that
they ought to insist only on those states in which the Church has been
nourisht and brought up.

There is a third Reason why these Prophecies cannot be understood but of the
Roman Empire, viz. because the reign of Antichrist, which is the greatest
affair that happens in the Church, and which must happen there, was to make a
part and a continuation of this Roman Empire. For Antichristianism is the Roman
Empire continued. This principle which I was willing to repeat here because of
its importance, will serve to answer those that say to us, How know you that
the Prophecies of the Revelation do not refer to China or Tartary? This
objection does not seem to me to be worthy of understanding persons.

This being supposed that the Revelation enigmatically contains the history of
the Roman Empire continued, The principal Catastrophes happening in the Roman
Empire are istinctly noted in the Revelation.
it must also be necessarily supposed that principal and great Changes that
happened in this Empire are described in large Characters, and with some note
of distinction in the Revelation. Otherwise the H. Spirit would not act
according to his profound wisdom, if in making a history of an Empire, he
should omit to mark the great Catastrophes that are to happen therein, or if he
should hide them, and make them to pass without any character of distinction
among the other less events.

We must therefore consider what are the principal events that have happened in
the Roman Empire. See here they are.

1. The fall of Paganism, when the Roman Emperors became Christians. This is
so great an affair, that it is impossible to suppose that the Holy Spirit should
have taken no notice of it.

2. The fall of the Temporal Roman Empire, when 'twas divided into ten Kingdoms.

3. The erecting a new Roman Empire, or rather the continuation of the same
under the rule of Antichrist.

4. The Birth of the Saracen Empire by the Arabians, that come to afflict the
Roman Empire in its Eastern branch, i.e. the Empire of Constantinople.

5. The power of the Turks, that come to finish the destruction of the Greek
branch of the Roman Empire, and to lay desolate the Latin Empire.

See the five great events that have changed the face of the word and of the
Empire. Wherefore I am persuaded these must be found in the Revelation with
Characters of distinction. Let us suppose therefore that in all the places
where there is a notable distinction, there we must find one of these notable
events.

The First distinction is found at the end of the sixth seal. After the opening
this seal, there happens a great Earthquake, the sun is eclypsed, and the moon
becomes red as blood, the stars fall. Afterward the vision of the seals is
interrupted by a new vision that comes between, in which an Angel marks the
elect among the twelve Tribes, twelve thousand of every Tribe. After which the
Holy Spirit returns to the seventh seal, under which nothing is done besides
the distribution of the seven Trumpets to seven Angels, that must sound the
successively. It Is clear this is an Epoch, a point on which the H. Spirit
would have our thoughts to dwell. This first Character of distinction must to
all appearance be affixed to the first distinct event that happens in the Roman
Empire; that is, the fall of Paganism. So that in the opening of the sixth
seal, we must find the fall of the Pagan Religion.

The Second very observable distinction is found at the fourth Trumpet. There
the third part of the sun is in like mannereclypsed, the moon and the stars
suffer the like diminution in their light. After which the process of the
Trumpets is interrupted by a new Vision, viz. that of an Angel, that flies in
the midst of heaven, and cries three time, Woe to the inhabitants of the Earth,
because of the three last Trumpets which are yet to sound. This is an evident
distinction; and this second distinction must signify to us the second distinct
event in the Roman Empire, viz. its fall and division among ten Kings, which
came to pass after Valentinian the 3d. in the middle of the fifth Age.

The making a new Vision and a new Angel, crying Woe there times, go before the
sounding the 5th. Trumpet, is also a mark of distinction for that 5th. Trumpet,
which signifies to us that it is an event greatly distinguished in the history of
the Roman Empire. And this third distinction cannot be applied to any thing but
the third notable event that befalls the Roman Empire, viz. the Birth of the
Saracen Empire by Mahomet and his Successors, that did so cruelly afflict the
Roman Empire, in the Empire of Constantinople, which was the greatest and the
most noble part of these ten into which this Empire was divided.

The Empire of the Turks at the bottom is but a branch of the Arabian and
Saracen Empire. Wherefore it does not deserve so great a distinction as the
other great events of which we have just now spoken. And yet the H. Spirit is
content to distinguish it by a very long description. The fifth and sixth
Trumpet contain an entire Chapter, whereas the four first Trumpets were finished
in 6. or 7. verses. which signifies, that this fifth and sixth Trumpet must be
concerning great Affairs, and Evils of a long duration.

As for that great Event, which was to happen in the Roman Empire, which
wereckon'd for the third; viz. the Erection of a new Roman Empire, or the
continuation of the same Empire under the new Name of the Pope and the Roman
Church; it is so great an Affair, that the Holy Spirit would not bring it into
the first part of the Revelation: He has reserved it to make it the Subject of
the second part. It Is there that he explains largly and much more clearly the
Birth, Progress, and Fall of this Antichristian Empire, that was to make the
last Period of the fourth Beast.

According to this System, the five first Seals must bring the Roman Empire to
the Fall of Paganism; i.e. to Constantine's time. Under the sixth Seal happens
this Fall of Paganism. The Elect having been sealed, and Silence having been
for half an hour, the four first Trumpets sound, that must bring the Roman
Empire to its Fall, to the taking of Rome by Genserick after the death of
Valentinian the 3d, the time wherein the Empire was torn in pieces into ten
Kingdoms.

The three last Trumpets are described by three Woes, Woe, Woe, Woe; that is to
say, Woe not absolutely, but to the fourth Monarchy; which signifies, that they
must be distinguished above all the rest. The fifth Trumpet brings the Roman
Empire afflicting, and always wearing it less and less to the ninth or tenth
Age. The sixth Trumpet brings and accompanies the Latin Roman Empire, or the
Ecclesiastical one, in afflicting it in like manner to its end; that is to say,
to the seventh Trumpet, which must bring the last misery on the Inhabitants of
the Antichristian World, and that is the Coming of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ
on the Earth. This sixth Trumpet, that brings the Roman Ecclesiastical Empire
to its end, begins about the tenth Age, and is subdivided into seven Vials in
the 16th chap. of the Revelation, just as the seventh Seal was divided into
seven Trumpets. There are here two great Victories over the Empire of the
Devil: The first is, The Fall of the ancient Paganism: The 2d is, The Fall of
the New or the Antichristian Paganism. The first happens immediately before the
opening the seventh Seal: The second immediately before the sounding of the
last Trumpet.

Lastly, After the seven Vials, that were to fall on the Beast, on his Throne,
on his Subjects. on his Empire, comes the sounding of the seventh Trumpet; and
the sounding of this last Trumpet, brings in and accompanies the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ on the Earth, in its whole duration, and ends with the end of the
World.

Thus you hay the System of the seven Seals, and the seven Trumpets; let us
now consider the particulars, and we shall see that every thing exactly agrees
with it.

CHAP. V.
The Explication of the Vision of the Six First Seals, according as it is in
the sixth Chapter of the Revelation.

THe Opening of the Seals begins with the sixth Chapter.

V. 1. I saw when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, and I heard as it were the
noise of Thunder, and one of the four Beasts saying, Come and see.

2. And I saw, and behold a White Horse, and he that sat on him had a Bow, and
a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer.

It must be observed, that the four first Seals make four Men to appear on
Horseback; which signifies they are Persons of Authority, and at the same time
Warriors too. The Horse is a living creature, designed for Fighting, and the
Riding of Commanders and Emperors. We must observe also, that these four living
Creatures call those four Horsemen from the four quarters of the World,
according to their situation. The first of these living Creatures was in the
East; the 2d in the West; the 3d in the South; and the 4th in the North.

The first living Creature, placed toward the East, causes a King to come
forth from the same quarter, The first Horsman is Vespasian and Titas his Son.
sitting on a White Horse; a Crown on his Head, and a Bow in his Hand: He comes
forth to Conquer. Joseph Mede, Henry More, Testard, Launay, and I know not how
may more, would have this first Horsman to be the Lord Jesus Christ, who comes
from Judea, which was eastward from Rome. Therefore this Horsman is called by
the first living Creature, which was in the eastern quarter. But I cannot be of
that Opinion;

First, Because the Equipage of this Horseman is not magnificent enough to
represent Jesus Christ. We need but consult the places where the Prophet makes
Jesus Christ to appear; the 1st, chap. the 10th, where he comes again to
deliver a New Book to St. John; the 14th, where he comes to the Harvest and the
Vintage; and lastly, the 19th, where he returns in the equipage of a Horseman.
But in all these places he is extraordinarily magnificent, clothed with Fire,
with the Light, with the Sun, with the Rainbow, riding on the Clouds, having
not one simple Crown, but many Diadems, and his Eyes casting out Flames. Here
there is nothing more plain and mean: It Is a Man sitting on a Horse, with a Bow
and a Crown. That which has deceived Interpreters is, the Color of the Horse,
White, which they have taken for an Emblem of Holiness. But white is the emblem
of Prosperity as well as of Holiness. So that this signifies only the Success
and the Victories of him that sits on the Horse.

2dly, The Bow is not the Arms which the Holy Spirit usually gives to Jesus
Christ; but a Sword, and a Sword coming out of his Mouth. A Bow does but little
execution in comparison of a Sword: and this signifies the few Wars which this
first Horsman should make.

3. Lastly; Seeing what comes after by the consent of Interpreters, whom I
follow, we endeavor to find out Roman Emperors, why should we put Jesus Christ
in the head of them? Why should we make him the first of the four Emperors
meant by these four Horsemen? It Is therefore much more reasonable in this place,
to find a Roman Emperor: One might here eafily find Augustus the most happy of
all men, that brought Peace, and shut the Temple of Ianus: But not to rise so
high, I think that we must seek Vespasian and his Son Titus in the first
Horsman: He sits on a White Horse. The one and the other, Vespasian and Titus,
were good Princes, under whom the Empire was pretty peaceable and quiet: They
had not great Wars; therefore the Holy Spirit gives them but a Bow. They come
from the Eastern quarter, because Vespasian was made and proclaimed Emperor
when he was in the East. They come forth to conquer: it is with respect to the
Nation of the Jews, and Jerusalem, that was taken and burn; and the Temple,
that was razed; and the People, that were led into Captivity by Titus under
Vespasian. The Temple and the Mosaical Worship, while they subsisted, were a
great Obstacle to the Establishment of the new Covenant. Therefore this
destruction of the Jewish Temple and Worship is a Victory in the behalf of J.
Christ, which deservd to be marked.

And when he had opened the seal, v. 3.
etc.

And there went out another horse that was Red; v. 4.
and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the Earth, and
that they should kill one another; and there was given to him a great sword.

It Is clear that this signifies a great Slaughter, and a great effusion of
Blood. The 2d. Horse signifies the Empire of Trajan and Adrian.
Empire of Trajan and his successor Adrian. Never was there a greater effusion
of blood; the Jews revolted almost in all places whither the were dispersed, in
Libya, in Cyrene, in Egypt, in Cyprus, in Mesopotamia, in Palestine it self,
and in all the East, under the conduct of their false Messiah Barchocheva.

In the beginning they made such a horrible slaughter of the Greeks and Romans,
that they are made to amount to above six hundred thousaud persons. Dion
reports, Osorius. Dion: Lyber Juchasin.
that their fury proceeded so far as to eat the flesh of men. They did tear in
pieces their entrails with their teeth. They flead them, and made Garments of
their skins. They anointed themselves with their blood. But they were fully
requited. History reports that Adrian put to death 12 hundred thousand in the
whole extent of the Empire. The Jews themselves confess that this civil war
cost the Jews above twice the number of persons that went out of Egypt. So that
under the reign of these two, Trajan and Adrian, there were more than two
millions of souls that died a violent death. Never was the like slaughter seen
before, nor since, till the Crusado's. This could not be better represented
than by a Red Horse; it is the color of Blood: or than by a Great Sword; the
greater it is the better it signifies that the slaughter shall be great; or
than by Men's killing one another, that signifies civil wars. Now it is in civil
wars that there is the greatest effusion of blood. This second horse comes out
of the Western quarter. Trajan was a Native of Spain, which was the Western
part of the Roman Empire.

At the opening the third seal, there comes forth out of the South at the voice
of the third living creature.

A Black Horse, v. 5.
and he that sat on him had a pair of Balances in his hand. v. 6.
And I heard a voice in the mid of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for
a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the
Oylnor the Wine.

This certainly signifies an Empire that has something of severity and
sadness, The 3d. horse is the Empire of Septimius Severui and Alexander the son
of Mammaa.
by reason of the Black Horse. But this does not signify slaughter, as the Red
horse of the second living Creature. This signifies also a reign of justice,
where every thing is done in weight and measure, and according to the Balance.
Lastly, this signifies a reign of plenty, wherein by the care of the Prince,
Wheat, Barley, Oil and Wine do abound. This the Character of the reign of
Septimius Severus and of Alexander the son of Mammaea. Septimius Severus was an
African of the Province of Tripoli. Wherefore the living Creature of the
southern quarter calls him. Both of them were severe protectors of justice.
Both of them, and especially Alexander, were sworn enemies to all Thieves,
public, private, known, or secret, and to all people that behaved themselves
ill, and were unfaithful in their offices. They made exact and strict searches
after them, Aurelius. Spartianus, Lampridius. Septimius. apud Lampridium.
and severely punished them. Alexander made even his soldiers live in so great
discipline, that they dared not take away a Hen or an Apple from a Peasant; or
if that did happen, he oftentimes punished them to the greatest extremity.
Lastly, both of them, both Septimius Severus and Alexander the son of Mammaea,
gave admirable Orders for the distributing Corn, and Wine, and Oil, to the end
all the World might have them, and there might be no want. This is what
Historians do expressly observe.

And when he had opened the fourth seal, v. 7.
etc.

And I looked and behold a Pale Horse, v. 8.
and his name that sat on him was Death, and hell followed him, and power was
given to them over the fourth part of the Earth to kill with Sword, and with
Hunger, and with Death, and with the Beasts of the Earth.

The fourth Horseman is the Empire of Maximin and his successors.
Behold visibly a reign sad, black, laden with all sorts of Calamities,
Massacrees, Effusions of Blood, Plague, War and Famine, Tyranny and Violence.
It Is the Character of the reign of Maximin and his successors to Aurelian. The
fourth living Creature calls this Tyrant from the North. Thence 'twas that
Maximin came, who was a native of Thrace in the North of the Roman Empire. This
Maximin deserved to bear the name of Death; for he was the most cruel of all
Tyrants; they gave him the name of Cyclops, Busiris, Scyron, Phalaris, Typhon
and Gyges. He made men be flead and crucified alive, buried living men in the
bodies of beasts, massacred, beat persons to death, without distinction of sex,
age or condition. He destroyed many thousands of men by all sorts of
punishments.

Julius Capitolin us. Trebellius Pollio de 30 Tyrannis. and in vita Gallieni.
Gallienus, that is included in the Period here meant, made himself remarkable
also by his cruelty. Oftentimes he made the throats of 3 or 4000. be cut in a
day. In this time reigned a plague of fifteen years, that began in Ethiopia,
Zosimus. Lipsius de Constantia. 2. 23. Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. c. 17.
and ran throughout the Empire. Lipsius acknowledges history speaks not of any
that comes near it. There was also a very great and a very universal famine.
The Barbarians in the East made havok of the Empire, and horrible desolations
therein. At last there rose up near thirty tyrants in the whole extent of the
Empire. One may judge what desolation that caused. Here end the four living
Creatures and the four horsemen, about the end of the third Age.

And when he had opened the fifth seal, v. 9.
I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God,
and for the testimony which they held.

And they cried with a loud voice, v. 10.
saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth?

The fifth seal is Dioclesian's persecution.
See here what clearly signifies a Period in which the Church suffers a cruel
persecution; and it is that which was caused by Dioclesian and his successors,
the most bloody that ever was, longer and more cruel than the nine others
taken together. Sulpitius Severus. Orosius. Scaliger de Emendat. Temp. l. 5.
For says Orosius, during ten years they ceased not to burn the Churches, to
proscribe the innocent, and to make Martyrs by Massacres and Punishments. In
Egypt alone were Massacred 144 thousand men, and 70 thousand were banished.
Thence comes the name of Era Diocletiana and Era Martyrum, an Epoch famous
in the history of the Church.

After this comes the sixth seal, under which we have said we must find the
fall of Paganism. Indeed a little time after Dioclesian, Constantine ascended
the Throne of the Emperors, and made the Christian Religion reign. He and his
Successors ruined Paganism. This fall of the Pagan Religion is thus represented
to us.

And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and lo there was a great
Earthquake, v. 12.
and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon became red as
blood.

And the Stars of Heaven fell to the Earth, even as a fig tree casts her
untimely figs, v. 13.
when she is shaken of a mighty Wind.

And the heavens departed as a scroll when it is rolled together, v. 14.
and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.

And the Kings of the Earth, v. 15.
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty
men, and every bondman, and every freeman his themselves in the dens and in
the rocks of the mountains.

And said to the mountains and rocks, v. 16.
fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb.

For the great day of his wrath is come, v. 17.
and who shall be able to stand?

The fixth Trumpet contains the fall of Faganism.
All these images are borrowed from the last judgment, wherefore they are usually
applied to it. Because indeed this fall of Paganism. is the most terrible
judgment that yet ever fell since the beginning of the World on the Devil's
Empire. We must know that in the whole Revelation we see these three heads
reigning, the Dragon, the Beast, the false Prophet. The Dragon is the Devil,
the Beast is the Roman Empire, the false Prophet is the Pope. The Dragon has
two Empires, the First is pure Paganism, and purely Pagan. The second is
Antichristian Paganism mingled with Christianity. See here the fall of the
first Empire, that is the purely Pagan Empire of the Dragon.

1. There is a great Earthquake. In the style of the Prophets, and
particularly of St. John; an Earthquake always signifies a Change of the face
of affairs in the world, because Earthquakes overturn the Earth, and make it
Change its face. Now what change of the face of affairs in the world can be
imagined greater than that which happened under Constantine and his successors.
The Church had been beat down, massacred, it was bathed in its own blood, and
all on a sudden behold it is the Mistress of the world. It is become rich and
powerful, it builds stately Temples, it overturns the Temples of Idols.

2. The sun becomes black as sackcloth. We must hold it for certain that the
Sun, the Moon and the Stars in the Revelation always signify the Sovereign, the
Dignities and Powers of the Empire treated of. We shall afterward see this
every where. Here the Empire treated of is that of the Red Dragon, viz. The
Devil. So that the Sun is the Sovereign of that Empire who is the Devil
himself. The Moon is the Pagan Religion, which borrowed all its power from the
Devil, as the Moon takes all its lights from the Sun. The Stars are the
Pontifexes and Priests of Paganism. All these powers suffered an Eclypse, were
destroyed by the Christian Emperors, and tumbled to the ground like Figs by a
great wind.

3. Every mountain and Every Isle were removed out of their places, i. e. the
Temples, the Idols, the Cities, the places peculiarly consecrated to the
devotion of certain Pagan divinities were changed, and superstition therein was
abolisht. The hand of God fell heavily on the Gods of the Romans, as formerly
it did on the Gods of the Egyptians.

4. Lastly, The King and all men of every age and condition are exceedingly
terrified, run up and down, flee, hide themselves, and endeavor to escape the
judgment and the wrath of God. One might have seen above a hundred times more
than what the Prophet here says, if one could have seen the commotions that
then happened, the terrors, the distresses, the frights that the invisible
Empire of Demons suffered at the fall of Paganism. All that the Devil suffered
at the coming of J. Christ into the world was nothing in comparison of this. He
reigned notwithstanding; he was master of Empires, Crowns, Temples, Altars. But
all on a sudden, and at that very time, when he thought he had entirely ruined
the Empire of J. Christ by the persecution of Dioclesian, behold him himself
cast down on the Earth. It Is easy to judge that the Horrors and Commotions of
the evil Spirits were unconceivable. And moreover, who can doubt but that this
great body of Pontifexes, Priests and Pagan Ministers felt a prodigious
commotion, when Constantine turned Christian, and his successors beat down and
run'd all the Temples of the Idols. History tells us enough of this; and tho it
said nothing, it would be very easy to apprehend that the images here made use
of are not too lively to represent the commotions of the Heathens and of
Paganism. This Period brings us to Theodosius the great, under whom Paganism
expired; but after whom also the glory and quiet of the Empire was quite lost,
as we shall see hereafter. The greatness of the Roman Empire and Paganism fell
at the same time. This was a great matter of triumph, to the Pagans, who said,
The Gods had abandoned the Empire, since their Altars had been beaten down. But
God was providing for great events, and it was necessary the temporal Empire
should fall, to make way for the Spiritual Empire of Antichrist.

CHAP. VI.
An explication of the four first Trumpets, which are the five degrees of the
Fall of the Roman Empire, or the Sovereignty of Rome.

The 7th. Chapter is a vision that interrupts the course of the seven seals. The
mystery of the 144 thousand sealed persons in the 7th. Chapter
Here God causes his Elect to be sealed, and their number amounts to 144
thousand. We shall see in the process of this discourse that 144 is a sacred
number, appointed to signify the Church; a number that arises from twelve
multiplied by it self. For the present it is sufficient to observe, that God
takes the time between the sixth seal and the first Trumpet to cause his elect
to be sealed, because more unhappy, sad, and much more fatal times were at
hand than the foregoing ones. In the ages of the Heathen Emperors and under
the Seals there were cruel persecutions, men had suffered much in their
bodies. But under the Trumpets must come the dark Kingdom of Antichrist, wherein
the souls of the Christian-Church must be attacked with Spiritual Temptations,
be swallowed up in Superstition and Idolatry; and that in such a manner that
the number of the faithful should be almost as nothing. The 144 thousand,
signify the Church, the pure Church under Antichrists reign. Now 144 thousand
are almost nothing in comparison of that innumerable multitude that is in the
reign of Antichrist. This little number therefore was to be sealed, to the end
that the destroying Angel of Spiritual Egypt might pass over them, and spare
them. And they were to be sealed before the seven Trumpets sounded, because the
ruin of the Church was to happen under these seven Trumpets. Thus you have the
whole mystery of the 7th. Chapter

In the beginning of the 8th. Chapter after the opening the seventh seal, there was
silence for about half an hour, plainly by way of allusion to what was done in
the Temple, where while the incense was offering, the music ceased, and all
was in silence. The seven Trumpets are given to seven Angels: Every thing is
made ready for the sounding of these Trumpets.

The first Angel sounded, ^.8.
and there followed Hail, and Fire mingled with Blood, and they were cast on
the Earth, and a third part of the Trees was burn up, and all green grass was
burnt up.

The seven Trumpets continue to concern the Roman Empire as the seven seals had
done. The first Trumpet begins where the sixth seal ended. The sixth seal
brings the Roman Empire to the total fall of Paganism, which happened under the
two Theodosius's, Father and son. The first Trumpet begins under Theodosius the
younger, and signifies the first irruptions of the Barbarians.
The first Trumpet then must begin at the same time. Hail mingled with Fire,
and Blood falls on the Earth. It Is is a lively and good representation of the
inundations of those barbarous people, who in the reign of Theodosius the
younger, came out of Thrace under the conduct of Alaric, and ravaged first of
all Macedonia, Thessaly, Greece, Achaia, Corinth, Argos, Sparta, Epirus and
Italy it self. Afterward and about the same time, the Vandals, the Alanes, the
Marcomans, the Herules, the Sueves, the Allemans possessed and desolated Gaul,
Spain and Afrique. It Is a Hail mingled with fire and blood. For these barbarous
people fell on like a storm of hail, with violence and in a sudden manner. The
carried fire every where, and bathed the Earth with blood. Is. 28.2. and ^0, 3.
and 32.19.
We may see Hail used for the like inundations of strange people in diverse
places of the Prophets; So is the coming of Salmanassar and his Assyrians
expressed by the Prophet Esaias. And the third part of the Trees was burnt. The
third part signifies the Roman Empire.
It must be observed that this third part appears again in all the Trumpets;
and this third part certainly signifies the Roman Empire. The reason of it is
evident. It Is because this Empire did possess, and does still, the third part
of the World. Geographers divided the world into three parts, Europe, Asia, and
Africa. The Roman Empire took up one of these three parts. viz. Europe. So that
when the Prophet says that the several plagues of the Trumpets afflict the
third part of the world, it is as much as to say, they afflict Europe. It will
be said that the Roman Empire extended it self also into Asia and Africa. But
1st. there was also in Europe a great extent of Northern countries that was not
possessed by the Romans. So that what it had in the other parts of the world
could only serve as an equivalent for what it had not in Europe. So that it
always remained true that the Roman Empire did not reach to above a third part
of the world. 2ly. Moreover, Europe being the seat of the Roman Empire, because
Rome and Constantinople are both of them seated in this third part of the
world; it is clear the Roman Empire cannot be better represented than by Europe,
or a third part of the world.


Lastly, 'Twas Europe chiefly that was harrassed by the inundations of the
barbarous people. Therefore by the third part we cannot understand any thing but
Europe.

The third part of the Trees was burnt: See here a Grammatical figure, that
must be well observed, for it is much used in the three following Trumpets.
That is to say, the trees of the third part of the world, viz. of Europe, was
burnt. Now the Prophet represents this first inundation of the Babarians, as
having yet afflicted the Trees only of Europe or the Roman Empire, because the
following plagues made so very much greater havoc. This first tempest (if I
may use the expression) touched the Trees only, did not cause such terrible
desolations as the following ones did; the Barbarians contented themselves with
the spoils of the fruits of the Earth and men's goods.

And the second Angel sounded, v. 8.
as it were a great Mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea, and the
third part of the sea became blood.

And the third part of the Creatures which were in the sea, v. 9.
and had life died, and third part of the ships were destroyed.

And the third Angel sounded, v. 10.
and there fell a great Star from heaven burning as it were a Lamp, and it fell
on the third part of the Rivers and upon the fountains of Waters.

And the name of the Star is called Wormwood, v. 11.
and the third part of the Waters became Wormwood, and many men died of the
waters because they were made bitter.

The second and third Trumpet signify the effusion of blood and the bitter
afflictions which the Barbarians caused in the Roman Empire
These two plagues of the second and the third Trumpet are very like those two
of the second and third violl in the 16th. Chapter of the Revelation. For in this
later place the two vialls fall as they do here on the sea, and the rivers.
They produce the same effect, which is, that they turn the Waters into blood,
and into liquor of Wormwood. The second and third vial is but one plague
continued, so the second and third Trumpet is but one and the same plague
continued. So that these two places of the Revelation may give much light one
to the other, not that they signfy the same events, but very like ones.

See. Jer. 51.36.44. Ezekiel. 31, 4. Is. 19.5.
In the one and in the other it is certain the sea and the Rivers signify people.
It Is the resemblance and emblem which all the Prophets use, and particularly
St. John. We shall see the whore sitting on the Waters, i.e. on the people. For
in all languages in the style of the vulgar, in that of Orators and Prophets to
make a sea of blood always signifies to make a great slaughter. We shall see
that the sea of blood in the 16th. Chapter signifies the great Slaughters caused by
the Crusados. Here the sea of blood signifies the slaughter which the
Barbarians make in the whole extent of the Roman Empire.

This mountain burning like fire, and this great star like a Lamp, at the
bottom signify but one and the same thing, excepting that the Mountain of fire
has the same proportion with the Star like a Lamp as the sea has with the
Rivers. The Mountain of fire falls into the sea, the star or the great Lamp of
fire falls into the Rivers: i. e. the great fire falls into the greater Waters,
and the lesser fire into the lesser waters. For here a Mountain of fire is much
more than a star of fire, tho in truth a star is a thousand and a thousand
times bigger than a Mountain. But the H. Spirit frames his speech according to
appearances, and has chiefly are spect to those fires that are often seen
falling from heaven, which are called Falling-stars.

Joseph Mede with all other Interpreters would find in this Mountain of fire,
and this Starlike a Lamp much more of mystery than is in it; pretending that
this means some great person distinguished by his dignity as a king or an
Emperor, or by his knowledge as a great Doctor. Therefore many by this star
understand a great Prophet. But it is not so. This must be explained with
relation to the first Trumpet, and we must know that this is but the sequel of
the history of the destruction of the Roman Empire by the Barbarians. The first
part of this destruction was but Hail mingled with Fire, a common storm, and
such as often happens in summer, wherein thunder and lightning in hot countries
are always mingled with the hail. But afterward this inundation of the
Barbarians increased in such a manner, that it was no longer an ordinary storm.
There fell not only Fire mingled with Water and Hail, this Storm becomes wholly
pure fire, a fall of terrible Lightning, a true Mountain of Fire that fell on
the Roman Empire, and overwhelmed it. Afterward the fire continued to fall on
a third part, in truth no longer as a Mountain, but as a firebrand, such as
the stars are that appear to fall in the air. See therefore here three fires.
The First is mingled with Hail. The second is mere fire, and great as a
mountain. The third is as a great Lamp. The First afflicts the Trees of Europe
or of the third part of the World. The second falls into the sea, and changes
it into blood. The third falls on the rivers and fountains, and makes their
waters bitter. This evidently signifies the three first degrees of the
Barbarians invasion. They come at First like fire mingled with hail, which
burns the trees, like a storm that spoils the fruits of the Earth. They
pillaged the Goods and the Riches of the Empire. The mountain of fire that
falls into the sea is Alario that made Italy desolate and took Rome.
2ly. They come like a meet fire that consumes and devours. They fell on the
sea. By that I understand the people of Italy, the taking of Rome by Alaric.
Italy was in respect to the Roman Empire what the sea is in respect to the
rivers. The sea is the center, and the rivers are all round about it. The sea
is the gulf, and the rivers come from all parts to pay their tribute to this
gulf. Rome and Italy was the midst of the Empire. Rome was the sea whither all
the Provinces came to pay their tribute and their riches. Alaric and his Goths
falls like a burning mountain on Italy, and the city of Rome, he takes it, and
sacks it. This sea becomes blood. Italy was filled with slaughter. After this
the Barbarians suffered themselves to be appeased. Alaric after he had taken
Rome, and made there a new Emperor named Attalus, with whom he went to besiege
Honorius in Ravenna, gave peace to Honorius, quitted Italy, retired among the
Gaulls where with his Goths he establishthimself. The Vandals possessed Spain.
The Burgundians staid on the Rhone. The Huns inhabited Pannonia. And then the
Fountains and the Waters, i.e. the people that depended on Rome, felt the force
of this fire of the judgment of God. But this fire did not turn the waters into
Blood, because then the slaughter ceased; the opposition ceasing, the
Barbarians saw themselves Masters. But they turned the Rivers and the Fountains
into Wormwood: i. e. They reduced the Roman Provinces into a bitter Servitude.
And by reason of this, the name of Wormwood is given this last Fire; that is to
say, this last Judgment and Punishment, less than the former, but yet so great
as to make the people live in Bitterness. For the Goths spoiled them of their
Lands and Goods. See the Mystery of the second and third Trumpet. I have no
need to give notice, that the third part of the Sea, and the third part of the
Rivers, signify the Sea, and the Rivers of the third part of the World; i. e.
of Europe: For I have given notice already of that once for all. In truth, they
were the People of Europe, that suffered these Desolations.

V. 12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and a third part of the Sun was smitten,
and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, so as the
third part of them was darkened, and the Day shone not for a third part of it,
and the Night likewise.

The Fall of the Reman Empire.
It Is still the same Figure that rules, that is to say, that the Sun of Europe,
which is the third part of the World, was darkened; in like manner the Moon and
Stars. We must remember, that in the Prophecies the Sun, Moon and Stars always
signify the Powers of a State. The Heaven of the politic World, is the
superior Region of Dignities, that sheds kind or malignant Influences on the
People. We shall see this constantly observed in this Book, in such manner,
that in all places where the Sun, Moon and Eclypses are spoken of, it is
unquestionable that we must understand the darkening and destruction of the
sovereign Powers in the State or Empire spoken of. Now what Empire is it that
is here spoken of? It Is the Empire of Rome. For yet once more we must stick to
this Principle, as one of the principal Keys of the Revelation, viz. that it
moves wholly on the Roman Empire, and that it is properly nothing but a Comment
on what is said of the fourth Beast in the 7th chap. of Daniel: The Roman
Empire, and in part the Invasions of it by the Goths and other Barbarians being
here treated of, there is no room for doubting, but that the Sun of the third
part of the World which is smitten, signifies the Sovereign of Rome, the Roman
Emperor; the Moon is the Imperial Dignity; the Stars are the Grandees of the
Empire. And it is the Extinction of the Roman Empire of Italy that happened in
the year 455. after the Death of Valentinian the 3d, when Genseric came from
Africa with his Vandals, took Rome, and sacked it fifteen days one after
another; after which the Empire was torn among tell Kings, according as St.
John foretold it in the sequel of this Book.

CHAP. VII.
An Explication of the Visions of the fifth and sixth Trumpet, wherein are seen
the Empires of the Saracens and Turks.

THis fall of the Imperial dignity at Rome in the fourth Monarchy is a great
affair. Therefore the H. Spirit stays upon it, and makes a pause as a mark of
distinction, as we have before observed. But that which follows also is a great
affair. Therefore the three Last Trumpets are preceded by an Angel that cries,
Woe, Woe, Woe; they are the three last blows of the Fall of the Roman Empire.
After this Cry follows the fifth Trumpet. Chapter 9.

And the fifth Angel sounded, v. 1.
and I saw a star fall from Heaven to the Earth, and to him was given the Key
of the Bottomless pit.

And he opened the Bottomless-pit, v. 2.
and there arose a Smoke out of the Pit, as the smoke of a great Furnace, and
the Sum and the Air were Darkened by reason of the Smoke of the Pit. v. 3. And
there came out of the smoke Locusts on the Earth.

And the sequel of the history, and the Characters of this Prophecy, persuade
me, that by the Locusts we must understand the Arabians and Saracens; for after
the fall of the Imperial dignity in Italy, the greatest event that happened
with reference to the fourth Monarchy and Religion, is the Empire of the
Arabians, The imperial dignity falls in the fifth Age. In the sixth Age the
Arabians are raised up to weary and torment the Roman Empire divided into ten
Kingdoms, but above all, for the punishment of the Empire of Constantinople,
the most remarkable part of the t^n. We shall see that the words of the
Prophecy agree very well with this discovery of those modern people.

The falling star in the fifth Trumpet is no^ a grandee or a Prophet.
A star falls from heaven. It Is a presage of some great event. By this star we
must not understand a great Lord, or a false Prophet, as some have imagined.
For this star does nothing, and appears no more in this fifth Trumpet. It Is
very improperly that De Launay and many others apply to this Star these words,
and to him was given the Key of the Bottomless-pit; as if a star could carry a
Key, use it, and open a door. The Prophecies are continued Metaphors and
Allegories. Now according to good Rhetoric, Actions in Metaphors must be
attributed to Subjects according to the nature of those subjects. Here an Angel
and a star are spoken of; It Is the Angel that opens the Bottomless-pit, and not
the star. It Is the proper office of Angels in the Apocalyptical Visions, to
open and shut, and bring in on the stage. So in the 20th. Chapter of the Revelation
it is an Angel that closes the Bottomless-pit on the Dragon. This star therefore
does nothing else here but only presage a great insurrection against God, that
was to happen under the fifth Trumpet. The bottomless-pit being opened, The
Religion of Mahomet meant by the black smoke.
there comes out a Smoke black and thick, like that of a Furnace, and the Sun
was darkened thereby. It Is the unhappy Religion of Mahomet that fills the world
with his thick darkness of Error: and there arose out of the smoke of the
bottomless pit Locusts on the Earth. And this unhappy and detestable doctrine
formed an Empire, and united the Arabians together under the detestable
Mahomet. By the Locusts the Saracens are meant.
One cannot better represent the Arabians than by Locusts. First because of
their innumerable multitude. So 'twas the Author of the book of Judges called
them many ages before St. John. And the Midianites and the Amalekites, and all
the Children of the East, were in the valley as Locusts for number. 2. It Is
from Arabia that these inundations of locusts come, that often cover both Egypt
and Ethiopia, and the other neighboring places round about. 3. The prodigious
swiftness of the Conquests of the Saracens is most admirably represented by
Clouds of Locusts, that fall on the fields in one night, and almost in a
moment. 4. One cannot better represent the hideous desolations which the
Saracens made every where, than by the hideous condition that the meadows and
fields are in when the Locusts come on them.

It is commanded these Locusts, ^. 4.
not to hurt the Grass of the Earth, nor any green thing, but only those men
which have not the seal of God in their forheads. This is to express, that
these Locusts are men that are sent against other men, whereas true Locusts
fasten on the green things.

And to them it was given, not that they should kill men, but torment them five
months. We must know and always remember the foundation we have laid, that the
whole Revelation is a history of the Roman Empire, and that all the events
refer to that Empire. So that the sense is, the Saracens by the permission of
God should have a great power to torment and harrass the Roman Empire divided
into ten Kingdoms, but not to destroy it. Indeed the Saracens tormented both
Greeks and Latins most cruelly. But both the Empire of Constantinople and the
other parts of the Roman Empire defended themselves against their assaults.

What the five mouths of the reign of the Locusts signify.
The duration of these Locusts is limited to five months, these make 150 days.
But these days do not signify an 150 years, a day for a year according to the
prophetic style. Joseph Mede that follows this hypothesis, assigns 150 years
to the time, during which the Saracens particularly afflicted Italy from the
year 830 to the year 980. But it is not so. We must observe, that the reign of
the Locusts is in the five months of the summer, May, June, July, August,
September, and that is their longest reign. For oftentimes they last not so
long, because sometimes in the midst of summer a great wind carries them away,
or a long rain makes them burst. So that the Prophet means that the Sarazens,
shall fulfill their reign in its greatest extent, and that God will not abate
any thing of it in favor of the men that are the subjects of the Roman Empire.

The description of these Locusts is notable. Their shape was like unto horses
prepared to the battle. It Is to signify the wars and fights whereby the Saracens
were to establish their government: On their heads were as it were crowns like
gold. All the Empires that at this day take up the East came from them, that of
the Turks, that of the Persians, that of the great Mogull, that of the Tartars.

Their faces were as the faces of men, and they had hair as the hair of women,
and their teeth were as the teeth of Lions, and the sound of their wings was as
the sound of Chariots. That is to say, they are as great women, with their hair
dishevelled, a hideous countenance, and wings on their shoulders. I question
not but the Prophet had respect to the description which the Poets make of the
Harpyes.

Tristius haud illis monstrum, Aeneid. 3.
nec saevior ulla Pestis, and ira Deum Stygiis sese extulit undis. Virginei
volucrum vultus, faedissima ventris. Ingluvies, Vncaeque manus and pallida
semper Orafame.

Whence comes the name and fable of the Harpyes.
Where it is very observable that the name of Harpyes, comes from the Hebrew word
Arbim or Arpim, which signifies Locusts. They were the terror of the East.
Therefore the Poets made of them Women with wings devouring all they saw, and
which came* up from Hell, Stygiis sese extulit undis. Exactly in the same
manner as these according to St. John, ascended out of the bottomless pit. So
the Prince of the bottomless-pit, viz. Pluto, is looked on as their Prince
among the Poets, and in the Pagan Theology; for it is he that in that Theology
is called Serapio instead of Serarpis or Sararpi, i. e. Prince of Locusts in
the Phaenician and Hebrew Tongue; just as the Phaenicians called the same
Pluto, Beelzebub, i. e. the God of flies. The flies and locusts being two great
plagues to the fruits and plants of the Earth. Pluto was thought to send these
plagues. Therefore he is called their Prince. It Is to this I say the Prophet
alludes, and he would tell us that the Saracens should be like these winged
women called Harpyes, that ascend out of Hell, that have Hooks instead of
Teeth, and that devour all things. In truth the Saracens and Arabians were
always professed Thieves. 'Twas by covetousness and pillaging much more than by
slaughter that they made the East desolate.

These Locusts had Tails like Scorpions, and stings in their tails. All the
world knows that the tail and the sting in the Serpent is the seat of venom
and poison. And poison is the Emblem of false Doctrine. Which signifies not
only that the Arabians should carry desolation and death every where, but also
the venom of a detestable Religion. Therefore it is the Devil is called a Serpent
and a Dragon, by reason of the poison of false Religions that he spreads.

Lastly, they have for their head the Angel of the Bottomless-pit, called
Abaddon in Hebrew, and Apollyon in Greek, i. e. destroyer. This is not the
description of the Devil, as Joseph Mede believed. It Is the description of
Mahomet, a Monster arising out of Hell, as well as the Locusts: The Angel of
the Bottomless-pit. Angel signifies Pastor and messenger; and we must observe
once for all that the name Angel in the Revelation does not signify a species
of those Spirits that are so called, Angels and Deviis. It Is the name of an
Office, given sometimes to J. Christ, sometimes to Pastors, sometimes to men
that are Instruments in Gods hand, sometimes to Spirits separated from matter.
So that the Angel of the Bottomless-pit, signifies here no other thing than the
false Pastor ascended out of the Bottomless-pit. He is called Destroyer,
because in truth there never was a man in the world that destroyed so many men
both as to Body and Soul.

Then the sixth Angel sounded, Chapter 9.13.
and I heard a voice, etc. which said to the sixth Angel, loose the four
Angels, which are bound in the great river Euphrates. And the four Angels were
loosed which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year. The
Turks and their in vasions on the fourth Monarchy.
This is the second of those Woes that were cried, Woe, Woe, Woe. These three Woes
all have relation to the Roman Empire in its second period, i. e. in its
Antichristian period. The first Woe is the birth of the Saracen Empire and the
Religion of Mahomet. The second blow is the irruptions of the Turks. They must
be found in the Prophecies that respect the Roman Empire; for they take up too
considerable a part in the history of this Empire. Now the Turks will not be
found any where else but here, they must therefore be here. And without doubt
they are here. What the four Angels in Euphrates signify.
What we said just now must be remembered, that the name Angel in the Revelation
signifies Office, and not a species of Spirits. See here four Angels bound in
the Rive Euphrates, and loosed. These cannot be good Angels; for the good Angels
are not bound. They cannot be Devils; for the Devils are not bound in some
places of the Earth more than in others. So that these four Angels signify
four Messengers of the Anger of God, four instruments of his Justice, whose
violence till this time he restrained; and whom afterward he leaves wholly to
their fury, for the punishment and ruin of the Roman Empire, as well in its
Eastern as its Western branch. These four Angels therefore signify these four
Sultanies which the Turks established round about Euphrates, and in the regions
of Asia the less, and Syria. All that have read the history of the Crusadoes,
know, that the Christians in the end of the Eleventh age found them established
in those four principal seats Nice, Damascus, Antioch and Aleppo. The founders
of these Sultanies had been kept behind Euphrates for some time. But in the
tenth and Eleventh age they were let loose, they overflowed the Greek Empire,
which made a part of the Roman Empire; they pusht on their Conquests as far as
Nice, the capital City of Bythinia; i.e. almost to the very Gates of
Constantinople. They afflicted all the Coasts of the Mediterranean-Sea, Greece,
Sicily and Italy; and at last they entirely destroyed the Empire of the Greeks,
by the taking of Constantinople, which happened in the year 1452.

This is what is meant by these words, The four Angels were loosed to kill a
third part of men.

The Turks are sent to destroy the Roman Empire.
We must remember what has been said in the explication of the first Trumpets,
viz. that the third part in these Prophecies signifies the Roman Empire,
because that took up about a third part of the World. The Turks are sent to
kill the third part of men; i. e. to kill the men of the third part of the
Earth, or of the Roman Empire, or of the fourth Monarchy. The Locusts of the
foregoing Trumpet were sent, not to kill men, but to torment them for five
months; because the Saracens and Arabians did only gnaw off the edges of the
Roman Empire, and did not penetrate into its entrails. But the Turks pierced
even into the very heart of the fourth Monarchy, and laid it desolate; and they
have established their Empire in one of its capital Cities, viz. Constantinople.

They are sent to kill the Men of this third part of the World.

Indeed, never was there seen so horrible a Butchery of Men, and so great an
Effusion of Blood, as that which the Turks have caused in their Irruptions, in
attacking, or in defending themselves in the Crusadoes. I am persuaded, all the
Conquerors together, since the beginning of the World, never shed so much Blood.

To Kill, signifies also a total Destruction: So that the Prophecy seems to
signify, that the Turks are sent of God entirely to destroy the Roman Empire.
They have already destroyed the Eastern Branch of it, the seat whereof was at
Constantinople; and there are some that conjecture, that God designs them also
to destroy the Western Branch, whose Seat at this day is at Rome; God only
knows this. But tho the Turks should do no more than they have already done,
it is enough to fulfill the Prophecy, which says,

That God sent them to kill the men of the third part of the Earth, i. e. of
Europe.

And the number of the Army of the Horsemen was 200. Thousand Thousand.

The Turks certainly are originally Scythians, Tartars and Nomades; people that
had nothing but Horsemen in their Armies. The formidable Infantry of the Turks,
which they call the Jannizaries, was not instituted till about the year 1300,
by Ottoman, the Founder of the Empire, which at this day possesses
Constantinople, Before that, their chief strength was in Cavalry. The Prophet
makes it prodigious for its number. All the World knows the thing happened
exactly according to the literal sense. He also describes them in a hideous
manner.

They that sat on the Horses, v. 17.
had Breastplates of Fire, and of Jacinth, and Brimstone.

That is to say, the heads of these Horsemen were like globes of fire, whence
came forth flame and smoke. The heads of the horses were as the heads of Lions,
and out of their mouths issued Fire, and Smoke, and Brimstone. This Fire, this
Smoke, and this Brimstone, seem to be a description of Gunpowder, and its
effects. And this may well signify, that the Turks should make their principal
desolations in the Empire of the fourth Monarchy, after the invention of canons
and firearms, whence come forth, lightnings, flames, sulphur and smoke; which
indeed did come to pass.

These horses that vomit up flame and smoke, have also tails like unto
Serpents, with which they do hurt, viz. in spreading their poison. And this is
common to them with the Locusts of the fifth Trumpet. It Is the venom of the
wicked Religion of Mahomet, which the Turks have established, and spread in all
places where they have established their dominion.

They that were not Killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of
their hands, that they should not Worship Devils, and idols of Gold, and
Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and Wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor
walk. Neither repented they of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of
their Fornication, nor of their Thefts. This signifies to us, that the Periods
of the sixth Trumpet, and the ravages of the Turks, is that of the corruption
of the Church in the fourth Monarchy, and in the Antichristian Kingdom; a
period, during which there reigned Idolatry, worshipping of Demons, or second
Mediatory Gods, Images placed in the Temples and Oratories, depravation of
manners, by Poisonings, Assassinations, Sodomies, Incests, Adulteries, and
other impurities, Thefts, Robberies and Violent Dealings. And in truth, the
Roman Church since the tenth Age, fell into such shameful Idolatry, and such
horrible Corruption of Manners, that never was any thing like it seen in the
History of the World. This point may be seen justified at large in our just
Prejudices against Popery.

CHAP. VIII.
The Explication of the Tenth Chapter of the Revelation.

THe ninth Chapter ends the first part of the Revelation, and the tenth begins
the second; wherein is what we seek after, viz. Antichrist, the time of his
continuance, and the circumstances of his end.

This tenth Chapter is properly the preface to the second little book; We must
explain it here before we proceed.

And I saw another mighty Angel come down from Heaven, clothed with a Cloud, v.
1. J. Christ appears a second time for a second vision.
and a Rainbow was upon his Head, and his Face was as it were the Sun, and his
Feet as Pillars of Fire. It Is clear by this Pomp, that this Angel is Jesus
Christ. They are very near the same colors, wherewith he was described in the
first chapter of the book; his Countenance was like the Sun, and his Feet like
unto fine Brass. This is an Argument, that here a new Prophecy begins, a second
act of this great piece. It Is Jesus Christ, the Prophet of Prophets, that must
cause these Visions to enter.

The differenes between the first little book of the Revelation, and the second.
He had in his hand a little Book open: and he set his right Foot upon the Sea,
and his left Foot on the Earth. See here a little book different from the
first, which was given to the Lamb in the fifth chapter. Another argument, that
it is a Revelation wholly new, of another order. The first book contained the
Destinies of the Empire, and this contains the Destinies of the Church. The
first book was Written without and within; by reason of the multitude of events
that were to befall the fourth Monarchy, the adventures whereof God would
foretell, until the coming of the fifth Monarchy; that is to say, the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ. The first book was Sealed with seven seals. But this later one is
a little book opened. It Is because the first part of the Revelation, which
respects the destinies of the Empire, is incomparably more obscure, and more
difficult to be understood than the second. The destinies of the Church are
more Clearly predicted than those of the Empire.
In this second part, which respects the destinies of the Church, Antichrist is
very plainly seen, and all those things that must befall the Antichristian
Empire. But the first part of the Revelation, which contains the destinies of
the Empire, is so obscure, that hardly any thing of it is understood, tho at
this day all the events are come to pass, and the prophecies fullfilled. Joseph
Mede in my opinion is the first, that understood any thing of it. He set his
right foot on the sea, and his left foot on the Earth. This signifies his
Empire over the whole terrestrial Globe, composed of Earth and water; and it
signifies also, that what he was about to foretell, respected all the men that
dwell in the world. He set his right foot on the Sea. The Sea in respect to the
land of Canaan was on the West; and this signifies, that the West should be the
principal Theater of the Adventures of the Antichristian Empire, which he was
going to describe.

And he cried with a loud voice as when a Lion roareth; v. 3.
and when he had cried, seven Thunders uttered their voices. This roaring of a
Lion was a presage, that that which he was about to predict, was terrible: As
in truth nothing is more fatal to the Church, What voices and thunders signify
in the Revelation, especally in the second part.
than the Empire of Antichrist. Seven thunders uttered their voices. In this
Book, Lightnings, Thunders, Voices always signify the words and oracles of God.
The seven Thunders of this second little book, are exactly the seven Spirits of
the former. For both the seven Spirits, and the seven Thunders signify the
divine Oracles: Spirits, because of him that dictates them: Thunders, because
of their efficacy, because they beat down to the ground, they astonish, and
they shake: Seven, because of their perfection. When Jesus Christ by his
roaring had given the presage of Future Events, the Oracles were given and
pronounced concerning those Events.

And when the seven Thunders had uttered their Voices, v. 4.
I was about to write, A sealed vision is an obscure vision.
and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, seal up those things which the
seven Thunders uttered, and write them not.

A Sealed Book, a Writing, a Word sealed, according to the Style of the
Scripture, is a word that is not understood. 1s. 29.11.
The Vision of all is, says Esaias, as a book that is sealed: that is to say,
you shall not understand it. God says to Daniel, seal up the vision, Dan. 8.26.
for it shall be for many Days. And in another place, O Daniel, shut up the
words, Dan 12.4.
and seal the book, even to the time of the end; many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased. That is to say, God will not have the Prophecies
be understood till a certain time. In like manner the Prophecy that respected
Antichrist, was Sealed up till an appointed time. For above ten whole ages
nothing of It was understood, or so little, that it is to be reckoned as
nothing. And write them not: that is to say, do not express them in such terms,
that in them the events may be read at least not very soon.

V. 5. And the Angel which I saw standing upon the Sea and upon the Earth,
lifted up his Hand to Heaven.

V. 6. And swear by him that lives forever and ever; who created Heaven, and
the things that therein are; and the Earth, and the things that therein are;
and the Sea, and the things which are therein, That there should be Time no
longer.

V. 7 But in the days of the Voice of the seventh Angle, when he shall begin to
sound, the Mystery of God should be finished, as he has declared to his
Servants the Prophets.

When the last Trumper must sound.
The Voice of the seventh Trumpet is that which must sound at the moment of the
last Fall of the Antichristian Empire, when Popery shall be destroyed: Then all
the Nations shall turn unto God, to make up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that
is yet to come; as appears by these words:

The seventh Angel sounded, Chapter 11.15.
and there were great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever
and ever.

Here our Angel swears, that in that time, that is to say, when the Kingdoms
shall be reduced to Jesus Christ, Time shall be no longer. Time in this place
is not opposed to Eternity, as if the Angel would say, that then the World
shall end, and Eternity begin; but his meaning is, that the times afforded to
Antichrist shall be ended, and shall be no more. It must be remembered, that the
Holy Spirit, as well by the mouth of Daniel as by that of St. John, assigns to
Antichrist a time, times, and half a time. This shall be no more. There shall
not be neither time, nor times, nor half a time for Antichrist. Time shall be
no more for his reign, it shall be the time of his total destruction.

Then the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants
the Prophets: viz. The mystery of this glorious reign of Jesus Christ on the
Earth, which has been foretold by all the Prophets in so magnificent a manner,
as we shall show in the process of this work, and which Daniel saw so clearly,
as to mark the time and circumstances of it.

And the voice, which I heard from heaven, v. 8,
spoke to me again, and said, Go and take the little book, which is open in the
hand of the Angel, which stands upon the sea and upon the Earth.

And I went unto the Angel, v. 9,
and said unto him, give me the little book. And he said unto me, take it, and
eat it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth
sweet as Honey.

The voice which he heard from Heaven, is the same as spoke to him in the
beginning of the book; I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind
me a great voice as of a Trumpet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the First and
the Last. And this also shows, that this here is a new prophecy, and not the
continuation of the first. For the same voice of God the Father, that began the
First Revelation, returns and begins the second; as the same Jesus Christ also
appears again a second time. Saint John receives the book from the hand of the
Angel, that is to say, of Jesus Christ, because it is he that sends the
Prophets, and that inspires them by his Spirit. This little book is Saveet in
Saint John's Mouth, because the Spirit of prophecy and the glory of being the
mouth of God from heaven, pleases the inclination of men that love honor. But
this little book Made his belly bitter, because that after having reflected on
the events which he was about to foretell, after having digested and
considered them in his own breast, he found them so dreadful, that they filled
his soul with sorrow.

And he said unto me, v. 11.
thou must prophecy again before many people, and nations, and tongues, and
Kings.

These words do no longer leave any cause of doubting, whether this be a new
prophecy, and not a continuation of the First. Thou must make a Second Prophecy
to Kings, People and Nations; and whereas what thou have prophesied to them,
respected their Temporal state; for the future that which thou shall foretell
them, respects their Spiritual state and the things of Religion.

CHAP. IX.
A short System of all the Events of the Church which are noted in the
Apocalypse; and first of all, an Epitome of the Chronology.

The history of the Church is not to be found but in the last eleven Chapters
of the Apocalypse.
WE must not seek for the History of the Church in the First Nine chapters of
the Apocalypse. Joseph Mede is the first that has discovered, that the
Apocalypse consists of two bodies of Revelations, meant by two Books; the first
of which we find in the beginning of the fifth Chapter, v. 1. And I saw in the
right hand of him that sat on the throne, a book written within, and on the
back side, sealed with seven seals. The other we find in the 10. Chap. v. 2.
And he had in his hand a little book open, and he set his right foot upon the
sea, and his left foot on the Earth. It is plain that these two Books are two
bodies of Revelations, perfect in their kind, and different each from the
other; that both the one and the other run through all, and reach to all the
times from the beginning of the Revelation of St. John, even to the end of the
World. One cannot imagine any thing more reasonable than this, that the First
Book contains the destinies of the World, the Empire, and the Church also, in
respect to her Temporal, and as far as she is a part of the World. The Second
Book contains the destinies of the Church properly taken as a Church, and
distinguished from the societies of the World. This is a much better notion than
that of Mr. de Launay, who tells us, that the first book contains the History
of the Church, and the second that of the Gospel. What can be the adventures of
the Gospel distinct from those of the Church? How can those Prophecies that
respect the Establishment and the ruin of Antichrist be applied to the book of
the Gospel, unless it be in a very indirect manner? For these events do
directly respect the Church and not the book of the Holy Scriptures.

That which God says to St. John, after he had caused him to swallow the
little book of the 10th. v. 11.
Chapter, Thou must prophesy again before many Peoples, and Nations, and
Tongues, and Kings. These words, I say, do plainly show, that this is a
Prophecy wholly new, which does begin, and pass over again all the periods of
time. This being so, that is to say, the first book included in the 5. 6. 7. 8.
and 9th. Chapters, containing the destinies of the Roman Empire, and the
various changes that were to befall it even to the time of its utter ruin by
the revolt of the ton Kings, it is evident that they are greatly mistaken, that
endeavor to find the Pope and Antichrist in the Star of the 8th. Chapter
called Wormwood.

It is true, that in the 7th. Chapter we find, the vision of the 144. thousand
persons that were Sealed, who do belong to the History of the Church. For these
are they that have not defiled their garments with the Idolatries of
Antichrist, nor partaken of his fornications. These are the same with the two
Witnesses of the 11th. Chapter, that prophesy clothed in sackcloth for 1260
days, during the reign of Antichrist and Babylon. The H. Ghost has placed
these 144 thousand Sealed persons in the destinies of the Empire, immediately
after the opening the first six seals, and before the opening of the seventh,
because the seventh Seal was to be subdivided into seven Trumpets, which do
reach even to the end of Antichrist's Empire: Trumpets that were to contain the
horrible corruption of the Church, the Birth and Progress of her Idolatries. It
was therefore very reasonable to take notice of those whom God intended to
exempt from those corruptions, before the opening of the seventh Seal, which
was to bring so many evils on the Church, as well as upon the World.

This in my opinion being certain, that the destinies of the Church do not
begin before the 11th. Chapter, and are prosecuted even to the end, it will be
necessary to consider the Chronology and the History of these twelve Chapters,
from the 10th. to the 22th. and the last.

As for the Chronology, St. John begins his Prophecy concerning the Church,
either from the beginning of the Christian Era, The Chrustian Church in the
Apocalypse must be divided into three Periods.
i.e. from the birth of the Savior of the World; or at least from the time in
which he prophesied, which was in the reign of Trajan. This duration of the
Church from Jesus Christ's time is divided into three general Periods. The
First is that of the Christian Church in the four first Ages, which were those
of her purity; the second is that of her Corruption, Idolatries and
Antichristianism, that was to endure 1260 years, at the conclusion whereof an
end must be put to the Babylonish Empire. The third Period contains the reign
of a thousand years, during which the Church must have peace, and after which
must follow the last judgment.

The first of these Periods is the shortest, not lasting above 3 or 400 years.
And therefore St. John does not stay much upon it. This is the Period which he
describes in a few words in the beginning of the 11th. Chapter And there was given
to me a reed like a rod, and the Angel stood, saying, rise and measure the
temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein. But the court which
is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not, for it is given to the
Gentiles, and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two Months.
All the world is agreed, that the Temple built by Solomon according to the
orders of God, was an Emblem of the Church. This Temple had two Courts, an
inward and an outward one. Here the H. Ghost represents the whole duration of
the Christian Church by the extent of this Temple and its Courts. Nothing is
more proper to shadow forth the extent of time than the extent of place. This
inward Court that was measured by St. John, together with the Altar and them
that worship therein, is the first Period of the Church, the Ages which we call
the happy times of the Church which reach to the end of the fourth Age, about
360 or 380 Years. The rest of the Christian Churches duration till the reign of
the 1000 years is shadowed forth by the outward Court, The inward court is an
Emblem of the pure Church, and the out ward court an Emblem of the corrupted
Church.
which God leaves to the Gentiles to tread under food 42 Months. This is the
Christian Church turned Pagan by the admission of secondary Deities, mediating
Spirits, and Images. Here is one thing that deserves to be carefully taken
notice of: between the duration of the Church in its purity and in its
corruption, there is exactly the very same proportion as there between the
greatness and the extent of the inward Court and the outward one. Those that
have taken the pains to compute the extent of these two Courts according to
that description of them, that we meet with in the Jewish Authors, both sacred
and prophanc, find that the proportion of the inward Court to that without, V.
Villal-pand. in Ezech.
is the same with that of one to three and a half. Now there is the very same
proportion between the duration of the Church in its corruption and in its
purity. The corrupt Church lasts 42. Months, that is three years and a Half:
according to which the Church in its purity must not have lasted above one
prophetique year, which contains 360 Days, that is to say 360 Years. Indeed the
Church did continue in its purity just so long. About the year 360 the unhappy
superstions about Relics, and the invocation of Saints began to creep into
the Church; which quickly degenerated into Idolatry. Thus the reign of
Antichristian Idolatry has lasted three times and a half, has l^sted as long
as the reign of pure Christianity. This is the outward Court, that is left out,
and trodden under foot by the Gentiles, and profaned by Idolatry, and which
nevertheless is called the Holy City; because there God did preserve his elect:
And they shall tread under foot the Holy City for 42. Months.

It Is chiefly upon this Period of 42 Months that the Prophecies of the
Apocalypse do turn: and it is necessary to observe in this place, that during
this Period several things fall out that are co-temporary. For this Period is
oftentimes repeated, and its characters are often affixed to diverss subjects;
to the Woman that dies hid in the Des^rt, to the Gentiles that are to tread
down the Court; to the two Witnesses that are to Prophecy clothed in
sackcloth, to the Dragon and to the Beast, to whom it is given to exercise his
power for 42 months. These are not different Periods that must be fastened one
to the end of the other. These are different Events, or the very same events
presented under different ideas, which must be accomplished in the same Period.
For the right understanding therefore of the Chronology of the Apocalypse; it is
necessary to know what events and things are co-temporary. As thus: Many things
in the Apocalypse co-temporary.
I. The Court which is to be trodden down by the Gentiles for the space of Forty
Two Months, Rev. 11.2. II. The Woman, to whom are given two great Wings of an
Eagle, to save her self in the Wilderness, where she is fed 1260 days, a time,
and times, and half a time; i. e. one year, two years, and half a year; which
make three years and a half, or forty two months. This is what is said Rev.
12.6, 14. III. The two Witnesses, that must prophecy, clothed in Sackcloth for
1260 days, Rey. 11.13. 1260 days make just forty two months, or three years and
a half. IV. The Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns, Rey. 13.1, 0.
to whom Power is given to fulfill forty two months: But we must observe, that
these 42 months are affixed only to the seventh head of the Beast, which is
that of Antichrist: the whole entire Roman Empire is signified by that Beast
with seven Heads and ten Horns. The last Head is that of Antichrist, which
alone must last as long as the other six. The Roman Empire under Kings,
Consuls, Decemvires, Tribunes of the People, perpetual Dictators and Emperors,
lasted about 1250 years, a little more or less. The seventh Head of the Roman
Emp^re is Antichrist, and he is to continue 1260 days. It Is evident, that we
must assign the duration of forty two months to the seventh Head, because it is
to that we must affix the ten Horns, that signify ten Kings; and it is to
Antichrist that Daniel assigns for his duration a Time, Times, and Half a Time.
All the World acknowledges, that he means Antichrist by the little Horn, that
grows in the midst of the ten, and that subdues three of them. He shall speak
great words against the Most High, C. 7. v. 25.
and shall wear out the Saints of the Most High, and they shall be given into
his hand, until a time, and times, and the dividing of time. We have already
observed, that this signifies one year, two years, and half a year. This is the
duration of the Kingdom of Antichrist; it is also the duration of the seventh
Head of the Roman Empire; and this is what they ought to take particular notice
of, that make a scruple to grant, that these forty two months express the
duration of the whole Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns. V. In like manner
the second Beast of the 13th chap. of the Revel. that has but Two Horns, like
to those of a Lamb, and that spoke like the Dragon, is also of the same
duration; i. e. it must be found in the space of 42 months. VI. The Whore also
of the 17th chap. sitting upon the scarlet-colored Beast, reigns in this
Period of forty two months, 1260 days, or three years and a half. She sits upon
the Beast, i. e. on the first Beast, that had seven Heads and ten Horns, and
lasts as long as the 7th Head. VII. Lastly, The 144 Thousand sealed persons,
that appear in the 7th chapter, and are mentioned frequently afterward, are
also co-temporary with the Beast, and the Court trodden down by the Nations:
for they are no other than the two Witnesses, that prophecy clothed in
Sackcloth for 1260 days, whilst the outward Court is trodden under foot by the
Gentiles; and they are no other than the Woman that remains in the Wilderness,
and is nourished there for a time and times and half a time, while the red
Dragon makes war with the saints.


The seventh seal, contains under it the seven Trumpets.
For the understanding this Chronology of the Apocalypse, it must also be known,
that the seventh Seal which is opened in the beginning of the 8th. Chapter contains
under it the seven Trumpets, and that the seven Trumpets reach to the end of
the second Period, which is the Empire of Antichrist, and even to the reign of
Christ inclusively: That is to say, to the very end of the World. For at the
sounding of the last Trumpet, C. 11.15.
there were great voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever. And the seven Trumpets begin about the time of the fall of the Roman
Empire under the Christian Emperors. C. 8.7.
Upon the sounding of the First Trumpet, there followed hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they were cast upon the Earth, and the third part of the Trees
were burnt up. These are plainly the numberless Northern Armies of the Vandals,
Goths, and Hunn's, who in the reign of Honorius begun to make dreadful havoc
throughout the whole extent of the Roman Empire, which is here meant by the
Third part, because the Roman Empire in truth did contain very near a third
part of the World. And so the duration of the six Trumpets even to the seventh
exclusively, is also very near co-temporary with the 42 Months of the reign of
the Beast and the Court trodden under foot by the Gentiles.

The seven Vialls are contained under the sixth Trumpet.
It must also be observed that the seven Vialls of the wrath of God are
co-temporary with the sixth Trumpet, and do divide it even to the sounding of
the seventh. The duration of the Kingdom of Antichrist, which is 1260 Years, is
divided into two other Periods. The first is that of the birth, growth, and
progress of the Babylonish Empire to its perfection. And this Period reaches
to the tenth Century, i. e. it lasts between 5 and 600 Years. The second Period
is from the tenth Century to the end of Antichrist's reign. Now the seven Vials
of the 16th. Chap. of the Revelation are the steps by which this Babylonish
Empire passes, to come to her ruin. So these seven Vials are not co-temporary
neither with the seven Seals, nor with the seven Trumpets, as some have
imagined; They are co-temporary only with the sixth, the effect of which begins
about the tenth Century.

The Chronology of the third general Period of the Church, which is that of the
1000 Years, has no difficulty in it that needs a resolution. We need only to
observe that these five things are co-temporary in the third Period. Five
things cotemporary in the Period of the reign of the thousand years.
I. The reign of the Saints for a 1000 Years. Rev. 20.4. II. The Dragon that is
bound, and whose power is broken. Rev. 20.2, 3. III. The New Jerusalem, the
description whereof we have Rev. 21. and 22. Chapters. IV. The company of Saints
that are clothed in white garments, and who carry Palms in their hands, singing
this song, Salvation to our God that sits upon the throne, Rev. 7.10. Rev. 7.17.
and unto the Lamb; and of whom it is said, they shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat; the Lamb
shall feed them; and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters. For these
are not the 144 thousand Sealed persons, spoken of in the beginning ^f the 7th.
Chap. St. John says expressly After this, v. 9.
i. e. after these 144 thousand sealed persons, I beheld, and lo a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people,
and tongues stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, etc. This plainly
shows, that these are not the persons that were Sealed; For they might easily
be numbered, because they were not above 144 thousand; whereas these here spoken
of are innumerable. In truth these are the same that are spoken of in the 20th.
of the Revel. who are there called the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God; and here they are called, they which
came out of great tribulation, C. 7.14.
and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
They are therefore co-temporary with the reign of Christ for a 1000 Years, as
the 144 thousand that were sealed are co-temporary with the reign of Babylon
for 1260 Days. V. The fifth and last thing co-temporary is the duration of the
seventh Trumpet. And the seventh Angel sounded with a Trumpet, and there were
great voices in heaven, Rev. 11.15.
saying, the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord. For at
the sound of the Last Trumpet, the last blow must be given to the Babylonish
Empire, and at the same time shall begin the reign of Jesus Christ, to which is
assigned a Period of 1000 Years. And the influence of this seventh and last
Trumpet must reach even to the end of the World.


Thus you have the Chronology of the twelve last Chapters of the Revelation. We
proceed to consider the History.

CHAP. X.
A short System of the Events foretold in the Revelation concerning the Church,
as to the Historical part.

A short explanation of the 11th. Chap.
IN the 11th. Chapter where the Destinies of the Church do begin, the H. Ghost in
the first place gives us an abridgment of these Destinies and Events; and
nothing is more methodical than that, First to give a general Idea of those
things, that are afterward more particularly to be explained. So this Chapter
from the 2d. v. to the end contains a short History of the 1260 Years of
Antichrist's reign, and of the 1000 Years of Christ's reign; as in the first
verse he had described the first Period of 360 Years, as we just now observed
in the foregoing Chapter. This reign of Antichrist is here described by this
Paganism that was to tread under foot the Holy City for 42 Months. v. 2.
The afflictions of the Church and its perpetual subsistence in the midst of
those afflictions during this reign of Antichrist, are signified by the two
Witnesses clothed in sackcloth. A great persecution, that must befall the
Church at the end of these 1260 Years of Antichrist's reign, v. 3.
is there also predicted. The total suppression of the profession of the truth
by that persecution is signified by the death of these two Witnesses, v. 7.
who must remain dead in the territories of Babylon the great for three
prophetical days and a half, i. e. three Years and a half. We shall see
afterward what that means, and where we must place this great event. At the
end of three years and a half these two Witnesses, i. e. the public
profession of the truth, shall rise again, and be gloriously reestablisht. For
the H. Ghost says, that the two Witnesses shall ascend again up into Heaven.
i. e. shall be exalted and glorified upon the Earth. In the same time the tenth
part of the City shall fall, v. 13.
i. e. one of those ten Kings that gave their power to the Beast, shall revolt
from him. And a little after, the seventh Trumpet shall sound, which will give
the last blow to the Babylonish Empire. v. 15.
After which the Reign of the Saints shall commence, which shall continue to
the end of the World. This is the Epitome of the whole History of the Church,
and the sense of the 11th. Chapter.

After this general idea of the History of the Church, Chapter 12. and its
explication.
the Prophet enters upon the particulars. In the 12th. Chapter God shows him the
vision of the Woman that was with child, and delivered of a Son, and persecuted
by the Red Dragon, who fain would devour the Child of the Woman. Afterward
there is a battle fought by Michael and his Angels, against the Dragon. The
Dragon is overcome and cast to the Earth; but as much overcome as he was, he
cease not to persecute the Woman. She is forced to escape into the
Wilderness, where she is nourisht 1260 Days. The Dragon not being able to reach
her, vomited out a flood after her; but the Earth opened, and swallowed up the
flood, and saved the Woman. This Woman is the Apostolical Church; this Child of
which she is delivered, is pure and holy Christianity. The Dragon is the Devil,
who by the authority of the Roman Empire, would devour and extinguish
Christianity in its birth. Michael and his Angels are Jesus Christ and his
Ministers celestial as well as terrestrial. The combat of the Red Dragon and
Michael is the combat of 300 Years that was between God and the Devil, during
the ten persecutions of the Roman Heathen Emperors; The Devil endeavoring on
one hand to destroy the Christian Church by the cruelty of the Emperors; and
God on the other hand defending it by his Martyrs, and Teachers. The victory
gotten over the Red Dragon is the casting down of Heathenism, which falls to
the Earth and is cast from Heaven i. e. it is tumbled down from the throne by
Constantine and his successors to the reign of Theodosius. The great flood
which the Red Dragon casts after the Woman, when he was thrown down on the
Earth, is those inundations of Heresies, that Arrianism, that covered the
Christian World immediately after the fall of Heathenism under Constantine. The
Earth swallowed up this flood in favor of the Woman; these Heresies were
destroyed and swallowed up as in a moment, and the Church remained delivered
from them by a kind of miracle. But the Dragon does not yield for all that, but
goes to make war with the remnant of the seed of the Woman, v. 17.
i. e. he endeavors to cause to be brought forth an Antichristian Empire for
the ruin of the Church; the thing which he will further explain in the
following Chapter. We have therefore in this the History of the Church to the
end of the fourth Century, or the beginning of the fifth. For it is in the
space of these 400 Years that the Apostolic Church did bring forth
Christianity, that Christianity was persecuted by the Emperors, that J. Christ
did miraculously preserve it, that it remained victorious under Constantine,
that the Church was almost ruined by Arrianism, and that she saw her self
happily delivered from it.

St. John spends but one Chapter about the first Period of the Church of 400
Years, because the great events were designed to be in the following Periods.

The 13th. C. 13.1, 2, 3. etc.
Chapter according to the most exact rules of method begins where the 12th.
ended. We have in the 13th. Chapter the birth of the Babylonish Empire, An
Epitome of the History foretold in the 13th. Chapter
which is grafted on the Roman Empire: this is the first Beast that arises out
of the Sea, having seven Heads and ten Horns; the seventh of these Heads is
laden with ten Horns, each of which is adorned with a Crown, to signify that
these were so many Kings. These ten Kings are the continuation of the Roman
Empire under the seventh Head, which is that of Antichrist. These ten Kings are
subject to this seventh Head, and together with it compose one Empire. A second
Beast arises out of the Earth; it is the same Empire and the same Beast, or
rather it is the seventh Head of the first Beast. This Empire of Antichrist,
that was represented in the first vision as one of the Heads, is represented in
the second vision as a new Beast; because it is the ancient Empire of Rome, and
yet nevertheless it is a New one. It Is the continuation of the Roman Empire,
having the same seat, viz. the City of Rome, and extending it self very near
over the very selfsame Provinces. It is a New Empire, because it is in another
form, and under another name, and is called the Empire of the Church, and an
Ecclesiastical Empire. These two Beasts therefore fill up but one and the same
Period, in which the Head of the Emperors, that was mortally wounded, is healed
again by Antichrist, in which Period ways of worshipping and doctrines full of
impiety and blasphemy are advanced in the Church. In which Period the Saints
are overcome, and the Truth is buried; in which all the inhabitants of the
Earth worship the Beast, and submit themselves to the Babylonish Empire; in
which Antichrist, whose name contains the Number 666. makes an image of the
first Roman Empire, and causes it to be worshipped; lastly, in which all
liberty to buy, and sell, and live is taken away, unless men will bear the
Image of the Beast. All this is the History of the 1260 Years, that begin about
the time that the 400 Years of the first Period do end. This is according to
the rules of History.

A short explication of the 14th. Chap.
The 14th. Chapter begins also where the 13th. ends. It contains the Prophecy of the
fall of that Babylonish Empire represented by the two Beasts, of the 13th.
Chap. It Is no longer a Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns; it is no longer the
Beast with two Horns; it is Spiritual Babylon. But this Babylon is the very same
thing as the first and the second Beast. She is fallen, v. 8.
she is fallen, Babylon that great City, because she has made the nations
drunk with the wine of her fornication.

The seven foregoing verses are a preparation for this great fall; and the
following ones to the end of the Chapter are a description of the ruin of
Babel. The Man that sits on the white cloud, v. 14.
is Jesus Christ. The sickle that is put in first among the corn to mow it
down, and afterward into the vintage to cut down the grapes, are the two
degrees of Babylons fall, which we shall afterward explain. This is the
Analysis of the 14th. Chap.

The H. Ghost thought it not enough to have foretold the fall of the Babylonish
Empire in general, Chap. 15.
he will also instruct us in the steps by which it must pass in falling. And as
this is a great affair, the vision of the 15th. Chapter is employed to prepare
men's Spirits for it. The seven Vialls of the wrath and vengeance of God, that
must overwhelm the Babylonish Empire, are distributed to seven distinct Angels,
to pour them out at different times.

The 16. Chap. contains the pouring forth of these Vialls, Chap. 16.
which are the several punishments by which the Empire of the Beast is
afflicted, till it be entirely brought to nothing. And these seven Vials
contain all the time of the fall of the Babylonish Empire: Of this we will
treat in a particular Chapter by it self afterward. It is enough to know that
this Chapter leads the afflicted Church to the very point of her deliverance.
And thus you have the whole History of the Church during the 1260 Years.

But because these things had been expressed in figurative terms, Chap. 17.
and prophetical symbols of Beasis, Horns, Harvest, Vintage and Vialls, God
will explain these things in terms less figurative and more intelligible.
Therefore the 17th. Chapter is spent in explaining the Visions of the two Beasis, to
give us to understand, that the Beasis signify an Empire, that the ten Horus
are ten Kings; that these ten Kings out of weakness and complaisance would give
their power to the Beast, and that at last they would ruin him, and take away
that power they had formerly given him.

As in the 17th. Chapter the H. Ghost declares the establishment and the progress
of the Babylonish Empire in a more clear and less figurative manner than he had
done in the 13th. Chap. in the like manner in the 18th. Chap. he gives us the
particulars of the ruin of this Babylon, Chap. 18.
more largely and more clearly; more largely I say, and more clearly than he
had done in the 14th. Chap. This has no need of proof. In the process of this
discourse we shall explain the circumstances of this fall.

The 19th. Chap. is as it were a recapitulation of all that respects the ruin
of Babylon. Chap. 19.
Therein J. Christ appears riding on a White horse, is called the faithful, and
true, and the Word of God. He assembles all his forces, and the Babylonish
Empire assembles all its forces; the fight begins, the Beast and the false
Prophet, i.e. the Antichristian Empire and Antichrist that is the head, are
taken and utterly destroyed. It Is the same thing we met with before in the 14.
Chap. at the end of the 16. at the end of the 17. and throughout the whole 18.
Chap. The frequent repetition of the same thing is to note the certainty of it.

The three following Chapters, viz. the 20, 21 and 22. contain the History of
the third and last general Period of the duration of Christianity. It is the
reign of J. Christ upon Earth. The matters contained in the 20 Chapter are so
remarkable, that they deserve a particular attention. But seeing that hereafter
we shall have occasion carefully to examine them, it is not necessary to stay
about them at present.

So much suffices for a general Idea both of the Chronology and of the History,
of the twelve last Chapters of the Revelation, which contain the destinies of
the Church.

CHAP. XI.
Several things, that all are agreed on, in reference to Antichrist, which will
serve to clear up those wherein we are not agreed.

WE seek First the Character of the Babylonish Empire; 2dly, the time of its
duration; 3dly, Its Establishment and end; 4thly, What must happen after its
ruin. The two first points respect what is past or present, and shall be the
subject of the first part of this work. About the first of these four things
there is no controversy among the Orthodox. But there is a great dispute about
it between the Papists and the true Church. However we have one great advantage
for the determining this controversy, viz. there are some certain principles in
which both sides do agree. In controversies where men are agreed in nothing,
but where every thing must be proved, it is very hard to determine any thing.
But where men are agreed in many things, ordinarily those things which they are
agreed in, serve for the clearing up of those things wherein they are not
agreed. I think it best therefore before we enter upon the Characters of the
Babylonish Empire, to consider those things wherein the Papists as to this
matter do agree with the true Catholics.

All agree that the little horn in the 7th. of Dan. is Antichrist.
1st. We are agreed about almost ll the places, whence we are to draw the
pourtraiture of Antichrist and his Empire. It Is confessed, that the Little horn
in the 7th. Chap. of Daniel is Antichrist; that it is of him that the Prophet
speaks. I considered the horns, Dan. 7.8.
and behold there came up among them another little horn, before whom three of
the first horns were plucked up by the roots; and behold in this horn were eyes
like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things. v. 24, 25.
The ten Horns out of this Kingdom are ten Kings that shall arise, and another
shall rise after them, and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall
subdue three Kings. And he shall speak great words against the most High, and
shall wear out the saints of the most high, and think to change times and laws;
and they shall be given into his hand for a time, and times, and half a time.

We are agreed that the First Beast in the 13th of the Revel. is the same with
the fourth Beast in the 7th. Chapt. of Daniel, The two Beasts of Rev. 13. are
Antichrist.
and that both the one and the other signify the Roman Empire. It Is
acknowledged, that the ten Kings that must be born of this Beast, which are
represented by the ten Horns of the fourth Beast in Daniel, and of the first
Beast in the 13th. of the Revelation, are the ten Kings, which in the time of
Antichrist are to divide the Roman Empire among them, and give their power to
Antichrist.

It Is confessed, that the little Horn, i.e. Antichrist, must be grafted on the
Roman Empire, enter into its place, and the last that shall possess the Roman
Empire. Antichrist, says Bellarmin, Bellarm. part. 1. c. 3. sect. 15.
Respondeo priorem etc.
shall be the last head of the wicked, and the last King that shall possess the
Roman Empire, but yet without the name of a Roman Emperor.

The same Author in the very same place confesses, that the head of the first
Beast, which received the deadly wound in the 13th. Chapter of the Revelation is
Antichrist. This miracle of a feigned Resurrection, says he, must be
attributed to Antichrist, in the opinion of Primasius, Beda, and Haymo, and
many others whom he names.

We are agreed, that the two Beasts of the 13th. of the Revelation do both of
them signify the Antichristian Empire. Bellarm. ubi Supra.
According to the opinion of Rupert. The second Beast in the Revelation
signifies the very same Antichrist. For Antichrist is represented by two
Beasts; by the one, his royal power and tyranny, by which he will offer
violence to men, is represented. And by the other, his magical power and crafty
tricks, by which he will seduce them. But according to Richard, and Anselm, and
many others, the second beast signifies the Preachers of Antichrist. Thus it
agrees to the Babylonish Empire to be the seventh head of the Roman Empire,
however without bearing the name of a Roman Emperor; to be a head wounded unto
death, and raised up again; to have ten Horns on its Head, ten Kings for its
subjects; to have a false Prophet with two Horns like those of a Lamb, which
causes the image of the Beast to be worshipped, whose name contains the Number
666, and who makes all those that he causes to submit to hi Empire to bear his
mark in their foreheads.

We are agreed that a time, times, and half. a time, the 42 Months, the 1260.
days do denote the time of the duration of the Antichristian Empire; and that
all that while the Church must be afflicted, beaten down, obscured, as it were
hidden and swallowed up by persecution.

It Is acknowledged that the great Whore in the 17th. of the Revel. and the city
with seven Mountains, is Rome. Some would have it be Rome Pagan, The Papists
are forced to confess that Babylon in the Revel. is Rome.
but others showing either more knowledge or more sincerity, do confess that
Rome in the 14th. and the 17th. Chapter of the Revelation is not Rome Pagan, but of
Christian become Antichristian. Estius and some others go a little further, and
are forced to acknowledge, that Rome must be the seat of Antichrist. Others, as
Ribera, Viega, Cornelius a Lapide, retaining the common hypothesis among the
Papists, viz. that Jerusalem must be the seat of Antichrist, are however forced
to confess that Babylon in the Revelation is the city of Rome, whereat the end
of the times an Idolatrous Empire, persecutor of the Church, and Enemy of God
must arise; who (say they) shall join himself to the Empire of Antichrist, when
he shall be come. Cornelius a Lapide confesses, that the Waters on which the
great Whore sits, signify all the Nations and people which Rome shall command
over, who shall agree together in their subjection, and in the vanity and
idolatry of Rome as their lady and the mistress of the universe, i.e. Rome
become Idolatrous after having been Christian.

We do agree that the Prophecies of the Eighth and the eleventh of Daniel, It Is
agreed that what is said of Antiochus agrees also to Antichrist.
that literally respect Antiochus Epiphanes, and the cruel persecution that he
raised against the Church of the Jews, belong also to Antichrist; so that
Antichrist is that King that shall do according to his will, and shall exalt
himself, and magnify himself above every God, Dan. 11.36, 37, 38.
and shall speak mavelous things against the God of Gods, and shall prosper
till the indignation be accomplished. Neither shall he regard the God of his
Fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any God, for he shall magnify
himself above all. But in his Estate shaell he honor the God of forces, and a
God whom his Fathers knew not, shall he honor, with gold and with silver and
with precious stones and pleasant things: v. 41.
He shall enter also into the glorious Land, and many shall be overthrown, etc.

We are agreed, that it is he of whom St. Paul speaks in the 2d. Chap. of his
second Epistle to the Tessalonians, and consequently that he is that man of sin
that was to be revealed, when he that then did let, i.e. the Roman Empire,
should cease to hinder; that it is he that is to sit in the Temple of God, as if
he were God, whose Religion is to be a Mystery of iniquity, and who is to lift
up himself above all that is called God. It Is confessed that the Antichristian
Kingdom is to be a temporal Kingdom at the bottom, whatever it may be as to
outward appearance. It Is agreed that he shall establish this Empire two ways,
the first is by sword and violence, the second by cheating and seducing. It Is
acknowledged that he shall be a great Persecutor of the Church.

Lastly, it is confessed, all this must come to pass in that Period which the H.
Scripture calls the later times. It Is acknowledged that the 11th. Chapter of the
Revelation contains an Epitome of the History of Antichrist, that is is he that
is to tread under foot and profane the Holy City for 42 Months, and afflict
the two Witnesses that shall prophesy clothed in sackcloth for 1260 Days; and
that he is to kill the two Witnesses, which are to remain dead on the places of
the Great City three Days and a half, after which they shall rise again. It
appears by this account of the points wherein the Papists are agreed to, that we
are all of the same mind first, as to all those places whence the main strokes
of Antichrists picture are to be taken; and secondly, as to almost all the main
strokes of which this Picture is to be composed. It will appear afterward,
that these truths wherein our enemies are agreed with us, do quite overthrow
those things wherein they differ from us.

CHAP. XII.
The Characters of Antichrist, which we are not agreed about. The false
Antichrist of the Papists.

THe things in which we are not agreed, are the false Characters of Antichrist,
which the Papists endeavor to establish, with a design to hinder our sight of
the true Characters of him and to obscure them. The false Characters are these:
I. That Antichrist must be only one single Man, and not a succession of Kings
and Tyrants. II. That the duration of his Kingdom is to be only three Natural
years and a half, and not three Prophetical years and half, which make up 1260
years. III. That he must style himself the Messiah, and that the Jews must look
upon him as such. IV. That his Seat shall be Jerusalem, that he shall rebuild
the Temple there; and that he shall re-establish the Mosaical Service. V.
According to Bellarmine, and Cotton the Jesuit, he is not to be an Idolater.
For he is not to worship any Idol, but shall worship the Devil in secret. VI.
He is to be of the Tribe of Dan, of an obscure place, and to raise himself by
Arms. VII. He is to deny the coming of Christ in the flesh. VIII. He shall do
nothing in the name of Christ. IX. He shall abolish the sacrifice of the Mass.
X. He shall compel the Christians to renounce their Baptism. XI. He is to
overcome three Kings, the King of Lybia, of Egypt and Ethiopia. XII. He shall
cause sire to come down from Heaven, and feign himself to be dead, to
counterfeit a resurrection. XIII. He is to hate Idols. XIV. He is to conquer
the whole Worldy by Arms. XV. Enoch and Elias shall be the two witnesses of the
eleventh of the Revelation, that shall be sent against him. XVI. He is to kill
the two witnesses, Enoch and Elias. XVII. These two witnesses must rise again,
after they have lain dead three days and a half. XVIII. He is to possess all
sorts of Treasures. XIX. He shall not only call himself God, but the only God.
XX. He is not to come, till the Roman German Empire be destroyed. XXI. His
coming is not to be till just at the end of the World; he shall be defeated
five and forty days before the end of it. XXII. Before he comes, the Gospel
must have been generally preached in all parts of the World. XXIII. He is to be
a Magician.


Of these 23. Articles, there are not above four or five of any importance.
It would be very tedious to confute all these false characters; and it would be
a work more unprofitable than long. There is a very small parcel of them that
are the principal ones, which when they are destroyed, all the rest fall to the
ground of course naturally and necessarily. For instance. I. That he is to be
only one single person. II. That he is to reign only three natural years and a
half. III. That he is to come precisely at the end of the World. IV. That he is
to be an open enemy of God and Christ, styling himself Messiah and the King of
the Jews. V. That he is not to come before all that bears the name of the Roman
Empire is destroyed.
These five points being proved to be false, all the rest consequently will be
so too. These are the only things that are worth our taking notice of. For as
for the rest, that Antichrist must be of the Tribe of Dan, born in an obscure
place; that he shall cause fire to come down from Heaven; that he shall feign
himself dead, that he may counterfeit a Resurrection; that Enoch and Elias must
come out of that earthly Paradise, where they are kept in reserve; to fight
with him; that he is to kill them; that they must rise on the fourth day: All
this I say is so fabulous, that it would be an injury to so understanding an
Age as ours, formally to confute such idle visions, and so wholly destitute of
any foundation.

All may be reduced to the single question-about the three years and a half of
Antichrists duration,
This controversy may be reduced to one only point; and it is that of the
duration of the Antichristian Empire. If it can be made very plain and certain,
that the three years and a half of the duration of this Empire must not be
taken for natural years, but for three prophetical years and a half, it will
also be very certain, that all which the Papists say concerning Antichrist, is
false. For if the Antichristian Empire must last 1260 years, Antichrist can
never be only one single man; seeing there is no man that has lived, does, or
can live 1260. years. Nor will it be more true, that Antichrist must not come,
but just at the end of the World: For the duration of 1260. years, and the end
of the World are not one and the same thing: Neither will it be more true, that
the Gospel must have been preached in all the Nations of the World, before the
coming of Antichrist. For there is no prophesy that says, or does so much as
insinuate, that the Gospel must be preached every where 1260. years, before the
last coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. It will be as false, that Antichrist is
not to come, till after the total ruin of the German Empire. For although we do
not exactly know the time the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, however this is
held for certain, that the World is not to endure yet two or 3000. years
longer, as it must do if Antichrist be not yet como, and must reign 1260.
years. For besides these 1260. years, we must find out a 1000. years of peace
for the Church, before the end of the World. Neither will it be true, that
Antichrist must be a false Messiah, received by the Jews, an enemy of God and
of all Religion. For God would not suffer that, His wisdom would not permit it.
There is nothing in the Scripture that gives us any ground to presume, that an
Infidel, an open enemy of Jesus Christ, and of his Religion, must remain master
of all the World for 1260. years.

It Is plain therefore, this is the principal controversy, on which all the rest
do depend. Let this be remembered: We will handle this controversy in its proper
place. In the mean time, we shall say something in this Chapter, to lay open
the falseness of the other pretended characters of Antichrist.

Antichrist is not only one single man.
I. He must be only one single person, and not a series of men. If this be so,
why did Saint Paul say, that the mystery of iniquity began in his time? Why did
Saint John say in his first Epistle, that Antichrist was already come into the
World? He was come in his forerunners, says Bellarmin. I acknowledge it: But
do the forerunners use to go 2000. years before him, whose forerunners they
are? Types indeed are and may be two or 3000. years before those persons of
which they are Types. But it is not so with forerunners. Why is Antichrist
represented as a Beast, if he be but one single man? Is it not usual in
Prophetical visions, to represent an Empire, i. e. all the successive Kings of
that Empire, by a Beast? So the Monarchy of the Babylonians and Assyrians with
all their Kings, is represented to us by the first Beast, in the seventh
Chapter of Daniel, which was like to a Lion: The Empire and Emperors of Persia,
by only one Bear; and so of the rest. At least, this makes it undeniably clear,
that there is no necessity, that we should understand one single person by
those two Beasts in the Revelation, that represent Antichrist. How can this be
reconciled with that which these men have confessed, that the fourth Beast of
Daniel, and the first Beast in the thirteenth of the Revelation, all are the
same beast? Seeing the fourth Beast in Daniel by their own confession signifies
an Empire, and a series of men; it is necessary also that the first Beast in
Saint John should signify a series of Kings and Tyrants.

It Is true, the Scripture often speaks of Antichrist, as of a particular
person. It calls him the man of sin, a King, a Horn, etc. But it speaks of
Empires also in the same manner. They are Kings, the ten Horns are ten Kings.
They are beasts, and one Beast in the singular number. The Empire of Persia is
one Beast; that of the Greeks is another; the Empire of the Romans makes the
fourth Beast. The Spirit says concerning the seven Heads of the Roman Empire,
the seven Heads are seven Kings, i. e. they are seven sorts of Governors and
Governments.

That Antichrist must not be a Jew.
II. Antichrist must be a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan. of a mean birth, and must
style himself the Messiah of the Jews. Where are the proofs of this? He must be
a Jew and of the Tribe of Dan, because it is written, Genesis 49.17. Jer. 8, 16.
Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, and an Adder in the path, that biteth the
Horses heels. The snorting of his Horses was heard from Dan. Does this deserve
a confutation? And because some of the ancients have been taken with these
visions, must we therefore receive them as Oracles? Among the things that are
certain Bellarmin places this, that Antichrist shall be a Jew, but does not
give us any show of proof for it, besides the testimony of the Ancients. But as
to that, we must take all or nothing. Either the Authority of the Ancients must
be wholly received in this matter, or else be wholly weak. If we must admit
what the Ancients have said concerning Antichrist, we must believe, that it
will be the Devil that shall incarnate himself in the bosom of a false Virgin,
as the Son of God did in the bosom of a chaste one. We must believe that Nero
was Antichrist. In a word, we must admit of a hundred dreaming opinions about
it, which at this day are unanimously rejected. If the Authority of the Fathers
be not good in many places, it is good in none, it is doubtful every where. We
must have proofs drawn from the Scriptures, to show us that Antichrist must be
a Jew. But see Bellarmines great proof.

III. Antichrist must be received by the Jews as their Messiah. Antichrist must
not be received by the Jews as their Messiah.
And the Jews would never acknowledge any for their Messiah that was a stranger,
uncircumcised, and one that was not of their own nation. But where do they find
this, that the Jews must receive Antichrist for their Messiah. These Gentlemen,
that have a more piercing sight than the Angels themselves, find it in those
words of our Savior, I am come in my Father's name, and ye have not received
me; if another come in his own name, him you will receive. He that will come in
his own name, and whom the Jews will receive, shall be Antichrist, who will
call himself the Messiah. Have these men any shame left in them, Bellarm. l. 3.
de Romans Pontif. Cap. 12. Sect. praeter.
to put this at the head of such a proof, viz. Sunt alia duo certissima, there
are two things most certain, of which this is one? Have not the Jews already
received a very great Number of false Messiah's? Did they not follow their
famous Barchocheva in the reign of Adrian, by whose orders more than a million
of Jews that revolted from all parts under the conduct of this false Messiah,
were Massacred? Why must he of whom Jesus Christ speaks, be Antichrist?

Antichrist;, is not to have his seat at Jerusalem.
IV. But Antichrist must have his seat at Jerusalem. Therefore he must be
accounted by the Jews for the Messiah. Another Chimaera. If the Messiah must
have his seat at Jerusalem, why do they make him to come forth from among the
ten Horns, i. e. from among the ten Kings that must divide the Roman Empire at
this day, viz. Germany? For that only at this day does subsist under the name
of the Roman Empire. What connection, what coherence can a Jew sitting in
Jerusalem have, with the ten Horns and the ten Kingdoms of Germany? Why did
they acknowledge a little before, that Antichrist must be the last King that
shall possess the Roman Empire? What is there in common between the Roman
Empire, and the Empire of a Jew that must reign at Jerusalem? Is it, perhaps,
because Antichrist shall reign in Germany? By the same reason the Persian
Empire must have been the same with the Assyrian, because the Persians did
extend their dominion in all places, where the Assyrians once did reign. This
dream is founded on what St. Paul says, that Antichrist must sit in the Temple
of God; and on what the H. Ghost says, that the two Witnesses whom Antichrist
should slay, should lie dead on the place of the great City where J. Christ was
crucified; now he was crucified at Jerusalem. As to the first, we say, that the
Temple of God can by no means signify the Temple at Jerusalem, which was no
longer the Temple of God since God caused this voice to be heard there, Let us
depart hence; since God has entirely abollisht the Mosaical service, since the
Law was abrogated, and the Gospel Established. The Temple of God is the very
Christian Church, wherein the throne of Antichristianism is raised up. And as
for that city in the Revelation, where Jesus Christ was crucified, it is the
Roman Empire in which the Savior of the World was crucified, it is also the
Empire of Antichrist, who has crucified Jesus Christ in crucifying his
subjects. Jerusalem is never called the great City, without the addition of the
Holy City.

V. Antichrist must hate Idols, and not be an Idolater. Why then is Babylon
called the mother of whoredoms? Who does not know, Antichrist is not to be an
hater of Idols. Dan. 11.38.
that in a spiritual sense Whoredom signifies Idolatry? Why do they confess,
that we must understand that place in Daniel concerning him, that he shall
worship Mahuzims? These Mahuzims, whatever they be, are they not Idols?

He must not deny the coming of Christ in the flesh.
VI. He must deny the coming of Christ in the flesh. St. John does not say so.
He says indeed, that he that denies, that Jesus Christ is come into the World,
and who does not acknowledge an incarnate God, is Antichrist, in the sense
wherein the same Apostle says there are many Antichrists, and in that sense,
wherein they that overthrow the foundations of the Christian Religion are
Antichrists.

He is not to abolish the Mass.
VII. He shall abolish the sacrifice of the Mass and shall make men renounce
their Baptism. This is not said in any place. It is true, it is said of
Antiochus, that he shall cause the daily sacrifice to cease, which he also did.
It is true also, that in so doing he was a Type of Antichrist, who has caused
the true sacrifices to cease, which are prayers to God, to substitute in their
place the worship of Mahuzims, and Demigods.

How Antichrist is to overthrow three Kings.
VIII. He is to overcome three Kings, viz. those of Lybia, Ethiopia and Egypt.
It is true also, that this is expressly spoken concerning Antiochus, and that it
agrees to Antichrist, as to the person of whom Antiochus was the Type. And it
is very certain, this has been accomplished in the Roman Antichristian Empire,
in what sense soever we understand it. For the Court of Rome has destroyed
three Kingdoms in Italy, that of the Lombards that of the Goths, and before
these that of the Greeks. These are the three Kingdoms which the Pope has
ruined, to usurp his Temporalities. He has overthrown the King of Naples, him
of Sicily, and him of Germany, to make them his vassals. He has overcome the
third part of those Kingdoms that have submitted to him, because he has
usurped more than a third part of their Riches, their Lands and their
Jurisdiction.

How Antichrist causes fire to come down from Heaven.
XII. He is to cause fire to come down from Heaven. It is enough to make fire
come down from heaven, to hurl Anathema's, and lightnings on the heads of men,
to damn them if it were possible for him to do it, and effectually to kill
them. For these are the lightnings, tho painted ones, that have set the
Christian World on fire.

He is not to conquer by arms.
XIII. He must conquer all the World by arms. How can this be true, seeing the
H. Spirit says expressly, that the ten Kings, which you your selves confess are
co-temporary with Antichrist, his friends and subjects, shall freely give their
power to him? There will be no need therefore to conquer them by arms. Moreover,
the Pope has not been wanting to make use of carnal weapons to strengthen and
increase his Sovereignty.

Enoch and Elias must not return, nor be killed.
XIV. Enoch and Elias must come again in the time of Antichrist, he must kill
them, and they must rise again. These are ridiculous visions, Jewish fables, or
tales made in imitation of them, who always expect their Elias as well as their
Messiah. As for us, we keep close to what the Lord J. Christ has told us, that
Elias has already come, and that that Elias was John Baptist, who had the
power and Spirit of Elias. As for Enoch and his return, it is a vision that
has not the least foundation in History or in Prophecy. It Is true, Enoch was
translated into Heaven; but there is not one word whence we can hope for his
return. These are fables upon fables. That Enoch and that Elias, those two
witnesses that must appear again in the time of Antichrist, are hidden (as they
say) in a retired place, in the Earthly Paradise, that subsists to this very
day, and which is invisible to all men.

Antichrist is not to style himself the only God.
XV. Antichrist is to style himself God, and the only God. How absurd is this?
How does this agree with what you say, that Antichrist must be received by the
Jews as their Messiah; that he is to re-establish the law of Moses, that he
must set on foot again the Levitical worship? How would the Jews receive him
for their Messiah, if he were so wicked a person, as not to believe there were
a God? To what purpose should he rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, and why
should he offer sacrifices to God in it, if he made himself to be worshipped as
the only God? Besides, it is clear enough, that the Pope causes himself to be
adored like a God, tho he does not call himself either the only God, or the
great God.

Germany is not the Roman Empire, that must be divided among ten Kings under
Antichrist.
XVI. He is not to come till the Roman Empire be entirely destroyed. We shall
afterward take an occasion to examine this. In the mean time, consider what
absurdities these men run themselves into. According to them, the Roman Empire
does yet subsist, viz. in the branch of Germany. According to them, at the end
of the World the Roman Empire shall be divided among ten Kings, that shall be
the Friends, the co-temporaries, and the supporters of Antichrist. That is to
say, the Empire of Germany shall be divided into ten Kingdoms. Those will be
notable Kingdoms, those ten Kingdoms on the other side the Rheine, and do well
deserve a place even ten times over in the Prophecies of Daniel and St. John.
If Antichrist must not come till the Roman Empire be destroyed, why did they
confess, that the little Horn in the 7th. Chapt. of Daniel, is Antichrist? This
Horn, does it not play the part of the fourth Beast, i.e. of the Roman Empire?
Why do these Gentlemen agree to this, that Antichrist is the seventh Head of
the first Beast in the 13th. of the Revelation, which they together with us
acknowledge to be the Roman Empire? Why did Bellarmine grant, that Antichrist is
to be the last Roman Emperor? The Roman Empire, therefore shall not be
destroyed when Antichrist shall come, because that Empire shall continue under
him.

Antichrist must come before the end of the World.
XVII. He is not to come but just at the end of the World. He is not to come
till the last times. But we shall hereafter examine, whether the last times
signify the three last years before the day of judgment. And when we shall have
proved that the 1260 Days of Antichrists reign are so many Years, this point
will be cleared up.

The Gospel has been preached almost throughout the World.
XVIII. Before he comes, the Gospel must have been preached throughout all the
World. Indeed before the Antichristian Empire did appear and was perceivable,
the Gospel had been preached in that which they called the whole World from the
time of the Apostles, in all the extent of the Roman Empire, and beyond it, in
all the then known World, in the countries which they knew were inhabited, and
where they could enter without being hindered by the barbarity of those that
dwelt there. But this universal preaching throughout all the Earth, without
Exception, must be consequent upon the fall of Antichrist, and not a sign of
his coming. Further, this term of Universal preaching even then must not be
taken in the strictest sense. For it may be there will be some Exceptions.

It is not necessary, that Antichrist should be a Magician.
XIX. Lastly; Antichrist must be a Magician. And that, because he must work
great signs and miracles by the help of Magic. It Is sufficient for the
fulfilling of these Oracles, that he does his signs by illusion and the
enchantment of men's senses, by cheating and deceit, and also by the help of the
Devil; without his making any compact with the Devil either direct or indirect.
The false miracles of Popery also are wrought by the cheats of the Priests, or
purely by lies, or by the Devil, that makes himself sport with their miserable
devotion. Seeing all these Characters of the Antichristian Empire are all
false, we must for the future examine and seek out what are the true Characters
of it.

CHAP. XIII.
What are the true Characters of the Antichristian Empire. They are three,
Tyranny, Idolatry, and great corruption of manners. That we must not look on
Tyranny alone, as the sole Character of Antichrist.

The Antichristian Empire has three names, that note its three Characters.
WE are seeking after the Characters of the Antichristian Empire. I believe we
may hope to find them in the names which the Holy Spirit gives it. For
assuredly names are given by God to signify the nature of things. I find that
the Holy Spirit gives three names to that Empire. He calls it Egypt and Sodom,
and lastly, Babylon. Egypt and Sodom in the eleventh of the Revelation, where
speaking of the death of the two witnesses, C. 11.8.
he says, their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. Babylon, in as many places of the same
book as it is said in, she is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon the great. Come out
of Babylon, my people. These three names signify the three Characters of that
Babylonish Empire.

The name of Egypt signifies the pride Tyranny and Cruelty of Antichrist.
Egypt is the emblem of Tyranny, Pride and Cruelty. Of Tyranny, because there
the Israelites did groan under hard bondage in the chains of Pharaoh, who
tyrannised over them; Of Cruelty, because that cruel Prince did vex them sorely
with hard labor, and the death of their children, whom he caused to be drowned
in the river Nile; Of Pride, because this proud Tyrant rebelled against God
with an intolerable pride, saying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice.

Sodom signifies the great corruption of manners in the Antichristian Empire.
Sodom signifies the mighty corruption of manners, and the reason of it may be
easily apprehended. It was neither Tyranny nor Cruelty that destroyed Sodom. We
do not read, that she did aspire after the dominion. It was not Idolatry; at
least, we have no reason to believe, that she was more notorious for it, than
the other Canaavites round about. It was therefore only dissoluteness, luxury
and debauchery, ease and abundance of bread, as the Prophets speak. Therefore
when they would set forth a mighty corruption of manners, they borrow an
expression from hence, and use the names of Sodom nd Gomorrha. ^s. 1.10.
Hear the word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the Law of our
God, ye people of Gomorrha. After which Isaiah falls not upon their Idolatry,
but upon their corrupt manners. He reproaches them with nothing but their
injustice and violence.

Babylon signifies the Idolatry of Antichristianism.
Lastly, Babylon signifies Idolatry. All do agree, that Babylon was the fountain
of all sorts of Idolatry. From Chaldaea it spread it self over all the Earth:
That is the fountain and spring of men, it is also of false Gods. As she was the
first fountain, so she did continue the chief Seat of it. 'Twas there that was
the most famous Temple, of the most infamous of all the Heathen Divinities,
viz. Venus the Goddess of prostitutions. And it is plain, that by way of
allusion to this infamous Goddess, Spiritual Babylon is represented in the 17th
of the Revelation, as a whore sitting on a beast, and offering her self from on
high to every comer. For Women did expose and prostitute themselves in the most
visible places of the Temple of the Venus of Babylon.

These three things Tyranny, Idolatry, and corruption of manners we meet with
in all the descriptions of Antichrist.
So then, these are the three Characters, by which the Antichristian Empire is
represented to us, in those places that speak of it. In the second Chapter of
the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, the head of this Empire is called the
man of sin, and the son of perdition, i. e. utterly lost, and plunged into a
mighty sink of corruption; Behold Sodom. It Is said, that he should exalt
himself above all that is called God, that he should sit in the Temple of God,
behaving himself as though he were God; Behold Egypt, pride and tyranny. His
Religion is called a mystery of iniquity, and he is to establish it by signs
and lying wonders; behold Idolatry, and behold Babylon. All the Heathens called
their Religion and their Ceremonies by the name of Mysteries. Ceres had her
mysteries, Bacchus had his, and Venus of Babylon had hers also; but these
Mysteries were abominable and idolatrous.

In the eleventh of the Revelation, this Empire is called a Gentilism, a
Paganism. The outward Court is left to the Gentiles, for them to tread under
foot for 42. months. Behold Babylon; behold Idolatry. By the profaning of the
outward Court, is also meant the corruption of manners; because the Heathens
were wont to make the Temples of their Idols, the place of their most filthy
debauches. v. 7.
In the same Chapter it is said, that the beast which comes out of the
bottomless pit, shall make war with the Saints, and overcome them, and kill
them. There is the tyranny and cruelty of Egypt.

In the two Visions of the 13th Chapter of the Revelation, this Antichristian
Empire is represented as a Beast. In the first as a beast compounded of a
Leopard, a Bear and a Lion, three cruel Beasts. This is to set forth its
cruelty and tyranny. It is given to him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them. Here again is Egypt, that oppresses the children of God, and
makes a cruel war upon them. Men worship this Beast and the Dragon, that gave
him his power. And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power to the Beast,
and they worshipped the Beast. Behold Babylon, where a Dragon was worshipped,
to which it may be the Holy Ghost alludes. Lastly, to this Beast was given a
mouth, speaking great things, and blasphemies against God, his Name, his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven; There is pride and idolatry.

The second Beast works great signs to seduce men: Rev. 13.14.
And deceives them that dwell upon the Earth, by means of those miracles,
which he had power to do in sight of the beast. It Is therefore a false Prophet,
that works false Miracles, to cause his false Gods to be worshipped. It Is a
Prophet of Babylon and of Idols. He causes all them to be killed, that do not
worship the image of the beast. Its cruelty and tyranny makes this Empire a
true Egypt.

In the 14th Chapter, it is said of this Babylon, that she made all nations
drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornications. They are her Idolatries,
that are so called. And in the 17th Chap. she is more largely described as a
prostitute woman, arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold
and precious Stones and Pearls, having a golden Cup in her hand full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication. And upon her forehead was a
name written MYSTERY, i. e. Religion; and for the explication of this word
Mystery, it is added, the mother of fornications or idolatries; this is Babylon.
She is also the mother of the abominations of the Earth; This is Sodom, whose
corruption spreads it self even to the end of the World. She makes her self
drunk with the blood of the Saints, this is Egypt, it is cruelty and tyranny.

Wheresoever these three Characters are found, there is Antichristianism. It is
not confined only to the Empire of the Pape,
One cannot question whether these be the Characters of the Babylonish Empire.
But we must carefully observe, that in all places of Christendom where these
Characters are found, the pride and tyranny of Egypt, the filth and
abominations of Sodom, and the Idolatries of Babylon, there is the
Antichristian Empire, in whole or in part. And hereupon we must conclude, that
this Empire is not confined to what we call the Papism, the Places subject to
the Pope, the Latin Church. In the Greek Church there is Idolatry, there is
Babylon; The Greek Church makes a part of Babylon.
for there they invocate Saints, and worship Images and Relics. There is
Sodom; for the corruption of manners there is great; and this corruption when
the Eastern Church was not under the Turkish Cross, appeared much more than it
does at this day. Lastly, There is Egypt, for there were tyranny and pride in
that Church. The Patriarchs and Prelates of the East, in their time, and in
their prosperity, carried themselves like Masters and Tyrants, though in that
respect they did not go so high as the Bishop of Rome. The Greek Church did not
separate from the Latin before the tenth Century; when the Latin Church was
already become Sodom, by the horrible corruption of her manners; Egypt by her
Tyranny and Pride; Babylon by her Idolatries. These two Churches made but one
Body and one Babel. And we must not imagine, that the Greek Church by her
separation became a Jerusalem, seeing she retained the corruption of Babel.

But this does not hinder, but that we may look for the capital of this
Antichristian Empire in Rome, Yet Rome cease not to be the head of the
Babylonish Empire.
and find the man of sin, the head of the Babylonish Empire, in the Pope. The
Greek Churches, and those of the Eastern Communion do no longer obey him. They
are revolted Provinces, over which he pretends a right, and who indeed ought to
obey him, seeing they have taken his mark and sign, which is Idolatry. The Pope
always keeps his Titles, and as he pretends, he keeps his ancient rights over
these separate Churches, calling himself the universal Bishop. Besides, we must
consider all the Churches that have revolted from their obedience to God, as
united under one spiritual head which is Satan; just in the same manner as
Churches of different communions remain united under one spiritual head, which
is Jesus Christ, if they hold the fundamental Doctrines. In like manner the
corrupt Societies are united under one spiritual head, which is the Devil, as
far as they follow the Doctrine of Devils, which is Idolatry, though they are
of different communions; yea, and excommunicate each other.

I therefore make no scruple to affirm, that the Babylonish Empire is in all
places, wherever tyranny, pride, corruption of worship manners and Government
mingled with Christianity are to be found. And that which I say in respect of
places, must be extended to times, also. It Is in those ages, where pride,
tyranny, corruption of manners and idolatry, have been visibly established in
the Church, that we must look for the birth and beginning of the Antichristian
Empire. And in the process of this discourse, this observation will be useful
to us, to find out that which we principally seek for in this work, i. e. the
time where we are to begin the 1260. years, that are assigned for the duration
of Antichristianism.

Men's mindings no other Character but that of tyranny, has made them mistake
the time of Antichrists birth.
It Is this chiefly, that has caused our Interpreters to be at a loss about the
time of the birth of the Antichristian Empire. They have looked only to
Tyranny, as if that were the only Character of this Empire. Monsieur du Plessis
has made a great Book about it, with this Title The Mystery of Iniquity; in
which he traces this Tyranny of the Church of Rome and the Popes, from its
birth to its perfection; as if the Mystery of Iniquity signified nothing else:
Whereas on the contrary, the mystery of Iniquity does not so much as
principally signify that. He that says a Mystery, says a Religion. This ought
to have been minded. So then, in this term the Papism is described with respect
to its Religion and Idolatry: And its tyranny and impiety is properly meant in
these words, that exalts himself above all that is called God.

Some men's heads have run so much upon this Character of Antichrist, viz.
Tyranny, as if that were the only one, that they will not find Antichrist, even
in the Papism before the time that the Pope began to act the part of a temporal
Prince, which they find he did toward the Year 755. This is the opinion of
Monsieur du Moulin in his accomplishment of the Prophecies. This also is the
reason, that he has so widely mistaken the time of the birth of
Antichristianism; and that he has set the time of his ruin so far off: For he
thinks that Antichristianism will not be at an end before the year 2015. so we
should have yet 330. Years longer to suffer. He should have remembered, that
Idolatry is more Antichristian than Tyranny, or at least as much. And
therefore, that there is no reason to exclude out of the Antichristian Period,
the sixth, seventh, and eight centuries, wherein Idolatry was so strongly
established. Corruption and looseness of manners were introduced into the
Church, and were the way for Antichristianism, its progress followed by the
introduction of Idolatry. And at last Antichristianism was consummated by
Tyranny. These are the three true Characters of that Empire, the union whereof
will show us the true point of its birth.

CHAP. XIV.
That the three Characters of the Antichristian Empire do perfectly agree to
the Empire of the Papism. Proofs out of History and Prophecies. Reflections
upon the Prophecy in the second Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians; and upon the end of the Roman Empire.

WE have seen in the foregoing Chapter, that the names of the Antichristian
Empire are Egypt, Sodom, Babylon; and that its Characters signified by these
names, are Tyranny, Pride, Cruelty, extreme corruption of manners, Idolatry and
Paganism. We have fixed this Babylonish Empire every where, where these
Characters are to be found. We have reckoned the Papism for the center and the
body, Rome for the capital place, and the Pope for the head. We must now prove,
that these Characters do perfectly agree to the Papism, to its capital place,
and its head. But we do pretend, that as to us, this thing has been already
done: we have done it in our just prejudices against Popery, as well as we are
able; and indeed that whole work is but a proof of this proposition, that all
the Characters of the Antichristian Empire do agree to the Papism.

The Character of Tyranny agrees to the Papism.
If any desire a proof of this, that the Papism is an Egypt, and that tyranny is
exercised there, he need only read the twelfth and thirteenth Chapters of the
first part, where he will see that the Empire of the Papism is an Empire purely
temporal, under the show of a spirituality; and the fourteenth Chapt. where its
purely humane, politiques are so clearly brought to light, that not so much as
a shadow remains unscatter'd. If any would be assured, that the conduct of the
Papism is a most horrible Tyranny, he need but read the 21. and 22. Chapters of
the first part, where is an account of the insolent, tyrannical and proud
actions and speeches of the Popes toward all men, without excepting even
Sovereign Princes.

That of Pride agrees to it also.
In the same Chapters will be found the proof that Pride, another Character of
the Antichristian Empire, perfectly agrees to the Papism. For there its Pride
will be seen in its opinions and Divinity; the pride of its Clergy and Priests,
that call themselves the Kings and Emperors of the World; the Pride of its
head, who calls himself a God upon Earth, who causes Divine honor to be given
to him, who domineers with authority over the Kings of the Earth; who spoils
them of their Crowns, who gives away their Kingdoms to others, who dispenses
with their Subjects Oaths of Allegiance; who treads them under his feet, and
puts his foot upon their throat; who as for his own person, is clothed with
purple, and all the pomp of the Roman Emperors.

The Empire of the Papism is an Egypt for cruelty.
In the 26th and 27th Chapters of the second part it will plainly be seen, that
cruelty perfectly agrees to this Empire. For there you will find an Epitome of
all the cruel persecutions, which the Church has suffered by this mystical
Babylon; the blood she has spilt, the fires she has kindled, the witty
punishments she has invented, and the incredible number of the faithful that
she has murdered. If enough of this be not found in that piece, you may have
recourse to our History of Popery.

The 2d recrimination is wholly spent in showing, that the Papism since more
than 700. Years ago, is like a cruel beast, armed with teeth and claws, that
tears in pieces and devours all that opposes its greatness; and that one cannot
follow it in History, but by the track of innocent blood that it has shed. It
will appear in all those places, that the Papism is always the same, and that
at this very day as well as formerly, it is cruel, bloody, and tyrannical;
which we have proved by the persecutions of Bohemia, Hungary, Savoy, and lastly
that of France, which at this day is driven on to extremity, and is the most
terrible of all that ever the Church endured.

The Empire of the Papism is a Sodom for corruption of manners.
As to corruption of manners, one may be convinced that it cannot go further
than it has already gone in the Papism, by reading what we have written in the
sixth and ninth Prejudice. In the sixth we have proved the corruption of the
heads of the Papism, by a short History of the abominable immoralities of the
Popes. And in the ninth, we have given an account of an infinite number of
witnesses in all Ages, who do depose, that all the most horrible and filthy
things that can be imagined, are to be met with in the carriage and manners of
the Monks, Priests, and Laity in the Papism. To perfect the description of the
corruption of the Papism, the eighth Prejudice may be added, in which the
filthy, sordid, simoniacal and sacrilegious covetousness of Rome, and all its
Agents are discovered.

The Empire of the Papism is a Babylon for idolatry.
To be assured that Idolatry, one of the principal Characters of the
Antichristian Empire, agrees to the Papism, you may read the 33. Chap. of the
last part, where you will find a short description of the extravagant and
abominable worship, which the Church of Rome gives to the Holy Virgin and all
the Saints; in which worship we have plainly discovered an evident Character of
reprobation and Antichristianism. Lastly, for the proof of the Paganism of that
Church, you may read the 12th of our prejudices. We have there made a very
exact Parallel between Popery and Paganism, enough to convince any one, that
they both had the same spring and Author, because they have the same objects
distinguished into the very same classes, and very near the very same
ceremonies. To which may be added the History of the fables of the Papism, more
filthy and more numerous than those of Paganism. You will find it in the
sixteenth Prejudice.

Besides all this, we have taken our second Prejudice from the perfect
conformity, that is between the Prophecies concerning the reign of Antichrist,
and the things we see in the settlement and the nature of the Kingdom of the
Papism. We have alleged all the Prophecies, wherein it is agreed, that
Antichrist and his Empire are both foretold and described; and we have
justified it, that all the strokes of these descriptions do agree to the Pope,
to his Seat, to his Religion, and to his Empire.

The Roman Religion, is that falling away and that Apostasy, of which St. Paul
speaks in the second Chap. of the second Epist. to the Thessalonians. It Is the
first Text we have produced against it.

The Papism is an Apostasy.
That Religion is an Apostasy, because there is in it Idolatry, profaning of
holy things, an introduction of new Gods, and the abomination of Images set up
in the Sanctuary. Its head is the man of sin and the son of perdition, because
his throne is the throne of pride, of covetousness, of ambition, of Simony.
There we find the Politiques of the World, and of the spirit of darkness;
cheating, deceit, violence, blood, fornication, sodomy, brutishness, magic,
and all manner of imaginable wickedness. This head of the Papism sits in the
Temple of God; i. e. in the Christian Church, where Jesus Christ dwelt, who is
the foundation. He sits there as a God; for he makes his feet be kissed by men,
yea, even by the highest powers of the Earth. He is called God, the Lieutenant
of God, the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and a Vice-God. In the quality of a God, and
as one clothed with his power, he changes the times and the Law. He dispenses
with things against the Law of God, Dan. 7.
against the Canons of the Church, against the Apostle, against the Old and New
Testament. He lifts up himself above all that is called God; for he exalts
himself above all the Kings of the Earth, that are the Gods of this lower
World. He exalts himself also above the true God, in making such laws as make
void the Laws of God; for instance, in commanding to worship Images, which God
has forbidden us to worship. He exalts himself above the Saints, which are his
Demy-Gods. For in the quality of a Judge, and consequently of a Superior, he
Canonises them, he places them in the Heavens, he causes them to be honored
with Temples and Altars, or he refuses it to them.

The Papism is a Mystery of Iniquity.
His Religion is a mystery of iniquity; for all that is in it is unrighteous,
unjust, wicked. It Is usurpations, violences and Idolatries. It ravishes away
from men their just rights, and from God that worship that belongs to him
alone; to appropriate it to a Tyrant, or give it to subjects that do not
deserve it. It Is a Mystery, for it has all the appearance of a Mystical
Religion. It has ceremonies in abundance, a pompous worship, a mighty
outside; but it is a Mystery of iniquity. This mystery was established by the
efficacy of Santan, with all power, signs and lying wonders. For one cannot
reckon up either the Diabolical illusions, or the Cheats of the Priests, or the
lying Miracles by which this false worship, and this false Religion, was
established in the World.

The explication and application of that place of St. Paul to the Empire of the
Papism, have been already made so exactly, that we shall not do it over again,
except only that Article, in which the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.6, 7.
Ye know what withholds, that he might be revealed in his time, etc. He who
now lets, will let, till he be taken out of the way, and then shall that
wicked one be revealed. All the world did formerly believe, and so it does
still, that by him who Held and possessed, or did let, in St. Paul's time, we
must understand the Roman Empire. And it has been generally apprehended, that
the Apostle intended to say, that the Antichristian Empire would not appear in
the world before the Roman Empire was abolisht and destroyed. Tho we should
stick to this, without any other explication, our cause would be much better
than that of the Church of Rome. For to demonstrate that the Romish Antichrist
is not yet come, she is obliged to prove, that the Roman Empire does yet
subsist. Germany is not an Empire, nor the Roman Empire.
does yet subsist. She finds it in the Empire of Germany. But nothing is more
vain than this, nor more easy to be confuted. The Government of Germany is
neither an Empire, nor a Roman Empire. It Is not an Empire. There is nothing
Despotical in it, nor any thing that savours of an Emperor. It Is rather a
Republique, or an heap of many different Monarchical, Aristocratical and
Democratical States. It Is not the Roman Empire, no more than the Kingdom of
France, or that of Spain. For it is one of the dismembered pieces of the ancient
Roman Empire, as well as the other Kingdoms of Europe. It retains the name of
the Roman Empire, its head is called the King of the Romans. What of all this?
Is it necessary only to retain names and vain titles, to be in possession to
the thing, and to exercise the rights belonging to it? The Jews retain the name
of the people of God, of the chosen people, of the Lords inheritance, by way of
exclusion of all the nations of the Earth; but does it follow, that they are
what they once were, and what to this day they call themselves?

We therefore may justly say, the Roman Empire is destroyed, and was abolisht
when the Goths, the Vandals, and the Huns rent it in pieces, and divided it
into so many parts, took away the rule from the City of Rome, and made it the
chief City only of a part of that ancient Empire. And indeed, it is then, that
the Antichristian Empire was born, or at least began to be Revealed, that is to
say, to become sensible; and this was in the fifth Age.

But this does not agree with the other Prophecies; for according to St. John
and Daniel, the fourth Monarchy, which is that of the Romans, must continue
till the Kingdom be given to the Saints, and all the Nations of the World be
reduced to the obedience of Jesus Christ.

The Roman Empire according to the Prophecy of St. John and Daniel is not yet
ended. v. 17, 18.
This is in the seventh of Daniel. There he makes four Beasts, i. e. four
Monarchies or four Empires. These four Beasts are four Kings, that shall arise
out of the Earth. But the Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom, and
possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. He places nothing at all
between the end of the fourth Beast or the fourth Empire, and the Kingdom given
to the Saints. Now if the fourth Monarchy did cease in the fifth Century, then
the fifth Monarchy, which is the Kingdom of J. Christ, being not begun, there
would be the space of 12. or 13. hundred Years between the fourth Monarchy and
the reign of J. Christ upon the Earth. One cannot conceive why the H. Spirit
should leave so wide a gap of time in the Prophecy.

This is yet more evident by what follows. The Angel, that explains the vision
to Daniel, says to him, v. 23.
The fourth Beast shall be the fourth Kingdom upon Earth, which shall be
diverse from all Kingdoms, and shall devour the whole Earth, and shall tread it
down, v. 24.
and break it in pieces. And the ten horns out of this Kingdom are ten Kings,
that shall arise; and another shall arise after them, and he shall be diverse
from the first, and he shall subdue three Kings. v. 25.
And he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the
saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws; and they shall be
given into his hand, until a time, v. 26.
and times, and the dividing of time. But the judgment shall sit, and they
shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end. And
the Kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, etc. He had
said before, on occasion of the fourth Beast and his little Horn, I behold
them, v. 11.
because of the voice of the great words, which the horn spoke; I beheld even
till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning
flame.

It Is clear, that the ten Horns, or the ten Kingdoms, together with the little
Horn, that subdues three Kings, are a continuation of the fourth Beast, and
make but one Monarchy together with it, which Monarchy must endure till the
Kingdom be given to the people of God.

The same thing plainly appears in the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, Chap. 2.
and the explication which Daniel gives of it. Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream a
great Statue, whose head was of Gold, his shoulders and his arms of Silver, v.
32.
his belly of Brass, his legs of Iron, v. 33.
and his feet divided into ten Toes were partly of Earth and partly of Iron. v.
34.
A Stone cut out of the mountain without hands, breaks this statue in pieces,
mingles the Gold, the Silver, the Iron and the Brass, and reduces them all to
dust. Daniel explaining this dream, declares, that the head signifies the
Monarchy of the Assyrians, of which Babylon was then the capital city since the
ruin of Nineveh, and Nebuchadnezzar the head. That the shoulders of Silver
signify a second Monarchy; and the belly of Brass a third. v. 40.
And the fourth Kingdom shall be like Iron, for as much as Iron breaks in
pieces and subdueth all things. All the World is agreed, that this is the Roman
Monarchy. After which follows, not the destruction, but the division of that
Empire among ten Kings. And whereas thou saw the feet and toes, v. 41.
part of potters clay, and part of iron, the Kingdom shall be divided, viz.
into ten other Kingdoms, as the feet into ten toes. For the ten toes of the
statue, and the ten horns of the Beast, are the same thing; which all
Interpreters have acknowledged. Among these ten Kings must he come, that must
subdue three, i. e. Antichrist. As therefore the ten Toes make a part of the
Statue, and the ten horns a part of the Beast, it is plain that the ten Kings,
that must arise from the division of the Roman Empire, and the reign of
Antichrist that must establish himself, by the ruin of three of those Kings,
are the continuation of the Roman Empire, and the Roman Empire it self.

Now immediately after, and without any thing happening between, comes the
reign of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy people, signified by the little stone
cut without hands out of the mountain. And in the days of these Kings shall the
God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, v. 44.
which shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and
consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

The same thing is evident by the Revelations of Saint John. The first Beast in
the 13th of the Revelation, in certainly the same with the fourth Beast in the
7th Chapter of Daniel: it is the Roman Empire. We have seen before, that it is
agreed, that the second Beast in the same Chapt. which had but two horns, is
the same with the foregoing Beast that had ten. Now the foregoing Beast is the
Roman Empire; the second Beast is the Empire of Antichrist. Whence it is plain
that the reign of Antichrist must be the continuation of the Roman Empire.

Saint John, after having described the Roman Empire, continued under
Antichrist, in the 13th Chap. carries on this continuation in the 14th Chap. to
the total ruin of that Empire, to the judgment that God causes to fall on the
Kingdom of Antichrist, to the harvest and to the vintage, i. e. to the total
destruction of the Devils Kingdom. The following Chapters carry on the matter
also to the reign of Jesus Christ, the description of which begins in the 20th
Chap. of the book. There is nothing comes between; whereby it is clear, there
is no interval of time, nor any Monarchy between the Roman Empire, and the
Monarchy of J. Christ; and so that the Antichristian Empire, that must
immediately proceed the reign of Jesus Christ, is the continuation of the Roman
Empire.

The same thing is evident from the 17th Chap. which is an explication of the
visions of the 13th. The 13th Chap. speaks of two Beasts, the one had seven
heads and ten horns, the other has but one head and two horns. The 17th Chapt.
speaks no more of the second Beast. It speaks only of a woman riding on a Beast
of seven heads and ten horns. It Is because the second Beast at the bottom was
no more than a continuation of the first; i. e. it was no more than the
continuation of the Roman Empire. Therefore the Holy Spirit in explaining the
adventures of the first Beast, pretends to explain those of the second also.
For otherwise, if the two Beasts had been different, it is plain the H. Spirit
would not have been wanting to have spoken of the one as well as of the other
in the 17th Chap. where he explains the visions of the Beasis. Now this Beast
with seven heads and ten horns, i. e. the Roman Empire must reach to the end of
the persecutions, and to the reign of J. Christ. This appears plainly in the
18th. and the following Chapters, where the ruin of Antichrist is represented
and described at large.

If these proofs did not suffice to prove, that the Empire of Antichrist must
be a continuation of the Roman Empire, one might bring others from the
comparison of the two Beasts of the 13th. Chapter For it is clear, that it is one and
the same Empire represented by two Beasts. And the thing is so plain, that the
Popish Authors themselves do acknowledge it. We have heard Bellarmin confess it,
and say, that Antichrist must be a King possessing the Roman Empire, but
without the name of the Roman Emperor.

He that did possess in the time of St. Paul, and was to be removed out of the
way before Antichrist came, is the sixth head of the Beast with ten Horns and
seven heads.
If this be so, what must we understand by those words of St. Paul, only he that
now lets or possesses, will let or possess till he be taken out of the way,
and then shall that wicked one be revealed? It does not import, till the Roman
Empire be abolisht, as the Ancients did believe, and as the Agents of
Antichrist at this day would fain persuade us. We must remember, that in the
Beast in the Revelation, with seven Heads and ten Horns, the seven Heads are
seven forms of Governments, under which the Roman Empire has past. 1. Kings.
2. Consuls. 3. Decemvires. 4. The Tribunes of the People. 5. Perpetual
Dictators. 6. Emperors. 7. and lastly, Popes.
Every one of these Heads and these Governments has had its time, one has
passed away and another has come in its place. In the time of St. Paul the
Head of the Emperors was in possession. And it is of that we must understand
those words of his Prophecy, only he which now withholds, or possesses,
i.e. the Head of the Emperors, shall cease at Rome, and then the Antichristian
Kingdom shall be revealed, and quickly form the seventh Head, which shall be
that of the Popes, calling themselves the Vicars of J. Christ, but being indeed
the true Antichrists.

And thus you have what I thought necessary to be added for the explication of
that Prophecy of St. Paul contained in the 2d. Ep. to the Thessalonians.

CHAP. XV.
An explication of the Visions of the thirteenth Chapter of the Revelation, and
of the two Beasts that appear therein.

WE come now to the description of the Antichristian Empire, according as we
find it in the Revelation, a book particularly designed to describe it to us.
It Is found above all in the 13th. Chapter. Two Beasts are seen in this Chapter.
We shall immediately examine both the one and the other, following the Text word
for word.

V. 1. And I saw a Beast rise out of the sea, having seven Heads and ten Horns,
and upon his Horns ten crowns, and upon his Heads the name of Blasphemy.

2. And the beast, which I saw, was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as
the feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion; and the Dragon gave
him his power, and his seat, and great authority.

There is no need that I should observe here, that in the style of the Prophets
a Beast signifies an Empire. A beast signifies a worldly Empire, enemy of God.
All the world knows it, and confesses it. It must only be noted, that a Beast
signifies an Empire that is worldly, terrestrial, and an enemy to God. The
Kingdom of God and of Jesus Christ, that must be given to the Saints after the
fourth Monarchy, is never represented under the image of a Beast. The Beast
that appears here, is the fourth Monarchy, which we have seen described in the
text of the seventh Chapter of Daniel. The Prophet had said, that it was
diverse from all the other Beasts. And Saint John in the explication of it
says, that it was composed of the shape of a Lion, a Leopard, and a Bear;
whereas the foregoing Beasts had but one simple shape. The First was as a Lion
with the wings of an Eagle. The second was as a Bear, and the third as a
Leopard. But this fourth Monarchy has all the strength, and all the advantages
of the tree others together. It Is courageous and strong as a Lion. It had the
swiftness of a Leopard in its conquests. It has the firmness of a Bear, whose
large feet make a firm basis for its whole body.

The Holy Spirit lays before the Prophets eyes this Roman Monarchy whole and
entire, Why the fourth Monarchy appears entire in the Revelation.
about a third part of it was already past, because this Monarchy was to be the
subject, on which all the great events were to turn. And to know and object
well, it must not be shown by pieces, but all entire. So that it is reasonable
the Prophet should see this Beast, or this Monarchy, in its whole extent. He
rises out of the Sea. This is not what was said in the eleventh Chapter, he
rises out of the bottomless pit. The bottomless pit and the sea are not the
same thing. The bottomless pit is Hell. Here the sea signifies a great number
of people. The Roma Monarchy rose from the midst of the people, as a monster
that should rise out of the sea. It Is because it was established with a terrible
havoc, such as a hideous monster, that should rise out of the sea, and of an
enormous greatness would cause, making the waves to foam, blowing the water
with his nostrills, and sending out terrible bellowings. It Is the emblem of the
manner; whereby the Roman Empire was established.

This Beast has seven Heads. The Spirit explains this of so many Kings, and so
many mountains. The seven heads are seven Kings, and seven Mountains. See here
the Character of Rome, together with its Empire. It sits on seven Heads, that
is to say, on seven Mountains; and it had seven Kings, that is to say, seven
forms of Sovereign Governments. We have already reckoned them up in the
foregoing Chapter. 1. Kings. 2. Consuls. 3. Decemvires. 4. Tribunes of the
people. 5. Perpetual Dictators. 6. Emperors. 7. Popes.


He has ten Horns. The Prophet does not say how these Horns were distributed
on the Heads. But however it is certain, The ten Horns are only on the seventh
head.
that they were all on the seventh Head, that is to say, on the Head of the
Popes. For it is under the Papal Dominion, that the Roman Empire is divided
among ten Horns, that is to say, among ten Kings. Europe, that obeys the
Pope, is divided into ten Principal Kingdoms. 1. Germany. 2. Hungary. 3.
Poland. 4. Suedeland. 5. France. 6. Spain. 7. Italy. 8. England. 9. Portugal.
10. Scotland.
The other Kingdoms and States were dependencies on these. From the first
division of the Roman Empire, that happened in the fifth Age, the partition was
made among ten Kings also, as we shall observe afterward. Horns always signify
power in the Scripture: this is known. So that these ten Horns must be powers,
But no signify that these Powers are Sovereign ones, and not subordinate, the
Spirit gives them Diadems. They are Sovereigns in name, but in truth they are
dependents on the seventh head, which is the Pope, and the Papism. For the
Papism subjects all Kings to the Pope.

On the heads there is a name of blasphemy. This is not on one of the heads,
but on all of them. And the name of blasphemy, is that of the Queen of the
universe, which she would always bear, since she attained to her greatness.
Terrarum Dea, Gentiumque Roma.

It Is the title of Rome eternal, as Saint Jerome has observed. Ad Algas.
quaeft 11.
The Roman Emperors made themselves be called your Divinity. They built
Temples to them, they burnt incense to their Genius, they sacrificed to them.
The seventh head has also its names of blasphemy. The Pope is called his
Holiness, Vice-God, God on Earth, Vicar of Jesus Christ. Rome under his
Dominion is called infallible Rome, eternal Rome.

The Dragon give him his power; It Is the Devil which gives to the Roman Empire
the false Religion, the idolatries and heresies, by which it makes war against
God; the ambition, the cruelty, and the covetousness, by which it makes war
against men.

And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, 1.3.
and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered after the Beast.
The Prophet does not say, what head was wounded: but it cannot be doubted, but
that it was the last save one. For that which comes in the place of that which
is wounded, lasts to the end. Therefore the head wounded to death must be the
sixth; and the resurrection of this head must make the seventh head, or the
seventh Government. The sixth head is that of the Emperors. It Is wounded by
the Goths and the Vandals. The Roman Empire is destroyed. But it rises again
under another head, and a new kind of government, viz. that of the Popes. De
Donat Constant.
In the power of the Papacy is brought forth again, if not the grandeur of the
ancient Empire, yet at least a form of government, that is not very much
different from that, by which all the nations once obeyed the Emperors. It Is
the confession of Steuchus Bishop of Agobio.

All the World wondered after the beast. The Earth being astonished, to see the
Roman Empire established under the new name of the Roman Church, follows this
new Beast, submits to this Church; being ravished with this dignity, that
appeared to list up Christianity to the height of grandeur, it submitted to
this Chimoera of the spiritual and temporal Principality of the Church of Rome.

And there was given to him a mouth, speaking great things and blasphemies.
After this, v. 5^
it is only the seventh head that is treated of, which is called the Beast
simply, because it is the longest duration of the fourth Monarchy. It Is
therefore this seventh head, the Pope and the Papism, that brings forth these
great things. Can there be any thing greater than that which the Roman Church
says of it self, that she is the Spouse of Christ, the Queen of all the
Churches, the infallible Judge of all controversies, the Ark, out of which
there is no salvation, the Divinity to which all nations must pay homage, the
common mother of all Christians, the Sovereign of the Kings of the Earth, that
can depose them, transfer their Crowns, and give them to whom she thinks fit?
see the great things; and these great things are blasphemies. This is clear.
For to attribute that to her self, which belongs only to God, is to blaspheme.

And power was given to him to continue forty and two months. It Is still the
seventh head that is treated of. It Is to it that the period of forty and two
months, of twelve hundred and sixty days, that is to say, of twelve hundred and
sixty years, is assigned. It Is clear, that these forty two months do not
respect the entire Beast, that is to say, the seven heads, or the seven
Governments; for after the third verse, it is only the seventh head that is
spoken of. Moreover, the seventh Monarchy, in its whole extent, has lasted
almost twice forty two prophetical months, as we have before observed. It Is
therefore the duration of the Antichristian Empire, or of the second period of
the fourth Monarchy, that must be extended to 1260. years.

He opened his mouth in blasphemy against God. ^. 6.
It Is to blaspheme God to attribute to it self his power, as the Roman Church
does against his name: that is to say, against his glory. The Papism ravishes
away the glory from God to give it to the creatures. Against his Tabernacle;
that is to say, against his Temple and his Church, in calling the true Children
of God, which are his house, heretics and schismatics. Against them that
dwell in Heaven. These are the Saints and Angels, of whom the Papism makes
idols, and whom by consequence it greatly injureth.

And it was given to him to make war with the Saints, v. 7.
and to overcome them. It Is well enough known how the Papism has employed
Anathemaes, thunders, fire, and sword to extinguish the truth, and to destroy
the faithful.

And I beheld another beast coming out of the Earth, v. 11.
and he had two horns like a Lamb, and he spoke as a Dragon.

The second Beast has two hoths.
In the foregoing vision, the Holy Spirit represented the fourth Monarchy in
its two Periods, and its whole extent by only one Beast. We have seen more-than
once, that this Monarchy has two periods very near of the same duration. The
first is from the birth of Rome, to the ruin of the Imperial dignity, and the
division of the Empire into ten Kingdoms. The second, from the destruction of
the Imperial dignity, to the entire ruin of the Roman Church. It Is this second
period, which the Prophet here represents under the image of a second Beast.
It Is another Beast, because it is another name, another sort of Empire, an
Empire hidden under the name of the Church. It Is a matter that begins again all
anew. As the City of Rome in its birth was little, insensible, a small matter
in a word, during two or three ages; so this new Roman Empire, that was to be
brought forth again, was to commence also from weak beginnings, and to be but a
very little thing for some ages. As this later period of the fourth Monarch was
to last as long as the other, and was to have a form wholly different from it,
it deserved to be called another beast.

This second Beast ascends out the Earth, and not out of the Sea. It Is the same
Beast, that is spoken of in the eleventh Chapter, that it ascends out of the
bottomless pit, that is to say, from Hell. The one hinders not the other. The
Papism comes from Hell, but not by the same means as the first beast did. These
two Empires come not from the same place. The first Empire springs from the
people, and their ambition. The second Empire proceeds from the Clergy, and
their ambition. It springs from the Earth as a plant, that shoots out small,
and becomes great insensibly, without effusion of blood, and without spoil. He
had two horns like a Lamb. The Roman Church calls her self the Spouse of the
Lamb; usurps his power; the name of Jesus Christ, is always in her mouth; and
if she may be believed, she does but exercise the power of Jesus Christ, that
has been lawfully conferred upon her. Jesus Christ has two powers, in Heaven
and in Earth. All power is given me in Heaven and Earth, says he. The Roman
Church says the same thing of her self. She ascribes to her self the temporal
power, and the spiritual one. He speaks as a Dragon. For he utters blasphemies
against God, and terrible threatenings against his Children.

And he exercises all the power of the first beast before him. v. 12.
The Papism has re-establisht all the authority of the ancient Emperors. The
Roman Church causes her self to be served by Kings. She takes away their
demeauss, she disposes of their Crowns, she draws tribute from them, and
exercises jurisdiction in all their States. The first Beast, that is to say,
the Roman Pagan Empire, did no more in the countries that were subject to it.

And causes the Earth, and them which dwell therein to worship the first
Beast. Raising up in her self the power of the ancient Empire, she makes that
ancient Empire be raised up again, under a new name, viz. that of the Roman
Church, be adored and served. v. 13.
And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on
Earth in the sight of men. We shall have occasion to observe, and prove several
times hereafter, as we have already done before, that in the style of the
Prophets, Heaven, when an Estate and an Empire is treated of, always signifies
the sovereign region of those dignities. The Sun is the Sovereign, the stars
are the Grandees. Here an Empire, a State, is treated of under the name of a
Beast. The Sovereign region of that State is the Heaven, from that State falls
fire, that is to say, thunders. It cannot be doubted, but this is what the Roman
Church it self calls thunders, and thundering Bulls. It Is those decrees and
those Papal Bulls, which proceed from the Court of Rome. These are no other
than Past-board thunders and artificial fireworks. However it is known, that
they have set Kingdoms is a flame a hundred and a hundred times, and have may
times thought to set all Europe on Fire. To this are added Signs, that is to
say, prodigies of pride; ambition, madness, policy, carnal weapons, and other
means, by which the Beast of Rome has used to establish its dominion, and
subject Kings to its self. This does not exclude the false miracles, which the
Papism has used to establish it self. But as it is here considered much more
as a Kingdom than as a Religion, by these signs it is much better to understand
the wicked means it has employed to establish its tyranny, than the lying
miracles, which it used to establish its false mysteries.

And deceives them which dwell on the Earth by the means of those miracles.
That is to say, v. 14.
he induced them by all the ways of deceit and violence to do homage to him,
and submit themselves to his dominion, Saying to them that dwell on the Earth,
that they should make an image to the beast. v. 15.
And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of
the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the
image of the Beast, should be killed. This here is an admirable place. The
Roman Church is an Empire. However, it is but an image of an Empire, an
imaginary Empire, founded only on the deceived imagination of men. They need
but say NOT, to destroy this Empire. The reality of an Empire consists in
citadells, in fortresses, in armies. The Roman Church has none of all this.
For the little armies that the Pope might raise, is not that which secures his
Empire. It Is not therefore a true Empire. The Convents of the Monks are his
Citadels. The Monks are his Soldiers and Armies. The Priests are his
Emissaries. The Bishops and Archbishops are his Lievtenanis. But all these are
but images. Nevertheless this image of an Empire speaks, acts, makes decrees,
raises all Europe, and causes all those to be killed, that will not pay it the
like homage, which was rendered to the ancient Roman Empire.

And he causes all, v. 16.
both small and great, etc. to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads. And that no man might buy, or sell, save he that had the mark or the
name of the Beast. The Forehead is the seat of profession. Thence it came, that
ancient Christians signified their profession of Christianity by a sign of the
Cross on the forehead. The Hand is the instrument of action. The inhabitants of
the Earth can neither buy, nor sell, under the dominion of the Papism, that is
to say, partake of its favors and its riches, unless they have the Profession
of a Papist on their Forehead, and the actions of one in their Hands. This is
what is meant by the Mark of the Beast, and not some particular mark, and one
Properly so called.

Here is wisdom; v. 18.
let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast: for it is the
number of a man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six. If so much
had not been wrote about this, here would be a subject to write a great deal
upon. But in a few words, I cannot doubt, but that they who have reckoned the
numeral power of the letters of the name of the Roman Church, and of its Pope,
have hit upon the sense of the Prophecy. It Is the number of his name; that is
to say, expressly contained in his name. It Is a number of a man; that is to
say, it is a number that must be understood according as men do count; not in a
prophetical and Mysterious style, which oftentimes under one number hides
another unknown number. But in what language must we count the numeral letters
of the name of the Beast? It Is easy to determine that. The Prophecies must be
explained according to the language of the Prophets. There are two languages of
the Prophets, Hebrew and Greek. Look for the name of the Roman Church in these
two languages. In Hebrew you will find Romiyth, and in Greek Lateinos. The
first signifies the Roman Beast, or the Roman Church. The second signifies the
Emperor or the Latin Pope. And in the one and in the other there is exactly
six hundred threescore and six.

Here I might stop with reference to the number 666. And it is with some
difficulty that I enter upon the depths of the interpretation of those Authors,
who would have this Number 666. respect not the Name of the Beast, but of his
Empire. They pretend, that as the Number 144. is consecrated to signify the
Empire of J. Christ, The number 144. denotes the whole Church, because of
twelve, its square-root.
which appears by the 144. thousand Sealed ones, pretty often mentioned in the
Revelation; in like manner the Number 666. mystically denotes the entire Empire
of the Beast and its principal Characters. They observe, that the Number 144.
has for its square root the Number twelve. For twelve multiplied by it self,
twelve times twelve makes 144. The Number of twelve is sacred, because of the
twelve Patriarchs of the ancient Israel, and the twelve Apostles, that are the
Patriarchs of the new Israel. So the Number 144. that mystically signifies the
whole Church of I. Christ, is founded on the Number twelve. That is to say, the
whole Christian Church is founded on the Apostles, who make one divine
Hierarchy. Wherefore the number twelve bears sway in all the parts of the
description of the Jerusalem, which we read of in the 21. Chap. of the
Revelation. She has twelve Foundations, twelve Gates, twelve angels, twelve
Tribes, twelve thousand Furlongs. The Tree of Life, which is in the midst of
the place, bears twelve Sorts of fruits every year; and lastly, the Wall is of
144. Cubits, i.e. twelve times twelve. So the Church, which has her root in
the number twelve, by the multiplication of this number twelve by it self,
makes 144. a sacred Number. But the number 666. which is exorbitant, and which
exceeds the number of twelve, and has not this number twelve for its root, is
the emblem of the Antichristian Church, which is not founded on the twelve
Apostles, which has not twelve Articles of Faith, but many more. In a word, as
the Number 666. has no relation to that of twelve, so the Antichristian Church
has no relation to the Christian and Apostolical Church.

Potter's opinion of the number 666.
An English Divine, one Potter, has carried this notion further than others
have done, in an express treatise, which he has made about the mystery of the
Number 666. He pretends, that as the Number of 144. is not mystically designed
to signify the Church and the Empire of I. Christ, but for the sake of the
Number 12, which is its square root, and on which it is built; in like manner
also the Number 666. is not mystical, but by reason of the square root, on
which it is raised; so he would have it, that we should extract the root of the
Number 666. and believes, it is in this root that we must seek after the Mystery
of the Empire of the Beast. Arithmeticians call the square root of a Number
given, that number, What the square root is.
by which in multiplying it by it self, the number given is produced, whether
there be any remainders or no. For instance, 10 is the square root of an 100,
because ten multiplied by it self, 10 times 10 make a 100 without any remains.
The square root of 55. is seven, because multiplying 7 by it self, 7 times 7
make 49, and a remainder of 6 makes 55. According to this, the square root of
the number 666 is 25, 25. Is the square root of 666.
for 25 multiplied by it self makes 625. with a remainder of 41. which makes
666.

This being supposed, that 25 is the square root and the foundation of the
Number 666, he pretends, that as 144 founded upon 12 represents the whole
Church, founded upon the holy Hierarchy of the 12 Apostles; in like manner 666
represents the whole Antichristian Empire of the Papism, founded upon the
Antichristian Hierarchy. And to make appear how exact the opposition to the
Christian Hierarchy is, he shows, that as the Number 12. bears sway in the
whole composition of Jerusalem, which is the Church and the holy City, 12
Foundations, 12 Gates, 12 Angels, 12 thousand Furlongs, 12 forts of Fruits; in
like manner the number 25 bears sway in all the Popish Hierarchy. The number
25. bears sway in the Papal hieraachy.
I. In the number of the Cardinals, who according to their first institution,
were 25, whereas the Apostles were but 12. II. In regard to the number of
Churches into which Rome Christian was at first divided, which were 25. whereas
the heavenly Jerusalem has but 12 Gates: The Churches in which they did
baptize, answering to the Gates of the City, because Baptism is the entrance
into the Church. III. In the number of the Parishes or Tribes, which in Rome
were 25; whereas the Jerusalem that comes down from above, has but 12 Tribes,
as appears by the 21 of the Revelation. IV. In the number of the Foundations of
Rome, which are 25 Cardinals, originally and anciently composing the sacred
College, that is called the foundation of the Church; whereas the Holy City has
but 12 foundations, which are the 12 Apostles. V. In the number of Angels, i.e.
Pastors who are in number 25 Pastors, Cardinals, Pastors of Pastors; whereas the
Jerusalem in the Revelation knows but 12 Angels, 12 principal Pastors, which
are the 12 Apostles. VI. In the number of the Gates of Rome, which were 25.
whereas Jerusalem has but 12. VII. In the extent of the City of Rome, which was
25 thousand furlongs; whereas the Jerusalem of St. John has but 12 thousand
furlongs. VIII. In the number of the fruits of the Tree of Life, which are the
Articles of faith, because the just shall live by faith.
The fruits in the Jerusalem of St. John are but 12. The Articles of the
Christian faith are but 12 also: but the Articles of the Popish faith are 25 in
number. He finds moreover, The number of 25 is found in the dependencies of the
Papism.
that the number 25 bears sway in all the dependances of the Empire of the
Papism; that in the greatest part of the Estates of the Papism they reckon 25
Provinces, or principal dignities. That upon the great Altar of St. Peter at
Rome there is a golden Cross of 25 hands breadth. Before the Church there are
five Gates, and one of them is not opened but every 25 years. In St. Mary Major
there are 25 Altars. The great Altar of the Church of St. Peter's, is 25 foot
square one every side. Besides all this, the Popish Altar are marked with 25
Marks, in honor of the 5 wounds of I. Christ 5 times redoubled. The same
number is consecrated in the Mass for the same reason, because of the 5. wounds
of our savior. He makes diverse observations of this nature on the Number 25
bearing sway in all the Papism, even in the Council of Trent, which began by 25
Bishops, had 25 Sessions, was subscribed by 25 Archbishops, and made 25
Articles of faith. And above all, he observes, that the Number 25 with its
square root 5, 25 a cursed number and of an ill omen.
were considered by the Heathen as numbers of an ill omen. See, says he, the
reason why the Number 666 represents the whole Antichristian Empire, it is
because it has for its square root the number 25, which is the prevailing
number in the Papal Hierarchy.

Wherers the number 144. that signifies the Church, has for its square root
the number 12, which is the sacred number of the Patriarchs and Apostles. As
for the remainder of 41, which is added to the number 625, arising from 25.
multiplied by it self, he gives many ingenious reasons for it, and which do
deserve to be consulted on the place. Why God adds a remainder of 41, to 625.
to make up 666.
Joseph Mede, who is a great Master in these sorts of things, gives a very
authentic approbation of this discovery. And it cannot be denied, but that it
is very ingenious. But I confess, I find it a little profound. However, I would
not deny, that it is the intention of the Holy Spirit. And it may be this is
the meaning of the Prophecy, Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding
count the number of the beast: For understanding may signify the wisdom of this
World, i. e. Arithmetique, which makes a part of humane sciences, to signify,
that to penetrate into this mystery of the number 666. we must use the rules of
Arithmetique, and seek for the square root of this number 666.

Besides, though one should admit all the observations of Potter as solid, this
would not destroy the common hypothesis, which is, that the number 666. alludes
to the names of Lateinos and Romiyth, in which this number is so precisely
found. For the product of 25. multiplied by it self, makes but 625. Why did the
Holy Spirit add a remainder of 41? why did he not leave the round account of
625, the product of the square root 25? or why, resolving to add a remainder,
did he not add 20 to make it 645, or 30 to make it 655; but adds precisely a
remainder of 41 to make it 666? I am persuaded, it was to make up the sum
contained in the names Lateinos and Romiyth. So that it is still true, that the
number 666 refers immediately to the name of the Antichristian Empire. But I
will not deny, but that besides this, there are other mysteries in it; and
those of Potter are very well contrived, and very probable. To strengthen them,
Two considerations to strengthen the opinion of Potter,
these two considerations may be added; First, That the number 12. signifying
very naturally the whole Gospel ministry, because of the twelve Apostles, who
are the first Ministers of the Gospel; the number 144. must also naturally
signify the body of the whole Church; because as the number 144. is produced by
the multiplication of 12, in like manner the body of the Church is formed by
the multiplication, which is produced by the Gospel ministry, of which the
twelve Apostles are the founders. On the other hand, as the number 666 is
produced by the multiplication of 25, so the Empire of the Papism and of the
Beast is produced by the multiplication, caused by his false ministry and by
his false Pastors, who originally were 25.

Seoond, The other consideration is, that the Holy Spirit signifies the Gospel
ministry by 12, and the body of the Gospel Church by 144. And on the contrary,
the body of the Empire of the Papism by 666. to teach us the proportion that is
between the false Church and the true. 144 is but the fifth part of 666. The
true Church in the time of the oppression and reign of Antichrist, is almost
nothing in comparison of the false Church.

CHAP. XVI.
The Explication of the seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation, where the Empire
of the Papism is plainly described.

IN pursuing the picture of Antichrist, according to the Prophecies, to show
that that Empire is found in the Papism, we enter on the 17th Chap. of the
Revelation, which contains an explication of the 13th Chapter. It Is the same
thing under less obscure aenigma's. In the 13th Chapter we have seen two
Beasts. Here only one of them is seen; but by way of amends for that, here is a
woman seen, sitting on the beast. So that here are two persons.

So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness; v. 3.
and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. See here the first Beast of the
13th Chapter, i. e. the Roman Empire. The Beast is of a scarlet color. It was
the color of the Roman Empire. Its Emperors, its Senators, and its Grandees
were clothed with purple; all the World knows that. In the following Chapter it
shall be proved, that these two Beasts, this here, and that of the thirteenth
Chapter, are one and the same Beast. On this Beast sits a woman: See here a
thing that speaks, and that loudly. A woman: who does not see, that this
signifies a Church? Did any ever see in the Prophets an Empire, as an Empire
represented under the image of a woman? Is not this the Emblem, which the Holy
Spirit uses every where, to represent either the true Church, the Spouse of
Jesus Christ; or the false Church, that is become unfaithful to her Spouse. A
woman sitting on a Beast. This is visibly a Church engraffed, and sitting upon
an Empire. It Is the Roman Church engraffed on the Roman Empire. But we shall
touch again on this reflection in the following Chapter.

And the woman was arrayed in purple, v. 4.
and scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls.
It Is not the Beast only that is of a scarlet color, the woman also is clothed
with purple. The Church, which is engraffed on the Empire, has taken the
color of the Empire. The Pope, the Cardinals, the Ministers of the Court of
Rome, are distinguished by the imperial purple and scarlet. The gold, the
pearls, and the stones, increase the magnificence. Nothing is more proud than
the pomp of the Roman Court. She holds a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations. Poculum Aureum Plenum Abominationum. It Is a wonderful accident,
that the four initial letters of these four words P.A. P.A. make the name of
Papa in the Bible of the Latins and of the Roman Church. Let him believe it
that will, that this was purely by chance, but I cannot believe it. This Woman
is a Prostitute, an adulterous Woman, a Church unfaithful to Jesus Christ her
Spouse. She is represented to us, making the Kings of the Earth drunk with the
Wine of her Fornications. These are her Abominations, her Superstitions, her
false Worship, her Idols, and her false Religion, wherewith she makes people
and Kings drunk by her unhappy persuasions. The figure is borrowed from those
debauched Women, that give delicious liquors to their Gallants to inflame them.
The cup of gold, into which all these abominations are poured out, is the
pretended infallibility. This Doctrine contains all the superstitions and the
errors of the Roman Church, as a Cup. It retains and unites them together.
Without this, all would run out, as wine out of a vessel. It Is a Cup of gold:
for this pretended privilege of infallibility, would be the most precious
thing in all the World to him that should have it. This Cup of gold, signifies
also that pompous outside of ceremonies, and those so glittering externals,
which contain disguised abominations and idolatries. The People drink the
poison by favor of the Cup. They receive the idolatry by favor of the pomp,
and the fair outside.

Upon her fore head was a name written MYSTERY Babylon the great, v. 5.
the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth. It Is the description of
the Roman Church. She bears written on her forehead MYSTERY; for it is the
mystery of iniquity, as we have seen before. All there is Mystery, all there
appears like Religion, it is the proper name of Religions: but the truth is,
it is a mystery of iniquity, a Religion full of abominations. It Is a very
remarkable thing, that the Popes did sometimes bear this name MYSTERY written
in the forepart of their Miter. A Venetian Author assures us of it, and Joseph
Scaliger says, that he had seen them so marked. It Is the great Babylon. We
have seen why she is so called; Babylon was once the Fountain of all Idolatries.

And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the Saints? v. 6.
It Is no longer the Beast that sheds the blood of Martyrs; it is the Woman. It Is
no longer the ancient Roman Empire; it is the false Church? it is the Roman
Church that uses the paws of the Beast, the Arms of the Empire, and of Kings,
to persecute the Church. As in the second Beast of the 13th Chapter, the image
of the Beast, the Roman Church, though she is but an image of an Empire, gives
order for the killing of the Saints.

The Beast that thou saw, was and is not. v. 8.
It Is the Angel that speaks, explaining the vision to Saint John. The Empire,
which thou have seen represented by the beast, is the Roman Pagan Empire, that
tends toward its end, and of which two thirds are already past. He must ascend
out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition. That Empire must very
speedily be brought to nothing. But after it shall have been destroyed, it
shall arise again out of Hell, under another form, under the name and the form
of a Church. It Is the head that was wounded to death, and which was to revive.
But this second Empire, that must raise up the first again, and spring from its
ashes, shall finally perish; whereas the Empire that shall be given to the
Saints, shall never perish.

And they that dwell on the Earth, etc. shall wonder, when they behold the
Beast, that was, and is not, and yet is. And the Inhabitants of the Roman
Empire shall comprehend nothing of this mystery. They shall see, that the Roman
Empire shall be abolisht, Rome shall cease to be the Mistress of the World by
the fall of the Emperors; and all on a sudden they shall again see Rome
mounted up again to the same dignity. The Beast was. The Roman Empire has
been. He is not; the Empire has ceased. And yet is: and yet they shall see
this Empire return, without knowing how. This prodigy will make them dizzy and
enchaunt them.

Here is the mind, which has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, v. 9.
on which the woman sits. We have seen seven Heads on the Beast on which the
Woman sat. These seven Heads signify two things. 1st. Those seven Mountains on
which the Roman Church is raised, by reason of the seven Mountains of Rome,
which is its Metropolis. It Is a Character that makes her remarkable; for she
has always been called Septicollis.

These seven heads are also seven Kings, v. 10.
five are fallen, and one is; and the other is not yet come. These seven Heads
signify also the seven Kings, that is to say, the seven sorts of Sovereign
Governments; under which this Empire has passed, and must pass along. First
Kings. 2d. Consuls. 3d. Decemvires. 4th. Tribunes of the people. 5th. Perpetual
Dictators. These five are fallen, these five Governments were passed in St.
John's time. The one is, viz. the sixth, that is the Government of the
Emperors; and the other is not yet come; that is to say, the seventh Head,
which is that of the Popes, is not yet come. And when he comes, he must
continue a short space. I formerly believed, that these words might be applied
to the Pope and to the Papism; but I believe it no longer; and to understand
them, we must read the following verse.

And the Beast that was, v. 11.
and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goes into
perdition. It Is it may be designedly, that is to say, to render the Prophecy
more obscure, that the H. Spirit has inverted, the words. We must therefore
resume the last words of the foregoing verse, join them with these here, and
place them all thus: And the eighth King is also of the Beast, which was, and
is not. He is of the seven; and when he shall come, he must continue for a
short space, and then goes into perdition. See here an eighth King, that
belongs to the Roman Empire. And this eighth King is of the seven, he is of the
number of the seven Governments. It must necessarily be, that this eighth King
must come from hence, that one of the seven is divided into two. And it is the
Head of the Roman Emperors divided into two. For the Roman Emperors are
either Pagans, or Christians. The conversion of the Emperors made so great a
change, that the Christian Emperors deserved to be reckoned for an eighth head.

However, because they last but a short space, and because in respect of their
Temporal, they were perfectly like the foregoing Emperors, the Holy Spirit
ranks them under the seventh head. And when he comes, he must continue a short
space. That is to say, when the second part of the Head of the Emperors shall
become, viz. the Christian Emperors, it shall not continue long. Indeed the
Christian Emperors did not possess the Empire, but from the conversion of
Constantine to Valentinian the third about 130, or 135. years. Besides, the
transposition of the words which I have supposed, does not make any difficulty
here; for if I made a commentary, I could easily bring examples much more harsh
in the writings only of the N. Testament.

And the ten Horns, which thou saw, v. 12.
are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet: but receive power as
Kings one hour with the Beast. These are the ten Kings, or the ten Kingdoms,
into which the Roman Empire was rent, when the Imperial power was destroyed in
the West. And the same time that the ten Kings were made; the Beast, that is to
say, the second Beast of the 13th. Chapter, the Beast with two Horns, the Roman
Church, began to form its Empire. This is one of the most remarkable places of
the Prophecies, to find the point of the birth of the Antichristian Empire.
Therefore it deserves a larger reflection, which shall be found afterward in
its proper place. v. 13.
These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast.
These ten Kings, or these ten Kingdoms, shall voluntarily submit themselves to
the yoke of the Roman Church. For she shall not obtain her dominion by the way
of Conquest, but by the way of illusion, of seduction, and persuasion. She
shall persuade the Kings of the Earth to give her their power. In truth this
did so happen. The Princes doting on this Idol of St. Peter's Chair, the
Apostolical See, raised this throne so high, that it was like afterward to
have swallowed them up.

These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them. v. 14.
They shall lend their arms and their power to the Roman Church to smother the
truth. But the truth of Jesus Christ shall surmount them, shall enlighten them,
and get such a victory over them, as shall be happy for those that are
overcome. England, Sweden, Denmark, and many other States have been already
overcome in this manner.

And he says unto me, v. 15.
the waters which thou saw, where the whore sits, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues. This Woman, this corrupted Church, shall
have the multitude for her, she shall ascribe great honor to her self from
thence, and make use of that as an argument, that she is the true Spouse of
Jesus Christ.

And the ten Horns, which thou sawst upon the Beast, these shall hate the
whore, v. 16.
and make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire, etc. We shall have occasion afterward more than once to reflect on these
words. Therefore we shall say nothing of them at present.

The woman which thou saw, is that great City, v. 1^.
which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. The great City is not precisely
the City of Rome, it is the Roman Church, that has its seat at Rome on the
seven Mountains. This is an important truth, that the great City in the
Revelation signifies not Rome precisely, but Rome conjunctly with its
Ecclesiastical Empire. It should be proved; but we must reserve the proofs for
another place, where it will be very material for us to fix this, what the City
signifies.

CHAP. XVII.
Babylon in the 17th. and 18th. Chapters of the Revelation is Rome
Antichristian and Papal, and not Rome Pagan.

THe 17th. Chapter is one of those wherein the description of the Antichristian
Empire is certainly contained. We have applied it to the Sea of Rome with the
same success as we have done the foregoing Prophecies. But we have some
considerations to add, to prove that that City spoken of in that Chapter is
Rome together with its Empire, of Christian become Antichristian.

That Rome Christian and not Pagan is Spiritual Babylon and the seat of
Antichrist
It Is a place where the Papists find themselves reduced to mighty straits. They
have confessed, that the 11th. and 13th. Chap. of the Revelation spoke
concerning Antichrist. But because in the 11th. Chap. the seat of Antichrist is
called the City where I. Christ was crucified, they will not acknowledge it to
be Rome. And because in the 13th. Chap. Rome. is not named, they will by no
means have it to be found there. But in this 17th. Chap. they are forced to see
Rome in the city on seven Mountains, and in that great city, that reigned over
the kings of the Earth. This brings them to the last extremity, and we need but
see what they say on this point, to convince them that their Holy Roman See is
the seat of the Antichristian Empire.

1st. They say that Rome in this 17th. Chap. is Rome Pagan and not Rome
Christian. Bellarm. l. 3. de Pontif Romans c. 13.
The falsness of this supposition is evident. First it is clear that the Beast
which carries the woman, The first Beast of the 13th. Chapter and that of the 17th
are the same.
is the same with that Beast that arises out of the Sea in the 13th. Chapter This
had seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten Crowns, and upon his
heads the name of blasphemy. The Beast in the 17th. Chapter is described after the
same manner. The Woman sat upon a scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of
blasphemy, having seven heads and ten Horns. Secondly the Beast of the 13th.
Chapter arises out of the Sea. C. 13.1. C. 17.3.
And I saw a Beast rise up out of the Sea. That of the 17th. Chapter ascends out of
the bottomless pit, or the deep. Chap. 17.8.
The Beast that thou saw was and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, or the deep. Now the deep and the sea in the visions are the
same thing. Thirdly, Chap. 13.3.
It Is said of the first Beast, that all the World wonders after the Beast. That
all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, v. 8.
whose names are not written in the book of Life. It Is said also of that in the
seventeenth. Chap. 17.8.
That they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names are not written in
the book of Life, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
Fourthly, The Beast in the 13th Chap. makes war with the Saints, Chap. 13.7.
and it is given to him to overcome them. That in the 17th Chap. carries a
Woman, Chap. 17.^.
that makes her self drunk with the blood of the Saints. Fifthly, The Beast of
the 13th Chap. receives a deadly wound in one of his heads, which dies and
rises again. The Beast in the 17th Chap. was, and is not, Chap* 7.7, 8.
and must ascend out of the bottomless pit, or the deep; was, and is not, and
yet is. Who does not see, that the latter is an explication of the former? The
Beast was, and is not, because his head has been mortally wounded. He is
however, and must ascend out of the bottomless pit, because his deadly wound
shall be healed, and the Beast shall rise again. Sixthly, The Beast in the 13th
Chapter has ten horns, which signify ten Kings. That in the seventeenth has
likewise ten Horns; and the ten Horns which thou saw are ten Kings.

Why there is not a Woman sitting on the Beast of the 13th Chap. as there is on
that of the 17th.
These so exact and perfect resemblances plainly show, that these two Beasts are
one. But why is there a Woman seen sitting on the second Beast, and none upon
the first? we have already hinted the reason. In the thirteenth Chap. there are
two Beasts, which by the confession of all Interpreters, even the popish ones
themselves, signify one and the same thing; only the Beast with the seven heads
signifies the Empire; and the Beast with two horns like those of a Lamb,
signifies the Religion. And these two Beasts together signify the Roman Empire
raised up under the name of the Church, and under the outside of Religion. In
the 17th Chap. the second Beast, which signifies the Religion, does not appear;
but in the place thereof appears a Woman riding upon the Beast to signify the
Religion. And this for the greater clearness, because the seventeenth Chap. is
an explication of the visions of the thirteenth. For the greater clearness, I
say; for the corrupted Church is much more clearly signified by a Woman, than
by a Beast. In all the Scripture, the Church is always represented to us as a
Spouse, and a Woman; and the corrupt and idolatrous Church, as a debauched
Woman, and an Adulteress. This is too well known to need any proof. Behold
therefore this corrupted Woman, this adulterous Spouse of J. Christ. And the H.
Spirit could not have described her in a more lively manner, and more proper
for us to know her.

This being supposed, that the Beast in the thirteenth Chap. of the
Revelations, is the same with that in the seventeenth, the later cannot be Rome
Pagan, because by the consent even of all the popish Interpreters, the two
Beasts in the thirteenth Chap. represent the Empire of Antichrist. On this
confession, and upon what we have just now proved, we argue thus:

The Woman in the seventeenth Chapter, by the consent of the popish
Interpreters is Rome. And by the consent of the same Interpreters, the Beast in
the thirteenth Chap. is Antichrist.

Now according to what we have just now proved, the Beast of the seventeenth
Chapter, and the thirteenth are one and the same Beast.

Whence it is clear, that Rome must be the seat of Antichrist, and that Rome in
the seventeenth Chapt. is not Rome Pagan.

That Rome in the seventeenth Chapter is not Rome Pagan, appears not only by
the comparison, Rome in the 17th. Chap. is not Rome Pagan.
which we just before made of the two Beasts, but also if we consider the Beast
of the 17th Chap. all alone, and without reference to that in the 13th Chapter.

God never calls the Pagan Societies Whores and Adulteresses.
I. First of all, there is a prostitute, adulterous, and debauched Woman sitting
upon this Beast. Every one knows, that in the Holy Scriptures Adultery
figuratively signifies Idolatry. Now we shall never find any one single
instance, where the Holy Spirit calls the Pagan Societies, Women and Spouses,
Whores and Adulteresses. This name is given only to a corrupted Church. And the
reason is plain, because the Pagan Societies having never plighted their faith
to God, have not broken it, and never were his Spouse: they are not therefore
unfaithful and adulterous in his account. So that this adulterous Woman cannot
here be Rome Pagan, but that Rome that has plighted her faith to Jesus Christ,
and broken it; that Rome that styles her self the Spouse of Jesus, and yet does
prostitute her self to others.

Secondly, This Women is represented to us, as having in her hand a Cup of
abominations of her whoredoms, of which she makes all the World to drink, i. e.
she endeavors to draw all the Nations of the Earth to her Idolatry. Now Rome
Pagan never troubled her head to change the Religion of those people she had
conquered, nor to force them to worship the same Gods as she did. On the
contrary, every one knows, she carried strange Gods in Triumph, and built
Temples for them within her own walls.

Thirdly, These words, the Beast which thou saw, was, and is not, and must
ascend out of the bottomless pit, or the deep, can by no means agree to Rome
Pagan. For this plainly signifies, that the Empire spoken of must perish, and
be swallowed up, and afterward be re-established. Now Rome Pagan and its
Empire have been swallowed up, but as Rome Pagan it is not raised up again.
Besides, we may observe by the by, that we do not deny, but that Rome Pagan is
represented by this Beast; for the Beast represents the Roman Empire in its
whole duration, and in both its periods, the Pagan period and the Antichristian
period. The Beast which thou saw, was, and is not; there is the Pagan
Period: and must ascend out of the bottomless pit, or the deep; there is the
Antichristian period.

Fourthly, It is said of this Beast, And the Inhabitants of the earth, whose
names are not written in the book of Life, shall wonder, seeing the beast which
was, and is not, and yet is. This signifies, that men shall give him homage,
and that this homage shall be given to him only by the enemies of Jesus Christ,
and the Reprobates. It is not therefore Rome Pagan; for the true Christians
obeyed, and gave a voluntary homage to the Roman Empire in its Pagan period,
just as the other subjects of the Empire. But since it was raised up again, and
is no longer what it once was, they have no longer obeyed it.

Fifthly, That which is said of the ten Kings, can by no means agree to Rome in
its Pagan Period. The ten Horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have
not yet begun to reign, but shall receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast. v. 12.
Let them inform us a little, where are, and who are the ten Kings, that shall
reign the same time with Rome Pagan; who in Saint John's time had not begun to
reign, and who yet were to begin their reign at the same time with the Roman
Emperors. Is it not plain, that these are ten Kings, that must receive their
birth from the ruin of the Roman Pagan Empire, and compose an Antichristian
Roman Empire, under the rule of the prostitute and adulterous Woman, i. e. the
revolted Church and Spouse of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, v. 13.
How can these words agree to Rome Pagan, these, i. e. these ten Kings have one
mind, and shall give their power and strength to the beast. Did those Kings,
whose Kingdoms were conquered by the Roman Pagan Empire, voluntarily give their
power to the Beast? Did not Rome Pagan by mere violence ravish away those great
Estates, of which she formed her Empire? Can it be said, that the Kings that
were conquered and subdued, had one mind? Did they reign together with Rome
Pagan? were they not destroyed, and their Kingdoms reduced into Roman
Provinces? This therefore can in no wise agree to the Pagan Period of Rome; but
does very well to the Antichristian and Papal one. For it is true, that the ten
Kings compose this Ecclesiastical Empire, and submit themselves unto it. It is
true, that they have one mind, and that they have given their power unto the
Beast. For it was not by Force of Arms, that Rome has acquired this second
Empire; but by persuasion, by illusion, by the false religion, by the communion
of idolatry, and by the Chimaera of an Empire of Jesus Christ on the Earth.

This is the only thing to be met with which the popish Interpreters have to
oppose, to prove that Antichrist must not sit at Rome, and that Rome in this
Chap. is Rome Pagan: say they, the ten Kings shall hate the Whore, How the ten
Kings shall destroy Antichristian Rome after they have built it. C. 17. v. 8,
16. De Romans Pontif. l 3. cap. 13. sect. 2.
and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire. It Is the Argument of Bellarmin, which all the rest have adopted. St.
John, says he, predicts, that the ten Kings, that shall divide the Roman
Empire, and under the reign of whom Antichrist shall come, shall hate the whore
clothed in purple, i. e. Rome, and shall make her desolate, and burn her with
fire. How then, shall she be the Seat of Antichrist, if in that very time she
must be overthrown and burnt? A mighty riddle, hard to be solved! We need but
read on, Saint John immediately adds, v. 17.
For God shall put it into their hearts to fulfill his Will, and to agree, and
give their Kingdom to the beast, until the Word of God shall be fulfilled. Who
does not see, that these are two distinct times? In one of them the ten Kings
shall give their power to the Beast, by the cheat of a false piety; and in the
other, being better instructed, and recovered foolish fondness, they shall
spoil that Empire, which they shall have formed by their complaisance? Men must
be hardly pressed upon, that have recourse to such vain evasions as these.

The foolish self-contradiction of the Papists.
But observe their foolish self-contradiction. Here Bellarmin and his adherents
say, that the ten Kings, which shall divide the Roman Empire, shall come in
Antichrists time: and that these are the same, that shall make the Whore
desolate, i. e. that shall destroy the City of Rome. viz. Rome that is here
spoken of, and which Bellarmin himself defines by the Whore clothed in purple;
that is to say, Rome. Now how will the ten Kings, that must not come till the
end of the World, according to them, be able to make desolate and burn Rome
Pagan, which has no longer been in being for above 1300. years? The ten Kings
associated with Antichrist only three years and a half before the end of the
World, will be able to make desolate no other Rome, than what will then be in
being. Now Pagan Rome will be no more; it will be Rome Christian, whose Empire
he supposes must subsist to the end of the World, and to the reign of
Antichrist. Men must have lost their understanding, and be given up to a
reprobate sense, so to contradict both themselves and the Truth with so much
dishonesty.

Lastly, it is clear by the following Chapter, which is the 18th, that the
great City which reigns over the kings of the earth, cannot be Rome Pagan,
but Rome Antichristian. In the 18th Chap. he calls her Babylon, whom just
before he called the great city; and even the popish Interpreters agree also,
that that Babylon is Rome. Now he describes the fall of that Babylon, i. e. of
Rome, in such a manner as cannot agree to any other but Rome Antichristian.
First, He says, v. 3.
that all Nations have drank of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. We
have already seen, that this signifies that Idolatry, to which Babylon has
drawn the Nations by her Charms and Enchantments, which does not agree to Rome
Pagan. Secondly, v. 4.
He says, come out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues. It Is plain, this cannot be understood
of any thing but of an Idolatrous Church, whence God would draw forth his
Elect. God never commanded his faithful Servants to go out of Rome Pagan, they
always remained in it. Thirdly, and lastly; the manner in which the ruin of
this Babylon is described, can by no means agree to Rome Pagan. The Holy Spirit
represents it as a City burnt, and entirely reduced to ashes; the Merchants
whereof, and they that gained by her, behold her desolation and her burning
afar off. And to conclude, he signifies, that it must be such a fall, from
which she shall never rise again. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a
great Millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall
that great City Babylon be thrown down, c. 18. v. 21.
and shall be found no more at all. Now this is not yet happened to Rome, she
has been taken, and retaken, and pillaged several times; but yet she subsists
still; so that this cannot be understood, but of the last ruin, that must happen
to Rome Antichristian.

And thus you have the proofs that show, that that Rome, which all the popish
Interpreters as well as we, do find in the 17th and 18th Chap. of the
Revelation, cannot be Rome Pagan: proofs which I call a demonstration; for I
maintain, there is no man, that can resist the force of them.

The confession of the modern Papists, that Rome must be the seat of
Antichrist. Ribera. Viega. Cornelius a Lapide.
And the modern popish Interpreters have felt the force of them. At this day
they do confess, that it is not Rome Pagan. But see what they say, viz. that
that Rome that now is, toward the end of the World, shall be corrupted, become
idolatrous, debauched; that she shall shake off the yoke of Jesus Christ, and
carry her disorders as far as Rome Pagan. But yet however, that it must not be
the seat of Antichrist; who must be accompanied with his ten Kings, have his
habitation at Jerusalem, and come to Rome when it is turned Idolatrous and
Pagan, to destroy and ruin it; as he will also do. See the words of Viega on
the eighteenth of the Revelation. One may plainly gather from the infinite
number of precious merchandises, and of all sorts that are here noted, that
Rome in the last times after her Apostasy, shall attain to sovereign power, and
great riches, and that her Empire shall extend it self throughout the World
upon the ten Kings so often named. For that these mighty riches do not belong
to Rome Pagan; it is clear by these words, Come forth of Babylon, my people.
For this shows, that it is not ancient Rome that is here spoken of, in which
there were no faithful ones; but that Rome that shall flourish in the last
times. Then therefore the City of Rome shall greatly flourish, and its Empire
shall be very large. She shall live in pleasures, and have great abundance of
all things. And at the same time, she shall be enslaved to Idolatry, be full of
Superstitions, sacrifice to Doemons and false Deities. And by reason of the
vast quantity of the blood of the Saints, that shall be shed by her under the
Emperors of Rome, by a terrible but a very righteous judgment of God, she
shall at last be made desolate, and burnt by ten Kings. See what the force and
evidence of the truth has drawn from the mouth of the worshippers of Rome.

What prodigious whimsies are these? To what extremity must these men have been
reduced? The Scripture speaks of but one Antichristian Empire; The Church never
imagined there was more than one, and lo here are men that make a couple. The
first shall be in Rome corrupted; for according to them, Rome in the last days
must have a great Empire, must subdue Kingdoms, and draw them together with her
self into a revolt from Jesus Christ. Lo therefore, there is one Antichristian
Empire at Rome: what need have we of another Antichrist sitting at Jerusalem?
Moreover, this Chimaera is founded on this principle, that the Beast in the
13th Chapt. which according to them represents Antichrist, is not the same with
the Beast in the 17th Chap. with the great City that rules over the Kings of
the Earth, and with Babylon spoken of in the 14th and the 18th Chapt. Now we
have confuted this ridiculous imagination, and have demonstrated that Babylon,
the great City, the Beast of the 13th and the 18th Chapter are the same thing.

This Chimaera is so ill to be defended, that the more modern Papists have
abandoned it, and at last have been forced to acknowledge, that Rome must be
the seat of Antichrist; that the great City spoken of in the 11th Chapter,
where Jesus Christ was crucified, is not Jerusalem, but spiritual Babylon,
spoken of afterward: and Bernard de Montreuil, that has write since the rest,
though he retains that ancient dream, that Antichrist must come out of
Jerusalem; yet he confesses however, that the Babylonish Empire and the
Antichristian are not two Empires, that must succeed one another, and the one
destroy the other, according to the supposition of those we were just now
speaking of. He confesses that Rome shall be the chief City of Antichrist's
party, that Antichrist must defend it, and that the ten Kings of the Beast are
the subjects of its grandeure, and that of Antichrist, the head of the League,
the Monarch of the time. He calls Antichrist the Prince of the Apocalyptical
Babylon. And he confesses, that this Babylon is Rome; therefore he
acknowledges, that Rome must be Antichristian, and the capital City of
Antichrist, Babylon, says he, is the Mistress, the Queen, the Empress of the
kingdom of Antichrist. Not daring to call Rome Babylon, On the 24. Chapt.
he defines it however by Western Babylon who being perverted, instead of
obeying the Laws of the piety of the first age, shall in her pride cause her
self to be called the great and the independent, and shall become much worse
under the reign of Antichrist, than ever Eastern Babylon was. After these
confessions, there remains no other help for the popish Doctors, to hinder
their Rome from being acknowledged to be Rome Antichristian, but the Chimaera
of the three years and a half's duration of Antichrists kingdom.

It is true, say they, that Rome must be possessed by Antichrist, that he must
establish Idolatry there, that Rome must become worse than Rome Pagan was in
the time of St. John, and than Eastern Babylon in the time of the Prophets; but
this must last but three years and a half. When therefore we have destroyed
this ridiculous dream of three natural years and a half, we shall have
demonstrated, that Rome at this day is the true Seat of Antichrist, and then I
shall make them this Argument.

Babylon in the Revelation is the seat of the Antichristian Empire, the same
thing with the prostitute Woman, with the Beast with seven heads and ten horns.
All this is Rome become Antichristian, and the seat of Antichrist. Which is
plain, either by what has been invincibly proved, or what the Papists
themselves have confessed. Now this Antichristian Roman Empire must endure, not
1260. natural days, but 1260. prophetical days, i. e. 1260. years.

Therefore it is evident, that the Antichristian Empire, which must be at Rome,
cannot be that chimerical Empire of Antichrist of three years and a half, that
must conclude 45. days before the end of the World; and that it is that of Rome,
which has endured so long already. The consequence is plain, because all do
acknowledge, the World must not, and cannot according to the decrees of God,
endure yet twelve or thirteen hundred years, to make room for the reign of
Antichrist; and a thousand years more at the end of that, to make room for the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the truth and certainty of which we shall prove. So
that if the reign of Antichrist must endure 1260. years, it is necessary that
it subsist at this present time, and that it has begun a long time since. This
is, I say, a demonstration, which I have in readiness for these Gentlemen, when
I shall have proved the only thing in this argument, that can be called in
question, viz. that the 1260. days of Antichrist cannot be understood of so
many natural days. I would prove this truth presently, were it not that it
regards the time of the duration of the Antichristian Empire, of which we shall
have occasion afterward to speak. Wherefore now we shall continue to give you
the explication of the Prophecies, that contain the Character of this
Antichristian Empire.

CHAP. XVIII.
More proofs, that the Characters of the Antichristian Empire do agree to the
Papism. A Proof drawn from the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle of St, Paul
to Timothy. The translation of that passage amended.

SOme persons reading our second just Prejudice against popery, have admired;
that to make up the character of Antichrist, we have not among other places of
Scripture inserted that Text of St. Paul, in his first Epistle to Timothy, in
the beginning of the fourth Chapter. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in
the later times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared with an hot iron. Forbidding to marry, and abstaining from
meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them that
believe.

The reason why this Text was not made use of in the book of Prejudices against
Popery.
It Is certain, this is one of the clearest Oracles of the New Testament, and one
of the most lively pictures the Holy Spirit gives us of the Antichristian
Apostasy. But I could not make use of it, in drawing my prejudices against the
Roman Church; because prejudices must be drawn from things either exceeding
notorious, or confessed and granted. My prejudice was not this: No Religion
that has Antichrist for its head, can be the true Religion. Now the Roman
Religion has Antichrist for its head, etc. If I had formed it thus, I had been
obliged to bring all the proofs that are to be met with in the H. Scripture, to
maintain, that the Roman Religion is the Antichristian Empire; and then I must
not have omitted this. But I argued otherwise in that prejudice; and said, I
judge not, but I prejudge. I do not pronounce, that the Pope and his religion
are Antichrist. But I say, it is very strange and surprising, that all those
places of Scripture, where, by the consent of Interpreters of all ages and of
all parties, Antichrist is spoken of, may be so easily and so justly applied to
the Pope and his religion. Though at the bottom popery should not be pure
Antichristianism, yet there is no likelihood, that God would describe
Antichrist and his reign in such equivocal terms, that all that that is
confessed to be spoken concerning Antichrist, may be adopted to him that should
be the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and to a Society that should be his faithful
Spouse. It Is plain, that to reason thus, I was to look for no other Texts, but
those that are not contested; such as are the second Chapt. of the second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, the seventh of Daniel, the 11, 13, 17, and 18th
of the Revelation, whereas the Romish Doctors do dispute about all, in the
words of St. Paul in the fourth Chapter of his first Epistle to Timothy. They
dispute about the particular sense and the general scope of it. They turn this
Oracle off on the Encratites, Manichees, etc.

Now, that I am not a drawing prejudices, but do dispute, I must prove; and
though the proofs are contested, yet we must not abandon them in a controversy.
We must only make them so evident, that they may be clear to all reasonable
men. And this is that, which we are about to do in pursuing the History of the
Characters of the Antichristian Apostasy, by this passage of St. Paul,
according to that sense of it, which the learned Joseph Mede gives us; who has
given us abundance of light into the Prophecies, but into none of them more, or
more happily than into this.

The division of Chapters and Verses in our Bibles is not authentic.
First of all we must rectify the translation of this passage; and in the
beginning give notice, that the divisions of our Chapters, being not altogether
authentic, and being often times made with little judgment, no regard must be
given to this, that the 4th. Chapter of the 1st. Epistle of Timothy begins with
these words, Now the Spirit says expressly that in the later times, etc. For in
truth the sense begins at the last verse of the foregoing Chap. and we should
read thus, Without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifest
in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up into Glory. But the Spirit
says expressly, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils. This observation
alone is enough to persuade all those that sincerely seek after the truth, that
the Apostasy, which the Apostle speaks of, is the Apostasy of Antichrist. For
he makes so clear an opposition of this apostasy to the Mystery of Godliness,
that it is impossible not to discern, that he opposes Mystery to mystery,
religion to religion; the mystery of Godliness to the mystery of iniquity, of
which he himself has spoken to us in his 2d. Ep. to the Thessalonians. And as
by the mystery of iniquity, all the world acknowledges, that he means the
religion of Antichrist; so all the world ought to acknowledge, that in this
place the Apostasy of the later times opposed to the Mystery of Godliness, is
the Antichristian Empire and Religion. And that the reason why the Apostle has
not here repeated the term of the mystery of iniquity, is because he did
believe, that it would be easily understood. It seems natural, that after he
had said the mystery of Godliness is great, he should say, but the mystery of
iniquity shall publicly appear, which shall be an Apostasy from the faith. He
would without doubt have thus expressed himself, were it not, that having spoken
elsewhere of the Mystery of iniquity, any one might easily perceive that in
this later place he makes an evident allusion to it, and that so it might
easily be seen in the Apostasy, which he describes.

Our common translation does not well represent St. Paul's sense.
Our version renders the Text of St. Paul thus; Now the Spirit says expressly,
that in the later times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their conscience scared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry; commanding to
abstain from meats, which God has created for them that believe. Looking on
the Text in this form, the first sense that offers it self to our sight is,
that these Doctrines of Devils are those which he adds in the following words
viz. Forbidding of marriage, and abstinence from meat. Now I confess, that ever
since I understood how to read and understand, I have always suspected this,
and I did not understand how and why the Apostle St. Paul should characterise
those opinions that seem so little criminal, as the forbidding of Marriage to
certain persons, and abstaining from certain meats at certain times, by such
black names as the Apostasy from the faith, and the Doctrines of Devils. I did
conceive, that the law of Celibacy in the Priests and Religious persons, might
well be called a Doctrine of Devils, by reason of those impurities that are
the consequences of it; but as for abstinence from meats in Lent and on certain
days, one cannot deny, but that it is a very extravagant expression to call it
a Doctrine of Devils. It must be observed therefore, that apostasy from the
faith, and the Doctrine of Devils, do not refer to the forbidding of marriage
and of meats, as the Genus referrs to the Species, as if these forbiddings of
marriage and of meats, were themselves Doctrines of Devils. They are only the
Characters of those that are to teach the Doctrines of Devils; that is to say,
that they shall be persons that shall make a profession of great austerity, to
that degree, that they shall abstain from marriage, which God has instituted,
and from meats which God has allowed us to use. And so this is the sense of
the words. The true sense, and the true translation of this Text of St. Paul.
In the latter days, there shall happen an apostasy and a revolting from the
faith; men shall give up themselves to seducing spirits and to doctrines of
Demons, which Doctrines shall be taught by hypocrites, liars, men whose
consciences are seared with a hot iron; and who making a great show of their
austerities, shall abstain from marriage, and from meats which God has
created, imposing a necessity on all their devouts to observe celibacy, and the
Laws of their fasts, that consist in distinction of meats. And to translate it
exactly according to the Greek Text, the sense is clear without a Paraphrase.

I. Now the Spirit says expressly, that in the latter times some shall revolt
from the faith, giving themselves up to deceiving Spirits and Doctrines of
Demons.

II. And this through the fictions of liars, men whose consciences are seared
with a hot iron.

III. Forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving by the faithful, and by them who know
the truth.

Those that understand Greek and the rules of Grammar, will easily see, that
the words cannot be otherwise translated. For the Greek pronoun some, and the
participle giving up themselves to, cannot be construed with liars and
forbidding; seeing the pronoun some, is in the nominative case, as they call
it, and the other words are in that which they call the Genitive. So that it
must not be translated, some giving up themselves and teaching lies. But liars
and forbidding must be construed with these words through the hypocrisy, and be
rendered through the hypocrisy, or through the fiction of liars. For the
proposition that signifies [in,] signifies also by or through. And our (French)
Interpreters have so translated it, teaching lies through hypocrisy. But
instead of teaching lies, it should be translated, through the hypocrisy of
those that teach lies, or liars. This Text thus rectified by a right
translation, presents two things to us, the first is the Antichristian Apostasy
and its Characters; the second is the fountain of this Apostasy, the men that
must cause and promote it. The first is the apostasy from the faith, to give up
themselves to seducing spirits and the doctrine of Devils or Demons; the
second is the hypocritical Authors of the Law of celibacy, and of abstinence
from meats. Let us examine whether these two things do well agree to the Papism.

CHAP. XIX.
That the term of Apostasy, is not too big to express the Papism by: that
Apostasy signifies rebellion and Idolatry: why the H. S^ripture uses such high
words to describe the popish Idolatry; and higher than those, it makes use of
to describe the Pagan Idolatry.

THe first Character of the Antichristian Empire that appears in this place is
apostasy: some shall revolt from the faith.

It Is exactly the very same word, which Saint Paul uses in the second Chap. of
the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, where by the confession of all, he
describes the coming of the Antichristian Empire. That day shall not come,
except there come a falling away, or an apostasy first, and that man of sin,
the son of perdition, be revealed. The Idea which the word Apostasy raises in
the mind.
This term of apostasy at this day begets a dreadful Idea in men's minds. It Is
used to signify an entire renunciation of the faith. Especially when it is
joined with the word faith, as it is here, They shall fall into an apostasy
from the faith; it seems to signify as much, i. e. an utter renunciation of the
Christian faith. Now the Papism makes great use of that, and pretends to prove
it cannot be called an apostasy, and a renunciation of the Christian faith,
because it retains that entire, receiving the Apostles Creed, the Nicene, and
Athanasius's, in the sense of the Scripture, and of the Church.

Before we show, that this makes nothing against our hypothesis; The word
Apostasy which signifies Antichrist, shows he must not be a Jew.
I will observe one thing, which I have not found any as yet have sufficiently
confirmed. It Is this, that the term of apostasy, which signifies the Empire of
Antichrist, evidently shows, that the Antichrist of the Romish Doctors, is a
mere Chimaera. According to them, he must be a Jew that must style himself the
Messiah, assemble all the Jews at Jerusalem, make war on the Christians, and
destroy Christianity. If he be a Jew by nation and religion, he will not be an
Apostate. For according to the Scripture usage of the word, and that of the
languages at this day, none are called Apostates, but those that abandon the
true religion to embrace a false one. So that see here is a new proof, that
Antichristianism must establish it self in Christianity, and the Subjects and
Prince of this Empire, must be Apostates from the Christian religion, which
cannot agree to the Jews. We must not say, that this Empire of Antichrist is
called an apostasy, because it will cause the Christians to revolt, and make
them Apostates: For it is plain, that the head of this Empire must himself be
an Apostate. That day shall not come, except there be first a falling away, or
an apostasy, and the man of sin the son of perdition be revealed. One may
plainly see, that this signifies, before the apostasy of the man of sin happens.

The revolt of the Papism from the faith is very well called an Apostasy.
At the present to make appear, that the revolt of the Papism from the faith is
very justly styled an apostasy, diverse things must be observed. And first, That
this word in its original, does not signify all that, that men at this day
would signify by it. The verb whence this word is derived, signifies no more
than to depart from any person or thing. They that understand Greek, cannot be
ignorant of that.

So Apostasy originally signifies a departure; it is to depart from the
obedience which is due to any one. It Is to refuse him, either the whole, or a
part of that homage, that is due to him. It Is not without a great mystery of
Providence, that such extravagant Ideas, and such as are not according to the
intention of the H. Spirit, should be affixed to the names designed to signify
the Antichristian Empire and its head. For example, the man of sin, the son of
perdition, the Beast with seven heads full of blasphemies, the great Whore, the
Cup of abomination, Antichrist. Excessive Ideas, I say have been affixed to
these names, as if hereby it were signified, that the person and the Empire,
designed by these names, should have nothing of the Christian; yea, nothing of
humane in it, and that they should be prodigies of impiety, madness, blasphemy
and impurity. The same thing has happened in the term Apostasy, to which has
been affixed the Idea of an utter renunciation of the faith. And this has not
come to pass without a singular Providence of God, who would not have
Antichrist to be known, to the end that during his birth and establishment no
man might oppose him.

Our second Observation is, that the word apostasy in the Scripture use of it,
answers to the Hebrew word mered rebellion, The word Apostasy properly
signifies rebellion.
and marad to rebel. It Is very usual with the 70. Interpreters, to render these
Hebrew words by those of, to apostatize and apostasy, whether it be rebellion
against God, or rebellion against men that is treated of. The Reubenites and
Gadites, returning home, after they had assisted their Brethren, to settle
themselves on the other side of Jordan, built an Altar on the bank of the
river. The other Tribes imagining, that the Reubenites and Gadites intended to
sacrifice on that Altar against the commandment of God, they say to them, ye
rebel against the Lord. Josh. 22.18, 19.
Timeredou, which in the Greek is rendered, you are become Apostates from the
Lord. On the other hand, the Reubenites justifying themselves, say, the Lord
knows, if this thing be done in rebellion. They use this word mered, and the
septuagint have rendered it by that of apostasy. When the Spies returned,
Joshuah and Caleb being desirous to induce the Israelites to pursue their
journey, to endeavor the conquest of the Land of Canaan according to the
intention of God, they say to them, revolt not, al timeredou; and the Greek
has it, do not turn apostates. Instances are without number, and it is
sufficient to have intimated it.

According to this use of the word, which is certainly the Scripture use of it,
it is evident that the Papism is a true apostasy, a rebellion, a revolt. To be
an Apostate in the Scripture sense, Apostasy does not always signify a total
defection.
it is not necessary that a man should utterly abandon the true God. When the
Israelites on this side Jordan, accuse the Reubenites of an intention to turn
Apostates, do not revolt, they do not so much as suspect, that they intend
entirely to renounce God, but only to build an altar against the Altar of
Moses, to sacrifice to that God that brought them out of Egypt. Do not
apostatize, say they to them, in building you an Altar besides the Altar of the
Lord our God. When Caleb and Joshuah say to the Israelites, on the occasion of
their refusing to go toward the Land of Canaan, do not apostatize, they did
not apprehend, that the Israelites were minded to choose another God; but only
that they would revolt from the orders of the true God, but yet without
renouncing him for their God.

How the Papism destroys the Articles of faith.
It is not therefore necessary, that the Papism should be a formal and entire
renunciation of the faith; it is enough that it is a revolting from the faith.
Now certainly the Papism is so. There are none of the Articles of the Christian
faith, which it does not destroy, and against which it does not plant its
engines. There are rebels, that do in words acknowledge a Prince for their
King, who yet do not cease to make war against him. This is the ordinary way of
rebels. The Papism does perfectly the very same thing. It does homage in words
to the principal Articles of the Christian faith, but indeed it fights against
them, it destroys them. It acknowledges a God manifest in the flesh; but it
revolts from this Article, and destroys it by another carnal God, or a God in
the flesh, i. e. the Bishop of Rome, to whom it ascribes a double power, which
agrees to Jesus Christ alone, and which even Jesus Christ himself would not
exercise, while he was here upon Earth. It destroys also this God manifest in
the flesh by another Jesus Christ, incarnated, breaden, transubstantiated,
indivisibly united to the accidents of the bread; and of this false Christ it
makes a true Idol. It believes one Jesus, the redeemer of the World; but it
destroys this article of faith, and revolts from it, in saying, the Saints are
our mediators, in offering to God their merits, besides the merits of Jesus
Christ, and in praying to God in their name and by their intercession. It
believes one only God; but it revolts from this article, in supposing new
objects of worship, to which it renders a truly religious worship. It believes
that the blood of J. Christ cleanses us from all sin; but it revolts from this
Article diverse ways, in seeking out strange satisfactions, and in supposing a
purgatory, the use of which is to expiate the sins of men.

It Is an Apostasy from the faith to introduce that Which is beside the faith.
And that we may clearly understand, that all these things and others of the
like nature, may very well be called an Apostasy from the faith, we must again
make use of that passage in the 22th Chapt. of the book of Joshua, where the
Israelites say to their brethren, do not apostatize in building an Altar,
besides the Altar of the Lord. These words show, that one may be an apostate,
not only by bringing things into Religion, which are against Religion, but also
in promoting things that are besides Religion. For they do not say against the
Altar, but besides the Altar. Now in this sense, it is clear, that the Papism
is an Apostasy. For besides the true object of worship, it introduces new
objects of religious adoration; besides the sole and only Jesus, it introduces
many saviors; besides the sole Intercessor, many intercessors; besides the
sole sacrifice another sacrifice; besides the true Sacraments, false ones. The
Papism introduces doctrines and worship, both against the faith and besides
the faith, therefore it is a true revolting or apostasy from the faith.

The Papism is an Apostasy, if it he considered alone.
My third Observation is this, that to have a right knowledge of the Papism, we
must not look upon it as is usually done, as compounded with the opinions and
worship of Christianity, which it has retained. This is one of the great
artifices of the Devil and his Agents, to make us consider, the Papism as a
Religion that confesses one only God, that worships J. Christ God coeternal
with the Father, the Redeemer of the World; that believes the resurrection, the
life everlasting, Hell, and the last Judgment. The eye confounds these fair and
great objects, with the additions of popery. And this confused and indistinct
view makes the additions to be esteemed as nothing, and appear very
inconsiderable, on the account of that Christianity that lies at the bottom.
That therefore we may know the Papism, and what name we ought to give it, we
must consider it alone, by it self, and as separated from the Christian
Religion. Then it is certain, it will deserve the name of an apostasy or a
formal revolt from the faith. For do but look only on that Troop of second
Gods, of Pilgrimages, Indulgences, Masses, Saints, Patrons, Intercessors, she-
Saints, Images Relics, Idols, the bread that is worshipped, prayed to, and
before which men prostrate themselves. This is a true Paganism, and a formal
apostasy from the Christian faith.

My fourth and last Observation, to justify that the terms of Apostasy from the
faith, which the Apostle makes use of here, are not too high, but agree very
well to the Papism is, Apostasy, especially signifies Idolatry. Neh. 9.26.
that Apostasy, though the word ordinarily signifies all sort of rebellion, yet
when Religion is spoken of, it particularly signifies Idolatry. So when the
Levites confess the sins of their Nation and of their Fathers, they say, they
were disobedient, and they rebelled against thee. The septuagint renders it,
they departed from thee, and fell into apostasy; by which, without doubt, is
meant the Idolatry of the Israelites. For that was the sin that did principally
draw down the wrath of God upon them. And the septuagint also says of Ahaz,
that plunged himself into the Idolatries of the Heathens, that he apostatized
from the Lord with a great apostasy: 2 Chro. 28.
not that he did absolutely abandon the God of his Fathers; 2 Kings 16.15.
for he kept the brazen Altar to enquire of the Lord therewith.

God gives such an Idea of the popish Idolatry as seems very extravagant.
If all the Idolatry of the Church be called apostasy, and deserves that name;
it is certain, the Idolatry of the Papism may well be called apostasy. And
hereupon, it is worth the while to enquire into the reason, why God speaks in so
high terms concerning the Idolatry of the Papism: He calls that Church, the
great Whore, that makes the Kings of the Earth drunk with the wine of her
fornication. He says, she holds in her hand a Cup full of abominations; and
all this, because of her Idolatry. This looks as if it were very extravagant,
when applied to the Idolatry of the Papism. For after all, its false worship
does not appear to be any great matter; the Church of Rome invocates Saints;
but besides that, they are the friends of God, she invocates them only in
relation to God, because he has honored them with his gifts. She believes,
that the good things which are asked of the Saints, are not obtained of them,
but because those Saints themselves do obtain them of God by their
intercessions. She prostrates her self before Images; but the worship she gives
them is relative, and goes up to their original. And lastly, it does not
appear, that this popish Idolatry does come near the Idolatry of the Heathens,
to which nevertheless the Holy Spirit has not given such frightful names. Here
then are two things to be enquired into. First, why God gives us so odious an
Idea of this popish worship. Secondly, why he speaks of it in higher terms then
he does of the heathen Idolatries.

As to the first question, I answer, that we need but plainly lay open the
invocation of Saints, their mediation, their intercession and the adoration of
their Images, The invocation of Saints, and their intercession ruins the
fundamental Article of the exaltation of J. Christ, at the right hand of his
Father.
to see that there is nothing more Antichristian, that does more subvert
Christianity, and one of its principal Articles, viz. that of the exaltation of
Jesus Christ at the right hand of his Father. This sitting at the right hand of
his Father does not merely signify, as is supposed, an elevation to the glory
and dignity of Sovereign Monarch of the Church. It signifies also that
perpetual assistance, if I may use this term in that sense; that perpetual
action, by which Jesus is always present with God his Father, to speak to him
in our behalf, and to obtain of him all things that we stand in need of. He
assists at the right hand of God, because that is the hand of glory, and glory
is for him. The right hand also is the hand of good omen. Therefore evil omens
are called sinister ones, i. e. very bad ones. Now in this respect the assists
at the right hand of God for us, and therefore it is that sitting at the right
hand is immediately joined with intercession. Who is he that shall condemn? It
is God that justifies; it is Christ that has dyed, or rather that is risen
again, who also sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.
And elsewhere, he is entered into the holy places with his blood newly shed, and
lives there, that he may make intercession for us. So that the honor of the
exaltation of Jesus Christ consists in these two things; First, his royal
dignity, that exalts him above all the Church. Second, the glorious privilege
of continually assisting before the Father, to be our Mediator.
These two great advantages belong to Jesus Christ in such a manner, that they
are incommunicable to every one besides. This was what was typified by the high
Priest, who alone entered into the Holy of holies to present his incense there.
Whosoever therefore communicates these two advantages to the creature, he
destroys the article of the exaltation of Jesus Christ, and consequently
promotes an abominable doctrine.

The Papism destroys the two parts of the exaltation of J. Christ.
Now this is that which the Papism does, it destroys the exaltation of Jesus
Christ by dividing it. First of all, it destroys his exaltation, that is to
say, his royal dignity, in giving him an Associate under the name of his Vicar,
who assumes as well as Jesus Christ, the name of God, Holy, most Holy and
Holiness. For to make a Vicar for a King without his order, and against his
will, is to give him a Rival. Supposing therefore, that this great office of
Vicar of Jesus Christ, be not according to God's intention; it is certain, that
it is the highest of all encroachments on his right and authority; and which
deserves the odious names of apostasy and abomination.

Secondly, It overthrows the mystery of his exaltation, in giving Jesus Christ
companions in his incommunicable privilege of standing before the Throne of
God, The privilege of assistikg before the Throne of God, is incommunicable to
any one besides J. Christ.
and being at his right hand to present our requests unto him. This is
evidently that which makes the connection of this Text of Saint Paul, now the
Spirit says expressly, there shall be a departing from the faith, with the
foregoing one, God manifest in the flesh, etc. received up into glory.
Naturally received up into glory, should follow after justified in the Spirit,
and come before seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the
World. But he would place the words, received up into glory, at the end of the
mystery of Godliness, and immediately before the prediction of the Apostasy, to
signify, that that Apostasy should principally aim at the ruin of that Article.
For in truth it seems, The Papism pulls down the Lord from his glory.
that the mystery of iniquity did principally design to draw down Jesus Christ
from the Heavens, and tumble him again into a low estate. It encloses him in a
bit of bread, it makes him descend into unclean entrails, it sends him to the
draught, it causes him to be eat by Mice and Rats. It takes away from him his
arms, legs, head, life, and leaves him without any action or defense. It sets
up rivals to him in all his offices, and divides his honor to wood and stone.
All this well considered, deserves the name of abomination and apostasy.

It Is an abomination to invocate any creature before Gods face.
That this may be more plain with respect to the invocation of Saints, and to
take off the veil, under which they hide the horrors of that worship; we must
observe, that that sitting of Jesus Christ at the right hand of his Father,
imports a very near presence of the Son, who assists perpetually before his
Father, and who is perpetually before his face, environn'd and (as I may so
say) buried by the rays of that glorious face of God. Thou shall not have other
Gods before my face. This face of God is a lively spring of light, that
swallows up whatsoever there is of brightness in the most excellent creatures,
in such a manner, that they are as nothing in the presence of God. There is but
one creature, that is not swallowed up by these rays, and that is the humane
nature of the Son of God. That is upheld by the glory of the second Person, to
which it is supernaturally united. By reason of this, the Son may be invocated
before the face, and in the presence of the Father, because the glory of the
Son is not swallowed up and annihilated by the glory of the Father. But it is a
true abomination, to go and worship, and invocate a simple creature before the
face of God, and at the foot of his Throne.

This consideration does utterly destroy that vain pretense, which so many take
for a good reason. One may pray the Saints which are on Earth, to pray to God
for us; because being far from the face of God, they are not swallowed up by
his beams.
We lawfully pray the Saints on Earth to pray to God for us, say they; what
greater harm is there to invocate them in the heavens? The difference is plain;
the Saints that are upon Earth, are conceived as far from God, their rays are
not swallowed up by the infinite brightness of the Divinity, we may give them
some homage. But to go and serve them before the face of God; to give them a
religious worship in Heaven, it is insolently to violate the Majesty of God. And
under what pretense soever it may be done, it is a bold attempt, that is not
pardonable. A Subject that is highly preferred, when he is alone, and far from
his Prince, may receive great honors from those that are beneath him. But both
the smallest and the greatest, when they are in the Sovereign's presence, are
equal. It would be a piece of high Treason, to render homage to a Subject
before the Sovereign's face. The Sun swallows up all the Stars. The glory of
God in his Throne annihilates all glory. It Is therefore an odious crime, to go
and render homage to the Saints at the foot of the Throne of God. If I honor
the Saints here below by my praises and my imitation of them, this does not
reach to the Throne of God, it is to men that I speak; but my prayers reach
Heaven. There is but one Subject that does invocate in the behalf of others in
the Heavens, and but one Object that may be invocated. This is what St. Paul
means, There is but one God, and one Mediator between God and men. There is but
one God, that may be prayed to in the Heavens, and only one Jesus that prays
for men. So that I conclude, that the invocation of the Saints is an
abomination and an apostasy, because it highly affronts Jesus Christ, in that
double manner as we have said, both because it snatches away from him the
privilege of assisting alone at the right hand of the Father, and because it
violates the Majesty of God, in whose presence all grandeur disappears. So far
are the Saints from being more worthy of adoration because of their
glorification, that on the contrary, the more they are glorified, and the
nearer they are to God, the more are they as nothing and invisible. Add to
this, that J. Christ has reserved it to himself as an incommunicable piece of
his glory, that we should call on the Father in his name. The Papism calls on
him in the name of Saints; for it invocates him by the merit and intercession
of the Saints. This is another abomination. As to the adoration of Images, it is
so plain an abomination and apostasy, that it cannot at this day any longer be
defended, but by denying it, and saying, God forbid that we should adore or
serve Images, we only make use of them, as a means to ascend to their originals.

The Idolatry of the Jews was never carried so far as that of the Heathens.
The second difficulty is, that the Holy Spirit speaks of the Antichristian
Idolatry, in more odious terms than it does of the heathen Idolatry. Which is
very strange. But none will any longer wonder at it, when he considers in what
manner God under the Old Testament spoke of the Idolatry of the Israelites. One
thing is as certain as it can be, viz. that the Israelites in their Idolatries
did never totally abandon the true God. They worshipped a golden Calf in the
wilderness; but they pretended it was an Emblem of that great God that had
brought them out of Egypt. They served Baalim, the Gods of strangers, it is
true; but this was in associating them with the true God, whose worship they
never did reject. If ever there was a time of corruption, it was that of Ahab,
who to the sin of Jeroboam added all the abominations of the Tyrians, which his
wife Iezabel taught him. Nevertheless at that very time, Elias confesses, that
the nation halted between two, worshipped God and Baal at the same time.

Yet it is described in higher terms.
It appears therefore, that the Idolatry of the Heathens, who worshipped none
but false Gods, was more criminal; however, the Holy Spirit speaks against the
Idolatry of Israel, with a thousand times more violence and vehemence than
against that of the Heathens. The Prophets describe the heathen Idolaters as
fools, as brutish persons, that had lost their senses, who of the same log of
wood made a God and a footstool. But when they speak of the Idolatry of
Israel, they do it in such terms as make persons of any modesty to blush. For
there are no odious Ideas in the most infamous prostitution, which the H.
Spirit does not bring in in his description of them. We need but consult the
16th Chapter of Ezech. and many more places of the other Prophets, where the
Idolatrous Jewish Church is represented as a woman void of shame, that
prostitutes her self to every comer, that sits in the cross ways, that offers
her self, that opens her bosom, that speaks such words as modesty cannot hear,
and does abominable actions.

The reason of this difference is plain, it is because the Idolatry of the
Heathens is considered only as a simple fornication, The Idolatry of the Church
is most criminal, and why.
and the Idolatry of Israel as adultery. Every one knows the difference between
simple Fornication and Adultery. Almost all nations have punished adultery with
death. But the Heathens did scarce think that fornication was a sin; the Jews
themselves counted it as a trivial matter. A man sees the worst of crimes
committed upon a woman that belongs not to him, without being much moved at it;
but the least debauches of his own wife stir up his jealousy, and kindle his
anger. He cannot speak of them without vehemence, and in terms that signify the
greatness of his grief. And it is not an unreasonable resentment. A woman with
whom he has made no treaty, that has not plighted her troth to him, nor he
his to her, does him no wrong, there is no shame redounds to him thereby;
whereas the crimes of his wife cover him with infamy. It Is the same with God;
the Idolatry of the Heathens in his opinion is but a simple fornication, he
has made no treaty with them who are without the covenant; no shame, nor
dishonor is reflected on him from their debaucheries. But he has treated with
the Church, she is his Spouse; he calls her so; it is a figurative expression
that he every where uses. We need not therefore wonder, if he be more sensible
of those wrongs, that are done him on her part. Although the Idolatries of the
Heathens were greater, considering them precisely in themselves, than the
Idolatries of the Church; yet however, God would not be so much offended by
them. A Husband is more offended by the light debaucheries of his Spouse, than
by the greatest crimes of one that is only his Kinswoman. It signifies nothing,
that this woman does not deny her Husband her favors; if she suffer others to
share with him, her crime is not the less. It signifies nothing also, that the
Church does not refuse to give adoration to the true God; if she suffer the
creatures to be sharers with him, she is not less criminal; she is still an
Adulteress, and her crime is an abomination.

It is easy to apply all this to the Christian Church; the bands of the sacred
marriage that unite her to her God are much more noble, glorious and strait
than those that united God to the Synagogue. So her adulteries also are much
more worthy to be condemned. It signifies nothing, that she commits them with
those that are called the friends of God. A King is not the less offended by
the disorders of his Spouse, that prostitutes her self to his favorites, than
if she prostituted her self to strangers. And thus, I think, enough has been
said to justify this, that the Papism is a true Apostasy, and that that term,
and others, though higher, are not too big to signify the abominations of the
Antichristian Empire.

CHAP. XX.
The deceiving Spirits which St. Paul speaks of, are Evil Spirits, The Doctrine
of Demons is that Doctrine, that has Demons for its Objects, and not that
which has Demons for its Authors. There is a perfect conformity between the
Theology and the Religion of the Heathens about Demons, and that of the Papism
about Saints and Angels, mediatory Spirits.

Evil spirits are the first Authors of this Popish Idolatry.
SAint Paul, continuing to describe the future Antichristian Empire, says,
that this Apostasy shall be joined with the spirit of seduction: They shall
give up themselves to deceiving spirits. It Is very indifferent whether by these
deceiving spirits, or spirits of error, as some copies have it, we understand
men, or spirits separated from matter; for both the one and the other yield a
true sense. It is true, that the Antichristian Apostasy was formed by the
deceit of certain deceiving spirits, who being mad upon a false devotion,
seduced others both by their examples and also by their bad arguments. Yet I
rather incline to believe, that by deceiving spirits we are to understand evil
spirits, which were the first Authors, in the first place, of the worthip of
Relics, afterward of the invocation of Saints, and at last of the adoration
of their Images. This was the way whereby superstition began to be established,
viz. the visions, by which Relics were discovered. We learn from Saint
Austine, that the bodies of the Martyrs Gervais and Protais were found out by
St. Ambrose by the help of a dream. Confess. l. 9. c. 7.
The same time God revealed to this holy Bishop in a dream, where lay the
bodies of the Martys Gervais and Protais, who many years were kept in the
secret of God, and preserved free from corruption, to the end they might be
discovered, to stop the fury of a woman that was Empress, and mother of the
Emperor. The visions whereby Relics were revealed came from the father of
lies.
I will not wrong Saint Ambrose so far, as to accuse him of feigning this
vision to deceive the people, to work false miracles, that he might make the
party that were for the word consubstantial, to triumph over Arianism. But this
is certain, it was a deceiving spirit that did abuse St. Ambrose, and did
discover these Relics to him to make Idols of them, because then the Relics
of the Saints began to be abused. The Miracles that were wrought by Relics,
either are fabulous stories of Impostors, or the productions of him, who is the
father of lies. Saint Austin says, that those who were possessed were
delivered by them. Besides that, the greatest part of those that were possessed
in those ages, were melancholy persons; it is not hard to conceive, that the
Devil would play these pranks to establish Idolatry, that was then receiving
its birth. He could do no less than go out of a body, feigning to be forced to
it by the virtue of Relics, and merit of a Saint. A blind man received his
sight by putting a cloth to his eyes, that had touched the Coffin of the
Martyrs. The people by their credulity make such sort of Miracles every day.
The Miracles were false ones.
St. Austin had a good share of this credulity. But though it were true; the
Devil might do things much harder than this, of restoring sight to a man, that
had not seen for some time. Besides, God, that was willing, that his decrees
should be accomplished, let loose the rains to the spirit of illusion. We need
but follow the History of the Church, and the Legends of the Saints, and there
we shall find every where these dreams, these visions, these apparitions of
Souls; Saints speaking, the Virgin Mary appearing to her devotoes; the whole
designed, not to confirm the Doctrines of Christianity, but the invocation of
Saints, the adoration of the Virgin, the adoration of Images, the Mass,
Purgatory and other parts of the Antichristian abomination. And this fountain
of seduction was opened in part by deceiving spirits among men, wicked,
superstitious wretches, Priests and Monks; in part by the wicked spirits, that
perpetually surround men to deceive and mock them.

The last Character of the Religion of Antichrist here expressed, is the
Doctrine of Devils, or of Demons, giving up themselves to deceiving spirits,
and to Doctrines of Demons.

The Doctrines of Devils, or of Demons what they are.
The common opinion is, that by the Doctrines of Devils, or of Demons, we are
to understand those Doctrines, of which the Devil is the Author and inventor,
and that bear upon them a Diabolical Character. Joseph Mede has made a new
conjecture upon it, and which I believe we owe to him. He understands by
Demons, not wicked spirits, that are represented as dwelling in Hell; but
those spirits, which the Heathens worshipped as Mediators between God and men,
whom in truth in their Theology they called Demons. For then the word was not
taken in an ill sense, and Demons were properly in the Heathen Religion,
secondary Gods, subject to the great Gods. By the Doctrine of Demons he
understands a Doctrine of which Demons are the object, not the authors. And
according to him, the sense is, that men in the Antichristian Religion would
renew the Divinity and the worship of these mediatory spirits called Demons;
that Paganism shall be introduced into the Religion of Jesus Christ; that
therein shall be established a second order of Divinities, besides the three
adorable persons of the Trinity; that dead men shall be invocated in this new
Paganism, in the same manner as was practiced under the old; that their
Relics shall be honored; Statues shall be erected to them; Images shall be
consecrated for them, which shall be worshipped; that Temples shall be built
for them, and sacrifices be offered to their honor; that apotheoses, or
canonizations shall be renewed; that Miracles shall be feigned to be done by
these Images and these Demy-Gods; that Trees shall a new be set up with
Trophies, which are the Crosses, before which men shall prostrate themselves;
that it shall be pretended, that God comes to dwell here below in a piece of
consecrated bread, just as in the ancient Paganism it was pretended, that the
Gods by virtue of the consecration came to dwell in their Images.

Popery has certainly Devils for its Authors.
Which interpretation soever we follow, it is certain, that Antichristianism is
found here. It is composed of Doctrines that are truly Diabolical, and that
have Devils for their Authors. It Is a Doctrine of Devils, that has established
that Tyrant in the Church, who has exercised so much fury there, who pretends
to be King of Kings, and Lord of the Lords of the Earth; who exalts himself
above all that is called God; who says he cannot be judged by any one; but
though he should lead men to Hell by troops, he must be suffered to do it, and
be left to God to be judged. It Is a Doctrine that has the Devil for its
Author, which sets up other objects of worship besides God, that gives Jesus
Christ companions, and believers other Saviors. It was no other than the
Devil, that could inspire Christians with the thoughts of adoring Images, and
bringing in afresh that Paganism, that was once buried. 'Twas the Devil, the
father of lies, that formed that monster of Transsubstantiation, that has
contrived that profane sacrifice of the Mass; and who of a Sacrament has made
a wretched Idol of it; and so to keep to the common opinion, the true Religion
will not lose any thing by it.

By Doctrines of Demons we must understand Doctrines, that have Demigods for
their object.
However, I confess I have resolved on Joseph Mede's sense. It has not been
without weighing things; and I did a long time believe, that this
interpretation was much more ingenious than solid. But after I had well thought
on it, I judged the quite contrary; and that for these reasons.

I. First, This expression, Doctrine of Demons, does not more naturally
signify, that the Doctrine spoken of has Demons for its Authors, than it does
that it has them for its Object. For it is certain, that in all languages
these sorts of propositions are aequivocal. We say, the love of God, to signify
the love of which God is the object, more naturally than to signify that love
of which he is the Author. We say, the knowledge of bodies, to signify that
knowledge of which bodies are the objects; the knowledge of the stars, to
express Astrology; a treatise of Angels, to express a book, not made by the
Angels, but treating of them. The same aequivocal speech, and the same usage is
to be met with in the sacred books. In the sixth Chapt. of the Epistle to the
Hebrews the Apostle speaks of the Doctrine of Baptisms, Heb. 6.2.
i. e. of the Doctrine, that has Baptism for its object. St. Luke says, that
the Pro-consul Sergius was astonished at the Doctrine of the Lord, Act. 13.12.
i. e. the Doctrine treating of the Lord. Gal. 2.20. Acts 3.16.
The faith of the Son of God, and faith of his name, is the faith, not which
has Jesus Christ for its Author, but its object. And thus you see, we have
already gained one point, viz. that Grammar can put in no obstacle to this
Interpretation.

By the Doctrine of Demons, must be understood the Idolatry of Popery.
II. My second reason is, because explain it how you will, I am persuaded that
by the Doctrine of Devils, or of Demons, is meant the Idolatry which
Antichrist was to re-establish in the Church. For this is that which
distinguishes that Religion from the Christian Religion, and which renders it
abominable. It will be said, that there are some things in the Papism, which
are not less abominable than its Idolatry, that is, the usurpation of Jesus
Christ's power by the Pope. I confess it. But besides, that this usurpation is
joined with Idolatry, seeing they make an Idol of the Pope, I say, there is in
Antichristianism an Empire and a Religion. The Empire is Diabolical,
Tyrannical, Antichristian, and may well be called and Empire of Devils, as
having them for its Authors. And it is in this respect of an Empire and a
Tyranny, that St. Paul principally considers Antichristianism in the second
Chapter of the second Epistle to the Thessalonians. For there he represents the
head of this Empire, as a Tyrant that sits himself down on the Throne of God,
and was to possess the Empire, when he that then held it, was cast down. It Is
true, that he considers siders it also a little as a Religion; for he calls it
a Mystery, and says, it shall be established by false signs and false miracles.
But in this fourth Chap. of the first Epistle to Timothy, he considers
Antichristianism purely as a Religion, and not as an Empire. Therefore he
speaks only of Apostasy, Spirits, Deceivers, and of Doctrines. Now, that which
is most abominable in the Papism, as it is a Religion, is without doubt its
Idolatry, and not its heresies; and consequently, this is what we must here
understand by the Doctrine of Devils, or of Demons. For the Apostle intends by
that to note that which is most criminal in the Papism. Seeing therefore we
must necessarily understand by these words Doctrine of Demons, the
Antichristian Idolatry, why should we not believe, that the Apostle Saint Paul
calls it so by way of allusion, and comparing it with the heathen Religion and
Theology?

Antichristianism is considered in the Prophecies, sometimes as a Religion,
sometimes as an Empire.
I have just before made a distinction, which I desire may be observed, because
it is of great use for the understanding the Prophecies of the Revelation, on
this argument of the estate of Antichrist; It Is this, that the H. Spirit
sometimes speaks of it as of a Religion, sometimes as of an Empire. Indeed, he
considers it much oftener under the notion of an Empire, than under that of a
Religion. In the 13, 14, 16, 17, and 18th of the Revelation, where
Antichristianism is represented as a Beast vith two horns, or seven heads and
ten horns* and as a City called Babylon, it is under the Idea of an Empire. For
in the Prophetical visions. Beasts always signify Kings and Empires: But in the
11th Chap. Antichristianism is represented as a Religion; for it is called
Paganism, and is shadowed forth under the emblem of a Temple that is profaned.
Leave out the Court, which is without the Temple, and measure it not, for it is
given to the Gentiles. In those places where it is represented as a Whore,
where the Cup of its abominations is spoken of, and where it is said, it shall
seduce the inhabitants of the Earth by the signs that it shall work, it is
considered as a Religion; because worship, idolatry, miracles and signs belong
to Religion.

The Doctrine of Demons and Antichristian Paganism are the same thing.
III. The H. Spirit's representing the Antichristian Religion as a Paganism, is
to me a new reason, that persuades me, that in the Text of St. Paul, which we
are now discoursing of, by the Doctrine of Demons we must understand that
doctrine, of which Demons are the object. For I look on these two Texts as
Parallel; this of the Revelation, the out ward Court is given to the Gentiles;
and this, the apostasy of the son of perdition shall be a Doctrine of Demons.
Now it is certain, that in that Text in the eleventh of the Revelation is
precisely meant that Paganism, that Pagan Theology, and that Pagan service,
that were introduced into the Christian Religion, and consequently here by the
Doctrines of Demons, we must understand the Pagan Religion, that worshipped
Demons, or Antichristianism, that has made for it self a Religion altogether
like it in worshipping new Demons.

God could not but predict the introduction of Paganisin into the Christian
Church.
IV. But the principal reason that persectly persuades me, is, the ^^^ent, which
is always the best, or rather the o^^ sure Interpreter of prophecies. One thing
is curtain, viz. that there is a perfect conformity between the Thelogy and
worship of the ancient Paganism, and the Antichristian Religion of the Papism.
This was not done by chance. God permitted it, God foresaw it, and without
doubt God has predicted it. For there is no likelihood, that having carefully
marked in the Prophecies events incomparably less considerable, he should
forget this, It Is true, one may say, that the Prophecy of it is found in these
words of the Revelation, the outward Court shall be given to the Gentiles; and
in those places where the Antichristian and popish Religion is compared to
adultery, and the corrupted Church to a whore. But the first seems to me to be
too obscure, and the second too general. I cannot believe, but that God would
leave us some Oracles more clear and less general, to predict this admirable
conformity, which is between the worship of the ancient Paganism, and that of
Antichristianism. Now this Text more express and more clear then the others, I
do not find elsewhere.

To set forth this last proof in all its strength, we must consider some points
of this conformity. They may be seen already in those two Chapt. of the second
part of our Prejudices, where we have shown the conformity between Popery and
Paganism. But not to give any the trouble of leaving this book to find out the
proof of this truth, that the worship of Demons among the Heathens, and this
of the Saints in the Papism are alike, we will here give an abstract of it.

The Articles of the Pagan Theology and Religion touching Demons.
The Pagan Theology about good Demons is reserred to these Articles. I. They
said, that besides the great Gods, there were inferior Divinities, that
received all their power from the superior Gods. II. The inferior Divinities
were either consecrated Heroes, and deified souls, or spirits naturally and
originally separated from matter. III. Their office was to be mediators
between men and the great Gods, to execute their orders in favor of men, and
carry the prayers of men to those superior Gods. IV. To the honor of the one
and the other, i. e. of Demons or spirits, as well those that were consecrated
souls, as those that were naturally separated from matter, they made Images,
built Temples, and by virtue of the consecration, they made them come and dwell
in those Images and Temples. V. Besides this, they did adore and worship the
ashes and the relics of their Heroes. These are the Articles to which the
Theology of the Pagan Demons was reduced.


Paganism acknowledged inferior Gods called Demons.
First, They held inferior Divinities, that were infinitely beneath the great
Gods. It Is a thing so known, that there is no need to prove it. They called
their great Gods, Dii superi, Dii coelestes, Sovereign Gods, and heavenly Gods.
They placed these Gods in the Stars, as souls in bodies; therefore the Greeks
called them (...) runners, as always going, and always running, as Plato says
in the Dialogue entitled Cratylus. These Gods were so very much above the
others, that they believed them only immortal; for the same Plato says
somewhere, that the inferior Gods were not immortal by their nature. They
called these inferior Gods Demons, and they ascribed this distinction to
Zoroaster. In lib. de defectu graculorum.
They, says Plutarch, seem to have removed great difficulties, who have
established a species of spirits called Demons between the Gods and men. They
have found, that they are these Demons, that do unite us with the great Gods,
and do conciliate them to us; whether this Doctrine comes from the Magi and
Zoroaster, or whether it drew its original from Thrace by Orpheus, or from
Egypt, or from Phrygia.

The Papism makes no more distinction between the Saints and God than the
Heathens did between the Gods and Demons.
The Papism acknowledges the very same distinction. And they must not tell us,
that it supposes but one Sovereign God, and no inferior Gods; for the Saints
are its true inferior Divinities. It calls them Divus and Diva, as well as he
was called Divus Augustus. The Heathens put the very same difference between
their great Gods and their inferior ones, as the Papism does between God and
the Saints. For the superior Gods were almighty and eternal; and the other
were created by the great Gods, did not act but according to their orders, and
were not immortal in their own nature. The Papists cannot make a greater
distinction between God and the Saints than this. The Demons were Mediators
between God and men.
The superior Gods of the Heathens were according to them so heavenly, so
sublime, and so pure, that they could not by themselves have any commerce with
men, nor abase themselves so far as to take care of humane affairs, to govern
them immediately and by themselves. Therefore they established a kind of
Demons, Plato in Symposio.
to be as Mediators and Agents between the Sovereign Gods and mortal men, said
Plato. God does not converse with men, says the same Author; but all commerce
between God and men is by the mediation of Demons. The Demons are Messengers
and Interpreters, that come from God to men, and go from men to God. They bring
to men the presents of the Gods, and to the Gods the prayers and homage of men.
He that would see this Theology more at large, may find it in Plutarchs
discourse, de Defectu Ordculorum. In Apuleius de Deo Socratis, in Jamblichus de
mysteriis, and above all in Saint Austin, in the eighth Book of the City of
God, with Ludovicus Vives's notes. Now one drop of water is not more like
another, than this Pagan Theology is to that of the Papism. God and Jesus
Christ, say they, who are their great Gods, are too sublime for us to address
our selves directly to them. We must have mediators, that may be more of our
rank; the souls of Saints and the Angels do this office for us. They are the
interpreters of our thoughts and our wants before God; and they receive
commission to do us good an serve us. Therefore it is that prayers are
addressed to them. Therefore it is that cures and deliverances are expected from
them. Lastly, therefore it is that men put themselves under their protection.

Hesiod the first author of the deifications of souls, the first order of
Demons.
In the heathen Theology the mediators spirits were of two sorts. One were
humane souls; the other separate intelligences. The most ancient of the Greeks,
in which we see this deification of souls expressly, is Hesiod, who says, that
by the counsel of Jupiter, the great men after their death are established
guardians and patrons of mortal men, inspectors of their good and evil works,
destributors of riches, and that in this consists their royal dignity.
Therefore afterward this sort of Gods were called the Gods of Hesiod. Plato
entirely adopted this Theology, and Eusebius quotes from this Philosopher these
words touching the Heroes; Eusebius. l. 3. c. 11. de praepar. Evang.
We will for the future serve and adore their sepulchers, as of the Demons,
following the advice of the Oracle. Those that have the smallest acquaintance
with the Pagan Theology and History, The Laws of ancient Rome about the
worshipping of Saints, exactly like those of new Rome.
know this, that the greatest part of their Gods were deified men. They
themselves made no secret of it: it may be seen in Plutarch's book about the
ceasing of Oracles. The Laws of ancient Rome are express and remarkable
hereupon. Divos, and illos, qui coelestes semper beati habiti sunt, colunto;
and eos, quos in coelum merita vocaverint* That the Saints should be
worshipped, as well those that had been always esteemed the happy inhabitants
of Heaven, as those that by their merits have been exalted into Heaven. See
another Roman Law like it. Deorum manium jura sancta sunto, hos letho datos
divos habento. That the rights of the Gods Manes should be inviolable, and that
they should be reputed for Saints after their death. Is there not an admirable
Providence in this, that new Rome has re-establisht the same Laws almost in
the same terms. And who can doubt after this, whether Antichristian Rome has
renewed ancient Rome's Doctrine of Demons?

A second rank of Demons, separate spirits.
But besides, these men become Demons, that ancient Pagan Theology did
acknowledge others that were always such, and that never had been men. All the
monuments of Paganism that we have, are full of this Theology. Apuleius
expresses it in these words; De Deo Socratis.
There is another sort of Demons that are superior and more august, who being
free from the bonds and dis-engaged from the chains of body, have each of them
received a certain particular strength and power. It Is from this rank of
superior Demons, that Plato has taken those Demons, of which he believes
every man has one all his life time for a witness of his actions and a
guardian. How is it possible, that one should not perceive this perfect
conformity, between the Pagan Theology and the popish Theology? The Papists
also make two sorts of mediatory spirits.
Exactly as the Heathens did, so do the Papists make two orders of spirits,
that are the mediators and protectors of men: humane souls or glorified
Saints, and Angels naturally separate from matter. The Heathens took Guardians
from among those Demons, who had never been men; the Papists assign to each
man a guardian spirit, but he is taken out of the order of Angels. They call
him the guardian Angel; and every devout person recommends himself to his
guardian Angel, when the undertakes any thing of danger.

The Papism in the crection, consecration and worship of Images has perfectly
brought back the worship of Demons.
The Heathens to render these Demons, or these Demigods, favorable to them,
erected their pictures, and made Images of them; all the world knows that. They
consecrated these Images, and persuaded themselves, that by virtue of that
consecration, the spiritual Gods came to dwell in that matter, to which they
had given a shape. The makers of Images, says Tertullian, give bodies to the
Demons. One may see this Theology very distinctly expressed in a Dialogue
entitled Asclepius, attributed to Hermes Tresmegistus, which at least is of
some antiquity, and was in some esteem among the Heathens, seeing Apisleius
took the pains to translate it into Latin. It Is a marvel, says he, that
surpasses all other marvels, that man has found a way to make Gods. Our
Ancestors were greatly deceived by their incredulity touching the Gods, and had
but little regard to religion and the purity of the Divine service. They
invented an art of marking Gods; Because they could not make souls, and join
them to insensible bodies, they called the souls of Demons and of Angels, to
put them into their Images, and in the holy mysteries, by which means these
Images obtain the power of helping or hurting. See altogether pure popery. They
may say what they will, that they believe not that there is any virtue in the
Images: yet however, it is true, First, That in the Papism, an Image, that has
not been consecrated, according to the Ritual, cannot be exposed to the public
devotion of the people. Secondly, That Images not consecrated, are reputed of
no virtue; whereas those that are consecrate, do often work miracles, or the he
and she-Saints work miracles by them. But if you would have any thing that is
yet more like to the Doctrine of the Heathens, touching the power of
consecrations, to draw the Gods into their Images, you will find it in the
Doctrine of Transsubstantiation, and the real-presence. As the Heathens
believed, they did by their invocations draw down their Gods into their brass
and marble; so the Papism by the virtue of consecration draws down its God into
a morcel of bread, and there encloses it fast.

The ancient Heathens defended themselves in this matter, just as our new
Heathens. You deceive your selves, said they; we worship neither copper, nor
silver, nor gold, nor other matter of which the Images of the Gods are made,
etc. But in these signs we adore and worship the Gods.

Lastly, the Heathens did adore and serve the Relics of their dead men and of
their Demons. 'Twas to the honor of these dead men, that the feasts were
made, that are called inferiae, parentalia, parentationes and novemdialia, and
a hundred other things, whence we have elsewhere showed its perfect conformity
with the services of the papism for the dead. We have heard Plato quoted by
Eusebius, telling us, we must worship the sepulchers of the Hero's. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Arnobius, Eusebius, etc. tell us, the Temples of the false Gods
were nothing else but the Tombs of the Heroes. And this is exactly what the
papism imitates; its Temples, and its Altars are garnisht with Relics; and it
would believe, that a Temple would not have all that it must have, if there
were not some bones of a Saint under the Altar.

Thus you have that which persuades me, that the Apostle designs the worship of
the papism by the doctrine of Demons? It Is this exact conformity that is found
between the ancient Doctrine of Demons and the mew. I think nothing can be
objected but this, viz. that the word Demon in the H. Scriptures is never
taken in a good sense. It always signifies those wicked spirits, that seduce
men in this World, and must torment them in the other. Whereas the Heathens in
their Theology by Demons understood those kind spirits, which are the
mediators of commerce between God and men. Joseph Mede answers to this, two
things.

The word Demon in the Scripture is not always taken in an ill sense.
First, That the usage of this word Demon in the sense of the Pagans, for Gods
of the second rank, was not unknown to the writers of the new Testament. Saint
Luke in the 17th Chap. of the Acts, introduces the Athenians, saying of Saint
Paul, that he is a setter forth of strange Demons. In the same Chap. Saint
Paul says, that he found the Athenians too much addicted to the worship of
Demons. In the 9th Chapter of the Revelation Saint John says, that the
horrible plague that fell on men, hindered them not from worshipping of Demons.
The people there spoken of, that came from above Euphrates, horsemen to the
number of twenty thousand times ten thousand, are in all likelihood the Turks.
And those that are smitten with that plague, are the Christians, to whom the
adoration of Demons is attributed, because they worshipped Saints and Angels.

The second thing, that Joseph Mede answers, which is very certain and very
solid, is, that the Heathens sacrificed and rendered their homage to evil
spirits, and not as they pretended to Angels, The Heathens and the Papists in
believing they worship good Genius's, serve the wicked spirits.
and to the happy Spirits; that are Administratours under God. Because these
holy creatures are too much given to the service of God, and too much in the
interests of their great master, to arrogate to themselves and receive any of
that homage that men would render to them. The Heathens therefore in their
intention served good Genius's, but indeed the wicked Demons? It Is the same
with the Heathens of the Antichristian Empire. They intend to serve the Saints
and Angels; but those pure and happy Spirits, have no mind to receive such
worship. It goes to them that refuse it, it goes not to God who abominates it.
It goes therefore to the Devils, that take it for themselves, and rejoice in
it; so the Antichristian Idolatry may justly be called by the same name as the
Heathen Idolatry. For they have the same model', the same principles, the same
ceremonies, and they go to the honor of the same Prince of darkness, whose
Empire they increase.

CHAP. XXI.
What is the Character of those, that were to establish Idolatry in the
Christian Religion. They are Priests and Monks, Authors of the Laws of Celibacy
and of fasts. How many fables and fictions have been invented by these men
seared in their Consciences.

WE are much obliged to the H. Spirit speaking by the mouth of S. Paul, that he
would in this Text add the Character of the persons that were to cause
Apostasy, What must be the Characters of those, that should teach Doctrines
concerning Demons.
and teach this doctrine of Demons. For at last these terms of Apostasy and
the doctrine of Devils, or of Demons, being general, the Subjects of
Antichrist would always have been able to have saved themselves, by the help of
the doubtfulness and ambiguity of them, in saying, that every heresy is
apostasy, and every lie is a doctrine of Devils. But see here, that which makes
the meaning of Saint Paul exceeding clear. The doctrines of Demons were to be
taught by Hypocrites, enemies to Marriage, and such as shall forbid the use of
meats. By the hypocrisy or fiction of liars, seared in their conscience, that
will forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats, which God has created
for them that believe.

It may be, there is nothing in the Prophecies more admirable, and more
particular. We have already observed, that we must not take this as if it were
here the doctrines of Devils, which the Apostates from the Christian Religion
were to teach. The. Holy Spirit shows it us by what they have of fair and
specious, to the end we may know them by those particulars, for which they
greatly value themselves.

We here see their Character, and afterward the means whereby they are to
advance this Apostasy and worship of Demons. Their Character is, that they
greatly affect outward austerity, in abstaining from Marriage, and depriving
themselves of the use of ordinary meats. The means they use to establish this
Worship of Creatures, and the theology of Demons, is Hypocrisy, Fiction and
Lying.

I know not whether one cannot see in this pourtraiture the Roman Clergy in
general, and the Monks in particular, that so greatly value themselves upon the
Law of Celibacy, their Fasts, and their abstinence from certain Meats. And
hereupon, Idolatry was established in the Church the same time the Laws of
fasting, and Celibacy were by the Monks.
that we may see how admirably the event answers to the Prophecy; we must
observe, that idolatry began in the Church precisely the very same time, and
tin the very same age, and, which is more, by the very same Authors as the Laws
if Celibacy and the Monastic life did.

It was in the 14th age, Paul the Theban and Anthony, the two Patriarchs of the
Monks, lived pretty late in this fourth age. Saint Anthony died Anno 358, and
Paul the Theban was dead a little before. 'Twas at the same time that men began
to speak of the Relics of the Martyrs, to seek after them, and attribute
Miracles to them. And a little time after, the Monks that had been hid in the
deserts of Syria and Thebais, spread themselves every where. Saint Bazil in the
East, assisted by Gregory Nazianzen and Gregory of Nyssa, established them in
Greece; from a Hermites life he made them pass to a Monastic one, and gave
them rules. Saint Ambrose in the West was as great a- Zealot for the monastical
life. In the same age, Lent, and the Fasts, that consist in the distinction of
Meats, began to be established. And it was the authors, of an zealots for these
illunderstood austerities, that pushed forwards also the worship of creatures.
For St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and the two Gregory's, are the most ancient
Authors, in whom we begin to find the worship and invocation of creatures. If
we prosecute the History of the Monks, we shall admire how they have been in
all ages the promoters of Idolatry and Superstition. We have a passage of
Eunapius the Heathen, who lived in the time of Theodosius the great, which
informs us, that the Monks were the original cause of Idolatry, the guardians
of Relics.

In the life of Edesius he makes a long complaint concerning the violence,
which the Christians had offered to the Temples of the false Gods in Egypt, and
says, that Monks were established in the place of Canopus, instead of
intelligible Gods to worship slaves. So he calls the Martyrs for Christianity;
and adds, that these Monks reducing into ashes the heads and the bones of
persons condemned to death for their crimes, made Gods of them, and prostrated
themselves before them. Let us see what they did in Saint Austin's time. Satan,
Lib. de opere Monachorum.
says he, spread abroad a great number of hypocrites, who in the habit of
Monks run over all the Provinces, without being sent, never staid long in one
place, never stood, and never sat; they sold the members of a Martyr, false or
true. They addressed themselves to all the World, and required a reward of a
rich poverty, or of a false and appearing holiness. Gregory of Tours, that
lived in the following age, Histor. Franc. l. 9. c. 6.
i. e. in the 6th, says, that the Monks came to Rome, in the night dug up
the bodies near the Church of Saint Paul, and that being gone away, they
confessed they intended to carry them into Greece, and there make them pass for
the Relics of the Martyrs. He also gives us the History of a Monk, that
pretended to come from Spain, with Martyrs Relics, and it was discovered,
that they were only roots of certain herbs, with rats teeth and some other such
like things. He adds, that there were many the like cheats at that time, who
ceased not endeavoring to seduce the poor people and the ignorant.

They were the same Monks that were the zealous defenders of Images in the
seventh and eighth Age, on which account they suffered so much, The Monks are
zealous defenders of Imager.
which gives occasion for the sad complaints of those both ancient and modern
Historians, that are worshippers of Images, on account of the great violence
that was offered to the Monks by the Emperors that were breakers of Images.
constantine surnamed Copronymus, was their mortal Enemy, as well as he was so
to Images. He made some of them be whipped, and others of them be dragged through
the streets. He is accused of having burnt a whole Convent, with the best
Library of the East. He did crush, as far as he was able, this generation of
vipers, and did severely chastise those that would not renounce this sort of
life, full of hypocrisy. The Monk Theophanes, and lately the Jesuit Maimbourg
in his History of the Iconoclastae, describe these pretended cruelties in a
tragical manner. There is somewhat of lying without doubt in what these Authors
say; but however, it is true, Constantine did use some severity against the
Monks because in a violent manner they opposed the design, which the Emperors
had to cleanse the Church again from the abomination of Images. This is not a
point that needs proof; the Historians that are for the worshipping of Images
confess it, and glory in it.

Monks are the authors of all the corruptions introduced into the Church.
In the following Ages the new orders of Monks were in the West the corrupters
of Religion. They were those that brought Transubstantiation and the Corporal
Presence of J. Christ in the Sacrament into the World. It was one Paschase a
Monk of Corbia, which first lick't this Bear into shape. They are the mendicant
Friars, that have carried the worship of the creatures, of Saints, and the
blessed Virgin, to those extravagant heights, that they are at this day
abhorred by all men of good sense, without excepting the Papists themselves.
One need not have very much understanding in History to be assured of this: The
proofs of it may be seen in our just prejudices against Popery; for there I
have showed these excesses, that smell of the spirit of reprobation; and that
they have had for their authors a Saint Dominick and his Jacobins, a Saint
Francis and his Cordeliers, and generally all the order of the Monks.

The Idolatry of the Papism was established by the Fables and fictions of the
Monks.
By what means did these persons establish Idolatry? by hypocrisy and lying: by
the hypocrisy of liars seared in their consciences. Behold preciesely the very
way by which the Roman Clergy, and generally the Priests and Monks, as well
those of the East as of the West, have established Idolatry; by profound
hypocrisy, by lies and fables. How many false visions were there to establish
the invocation of Saints? How may false miracles? You should consult the
Legends on this point; and if any will not give himself that trouble, let him
read eleven Chapters of our prejudices in the second part, from the 11th to the
23th. We have given our selves the trouble to make a considerable collection of
the horrid, filthy, shameful falsities, which the Papism, its Priests and
Monks have advanced, to uphold the idolatrous worship of Saints, Relics and
Images. And it should be observed, that this spirit of fables was introduced
into the Church, exactly at the same time that the Antichristian Idolatry began
to enter into it. The lives of the ancient Monks Paul, Anthony, Hilarion, etc.
were written by St. Jerome without honesty and judgment. The History of the
Church from this very time begins to be a Romance, where it is extreme difficult
to distinguish truth from lies.

Under Julian the Apostate Babylas the Martyr begins to work miracles by his
Relics.
For near 350. years, there was not a miracle wrought by Relics ever heard of.
But under the reign of Julian the Apostate, who succeeded the children of
Constantine, Babylas the Martyr, sometime Bishop of Antioch, made a martyr in
Decius's persecution, interred in a Suburb of Antioch called Daphne, more than
a hundred years after his death, thought of working the first miracles. Julian
the Apostate would consult the Oracle of Apollo of Daphne, who not being
willing to answer, and conjured at least to tell the reason of his silence,
said it came from hence, that the bones of the Martyr Babylas were interred
near his Temple. This is the most ancient History of a miracle wrought by
Relics, that we have been able to discover. So the corruption of Christianity
began in the same place, where the faithful began to be called Christians. It
was not very long, before miracles were seen wrought by other Relics. St.
Ambrose was informed in a vision, where the bones of the Martyrs Gervais and
Protais were interred: they went to seek them, they carried them in great pomp
to the Church, and they did not fail immediately to work great miracles. This
was found so good and so proper to beat down the remainders of Heathenism, that
this torrent gained ground every where.

Miracles wrought by Relics were looked upon as new in the 4th Age. Orat.
adversus Games.
But that which is highly observable, is, that the Authors who report these
facts as true, confess, that this was new, and had not been seen since the
Apostles time. St. Chrysostom speaking of Babylas says; if any one will not
believe the things done by the Apostles, let him mind those that are done in
this age, and cease impudently to deny the truth. He does not send them back to
the times immediately foregoing, he does not say, if any one will not believe
the Miracles that are always wrought in the Church, let him believe that which
he sees at present. But he sends them back to the Apostles, as if nothing of
the like nature had been seen since them. St. Ambrose also says it plainly
enough, speaking of the Miracles wrought by the Relics of Gervais and
Protais. He reckons up the Miracles of these two Saints, Epist. and Marcell.
Soror* l. 7.
and finds nothing like it since the Apostles time. Wherefore after he has
made an enumeration of the Miracles of these Saints, he makes one of those of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, which he sees renewed, and says nothing of any
that were wrought in the ages immediately foregoing. St. Austin, that was very
fond of the same superstition, makes the same acknowledgement in the 8th
Chapter of the 22th Book of the City of God, whence the Papists pretend to draw
so great advantage to themselves. It Is true, he there makes a History of many
Miracles wrought by Relics, but he acknowledges this is all new. We have
given order, says he, for the making public memoirs and books, for the
reading of these Miracles before the people, seeing that in our time the signs
and miracles of the ancient times were renewed. It was therefore new, and had
not been since the ancient times.

Now it is certain, that these pretend miracles had for their Author the Spirit
of lying, and for their spring the Hypocrisy of Liars. It was the Devil that
abused these good men, The fable of Protais and Gervais very plain in St.
Ambrose.
to lead them to superstition and idolatry. that which St. Ambrose himself
says of those Saints Gervais and St. Protais, is very proper to make one
suspect a cheat. The inhabitants of Milane desire him to build in their City a
Temple like that at Rome. I Ubi supra.
will do it, says he, provided I can but find some Relics. He had them not
as yet, he knew not where to find them, but lo, he is in quest of them, and
hereupon subiit veluti cujusdam ardor praesagii; behold, he was inflamed with a
certain fire, that savoured of presage and inspiration. He makes them search in
a certain place, he there finds two bodies of Giants. We found two men of
extraordinary bigness, such as the ancient time did yield. In-venimus mirae
magnitudinis viros duos, ut prisca aetas serebat; Ossa integra, sanguinis
plurimum. The bones were yet entire, and there was a great deal of blood. Would
you not say, that he speaks of the time wherein Polyphemus and the old Giants
lived? Men, I warrant you, were much bigger in the third Age under the Empire
of Decius, than under that of Gratian and Valentinian. I don't know whether it
be apparent, that God chose martyrs from among the Giants. They are a sort of
people, the enormous mass of whose bodies dies is usually a sign of the vices
of their souls; at is usually a sign of the vices of their souls; at least of
that fury and warlike heat, which is not the Character of a Saint. But it was
necessary every thing in the fable should be great, even to the bodies of those
that were found.

This spirit of lying and fables increased and grew with the reign of Idolatry.
In the sixth Age the two Gregory's, one the Bishop of Rome, the other the
Bishop of Tours, stufft their Books with these Fables, designed to establish
Idolatry, and make us invocate the Saints as our patrons. He of Tours made a
book on purpose, entitled de Gloria Martyrum. These Fables go to this very
point of impudence, as to bring in the martyrs themselves desiring of God, that
the men that invoke them, and the prayers that are made in their name, The
Fables of Simeon Metaphrastes tending to make men invocate the Saints.
may be heard. Simeon Metaphrastes reports, that Saint Barba, as she was a
dying, desired of God, that all those who should in their prayers make mention
of her combat and her martyrdom, should be kept from all sorts of contagious
diseases, and that they should not be touched with any evil in their bodies and
their persons. And he says of St. Blaise, that on a certain day he prayed to
God in these words; If any evil happen to any man, or child, or even any beast,
and my name be called upon over them, saying, Hasten to help by reason of the
intercession of thy servant Blaise, give presently a cure every where, to the
glory of thy holy name. He makes him also speak after the same rate to a Woman,
to whom he had restored her Hog, which a Wolf had eaten up, and who returned
him thanks for it: Woman, always celebrate may memo^y, and nothing shall be
wanting in thy house; and if it shall come to pass, that any other in imitation
of thee shall celebrate my memory also, be shall obtain of my God a perpetual
Blessing all the days of his life. One may easily see whither the spirit of
lying in these Fables tended; it was to cause men to invocate these Saints.

We must also see the History of the establishment of Images, and how many
miracles were wrought to introduce this abominable devotion. It Is the same with
respect to the Adoration of the Sacrament, of which they have made an Idol.
Books are full of fabulous miracles, which the Devil wrought, or made the Monks
write, for the establishing this Idolatry. This is so notorious, that it would
be useless to bring proof of it.

The Authors of the Legends had consciences seared, insensible, and hard.
The Apostle to perfect the pourtraiture of these Impostors, that have corrupted
the Christian Religion in introducing Antichristianism, says, that they are
seared in their consciences. All parts where the Fire and the Searing-iron have
passed, become callons, hard, and consequently insensible. The Apostle could
not better describe to us the disposition of these Authors of Lies, that have
written Legends for us. For in truth they have lost their sense, they are such
fools, stupid and senseless. There is nothing that is ridiculous and absurd,
which they were not capable of digesting. The most plain absurdity and impiety
they are not sensible of, and their conscience is as if it were of iron and
marble. They have a heart of lead, and a mouth of iron, said Canus, Bishop of
the Canaries, concerning them. The Fables, of Heathenism are not more filthy,
nor more shameful than theirs. They introduce the Virgin Mary embracing the
Monks, suffering them to feel her bosom, giving them milk out of her breasts,
wedding them, and marrying her self with them. They make Images of wood and
stone to speak, they make their Saints do filthy and foolish actions, which
they would have to pass for miracles. This may be seen largely proved in the
second part of our just Prejudices.

The pronoun Some does not exclude the multitude.
I know not of any thing further in this Oracle of the fourth Chapt. of the
first Epist. to Timothy, that can leave any scruple behind it, unless it be the
pronoun Some; for this word does not seem to agree with this so general and
Apostasy: seeing on the contrary, it seems to signify, that the number of
Antichristian Apostates shall not be great in comparison of others. It Is
answered.

1st. That the pronnoun Some does not always exclude the multitude, but only
signifies, there will be Exceptions. We need no other instance than that of the
Jews, of whom St. Paul speaking in the 11th Chap. to the Romans, says, Some of
the branches were cut off.

'Twas the revolt and rejection of the Jews that was signified thereby. And
what is this Some? that is to say, almost all. For the entire Nation of the
Jews is engaged in this revolt. There was but a small number of the Jews that
believed on Jesus Christ, and believed truly. And certainly, the proportion
that is between the small company of the faithful, that love not the Beast, and
those that adore him, is greater than that which was between the converted
Jews, and those that have remained unbelievers these 16 hundred years. The same
Apostle speaking of the Israelites in the Wilderness, that worshipped the
golden Calf, 2 Cor. 10.7.
says, Be not ye Idolaters, as some of them were. Now these Some, Exodus 32.3.
were all; for Moses says expressly, that all the people brake off the golden
earrings which were in their ears. In the same manner he says in the same
place, Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them tempted him; Let us not commit
fornication, as some of them committed. Now it is certain, that these some
signify the far greater part: and it only shows, that there were some
exceptions. The Apostle might the rather use this like expression, because the
Antichristian idolatry and Apostasy were shadowed forth by these revolts of the
people of the Jews in the Wilderness.

To this we may add, that the Apostle St. Paul considers this evil not in its
last period, but in its beginning. Now it is certain, that the introduction of
idolatry into Christianity began by a small number of bigots, superstitious men
and false devoto's.

Other persons, besides those against whom we dispute, may wrangle also about
this term, the later times, and say, that we cannot reasonably call the times
that last 12. or 13. hundred years, and that began so long before the end of
the world, the later times. The Papists, I say, against whom we dispute, cannot
make use of this difficulty, because they apply this Oracle to the Encratites
and the Manichees, the first of which were known in the second Age, and the
others in the third. Those were times yet further distant from the end of the
world; than those ages where we place the Antichristian Empire. When we shall
speak of the duration of the Antichristian Empire, we shall have occasion to
say, why the ages of its Empire are called the later times.

These words, with which the Oracle begins, the Spirit says remarkably or
expressly, would well deserve some consideration, to know whether they ought to
be understood of some Oracles in the Old Testament; so that the sense should
be, The Spirit has said expressly by the ancient Prophets; or of a present
inspiration, so that the Apostle would say, the Spirit gives me to understand
very clearly. But it is of very little importance to know by what Spirit this
has been expressly said, by that of the Prophets, or that of St. Paul, seeing
it is the same Spirit. And besides this, we shall have occasion to say
something o fit in one of the following Chapters.

CHAP. XXII.
The Characters of Antichrist in the Papism confirmed by the great type of
Antichrist, Antiochus Epiphanes. That which is spoken literally of this
Antiochus, agrees mystically to the Pope and the Papism.

THere is but one spring more, whence I would draw the Characters of the
Antichristian Empire; viz. those Chapters of the Revelation of the Prophet
Daniel, where the most famous of the persecutors of the Jewish Nation is
literally spoken of, and the most fatal persecution that Nation endured. The
first Text of this prophecy is found in the 28th verse of the 11th Chapter to
the end.

In the 28th verse of the 11th Cha of Daniel, Antinchus Epiphanes is found
according to the letter.
28. Then shall he return into his Land with great riches, and his heart shall
be against the holy covenant, and he shall do exploits, and return to his own
Land.

29. At the time appointed he shall return and come toward the south, but it
shall not be as the former, or as the later.

30. For the Ships of Chittim shall come against him: Therefore he shall be
grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant: so shall
he do, he shall even return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the
holy covenant.

31. And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the Sanctuary of
strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the
abomination that makes desolate.

32. And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by
flatteries: but the people that do know their God, shall be strong and do
exploits.

33. And they that understand among the people shall instruct many; yet they
shall fall by the sword, and by the flame, and by captivity, and by spoil many
days.

34. Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help: but
many shall cleave to them with flatteries.

35. And some of them understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge, and
to make them white; even to the time of the and; because it is yet for a time
appointed.

36. And the King shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt himself,
and magnify himself above very God, and shall speak mavelous things against
the God of Gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for
that that is determined shall be done,

37. Neither shall he regard the God of his Father, nor the desire of Women,
nor regardany God; for he shall magnify himself above all.

38. But in his estate shall he honor the God of forces, and a God whom his
fathers knew not, shall he honor with gold, and silver, and with precious
stones, and pleasant things.

39. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange God, whom he
shall acknowledge, and increase with glory; and he shall cause them to rule
over many, and shall divide the land for gain.

40. And at the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him, and
the King of the North shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots,
and with horsemen, and with any Ships; and he shall enter into the Countries,
and shall overflow and pass over.

41. He shall enter also into the glorious Land, and many Countries shall be
overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and
the chief of the children of Ammon.

42. He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the Countries; and the Land of
Egypt shall not escape.

43. But he shall have power over the treasures of gold, and of silver, and
over all the precious things of Egypt; and the Libyans, and the Ethiopians
shall be at his steps.

44. But tidings out of the East and out of the North shall trouble him.
Therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make
away many.

45. And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas, and in
the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help
him

I find a pretty great agreement among Interpreters on this Chapter, and the
Verses which we have just now read. By those of both communions it is agreed,
that it is Antiochus called Epiphanes, one of Alexander's successors, that is
here literally spoken of. It is the very same that the other Prophecy respects,
in the eighth Chap. where the H. Spirit having represented to Daniel in a
vision, the Empire of the Medes and Persians under the Emblem of a Ram with two
horns, he describes the Empire of the Greeks, under the Emblem of a he-goat,
that had at first only one horn in the middle of his forehead, which being
broken, four other horns less than the first came in its place. Afterward,
from one of these four horns comes forth a little horn, of which the prophecy
thus speaks.

C. 8. v.9. And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed
exceeding great toward the South, and toward the East, and toward the pleasant
land.

v. 10. And it waxed great even to the host of Heaven, and it cast down some of
the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them.

11. Yea, he magnified himself, even to the Prince of the host, and by him the
daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.

12. And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of
transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground, and it practiced and
prospered.

13. Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that certain
Saint which spoke, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice,
and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to
be trodden underfoot?

14. And he said unto me, unto two thousand and 300. days, then shall the
sanctuary be cleansed?

It Is also to the same Antiochus that we must refer the whole 12th Chapt. of
the same book of Daniel.

C. 12. v. 1. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince, which
stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble,
such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time; and at that
time shall thy people be delivered, every one that shall be found written in
the book.

2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall wake, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt.

3. And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firnament; and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

4. But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book even to the time
of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

5. Then I Daniel looked, and behold there stood other two, the one on this
side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the
river.

6. And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?

7. And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand to heaven, and swear by
him that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and a half; and
when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all
these things shall be finished.

8. And I heard, but I understood not. Then said I, O my Lord, what shall be
the end of these things?

9. And he said, Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are closed up, and sealed,
till the time of the end.

10. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried, but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand.

11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination that makes desolate, set up, there shall be 1290. days.

12. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the thousand three hundred and
five and thirty days.

13. But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shall rest, and stand in thy
lot at the end of the days.

As Interpreters agree, that these Prophecies in the literal meaning of them
are concerning Antiochus Epiphanes, the great persecutor of the Jews and the
true Religion; so almost all agree also, that this mystically referrs to
Antichrist. And it is a truth, I do not at all doubt of. Antiochus was a type of
Antichrist: we shall see such clear proofs of it, that it will not be possible
to doubt of it. As the principle is commonly perceived. I will suppose it, and
will not give my self the trouble to prove it, any otherwise than in applying
all that to Antichrist that is said of Antiochus. I will only make some remarks
to confirm this truth.

I. Both good and bad under the N. Testament have had their types under the Old.
We must observe that all the things, that were to happen under the New
Testament, had their types under the Old. It is not only Jesus Christ that had
types for his person, for his offices, for his good works; his enemies also
have had their types. The actions of the Saints have been typical; the
victories of Sampson over the Philistines, those of David over Goliath, were
types of the victories of Jesus Christ. All the world believes it, and no one
doubts it. It must be acknowledged also, that the criminal actions of eminent
persons have been typical likewise. If on one hand there have been persons and
actions typical of the good, there have been also persons and actions typical
of the evil. Cain was a type of the enemies of Jesus Christ coming of the seed
of the woman, he was a type of the seed of the Serpent; and his action against
his brother was a typical sin, that represents the persecution, which the
Devil was to bring upon Jesus Christ and his Church. The sin of Esau, that
despised the right of primogeniture, and sold it for a mess of broth, was a
type of those profane ones, that renounce the benefits of the World to come,
for the vanities of this present World. Lots wife, that looked toward Sodom,
and the Israelites that turned their eyes toward Egypt, after they were gone
forth from it, are types of those miserable persons, who after they have been
drawn from sin by the grace of Jesus Christ, are eager after the World from
which they were departed, and return to it again.

As therefore Jesus Christ has had his types, Antichrist ha^^ had his types as
well as J. Christ.
without doubt Antichrist had his too, and that in great number. Cain, Goliath,
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and the other oppressors of the truth and the
faithful, have been types of Antichrist. Among these types there was not any
one more noted and more p^ain than Antiochus, who made the continual sacrifice
cease for three years and a half, who made the Church desolate, who made almost
the whole. Nation fall into Apostasy, who profaned the Temple, and cruelly
persecuted those that persevered in the true Religion. So that as in the types
of Jesus Christ we seek for and find his Characters, in like manner in
Antiochus and that which the Prophecies say of him, we may find the Characters
of Antichrist.

But we must observe, there are two sort of Prophecies; one that directly
respect the principal subject, the other that respect it only mediately and
indirectly, and by the means of some type, to which the literal sense of the
Proph^cy does belong. For example, the Prophecy of the 53. Chap. of Esai,
respects J. Christ immediately and without the intervention of any type. There
are Prophecies wherein the things agree partly to the type, partly to the
person signified by the type.
But the 45th Psalm. and the second respect Jesus Christ, but mediately and by
the intervention of the type. In the second Psalm. the type is David, to whom
belongs the literal sense of the Psalm. In the 45th Psalm. the type is Solomon,
and it is him the literal sense of the Text respects. These two sorts of
Prophecies ought to be handled differently. Those of the first rank, i. e.
those that refer only and immediately to Jesus Christ, must be applied only and
uniformly to Jesus Christ in all their parts. But those of the second rank are
much harder to be disintricated. For there are some things that belong only to
the person that is the type. Others that belong only to the person that is
represented by the type; and lastly, others that belong both to the one and the
other. For example, in the 45th Psalm. these words, Thy throne, O God, is for
ever and ever; the scepter of thy Kingdom is a scepter of Righteousness, etc. O
God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above all thy fellows.
These words, I say, cannot without great violence be applied to Solomon. For
Solomon is not a God, and it cannot be to him that the H. Spirit says, Thy
throne, O God, etc. There are other words in the same Psalm, which certainly
respect Solomon as a type, and J. Christ as the person represented by the type.
For example, Thou art fairer than any of the children of men: v. 3.
Grace is poured into thy lips, because God has blessed thee for ever. Lastly,
I am certain, there are other words that agree only to Solomen, and that it is
not at all necessary to refer them to Jesus Christ. For example, these words;
v. 10.
Daughters of Kings are among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did
stand the Queen in gold of Ophir, v. 14.
etc. She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: the virgins
her companions that follow her, shall be brought unto thee. Supposing the
Spouse to be the Church, it will be very difficult to tell what these daughters
signify, that are introduced to Jesus Christ, different from the Church. I know
well indeed, one may easily imagine something thereupon, but I do not believe
that it would be solid. It Is the fault which they fall into, that do explain
the types: they stretch the parallels, and fain would have the pictures in
every thing resemble the original. Whereas we must not search after the
resemblance, but in the principal subject. All the rest is but as the leaves
that do adorn the picture.

It Is according to these principles, that we must explain the Prophecies of the
eighth, eleventh and twelfth of Daniel. As to the latter, it is the history of
Antiochus. This Antiochus having been the most considerable type of Antichrist,
as David was the most glorious type of Jesus Christ; it is not to be doubted,
but that there are in the Prophecies that respect Antiochus, many things that
must have a mystical reference to Antichrist. But it is not necessary, that all
that is said of Antiochus in the literal sense, must be applied to Antichrist
in a mystical sense. In some places Antichrist is there with Antiochus, in some
other places Antiochus is there alone, and it may be there are some places
where Antichrist is alone. Let us briefly review them

From one of the four hsrns of the he-goat Chapter 8. v. 9. Why Antiochus is called
a little horn.
which signified the Empire of the Greeks, came forth another little horn
toward the South, and toward the East, and toward the pleasant Land.

It Is certain, this little Horns is Antiochus. He is described by a little
Horn, because he climbed the throne not by the lawful right of succession,
publicly and with full right; but by subtilty he ravished the Kingdom from
Demetrius the son of his brother Seleucus. Therefore the H. Spirit explaining
the Prophecy in the following part of the 8th. Chapter says, and at the end of
their Kingdom, v. 23.
a King of a fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand
up.

And in the 11th. Chapter where the History of Antiochus is more large, it is said,
v. 21.
And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give
the honor of the Kingdom, but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the
Kingdom by flatteries. It was because Antiochus was an hostage at Rome that he
was reputed as a stranger, and that he had no right to the crown of Asia,
having an elder Brother, who left a Son, a lawful heir of his Estate. Antiochus
being returned from Italy, applies himself to be liberal to the people. He was
affable and familier, he bathed in the public baths, and by these means he got
away the Kingdom from his Nephew. This agrees well enough to the head of the
Antichristian Empire, who is also called a little Horn in the 7th. Chapter This is
plainly that which has deceived two of our Interpreters, who would have the
little Horn in the 17th. Chapter also to be Antiochus. The little Horn in the 17th.
Chapter is not Antiochus. A strange oversight of some Interpreters.
Which I call a mighty great oversight, and utterly unworthy of great men. For
for this we must metamorphose the 4th. Beast; and whereas by the consent of all
Interpreters, it signifies the Empire of the Romans, it must be made the Empire
of the Greeks, in despite of as great evidence as can be found in the
Prophecies. For one must be blind, not to see the Roman Empire, the 4th.
Monarchy. in this 4th. Beast.

The Pope is mystically the little Horn.
The Empire of Antichrist therefore is a little Horn, despicable in appearance,
that raises it self up from a low place; and from a beginning that seemed to
promise nothing that was great, is mounted to that grandeur, that has given it
both the form and the power of an Empire. The head of this Empire is of
understanding in dark sentences, etc. it is by subtilty, that he made himself
master of the Western Empire. The little Horn of the 8th. Chapter which signifies
Antiochus, The Pope exalts himself against God.
waxed great, even to the host of Heaven, cast down some of the host, and of
the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them. Yea he magnified himself even
to the Prince of the host.

These words agree to Antiochus and to Antichrist. To Antiochus, because he
insolently exalted himself against God, the head of the heavenly armies, and of
the Church; made a great part of the nation, and even some of the Priestly
race, fall into Apostasy. To Antichrist, and the Papism, because he has
exalted himself against J. Christ, and engaged the whole Church in his revolt.

The Pope makes the daily Sacrifice to cease.
Antiochus makes the daily sacrifice to cease by reason of transgression, and
casts down the truth to the ground, and prospers. The history of the
Macchabees informs us, that this was accomplished according to the literal sense
of it. And the same thing has been accomplished by the Antichristian Empire,
that has abolisht the continual service, because it has destroyed the true
service of God, and the sacrifices of pure prayers, in mingling with them the
worship of creatures, the invocation of he and she saints, the adoration of
Images and their relics, and in establishing a new continual sacrifice in the
room of the true one. It has prosper'd, for its successes have been prodigious
for 8 or ten Ages.

In the 11th. Chapter the Prophet begins from the 21th. verse to speak of
Antiochus. But we must not look for Antichrist therein till the 34. v. The ten
first verses are a description of the victories, which Antiochus obtained over
his neighbors; and of his quarrels with the Kings of Egypt, quarrels which in
my opinion had nothing Typical in them. And the reason of it is clear, because
Antiochus was not a Type but in what he did against the Church. For the strange
nations had no reference to the Church; nothing that the Tyrants did against
them is mystical. At the 31. v. begin the violences which this persecuting
Prince was to offer to the Church of Israel. Arms shall stand on his part, and
they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily
sacrifice. This is what was already said in the 8th. Chapter and what we have
applied to the Papism and its head. The Prophet adds, v. 32.33.
And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatterier;
and they that understand among the people shall instruct many. He continues to
the 36th. v. to describe the ways full of fraud and violence, The Papism was
established by fraud and violence.
which the Tyrant was to make use of, to pervert the nation of the Jews, the
constancy of some, the falling of many. And all this without doubt agrees to
the head of the Papism, as well as to Antiochus; the application is easy, every
one may make it. For all the world knows, how many frauds have been used by the
Papism to engage the true believers in a revolt, and how always violence has
been used together with fraud. In the 36. v. the H. Spirit pursues the
description of the Tyrant, and says, This King shall do according to his will,
and shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every God, and shall speak
mavelous things against the God of Gods, and shall prosper till the
indignation be accomplished; for that that is determined shall be done. This is
so like what St. Paul says, that the son of perdition shall exalt himself
above all that is called God, The Pope exalts himself above all that is called
God.
and that he shall sit in the Temple of God as if he were God; And to that
which St. John says of the First Beast in the 13th. Chapter that there was given
to him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies, and that he opened his
mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and
them that dwell in Heaven. This, I say, is so like, that it is inpossible not to
see that it is the same thing. This passage of Daniel gives us a great deal of
light for the understanding that of the Revelation. When we would apply these
words to the Papism and its head, he shall exalt himself above all that is
called God, and speak blasphemies against God, they cry out it is notorious to
all the world that the Pope calls himself the most obedient servant of the true
God, and does not blaspheme his name. Just the very same is said of Antiochus,
he shall magnify himself above every God; He shall not regard the God of his
Fathers, and he shall not regard any God. Antiochus and the Pope have exalted
themselves above every God, not by Atheism, but by Pride.
This does not appear in his History. It Is well said that he was a wicked
person, and I would easily believe it; but the Prophecies do not predict the
thoughts of the heart, but events. Now as to the event, so far was Antiochus
from being impious toward his Gods, and from exalting himself above them, that
on the contrary he had a furious and outrageous zeal to cause them to be
worshipped. Never did any idolatrous Prince carry this false zeal so far. He
did not persecute the Jews to make them become Atheists; but to make them
worship Jupiter Olympius, whose Idol he had caused to be placed in the Temple.
This is to exalt ones self above God, to mount to that pitch of Pride to which
Antiochus and the Popes have mounted.

CHAP. XXIII.
A notable Prophecy of the Mahuzim, that Antichrist was to worship. The whole
found admirably accomplished in the Papism. What is the literal sense of the
Prophecy with respect to Antiochus. An explication of the beginning of the 12th
Chap. of Daniel applied to Antiochus and the Papism.

IN this Prophecy which literally respects Antiochus, Dan. 11. v. 37, 38, 39.
and mystically Antichrist, the most considerable passage is this. Neither
shall he regard the God of his Fathers, nor the desire of women; nor regard any
God; for he shall magnify himself above all. But in his estate shall he honor
the God of forces: and a God whom his Fathers knew not, shall he honor with
gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall be
do in the most strong holds with a strange God, whom he shall acknowledge, and
increase with glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall
divide the Land for gain.

The Papism does not only agree that we understand this Oracle of Antichrist,
but with its utmost force endeavors to have it so understood, because it hopes
to draw great advantages to it self thereby, A notable Oracle concerning the
Mahazim, which Antichrist must worship.
pretending that nothing of this does agree to the Pope. He has not abandoned
the God of his Fathers, he does not worship the God of Mahuzim: That Is the word
in the original, which our translation renders the God of forces. Our Joseph
Mede thinks quite contrary to this; he is so far from believing, that this
cannot agree to the Pope and to the Empire of the Papism; that he believes,
that St. Paul had a regard to this Oracle, when he says in that passage of the
fourth Chapt. of the first Epistle to Timothy, that the Spirit says
remarkably, or expressly, that some shall depart from the faith, and shall teach
Doctrines of Demons. To understand his notion, which assuredly is pretty and
ingenious, we must represent the Text of Daniel according to his version, which
is much better than our ordinary one.

36. And a King shall do according to his will, etc. In this Verse there is no
essential difference between our vulgar translation and that of Joseph Mede.

37. He shall not regard the God of his Fathers, nor the desire of women, nor
regard any God, but shall magnify himself above every God.

38. For he shall honor the God of Mahuzim besides the true God, in exalting
them together with him in his seat. And together with this God whom his Fathers
knew not, he shall worship the Mahuzim with gold, silver, precious stones and
desirable things.

39. He shall make strong holds of the Mahuzim, with the strange God, whom he
shall acknowledge, he shall multiply the honor, and make them rule over many,
and shall divide the Land for a recompense.

Here Joseph Mede, by the unknown God understands Jesus Christ, whom ancient
Rome knew not, and whom the new Romans know and worship. Together with this God
whom his Fathers knew not, he shall worship the Mahuzim. Mahuzim and the
unknown God in this Prophecy, are not the same thing,
Interpreters ordinarily confound these Mahuzim with the unknown God; and the
Papists say, it is the Idol that Antichrist shall worship. But it is clear, that
the Mahuzim are distinguished from the unknown God. For in the 39th verse, the
H. Spirit clearly distinguishes the Mahuzim from the strange or unknown God, in
saying, he shall make strong holds of the Mahuzim with the strange Gods. hhim
Elohah necar. So that these words serve as a comment on those that go before;
which have the same sense, but are a little different. The Prophet does not use
the praeposition hhim which signifies with, besides, but uses the particle L.
which usually signifies to; L'Elohah Mahuzim, which may be translated to the
God of Mahuzim. He shall give honor to the God of Mahuzim. So in the same
Verse the Spirit adds, and he shall glorify, or he shall give glory and honor,
L'Elohah, to the God whom his Fathers knew not. But they that understand the
Holy tongue, know also, that the particle el, and L signify besides, together
with, as well as to. For example. The Law says, thou shall not take a woman,
el ahotah, together with her sister. They that consult the Hebrew
Lexicon-writers, will find in them an infinite number of the like examples. So
that instead of translating it, He shall honor the God of Mahuzim, it should
be rendered together with God, he shall honor the Mahuzim. And that which
determins the Text to this sense is, 1. That the noun Elohah, God, is in the
singular number, and Mahuzim the plural. Now in all regular constructions, the
nouns that are construed together, should be of the same number. It should be
said the Gods Mahuzim, or in the singular number the God Mahus. 2. A barbarous
construction is made, in supposing, that the Prophet says of him concerning
whom he speaks, He shall honor TO the God Mahuzim. The particle L is a sign of
the Dative case, and signifies to; now in the holy Tongue as well as in ours,
it is a barbarous construction, and without example to place a dative case after
honor. He shall honor to any one. This barbarity is taken away, in giving the
particle of the Hebrew Text the signification of together with or besides,
which it also usually has. He shall honor Mahuzim besides God, or together
with him. 3. The Prophet clearly explains himself, as I have already observed.
What he said le Elohah, he repeats by hhim Elohah together with God; he shall
build strong holds to Mahuzim together with the strange God. 4. This word
vehimishelam, and he shall cause them to rule, shows, that he speaks of many
Gods, for he says them, which shows that the word God in the singular number,
that is joined with Mahuzim in the plural, is not the same thing.


Understanding Jesus Christ by the unknown God, it is clear, that by Mahuzim we
must understand the he and she-Saints, the Angels, Mediators, The unknown God
is J. Christ, and the Mahuzim are the Saints and guardian Angels.
and second Gods of the Papism. One may almost as well number the stars of the
Heavens, as the conjectures of the learned about these Mahuzim. So that I will
not endeavor to give an account of them. I will only observe, that this word
properly signifies the strong, or forces or fortresses. There is no word that
we oftener meet with in the Psalms of David. Jehova Mahuzzi the Lord is my
strength, my strong one, or my fortress. And it is certain, that by that David
meant, the Lord is my protector and my patron. It is very remarkable, that the
Septuagint often translate this Hebrew word by Hyperaspiste, a Greek word, that
signifies defender, protector, patron. See Psalm. 27.1.28.8.
Now this is exactly the name that the Papists give to Saints and Angels; they
call them their patrons, protectors, defenders, guardians. And if they spoke in
Hebrew, they could not call them otherwise than Mahuzim; for it is the proper
signification of the word. They vow themselves to their service, put themselves
under their protection, and they worship them, seeing they give homage to them.
Therefore following the true Text of Daniel, and the true translation, we find
an admirable sense in it, and what agrees to the popish Antichristianism more
than all that can be said; which may be seen by the application of the Prophecy
to the events.

V. 36. This King shall do according to his will, and shall magnify himself
above every God, and shall speak mavelous things against the God of Gods. So
does the Antichristian Empire do, that treads under feet all the Gods, i. e.
all the Kings of the Earth; and who by its idolatries and superstitions, exalts
it self even against God himself by an unsupportable pride. He calls himself
the Vicar of God, and says, he is clothed with the fullness of his power.

37. He shall not have regard to the God of his Fathers. That is to say, he
shall not worship the Gods of the ancient Romans, he shall reject the Jupiters,
the Demons, and the other Pagan divinities.

He shall have no regard to the desire of Women. Behold, a place that cries,
that speaks aloud, and which alone is capable of making us acknowledge the
Antichristian Empire of the Papism. It has been foretold, that Idolatry should
be promoted by persons that were enemies to marriage.
This cannot be understood in a general sense, neither of Antiochus, that gave
himself over to all manner of debauchery, and came to that height of impudence
as to ly with his Misses in public; nor of the Popes and their Clergy, the
persons of all in the World most dissolutely given to women and Sodomy. But by
the desire of women, marriage is meant, the lawful desire of women. It Is
exactly the Character by which St. Paul would have us know the Teachers of the
Christian Apostasy, forbidding men to marry. Now this is that which
distinguishes new Rome from the old one. In old Rome celibacy was disgraced,
marriage had great privileges, as appears by the Julian and Papian Laws. New
Rome has destroyed these Laws, and has transferred to celibacy all the
honors of marriage. According to the Roman Laws, a man 25 years old that was
not married, Sozom. l. 3^ c. 4. Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 4. c. 20.33.
could not inherit, nor receive any Legacies by Will, no not of those that were
nearest of kin to him: Constantine abolisht this Law, and not only made
unmarried persons capable of receiving by will, but permitted those of the one
and the other Sex that were unmarried, to make Wills, though they were not at
age. So Rome began no longer to have regard to the desire of women. But quickly
after, she began utterly to destroy the honor of marriage, which the Empire
passed to and was devolt upon those persons, that make it a matter of glory and
religion to live unmarried.

The Popes have lived as without God.
He shall not regard any God. That is to say, he shall act like a man without
any religion. We need but study the lives of the Popes, to see with how much
exactness this prophecy has been accomplished. For they have been proud,
usurpers, cruel, disturbers of the public peace, whore-mongers, sodomites,
adulterers, and every thing the most horrible that can be imagined. This is to
live as without God, and not to care for God.

Tyranny and Idolatry were advanced on the same feat.
He shall worship Mahuzim besides the true God. For he worships J. Christ; but
besides this, makes himself new protectors of the Saints and Angels, whom he
calls his intercessors and his patrons with God. In exalting them together with
him in his seat. Indeed proportionably as the Sea of Rome exalted it self above
other Sees, the Idolatry of Saints and Relics was established; they were born
the one and the other, i. e. tyranny and idolatry, in the fourth Age. And
together with this God, whom his Fathers knew not, he shall honor them.
Together with J. Christ, the God unknown to the ancient Romans, he shall
worship second Gods and patrons. He shall honor them with gold, silver,
precious stones, and desirable things. We need only see the places famous for
the devotion of the Papism. Those places I say, where some Saint, or some one
of our Ladies is famous for her miracles, there are seen treasures, where
silver, gold, and precious stones are in abundance.

The Saints and the Relics are the fortresses of the Papism.
He shall make strong holds of the Mahuzim. Certainly, so we may call the
Temples, the Chapels, and the places consecrated to the devotion of Relics
and of the Saints. These are fortresses for the people, look on them as their
preservers. When a City would obtain a favor from Heaven, she sets up the
shrines of her Saints; when she has lost them, she believes she has lost her
protectors; when in the war they have been taken away, peace being restored,
she brings them again into the Churches in pomp, as tutelary Gods and
protectors. One City has a bit of the true Cross, and other the head or body
of a Martyr; Lo, what is to her instead of a fortress and a citadel, under
which she believes her self to be in safety. This is the idea, which
superstitious persons have had of this criminal devotion, from the very time
that it began to appear in the world. We must see what Saint Ambrose says to
his sister in the Epistle which we have cited above. He speaks of the bodies of
Protais and Gervais, as of two tutelar Angels, under whose care they had been
without knowing it. Mom. 32. in Epist. ad Romans
St. Bazil in the Homily, on the 40 Martyrs says of them, These having taken
possession of this Country, are to it like so many towers joined together
against the invasions of our enemies. St. Chrysostom speaking of the Relics
of St. Paul and St. Peter, that are at Rome, says, that those bodies do
fortify that City more than the towers, and ten thousand ramparts. Venantius
Fortunatus a Christian Poet, who lived about an age after the birth of
Idolatry, calls the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul at Rome, ramparts and
towers. A facie hostili duo propugnacula proesunt
Quos fidei turres urbs caput orbis habet.


Those that followed, spoke after the same rate.

He shall multiply the honor, and make them rule over many, and shall divide
the Land for a recompense: Is not this exactly what the papism does to its
Saints? It makes them rule over States, it divides the Earth among them; St.
James rules over Spain, St. Denis and the Virgin over France; every Country
has its Protectors and its Patrons. So you have in a few words, the exposition
of this famous and important Text. That which follows to the very end of the
Chapt. seems to belong more to Antiochus than to Antichrist. However it may
agree both to the one and the other. But I find no great necessity to find
Antichrist there, because we find him enough elsewhere.

The Prophecy of the Mahuzim may have a literal sense with respect to Antiochus.
It may be asked, whether the Text touching the Mahuzim, and the worship of a
strange God can agree to Antiochus in the literal sense? To speak the truth,
this part of the prophecy seems to be one of those that do not agree to the
type, but only to the person represented by the type. For we do not find that
Antiochus made himself new Gods, nor that he rejected the God of his Fathers,
nor that he worshipped an unknown God, nor that he had Mahuzim, that is to say,
protectors besides his old false Gods. But see what I believe. All this with
respect to Antiochus is a prophecy that referrs to the Temporal, not the
Spiritual, the Empire, not the Religion. And on the contrary, with respect to
Antichrist, it principally respects Religion.

They are his adventures with the Romans that are hare declared.
So that with respect to Antiochus, these are his adventures with respect to the
Romans; This Tyrant was the most insolent and the proudest of all men; he
exalted himself above all the Gods, i. e. above all the neighboring Countries,
and all the Kings his allies. The Countries are often meant by the Gods that
ruled there. Bell boweth down, If. 46.1.
Nebo stoopeth. That is to say, the Chaldaeans and the Babylonians are perished.
This use of the word is usual enough with the Prophets. So Antiochus is said to
have exalted himself above all the Gods, i. e. above all the Countries, the
protection of which is committed to diverse Gods. He regarded not the desire of
women, i. e. being a debauched person, he despised marriage, but he worshipped
Mahuzim in his seat. If one would translate this word into Greek word for word,
it must be rendered by Romaious the Romans. For the word Romans in Greek
signifies strong or puissant, being derived from the word Rome, that signifies
strength; and this is also what the Hebrew word Mahuzim signifies. So that
having respect to the signification of the word Romaioi, it cannot otherwise be
rendered in Hebrew than by Mahuzim. Now this is what did exactly come to pass.
This so fierce a Prince was obliged to render homage to the Romans, to pay them
tribute of gold, of silver, and precious stones. The second Book of Macchabees
says, that Nicanor appointed a tribute to King Antiochus Epiphanus, that was
to come to the Romans, to wit, two thousand Talents. He shall build strong
holds for Mahuzim; that is to say, the Romans. This also came to pass:
Antiochus was obliged to leave to the Romans the Provinces of Asia, which are
on the other side mount Taurus. And so he put that great list of mountains in
Cilicia, as a rampart and a fortress between the Romans and him. These Romans
were Gods, whom his Ancestors knew not. For the first founders of the Empire of
the Greeks, Antiochus rendered homage to the Romans, new Gods, whom his
Ancestors knew not. Appian. in Syriacis. Titus Livius. l. 38.
Alexander and his Successors, had not heard the Romans so much as spoken of.
It was Antiochus the Grandfather of Antiochus Epiphanes, that first of all
felt the effort of their might, that left Asia to them, and obliged himself to
pay them 500. Talents for the charges of the war, 2500. Talents when the Senate
should ratify the Treaty, and ten thousand five hundred Talents at several
payments within twelve years. Hereupon this difficulty may arise, that it was
then the father of Antiochus that rendered homage to the Romans, and not he
himself. It must be answered, that Antiochus Epiphanes must not here be
distinguished from his father. First, because it was in his time that this
servitude began, and he himself was given as an Hostage to the Ramans for a
pledge of the fidelity of his father. Secondly, He continued the same
servitude, and paid Tribute. And his being Hostage at Rome many years, going
to render Homage to this God even in his own seat, makes the servitude and the
homage principally fall on him, and they may be justly attributed to him.
Thirdly, Though the servitude began in the time of his father, nevertheless the
Prophecy particularly fixes it on the Son, because of that pride which was
peculiar to him. As if the Holy Spirit would have said, the Kingdom of Asia
shall feel the force of the Romans, for the mortification of this proud
Antiochus, who shall endeavor to exalt himself above all the Kings of the
Earth.

This is an accident that to me seems mavelous, that this prophecy found its
accomplishment in Rome and in the Romans, as well in the temporal as in the
spiritual sense. I said above, that Antiochus was not a type of Antichrist, but
in the things he did against the Jewish Nation. Because the strange Nations
having no reference to the Church, nothing that Tyrants do against the Nations,
is mystical. Therefore we must not seek after a mystery in that, which the
Prophecy fore-tells that Antiochus should do against the Egyptians, against
Ptolomee, and in reference to other people. But it is reasonable to except the
Romans from this rule. Though they then were a nation estranged from the
Church, yet however they had a reference to the Church. For Rome was to be the
head of the Antichristian Church. And already in the Prophecies Rome Pagan that
then was, made but one beast, i. e. one Empire with Rome Christian and
Antichristian; so that it was proper to the genius of the Prophecy, that the
type of the Roman Antichrist should be a type in what he did with respect to
the Romans.

Besides, it cannot be thought strange, that the same prophecy should have two
prospects, and consequently two accomplishments. For so it is always in those
Prophecies, that turn on a typical subject. That which may make some
difficulty, is, that the temporal adventures of the type have usually their
figurative respect to the spiritual adventures of the thing represented by the
type. Which does not appear here: for the homages which Antiochus rendered to
the Romans, do not appear to have any typical reference to the homages, which
the new Romans give to their Demigods. They have however, and it is certain,
that the homage which the new subjects of the Roman Empire do render at Rome to
its head, to its Saints and Idols, have respect of a figure, and the thing
figured to the homage, which the people of the world did render to ancient
Rome, whose Citizenship they did underhand labor for, and whose Eagles and
other military Ensigns they worshipped. Religio Romanorum tota castrensis, Tertul
Apolog. c. 1^.

Signa veneratur, signa jurat,
Signa omnibus Diis praeponit.


St. Peter, and St. Paul, and the H. Virgin at this day, are in the banners of
Rome, just as the Eagles were heretofore; and all the world gives homage to
these banners, and to that which is represented by them, just as during the
Empire of ancient Rome, men did prostrate themselves before the Eagles.

I hold that the twelfth and last Chapter of Daniel, The 12th. Chapt. of Daniel
respects also Antiochus Epiphanes.
does also refer to Antiochus and Antichrist, And at that time shall Michael
stand up, the great Prince, that stands for the children of thy people; and
there shall be a time of trouble, such as nevey was since there was a nation,
even unto that same time; and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every
one that shall be found written in the book of life.

This Prophecy literally respects Antiochus's last persecution of the Jews,
that was terrible and cruel, but ended by the victories of the Macchabees. This
Michael is the Son of God himself, who always watched for the preservation of
his Church. Spiritually and mystically this agrees to Antichrist, and respects
the last persecution that he must cause the Church to suffer, after which he
himself is to be ruined, and the people of the Saints delivered. It Is the same
victory as is described to us in the 19th Chapter of the Revel. The words that
follow make it very plain, that this Prophecy must be understood of that
victory that J. Christ must obtain over Antichrist, at the end of the
Antichristian Empire.

Daniel brings in the resurrection here, to show that he speaks of the
victories of J. Christ over Antichrist.
And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt. And they that be
wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many
to Righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. What, I pray, should the
resurrection do here in the middle of the Chap. in which the adventures only of
Antiochus Epiphanes are spoken of? It Is plain, that this is perfectly the same
Prophecy as that of St. John, in the 20th Chapt. of the Revel. where the
Apostle predicts the deliverance of the Church, and the coming of the Kingdom
of Christ by a resurrection. They that were beheaded for the Name of Jesus,
must be raised up, and reign with him a 1000. years. This is what Daniel says
here, that they that have turned many to Righteousness by their Doctrine, and
by their Martyrdom, shall be as shining and ruling Stars in the Kingdom of J.
Christ.

The Prophecy of Daniel joins together the two resurrections, the first and the
second, though they are distant each from the Other a 1000 years.
It Is not the last resurrection, nor the last coming of Jesus Christ, that St.
John speaks of, no more than Daniel. It Is of that coming that St. Paul speaks
of, when he says, that Jesus Christ, shall destroy Antichrist by the
brightness of his coming; when he shall come to establish his Kingdom of a 1000
years on the Earth. It Is that resurrection which the Revelation calls the first
resurrection. And therefore Daniel does not say, And ALL those that sleep in
the dust shall awake, but he only says MANY of those that sleep in the dust:
even as St. John says so expressly, that then all the dead shall not arise.
It Is true, that Daniel also joins the resurrection of the wicked; and some
shall awake to shame and everlasting contempt. But we must not conclude, that
this resurrection of the wicked must be at the same time; one Prophecy must be
explained by the other. The resurrection of the wicked, which Daniel joins here
with the first resurrection, is distant from it at least a 1000 years. But he
speaks of it as of two things joined together, because he who speaks is God,
before whom a 1000 years are but as one day. Besides this, when our eyes look
on things very far off, always those things that are far from one another seem
to be near. The Stars seem to us to be near the Moon, and yet they are at a
prodigious distance from it. So the Prophet looking on these two resurrections,
the first and the last, it is not strange that beholding them at so great
distance, he looked on them as joined together, though they are a 1000 years
distant from each other. Moreover, the H. Spirit from this first resurrection,
in which the Church must be delivered, and which it may be, is but a figurative
resurrection, would raise us up to the contemplation of the last and general
resurrection; because this first resurrection, that must be before the 1000
years of the reign of Jesus Christ, must be but an Emblem of the great
deliverance of the Church, when it shall be in one body translated from earth
to heaven by the last resurrection. It Is usual with the Prophets to have holy
sallies, that from temporal things do transport them to spiritual and eternal
ones. Isaiah speaking of a sign that God would give to Ahaz, and which he
refused, passes over many ages, leaves there Ahaz and his sign, Esai, 7.
and says, the Lord God shall give you a sign, behold a Virgin shall bear a
son.

The rest of the twelfth Chapter is not less profound; but as it respects the
duration of the persecution of Antiochus literally, and mystically the time of
the duration of the Kingdom of Antichrist, we shall reserve it for that Chap.
where we must speak of the duration of his Kingdom.

CHAP. XXIV.
In which are gathered together 35. Characters of Antichrist, that perfectly
agree to the Papism, and cannot agree to any but it.

A short portraiture of Antichrifi and his fearures.
AFter sounding all the fountains whence the pourtaiture of Antichrist is drawn,
I believe it will not be unuseful, to gather together here all the strokes,
that we may see them all with one view, and that we may discern the perfect
conformity, that is between that Antichrist and the Papism.

1. It must be an Empire; Rev. 13.1.
for it is called a beast: now in the Prophetic style, a beast always
signifies an Empire, when Kings are treated of. The Papism is an Empire in all
the forms of worldly Empires, ancient and modern. We have proved it with the
greatest evidence in our prejudices.

2. It must also be a Religion; 2 These. 2.
for it is called a mystery; and it must be a false Religion, for it is called
a mystery of Iniquity, and an apostasy. There is only the Papism, in which an
Empire and a Religion are found both together. 1 Timothy 4.1, 8.
It Is true, Mahomet made an Empire and a Religion at the same time. But in
Mahometanism, the Religion is not the Empire, nor the Empire the Religion; and
the Priests are not Sovereign Lords under the pretext of Religion. Mahometanism
is divided into many Aempires, and yet there is but one Religion; a proof that
the Religion and the Empire are not the same thing.

The Papism is the only Religion that boasts of a Prophet always living. Rev.
19.20.
3. Antichrist must have a Prophet, i. e. a man that says he is infallible, and
that pretends to pronounce Oracles as well as the ancient Prophets. For with
the beast is joined the false Prophet. The beast was taken, and together with
him the false Prophet, that wrought signs before him. There is no Religion in
the World but the Papism, that pretends to have an infallible head, always
pronouncing Oracles when it is necessary, always speaking, and always living.
This is a very peculiar Character, and which should make us well discern him.

4. The corruption of the Religion of Antichrist must principally consist in
Idolatry; 1 Timothy 4. 2 These 2. Rev. 17.
for it is called apostasy, a Doctrine of Demons, spiritual whoredom. The
Papism is a Religion, in which Idols are reestablisht: under new names. We have
also clearly proved it.

The Idolatry of Antichrist must be an idolatry of Christians. Rev. 17.
5. This Antichristian Idolatry must be an idolatry of Christians, which must be
exercised in the Church, and not without, by the Spouse of Jesus Christ, and
not by a stranger. For this idolatry is called adultery, and conjugal
unfaithfulness. The Papism with its Idolatry, retains the foundation of the
Church, and preserves Christianity.

6. The chief City of this Empire and of this Religion must be a City seated on
seven Mountains, Rev. 17.9.18.
and the great City which in the time of Saint John ruled over the Kingdoms of
the Earth; that is to say, Rome. The Papism has for the capital of its Empire
and Religion new Rome, built where the ancient one was.

7. This Empire was to form it self, not by force, but by craft, by seduction
and by the consent of the Kings of the West, Rev. 13.13.
that were to give their power to the beast. The power of the Papism and the
Bishop of Rome come by illusion, rather than by the violence, that both Kings
and people have suffered.

8. This Antichristian Empire must be a continuation of the fourth Monarchy,
which is that of the Romans, Dan. 2.7. Rev. 13.
as has been shown by the vision of Daniel's Statue; by that of the four
beasts, and by the beast of the 13th of the Revel. The Papism is a true
continuation of the Roman Empire, having the very same seat, and very hear the
same Provinces.

9. This Empire must be only an Image of an Empire, an Image of the Roman
Empire. Rev. 13.14, 15.
Yet this Image must speak, and must be worshipped in all the Earth. The Papism
has no arms, nor citadels, that really make an Empire; it has nothing but
superstition and foolish fondness for all its arms; however it speaks, it
threatens, it promises, it teaches, it seduceth, and by this means it reigns.

10. The Empire of Antichrist must have ten horns, Rev. 13. end 17.
that is to say, ten Kings, vassals and subjects, props and upholders of its
throne. The Papism has always had under it ten principal Kings, that have
worshipped and maintained its power.

11. Antichrist must speak great things in his own behalf, Rev. 13.5.
but against God, for they must be blasphemies. The Papism says of it self and
its capital, great and mighty things, saying that Rome is eternal, that she is
infallible, that the Pope is Superior to all the Kings of the Earth, the
Spouse of the Church, the Vicar of J. Christ, God upon Earth, his Holiness, and
most holy Lord. And these arrogant pretensions are true blasphemies against
God, against J. Christ, and against the true Church the Spouse of J. Christ.

12. Antichrist must raise wars and cruel persecutions on the account of
Religion. Rev. 13.7.
For it is given to him to make war against the Saints, and to overcome them.
The Papism has bathed it self in humane and Christian blood for six or seven
hundred years.

13. The Empire of Antichrist must be an Empire raised up again, Rev. 13.3.
an head mortally wounded, but healed again. The Empire of the Papism is the
Roman Empire, that was brought to nothing by the Goths and Visigoths, but is
raised up again by the Popes.

14. Antichrist must ascribe to himself two powers, Rev. 13.11.
like to those which J. Christ has. Now the Lord has temporal and spiritual
power. There is no Potentate in the World, that says he has this double
power, but the Pope, the head of the Papism.

15. Antichrist must be an Empire, Rev. 13.18.
as has been proved; and the name of this Empire must contain the number 666.
The number 666. must be in the name of an Empire, and not in the name of a man.
There is no Empire in the World whose name contains 666, but that of the Latin
and the Roman; which is the name that the Papism glories in. And this should be
well observed, to lay open the vanity of the observations of the Papists, who
to elude this so plain a Character seek for certain names of men, in which they
would find 666. They would fain find it in the name of Luther; and very lately
M. Simon would find it in Roterodami. We must let them know, they do nothing;
that here it is not the name of a man, but of an Empire, that is treated of. Now
they will search in vain, they will not find any Empire in the world whose name
contains 666, besides the Roman, or Latin Empire.

16. The Kingdom of Antichrisi must be a Sodom, Rev. 11.
full of impurities and abominable crimes. The Papism in all the foregoing
ages, has been a sink of all the abominations of the Earth. There are no
filthy and odious crimes, of which its Clergy and its subjects have not made
themselves guilty. The proof of it at large may be seen in our just prejudices.

17. This Antichristian Empire must be a cruel Egypt, a Babylon, Rev. 18.4.
in which God will preserve his people notwithstanding its corruptions. Come
forth of Babylon my people. There is no false Religion, that has possessed the
Church more ages, and in which God has been able to preserve his Elect than
the Papism.

18. Antichristianism must be established in the Temple of God, i.e. in the
Church. There is no Kingdom, Empire and corrupt Religion together with it, that
is established in the Christian Church, but the papism.

19. The Antichristian Empire must be exceeding proud. 2 These. 2.
For its head must sit in the Temple of God, as if he were God. The papism has
carried pride beyond whatsoever can be imagined. It Is notorious.

20. Antichrist must worship Mahuzim, i. e. Patrons and Protectors. The Papism
worship its Guardian Angels and Saints, under whose protection it puts it self.

21. Antichristianism must be a Paganism raised up again. Rev. 11.
For the outward Court must be left to the Gentiles for 42 months. The Papism
has all the parts of a paganism built on Christianity, as has been so
evidently proved.

22. Antichrist must usurp the power of J. Christ. For he shall have the horns
of a Lamb, Rev. 13.11.
and shall speak as a Dragon. The Papism has usurped all the power of J.
Christ. The Pope acts, speaks, censures, absolves, damns, dethrones Kings, etc.
in the name and by the authority of J. Christ.

The Empire of the Papism ascended out of the Earth by little and little.
23. The Antichristian Empire must not be formed with noise; this beast must not
ascend out of the sea, as a monster that comes out of the deep, very great and
wholly formed in the twinkling of an eye, and which devours as soon as it is on
the Earth. It must arise out of the Earth as a plant, that is nothing in the
beginning, and which after many years grows a great Tree. Rev. 13.11.
For the second beast ascends out of the Earth, and not out of the Sea. The
Empire of the papism came by little and little as a Tree, which for many years
has been but a little herb.

24. The Empire and the Religion of Antichrist, must be established by false
signs and false wonders? It Is impossible to reckon up the false miracles,
Popety is the only religion that boasts of working signs and miracles.
which the papism has produced to establish its superstitions and its power.
It Is at this day the only religion in the World that pretends to work miracles.

25. The Christian Apostasy must be promoted by persons given to lies, lovers
of fables. It Is the true signification of the word which St. Paul uses
Pseudologoi. 1 Timothy 4.
There never was a religion in the World, that has produced so many fables as
the papism. I have proved it in my just prejudices.

26. The Teachers of Antichristianism must have a great appearance of
Austerity, they must despise and discredit marriage, and command abstinence
from meats. The Teachers of the papism make it necessary for them to remain
unmarried, and think they merit greatly by abstinence from meats.

27. Antichristianism was to appear in the world, when the head of the Roman
Emperors was beaten down. The papism in the time that the Roman Empire was
destroyed by the Goths and the Vandals, began to be sensible in its idolatry
and its tyranny.

28. This Empire must have its course in the later times. 1 Timothy 4.
It is unquestionable that we are in the later times; therefore the Empire of
the papism at this day subsisting is the Empire of Antichrist.

29. The Antichristian Empire must subdue three Kings of the ten. The Empire of
the papism, Dan. 7.
besides that it has subdued more than a third part of the temporal power of
the Western Kings, it has actually subjected to it self in fief and temporal
homage many Kingdoms. Among others, that of the Lombards, of which he
possesses one part, the City of Rome and its jurisdiction, and the Kingdom of
Naples, for which even at this day he makes homage be paid him every year.

30. The Antichristian Empire must put to death the Witnesses of the Truth of
God. Rev. 11.
The papism uses all imaginable attempts to extinguish those Societies, that
give testimony to the truth, and that oppose Superstition and Idolatry.

31. The Antichristian Empire must interdict fire and water, Rev. 13.
i. e. all commerce with those that will not pay homage to it, and carry its
mark and its name. The Papism excommunicates, damns, proscribes and puts under
interdict all those that will not submit themselves to its Laws, and that will
not bear the names of Roman Catholics.

32. Spiritual Babylon must be a Merchant, Rev. 18.
and there must be great traffic in all precious things, even in souls.
Therefore they that live of its Traffic, shall weep bitterly upon her ruins.
Of all the Religions in the World there was never any, where avarice, simony,
and the sale of spritual things reigned to that degree, as they have done in
the papism. If any one can tell of any one, they would much oblige us to show
it to us.

33. This Babylon must make all the Nations of the Earth drunk, Rev. 18.
to make them her slaves. The Papism has poured out on the people a spirit of
dullness, a drunkenness, a charm, which has bewitched them to run after her.

34. The color of Antichrist shall be purple and scarlet; Rev. 18.
his magnificence must be extraordinary, he must be adorned with gold, precious
stones, and pearls. The Court of Rome has purple for its color, its chief
Priest in the days of ceremonies is covered with gold and pearls, its Cardinals
are as Kings.

35. The reign of Antichrist must endure 1260. years, which shall be proved
afterward. The Empire of the papism has endured very near so long already.

CHAP. XXV.
How Antichrist came to be mistaken, being so well Characterised in the
Prophecies. A comparirison of J. Christ and Antichrist in the accidental
circumstances of their coming.

SEeing the Empire of the papism so expressly marked with the Characters of
Antichristianism, one cannot sufficiently wonder than men have so generally
mistaken him. It Is a scandal on the faithful, and a prejudicable opinion that
seems favorable to the papists. Therefore we must say something of the
reasons, that have made Antichrist be mistaken when he did come.

God will not have the Prophecies understood, that they may be accomplished.
The first and the fundamental reason is, the profound will of God, who will not
have prophecies be understood, to the end they may have their accomplishment
with the more ease. If the Jews had understood the prophecies touching the
Messiah, if they had apprehended that he must have been a man of griefs,
accustomed to weakness, that he must have been led as a Lamb to the slaughter,
and offer up his soul as an oblation for sin; and that he was not to be a
temporal King, at least in his first coming, they would have been on their
guard. Moreover seeing J. Christ working of miracles, teaching so holy a
Doctrine, leading so holy a life, they would not have mistaken him, though he
had not been a King. They would not have crucified him, and the Prophecies
would not have been fulfilled. This example of J. Christ, mistaken by that
whole Nation for which he came will be very useful to us.

First, It will teach us, J. Christ mistaken by the Jews, instructs us how
Antichrist might be might be mistaken by the Christians.
that we ought not to be scandalized in any manner at this, because the whole
Church during so many ages did mistake Antichrist, nor grant that as a
favorable opinion for the papism. For the thing is not more strange than what
happened to the Jews. All the whole Nation except a small number knew not J.
Christ. All the whole Church except a few persons, did not know that the papism
was Antichristianism.

Secondly, This example teaches us, that as it was necessary for the
accomplishment of the Prophecies touching J. Christ, that he should not be
known; in like manner it was necessary that the Prophecies touching Antichrist,
should not be understood by the Church, to the end they might be accomplished.
If the Church had understood that Rome was to be the seat of Antichrist, To the
end that the Prophecies touching Antichrist might be accomplished, it was
necessary that they should not be understood.
that the Bishop of Rome was to be the head of the Antichristian Empire, that
the invocation of Saints was to be a Christian Apostasy, that the worship of
Relics and the adoration of Images was to be an abomination, by which the
Sanctuary should be defiled, the Doctors of the Church would never have
suffered the establishment of tyranny at Rome, and idolatry in the Temples.

A comparison of the accidents of the coming of Christ and Antichrist.
Thirdly, This event common to Jesus Christ and Antichrist, not to be known by
those in the midst of of whom they came, gives occasion to make a reflection on
the profound and mysterious dispensation of providence, that would make this
conformity between two subjects, in other respects so different and opposite.
But as opposite as they are, they agree in the manner of their coming, and in
the accidents of that coming; which we will presently see by the comparison
that we will forth with make.

Antichrist is a false Christ; he is a false Image of him. Now it is of the
essence of false Images, to have something that imitates the things for which
they would pass. A parallel between what Jesus Christ is, and what the Pope
pretends to be, or is.
First, Jesus Christ is the Holy of Holies; Antichrist calls himself his
Holiness, and most holy Lord. Secondly, Jesus Christ is the true Bridegroom of
the Church; Antichrist assumes the name of the second Bridegroom. Thirdly,
Jesus Christ is the Vicar and Lieutenant of the Father, sent on the Earth to
act in his name. Our Antichrist also calls himself the Vicar of Jesus Christ.
Fourthly, Jesus Christ is he who opens, and no man shuts; it is he that
distributes the indulgence of his Father, and gives remission of sins.
Antichrist arrogates the same rights to himself. Fifthly, I. Christ was
promised by the Prophets: so Antichrist has been foretold. 6ly, Jesus Christ
was described by such lively strokes, that it was almost impossible not to know
him; for is there any thing more express than the 53th Chapter of Esai, and the 9th
of Daniel? Yet he was not known. Antichrist, though so exactly described as we
have seen, was not acknowledged by them that nourisht him in their bosom. 7ly,
The coming of I. Christ was marked by a circumstance so notable, that one could
not but know it. It Is the destruction of the Jewish nation. Shiloh was to come,
when the Lawgiver, and the Scepter were departed from Judah. Genesis 49.
The coming of Antichrist was marked by the ruin of the temporal Roman Empire;
a circumstance so remarkable, that all the World saw it. 8ly, I. Christ was
expected at the time when he came. The Jews perceived, that the time of the
fulfilling the Oracles did draw nigh, they reckoned up the 70 weeks, and
apprehended that the end of them could not be far off. The Christians expected
Antichrist at the time when he was revealed. We learn it from St. Ierom, who
seeing the Empire run to ruin by the invasion of the Quades, Goths,
Burgundians, etc. confesses the time of the coming of Antichrist could not be
far off. 9ly, I. Christ not known by so many people, was however acknowledged
by some of the nation of the Jews. Antichrist not known almost by the whole
Church, however has been so by diverse particular persons, whose testimonies we
have produced in the first part of our prejudices against popery.

That which is more admirable in this parallel, is, that I. Christ and
Antichrist were not known almost for the very same reasons.

The figurative high expressions are the cause why Christ and Antichrist are
not known.
The Prophecies that were designed to make known I. Christ, were in part the
cause why he was not acknowledged. For if in some places he be represented to
us in his natural and true estate, in others he is represented in lively and
bright colors, with magnificent and pompous figures. So that by these
descriptions one would have taken him for a King of this World, and his Empire
for an earthly one. The Jews stretching these descriptions of the H. Spirit,
not comprehending the sense of them, and not entering into the meaning of those
figures, had an Idea of the Messiah quite different from what in truth he was
to be in his first coming. In like manner the Prophecies concerning Antichrist,
are expressed sometimes in terms plain and natural enough, but at other times in
high terms borrowed from the most hideous objects that are in the Old
Testament, of Sodom, Egypt, Babylon, the apostasy, a revolt from the faith, the
Doctrine of Demons, the Cup of abominations, adulteries, whoredoms; every
thing is brought in here, and upon these high expressions men have stretched the
Idea of Antichrist.

The two comings of I. Christ, that gave occasion to these two sorts of
Prophecies, The chief reason why Antichrist was not known, was the means of his
original, and the insensibleness of his growth.
were the occasion of the mistake. I. Christ was to come in a state of
humiliation and abasement, and he must come in a state of grandeur and glory.
The Prophets often speak of this last state, the Jews give heed only to this
sort of Prophecies and neglect the others, affixing them to another subject.
The two degrees of Antichrist's coming have done the same thing. The
Antichristian Empire in its beginning was low, creeping, its first years did
savor of weakness and infancy. The malice, the corruption, the pride, the
tyranny, the Idolatry of this Empire, were but in their beginning, they were
buds and the first draughts, which men did not perceive.

And this is the great reason why Antichrist has not been known. If the Papism
in the fourth age had endeavored to introduce into the Church, both the
tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and the idolatrous worship of the creatures,
such as it was afterward, all the world would have revolted from him, and the
Antichristianism would easily have been observed. But in that way that the
Devil took, it was impossible that it should not succeed. The first degree of
tyranny and superstition was so small, that though it was new, yet it was not
at all perceived. What evil could one imagine, for instance, in having a
respect for the memory of the Martyrs, and making an honorable mention of them
in the celebration of the mysteries? How could one have been on ones guard,
when nothing was treated of a yet, but some honor of precedence between a
Bishop and a Priest; and between a Bishop of one see and of another? I am also
sure that the mystery of iniquity was advanced by ways where the Apostles had
no suspicion of evil. For instance, it was the custom in the Apostles time
sometimes to hold their assemblies in the Dormitories and on the tombs of the
martyrs. I believe, it is to this that Saint Paul referrs, in that famous
passage in the 15th of the first Epist. to the Corint. If the dead rise not,
why are they then haptized for the dead? That is to say, to what purpose do you
honor the martyrs, so as to celebrare the mysteries on their tombs, if they
are no longer any thing, This did appear the most innocent thing in the world.
and must never return? a To pray to God in a Dormitory, and upon the tomb of a
dead man, to testify that one would dye in the same faith wherein the Martyr
died? Yet this was the first fountain of the popish Idolatry about Saints. From
the first degree to the second, there is but one step; in like manner the
passage is insensible from the second to the third. And men found themselves
sunk down into superstition, and swallowed up in tyranny, without perceiving
it, and without its being possible for them to perceive it. When corruptions
are insensible in their progress, those that are engaged in them, cannot know
them. They must be without. When one is carried in a vessel, one does not
perceive its motion, one must be out of the vessel and in a fixed point to
discern it. In this manner it was, that the Devil labored about this mystery
of iniquity in the time of St. Paul; he began to work, as he speaks, he began
with vending a little wicked Philosophy about the mediation and intercession of
Angels: Coloss. 2.
Platonic Philosophy, which is the very same that the Apostle calls the
Doctrine of Demons; by which some would introduce the serving of Angles, from
which Saint Paul would remove the Colossians, Chapter 2. v. 8.
in saying to them, beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, v. 18.
after the tradition of men, etc. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things,
which he has not seen. Satan also beat out a path for tyranny by those
disputes for precedence and honors; of which we may see a pattern in the
differences that reigned in the Church of Corinth, where one said; I am of
Apollo, I am of Paul, and I am of Christ. But who would have suspected, that
things could have gone so far, as they have since proceeded?

The false Idea which the ancients had of Antichrist, before he was revealed,
has been one cause of Antichrist's not being known when he did come.
Lastly, The ancient Writers, and the prejudices which men took from their
errors and oversights, did mightily serve to the causing Antichrist not to be
known. The further one is removed from the accomplishment of the Prophecies,
the less one understands them. So it is certain, the Fathers of the second and
third age understood almost nothing of the Revelation. Yet they did busy
themselves to interpret it, and have vented nothing but vain imaginations about
it. They had in their minds a Chimaera of an earthly paradise yet in being.
This terrestrial Paradise must not be useless; one dream draws another after i^
as one deep calls on another. This earthly para^^se then must be designed to
receive souls, and ^ontain them before they were translated into the Heavenly
paradise, which was not to be till after the day of judgment. Into this
terrestrial Paradise were translated in body and in soul, according to them,
Enoch and Elias. For there was no color for the putting them in the superior
Paradise, while all the Saints and Patriarchs were only in the inferior one.
Now why were Enoch and Elias translated both body and soul into that place? It
has been found very convenient to place them there, expecting the last day of
judgment to be sent back into the World to encounter Antichrist. And so Enoch
and Elias are transformed into those two witnesses, that were to prophecy
clothed in sackcloth for three years and a half, which are the days of
Antichrist. There was no color for making Enoch and Elias sojourn on the Earth
1260. years. So that it was necessary to take the 1260 years, of which the
Revelation speaks, for so many natural days, which make three natural years and
a half. The name of Antichrist made them believe he would call himself Christ.
The Temple of God, where St. Paul says, that the son of perdition must sit,
has made them think of the Temple of Solomon, and they have concluded that
Jerusalem was to be the seat of this Empire. Consequently that Antichrist must
be a Jew; and for the reasons we have observed above, he must moreover be of
the tribe of Dan, and by consequence a single person. Behold the visions which
St.Irenaeus vends in his fifth book against Haeresies; Why Antichrist was not
known fooner. The Fathers did copy one another without consideration.
visions for which we are apparently indebted to him, that forged the false
Oracles of the Sibyls in the second age. They that came after him adopted these
vain imaginations, and added others to them. The Ancients did copy one another,
almost without any judgment, and always without consideration. Those that were
very fond of this vain phantome of a Chimerical Antichrist, could not discern
the Character of the true Antichrist. The later ages have been much more
enlightened. The differences of the Popes with the Kings of Europe, and
particularly with the Emperors, opened the eyes of many, and made them see the
Antichristian Empire in Rome Christian. But being in part very fond of the old
Idea of Antichrist, in part being kept in by that respect they had for a See,
which they believed was once the Chair of Saint Peter, in part through
cowardice and want of zeal; and above all because the time designed by
providence was not yet come, they stopped in the way, and never reached to a
perfect Idea of the Antichristian Empire. And in this manner the prejudices,
the ignorance, the passions, the interest of the flesh, and the subtilty of the
Devil have detained the truth in profound darkness, till in these later times
God has set them in a perfect light.

But one cannot sufficiently wonder, that in so great a light, yet there have
been two persons sufficiently prepossessed or ill enough disposed, for the
mistaking this Antichrist. The learned Grotius and Dr. Hammond have unhappily,
and to the scandal of all Protestants, used great endeavors to turn these
prophecies of the Revelation another way. The one through his being wedded to
the papism, which he defended with all his might against the late Andrew Rivet.
And the other apparently for the same reason as Grotius, and it may be so
through his jealousy for the Episcopal order, imagining that if the Pope, who
ca^^^, himself the head of the Bishops, should be made Antichrist, some
disgrace would redound thence to the whole Episcopal order. But Joseph Mede,
the learned Usher Archbishop of Armagh, the learned Andrew Willet, and so many
other learned English men, that appear so zealously for the government and
order of Bishops, have continued to find Antichrist and the Pope in the
descriptions, which the prophecies have left us of him. And to speak freely, I
am so strongly persuaded of this as an Article of the faith of the true
Christians, that I cannot hold them for good ones, who deny this truth after the
events, and the labors of so many great men have made it so very evident. I
reckon the blindness of the papists, and of their favorers in this point,
among those prodigies, wherein we must acknowledge something supernatural.

The end of the First Part.
THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROPHECIES, OR THE Approaching Deliverance of the
CHURCH.

A work, wherein it is proved, that the Papism is the Antichristian Empire;
that that Empire is not far from its ruin; that the present persecution may end
in three years and a half. After which, the destruction of Antichrist shall
begin, which shall be finished in the beginning of the next Age; and lastly,
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall come on the Earth.

The second Edition Corrected and Enlarged by almost a third part, and the
explication of all the Visions of the Revelation, and of many Chapters
concerning mystical Theology.

Tome the second.

Written in French by Mr. PETER JURIEU, the present Minister of the French
Church at Rotterdam. And from this second Edition faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1687.

THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROPHECIES, OR THE Approaching Deliverance of the
CHURCH.
THE SECOND PART.
Of the end of the Antichristian Empire; when it must be destroyed; the
circumstances of its ruin, and what shall be the Estate of the Church after the
ruin of that Empire.
CHAP. I.
Of the duration of the Kingdom of Antichrist. A refutation of that dream, that
it must last but three years and a half. Ten Arguments which demonstrate, that
that supposition is false and impossible.

IN the First Part of this Work, we have found Antichrist and the Antichristian
Empire; in this we proceed to seek out the time and the circumstances of its
end. That we may succeed well in this enquiry, we must do four things. I. We
must know, how long the Antichristian Empire must last. II. We must see, where
we ought to begin the 1260 days, which the Holy Spirit assigns it. III.
After-wards we shall see, where they must end. IV. And lastly, we shall seek
for that which has not yet been found in the Revelation, that is, the
circumstances of the fall of that Antichristian Empire.
We shall begin with that question, which we have above laid down as the
chiefest one; that is, The time of the duration of that Antichristian Empire.

The importance of this question, whether Antichrist must reign 1260 days, or
1260 years.
The Roman Church supposes, that this duration cannot be above three years and
a half, i. e. 1260. natural days; and we pretend, this must be understood of
1260. prophetical days, which are 1260. years. It Is so important a matter, that
on this all the rest depends. If this supposition of the duration of Antichrist
merely and simply for three years and a half, be false, all that the Roman
Church says of Antichrist, is false. And if we have reason to say, that the
Antichristian Empire must endure 1260. years, this Empire must of necessity
have begun a long time since; and having begun a long time ago, it must of
necessity also be the papism. This is therefore a particular, which we must
carefully mind; and in the beginning we must lay down these three indisputable
principles.

I. That the duration of the 1260. days, wherein the woman in the 12th Chapt.
of the Revelation, must be fed in the desert; which is also called in the same
place a time, The 1260 days. The 42 months. The three years and half; a time,
times, and half a time are the same poriod.
times, and half a time: The 42 months, during which the Court must be left to
the Gentiles, according to what is said in the 11th Chap. The 1260 days, during
which the two witnesses are to prophecy clothed in sackcloth, as it is foretold
in the same 11th Chapter. And lastly, the 42. months given to the first beast
of the 13th Chapter of the Revel. to exercise his power. All these different
periods, I say, are one and the same period, and signify the duration of the
Antichristian Empire. This cannot be disputed.

The second principle is this, that in that Prophecy, the days, the years, and
the months, may be taken for natural days, months, and years; or for
prophetical ones, a day for a year. Sometimes the Prophets count the time as
other men do.
This might signify natural days: for sometimes the Prophets do so speak; they
reckon the time as other men do. Jeremy reckoned 70 years for the duration of
the captivity; and these years are natural ones. It Is certain also, that in the
period of the thousand years, designed for the reign of the Church after the
destruction of Antichrist, the years are taken for natural years.

But it is not less certain, The Papists cannot deny, but that the 1260 days
may signify 1260 years. Chap. 9. Chap. 4. v. 4.6.
that these days and these years may be taken mystically for prophetical days
and years. It Is confessed, that the 70 weeks of Daniel signify 70 weeks of years.
God said to Ezekiel, Thou shall sleep on thy left side, and lay the iniquity of
the house of Israel upon it; according to the number of the days that thou
shall lie upon it, thou shall bear their iniquity. I have appointed thee each
day for a year. Numb. 14.34.
God said to the Israelites, according to the number of the days in which ye
searched the Land, even 40 days, each day for a year, shall you bear your
iniquities, even 40 years. This could not be obscure to the Israelites, who
were accustomed to this style; and who knew there were weeks of years in their
Calendar, as well as weeks of days; and that a week of years answered to that
of days, one year for one day?

The third principle is this, that here the number of three years and a half,
42 months, and 1260 days, cannot signify an indefinite time. As it sometimes
happens, The number 1260 must be a definite number, not an indefinite one.
that the Holy Spirit by a determinate number means an undetermined one. A way
that would be extremely advantageous to the partisans of Rome. For when one
shall have demonstrated, that it is absolutely impossible, that that which is
predicted concerning the Antichristian Empire, can be fulfilled in the compass
of three years and a half, it would be very useful for them, if they could say,
we must not take this so strictly in the literal sense; that it may signify
three times ten, three times twenty, or more, according as the Holy Spirit
oftentimes means an indefinite number by a definite one. But here that cannot
be. There are certain numbers by which the Prophets use to describe an
indefinite time, by reason of a certain privilege those numbers have. As that
of three, because it is the first odd number, and the number of the persons of
the Trinity; that of seven, because of the seven days of the creation; that of
twelve, because of the twelve Patriarchs, the twelve Tribes, and the twelve
Apostles; that of 100, and that of 1000, because these are numbers, that
according to the custom of men, are often designed to signify a great
undetermined quantity. But we shall not find any examples of broken numbers, as
that of three and a half, of 42, and 1260 taken for indefinite numbers. It Is
true, the Revelation speaks of the 144 thousand sealed ones. Now the number of
144, is not less a broken one than that of 42. But it is, because 144 is the
product of that of 12 multiplied by it self. The Holy Spirit takes twelve
thousand sealed persons of every Tribe, 12 times 12 make 144. Here a reason
cannot be given, why God should choose 1260 days to mark out an indefinite time.
There is no middle way therefore; they must be so many years, It must be 1260
years, or 1260 days, and no more.
or so many simple days. So that when we shall have proved, that the course of
this Empire is not three years and a half, we shall have proved also that it is
1260 years. To prove that it is not three years and a half, we need but run
through the History of this Empire, according as we find it in the book of the
Revelation.

The first Argument against the three years and half. One half of the
Revelation would be taken up, in giving an account of the events of only three
years and a half.
First of all we must know, that according to the greatest part of
Interpreters, almost the whole Revelation is spent in foretelling us, and
setting in order the events that must happen to the Church during this reign of
Antichrist. At least, it is certain, that it is the subject of one half of this
book: the 11th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th and 19th Chapters contain the
birth, progress, finishing, ruin, and fall of this Antichristian Kingdom. Let
any one judge, if there be any likelihood, that this only prophetical book,
which the Apostles have left us for the time of the N. Testament, moves but
upon three years and a half, and has omitted the events of almost two thousand
years. So that the general Idea of this Prophecy cannot bear this imagination;
but let us come to particulars.

Second Argument, these three years and a half cannot agree with what is said of
the first beast in the 13th Chap. of the Revelation.
Second, The 11th Chapt. begins to speak of this Antichristian Empire; but
because this is but as a general History, and an abridgement, it is in this
general account, that the vision of the three years and a half is hid, and it is
from hence it has been taken. Let us see if this can agree with the places
where the Prophet enlarges this short description. We have in the 13th Chap. a
representation of this Empire under the emblems of two beasts, of which one had
seven heads and ten horns, and the other but one head and two horns. We there
see in the first place a beast with seven heads and ten horns. It has been
confessed to us, that this is Antichrist. We have proved, that the word beast
signifies an Empire, consisting of a founder and his successors. Now see a fine
succession, and a very considerable time, that same of three years and a half,
to be called an Empire, and to be meant by a beast. Certainly this beast with
seven heads and ten horns, is the Roman Empire in its whole extent, from its
founder Romulus even to Antichrist, who must be according to Bellarmine, the
last Roman Enperour, though without the name of a Roman Emperor. And this
Roman Empire is brought in anew expressly, for the seventh head with ten horns,
which make Antichrist, i. e. the ten Kings his vassals, which give him their
power. In truth, three years and a half would they well deserve, that the Holy
Spirit should represent them to us, and lay before our eyes afresh, all this
great Empire of almost 3000 years duration? For by the confession of our
adversaries, the Roman Empire does yet last, and shall continue even to
Antichrist, who shall be the last King of it. Now there is about two thousand
four or five hundred years since the first foundation of Rome. Moreover
Antichrist is the seventh head of the Roman Empire. This is so evident, that it
cannot be gain-sayed. Now must there not be some proportion between the heads
and their durations? The head of the Kings lasted near 200 years, that of the
Emperors above 500 years: what proportion is there between so long a duration,
and this of three years and a half? As for us, we pretend, that the last head
must endure as long as the other six. Rome under Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs,
Tribunes of the people, perpetual Dictators, and Emperors has lasted about
1250 years; it must be as long under the Popes. But at least, the head of
Antichrist should last at Rome some ages, to have its duration proportionable
to that of the other heads. It signifies nothing to us what period is assigned
to it, provided it be not that of three natural years and a half.

For we have proved that if it cannot be taken for three natural years and a
half, it must necessarily be taken for prophetical years.

Third Arg. in three years and a half Antichrist cannot prevail over the Nations
of the earth, neither by violence, nor by seducing them.
Thirdly, In the same Chapter, the same Antichristian Empire appears again
under the form of a second beast, that has but one head and two horns. Yet
once more, see a great mystery, for a matter that is to endure but three years
and a half, in a period of 2000 years. Of the first beast the Prophet says,
that it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them; and
also to him was given power over every Tribe, Tongue and Nation. And of the
second, that he should deceive them that dwell on the Earth, by reason of those
miracles, which he had power to do, etc. and that all, both small and great,
free and bond should receive his mark in their hand, and in their foreheads.
Afterward it is said of this Antichristian Empire, under the emblem of a woman
sitting on a beast with seven heads and ten horns, that all the Kings of the
Earth have committed whoredom with her, that she made drunk all the Inhabitants
of the Earth with the wine of her whoredoms, and that all the Nations drank of
the wine of her whoredom. This signifies two things; one, that this
Antichristian Empire must subdue all Nations; the second, that it must seduce
them by its signs and false miracles. Now can any one imagine, that three years
and a half suffice, first to conquer an Empire and overcome all Nations;
secondly, to seduce and pervert them, and bring them to deny the Christian
Religion. If Antichrist were to use that method that is used in France, and
were to use no other but that, it may be in three years and a half, he could
make many Kingdoms abjure Christianity, as in six months he has made the
reformation be abjured by more than a million of persons. But it is plain, the
Antichrist of the Papists is not to use this way. So that one may say, the
Clergy of France have outstript their Antichrist, and that there never was a
more hellish sort of persecution. It is clear, I say, that Antichrist is to
carry away men by seducing them; for otherwise, why should he work signs and
miracles? and though he were to pervert the Christians with Dragoons, at least
certainly he ought to have conquered them by arms before hand, and have
overturned every other Empire. Can he conquer all the World in three years?
where are the examples of so swift a conquest? Alexander the Great is
represented in the vision of the four Beasts, as a Leopard, by reason of the
speediness of his conquests. Yet he spent more than three years and a half, and
had conquered but one part of Asia when he died. Are three years and a half
sufficient to reassemble the Jews from all the Countries of the World, to make
them masters of the whole Universe, to re-establish the mosaical worship, and
rebuild the Temple of Solomon? Only the building of the Temple the first time,
took up seven years. The labored more than 40 years about that of Herod; and
this of Antichrist, which will apparently be more magnificent, shall be finished
in a few months. If there were therefore nothing else but what were to be done
by the violence of Antichrist, according to the very supposition of the popish
Doctors, it would be impossible to be done in 30 years.

How much more impossible is it, that he should attain his end in so short a
time, in what he is to do by the means of seducing? His false Prophet must
seduce all the inhabitants of the Earth, i. e. all the Subjects of the Roman
Empire, according to the style of the Writers in those times, who defined the
Roman Empire by the habitable earth. There must be much more time to seduce the
Nations than to conquer them. If Antichrist was to establish his Religion by
violence only, it might be said that in building up his Empire he would build
up his Religion; but it is clearer than the day, that he must persuade and
seduce. It Is for this purpose that he works Signs. There Is no need of
miracles to establish a Religion by arms. The Prophecy says expressly, that he
shall make drunk the Nations of the Earth with the wine of his whoredoms. Which
signifies great obstinacy, drunkeness of mind, persuasion. Now behold a strange
thing, in less than three years and a half, a seducer utterly destroys the
whole Christian Religion, and by the means of persuasion seduces all the
Christians, and persuades them to become Jews. Fourth Argument, the mere fall
of the Antichristian Empire must take up more years, according to the 14th
Chap. of the Revel.


Fourthly, We have in the 14th Chap. an abridgement of the History of the ruin
of spiritual Babylon. She is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon that great City. We
have proved before, that Babylon and the Antichristian Empire are the same
thing. Now the Prophet in this Chapt. concerning the end of the Antichristian
Empire, makes two periods of his last ruin; the first is called the harvest.
Then he that sat on the Cloud thrust in his sickle on the Earth, c. 14.8.
and the Earth was reaped. v. 16.
The second is called the vintage. v. 19.
And the other Angel thrust in his sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Vine
of the Earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God. It is
plain, at least, that these two periods must be distant one from the other, as
much as ordinarily the harvest is from the vintage. Now it is well known, that
the prophecies represent in a little, what the events show in the great; and
consequently as the harvest is many days distant from the vintage, it will be
necessary that the two parts of the fall of the Antichristian Empire, should be
many years distant one from the other. Now if merely the fall of the Babylonish
Empire takes up many years, the flourishing and the strength of this Empire
must take up much more time. An Empire so strong, cannot be ruined in the
twinkling of an eye, and in one months time. Moreover, there must be an
interval of rest between the harvest and the vintage. All this necessarily
supposes more than three years and a half.

The 15th and 16th Chapt. contain the vision of the seven viols of the wrath of
God, that must be poured out on the Earth. It is evident that all these seven
viols respect the Antichristian Empire. The first plague is an ulcer, that
seizes on the men that had the mark of the beast. c. 16.2.
The 15th viol is cast on the seat of the beast; v. 10.
at the seventh, v. 19.
the great City, which is the same beast, c. 15.2.
is divided into three parts. And before the viols were given to the seven
Angels, they that had obtained victory over the beast, over his image, over his
mark, and over his name, are represented as rejoicing in the presence of the
seven Angels, that had received the seven plagues.

The fifth Argument, the seven viols of the 15th Chap. are seven periods of the
fall of the Antichristian Empire; and every one of these periods contains more
than an Age.
Fifthly, All this makes it appear, that these seven viols are seven periods,
included in the duration of Antichrists Empire, under which God must pour out
his terrible judgments on that Empire. These seven periods must divide his
duration into seven parts, very near equal, even though one should suppose that
the seven periods contain this whole duration, every viol and every period
would have but six months to last, according to the supposition of the Romish
Doctors. The truth is, that these seven viols are included in the half of the
duration of Antichrists Empire, or a little more; For it is the History of the
fall of that Empire. If it lasts but three years and a half, it is necessary,
that at the least it should be two years a growing; so there will remain no
more than eighteen months for these seven viols, and to every period we must
assign a little more than two months. This is very plainly absurd. There is no
example of the like matter in all the Prophecies. The seven seals, the seven
trumpets of the Revelation contain many ages; it is ridiculous to suppose that
the seven viols contain but some months. We shall see afterward, that every
viol extends it self to more than a 100 years.

The sixth Argument, what is foretold in the 17th Chap. cannot come to pass in
three years and a half.
Sixthly, The 17th Chapt. represents to us the Empire and the Religion of
Antichrist, under the emblem of a woman sitting on a beast with seven heads and
ten horns. It Is said, this woman must make her self drunk with the blood of the
Martyrs. That first of all, the ten Kings must give their power to the beast;
that afterward, c. 17.6.
they must fight against the Lamb in favor of the beast; v. 13.
and that at last, v. 14.
these very same Kings must change their side and their opinion, v. 16.
Strip the whore, make her desolate, eat her flesh, burn her with fire: can so
many changes in men's spirits, and in the world, can so many revolutions happen
in three years and a half?

In the same Chapt. we find a head that lasts a little. v. 10.
The seven heads are seven Kings, five are fallen, the other is not yet come,
and when he comes, he must continue a short space. I once believed, that he
that was to come, and was to continue a little time, was Antichrist. But
looking more carefully into the Text, with reference to the events, it is plain
that that cannot be. We must therefore; v. 11.
by him that was to continue a little time, understand the eighth King. And the
beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth King. And this King is the
second part of the head of the Emperors, which being divided into two,
Christian Emperors, and Pagan ones, makes eight heads, or eight Kings, together
with the other six. This eighth head, which is that of the Christian Emperors,
in truth lasted but a very little while, viz. from Constantine to Valentinian,
who was assassinated by Maximus, about 130 or 140 years. See what the Holy
Spirit calls a little time. Judge if the Empire of Antichrist, that must last
longer than the eighth head, must last but three years and a half.

The 7th Argument, the duration of the Empire of old Babel is the figure of the
duration of the Antichristian Empire
Seventhly, The 18th Chap. contains a larger description of the last ruin of
this Antichristian Empire. It Is there represented, as a great City called
Babylon, rich, merchandising, pufft up with the concourse of people, and of
their riches carried thither for many ages.

Its inhabitants are described, as Merchants grown rich by its commerce. She is
described as a City abounding in pleasure, as well as in riches. For all that
contributes to pleasure and luxury, enters into this description. Chap. 1^. v.
12.15.
Gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, purple, silk, sweet smelling vessels,
and most precious wood; brass, iron, marble, cinnamon, v. 22.
perfumes, ointments, incense, wine, oil, musicians, players on the harp,
pipers, trumpetters; In conscience, is this the description of an Empire and of
a City, that must last but three years and a half; that in that little space of
time must be built, raised, enriched, and ruined?

First of all, the Antichristian Empire is called Babylon, because ancient
Babylon was its type and figure. That Empire of old Babel lasted many ages; and
should these many ages be the type and figure of these three years and a half?
Can this be said or thought? It happens well, that the Prophets represent
future things that are great, by types that are much less. This is the very
nature of types. They are little draughts of that, which the event must produce
at large. So days in the types, must naturally represent years. But it is absurd
to say, that years in the types represent but days in the things signified by
the types.

The 8th Argument, spiritual Babel is represented as a City en riched by a long
commerce.
Eighthly, Moreover, does a City become rich in three years and a half? What
kind of commerce then must that of this Antichristian Empire be, that shall
make the fortunes of her merchants in so little a time? The H. Spirit borrows
these figures from what is done and seen inhumane life. It Is seen therein, that
Cities become rich and powerful by long commerce. But never were any of them
seen to attain to a surprising greatness, by two or three years commerce.

Lastly. A City and an Empire, that are raised and destroyed in three years and
a half, have not time to gather together voluptuous things, The 9th Argument,
spiritual Babylon is represented as having enjoyed a long peace.
and to enjoy them. It must always fight to conquer, to grow greater, or to
defend it self. If the Antichristian Empire lasts but three years and a half,
this is not too much to establish its greatness by sword and by fire, and to
repel that force that must destroy it. Of necessity Antichrist and his
adherents must always be in violent motion, in trouble and in war. Whereas the
description of spiritual Babylon imports the possession of a long peace, during
which she must heap together both all the riches, and all the pleasures of the
World.

The 10th Argument, the ruin of the Babylonish Empire according to its
description in the 19th Chapter cannot be wrought in three years and a half.
The 19th Chapt. is the last, where in the ruin of this Empire is described to
us. We there see him who is called, the faithful and the true, and the Word of
God, i. e. J. Christ, that prepares himself for the combat, that causes the
armies of Heaven to follow him, that calls all the birds of Heaven and all the
beasts of the Earth to the slaughter, that gives battles, that obtains the
victory, that casts the beast and the false Prophet into the lake of fire and
brimstone. For this alone, more is necessary than three years and a half. For
an Empire so vast, so large, and so strong as that of Antichrist must be, is
not destroyed in a few days.

CHAP. II.
The last Argument against the Chimaera of three years and half, taken from the
time, during which the Temple was profaned by Antiochus. Four quite different
times set down for that in Daniels Prophecies. An explication, and a
reconciling of those four times. An application of these four times to the
Kingdom of Antichrist, and the ruin of that Kingdom.

I Draw my last Argument against this chimerical duration of three years and a
half, from the most famous of all the types of Antichrist, viz. Antiochus
Epiphanes. It Is he that persecuted the Church, that oppressed it, that defiled
the Temple, that caused the daily sacrifice to cease for the space of three
natural years and a half. Wherein it is evident, that God has set him as a
type of Antichrist, who during the space of three prophetical years and a half,
was in like manner to seize on the Church, to fill the Temple of God with
Idols, and make the pure service of God, the continual sacrifices of praises
and prayers, which God has reserved for himself alone, to cease. Now we must
remember this maxim, which we have already advanced in the foregoing Chapter,
viz. that types are oenigmatical, and short pictures of great events, great in
their extent as well as in their qualities. Types are short pictures in a
little.
This maxim is evident, it has no need of proofs. And according to this
principle, seeing the times must be short, as well as the other strokes, it is
clear, that contracted years cannot be better represented than by days, not by
months, for a month is the revolution of the Moon, and consequently it cannot be
proper to represent the revolution of the Sun, which is a quite different Star.
But the day and the year are the revolutions of the Sun; the year is the great
revolution, the day the little one. If one would represent in short the great
revolution of the Sun, one cannot do it better than by the small revolution of
the same Star. And thence I conclude, that the oppression of the Church by
Antiochus, who was the type, having lasted 1260 little revolutions of the Sun,
they must represent so many of the great revolutions of the same Star. I spend
a Chapter on this last proof, because in the duration of the oppression of the
Jewish Church by Antiochus Epiphanes, there are considerable difficulties,
which spring from the differences of the Prophecies of Daniel and the events,
such as the first book of the Macchabees represents them to us. I hope that the
clearing these difficulties about the duration of the persecution of Antiochus,
will give us such light into the duration of the Kingdom of Antichrist, as will
please the curious.

Four times noted by Daniel for the duration of Antiochus's persecution.
We must therefore observe, that the Prophet Daniel, describes the time of the
duration of the persecution that was to befall his nation, in four different
manners.

First of all, he says in the eighth Chap. after having spoken of Antiochus
Epiphanes, under the emblem of the little horn; C. 8. v. 13.
Then I heard one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that certain
Saint that spoke, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice
and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to
be trodden under foot? And he said unto me, unto 2300 days; then shall the
Sanctuary be cleansed. v. 14.


Daniel reassuming the affair of Antiochus in the eleventh Chapter, and
continuing it in the twelfth, observes three time. Cap. 12. v. 6, 7.
And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders? And I heard the man
clothed in linen, which was on the waters of the river, when he held up his
right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and swore by him that lives for
ever, that it shall be for a time, times and a half: It is plain, this
signifies one year, two years, and half a year, three years and a half. So then
you see the second time.

The third is observed in the same Chapt. C. 12. v. 11.
And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination that makes desolate set up, there shall be 1290 days.

Lastly, The fourth time is found in the following verse, Blessed is he that
waits, v. 12
and comes to the 1335 days. See then four different numbers.

Two thousand three hundred evenings and mornings. 2300.


A time, times and half a time, 1260.
that make three years and a half, and days.

One thousand two hundred fourscore and ten days. 1290.


And lastly, 1335.
one thousand three hundred and thirty five days.

The mystery of the four numbers.
I do not know whether any Interpreters have understood the mystery, but see how
I explain it.

First, we must know, that the first number of 2300 mornings and evenings, must
not be taken for 2300 days, as Interpreters take it; which forces them to go
back to the very beginning of the reign of Antiochus. Two thousand three
hundred mornings and evenings taken for so many days, 2300 mornings and
evenings make but 1150 days.
make six years, four months, twenty days. The profanation ended in the 148th
year of the Era of the Seleucidae as we shall see. So that we must go back
even to the 142 year, to find there the beginning of these six years, four
months, and twenty days. And it were necessary that the profanation of the
Sanctuary, and the cessation of the daily sacrifice should then begin. For the
Prophet speaks expressly of the cessation of the daily sacrifice. How long shall
be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice? And he receives this Answer, for
2300 evening and mornings. Yet it is certain, by the History of the Macchabees,
and by the Prophecy of the twelfth Chapter of Daniel, that the profanation of
the Sanctuary, and the cessation of the daily sacrifice, begin not till three
years after, viz. the 145 year of the Era of the Seleucidae. I am persuaded
therefore, that we must understand by it, two thousand three hundred sacrifices
of the evening and the morning. And this will not be scrupled by him that shall
consider, First, That it is not usual in the holy Tongue, nor in any other, to
say, two evenings and mornings, or three evenings and mornings, meaning two
days, three days, etc. Secondly, That the cessation of this daily sacrifice
that was offered morning and evening, being here spoken of, to this question,
How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice; a more proper and
intelligible answer than this cannot be given, viz. It shall be for two
thousand three hundred evenings and mornings. That is to say, There shall be an
interruption of two thousand three hundred sacrifices. So that this number
makes one thousand one hundred and fifty days. See then these four numbers. 1.
Eleven hundred and fifty days, which make three years, two months, and ten
days. 2. A time, times, and half a time, which are three years and six months.
3. One thousand two hundred fourscore and ten days, which make three years and
seven months. 4. One thousand three hundred thirty five days, that make three
years, eight months, and fifteen days.


In the whole taking thirty days for every month, a round number, which the
Holy Spirit has chosen, to avoid broken numbers arising from the inequality of
the months: Which appears by this, that in the Revelat. 42 months and 1260
days, are taken for the same thing. It Is so, if 30 days be assigned to every
month.

These four numbers are different, and the later always exceeds the former.
There is six months and five days difference between the least and the
greatest. How can we reconcile this with the History? We find this history in
the four first Chap. of the first book of Macchabees. The first Book of
Macchabees is a book that deserves esteem.
Though this book be not Canonical, it deserves however a very great esteem,
and I do not at all doubt but it was left to the Church by a singular
Providence of God, that by it we might see the truth of Daniel's Prophecy; and
at the same time to instruct us in the different periods of the duration and
end of Antichrist's Kingdom, shadowed forth by that of Antiochus. See then how
we must frame the Chronology of the four first Chapters of this Book, to the
end we may find an admirable agreement between the events and these four
numbers in the Prophecy.

To understand what we are about to say, it must in the first place be
observed, that two things usually are Confounded, that must be very carefully
distinguished in the persecution of Antiochus: We must observe four periods in
the persecution of Antiochus.
the first is, the profanation of the Sanctuary, the second is the cessation
of the daily sacrifice. It Is supposed, that they are the same thing, or at
least that these two things lasted one as long as the other. Which is not so;
for the profanation of the Sanctuary began some months before the cessation of
the daily sacrifice, and also it ceased sooner. For the daily sacrifice began
not again, till some months after the sanctuary had ceased from being
profaned; see then the four Periods that must be observed in the persecution
of the Jewish Church by Antiochus.

The first, from the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice, till its first beginning
again.

The second, from the beginning of the profanation of the Temple by the
Gentiles, to the purification of the Temple begun by Macchabaeus.

The third, from the beginning of the profanation of the Temple by the
Gentiles, to the finishing the purification of the Temple by Judas Macchabaeus.

The fourth, from the beginning -- the first profanation of the Temple by the
Geniles, to its dedication and consecration, which was the very same day that
the first daily sacrifice began again.

The four numbers in the Prophecy answer to these four Periods. 1. The first
number of 2300. evenings and mornings, answers to the cessation of the daily
sacrifice; as is clear, and this signifies, that from the ceasing of the last
daily sacrifice to the first beginning again of the daily sacrifice, there was
to be an interruption of 2300. sacrifices. i. e. 1150 days, which make three
years, two months, and ten days. 2. The number, of a time, times and half a
time, i. e. three years and six months, answers to the period, that ran out
from the first profanation of the Temple by the Gentiles, to the beginning of
the purification of it by Judas Macchabaeus. And this signifies, that from the
first profanation, to the beginning of the purification, there were exactly 3
Years and 6 Months. 3. The third Number, which is 1290. days, answers to the
period that ran out from the first profanation of the Temple by the Gentiles,
to the finishing the purification by Macchabaeus: and this signifies, that from
the first profanation of the Temple, to the finishing its purification, there
were 1290 days i. e. three Years and seven months. 4. Lastly, the fourth
number, which is 1335. days, answers to the period that ran out from the first
profanation of the Temple, to its dedication and consecration. And this
signifies, that from this first profanation to the feast of the dedication,
there were 1335 days i. e. three years, eight months and fifteen days.


The three last periods begin at the same point viz. the profanation of the
Temple by the Gentiles; but they end at three different points. One at the
beginning of the cleansing of the Temple, the other at the end of this
cleansing, and the third at the day of consecration, or dedication. It Is to
this Chronology, that we must accommodate the History of the first Book of the
Macchabees, as we shall presently do. The Chronology of the persecution
according to the book of the Macchabees.


First, we must find a fixed and a certain point in the History of the
Macchabees, and the persecution. See, it is that of the consecration and
dedication of the Temple. And on the 25th day of the 9th month, which is the
month Kaslen, in the 148 year, they arose betimes in the morning, 1 Macc. c. 4.
v. 51, 53, 54.
and offered the sacrifice, according to the Law, on the new Altar, which was
dedicated the same time, and the same day, wherein the Nations had profaned
it. This is the day of the dedication. This is the beginning again of the first
daily sacrifice. We have seen, that from the beginning again of the first daily
sacrifice, reckoning backwards, we find 2300 sacrifices interrupted, i. e. 1150
days, or three years, two months, and ten days; and consequently the cessation
of the first daily sacrifice must fall on the 15th day of the seventh month of
the 145th year of the Era of the Seleucidae. For from the tenth day of the
seventh month of the year 145, to the 25th day of the nineth month of the year
148, there is exactly three years, two months and ten days.

We have also seen, that from the dedication of the Temple, which is the same
day with that of the daily sacrifice's beginning again, counting backward to
the first profanation of the Temple, there are 1335 days. i. e. three years,
eight months and fifteen days. And since the day of the Dedication falls on the
25th of the ninth month, of the 148th year of the Seleucidae, the first
profanation of the Temple must fall on the fifth of the first month, of the
year 145; and consequently, that the Temple was profaned six months and some
days before the ceasing of the daily sacrifice. But for the greater clearness,
we must relate the History as it is in the Macchabees, The History of the first
book of the Macchabees fixed to its true times. 1 Macc. c. 1. v. 21, 22, 23.
and fix it to its true times.

In the 143 year, Antiochus having overcome Ptolomy King of Egypt, passed by
Jerusalem, took it, pillaged it, and carried away the vessels of the Temple.
Now after Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again in the 143 year, and
went up against Israel and Jerusalem with a great multitude, and entered proudly
into the Sanctuary, and took away the golden Alter, and the Candlestick, and
all the vessels thereof. This is not that which is called the profanation of
the Sanctuary. For it is idolatrous and impure worship, that profane the house
of God; it is not violence and pillaging it. 1 Macc. 1. v. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,
35.
And after two years fully expired, the King sent his chief Collector of
Tribute, who came to Jerusalem with a great multitude. And spoke peaceable
words to them, but all was deceit; for when they had given him credence, he
fell suddenly on the City, and smote in sore, and destroyed much people of
Israel, and took the spoils of the City, and set it on fire, etc. Then built
they the City of David with a great and strong wall, and made it a strong hold
for them. Then it was the profanation began; after two years fully expired,
reckoning from the 143d year inclusively, this falls on the beginning of the
year 145 in the first month. 'Twas then, I say, the Temple was profaned by the
Apostates of the Jewish Nation. This also is what that Author says expressly.
v. 36.37.
For it was a place to lie in wait against the Sanctuary, etc. They shed
innocent blood on every side of the Sanctuary, and defiled in. That is to say,
Menelaus the Apostate Sacrificer, sacrificed together with his fellows in the
Temple to the Heathen Gods.

But observe, the daily sacrifice did not yet cease. The Apostate Menelaus did
what Ahaz the father of Hezekiah had done, and what Manasseh had done; he
profaned the Temple by false worship; however, without causing the worship of
the true God to cease. There it is Apostates begin. At first they would fain
reconcile God and the Devil, afterward by degrees they advance to a total
Apostasy.

Antiochus's men were six weeks a building the City of David to make a Citadel
of it: when that was done, they thought themselves strong enough to undertake
every thing. They finished what they had begun, entirely abolisht the Mosaical
worship, and caused the daily sacrifice to cease six months and five days after
the profanation of the Temple, the tenth day of the seventh month. v. 54.
Two months and five days after they arrived at that height of boldness, as
even to put the Idol of Jupiter Olympius in the Temple of Jerusalem. In the
fifteenth day of the month Caslen, in the 145th year, they set up the
abomination of desolation on the Altar of the Lord, and built Altars in all the
Cities of Judah on every side. This desolation lasted till the tenth day of the
seventh month, of the year 148, the day wherein Macchabaeus entered again into
Jerusalem, visited the Holy places, and undertook the cleansing of them. Then
said Judas and his brethren, 1 Mae. 4.36, etc.
our enemies are discomfited, let us go up to cleanse and dedicate the
Sanctuary. And all the Army met together, and went up to the Mountain of God,
and saw that the holy place was forsaken, and the Altar profaned, etc. And
Judas chose Priests of blameless conversation. etc. who cleansed the Sanctuary,
and bare our the defiled stones into an unclean place.

I suppose, I say, that this work was begun the tenth day of the seventh month
of the year 148. And so from the tenth of the first month of the year 145,
there are exactly three years and a half, the very time marked by the Prophet
for the duration of the profaning of the Sanctuary. Then therefore this
profanation of it ceased.

Afterward, I suppose, they were one entire month in cleansing the Temple, and
carrying away the filth, which the Heathens had laid in it, and taking way the
stones of the Altars that had been built, and of the great Altar that had been
profaned by the Idol of Jupiter Olympius. Add one month, i. e. thirty days to
1260 days, you make 1290 days, which is the account we find in the 11th verse
of the 12th Chapter of Daniel. From the time that the abomination of desolation
shall be set up, shall be 1290 days, which are three years and seven months,
that is to say, since the profanation of the Temple to the finishing its
purification.

But after the finishing this purification, the Temple was not yet in a
condition to sacrifice in. For they were fain to build a new Altar, and make
utensils all new, in the place of those that had been either taken away, or
profaned.

To do this, no less than 45 days were necessary; and these are the 45 days
added to 1290, that make the number 1335 days, of which the Prophet says,
Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the 1335 days. And it is at the end of
these 1335 days, reckoning from the profanation in the beginning of the year
148, that the dedication was made in the year 148. on the 25th day of the ninth
month. Therefore it is the Prophet cries out, Blessed is he, etc. because it was
a great feast, and great rejoicing in Israel. See, I say, both the History and
the Chronology, and the duration of the cessation, of the profanation of the
Temple, and the interruption of the daily sacrifice, made to agree with the
Prophecy.

At present, from the type we must in a few words make our conjectures touching
that, which must come to pass in the duration of the Antichristian Empire. The
profanation of the Mosaical Sanctuary by Antiochus, lasted three years and a
half, to the time that Judas Macchabaeus drove the Heathen out of Jerusalem,
and Paganism out of the Temple, the cleansing of which he began. To the end the
truth may answer to the figure, the Antichristian Empire must endure three
years and a half, consisting of 1260 days, which are 1260 years, during which
the Sanctuary shall be profaned by the Heathens, i. e. the service of God
shall be polluted by revived Paganism, and the Temple of God possessed by a
Tyrant. At the end of 1260 day Judas Macchabaeus began the purification of the
Temple, and spent 30 days about it. The cleansing of the Church must be begun,
the Idol must be cast out, the Tyrant expelled after the 1260 years. But as
Judas Macchabaeus spent 30 days about purifying the Temple, after he had taken
away the Idol thence, and had rescued it out of the hands of the Tyrant; it is
propable, that after the fall of the Papism, of its tyranny, and idolatry, 30
years more will be spent in purifying the Church from all schisms, heresies,
divisions and etrours.

Lastly, as Judas Macchabaeus spent 45 other days, to prepare all things for
the consecration of the Temple; in like manner after the Church shall have been
cleansed from idolatry, haeresy, superstition, schism and errors, God will
employ yet 45 years more, to prepare all things for the consummation of the
Church. At the end of which time will be the dedication, the solemn feast. And
it is in my opinion in this last space of 45 years, that God is to call the
Gentiles, and all the Nations of the Earth to the knowledge of himself; this is
that which the Apostle Saint Paul calls, The fullness of the Gentiles. For see,
as I believe, the degrees by which the Church must arrive at it perfection.

1. Babylon shall fall, the Kingdom of Antichrist shall cease.

2. The Church shall be reunited in the same opinion; schisms and divisions
shall be at an end.

3. The Idolatrous and Infidel Nations, especially the Turks, who are at this
day scandalized at the divisions, manners and the false Doctrines of the
Christians, shall submit themselves, at least the greatest part of them, being
prevailed upon by the purity of Doctrine and holiness of manners.

4. Lastly, The Jews overcome by so unanimous a consent, and, it may be, by
some glorious apparition of our Lord, shall be converted, and strongly labor
to convert the rest of the Nations, far distant and separated from us. Then
shall be the Dedication, the consummation of the Church. And blessed is he that
shall wait, and come to the 1335 days, i. e. to seventy five years after the
fall of the Popish Empire. For he shall see the reign of J. Christ in all its
Glory.

CHAP. III.
What the Last time are. It does not signify the end of the World. There are
many times with reference to the Church, and with reference to the World. If
Antichrist must reign 1260 years, he is come. Mahometanism is not
Antichristianism.

THus much is enough to destroy that Chimaera, of the duration of the Kingdom
of Antichrist for three natural years and a half. It Is necessary only to answer
a difficulty that may be raised from hence, that the reign of Antichrist is
called the last times, which seems to mean the end of the World. And without
doubt, this is that, which gave occasion to the ancient Writers to suppose,
that the end of this Empire was not to be above forty five days before the day
of judgment. But to fall into this error, a man must be little used to the
style of the Scripture. One thousand two hundred and sixty years, it is said,
cannot be called the last times, the period is too long. It Is necessary the
reign of Antichrist should be nearer the end of the World and the day of
judgment, than so. But what will those Gentlemen say, that make this
objection; St. John calls his time the last time 1 Ep. 2.18.
what will they say of Saint John, who speaking of Antichrist, and precisely of
that tradition according to which he was to come in the last times, says,
Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last time. It Is above sixteen hundred years ago, that Saint John said so, and
then from that time he counted the last times. With much more reason may we
reckon those ages that came not till four or five hundred years after, for the
last times.

The last day, and the last times are not the same thing. John. 6.54.^
Neither must we imagine, that the last times signify a short space. We must
well distinguish the last day, from the last time. When the Holy Spirit speaks
of the last day, he always means a short time. He that eats my flesh, says
our Lord, I will raise up again at the last day. But the last time, and
especially the last times in the plural number, always signifies a long
period. See the proofs of both these things.

First, that the last times signify not the end of the World. The last times
does not always signify the last day.
The last time in the singular number sometimes does. St. Peter says, that we
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed
in the last time. 1. Pet. 1.5.
But it does not always so signify, as appears by that passage of St. John,
which we quoted a little before, it is the last time. As for that in the plural
number, the last time, and the last days, we find, they always signify a time
far enough off from the end of the World. Saint Paul in the second verse of the
Epistle to the Hebrews says, 1 Ephesians. 1.20.
that God has spoken to us in these last days by his. Son. The Apostle Saint
Peter says, that Jesus Christ was foreordained before the foundation of the
World, but was manifest in these last times for us. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
The same Apostle tells us, in the last days shall come scoffers, walking after
their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming? 'Twas the very
time in which Saint Peter spoke and wrote. For it is spoken as of persons that
were in being already. And it appears by the second Chapter of the Epistle to
the Thessalonians, that there was an opinion spread abroad, that the end of the
World was at hand, which made profane ones say, where is the promise of his
coming, which they tell us is nigh? The Prophet Joel says, Acts 2.
in the last days I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. St. Peter applies
this Oracle to that which happened on the day of Pentecost, and in the ages of
the Primitive Church. 2. Tim. 3.1*
St. Paul says to Timothy, Know this, that in the last days perilous times
shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves, etc. These last days
began a little after St. Paul; For the Church was not long, before she
corrupted her manners. These very same Texts prove also the other thing we have
laid down, which is, that the last times do not signify a short duration. For
the manifestation of Jesus Christ made in the last times, and God speaking to
us in the last days by his Son, and the last days wherein the profane shall
bear sway* all this I say, signifies the time that passes from I. Christ to
the end of the word.

The times divided into three parts in reference to the Church.
To understand why the Period that passes from Jesus Christ to this present
time, is called the last time, we must observe, that in the Scripture the times
are divided either with reference to the Church, or with reference to the
World. With reference to the Church, there are three times; A time when the
Church was without the Law and without the Gospel; this is the first time that
passed from Adam to Moses; A time wherein the Church had the Law of Moses, that
was the time from the departure out of Egypt to I. Christ, that is the second
time; Lastly, A time wherein the Church enjoys the light of Jesus Christ;
that is ours, and that is the third time.

The times in reference to the world are divided into four.
With reference to the World, the time is divided into four great Monarchies,
that must precede the last reign of I. Christ. The first was the Monarchy of
the Assyrians, which had its seat first at Niniveh, and afterward at Babylon;
The second is that of the Persians; the third that of the Greeks; and the
fourth that of the Romans, whose reign must be prolonged till the Kingdom be
given to J. Christ and his Saints.

Since Jesus Christ we are in the last times.
Now whether we refer it to the first division, or the second; it is still true,
that we are in the last times; that I. Christ came in the last times, and that
the Empire of Antichrist must be in the last times. J. Christ came in the third
and last time, with reference to the times of the Church, seeing he came since
the Law of Moses ceased to be in its vigor. And Antichrist also has his reign
in the third and last period of the Church. Jesus Christ also came in the last
times with respect to the World, for he came in the time of the fourth
Monarchy. Antichrist with much more reason may be assigned to the last times of
the fourth Monarchy, because he himself is but a continuation of that fourth
Monarchy.

But to be so much the more fully persuaded, that it is a very proper
expression, it must be observed, that the fourth Monarchy figured by the fourth
beast, was to have two great periods, one of six heads, the other of a seventh
head, having ten horns. The Period of the six first heads is the Roman Empire
under Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes of the people, perpetual Dictators
and Emperors. And this first Period contains about 12 or 1300 years. The period
of the little horn, or the seventh beast with ten horns, is that of Antichrist
and the ten Kings, which must also be between 12 and 1300 years. Antichrist
therefore is come in the last time of the last time, i. e. in the last period
of the fourth and last worldly Monarchy. And consequently the Holy Spirit might
with very great reason call his reign the last times* And thence it can by no
means be concluded, that this Kingdom must last but a few years, before the end
of the World.

Having said all that I had to say, to destroy this false imagination, that the
Empire of Antichrist must last but three years and a half, I might justly
reassume, and urge all those Arguments I formerly mentioned, to prove that the
Idea of Antichrist, which the Papists frame to themselves, is false, and that
the popish Roman see is the true Antichrist. But before that, I must use them
yet once more to confound the dishonesty of the Translators of the Port Royal,
Rev. 17.10. The dishonesty of the translation of the Port Royal about the
duration of Antichrists reign.
who say of the ten Kings, that they shall take power for one hour, or for a
little time with the beast, instead of translating in in the same hour, or at
the same time with the beast. They found this translation, or rather, this
notorious falsification very proper to take away from the Reformed this Text,
that proves so clearly, that the birth of Antichrist must be reckoned from the
division of the Roman Empire among ten Kings, and into ten Kingdoms. But
afterward we shall see, that though we should let their translation pass, our
proof would not in the least be weakened by it. But as they will not agree, that
1260 years may be called a little time; see here, they are engaged to prove,
that all that we have said to prove, that the 1260 days of Antichrists reign
are so many years, is illusion, a Chimaera, a dream, and a sophism. For if our
proofs do subsist, how will they maintain their version, that the Kings shall
take power for a little time with the beast? Seeing all Interpreters do agree,
and it is clear of it self without their consent, that the power of the ten
Kings must last as long as that of the beast. And also these ten Kings must
reach beyond the beast; for after they have clothed him with their power, they
must strip him of it, eat his flesh, and burn it with fire. If therefore they
duration and continuance of the beast be 1260 years, as we have demonstrated
it; it is necessary, that the reign of the ten Kings be 1260 years, and
consequently this reign will not be for one hour, and for a little time.

It Is here that these Gentlemen the Interpreters will have great need of the
Arabique, Rabbinical learning, and Hebrew of Father Simon the Grammarian, that
not long since has set up for an Interpreter of the Revelations. His new
lights do well deserve a particular Chapter by themselves. But for the present,
we must follow on our way, and show, that if the 1260 days be 1260 years, then
all that the Papists say of Antichrist is false, and all that we say of him is
true. It being proved, that the 1260 days are 1260 years, the Papists
Antichrist is a Chimaera.
If it be false, that this Empire must last but 1260 natural days; it is true,
that it must last 1260 years; for I have proved, there is no middle way to be
taken. And if it be true that Antichrist must reign 1260 years, he can no
longer be only one single man, nor a revolted Jew, nor a salse Messiah, nor a
man of the Tribe of Dan, nor a Tyrant that must re-establish the Mosaical
worship, and rebuild Jerusalem to cause the Jews to reign there. For it would
be absurd, to suppose that one man should live 1260 years, that the reign of
the Law of Moses should return for 12 Ages, and that Judaism for so long a time
should oppress the Christian Religion. If the Empire of Antichrist must last
1260 years, it must necessarily be already come. If his duration be 1260 years,
Antichrist is come.
For it is to go against the general opinion of all men, to suppose that before
the reign of Jesus Christ comes, we must yet expect a tyrannical Monarchy of
1200 years. If the Antichristian Empire be come, it must be either
Mahometanism, or the Papism.

Antichristianism cannot be found among the Arri-ans; for they have been extinct
a long time, and their reign did not come to near 1260 years. We cannot find him
among the Athigenses, who never reigned, who appeared but for a little time,
and who were always oppressed. He cant' be found neither among the Lutherans,
nor Calvinists; for none of the Characters of Antichristianism do agree to
them, and the Papists would not acknowledge that our reign should be for 1200
years.

There Is nothing remains but Mahometanism, on which one can cast ones yes,
Mahometanism has not the Characters of Antichristianism
to seek out Antichristianism; it is indeed an Antichristian Sect, because it is
an enemy to Jesus Christ, and has already subsisted above a 1000 years. But we
cannot find therein the Characters of Antichristianism, so as it is described in
the Prophets. First, Antichristianism must be an Apostasy, and a revolt of men,
that formerly were obedient to the faith. The Saracens, Arabians, and Turks,
the founders and preservers of this Sect, never were Christians, and are not
Apostates. Mahomet and the Arabians were Heathens. Secondly, Antichristianism
must be an Idolatry, for it is called a Whoredom; and must teach the Doctrine
of Demons, and mediatory spirits. Now the Mahometans are not idolaters; on the
contrary, they abhor the adoration of Images; and it is this that greatly
scandalizeth them against the Christian Religion. Thirdly, In the name of
Antichrist, we must find the number 666. In the name of Mahomet, and Mohammedan,
Arabians and Saracens, in any language, this number is not found. Fourthly,
Anchristianism was to have its seat in the great City, which in St. John's time
ruled over the Kings of the Earth. That is Rome, as all Interpreters
unanimously acknowledge. Mahomet and his Partisans never did possess the City
of Rome, and do not possess it. Fifthly, The Empire of Antichrist must be the
Roman Empire continued; the Empire of the Arabians is so far from being the
continuation of the Roman Empire, that it has been the destruction of it in
the East. Sixthly, Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, i. e. in the
Church. Mahomet and his Successors are out of the Church, and do not belong to
Christendom. Seventhly, Ten Kings must voluntarily give their power to
Antichrist. But the Arabians and Saracens have conquered all Kingdoms by mere
violence; none did voluntarily submit to them. Eighthly, Antichrist must be the
seventh head of the Beast in the Revelation, i. e. Of the Roman Empire; Mahomet
has nothing in common with the Roman Empire. Ninethly, The Empire of
Antichrist must be properly nothing else, but the image of an Empire, which yet
however must be worship, and obedience be given to it; The Empire of the
Mahometans is not an image, but rather the most despotical and arbitrary
Empire, that ever was in the World. Tenthly, The Antichristian Empire must have
under it ten horns, i. e. ten Kings. Ten horns, every one having his crown, and
his Royal power. So far is the Empire of the Mahometans, from suffering any
vassal Kings to subsist, that it has destroyed all the great Lords. In India,
in Persia, in Turkey, every one of these Mohammedan Empires has but one only
Lord. Eleventhly, The Empire of Antichrist must be but one, it must not be
divided; For the Kings that are to submit to him, shall acknowledge him for
their only head. But the Empire of Mahomet is divided into many Empires. The
Empire of the Tartars, the Empire of the Turks, the Empire of the Persians, the
Empire of the Mogulls; and these four Empires are not only different, but
always opposite and almost always enemies. Twelfthly, Antichrist must have two
horns, i. e. two powers like to the Lamb. It Is notorious, the Mahometans have
nothing in common with Jesus Christ, with his Religion, and with his power.
Thirteenth, Antichrist must excommunicate, persecute, take away liberty of
commerce from all those that will not take on them his name and his mark in
their foreheads, i. e. that will not follow his Religion. The Mahometans
suffer all sorts of Religions, Heathens, and Christians. Fourteenth, The
Antichristian Empire must be a head, i. e. a Kingdom hurt with a deadly wound,
and revive again. This can by no means agree to Mahometanism, which is a
Religion wholly new, and which has formed Empires wholly new. It was necessary
to make these observations against those, that greatly desiring to take
Antichrist from Rome, would fain place him among the Mahometans.

CHAP. IV.
Some Principles to discover, when the Antichristian Empire began, and when it
must end. Three Characters of that Empire, Idolatry, Pride, and corruption.
That these three Characters began to appear in the fourth Age, and did
infinitely increase in the fifth.

HItherto we have discoursed on what is past, now we proceed to treat of what
is future, or at least of those things that are believed so to be. For we shall
see that many things, that are looked upon as future, are already past.

It Is the ruin of Antichrist and his Empire, that we are now about to speak of.
And the first question that is asked thereupon is this, When shall that Empire
be destroyed? A great question, and which has hitherto been looked upon, as a
thing that none could penetrate into. It Is certainly, very difficult to be
penetrated into, but yet however I do not think, it is impossible to find out
the truth. There is a particular Providence, that presides over the the
understanding of Prophecies, as we have observed; God would not have them
understood in every age, because this would hinder their accomplishment. But
when they are just ready to be fulfilled, God permits them to be penetrated
into; and the things which we see come to pass from day to day, open men's eyes.

The great point is, to know where we must begin the 1260 years.
In this matter the whole depends on our knowing, where we must begin the 1260
years, that are assigned for the reign of the papism. And there are as many
opinions about that, as there are men. Some begin them with Boniface the third,
Successor to Gregory the great, because they would be favorable to Gregory the
first, who seems to have had very good things in him: And because his Successor
was the first, that assumed the name of Universal Bishop. Others descend lower,
and begin the 1260 year, at the time when Images were established. Some come as
far as to the 11th Age, and to the reign of Gregory the seventh, who was
insolent to a higher degree than any of his Predecessors dared to advance
themselves unto. There are some also, that come as far as to the 12th Age.

The fountain of their error, that descend so low for the beginning of the
1260 years.
I shall not amuse my self with mentioning, much less with confuting all these
Opinions. I shall only say this boldly, that they who go so low to find out the
beginning of the 1260 years, are in an error. That which has deceived them is
this, they imagine, we must not begin the Antichristian Empire, till the time
that Idolatry and Tyranny were arrived to their height in the Church; in which
I am thoroughly persuaded, they deceive themselves. Another cause of their being
deceived, is this, having this truth in mind, that Rome must be the head of the
Antichristian Empire; they will not begin that Empire before the Roman Church
was most notoriously remarkable for her pride among all the Churches.

When any make a history of an Empire, they must begin it from its original.
Totally to remove these two mistakes, it must be observed, that in every
country, and in every language, when any would make a History of an Empire and
a Kingdom, they begin it from its orginal. They that make the History of the
Franks, or Frenchmen among the Gauls, do not fix their beginning on that time,
when the French were masters of all the Gauls, from the frontier of Flanders,
to the Alps, and the Pyrenaean mountains. For that happened very late. But they
begin with the first entry of the Franks into Gaul, and their first
establishment on this side the Rhine. When any make a History of the Empire of
Rome, they begin the Roman History from the first foundation of that City; so
they reckoned in Rome it self, ab Vrbe Condita. And this way of reckoning
continued till the fifth age, when the Christian account began to be in use,
and men reckoned by the years of Jesus Christ. Moreover, it is the custom of
the Scripture, and of the Holy Spirit, as well as of the World: It Is said, the
sojourning of the Israelites in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years, yet
they were not in that slavery above 210 years. But the Holy Spirit reckons from
the time of the calling of Abraham, and his passing into Canaan, where he and
his offspring* were strangers. It Is therefore all the time of the pilgrimage
of the family of Abraham, which God begins from its original. Lastly, it is the
style of the Prophets; and particularly in the Prophecy we are treating of. The
fourth Beast is the Roman Empire; all the World agrees in that: where does the
Holy Spirit begin the History of that Beast, or of that Empire? not at the
point of its grandeur, which happened not till above 400 years after its
original, but from the point of its birth; and that is clear, because he
ascribes seven heads to that Beast. Heads, which signify so many Governments,
under which Rome has passed. Now the first of these Governments, is that of
Kings, under whom Rome in the beginning was no more than a great Village, and
afterward a very little City without dependencies. This principle therefore
must be supposed, that the H. Spirit dates the Antichristian Empire from its
original.

It Is not necessary, that the first seeds of Antichristiaenism should have been
conceived at Rome.
The other mistake that we must get rid of, is this, that Rome is precisely the
place where the Empire of Antichrist must have its birth. It Is not so.
Antichristianism is born every where, and it might very well be born in the
East, before it came to fix its seat in the West. That which makes men affix
the birth of the Antichristian Empire precisely to Rome, is, because being
struck with what Saint Paul says, that the man of sin must exalt himself above
all that is called God, they have confined Antichristianism principally, and
almost solely to tyranny and Pride; and have imagined, that the birth of
Antichristianism was not to be found but in that City, which had always been,
and which afresh was to be the Throne of Pride. But herein they have been
deceived. Antichristianism consists no less in idolatry, and corruption of
manners than in tyranny: in such a manner, that in all places where we see the
birth of Idolatry, Superstition, and Corruption, there without doubt
Antichristianism is born.

These principles being laid down, the three Characters, which we have affixed
to the Antichristian Empire, by reason of its three names, must be remembered.
Idolatry, because it is called Babylon, the mother of fornications and
abominations; corruption of manners, because it is called Sodom; Pride and
Tyranny, The three Characters of Antichristianism began in the fourth Age; and
first of all superstition.
because it is called Egypt. When these three sins began to be established in the
Church, Antichristianism began to enter into it. Now it is certain, it was
toward the end of the fourth, and in the whole fifth Age, that these disorders
received their birth. The superstition of Relics, the veneration and worship
of them, and immediately after, the invocation and intercession of the Saints,
were introduced about the year 360. or 380. Already before this time, that
superstition had begun among the people. I do not at all doubt, but that women,
and simple persons, especially those that were but newly converted from
Paganism, were the first Authors of it. Devout ignorant people easily fall into
superstition. It had been a very ancient custom to frequent the Martyrs tombs,
there to celebrate their memory, to pray for them, and there to pray for
themselves. For in Eusebius's time, men were wont to assemble themselves at the
sepulchers of the Martyrs, to say their prayers upon their sepulchers, and
there to honor their most happy souls. The Papists in this passage would fain
find the invocation of Saints; but it is not there. Praep. Evan. l. 12. c. 11.
Eusebius only uses the word honor, which does not import either invocation or
adoration; 'twas only out of a design to honor the memory of the Martyrs, that
they assembled at their tombs. But the ignorant people, surprised with the
deceit of some false miracles, which the Devil wrought at those tombs, from a
simple honor immediately proceed to a religious worship; and a few years
after, the Pastors suffered themselves to be carried down the torrent, they
gave way to it, and labored to establish this false devotion. Saint Basil in
the East, and Saint Ambrose in the West, are the most ancient Fathers, in whom
we find the footsteps of the invocation and intercession of the Saints.

As for the corruption of the manners of the Clergy and people, it began to be
great at the very same time. Corruption of manners began also in the fourth Age.
The Church being become Queen of the World by the means of her Emperors,
clothed her self with its luxury, and followed all its manners; covetousness,
unchastity, debauchery were introduced into the Sanctuary. We need only to see
what St. Jerome, who lived in that time, says of Rome and the Roman Clergy,
and of the Ecclesiastics in general in his days. He represents Rome as already
become a Babylon. Panla and Eustochium ad Mercellam.
Go out of Babylon, my people, says he, for she is fallen, Babylon the great,
she is become a habitation of Devils, and a dwelling place of unclean spirits.
It Is true, there is the Holy Church, etc. But the pride, grandeur, power, etc.
that are found in that City, agrees not with the life and tranquillity of
Monks. The same Author says, that the Princes of the Church lived in
deliciousness, and imagined they did preserve their purity in the midst of
mighty repasts, and lascivious actions. Elsewhere he says, Comment. in Mic.
cap. 2.
that the Ecclesiastics did kiss and caress the Ladies, stretched forth their
hands to them to receive their presents. They observed the tempers of women,
they caused great estates to be given to themselves; and their covetousness
became so odious, Ad Nepotianum.
that the Christian Emperors forbad the Ecclesiastics the receiving Legacies
by Will, whilst Whores, and Comedians were permitted so to do.

Lastly, It is certain, that so it was, that Pride was established in the Church
in this and the following age. The Pride of the Bishops, and particularly of
the Bishops, of Rome increased in the same Age.
Then it was, that the Bishops, who till that time had been all equal, through
pride made themselves Archbishops, and Patriarchs. Patriarchs, that are
diminutive Popes, and consequently petty Antichrists. Above all, the pride of
the Bishops of Rome began to be very plain. 'Twas in the fourth age, that that
noble Roman Consul* lived, who said, make me Bishop of Rome, and I will be a
Christian. St. Jerome. Ammian Marcellin.
These Bishops caused themselves to be carried in a Litter, kept sumptuous
tables, had great equipages, and lived like the great ones of the World. 'Twas
at this time also, that they began to ascribe to themselves the primacy over
other Bishops. Therefore bribery and violence began to be used to climb up into
that see.

In less than an Age, this torrent of pride, superstition, and corruption
swelled to such a degree, that it became exceeding plain; in the 450 year
superstition was already advanced to the degree of idolatry, corruption was
very high, and pride very great. In the fifth age, superstition was advanced to
the degree of Idolatry.
To know to what degree idolatry was already advanced in the middle of the
fifth age, we need read but the 8th book of Theodoret, de Curandis Graecorum
affectionibus. He says, the Christians called the Martyrs, their Physicians
and their Protectors. The Temples of the Martyrs, says he, are remarkable for
their greatness and their magnificence, they are filled with all sorts of
ornaments, and they diffuse abroad the splendour and glittering of their beauty.
We assemble there, not only one, two, three, four, or five times a year; but we
celebrate feasts therein very often, yea, and every day we sing in them the
praises and hymns of the God of the Martyrs. They that are well, desire the
Martyrs to preserve them in health; and they that have any disease, desire of
them to be cured of it. Men and barren Women ask Children of them; and they
that have them, desire them to preserve um. They that take a Voyage, pray to
the Martyrs to accompany them in the way, and also to guide them; and they that
return in health, thank them for it, confessing that it is from them they have
received that benefit. Not that they look on the Martyrs as Gods, but pray to
them as divine men, and invocate them as their intercessors with God. Now that
they who pray devoutly and with faith, receive that which they desire, appears
plainly enough by the gifts which they present them, with acquitting themselves
of their vows, which are the marks of the health which they have recovered. For
some hang up figures of eyes, others of feet, others of hands made of gold and
silver. All these things exposed to view, show, that diseases have been cured,
seeing they have been given by those that have been cured. These things, I say,
show, how great is the virtue of the Martyrs and of their Tombs.

The great corruption of manners in the fifth age.
If any would be assured of the degree to which corruption of manners was
advanced in the same age, he may read Salvian Bishop of Marseilles: Speaking
concerning the excellency of the territory of Aquitain, l. 7. de Provid.
and that abundance wherein its Inhabitants lived, he says, that as they
surpassed all others in riches, they surpassed them also in vices; that never
was there any where seen more infamous pleasures; that their life was exceeding
filthy, and that discipline was entirely corrupted. This is, says he, the
returns they have made to God for his holy liberality. He confesses, the
inundations of the Barabarians, that had spoiled them of their goods, could not
take away their vices from them; and that they remained unchaste to that
degree, that the very Barbarians were scandalized at their impurities. For the
Goths suffered not among themselves, either impurity, fornication, or adultery.
Spain, said he, is lost in the same vices, if not in greater. Speaking of the
people of Africa, he says, that the City of Carthage was full of abominations,
that there was no place, nor street without a Whore-house. All the streets were
full of snares and baits, as so many ditches of impurity, in such a manner,
that they who disliked these sorts of crimes. could not prevent their falling
into them. All the Inhabitants of that great City were plunged into the filthy
mire of those infamous debauches. They breathed from one to another the filthy
smells of their mutual unchastity; but none trembled at it, because every one
was plunged in it. He tells us, the Clergy was engaged in the same disorders,
and that there were no imaginable crimes, thefts, covetousness, robberies,
abominable extorsions, voluptuousness, but what were in use: the corruption
then was an overflowing torrent. We must repeat the whole work, to make an
exact description of the miserable state the Church then was in. This Bishop
seems persuaded, that 'twas these horrible excesses, that drew down the sad
judgments of God, and that opened the door to the barbarous nations, which
made the Empire desolate.

In the fifth Age, the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome began to be considerable.
The tyranny and pride of the Clergy; and particularly that of Rome, were also
found very high in the fifth age. Leo the first, that held the sea of Rome in
the year 450. has diffused abroad in his writings an air of pride and
domineering, wherein it appears, that he aspired after tyranny, and that he
designed to make himself master of the Christian Churches. He exalted his See
above all others; Jer. ^. in annivers. assumpt. ad Pontificatum.
it is the Chair of St. Peter, who is called the rock and the foundation. He
says, that God had exalted him, viz. himself Leo, to a Sovereign degree.
Humilitatem meam in summum gradum provehit. After he had said, that Saint Peter
was called the rock, the foundation, the Porter of Heaven, the determiner and
judge of those that are to be bound and loosed, he adds that the power of Peter
lives in his See, and that his excellent authority resides there. And he says
afterward, that Saint Peter was the Prelate and Primate of all the Bishops.
The Sermon whence this is taken, shows, that every year he celebrated the day
of his exaltation to the Popedom, and made it be celebrated in his Church;
which is great Pride.

Writing to Flavian Bishop of Constantinople, he complains, that he had not
acquainted him with what Eutyches had done, and pretends, that upon that
account he had not been rightly condemned. He complains of this especially,
that they did not show respect to the appeal to Rome that Eutychus had put in.
Sometimes to the title of Bishop of Rome, he adds that of Ecclesiae Catholicae.
Ep. 22.
Ecclesiae Catholicae Episcopus urbis Romae; Bishop of the Catholic Church. He
opposes the decree of the general Council of Constantinople, by which the
second place was given to the Bishop of new Rome; and a power to exercise the
same jurisdiction within his district, as the Bishop of old Rome exercised in
his. Can. 28.
The Council of Chalcedon confirmed the decree of that of Constantinople, and
made the Church of Constantinople equal in all things to that of Rome: He was
vexed at it, and opposed the execution of it as much as he was able. This I
confess, was nothing in comparison of what was afterward seen; however, it was
much; and the Bishop of Rome did not long stay from proceeding further.

CHAP. V.
That we must look for the point of the birth of Antichristianism in the fifth
Age. It must end about the year 1710, or 1715.

WE have just before seen, in the extent of an age from the year 350, to the
year 450, the idolatry, tyranny and corruption of manners that were established,
and increased. And it is in the extent of this Age, that one may seek for the
point to which God would affix the beginning of the Antichristian Empire, and
whence he would have us reckon the 1260 years of Antichristianism. But the
difficulty is yet to know the year precisely, or within a little of it. We must
here again make use of the ingenious observation of Joseph Mede, which we have
already mentioned. He thinks, that in the words of the 11th Chapter, Rise and
measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein. But
the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not; we have a
short representation of the Church, and its duration.

A pretty observation of Joseph Mede, on the first verse of the 11th Chap.
By the Altar and the Temple he understands the inward Court, and by this inward
Court, he believes, is meant the primitive Church, pure in its manners, sound
in its Doctrine. And by the outward Court he understands the Church corrupted
by superstition, idolatry, tyranny and impurity. He has found, that the inward
Court was much less than the out ward one; there was the same proportion
between these two Courts, as there is between one, and three and a half. So
that the outward Court contained the extent of the inward one three times and a
half. And he concludes, that her extended quantity being the image of the
extent of time; the duration of the corrupted Church signified by the outward
Court, was to be three times and a half, and the duration of the pure Church
was to be but one time. Now it is plain by the Prophecies, that the duration of
the corrupted Church must be three Prophetical years and a half, which are 1260
natural years: therefore the duration of the pure Church must be one
Prophetical year, that is to say, 360 years. I confess, this appears to me as
if it were inspired.

The pure Church lasting 360 years, there may be four terms whence to compute
these 360 years.
He adds, that one may begin these 360 years, either 1. from the birth of Jesus
Christ, according to the Christian account; or, 2. from the time of his
Passion, which makes the beginning of the Christian Church. Or, 3. from the
time of the destruction of Jerusalem, because then the Law was perfectly
abrogated, and the new covenant perfectly established. Or, 4. Lastly, from the
time in which St. John prophesied.
The first calculation begins with the first year of Jesus Christ. An. Christi.
1 The second, in the year of our Lord. 33 The third, in the year of our Lord.
70 The fourth, about the year. 94


If we reckon the 360 years, which must contain in them the purity of the
Church, from the first year of Jesus Christ, the last year falls on the 60 year
of the fourth Age. And this agrees admirably with the event. For indeed, it is
precisely in this time, that we see the footsteps of the superstition of
Relics, and the invocation of Saints, appearing in the Authors of the fourth
Age.

If we reckon from the 33th year of Jesus Christ, which is that of his death,
the 360th year will fall upon the end of the fourth Age. In which time Sr.
Austin, and St. Jerome wrote, by whose writings it appears, that the
superstition of the worship of the creatures had already made great progress.

If we begin the 360 years from the destruction of Jerusalem, which happened in
the 70th year of our Savior, the years of purity will end in the year 430, a
time in which it is also certain that the corruption was greatly increased.

Lastly, if we take the last account, and reckon from the year 94, in which
Saint John composed his Prophecy, the 360 years will end about the year 454;
and it is about that time that Theodoret wrote, in whose words we have seen,
that the false worship of the Saints, and the Doctrine of secondary
intercessors were so well formed.

Which of the four points we must choose.
If we place the birth of Antichristianism in the 360 year of our Lord, when men
began to render a religious worship to Relics, this Antichristian Empire
being to last 1260 years, it is clear, that they should have ended in the year
1620. i. e. 65 years ago.

If we began it according to the second computation, in the year 393, or 394,
it should have ended in the year 1653, or 1654.

If we began it according to the third calculation, at the year 430, it should
end in the year 1690, about four or five years hence.

Lastly, if following the last computation, we begin it about the 450 or 454th
year, it must end in the year 1710, or one of the following years to 1714.

It Is clear by the event, that we must not begin the 1260 years, neither from
the year 360, nor that of 393. For the Antichristian Empire, did not fall in
the years 1620, and 1653, as it should have done according to these
calculations. In those times, in the year 360, and the year 393, superstition
was yet but in its birth; the worship of the creatures was not yet established
in the public service. Great cautions also were used not to confound the
service of God with the service of the creatures, which was just ready to
receive its birth. Moreover, the pride of the Bishops of Rome was moderate, and
their tyranny did not yet extend it self very far. Men reckon the years of the
life of a man from the time of his birth? not from that of his conception.
Idolatry and tyranny were as yet but like a faetus's, that were forming and
perfecting, but were not yet perfected.

The principal reason why God will not have the 1260 years of the reign of
Antichrist begin, but in the 4th Age. Rev. 17.12.
But the principal reason, why God would not have us count the birth of
Antichristianism from the years 360, and 393, is, because there was a fourth
Character of the birth of that Antichristian Empire, that had not yet happened;
that is, the ten Kings, that were to take their power together with the Beast.
These ten Kings are ten Kingdoms, into which the Roman Empire was to be
subdivided. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have
received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast.
These words are admirable; to me they appear express, and I am astonished, that
it has not been observed, that they precisely mark the time, wherein we must
begin to reckon the reign of the Beast.

Especially, if we consider them with the words of St. Paul, he who now
lets, or possesses, will let, or possess, until he be taken out of the
way; then shall that wicked one be revealed. That is to say, till the time that
the head of the Roman Emperors be destroyed. These two passages signify
expressly, from what time we must compute the 1260 years. It Is from the time,
that the Goths, Vandals, etc. after having a long time harrassed, and rent the
Roman Empire, at last divided it into ten pieces.

Moreover, the falsification of the translation of the Port Royal, that render
it thus, the ten Kings shall take power for a little time with the Beast, would
not destroy the evidence of the Oracle, though we should suffer the ill
translation of these Gentlemen to pass. For if we must translate it for a
little time, by that little time we must understand, the three years and a half
of Antichrist's duration. And seeing we have invincibly proved, that these
three years and a half consist of 1260 Prophetical days, i. e. 1260. years,
it is clear, we must understand that little time in a prophetical and
compendious sense, for three years and a half.

That which is essential here, and which the rashness of men has not been able
to take away, is, that the ten Kings were to receive their power together with
the Beast, that is to say, at the same time. Whethey it be for a short, or a
long one; it is still certain, that this Oracle plainly teaches us, that we must
seek for the birth of the Antichristian Empire in the time when we find ten
Kingdoms arise from the dismembered Roman Empire. We must therefore see, when
that was thus dismembered.

The greatest part of men make the Roman Empire to subsist till the year 475,
under certain petty Kings, that retained the name of Roman Emperors; because
they did yet possess the City of Rome from Valentinian the third to Augustulus.
But the truth of it is, that the Roman Empire was parcelled out, and rent in
pieces, and entirely destroyed immediately after the death of this Valentinian,
who was killed by Maximus. Genseric King of the Vandals comes from Africa,
being called in by the Empress Eudoxia to revenge the death of her husband. He
takes Rome, carries away all the riches, precious things, and rarities of it.
They spent fifteen whole days in spoiling it of its treasures. Genseric
transported them into Africa together with the Empress, her daughters, and the
principal men of Rome. Just in the same manner as Nebuchadnezzar carried away
the vessels of the Temple, and led the flower of the people into captivity.
It Is assuredly from this very time, that we must compute the entire ruin of the
Empire of the City of Rome, though it had still a shadow of a Kingdom, under
the images of Emperors, that lasted about twenty years. Jeremy reckons 70
years for the captivity of Babylon. Yet it is certain, the from the last ruin
of Jerusalem till the return, there were not sixty years. But the Prophet
counts upon Jerusalem as destroyed, and its Kingdom as entirely ruined from
Jehojakim's time, under whom in truth was the first transportation of the
people: And since whose time, the Kingdom of Judah under Zedekiah, was but a
shadow of that of his Predecessors, because he was the Chaldaeans vassal. On
this account, I say, God reckons it for nothing. By the like reason, we must
reckon for nothing those petty Kings of Rome, who having as it were nothing
more than the City of that name, retained however the name of Roman Emperors to
Augustulus's time.

We must reckon the dismembring of the Roman Empire into ten Kingdoms from the
death of Valentinian the third.
Then therefore from the wrecks of the Roman Empire were formed. 1. The Kingdom
of the Britains in Britanny. 2. Of the Saxons. 3. Of the Franks. 4. Of the
Burgundians in the Gauls. 5. Of the Visigoths in the South of Gaul and in
Spain. 6. Of the Sueves in Gallicia and Portugal. 7. Of the Vandals, first in
Spain, and then in Africa. 8. Of the Allemans in Germany. 9. Of the Ostrogoths
in Pannonia. 10. Of the Greeks in the East.
They took their power with the Beast, that is to say, with Antichristianism;
therefore Antichristianism received its birth and power with the ten Kings.
That is its Epoch, or Date.

According to which, we shall place the future fall of the Antichristian Empire
in the beginning of the 18th Age. I believe it would be very difficult, to set
down precisely the very year. For God does not so exactly observe Chronology in
his Prophecies. A few years more or less, signify nothing. However one may say,
that according to all appearance, it must happen between 1710, and 1715.

The concourse of four Characters make the Epoch of the birth of the
Antichristian Empire.
It Is, I say, the concourse of these four Characters, that must conduct us to
find out the beginning of the 1260 years of Antichristianism. 1. The birth of
Idolatry. 2. The birth of Pride and Tyranny. 3. The progress of corruption of
manners. 4. The division of the Roman Empire into ten parts.
Till these four Characters meet together, we cannot begin the computation of
the 1260 years. Therefore I do not reckon them from the year 430, though that
be an Epoch that is notable enough, having its original in the destruction of
the Temple of Jerusalem. According to which, the accomplishment of the 1260
years would fall on the year 1690, four years hence. I reckon them not from
thence, I say, because in the year 430, the Roman Empire was not yet entirely
dismembered.

Withal it appears not, that then things were ripe for so great an event. We
must not imagine, that the Empire of Antichrist and of Idolatry, will fall and
be destroyed in four or five years. He will have some partisans remaining a
long time before he shall be entirely brought to naught.

Antichristianism was born by degrees; it also falls by degrees.
See one thing, that must be well observed. It Is this, that though we do not
begin the 360 years of the Churches purity, at the first year of I. Christ as
we might have done, to end them in the 60th year of the fourth age, according
to which the Empire of Pride and Idolatry should have ended in the year 1620,
65 years ago; nevertheless, as superstition and tyranny began to be established
in the middle of the fourth Age, a hundred years or thereabouts, before the
point which God marks out for the birth of Antichristianism; in like manner a
hundred years before the entire destruction of this Antichristianism, the
tyranny and superstition of the Papism sensibly grow less and less, and are
visibly falling.

Antichristianism is tending to its last ruin since the year 1620.
Counting the first original of superstition from the year of our Lord 360, and
reckoning after this the 1260 years of its reign, it falls as we have seen, on
the year 1620. At which time Idolatry and tyranny must begin to fall, as they
did begin to appear in the 360th year of our Lord. And indeed it is certain,
that since that time, Images, and Saints have extremely lost their credit. And
since the year 1620, we shall find more persons among the Papists themselves,
that have discredited these false worships, than we shall find in all the
foregoing Ages.

From that very time the power, of the Pope is visibly diminisht in France.
The Tyranny of the Pope also since that time has suffered a visible decay. In
the past age, the Popes had pretty well recovered that blow, which the Council
of Constance, and the reformation of Luther and Zwinglius had given them.
Julius the second, and Leo the tenth, assembled the last Lateran Council, which
abrogated all that had been done against their Authority. The Council of Trent
indeed did not pronounce the superiority of Popes above Councils, and the
Temporality of Kings; but it left them in a full and entire possession of their
pretended Rites, without so much as touching of them. Yea, it did confirm them,
if not by its decrees, at least by its practice, in submitting all its Canons
to the Pope, in declaring they had no design to diminish the authority of the
Holy See, and demanding from thence the confirmation of their decrees. In
truth, the Popes remained in possession of that superiority, and of that power,
as well over Councils as Kings. The deposed since the Council of Trent, the
Kings Henry the third, and Henry the fourth of France. They caused these two
Henry's to be assassinated; and also during the minority of Lewis the XIII. the
Pulpits and assemblies rung with nothing but the Sovereign power of the Pope
over Sovereigns, and the power they have to depose them. In the States in the
year 1616. The Clergy of France had the insolence to maintain this Doctrine so
prejudicial to the authority of Kings, by the mouth of Cardinal Perron. Edm.
Richer, a Doctor of the Sorbon, in the year 1611. made a Book with this title,
De Ecclesiastica and Politica Potestate, which was the Epitomy of that which we
have at this day under the title of Apologia pro Johanne Gersono. Therein he
proved the superiority of the Council above the Pope, and the independance of
Kings. The Author was deprived of the dignity of Syndic of the Sorbon, and of
his benefices. His Book was censured by two Provincial Councils held in the
year 1612, one at Paris, the other at Aix, and was confuted by D. du Val.

But since the year 1620, Richer is advanced again to the throne, the power of
the Pope has been always diminisht. And at this day, it is in so great a
declension, that it will never more rise up. So that Antichristianism falls
precisely by the same degrees, by which it rose. It was a hundred years a
budding before it was blown; it shall be a hundred years declining, before it
shall be entirely overthrown. It had its first beginnings in the year 360. Its
great declension began precisely 1260 years after. It was born about the year
450. It shall dye about the year 1710, just 1260 years after its birth. This
may happen sooner; for the Roman Empire even under Valentinian, whom I reckon
for the last of the Roman Emperors, was very much dismembered. But I do not see
that it can go much further, unless it may be to 1714, reckoning the 1260 years
after the death of Valentinian.

This, I profess, does not seem to me to be altogether a simple conjecture, by
reason of two passages so express. He that does let, or possess, will let, or
possess, till he be taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked one be
revealed. Yhe ten horns are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet;
but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast. But that which I shall now
add, is a conjecture to which men may give such entertainment as they please.

It Is a consequent from what we have said of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the
duration of the persecution, to which the Prophet assigns four times. 2300
mornings and evenings, that is to say, 1150 days. Three years and a half, that
is to say 1260 days. 1290 days, and 1335 days. We have said, that the number of
1260 days, is that of the time of the duration of the profanation of the
Sanctuary, till the time that Judas Macchabaeus having taken out of the Temple
the Idol of Jupiter Olympius, began the cleansing of the Sanctuary; that he was
a month in taking away all the impurities; wherefore Daniel after the number of
1260 days, adds 30 thereunto, and says, that it shall be for 1290 days.
Lastly, we have supposed, that Judas Macchabaeus spent 45 other days in
preparing all things for the dedication of the Temple.

The order in which the enrite restoration of the Church must be effected.
That the type may answer the truth, if the Empire of the Papism must fall, and
be abolisht about the year 1710, we may believe the Church shall not be
perfectly reformed and cleansed for all that. It may be, that all Christians,
although they agree to chase away Idolatry, and beat down Tyranny, yet they
will not agree in every thing. So that I suppose 30 years shall pass, for the
reuniting all Christians in the same communion, and that this union shall be
effected about the year 1740.

This reunion shall be a pathway for the calling the rest of the Pagan and
infidel Nations, who are yet almost innumerable. For we must not hope, that
Pagans and Infidels shall enter into the Church, while they see it divided.
Into what part of it should they put themselves. It shall be the unanimous
consent of all Christians in one only Religion, that shall overcome the
obstinacy of the enemies of Jesus Christ. To effect this reunion of all
Christians, no less than 30 years as I suppose, will be necessary; and that was
figured by the 30 days, which Macchabaeus employed in purifying the Temple of
Jerusalem. After the purgation of the Temple, he spent 45 days to prepare the
vessels for the dedication. I suppose, that in like manner, when the reunion
shall be effected, no less than 45 days, that is to say 45 years, will be
requisite to run overall the Earth, and convert the Nations that are strangers
to the Covenant, to prepare them for the last dedication. Add 45 to 1740, that
will fall on the year 1785, in which shall come the glorious reign of I. Christ
on the Earth, of which we shall speak afterward. And it is in these 45 years,
that the Jews shall be converted, and shall finish the conversion of the
Infidel Nations; their obstinacy shall hold out to the end, and shall not be
overcome but by an extraordinary event, and more extraordinary than the fall of
Babel shall be.

The Empire of Anchrist must be destroyed before J. Christ comes.
There is no ground to believe, that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall come in
the time that God shall employ in the destruction of the Antichristian Empire.
For that Empire shall fall with noise, wars, troubles, effusion of blood. Now
the Spirit of God is not in the wind that breaks the rocks; it is in the thin
and gentle one. When Jesus Christ shall come, there must be a profound peace on
the Earth. Neither shall he come in the time wherein men shall endeavor the
conversion of the Infidel Nations; for that shall be a time of contesting and
disputings; those things must cease when Jesus Christ shall come.

A type of the time in which images were introduced.
The number of 2300 evenings and mornings, which make 1150 days, to me seems to
signify precisely the days in which the daily sacrifice was interrupted; an
interruption that began not, till some months after the Sanctuary had began to
be profaned by impure sacrifices, added to the daily sacrifice that yet was
continued. And even the Idol of Jupiter Olympius seems not to have been brought
into the Temple, till two months after the cessation of the daily sacrifice. So
that the introduction of the Idol, was not till six or seven months after the
profanation of the Temple. This seems to me to have a typical relation to that
which happened in the Christian Church, by the introduction of the adoration of
Images. They were brought into the Churches in the fifth Age; but we do not
find, that Images were adored and served before the sixth Age, from the year
560 to the year 600. Now one may say, that then the abomination, the Idol of
Jupiter Olympius was introduced into the Temple, and placed on the Altar; one
may say, that then the daily sacrifice entirely ceased; whereas the Divine
service had been only polluted by the invocation of Saints, it was entirely
spoiled by the adoration of Images. Compute this cessation of the daily
sacrifice, that is to say, of the service of God, from the year 560, or
thereabouts, add thereunto 1150 years of interruption by the adoration of
Images, this will fall on the year 1710 or thereabouts, the time wherein Images
shall be entirely abolisht with Popery.

Although Antichristianism began in the fifth Age, all the Christians* of that
time were not damned.
See what I had to say, to confirm my notions about the time, in which I do
believe that the 1260 years of the Antichristian Empire must begin and end.
Without doubt, some Protestants, together with all the Papists, will judge that
I ascend very high, and that in placing the birth of this Empire in the Popedom
of Leo the first, I hay made Antichrists of many good Bishops of Rome, to
Gregory the great, inclusively; and all the Christians since that time, the
subjects of the Antichristian Empire. But they that make this objection, do not
consider, that Antichristianism is properly nothing but the corruption of
Christianity; that all corruptions go gradually, and that the first degrees of
a corruption are not mortal. There was Antichristianism mingled with the
Christianity of the Christians of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Age; but it does
not follow, that this Antichristianism did from the beginning ruin the
salvation of those that did partake of it. When the Antichristian corruption
was come to its full, and became mortal, then God by his mercy and the means
that are known to him, showed grace to the Elect that were in Babylon, so that
they did not participate of her mortal idolatries. The good Bishops of Rome in
the fifth and sixth age, were no more Antichrist, than the Christians then were
Antichristian; and if God did tolerate the first beginnings of Antichristianism
in the faithful people; he may also as well have born it in the Bishops.
Before Boniface the third, Successor of Gregory the Great, no Pope called
himself Bishop of Bishops, or Universal Bishop; and so till that time the
Bishops of Rome were not Antichrists perfected, they were only Antichrists
begun.

Degrees of the increase of the papal Tyranny.
It Is known, this papal Tyranny had its degrees since Leo the first, that sat
in that See in the year 450, to Gregory the Great, the Bishops of Rome
endeavored to arrogate to themselves a superiority over the Universal Church;
but yet however without desiring to be called Ecumenical Bishops. After
Gregory the first, to Gregory the seventh, the Popes called themselves
Universal Bishops, but without styling themselves Sovereigns, and Masters of
Kings and Kingdoms. This Gregory was the first, that endeavored to depose
Emperors and Kings. This is Antichrist perfected. Those also that did not know
him when he was yet in his first periods, did know him when he arrived to this.
We have many testimonies of the German Bishops of that time, who profess that
this Gregory the seventh and his successors were Antichrist.

CHAP. VI.
The circumstances of the fall of Antichrist re-establisht in their order. An
explication of the fifteenth Chapter. Principles for the right understanding
the sixteenth Chapter. Diverse interpretations given of it, and their visible
faults.

AFter having seen the time in which the fall and last ruin of the
Antichristian Empire must happen, it is time to see the circumstances of that
fall; and I am very well satisfied, that therein we shall find what will
confirm that which we have affirmed, touching the approaching end of
Antichristianism. I pretend to improve my conjecture to a kind of
demonstration, by the full agreement there is between my hypotheses and the
Prophecies. The circumstances of the fall of the Antichristian Empire are to be
found in the 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19th Chapters. It Is certainly that
part of the Revelation that has been least understood; I mean, as to what
respects the circumstances of the ruin of the Antichristian Empire. For as for
the Characters of that Empire, which are also contained in those Chapters, they
have been well enough apprehended. But as to the fall of that Empire, the time
and progress of that fall, God would not let men hitherto be so happy in their
conjectures. I hope, that in what I shall now say, something shall be met with,
that shall much more bear upon it the Characters of truth.

Diverse circumstances of the fall of Antichrist, which the H. Spirit has not
pleased to put into one vision.
The H. Spirit's so often repeating the prophecy of the fall of Babylon, and the
ruin of its Empire, is not only to give us a perfect certainty of the event,
it is principally to mark out unto us that fall by diverse circumstances. But it
has not pleased God to give us all these circumstances in one vision, that so
the Prophecy might not be too plain. For it is not at all the intention of God,
to inform us clearly of things to come, with respect to their circumstances.
But only as to the substance of the thing. The fall of the Antichristian
Empire, is the substance, that which is necessary to support the hopes of the
Church. Hence it is, that there is no obsecurity in the prophecy, with respect
to this; no more then there was in the Prophecies concerning the Messiah, with
respect to the substance of it, and the certainty of his coming; but there was
much as to the circumstances of that coming. Therefore, God has misplaced the
circumstances in the visions, that they might be obscure,
because God was willing, that the circumstances of the fall of the Kingdom of
Antichrist should be obscure; he has for this reason divided them into several
visions. And for the same reason (that is, that he might put a venerable veyle
upon that, which he was not willing that we should know before the time.) He
has not placed the circumstances exactly, according to the order of their
coming to pass. The vision which marches fore-most, contains things which ought
not to come to pass till afterward: and the visions which follow, contain
things which ought to come to pass before. Therefore that we may place these
adorable obscurities in such a Light, as is necessary to pierce into them; we
must bring things into their natural order, and explain the visions, according
to the order of those events which they foretell. In doing this, we will begin
with the 16th Chapter of the Revelation, which contains the admirable vision of
the seven viols, which are the seven periods, through which the Antichristian
Empire ought to pass to come to its fall.

God does ordinarily prepare for greater visions by lesser.
The fifteenth Chapter is nothing but a preparation for the vision of the
sixteenth. Where are the seven last plagues (as the twelve first verses of the
14th, are nothing but a preparation unto the vision of the harvest and
vintage,) which is very evident from the beginning of the 15th Chapter, which
is, And I saw another sign in Heaven great and mavelous, seven Angels having
the seven last plagues. As a preparation unto the vision of these seven last
plagues, God does make the Prophet see a sea of glass, or of crystal mingled
with fire, that is, a sea where ice and fire are mingled: and them that had
gotten the victory over the beast, and over his Image; that is, them that had
escaped his corruption and idolatry; stand upon the sea of glass, or of ice,
and they sung the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb; Great and mavelous
are thy works. It is clear, A lively Image of those who escape the corruption
of Popery, and its persecutions.
that the Prophet does make an allusion unto the passage through the red Sea,
and unto the Children of Israel, who being got upon the shore of that Sea, sung
the song which Moses composed for them. The Sea of glass mingled with fire,
answers to the red sea; they who had gotten the victory over the Beast; answer
to the Israelites, who had overcome the Egyptians. Egypt, out of which the
Israelites marched, answers to this Antichristian Empire, out of which the Elect
do escape. Therefore as the red sea, and its waves were the danger out of which
the Israelites coming out of Egypt were delivered; so this sea of glass mingled
with fire, represents the evils which the Faithful who leave Babylon do escape.
These evils are called a sea, on the account of their greatness and bitterness;
my breach is great like the sea, said Jeremy: they are called a sea of glass,
or a sea of ice, because of their hardness. It Is more easy to escape out of a
sea of water, because the liquidity of waters does make it possible to swim
through them: but if a sea was glass or ice, it would be impossible to get out
of it. There is also fire mingled with glass, to represent the burning, and
extreme dolours of those evils. Fire and Ice are two extremes in evil; yet they
are joined in the description of the calamities of the Church, though they seem
inconsistent: if it be a sea of ice, there cannot be fire there; and if there
be fire, how can it subsist with ice? This is to express, that the calamities
of the Church are extreme, and that they include all kinds of evils: There is
Ice, that is Irreligion, a privation of the Fire of Piety: There is fire
through the cruelty of persecutions. It Is for this, that the Spirit used the
term glass instead of ice; to signify that it should be a frozen sea, which
should subsist with fire. I know not what they had in their thoughts, who have
said, that this sea of glass signified the Church. The Israelites who are
escaped out of the spiritual Egypt, are represented upon the sea of glass, that
is, upon its shore, and as those who come out of the water. In the style of the
holy language, upon the river, upon the sea, is, upon the shore of the river,
and upon the shore of the sea.

After this come out of the Temple, which is in Heaven, the seven Angels
appointed to pour out the seven vials of the wrath of God. They are clothed in
white, v. 6.
to denote their purity; they had their loins girt, after the fashion of the
ancients, who girt themselves, when they made themselves ready for a combat,
or any other difficult work. v. 7.
One of the four beasts gives to each of them one viol, a bottle out of which
we pour into a cup. This Figure of speaking is common, we pour out of a viol
into a cup. Now a Cup in the figurative and Prophetic style, signifies the
judgments of God, in allusion unto that stupifying cup, which was given to
Criminals condemned to dye, that they might be less sensible of the pain of
their punishment. Or rather, which I judge more probable, God in this vision
makes an allusion to hour-glasses, in which water did run out, to mark the
hours and duration of time; as now adays this is done by the running of sand.
And this later explication is to be preferred; because by this, we shall more
easily distinguish the Periods, from the judgments which are executed during
those periods. Viols, or hour-glasses, are appointed to measure periods and
times, and the plagues naturally signify, the judgments of God upon men. For
these seven viols signify seven Periods of time, which God designed to run out
(during seven or eight Centuries) leasurely, as water and sand run out in
hour-glasses.

The Temple was filled with smoke from the Glory of God, v. 8.
and from his power, and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the
seven plagues were fullfill'd. It Is a manifest allusion, to that which happened
in the Tabernacle, when it was dedicated by Moses; and in the Temple when it
was dedicated by Solomon, such a cloud and smoke did at that time fill the
Temple, that Moses could not enter into it, nor the Priests were able to stand
there. Both here and there, this signifies the extraordinary presence of God;
there, for the consecration of the Tabernacle and Temple; here, for the
accomplishing his decrees, and the executing of his judgments: I do not
believe, that we ought to search after any other mysteries here.

After this begins the 16th Chapter, Chapter 16.
and the vision of the viols; it is one of the most august and excellent
visions in the whole Book, but withal the least understood. Till now, nothing
has been understood of the sense of the 16th Chapter of the Revel. which is
the Key of the fall of- Antichrist.
I am fully persuaded, that Interpreters have understood nothing of the meaning
of this Chapter; Gods knows whether we shall be more happy, if we are mistaken,
as others are, this must be charged on us: if we light upon the truth, this
must be ascribed to God. But I am persuaded, that God has heard me in this
thing, and has answered the very ardent desire, which I have had, to pierce
into these profound mysteries, to the end, that I might descry the deliverance
of his Church. There cannot be a greater mistake, then that of some modern
Interpreters, who make these seven plagues to be poured out, during seven ages,
either of the Church in general, or of the Christian Church in particular.

All that others seem to have understood as to this Chapter, is, that it
contains the History of seven degrees, or seven periods, through which the
Antichristian Kingdom ought to pass before its fall; every period containing
dismal judgments of God, which are to afflict the Empire of the Beast. This
carries such evidence along with it, that it is almost impossible not to see
it; but yet, this has been seen very confusedly, and the application which
has been made, has been very unhappy. Now since others have understood
nothing of the sense of this Chapter, we must not wonder that they have said
nothing pertinently concerning the fall of the Antichristian Empire, and
concerning the time in which it must come to pass: for here is the Key of all,
this is a complete History or its calamities. It Is the most important Chapter
of all, and from which we may learn the time of the ruin of popery. If these
plagues are not yet poured out, if they are all yet to come, as Monsieur de
Launay asserts, we are then indeed a great way behind, and very far from the
end of our reckoning; We must yet tarry many ages. Those that are more liberal
and judicious, do allow us two or three viols already run out, but they will
have that four or five are yet to come. I admire that the piercing Joseph Mede
should entertain this opinion: if he was now alive, one might convince him,
that this cannot agree with the other Principles, which he has laid down with
so much exactness, and depth of judgment. As to my self, I assert, that the
seven plagues are already past, and hope to prove it with all that evidence
which can be given to explications of Prophecies, about which it is very
difficult to frame demonstrations. And it is from hence, that I intend to draw
my strongest proof, wherewith to sustain my general hypothesis, That the Empire
of Popery is just come to its end. We shall see such an admirable agreement,
between the events and the Prophecies explained, that shall abundantly
convince, that what I am about to say, is not simple conjecture: But we must
not pass judgment upon one piece, we must see the whole.

Now that I may assist my Readers the more easily, to comprehend the true sense
of the seven viols, and the seven plagues, because upon them depends our whole
Systeme of the approaching Fall of the Antichristian Empire, I intend to do two
things. The first is, to lay down certain Principles, which must serve us as
guides. The second is, to do that very briefly, which I have omitted in other
places. I mean, to relate the various Interpretations of Divines. For that
which they have said, is so far from the likeness of Truth, that it may be
opposing my Commentaries and theirs easily be seen, who has hit upon the truth.

Principles for the understanding the 7. viols, in the 16th Chap. of the Revel.
1. Principle. The 7 viols are 7 judgments of God upon the Kingdom of
Antichrist.
The Principles are there:

1. The pouring out of the viols, and the several plagues, which follow upon
their effusion, do certainly signify the judgments of God upon the Kingdom of
Antichrist: But we must not imagine that they are as so many steps, which
sensibly carry it to its ruin. God does afflict Commonwealths by Pestilence,
Famines, and Wars; and yet they do not perish by these calamities. They
continue a long time under them, and sometimes do regain their former luster
after them. This principle must be carefully minded, because all other
Interpreters have been mistaken; either through their not attending to it, or
their not due understanding of it. This they have understood, that we ought not
to place the beginning of the pouring out of the viols, until after that we
see the Empire of Popery sensibly to fall. Hence some have not placed their
beginning, till after the preaching of Luther.

2. Principle, These 7 viols signify 7 periods of time.
2. The second Principle, That these seven viols do certainly signify seven
periods of time, which ought to be distinguished one from another. As the seven
Seals and seven Trumpets in the preceding Chapters did signify seven periods,
which succeeded one to another the figurative expression of viols, borrowed
from hour-glasses, which measured time, signifies this thing more naturally
then the Seals and Trumpets. And this again is a Principle, which other
Interpreters have not at all regarded, whence it is that they confound the
viols, and make either all, or almost all of them, to be poured out in the same
Period.

3. Principle, The viol does differ from the plague.
3. The third Principle, That to every Period or viol, a plague is annexed; but
we must distinguish between the viol and the plague. The viol signifies the
period of time, the plague signifies the judgment of God, which falls out
during the period. It Is true, that the plagues are not always restrained unto
the duration of the viol, or of the Period marked by the viol, but sometimes do
reach both before and after it; the reason of which we will give hereafter.
This again is a Principle which has not at all been taken notice of: the viols
and plagues have been confounded by Interpreters, as if they were one and the
same thing, and almost all of them have been placed in the same time.

4. Principle, Nothing but evil is denoted by the viols, never any good.
4. The fourth Principle, That all that is denoted and signified by these viols,
is evil to be inflicted on the Antichristian Kingdom: So that nothing but
Judgments can be found in them. But it must be considered, that these
Judgments do fall sometimes upon the head of the Antichristian Kingdom alone,
and sometimes upon the body alone, and sometimes upon both together. And we
must not imagine, that all those plagues do denote evil or mischief unto
Antichrist, i. e. the head of the Antichristian Kingdom: This again is a
Principle, which has not been minded; for men have imagined, that every one of
these seven viols, must be fatal to the power of the Beast.

5 Principle, The Antichristian Empire is represented under an Emblem of the
systeme of the World.
5. The fifth Principle, That the Antichristian Kingdom is here represented
under a figure drawn from the Systeme of the World: Hence it is, that mention
is made of the Earth, of the Sea, of Rivers, of the Sun. The Earth is the
entire Globe, composed of Land and Water, and this signifies the whole mass of
the Antichristian World, both the head and the members. The Sea and the Rivers,
signify the people, according to the constant style of the Prophets. But the
people distinguished from their head and sovereign, the Sun denotes the
sovereign of this Kingdom, as will be made out clearly in the sequel. All these
Principles in my judgment are clear, and whoever will examine them well by the
Text, and the Commentaries annexed, will not doubt of their truth. Let us see
how ill the modern Interpreters have followed them.

Seven Interpretations of the first plague.
The first Plague is, a noysom and grievous sore upon the men that had the mark
of the Beast. 1. Forbes understands by this, the filthiness of the Clergy,
their pride, covetousness, and other vices: but he does not restrain this to
any period; affirming, that this corruption is to be considered, as taking in,
or reaching unto the whole duration of the Antichristian Empire. 2. Cocceius
understands this of the schisms, and divisions, and disputes, which have been
and still continue in the Popedom: Instances disputes about Images; about the
single life of the Clergy; about Investitures; the several schisms of Popes;
the grand schism of the West; the disputes between the Scotists and Thomists;
the quarrels about the Authority of the Pope: So that according to him, this
plague has lasted near a thousand years, i. e. ever since the contentions
betwixt the Iconoclasts and the Iconolatres, or Patrons of Image Worship until
our times. It is not possible that a man should be more mistaken then this
Author; and I wonder, that an Author, who had so much studied Prophecies,
should not perceive that the viols signify here Periods, and different times,
and consequently, that we must not make run the same plague to all these times:
Besides, there is no exactness in this conception, nor any agreement between
divisions, and a noisome sore. 3. Joseph Mede, takes this noisome sore to be
the fury and rage, with which the papists were seized upon the preaching of the
Waldenses. 4. Dr. More follows him in this, as almost in all other things. 5.
De Launay also, will have it to be that vexation of Spirit, which the subjects
of Antichrist must feel, when they shall see his complete ruin. 6. Testard is
of the same opinion. 7. James Durrham, a Scottish Minister at Glascow asserts,
that the Earth in this first plague is the Authority of the Pope; and that this
noisome sore signifies the diminution which that Authority has suffered by the
Reformation.


Seven Interpretations of the second plague.
The second Plague is, The sea turned into blood, and the fishes dying in the
sea. One would think that Authors have with earnestness strove, who should keep
farthest from the very likeness of truth in this matter. 1. According to
Forbes, this sea turned into blood is the universal reproach, under which the
worship of Popery is fallen, together with its doctrines; for instance, its
worship of Images, its Purgatory, its sacrifice of the Mass, etc. Behold, what
an agreement there is between this, and a sea of blood. 2. Cocceius asserts,
that this sea signifies the reduction of the Lombards, Hungarians, Poles,
Bohemians, Vandals, Goths, Danes, Saxons, Franks, etc. in a word, of all the
Western nations; unto the obedience of the Church of Rome. But besides, that in
this there is no shadow of resemblance between the Prophetic Emblem, and that
which is pretended to be signified by it; this contradicts the evident
Principle, that these plagues never signify good to the Antichristian Empire:
The reduction of so many Nations under the obedience of the Pope, is the
greatest advantage that has happened to the Antichristian Kingdom. 3.
According to Mede, it is the popish sea, slain and turned into blood by the
Reformation, which was done in the last Age. 4. According to De Launay, it is
the government of sovereign Princes allied with the Pope, which shall become
tyrannical and odious to their subjects. 5. Testard thinks that it signifies,
that many States shall withdraw themselves from the jurisdiction of the Pope,
so that this domination shall become like a bloody carcass, which putrifies the
waters. 6. According to Durrham, the waters are Ecclesiastical constitutions,
decrees, Canons, worship, Mass, etc. And that the viol shall make all these
become deadly to those who use them. 7. Lastly, in the judgment of Dr. More,
the fishes here signify men, and the sense is, that men shall withdraw
themselves from the dominion of the Pope, so that no more any men shall be
found under that dominion.


Interpretation of the third plague.
The third Plague is, The Rivers turned into blood. 1. According to Forbes,
these are the Doctors, Bishops, and Priests of the Church of Rome, which must
become stinking unto the people, even as Rivers of blood. 2. According to
Cocceius, this signifies the wars and divisions, which have spilt so much blood
among Christian Princes, since the time of the Waldenses and Albigenses. 3.
According to Mede, the Rivers are the Emissaries, Agents, and Protectors of
popery, whose turn shall come to suffer the deaths and torments, which they had
caused the faithful to suffer; which he says came to pass in England in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth. 4. According to de Launay, this is the Doctrine of
popery, that shall become odious to all its followers. 5. Testard follows the
Interpretation of Mede. 6. Durrham does the like. 7. And so does Dr. More.


Interpretations of the fourth plague.
The fourth Plague is, The Sun, whose heat and scorching beams do burn men. 1.
According to Forbes, this is the Light of the Gospel, which is renewed, and
doubled by the Reformation, and which fills the Papists with despair. 2.
Cocceius says almost the same thing, that the Sun is Jesus Christ, the beams
are his efficacy and light, which destroys the superstitions of popery by
discovering them. 3. Mede thinks that the Sun in this fourth Plague is the
Emperor, or some other great Potentate, who shall abandon popery and torment
it. 4. De Launay judges, that the Sun is the Pope, (and this is the only thing
in which he has guessed right) and that the burning caused by the Sun,
signifies that remorse of Conscience, which Papists subjects of the Pope will
feel. 5. Testard, who every where follows Mede, does leave him here and follows
Forbes. 6. Durrham follows Mede. 7. And Dr. More is of the opinion of Forbes
and Cocceius.


Interpretations of the fifth plague.
The fifth Plague falls upon the seat of the Beast, which is darkened by it. 1.
According to Forbes, this is the diminution of credit and authority, which
happened to popery by the Reformation. 2. According to Cocceius, the throne of
the Beast signifies a multitude of Nations, upon whom the Pope did sit, and
this throne was overturned by the Council of Trent, which by its
excommunications has separated a multitude of Nations from the Sea of Rome. 3.
According to Joseph Mede, this signifies, that the City of Rome shall be
utterly destroyed a considerable time before popery be completely ruined. 4.
This is also the opinion of de Launay. 5. Testard has followed them both. 6.
And Durrham likewise. 7. Dr. More says, that the plague which falls upon the
seat of the Beast, and darkens it, is the discovery of the falsehood of the
pretended infallibility of the Pope.


Interpretations of the sixth plague.
The sixth Plague falls upon Euphrates, whose waters are dried up, that a way
may be opened to the Kings of the East. 1. According to Forbes, Euphrates
signifies the Papal power and domination; the Kings of the East are Turks and
Jews: this Papal domination is an obstacle to the conversion of these Kings of
the East; when it shall be abolisht that which is signified by the drying up of
the River Euphrates, the Turks and Jews shall be converted. 2. According to
Cocceius, Euphrates signifies also the power of the new Babylon. This Euphrates
(says he) this Roman power, has been much weakened in this present age by the
wars, which have happened between the Spaniards, the French, the Germans, the
Hollanders. The Kings of the East are the Turks, which must come; but he knows
not how far they must come. 3. According to Joseph Mede, Euphrates dried up,
signifies the ruin of the Mahometans; and the Kings of the East who shall come,
are the Jews, who shall be converted. 4. De Launay, says almost the same thing;
save that by the Kings of the East who shall come, he understands all the
Nations which are on the other side of the Bosphorus, who shall be converted to
the Faith. 5. Testard exactly follows the conjecture of Joseph Mede. 6. James
Durrham does not much differ. 7. And Dr. More conjectures, that here is
signified the conjunction of the Turks and Jews, as well as their conversion.
They all agree in interpreting, the three unclean spirits like unto Frogs, to
be the Agents and Ambassadors of the Pope, or Monks.


Interpretations of the seventh plague.
The seventh viol falls upon the air, and the plague consists in thunders,
lightnings, earthquakes, and the division of the City into three parts. 1.
Forbes explains this to be the total ruin of popery, but knows not what to make
of the division of the City into three parts. 2. Cocceius applies this to the
wars, which have happened in this Age in England, Scotland, to the massacre in
Ireland, to the death of King Charles I. to the War between the Hollanders and
Spaniards; He confesses also, that he knows not what the division of the City
into three parts means: by the City he understands the true Church. 3. Mede
also explains all this, to be the final destruction of popery: but says
nothing of the division of the City into three parts. 4. De Launay understands
it after the same manner; he says, that the three parts of the City have
relation to the three great judgments, by which God will destroy the
Antichristian Empire. 5. Testard follows Mede, and knows no more then he the
meaning of the division of the City into three parts. 6. According to James
Durrham, this Plague comprehends all the calamities which must happen from the
fall of Antichrist, unto the end of the world: the division of the City into
three parts in his judgment, means nothing else but the total subversion of
popery. 7. Lastly, Dr. More agreeing with the others, that this Plague
comprizeth the total ruin of popery, adds that the division of the City into
three parts, alludes to the three grand Parties that divide the world, viz. the
Infidels, the Antichristians, and the Protestants: this division indeed, is not
an effect of the seventh plague; but is (says he) ascribed to it, for the
adorning of the Prophecy; but it is a sign of no deep thinking to make such
conjectures.


General defects of all these Interpretations.
I will not spend time to lay open the weaknesses of these Interpretations: they
are so apparent, that the dimmest eye may discern them. Only you may please to
remarque these general faults or defects in them. 1. They confound the viols
with the plagues. 2. They do not divide the times of these plagues by periods;
but for the most part heap one upon another. 3. They observe not any
Chronology, or order of History. 4. They make not a System of events. 5. They
observe not to set down the resemblance between the Prophetic representations
and Historical events: For example, what resemblance is there between a Sea and
the popish worship; between Rivers and Doctors, or Bishops? If in some places
they have laid down a resemblance between the Emblemes which the Prophet uses,
and the things to which they have applied them. This is by mere chance, this
appears, because this resemblance is only to be found in some places, not in
all. 6. They have this common fault, that they pass over several things,
without explaining, for instance, the division of the City into three parts.
Let this be carefully observed, that we shall give such an explication, in
which not one of these faults can be found; but there will be a System of
events well set together: there will be a distinction between the viol and the
plague, and the plagues will follow one another, as well as the periods: there
will be a perfect resemblance, between the Prophetic Emblems and the Events.
Lastly, there will not be so much as one article in the Prophecy, of which we
have not found the complete fulfilling in the Events recorded by history.

CHAP. VII.
An explication of the three first VIOLS, and the three first PLAGUES.

AS to the five first plagues, I continue to have the same thoughts, which I
proposed in my prejudies against popery: Part 1. Chapter 8.
nothing remains, but to confirm and illustrate them. The Text is thus:

Chap. 16. v. 1. And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the
seven Angels, Go your ways, and pour out the viols of the wrath of God upon the
earth.

v. 2. And the first went, and poured out his viol upon the earth, and there
fell a noysom and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast,
and upon them which worshipped his Image.

The Emblems are here bor-a rowed from the plagues of Egypt.
It is clear enough, that God makes here an allusion to the plagues of Egypt: We
have a little before seen, that the Sea of glass, i. e. of ice mingled with
fire, upon which those stood who were escaped out of the spiritual Egypt, had
its allusion unto the red sea, upon whose shore the Israelites being got out of
Egypt were found. In like manner, here the Prophet alludes to that powder,
which Moses cast into the air, and which falling down upon the Egyptians became
swelling boyls. In the Greek there stands not in the first verse the general
term plague, but an evil and wicked boil; and this I interpret to be that
dismal corruption, which seized on the Popedom, head and members, in the tenth
Century; for there I place the beginning of these plagues, and they must not
have a shorter space of time. Every plague takes up a period of more then a
hundred years, so that eight hundred years are not too much for seven periods.
When the Prophets divide times by periods, they are not wont to assign to each
less then an age, or Century.

The first plague is the dismal corruption of the Popedom in the tenth Century.
We must know then, that until the 10th Century, all things favored the
Antichristian Empire, whilst it was brought forth and grew up. It Is true, Rome
(as also other Cities of Italy) did suffer in the fifth, sixth, and seventh
Ages; by the irruptions of the Goths and Vandals, by the Wars of Belisarius and
Narses, during the reign of Justinian, by the Arms of the Lombards, who were
called in by Narses. But these temporal Calamities were far from doing
prejudice to the Antichristian Empire; on the contrary, it grew and got
strength by the ruins of the Roman Empire, and by the total abolition of the
authority of the Greek Emperors in Italy. The Western Nations, insensibly grew
passionate for the supremacy of the pretended seat of St. Peter; hommage was
paid to him without contradiction, at least in spirituals, and also in
temporals, the power of Popes was great and the Bishops of Rome, had made
themselves formidable to the whole World. But the first step to their declining
state was that astonishing corruption, which the Sea of Rome fell into, and
thereupon all the Provinces that had had dependence upon it. This corruption
was so dismal, that the descriptions made of it by popish Authors themselves,
do even at this day affright us. They call the tenth age, an iron and leaden
age; an iron age, because of its hardness and barrenness; a leaden one, Baron.
ad an. 900.
on the account of these deforming evils, which broke in like a deluge; and age
of darkness, because of its ignorance. Two women, famous for their debauches,
did make and depose Popes. For the space of 120 years, the Bishops of Rome were
Murderers, Poysoners, Adulterers, Sodomites, profane Blasphemers, known and
open Magicians: the corruption of the head diffused it self into all the
members. The Author of Fasciculus Temporum informs us; that in many places men
did not know so much as the Sacraments. The Priests Religion was Astrology,
Negromancy and Magic, and their life and excess of all sorts of abominations.
Baronius confesses, that things were come to that pass, that it was an opinion
spread through the whole world, that the end of the world was at hand, because
Antichrist was come.

An Ulcer very proper to represent such a corruption.
Now what resemblance can be more proper to represent such a corruption of
manners, then a noysom sore, or ulcer, which is here given by Saint John? An
ulcer does contain the Idea, 1. Of a great corruption of the blood; for
Apostems and Ulcers do always proceed from thence. 2. Of a very great stink,
offensive to the smell. 3. Of a frightfull object to the sight.
Such was this corruption of manners, it proceeded from a deep corruption of
the inward parts of the heart and mind, it cast a very bad smell, which has
reached even to us: it formed a most frightfull object, upon which the adorers
of the Pope, and of the (so called) holy seat, cannot even now adays reflect
without horror and indignation. This plague fell upon the Earth, i. e. upon the
globe or whole mass of the Antichristian world. For the members and the head,
the whole and the parts were covered over with this dismal corruption.

This corruption was, and is 20 this day a terrible blow to Popery.
And further, it cannot be expressed how great a plague, how sore a blow this
See received from hence. For this gave occasion to the Emperors to meddle with
the affairs of Rome and its Bishops. The Successors of Charlemaine, having let
go this fair patrimony, kept themselves in Germany, during which time the Popes
got strength and made themselves Masters. But the excesses of the Court of
Rome, obliged the Otho's Emperors of Germany to march into Italy, there they
corrected and deposed some Popes, and chose others to their mind. They revived
the ancient right, which the Emperors had of confirming Popes after their
election, which was a very sore mortification, of which they did not recover
until Gregory the VII. And besides, this corruption rendered the Sea of Rome
contemptible to all nations. In some Countries men took liberty to write very
bitter invectives against it, some of which are come to our hands. This is a
wound that bleeds even at this day, and affords us a very strong argument
against the pretentions of infallibility and supremacy, challenged by the
Church of Rome. For we will never cease to object, and very rationally, that
God is too good and too wise, to suffer the Seat of his Vicar, and of an
infallible Vicar, to be infected with so dismal a corruption. These
considerations let us see that none ought to object against us, that we make
one of the plagues of the Antichristian Empire to be that corruption, which is
one of its Characters. The same thing we shall see in the fourth plague, where
we will make it appear, that the tyranny of the Antichristian Kingdom, which is
one of its Characters, is notwithstanding become one of its plagues. When these
Characters are risen to an immoderate height, they become sensible, they
discover Antichristianism, and by discovering it they destroy it; for its
safety consists in being a mystery; it is a mystery of iniquity. This is the
first plague, and the first period of Antichrists declining; this period lasted
above a 150 years; for this corruption continued for a good space of the
eleventh Age. The second and third plagues are thus set down.

v. 3. And the second Angel poured out his viol upon the sea, and it become as
the blood of a dead man, and every living soul dyed in the sea.

v. 4. And the third Angel poured out his viol upon the rivers and fountains of
waters, and they became blood.

Waters signify people, the sea of blood the Croisades
Observe, that the sea and waters in Prophetic visions, signify people or
nations; this is so well known, that it needs not to be proved. And supposing
that this Emblem is not common in other Prophets, it is most evidently so in
St. John. Come, says the Angel to him, Chap. 17. v. 15.
I will show thee the judgment of the great whore, which sits upon many
waters. The waters which thou saw, where the whore sits, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and languages. The first viol was poured out upon the
earth, i. e. upon the whole Globe; for earth contains both dry and moist. The
corruption of manners was spread over the head and the members, over the papal
Seat and all its subjects. But this second viol is poured only upon the waters,
the sea and the rivers, i.e. upon the people of the Antichristian Empire, or
upon the different Nations, Tribes, and Languages (as the Spirit does express
it) it falls not upon the Head and the Seat, on the contrary, it is the Seat of
the Beast, which contributes to this Plague. The waters of the sea were turned
into blood, and every living soul dyed. What more native and lively
representation could have been made of the Rage of the Croisades. In all
languages and in all sorts of style, a sea of blood, rivers of blood, streams
of blood, signify a very great slaughter. Now the proper Character of the
Croisades, is slaughter, murder, which falls not upon the head of the
Antichristian Empire, but upon the people, all was there turned into blood.
Never was there such a prodigious effusion of blood in the sea, i. e. among the
peoples. In the first Croisade, there dyed more then two millions of men in
three or four year. It Is evident that God did lead these wretched creatures, as
it were to the shambles, that they should find the punishment of their crimes:
the took away so great a quantity of blood, that he might cure the Ulcers of
Christendom. For that he might purge it of that vast rabble, he permitted the
Devil to inspire them, either with such a sottish superstition, or an
extravagant ambition; that they must go and deliver the holy Land, or go and
conquer Kingdoms in the East. This plague lighted only on the sea, not at all
on the dry land: upon the subjects of the Popedom, not at all upon the Popes.
On the contrary, the Popes improved that evasion to greaten their power, to
plunder whole Countries, to make Generals of Armies, to act as sovereign
Monarchs, and to lay a heavier yoke upon Kings: whom they ordered to march, and
sent them as their slaves into the East, and during their absence plundered
their Kingdoms.

We must not imagine that all the plagues laid down by St. John, must tend to
the ruin of the Sea of Rome, or to the diminution of its power; for some are to
light upon the head of that Empire, to crush it, others upon the people to
punish them, because they worship the Beast: the plague of blood and slaughter
is for the people.

This plague of the Croisades is divided into two plagues, because of its long
duration, for it lasted 200 years, from the end of the eleventh Age, until the
end of the thirteenth. The third viol which makes the third plague, fell only
upon rivers, i. e. upon lesser waters; because after a hundred years the fury
abated, there was no more marching of the whole West unto the East, only that
of some particular nations, as of the Freneh among others under the conduct of
St. Lewis; and consequently the effusion of blood was much less, there were
only rivers of blood, whereas the former Croisades had made a sea. I shall add
this explication which I have given, does exactly agree with the Genius and
Emblems of the Prophets. The Prophet Ezec. 32.6. says to Egypt, I will water
with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains. There
must be no less then a sea of blood, to overflow a Country with blood, even to
the tops of the mountains. The mountains shall be melted with their blood,
says Isaiah 34.3. there must be rivers of blood to do this.

v. 5. And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord,
which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus:

v. 6. For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy.

There will not want some, who from these words will object and say, that
until this time there had been no persecution on the account of Religion, and
that the Popedom had in no wise shed the blood of Saints of Prophets. To this I
answer. First, It Is not true, that during the time of the Croisades, Why God
charge Antichristian Rome, with the blood which she had not yet shed.
no blood had been shed on the account of Religion; for it was exactly in the
middle of the Croisades, that that horrible barbarity was used against the
Waldenses and Albingenses. Innocent III. published the fifth Croisade at the end
of the twelfth Century, and at the same time gave sentence of death against the
poor Albigenses. But that which is especially to be observed in this matter, is
this, that those who make this objection, must make a stronger against those
words of Jesus Christ, Luc. 11.50, 51.
That the blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the
world, may be required of this generation. From the blood of Abel, etc. verily
I say, it shall be required of this generation. What reason to require of the
Jews, who lived in the times of Christ, the blood of Abel and other holy men,
who were slain before the Flood? what reason to require of them the righteous
blood, shed before Abraham? Nay, what reason to require of them the blood of
the Prophets slain by their fathers, since they disapproved the deeds of their
fathers? Why, this is the reason, God when he executes judgment, ought to hear
the cries of all the righteous blood that is shed; for these cries make up but
one voice; and the race of murderers makes up but one people, on which God
will charge that blood. It matters not, that it was shed by the Parents or the
Children, before the one were born, or after the death of the others, this
makes no difference; God looking upon this murdering race all in one body,
will charge the whole upon the whole in the lump. Which evidently appears from
that which God here speaks of this generation of Antichrist; they have shed the
blood of Prophets, he says not of Apostles, he goes back as far as the
Prophets, and inflicts the punishment of the blood of the Prophets, slain so
many ages before upon the Antichristian Empire. Rome has always been a
murdering City; the holy Apostles, Martyrs, Doctors, Confessors of the first
ages of Christianity, were slain by its orders and in its Dominions. Modern
Rome, within the circuit of its Jurisdiction, has shed an infinite quantity of
holy and faithful blood. The old and new Rome, in the account of God, and in
the executing of his judgments, make up but one body, because God beholds the
whole in one instant or point. He looks upon her as one murdering tyrant, as
one race of manslayers. It matters not, that as to some particular persons, and
some particular ages, she is not guilty of the blood of the Prophets; she is
guilty as to her whole, in her beginning and her end: now the beginning and the
end do involve the middle.

But it will be objected, Had not Rome Pagan been sufficiently punished for the
blood of Apostles and Maryrs, which she had shed? So many sackings and
desolations as she had felt, did not they suffice? Must Antichristian Rome pay
once more for that blood? I will object on the same grounds; Had not Jerusalem,
the mutherer of the Prophets, suffered enough for her murders, by that dismal
desolation made by the Chaldeans, by the captivity of all her Inhabitants, by
the fire which consumed her Palaces? Must God chastise her by the Romans for
those crimes, which had been punished by the Babylonians? Thus was it necessary
that God should punish Rome Antichristian, for the crimes committed by Rome
Pagan, or for the sins which were not committed till the following ages of this
Antichristian Rome? It Is to this objection, that the other Angel answers, who
speaks at

V. 7. And I heard another out of the Altar say, even so Lord God Almighty,
true and righteous are thy judgments. That is, though it seem unjust to give
blood to drink unto new Rome, on the account of the blood that was shed by old
Rome, or of that which shall be afterward shed by the new; notwithstanding thy
judgments are righteous and true. Behold, the three plagues which bring us
down unto the thirteenth Age. The last Croisade, was the second expedition of
St. Lewis, who carried out and lost 60000 men at Thunis, in the year 1269.

CHAP. VIII.
The fourth plague; the increase of the heat of the Sun, denoting the increase
of the Papal Authority, which had almost utterly ruined the World and the
Church. The fifth plague is the desolation of ROME, when the Pope retreated to
Avignon, and the diminution of the papal Authority by the grand Schism of the
West.

v. 8. ANd the fourth Angel poured out his viol upon the Sun, and power was
given to him to scorchmen with fire.

v. 9. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God,
who has power over those plagues; and they repented not to give him glory.

This is the fourth plague, in which we see the Sun. It Is known and confessed
by all, who know any thing of prophecies, dreams and visions; that the Heavens,
What is the Sun of the Antichristian Empire.
the Sun, the constellations, and the Stars, are emblems of dignities and
grandeurs on earth; and the image does bear a lively resemblance; for the
Heavens are the superior region of the World, from whence good and bad
Influences do come; and supreme Authority is the heaven of the lower World,
from whence both good and evil proceed; great dignities are like constellations
in Societies: The Sun always signifies the Sovereign, and the Stars inferior
Magistrates. Before, in the sixth Chapter, the fall of the Empire of Rome Pagan
and of the imperial dignity, is represented to us by the same images. Chap. 6,
12, 13.
And the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon became as blood,
and the Stars of heaven fell unto the earth. This is a thing which admits not
any dispute.

The Sun of the Antichristian Kingdom is the Pope.
That the Antichristian Kingdom is treated of here, is generally agreed to:
therefore it cannot be doubted, that the Sun is the Sovereign of this Kingdom.
The heat and beams are the instruments by which the Sun operates. It Is by his
beams that he quickens, warms, and begets, and causes fertility, when his heat
is moderate, as he causes sterility when it is excessive. It Is by heat that he
preserves and strengthens health, when his beams are gentle; and it is by it
that he produces death, when his beams are mingled with poisonous vapors.

Authority and power in Sovereigns exactly correspond to heat and light in the
Sun: it is this Authorrity which warms and burns, which saves and destroys,
which does good and hurt. When it is moderate like a Sun, it enlightens and
preserves that State: when it is excessive, it is like a fire which devours; when
it is gentle, and the Prince uses it aright, there is no advantage that it does
not produce, fertility, abundance, peace, strength, and health of the
Commonwealth. But when it is malign, and the Prince uses it wrong, it is a
burning Sun, which consumes, which wastes, which scorches and kills, which
brings barrenness and want into the place of abundance, trouble and confusion
into the room of peace, and death into the place of life; these things also
carry an undeniable evidence.

The increase of heat, signifies the increase of the papal Authority.
Therefore I conclude, not by way of naked conjecture, but with assurance, that
the increase of heat in the Sun of the Antichristian Empire, and in his beams,
is the increase of his Authority and power, and also the pernicious and wicked
use of this usurped power. And this clearly signifies that prodigious
augmentation of the papal authority and power, which was made in the eleventh,
thirteenth, and fourteenth Centuries. The Pope had been Tyrant over the Church,
then he became Tyrant over the World. Gregory VII. by an incredible attempt,
raised himself above all Sovereigns, excommunicated Emperors and Kings, deposed
them, and took away their Crowns, made other Emperors and other Kings, to whom
he gave the Territories of the former. His Successors kept the same path, yea
out-went him. They had a mind to make Emperors their Vassals, and did so. This
heat scorched men like fire, and men were scorched with great heat; for none
can describe the dismal desolations, which Popes have made by the use of this
usurped and excessive authority. The increase of the authority of the Popes,
had almost consumed all Europe.
It cost Henry IV. alone, sixty and odd battles and combats in which he was
engaged, to defend himself against the enemies which the Popes stirred up. The
history of the two Frederiks, that of Lewis of Bavaria, and the general history
of Germany for the space of 300 years, can witness to what I say, without
reckoning England, France, and other States, where the papal Authority has
caused bloody and horrible Tragedies, and such troubles, whose bare reading
does move compassion; Matthew Paris alone may suffice to let us know, how
exactly this Prophecy was accomplished, [ that the beams of the Sun scorched
men.] He tells us, how the Authority of the Pope made such exactions in
England, Chap. 6.7, 8. of the first part, Chap. 5. of the second,
and brought it to so great misery, that it was almost quite ruined. This may
be found every where, and lately in our History of Popery, in the first and
third recrimination.

Why the fourth plague begins before the second and third.
This is the fourth plague, and whoever seriously considers this matter, will
have no scruple about it, not more then I have. Perhaps some will make one,
that this fourth Plague did begin before the second, for the prodigious tyranny
of the Popes began under Hildebrand, named Gregory VII. about the year 1074,
and the Croisades did not begin till 1096. more then 20 years afterward.
Wherefore then does the Spirit make this to be the fourth Plague, and not the
second? I answer, because this came down lower then the continuance of the
Croisades. The Croisades ended about the year 1270. when as this papal tyranny
continued in all its strength, and all its dreadful effects, the whole
thirteenth and the whole fourteenth Centuries. Afterward, though the Popes
have ever kept up (and do still) the same pretentions, notwithstanding they did
far less mischief in Europe, by the use of this proud Authority, which they
take to themselves.

It is to be observed, that the Prophecies which divide times and events by
periods, do not divide them in such a manner, In prophecies the periods of
times are often inlayd in one another.
that one period should begin exactly where another ends; on the contrary, they
are always joynted or inlayd, one within another. For example, the Roman
Monarchy does not begin where the Grecian ends; on the contrary, the Roman
Monarchy in its longest duration does take in the whole Grecian entirely, yea,
it begun before the Grecian. When Alexander founded the Grecian Empire, the
Romans had already begun to make a figure in the World. And Livy in that part
of his History proves, that if Alexander had marched into the West, as once he
designed, he had not so easily mastered Rome, as he did the East. Rome had at
that time conquered all her neighbors, she had subdued the Aequi, the Volsci,
the Samnites; yea, she had humbled the Gauls by many defeats given to them. At
that time lived the Fabij, the Papyrij, and many other Hero's, whose names are
so famous in history. The City was at that time 420 years old, and the
Prophecies do reckon the destinies of Rome from its first beginning, for they
mention its seven heads, i.e. the seven Governments, Revel. 17. The fourth
Monarchy preceded the third more the^ f^ur hundred years.
under which they do consider it: of which the first was that of their Kings.
So that the fourth Monarchy did precede the third, more then 400 years: But
notwithstanding the Roman Monarchy is reckoned the fourth, because it kept its
grandeur entire; nay, did much increase it, a long time after the fall of the
Grecian. Thus the plague of the Sun, i.e. of the papal Authority, is reckoned
as the fourth, though it began before the second, because it continued during
the second and third plague, and its reign was lengthned above a hundred years
after them both, and the last hundred years ought to be reckoned, as the period
of the sourth plague.

There is another objection which will seem stronger, but notwithstanding is
more easily answered. According to our exposition, the augmentation of the
papal Authority, is accounted (to be) a calamity upon the Antichristian State;
whereas on the contrary, it is the highest step of its exaltation and
perfection. I answer, that the one contradicts not the other: for first, we
must remember the remark already made, viz. that these plagues do not all fall
upon the head of the Antichristian Kingdom: they are heavy judgments of God,
which often touch not the Pope, who is the Instrument to execute them. The
plagues fall on them that worship the Beast and his Image, and not on the Beast
himself, and on the false Prophet; yea, this false Prophet is an Instrument in
the hand of God to inflict the plagues. Thus in the second and third plagues,
which are the Croisades, the Pope is not the sufferer; it is he who makes others
suffer, it is he who sends many millions of his subjects to be murdered and
slain; yea, this very thing proved a great augmentation of his power. In the
same manner, this fourth plague falls upon the Antichristian people, and
therefore in the following plague the Spirit says, that the viol was poured on
the seat of the Beast, to signify that the people or subjects of the Beast,
should not be the chief sufferers by it.

The abuse of the papal Authority, did tend to its ruin.
I answer in the second place, that the prodigious advancement of the papal
Authority, which in truth brought Antichristianism unto its perfection, yet not
withstanding was one step to its ruin. If the Popes had kept within the bounds,
which they did in the preceding ages; if they had not meddled with secular
affairs, to dispose absolutely concerning them; perhaps the Sea of Rome had not
been thought to be Antichrist; but then it was that this truth became so
sensible, that every one perceived it. The abuse of the Ecclesiastical power in
the ninth age, made some perceive that Rome was the mystical Babylon. Thus
Gontier Bishop of Colen, and Thetgaut Archbishop of Triers, named it in the
ninth Age. But after the eleventh Age, this truth was so demonstrated, that we
of this Age do not speak it more plainly and confidently. We may judge by that
excellent passage of Eberard Bishop of Saltsburg, See Aventin. Annal. Boior
lib. 4 page 330.
which we cited out of Aventin, in the tenth Chapter of the first Part of our
Prejudg. After that time, there never wanted those who asserted the same thing.
Thus the dismal abuse of the papal Authority was, and is still a sore plague to
that See: for it is one of the strong Arguments, by which we prove that it is
Antichrist.

Men were scorcht, but they repented not to give glory to God. The Germans
cried out very much against Babylon and Antichrist, but they did not forsake
them, or renounce their Idolatry; on the contary, they blasphemed the name of
God, who had power over these plagues, for those Ages were exceeding wicked and
corrupt.

v. 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his viol upon the seat of the Beast, and
his Kingdom was sull of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain.

v. 11. And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and their
sores, and repented not of their deeds.

This is the fifth plague. I ask not any favor for my conceptions about it;
let them be examined with the utmost rigor; if they are not liked, let them be
disregarded; but for my part, I cannot abandon them, until the times and
events do undeceive me; but those events shall never be seen. Who can doubt,
that by the seat of the Beast is meant Rome? and when was it that the viol of
the wrath of God fell upon this seat, i.e. Rome? It was when it lost its Sun,
the Sun which is spoken of in the preceding plague, i.e. its Pope, the papal
Court, that like a gulf or whirle pool drew to it all the riches of the
Kingdoms of Europe. A prophecy of what fell out when the Popes left Rome, to go
to Avignon.
In the year 1305, Clement V. left Rome, to go and dwell at Avignon. The City
that was mistress of the World, became desolate, a very desert, and a shadow of
its self during those 74 years* when its Masters kept their Seat at Avignon.
The viol fell upon the Seat of the Beast, and his Kingdom was full of darkness.
It Is not only said, that his Seat was darkened, but his Kingdom. And indeed,
till that time the Kingdom of the Beast, the Authority of the Pope, the Glory
of the Holy See (as'tis called) had never suffered such a strange and terrible
an eclipse. This removal of the papal Seat unto Avignon, was the cause of a
Schism. At the end of 74 years Gregory XI. compelled by the complaints of the
Romans, brought back the Seat to their City. But after his death, the Cardinals
(who were ^lmost all French) resolved to have a Pope of their own Nation, the
Citizens of Rome fearing lest a French Pope should return into France, forced
the College of Cardinals to choose an Italian to be Pope, who called himself
Vurban VI. The Cardinals incensed at the force which was used in the election,
contrived to revolt, which they did, and chose another Pope, who called himself
Clement VII. he held his Seat at Avignon, and his Successors for 40 years, in
the mean while, Urban VI. and his Successors at Rome, had one part of the
Church of Rome under their obedience.

At that time, the Sun of the Antichristian World was divided into two; The
great Schism of the West, was a terrible plague to the Antichristian Empire.
as it happens to the Sun and the Moon, when they are eclipsed) it was eclipsed
and darkened. The Church of Rome suffered the greatest reproach imaginable.
Jesus Christ had no less then three or four Spouses at one time. This is a
piece of History, which confounds popery even at this day; which destroys its
foolish pretenses unto an uninterrupted succession, an undivided unity and
infallibility: from hence we draw a conclusion against it, which cannot be
avoided. Then the Kingdom of the Beast was darkened; Princes despised the Popes,
and made themselves their Judges (whereas formerly Popes had judged Kings.)
They made them be deposed, they called by their own Authority the Council of
Constance, where Popes were subjected to Councils, and accounted deposable, as
in effect there were three who were there actually deposed. Till that time
Censures and Excommunications, had been the strongest beams of the
Antichristian Sun, the most efficacious methods of his domination. But then men
began to despise them. There was nothing but excommunicating of one another;
the Western Church was divided into two Obediences, that which obeyed one Pope
was excommunicated by the other; and by this means all Europe lay under
excommunication, which made it contemptible, and the people who once respected
the Censures with incredible trembling, began to discern that these
thunderbolts were vain and empty things. And this brought a considerable
darkness upon the seat of the Beast, and the papal power; for all Europe
groaning under the slavery of the Popes, every one began to think of recovering
their liberty. Germany refused to submit to Reservations and Expectations means
which the Court of Rome make use of. to make her self Mistress of all
Benefices. France, not only rejected Reservations and Expectations, but
annulled Annats, Provisions, and all other exactions of the Court of Rome. Then
were laid the foundations of the pragmatick Sanction, which gave the Popes so
much trouble, because it cut off all the simonaical tricks, which the Court of
Rome used to enrich her self; even Italy it self, during the Schism, did shake
off they yoke; the City of Bolonia made a Law, that the Benefices of that
Church should be conferred upon none but of that City and Territory. To
conclude, it cannot be expressed by how many ways that grand Schism, which
divided the Sun of the Antichristian World, did spoil it of its strength and
luster. After this time, the Authority which the Popes had so mischievously
used, (to ruin the Kings and Kingdoms of Europe) did scarce do any more
mischief. It Is evident, that then the Kingdom of the Beast was darkened, because
by this Eclipse it lost half of its beams, i.e. of its Authority.

They grawed their tongues for pain. History must be consulted to know how many
calamities, wars, combats, how much shedding of blood, rage and fury, did
spring from this shameful Schism. Every one of these Popes gnasht his teeth,
and bit his tongue against the Antipope: There were nothing but thunderbolts,
excommunications, Croisades, wars and combats, of one against another. Nay,
still to this day, the slaves of the papal Seat are vexed to the death, when we
prefs them with this thing.

But under all their sorrows, they blasphemed the God of Heaven, and repented
not of their deeds, In those Ages, Idolatry was so far from loosing any thing,
that it increased; then was the reign of Monks, of superstition, of Fables, of
Legends, and a thousand abominations. In that age Simony was come to its
height. While the Court of Rome sat at Avignon, is invented a thousand ways
of selling holy and profane things; Crimes, Paradise, Sacraments, Minis^ry,
Marriages, and in a word everything. Then came abroad that famous book, the Tax
of the Roman Chancery and Penitentiary, which at that time and yet every day,
forces to make the Kingdom of the Beast full of darkness. This period lasted
from 1305 until 1440.

CHAP. IX.
The sixth Plague are the Turks, who pass aver the Bosphorus, and invade the
Greek and Latin Empires. The three unclean spirits, which come out from the
mouth of the false Prophet, are the papal Laws, armed with Excommunications.

I Have carried on my conjectures until I came, hither, and did somewhat
content my self in what I had said about the five first Plagues; The certainly
of what has been said ought to be increased by that which follows.
but I confess that the remainder of this Chapter was thick darkness to me. And
understanding nothing of it, I put it among those things that are to come,
according to the usual custom of them who Interpret Prophecies; who say of
every thing which they understand not, that it is not yet come to pass: And
this made me ready to think, that my persuasion, as to the five first plagues,
was but a mere opinion: For in the framing of systems; whether they be of
Principles and conclusions, or of Events contained in Prophecies, we must
pierce through them all, that we may see them clearly, and be assured of their
truth. Whilst I thought that the remainder of the Chapter concerned the time
to come, I was content to understand nothing of it, but I was afflicted with
the fear, that the end of Antichristianism was not at hand. But at last, after
I had knocked twice, thrice, four, five, yea six times, with devout attention
and deep humility, I believe, that the door is opened to me. I dare speak thus,
though I know that some have said, that this savours of Enthusiasme; to whom I
answer, that there is one Article at least more in my Creed, then there is in
theirs, viz. I believe in the Holy Ghost, and his operations. I am in this
matter a Disciple of the Author of the enquiry after Truth, and am persuaded
that we see no truths but in God, and by the assistance of God: we contribute
nothing besides our attention, our prayers and our desires. However, I think,
that I have found out the two plagues that follow in this Chapter, and by this
means, that which was only a conjecture of mine concerning the five foregoing,
is risen to a real persuasion. I am therefore persuaded, that through the
Divine assistance I have pierced into the Systeme of the seven periods; a
favor for which I will render to him immortal thanks as long as I live. For I
confess, that I cannot express the ravishing consolation that my heart has
felt, in seeing such evident reasons, to persuade me of the approaching
deliverance of the Church. If these two plagues had been yet to come, I felt my
heart began to faint, at the prospect of the dismal calamities which now
oppress the Church, without reckoning those which do still threaten her. Hope
deferred makes the heart sick, says the Wise man.

Sixth plague.
v. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his viol upon the great river Euphrates,
and the water there of was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East
might be prepared.

The Kings of the East, and the river Euphrates do give light to this Text. As
for the Kings of the East, we cannot doubt but that they are the Turks, for
they are the only Kings of our East. They possess exactly that part of the
Roman Empire, which is called the East, and has kept the name of Natolia: in
the Text they might have been translated the Kings of Anatolia, for that is the
word which is used. Now all know that the Turks are the Kings of Natolia. As
for Euphrates, we find it in the sixth Trumpet, as it is here in the sixth
plague.

v. 13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of
the golden Altar, Revel. chapter 9.
which is before God.

v. 14. Saying to the sixth Angel, which had the Trumpet, loose the four Angels
which are bound in the great river Euphrates.

v. 15. And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a
day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third pare of men.

v. 16. And the number of the army of the horsemen, were two hundred thousand
thousand: and I heard the number of them.

v. 17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them,
having brest-plates of fire, and of jacinct, and brimstone, and the heads of
the horses were as the heads of Lions; and out of their mouths issued fire, and
smoke, and brimstone.

The most skillful Interpreters, have in this Metaphorical description
discerned the Turkish Cavalry, which was formerly so formidable, The Turks and
their invasions are foretold in the 9th chapt. of the Revelation.
and after the reading of what Joseph Mede has wrote upon this, I think it
cannot be doubted that the thing is so. This barbarous Nation which came out of
Tartary, had carried on its conquests even to Euphrates, nigh to which if
formed four Dynasties or Governments; and there it abode a long time: these are
the four Angels, who were bound behind Euphrates. This River for some time
served as a boundary, or barriere of the Empire of Constantinople against the
Turks. But they leapt over this barriere, and spread themselves as far as the
Euxine Sea, and the Bosphorus, and the Aegean Sea, or the Archipelago. The
Croisades, about the end of the eleventh Age, drove them back, took from them
Nice and a part of the lesser Asia. But afterward they came again, and wasting
the Grecian Empire, they took all away from it as far as the Sea called
Bosphorus, and as far as the Archipelago.

Behold, these are the Kings of the East, which appear again in our sixth viol:
behold the Euphrates, which again comes upon the stage. But what is this
Euphrates? Here Euphrates is the Thracian Bosphorus, the second barriere of the
Turks.
In this Prophecy whatever serves as a barriere to the Turks, is called
Euphrates, because this River was the first barriere, which did separate that
people from Christendom. After the Turks had got over that River, they find
another Euphrates, viz. the Bosphorus. This in their last irruptions was the
same, that Euphrates had been in their first, namely, a barriere, that for a
little while stopped their course, though at last they leapt over it. This figure
is very ordinary in Orators, (and consequently, there is ground to seek it in
Prophets, whose style is much more figurative.) Thus one will say, Here are my
Herculis's pillars; meaning, here I will bound my conquests: another will say,
Here are my East Indies; meaning, here I will bound my longest voyages: A third
says, This is my Louure; meaning, this is my Palace, or residence. So it might
be said of the Turks, stopped behind the Bosphorus. This was their Euphrates;
therefore the Sea called Archipel, and the Bosphorus of Thrace, in the
thirteenth age were the barriere, that parted the remainder of the Greek
Empire, and the Empire of the Turks: But at the end of the 14th age, the Turks
under the conduct of the proud Bajazet, and by means of the treachery of the
Genuese (who let their Galleys to them) they passed the Bosphorus, made
themselves masters of all Thrace, fixed the Seat of their Empire at Adrianople,
and plundered all Greece; insomuch, that the Greek Emperor had scarce any thing
left; besides the City of Constantinople. Tamerlain tamed the pride of Bajazet,
and for a while stopped the fury of this torrent. But the Children and Successors
of Bajazet, soon after carried on their conquests; and 50 years after quite
ruined the remainder of the Greek Empire. Mahomet II. took Constantinople, in
the year 1452. After which the Turks overflowed as a torrent, conquered all
Greece, Macedonia, Albania, Slavonia, Croatia, Bulgaria, Hungary, and extended
the bounds of their Empire even unto the borders of Germany.

Here therefore the Archipel, and the Bosphorus (which is joined to it) are
called Euphrates, because this Sea served as a barriere against the Turks, as
Euphrates formerly had done; this was the Euphrates of that time, and the Holy
Ghost kept the name of Euphrates in this second barriere, that we might in this
Text the more certainly discern the Turks, who had passed over Euphrates, when
they first invaded the Greek Empire and Christendom.

The Latin Church suffered infinitely by the passage of the Turks into Europe.
This is the sixth plague, which may be well called the plague upon the Kingdom
of the Beast; for that Kingdom did infinitely suffer by it. It Is true, the
first desolations fell upon the Greek Empire: but as I have already remarkt,
the great Idolatries which reigned in the Greek Church, had made it become a
Province of the Antichristian Empire; it was indeed separated by a schism from
the Latin Church, notwithstanding it was a Province. Besides this, the Latin
Church, the Kingdom of the beast was infinitely a loser. How many fair
Provinces and brave Kingdoms were rent off from the West by the Turks? How
often have the Turks vexed Italy? nay, even Christian Princes have used them to
mortify the Popes; besides what they have already done, we know not what they
must do hereafter. The Holy Ghost seems to intimate, that God has placed them
there for some greater work than that, which they have already performed: for
the Spirit says, that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared,
without telling us what work they are to do; and the reason is, because their
greatest work must not be done under the sixth plague, but at the end of the
seventh. God has thought it sufficient to tell us, that he has placed them on
this side the Bosphorus, and brought them even to the borders of Germany, to be
the instruments of his great work: at least this is the opinion of many, who
are taken with the Prophecies of Drabicius: They are persuaded, that the Turk
must destroy Rome. The present state of his affairs does not promise this; for
since the Ottoman Empire was founded, he was never brought so low. But I
confess, that this is far from weakening my opinion, that the Turk must be the
Instrument of the vengeance of God against Rome; for it is this, that does
confirm me in it: for I look on this year 1685, as a Critical year in this
great affair: God has brought low the Protestants and the Turks at the same
time, that he may raise them up at the same time, and make them the Instruments
of his vengeance against the Babylonian Empire. Notwithstanding, as I do not
found my predictions upon the visions of Drabicius, but upon those of Saint
John, and he says nothing that does determine me; I am in suspense whether the
Turks have been placed so nigh the Kingdom of the Beast, to bear a part in
destroying him, or to be honored with the blessing of conversion, upon the
sight of that great work of God. I am persuaded, that a few years will inform
us which of these is the truth.

From 1390 until 1526.
The duration of this period, is about 125 or 130 years. In the year 1529, the
Turks came and besieged Vienna, Charles the fifth made them raise teir siege.
Since that time, they have not made any great progress into the Kingdom of the
Beast. And this sixth plague exactly brings that Kingdom unto the time of
Luthers preaching, of which the consequences are foretold in the seventh
plague, as I hope a Parenthesis of a great depth and obscurity.

V. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet.

V. 14. For they are the spirits of Devils, working miracles, which go forth
unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty.

V. 15. Behold, I come as a thief, etc.

V. 16. And he gathers them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue
Armegeddon.

Behold, great affairs, until now finding nothing better, I was contented with
the conjecture of those, who by these three unclean spirits, understand the
Monks; nay, I found this explication very serviceable: I ranked the Monks into
three Classis, begging, not begging, and mixed, (as the Jesuits are, who have
according to their Statutes no Estates or possessions, and yet do not beg, as
the Custom is.) It Is certain, that these are unclean spirits; for all the
corruption of the Christian Religion is come from them: they go out to the
Kings of the earth to unite them against the true Religion: but however exact
this notion seems to be, I could never find in it the settled rest of a mind,
which believes that it has found the truth. At last I found that rest: and
three things by the assistance of God, gave me light about this matter; the
word mouth, that of spirit and spirit of the mouth, and that of Armageddon;
these three words have fully persuaded me, that these unclean spirits signify
papal Laws, and the Oracles of the Seat of the Beast, armed with
excommunications and Curses.

The three unclean sp^rits are the Oracles of the Pope, as the seven spirits of
God are the Divine Oracles.
First, that the term mouth is taken for speech, examples are so many, that it is
scarce necessary to cite any: Put away from thee a froward mouth; that is, Put
away from thee perverse speech. A wicked man walks with a froward mouth. The
mouth of the just is a fountain of life, i. e. the speech of the just. The
Messiah speaking by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 49.2. he has made my mouth like
a sharp sword, i. e. my speech or word, this is a figure which is usual in all
languages.

Secondly, the term spirit signifies so often word, or Oracle, that the places
cannot be numbered. The 7 Spirits are the 7 Oracles. Revel. 1.4. Chap. 3.1.
Chap. 4.5. Chap. 5.6.
In the beginning of this book mention is made of seven spirits, and from the
seven spirits which are before his Throne; these things says he, that has the
seven spirits, and the seven stars. And there were seven lamps of fire burning
before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God: and Christ himself is
represented, as having seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, seni out
into all the earth. It Is certain, that these seven spirits, are the same thing
with the seven thunders of the 10th Chapter, i. e. the seven words or Oracles,
which sound like thunders. Now it is clear, that by these seven spirits, we
ought to understand the Divine Oracles, which were inspired into the Prophets
and Apostles by the Holy Spirit; First, because these are joined with the seven
stars; Chapter 1.2^.
he that has the seven spirits and the seven stars; for the seven stars are
the Angels of the seven Churches, i. e. the seven Pastors, and this signifies
the seven Oracles, which proceed from the seven stars. Secondly, these seven
spirits are called lamps; he had seven lamps, which are the seven spirits; and
this is the proper title of the word of God: Thy word is a lamp unto my feet.
Ps. 119.
And it is the proper office of the word and Oracles of God, to serve as a lamp,
to enlighten souls and the world. Lastly, it is said, that these seven spirits
of God are sent into all the world: This can signify nothing but the sacred
Oracles, which are sent and preached by the Apostles through the whole earth.
It Is in this sense, that our Saint John takes the word spirit in the fifth
Chapt. of this first Epistle: There are three that bear record on earth, the
spirit, the water and blood. By water and blood I cannot doubt, but that the
two Sacraments of the Church are understood, Baptism is the water, the
Eucharist is the blood; and the third, or rather the first, and principal of
these witnesses is the spirit, i. e. the word. Lastly, this is the name which
Saint Paul often gives to the Gospel; 2 Cor. 3.6.
the Letter kills, but the Spirit quickens; we are Ministers, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit: It Is certain, that the Letter signifies the word of
Moses, and the Spirit the word of Jesus Christ.

The three spirits of Antichrist, are opposed to the seven spirits of J. Christ.
I cannot therefore doubt, but that the Holy Ghost, by these three unclean
spirits of the Beast, and the false Prophet, intends the false and impure
Oracles of popery, opposed unto the seven Spirits of God, who are before his
Throne, and go forth from him. The opposition is so sensible, that it cannot
but be discerned; the Spirits of God are sent out into all the Earth; the
spirits of the beast likewise go unto the Kings of the Earth. The Spirits of
God are lamps, which being set on some high place, do give light: but these are
like the froggs, creatures of the night and of darkness, that croak in the
night, and love the bottoms of waters. As therefore the Spirits of God, are
undoubtedly his Oracles: there is no cause to doubt, that those unclean spirits
of the beast and false Prophet, are the false Oracles of Antichrist.

The spirit coming out of the mouth, always signifies word.
In the third place, Spirits coming out of the mouth, so clearly denote words,
that it cannot be enough admired, that none has seen this. First, every thing
which comes out of the mouth in a figurative style, See also Chapter 1.16. and
2.15. Isa. 11.4.
signifies words. It Is said in the 19. Chapt. v.15. that out of his mouth came
a twoedged sword. All know that this signifies the word of God, that comes out
of the mouth of Jesus Christ. Isaiah says, that the Messiah shall smite the
Earth with the rod of his mouth, and slay the wicked with the breath of his
lips, a notable passage for explaining plaining that, upon which we now are;
spirit or breath is there taken in the sense that we lay down, the spirit of
his lips, is the speech of his lips. And the rod that comes out of the mouth of
the Messiah, is also evidently his word or speech. This is usual in all
languages; 'twas said, that lightnings came out of the mouth of Pericles; we
say every day, there come flames, arrows, etc. out of the mouth of such or
such: every one understands that this signifies words; but (above all) the
spirit of the mouth is never taken in any other sense. Saint Paul says, that
Jesus Christ will come and destroy that wicked one by the spirit of his mouth:
we have even now heard Isaiah call the word of the Messiah, 2 These. 2.8.
the breath or spirit of his lips. Ps. 33.6.
The Prophet David says, that the Heavens were made by the word of the Lord,
and all their host by the breath or spirit of his mouth. There is none who is
not persuaded, that the word that formed the heavens, and the breath or spirit
of the mouth of God are the same thing. Besides, the figure is so natural and
comely, that we necessarily fall upon it; speech or words are formed in the
mouth, by the wind, the breath of the lungs; thus it is the breath or spirit of
the body: besides this, it discovers the sentiments and thoughts; and thus it
is, the breath or spirit of the soul. After all this, I do not think that any
can in the least doubt, but that these three spirits, that come out of the
mouth of the false Prophet, are the false Oracles and Laws of this false
Prophet. These things are like those riddles, which when they are unriddled, we
wonder that they were not sooner guessed; for there was never any thing more
easy to be understood.

The third expression, which God made use of to enlighten my mind, is that of
Armageddon, which Saint John says is a Hebrew word: the learned know, The
Syriak in the age of St. John was called Hebrew.
that the Hebrew language in the time of St. John, was Syriack and Chaldee.
This is the language that our Savior spoke; it is that which is called the
Hebrew tongue, Acts 22.2. where it is said, that the people of Jerusalem kept
silence while St. Paul spoke to them in the Hebrew tongue: He would not we are
sure, speak to them in Bible-Hebrew, for they understood it not at that time.
It Is this language, which in the Gospels is often called Hebrew, and yet the
expressions set down, are found to be Chaldee, Armageddon signifies a cutting
off by a Curse or Anathema.
or Syriack: as, Golgotha, Talitha kumi, Gabbatha, etc. Now the word
Armageddon, without any straining, signifies in the Chaldee, or Syriack,
Cutting off by a Curse, or Excommunication. Gedad, signifies to cut off, to cut
asunder; Giddou ilana, cut down the tree, said the Angel in the vision related
in the third Chap. of Daniel, so Geddon signifies cutting off: The word Herem
in the Hebrew, and Harma in the Chaldee, is a word which we find in our Bibles
at every step, under the phrases of cursing, abstaining from the cursed thing:
This is accursed, which the 70 have every where translated anathema: this is
the term, which the Apostle Paul uses, when he would excommunicate all those
who love not the Lord Jesus. Let him be Anathema Maranatha, let him perish in
Armageddon; and it is the same word that the Jews used in the time of Saint
John, and which they still used, to signify their great Excommunication. Thus
if you join these two words Harma and Geddon, you have exactly without any
alteration. A cutting off by a Curse, by Excommunication, or an Anathema. Now
what can be meant by the spirits which come out of the mouth of the false
Prophet, and which are gathered or placed in Armageddon, (i. e. under the
shelter, and under the defense of a cutting off by a Curse, or an Anathema) but
the orders, laws, and false Oracles of the Popedom, and the Antichristian head?
It Is known that there is a Curse and a Armageddon at the end of the every
Canon. It Is known that the Canon Law says, Decret, Gratiani causa 2. quest. 1.
Canon genesis
We declare to be anathema, and accursed for ever before God, and a
prevaricator against the Catholic Faith, every King, Bishop, or other
Magistrate, who shall violate and suffer to be violated in any kind, the
Censures of the Popes of Rome. Behold, the scale of all the papal Laws. Lastly,
it is known, that through one of the sorest judgments of God that ever was
felt, the subjects of the Popedom suffered themselves to be seized with such a
fear of these Armageddons, or Excommunications with a Curse, that this very
thing was a rampart, and an inviolable asylum to protect all the attempts, and
all the crimes of the Clergy. The whole strength of the Ecclesiastics
consisted in Armageddon; but this supply never failed them whatever they did,
whatever they undertook, men endured every thing, out of fear of the Anathema
and the Curse. To avoid these imaginary thunderbolts, Subjects revolted and
broke their Oath of Allegiance, Kings abandoned their Crowns, as John King of
England did, who that he might obtain of Innocent III. the taking off of an
Excommunication or Interdict laid upon England, surrendered himself and all his
Subjects to be the Popes slaves. All public service of God was made to cease
in a great Kingdom, Churches were shut up, the sick died without Sacraments,
the dead remained unburied; Excommunicated persons, through a ridiculous
sillyness of the people, became odious to all that were not. It mattered not
whether the Excommunications were unjust or no, 'twas enough that they were
denounced. By means of this the Clergy defended their plunders and robberies:
as Father Paul has excellently remarkt in his Treatise of Benefices. The
people (says he) were so afraid of Censures, that nothing did terrify them
more. 'Twas even amazing to see, that Captains and Soldiers, who plundered any
man, without the least concern at the sin committed against God; as desperate
and profligate wretched as they were, yet with great respect spared whatever
belonged to the Church, only from the dread which they had of its Censures. And
on this ground many ordinary people, gave their goods to the Church, that so
they might shelter themselves from the rapine of the Soldier. Thus the Laws
and Ordinances, and goods, and crimes, and enterprises of the Church, were all
under shelter and in a place of safety, in Armageddon. I do not think, that
there can arise any doubt in any ones mind, concerning what we have now said.
But to give the fuller confirmation to these truths, let us go over all the
expressions used in this Prophecy.

From whence these three unclean spirits do come.
And I saw three unclean spirits like froggs come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet. The Dragon is the Devil, the Beast is the Empire of the Popedom, and
the false Prophet is the Pope; these are the three springs of false Oracles.
The Devil is he, who inspires them; all those decrees, and those Canons, which
overthrow the true Religion of Jesus Christ can come from none but him. They
likewise come out of the mouth of the Beast, for it is the Church of Rome that
makes them: hence they are called the Canons of the Church, the Laws of the
Church and its decisions. And lastly, they come from the false Prophet; for the
Pope is the mouth of the Church, he is in fallible when he speaks ex Cathedra;
all his decisions are seized with the word Armageddon, and of the grand
Excommunication.

Why three unclean spirits.
These spirits or Oracles are three in number, not of the number seven, for this
number is sacred, and proper to signify the sacred perfection of the Divine
Oracles, which thing the Holy Ghost intimates not only by seven spirits, but
also by seven thunders. Nevertheless, seeing the Oracles of the false Prophet,
of Antichrist, are perfect in their kind, i. e. they are at the height of
impurity, there must have been a number denoting the perfection assigned to
them; now no other could be found, but that of three. Besides, these unclean
spirits are of the number three, because of the three springs, or sources, the
Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, as if every one must have one of his
own. And further, it is a wonderful providence of God, that the body of the
Canon Law, which is the heap of the papal Laws, is divided into three parts,
which appeared in the World at three different times. The Decree, of Gratian is
the first part, Three parts of the Canon Law, that answer to these three
unclean spirits.
and it was compiled in the twelfth Century. After this, came the second part,
under the title of the Decretals of Gregory IX. The third part is made up of
the Bulls of Popes, called Clementines, published at the Council of Lions, by
Clement V. of others called Extravagants, others called common, and common
extravagants. These are the three parts of the Canon Law, which are in truth
three unclean spirits; for there is nothing so monstrous, and so contrary unto
the spirit of Christianity. The papas Laws have three unclean spirits, pride,
covetousness, unchastity.


Lastly, these papal Laws are set forth by the number of three unclean spirits,
because there are in effect three spirits of impurity, that do reign in them;
Pride, Covetousness and Unchastity.

Pride: for first, nothing is more proud then the design of the Popes in
general, to give Laws to the World, to make Emperors, to give a body of Laws,
which all shall use, to call themselves infallible, to pretend to pronounce
Oracles, to thunder out Bulls upon the heads of Kings, and of all men.

Covetousness: for in the papal Laws, every thing tends to profit; the Rules of
the Roman Chancery and Penetenciary, do make up a part of the Roman Laws, and
in them every thing is sold; not the most abominable crimes excepted. If we
would examine the Laws of the Popedom, they are all for gain, and tend to the
exercise of a most abominable simony. They that will, may consult the first
part of our prejud. against popery, without reckoning up many other books,
where the same matter is treated.

Unchastity has its share: for in these Laws such filthiness is to be found,
as cause horror; the rules of the Penitenciary do enough prove this: This same
is found in the Decree of Gratian, in Buchard the famous Canonist, First part,
chap. 28. Apolog. for the Reform. Why the Oracles of popery are compare to
Froggs.
and in such like Authors. I have given some specimen's in my Prejugd. and in
my Apology for Theodore Beza.

It Is for this reason, that the Oracles of the false Prophet are compared to
Froggs; the Oracles of God are Eagles, that fly in pure air; but the Oracles
of popery and false Religion, are creatures that love the dirt, that descend
into pits, and live there. They make a great noise in times of darkness, as
Froggs do in the night, but will immediately be silent as soon as the Sun of
grace is risen, that is, when it shall dissipate all the shadows of false
Religion.

These are the spirits of Devils, working miracles. For these papal decisions,
these orders of the Antichristian Kingdom, that they may establish the
adoration of idols, the invocation of Creatures, the idolatry of bread, are
supported by signs, and a thousand lying miracles. But 'twill be objected,
these decisions do not work miracles; whereas the Text here says, that these
three unclean spirits work miracles: A very slight difficulty! For seeing the
Holy Ghost represents these Laws of the Popedom, as spirits, i. e. as persons,
and as intelligent existing substances; there must be actions ascribed to them:
Actiones sunt suppositorum, say the Schools. Thus Saint John ought necessarily
to speak of miracles, wrought in favor of the papal Laws and Papists, as of
miracles that are wrought by them. They go forth unto the Kings of the Earth
and of the whole World, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty. The Bulls of Popes are as so many thundering messengers, who are sent
to Princes, and who threaten, order, and command them to make Croisades, to
destroy pretended heretics; and to employ temporal weapons, to execute the
orders of the spiritual Authority: and also command them to enjoin the
observation in all places of idolatrous worship, wicked Canons, and the proud
government which the Popedom has established by its decrees. All this unites
together, and gathers the Kings of the Earth, makes one body, one army of
persons joined in a bond of a most real conspiracy, who fight against God, and
seek to rob him of his honor and glory. The day of battle is the whole
duration of the Antichristian Kingdom.
Interpreters have entertained a false notion, in imagining that by the day of
battle is to be understood, the very time in which Antichrist must be
destroyed. For it is the whole time of the Antichristian Idolatry and Tyranny,
though especially of the last period of Antichrist, i. e. of Antichrist
declining or approaching to his fall. This time is called the day of God
Almighty, because at the end of this day or time, God shall display his
vengeance against these Kings, who are leagued against him, through means of
the papal. and Ecclesiastic Laws and decrees. During three parts of that day
and battle against God, his Church is worsted; but in the last part of the
battle, God shall overcome.

These Kings of the Earth are gathered together in Armageddon. The place
Armageddon, is the place from whence the thunderbolts of excommunications and
curses do come forth; i. e. the Sea of Rome, and of the Pope or the Vatican,
whose thunderbolts have so often consumed whole Countries. All the Kings who
are subject to the Popedom, are gathered, leagued and united, in this place,
and by this place. Seeing the Prophet had represented the papal Laws as spirits
and persons, he ought in the same manner to represent the Excommunication or
Curse, as a place which unites and gathers together the men who are contained
in it.

Behold, I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. This is a Parenthesis,
which has relation to the battle, that the papal laws, censures, interdicts,
anathema's, decisions and Papists do fight against the Truth and the Faith, to
admonish the faithful, that they be upon their guard against so many assaults,
and so many lying Oracles, which deceive the minds and hearts of men. Why God
places these three unclean spirits of papery under the sixth viol. First reason.


There remains only one difficulty, and that is, to know why the Holy Ghost
places these papal spirits or Laws under the sixth viol: but the reasons are
evident enough.

This sixth viol begins its period in the year 1390. when the Turks began to
pass over the Archipel, and the Bosphorus, they went still forward, until the
year 1526. when they ceased to gain ground upon the West. Now 'twas at this
time, that the body of the papal Laws, (styled the Canon Law) was completed;
the Clementines had been published by John XXII. about the year 1320. he
likewise published the Extravagants. But the Common, or the common Extravagants
appeared not, nor were compiled till the end of the fifteenth Century: So that,
it is properly in this sixth period of the viols, that this work of darkness was
wholly finished. Now it is natural, when something is to be brought upon a great
Theater, that it may be shown, to stay till it be finished; and therefore the
Prophet ought not to speak sooner of these papal Laws.

Second reason. The 15th Censury was an Age of Excommunications.
Besides, there never had been any age, or time, wherein there were more
Armageddons, Anathema's and Excommunications, then in this period. The Popes at
Rome and Avignon did excommunicate one another. Within this period, the
Councils of Pisa, Constance, Basil, Florence, and the Lateran under Julius II.
and Leo X. were held; and its was nothing but anathema's, excommunications,
canons, decisions, censures, either against Popes or pretended heretics, as
the Wickliffites, Bohemians, Taborites, and lastly against Luther, etc.

Lastly, these spirits are most fitly placed under the period of the sixth
viol, because then the Bulls, Third Reason.
decisions, decrees of the Church of Rome, gathered the Kings of the Earth to
battle against the Bohemians. And Zisca having gained such signal victories,
that they might well be called the battles of the great day of God Almighty; a
Croisade was published against him, and all those who stood for the Truth in
Bohemia, and the neighboring Countries.

CHAP. X.
The seventh plague is the preaching of Luther, and other Reformers, by which
the Latin Church was divided into three parts, Papists, Lutherans, and Reformed.

ANd thus behold, we are come to the seventh and last viol.

V. 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his viol into the air, and there came
a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, saying, It is done.

It is done, does not signify the final ruin of Antichrist.
This expression, It is done, has deceived all the Interpreters; who have
confounded this moment or space of time, with that of the seventh trumpet, when
it must be proclaimed, It is done, the Kingdoms are brought under our Lord
Jesus Christ; The great Babylon is wholly destroyed, etc. They have believed,
that this expression, It is done, signified the total destruction of the
Antichristian Kingdom, at that very moment. But certainly, they are mistaken.
It is done, is nothing else, but It is done with the viols; The viols
comprehend and signify periods of some length.
this is the last, this is the last period of the Antichristian Kingdom, and
which shall comprehend its total ruin. We have remarkt already, that every
period contained in every viol, took in a considerable space of time, a
hundred, a hundred and forty, a hundred and fifty years, and more. Therefore,
there is no reason not to allow some length of time to this seventh viol, it
ought to have as much as least as the others; yea, more, because it is the last;
and consequently it must have about two hundred years allowed to it. And this
is the period that comprehends the total ruin of Antichrist; which ruin (as we
shall see anon) is divided into two parts, the harvest and the vintage; the
harvest has been in the age last past, the vintage must be at the end of this,
and the beginning of the next age. This last viol begins exactly at the
preaching of Luther, and as an hourglass must run until the total destruction
of popery: And I hope none will doubt of this, when we shall have made out, how
exactly all that follows in the Prophecy, agrees with the times and things
which have been seen since the Reformation.

This seventh viol is poured not upon the Earth, or the Sea, or the Sun, or the
Seat of the Beast, as the others were; but on the air, which is the seat of the
voice of sounds, and thunders, and we shall presently give you the reasons.

V. 18. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and there was a
great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake and so great. These voices, The seventh viol raises Preachers, and
voices for the ruin of Antichrist.
these lightnings. and these thunders, are the voices of Preachers, who
labored in Reforming the Church: we shall afterward see, that there are three
ways of Reforming the Church, the way of Inspiration, the way of Authority, the
way of Preaching: this last is signified by voices and thunders: And 'twas this
way that God used, to reform the Church in the last age. These voices glittered
like lightnings, and passed with a prodigious swiftness from one end of the
Antichristian Kingdom to the other. All men saw them, and would see them, men
studied Religion. The very Grandees of the World (persons who despise
knowledge) were concerned in these affairs. Henry VIII. wrote a book against
Luther, Charles the fifth made Laws about Religion: now on the account of these
lightnings, i.e. the voices of Preachers, this seventh viol is said to be
poured on the air; for the air is the seat and vehicle of the voice. There was
a great Earthquake. In the Prophetic style, this signifies a change of the
face of the World: the Earth plainly signifies here the frame and face of the
Antichristian Kingdom. We have already seen, and shall afterward have occasion
to see, that Earthquakes in the figurative style of the Prophets, always
signify a change of the face of the World: because Earthquakes do overturn not
only Cities, but Mountains, Forests, hilly Countries and Valleys: they set
Mountains where Valleys stood, and Valleys where Mountains stood; in so much
that the face of a whole Country is changed. Now all know what a change the
reformation made in the face of popery. It took away from it at one clap
several Kingdoms, and a great number of Sovereign States: And this Earthquake,
i. e. this change of affairs was so great, that there had not been such since
men were upon the Earth. This may be truly spoken without any exaggeration. For
we must observe, that this last period comprehending the harvest and the
vintage, the first and last destruction of Antichrist; it is undoubted, that the
face of the World was never so changed, as it shall be changed after the total
ruin of Antichrist, the time of the first establishing of Christianity not
excepted. For at that time, there were great numbers of men converted, up and
down among the Nations: But at the time we speak of, all the Nations and whole
Nations shall submit themselves to the Faith.

And thus, this period shall make greater changes in the World, then were ever
seen. Nay, if we should interpret these changes which ought to happen, only by
those which fell out in the last age; surely we may say, that never were
greater and more surprising alterations. The Earthquake signifies the great
change of the world by the Reformation.
In less then twenty or thirty years, a great part of the Christian World was
Reformed. And at the same time there were dreadful wars, troubles, and
sheddings of blood, in Germany, in Flanders, in Holland, in England, and in
France, as every body knows.

V. 19. And the great City was divided into three parts. Behold, something
which does furnish us with a plain Character of this last period, and of this
last viol. These words have not hitherto been understood, but I persuade my
self, that it will be judged, that they can be understood. We have already
said, and shall hereafter prove it, that the great City is not Rome strictly
taken, but Rome made up and joined with its whole Empire. In a word, this City
is the Antichristian Kingdom, otherwise called the Latin Church. A remarliable
prediction of the division of the Latin Church into three principal parts,
Papists, Lutherans, and Reformed.
This City upon the pouring out of the seventh viol, was to be divided into
three parts. This is exactly come to pass at the preaching of the Reformers,
the Antichristian Kingdom was divided into three: one part remained with
Antichrist, one part did separate from him, under the name of the Ausburg
Confession. A third part did separate under the Confession of those who are
barely styled the Reformed; Sweden, Denmark, and a great part of Germany make
the second part. England, the United Provinces, the reformed part of France, a
part of Germany, make the third part. These are the three grand parts, that
divide the Western Church, which is the great City. Let this be attentively
minded; for I affirm, that this passage does as it were speak with a tongue,
and is able alone to convince, that our System of the seven plagues is a most
undoubted truth. This division of the great City into three parts, so clearly
points out the three Communions of the Latin Church, that to deny it can
proceed only from unreasonable passion, and opiniatrety. And if we have hit
upon the truth in this point, we have done so in all; for if this Character of
the seventh plague is true, and is already accomplished, all the other plagues
are also accomplished; and if they are accomplished, I do boldly affirm, they
cannot be applied to any other events, then those to which we have applied them.

And it must not be hoped, that to obscure this evidence, a fourth part may be
made, viz. the Church of England, because of the controversies about Church
government; for the Church of England never refused to receive other Reformed
ones into her Communion, nor have these again ever refused to receive her into
theirs. We have always professed the same Religion with the Church of England,
on the account of the perfect agreement of our Doctrine, notwithstanding the
difference of discipline and government. When as the Lutherans have constantly
refused to receive the Reformed into their Communion. There is among the
Lutherans themselves a difference in point of government. Sweden has Bishops,
Denmark has none, at least not such Bishops as those of Sweden and England;
and nevertheless, this makes not a different Sect. There is also the same
difference among the Reformed on this side the Sea, for the Superintendants;
who are in many Reformed Churches of Germany, are real Bishops; and
notwithstanding the Reformed are not divided one from another. Thus in truth,
there are but three grand parts, into which the Latin Church is divided, i. e.
Papists, Lutherans and Reformed; as they are called by one another; or
Catholics, Reformed, Evangelici, as they style themselves. And the Cities of
the Nations fell; i. e. they fell with respect to Popery, they departed out of
the Antichristian Kingdom, in the same sense that in the eleventh Chapter it is
said, that the tenth part of the City fell.

And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of
the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. These words let us see, that the
expression, It is done, did not signify the very point of the final ruin of the
Antichristian Kingdom. For behold, after 'twas said, It is done, Babylon comes
in remembrance before God, to give her the cup. Now these expressions signify
both the future, and the present time. And indeed it is within the duration of
this period, that God will remember Babylon, to give her the last cup of his
wrath. And observe it, that the great Babylon comes not in remembrance before
God, to give her the cup, i. e. the last cup of her ruin, till after her
dividing into three parts. This division is not her total ruin; but after that
she shall be thus divided, into Papists, Lutherans and Calvinists, then God
will prepare to give her the last cup of his wrath. Which signifies, that the
division of the Latin Church into three parts must continue, until the
complete ruin of popery.

V. 20. And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found. This is
nothing but a Paraphrase, and a description of the Earthquake, which he had
spoken of a little before; for these are the effects of Earthquakes, where
mountains once stood, they are not to be seen: new Islands are produced, and
the old ones are often swallowed up. But yet if any will interpret Islands to
signify lesser States, and Mountains great ones; I do not contradict it; for
it is really true, that the Reformation has already taken away from the
Popedom, and shall yet take away all States both small and great.

V. 21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of Heaven, i. e. upon the
Subjects of Antichrist: this signifies the judgments of God, which fall upon
this Kingdom; and these judgments are well known, for it has suffered of all
kinds, wars, famines, pestilences, mortalities.

And men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail. The Subjects of the
Popedom have not hitherto been converted by all these chastisements, but have
always stuck firm to the Kingdom and Seat of the Beast, whose head is covered
with names of blasphemies.

The seven hour-glasses being run out, the Kingdom of Autichrist must be at its
end.
This is the seventh and last viol, or hourglass, which, thanks be to God, will
in a little time be run out; now we have that which we seek, namely, an
evidence that the Antichristian Kingdom is near its end. We need not longer
wait for the accomplishment, either of all the seven plagues (as some of our
Interpreters say,) or of some of the seven plagues (as others say,) It is done,
all is accomplished, we are in the last period of the seven; yea, we are at the
end of the seventh period. I am informed, that since the first Edition of this
work, some persons, that they might be taken notice of, will yet affirm, that
not so much as one of these seven plagues is hitherto come to pass; This
singularity is neither too edifying nor too comfortable. I earnestly entreat
them to lay aside the desire of contradicting, and to consider without
prejudice these two things. First, that in the whole explication of this 16th
Chapter, there is not the least forced application; the Emblems which the
Prophet makes use of, do exactly resemble the events set down in History. The
second, that in the application of these seven plagues unto the events, every
thing does hang together, no part of this System contradicts another.
This being supposed, I entreat them to consider, if chance can do this, and
has ever done it; chance may hit right in some points, but never does so in
all.

I say again, that we are at the end of the seventh period: for it ought to be
well observed, that there is not one viol, which distinct and separated from
others, lasts 200 years, the greatest part does not come near that number. This
has already lasted 170 years, it cannot last much longer. It Is true, the papal
authority, whose beams so scorched men under the fourth viol, lasted above 200
years; but this was, because it was inlayd or jointed in those that preceded,
and those that followed. And its particular strict period, must be reckoned to
be only 108 years, which begun at the year 1270, when the Croisades ended, and
continued until the grand Schism, which happened in the year 1378. for then
began the diminishing of the papal authority, and the darkning of the Kingdom
of the Beast. The seventh viol has already lasted longer then any of the rest,
and it is probable, that it must last about 200 years, which none of the others
has done; but we shall see the reason of this in the next Chapter, where we
shall show that this seventh period is it self divided into three other
periods, the harvest, the vintage, and the time that is betwixt the harvest and
the vintage. The harvest is already past; the time betwixt the harvest and the
vintage is almost expired; we are approaching to the vintage, and at this day
ought to say, Come Lord Jesus, come; but within a little while we shall say, He
is come, he is come.

CHAP. XI.
The explication of the 14th Chapter. The vision of the harvest, and the
vintage: the harvest of the Reformation, made in the age last past; the vintage
is the Reformation, which shall be made this present age.

THe fourteenth Chapter, is the second of those wherein we find the
circumstances of the fall of the Babylonian Kingdom. In the beginning of the
Chapter, we find the 140 thousand marked ones, who are the same with the two
witnesses, (whom we shall discourse of hereafter,) the small number of faithful
ones, whom God preserved in spiritual Babylon, and who did not partake of her
Idolatries. We find them, I say, who sing a song which none was able to learn,
but they; i. e. they taste peculiar joys and pleasures, which the Antichristian
Christians were notable to taste.

In the following verses an Angelappears, flying in the midst of heaven, Chap.
14.6. having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the
earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. This is the
preparative unto that preaching of the Gospel, which must be made to all
Nations, when the Antichristian Kingdom shall be ablosht. This preaching is
said to be of the everlasting Gospel, because it shall last until the end of
the world. All Nations shall be converted, and their purity shall suffer no
alteration, as long as the world shall last. And to signify that the Kingdom of
Antichrist shall fall, through the preaching of this everlasting Gospel;
immediately after, another Angel cries Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great
City. Which proves, that in the vision that follows, the harvest and the
vintage are the two parts of the fall of the Babylonian Kingdom.

The persecution of the Waldenses, and Albigenses, foretold in the 14th Chap.
verse. 9.10, 11.
In the third place, we have in this Chapter an Angle who denounces the terrible
judgments of God, that must fall on those who worship the Beast, and his image,
and receive his mark in their foreheads, or in their hands. And at the same
time, by these words, here is the patience of the Saints, is signified a sore
persecution that must go before the fall of Antichrist; not that persecution,
which we suffer at this day, and which must be the last; but that which the
Church endured in the Waldenses, the Albigenses, the Bohemians, etc. For this
is the persecution which happened before the Reformation of the last age,
because the fall of Babylon, which is spoken of in this Chapter, begins by the
Reformation made in the last age. Therefore the persecution here spoken of,
must be that which went before our Reformation: but there is no other, besides
that against the poor Waldenses, which lasted a full 100 years, before the
preaching of Luther. All these things are only a preparative unto the last
vision of this Chapter, which contains a new prediction of the fall of
Antichrist, with new circumstances: and it is this

V. 14. And I looked, and behold a white could, and upon the cloud one sat like
unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp
sickle.

V. 15. And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to
him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come
for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

V. 16. And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, and
the earth was reaped.

V. 17. And another Angel came out of the Temple, which is in Heaven; he also
having a sharp sickle.

V. 18. And another Angel came out from the Altar, which had power over fire,
and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her
grapes are fully ripe.

V. 19. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the
vine of the earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God.

V. 20. And the wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came out of
the wine press, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs.

A distinction of circumstances, and substance in this vision.
In this vision there are circumstances and substance; the circumstances are
these, the Angel who sits on a white cloud, and his clothing; another Angel
who bids him thrust in his sickle; another Angel who appears likewise having
asickle; the ripeness of the corn and grapes; the wine press of the wrath of
God; the blood that flows out by the space of 1600 furlongs. These, I say, are
circumstances. The substance is the harvest and the vintage, which are reapt at
two different seasons, by the Angels who have commission thereunto. The
understanding of the circumstances, depends upon the understanding of the
substance; therefore this later must be explained, before we go about to
explain the former.

I cannot tell by what spirit it is, but at last I am strongly persuaded, The
harvest in the vision is the Reformation already made; the vintage is the
Reformation, that shall be shortly made.
that the harvest and the vintage, are the Reformations of the Church, that
which happened, the last age, and that which shall happen in the end of this
age, and the beginning of the next. The harvest therefore is past, the vintage
must presently come. In this matter, Joseph Mede seems to be not more happy in
his conjecture, than others: He makes the harvest signify the ruin of the city
of Rome; and the vintage, the total ruin of the Antichristian Kingdom, which
must happen a little while after Rome shall be sacked. But I am persuaded, that
they who will read me with some attention, and without prejudice, will prefer
my thoughts before his.

Harvest taken in an ill sense. Jerem. 51.33.
The word harvest in the style of the Spirit, sometimes signifies good, and
sometimes evil. God speaks by Jeremy, The daughter of Babylon is like a
threshing floor, it is time to thresh her; yet a little while, and the time of
her harvest shall come. And the Prophet Isaiah speaking of the desolation which
should befall the ten Tribes by the Assyrians, says, And it shall be, Isa.
17.5.
as when the harvestman gathers the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm.
Joel 3.13.
The Prophet Joel also represents the day of Gods vengeance, Put in the sickle,
for the harvest is ripe; come, get you down, for the press is full, the fats
overflow; for their wickedness is great. In all these places, the word harvest
signifies destruction and ruin.

In other places, harvest signifies something that is good. The harvest is
great, said our Savior; Mat. 9.33.
but the laborers are few, speaking of the conversion of the Gentiles; Lift up
your eyes and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest. Ioh.
4.35a 38.
I sent you to reap, that whereon you bestowed no labor. Lastly, sometimes
harvest signifies both Good and evil together. As in the Parable of the Tares
in the field. Matt. 13.30.
Let them grow both together until the harvest. And at the time of the harvest,
I will say to the reapers, Gather first the tares, and bind them in bundles to
burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn. The harvest is the end of the
world, the tares are the wicked, the wheat is the good, the reapers are the
Angels, the same harvest that shall cast the chaff into the fire, shall lay up
the corn in the garner. The same judgment that shall adjudge the wicked unto
Eternal flames, shall gather the elect into glory. The harvest therefore may
signify something that is good; but we cannot find, that any where the term
vingate is taken in a good sense. The juice that comes out of the grape, The
word vintage, always signifies, some evil.
has the color of blood, which comes out of the veins of them that are
murthred. For this reason vintage always signifies anger, wrath, destruction,
vengeance, shedding of blood. I have trod the winepress alone, their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments; Isa. 63.
my own arm saved me, my fury it upheld me. In the 19 Chapter of the
Revelation, it is said of him, who sits upon the white horse, that he treads
the winepress of the wrath of God Almighty. The term vintage, that is never
taken in a mild sense, in this place determines the sense of the harvest, that
it must likewise signify a time, or season of destruction. And these are the
two parts of the fall of the Antichristian Kingdom. Already one half almost of
its subjects has been taken away, in the last age; the other part shall be
taken away, in this, and the next, which is the vintage.

But observe: God has exactly put the distance between these two parts of the
fall of the Popish Kingdom, in proportion unto that which is between harvest
and vintage. In our climates, The distance of the two Reformations answers to
that of harvest and vintage.
harvest ordinarily begins at the end of July, the vintage at the middle of
September; The same proportion is every where found: where harvest begins
sooner, the vintage begins sooner also. They are about fifty days distant one
from another, or a little more; let us take fifty, which is a sacred number,
made up of seven times seven. Fifty days make the seventh part of a year,
(which is the period of the sowing, budding, springing, growth, and ripeness of
grains and fruits) only there are ten days over. Now divide the period of 1260
years, which is that of Antichrist's reign, of his budding, his first birth,
his progress, his consummation, the steps of his declining, and his
destruction; divide, I say, these 1260 years into seven parts, and every
seventh part makes exactly 180 yeas. If now you reckon these 180 years, from
the year 1517. in which Luther began to preach against popery, this brings us
to the year 1697: If you reckon them from the year 1520, the date of Leo the
tenths Bull, this will bring us to the year 1700. from which last if you take
away ten years, because seven times 50 make but 350 (whereas the prophetic
year is 360 days, or 360 years) this will exactly fall upon the year 1690. And
this is the time that I judge, must be the beginning of the vintage: for the
witnesses shall then rise: after which France must break off from the Pope, in
my opinion before the end of this age; and in the beginning of the next, the
remainder of the Antichristian Kingdom shall be every where abolisht. Thus
every thing agrees with my calculation, viz. that we cannot be far from the end
of the Kingdom of Popery.

It Is also to be observed, that harvest and vintage are not gathered in a day,
Harvest and vintage require some space of time. The first and second
Reformation must also take up some space of time.
there must be some time spent in reaping and gathering in the corn, as also
the grapes. The first ruin of the Antichristian Kingdom in the last age, took
up about 30 or 40 years; Germany began in the year 1520, Denmark and Sweden
followed in 1525, and the following years. England drove out the Pope in 1534.
France embraced the Reformation under the reign of Henry II. In the same
manner, without doubt, will the Reformation that we expect, be carried on. All
those Countries, that remain under the papal Empire, will not fall off all at
the same time: this shall be done in the space of several years. Spain, in all
appearance will be the last. And as Peter de Lune, after he had been deposed by
the Council of Constance, went and held his Seat in the mountains of Arragon,
where he continued a Schism ten or twelve years; so it is probable that the
Popes being driven out of the rest of Europe, will shelter themselves among the
Spaniards, from whose hearts it will be a hard matter to pull popery away.

Lastly, it must be observed, that it is true, the harvest does spoil the Earth
of a part of her fruits, but it does not of all, it remains to be a fair and
pleasant season; the Autumn which follows, has its beauties, its profits, and
advantages; it is a second Spring, the medows are crowned with an aftergrowth,
the trees put forth new flowers. But the vintage makes all waste, A lively
Emblem in harvest and vintage of what has happened, and shall happen in the
ruin of popery.
it spoils the Earth of the very remainders of its fruits and beauty, and
immediately Winter comes, that puts on the Earth the very complexion of death
and destruction. This is an Emblem of what fell out in the first destruction of
popery, and of what shall in the second. The Reformation cut down several fair
Countries in the last age, but notwithstanding many were left to it, nay, it
had great success, massacred an infinite number of the faithful, procured to it
self the confirmation of a famous Council, engaged those Kings who were its
vassals, to double their endeavors, for the preservation of its Worship and
Doctrines. It has gained ground in the East, in China, in the Indies, in the
West, in America, by the conquests of the Spaniard and Portuguese. It has sent
Missions, even to the end of the World, has made an infinite number of false
Christians, it has regained on one side as much as it had lost on the other;
and has made its worship and Idolatry to reign as much as ever. For Spain and
Italy were never more deeply plunged in Idolatry, then since the Reformation.
It has strengthened its tyranny; for the Popes since the Council of Trent have
domineered and acted as Sovereigns over Kings, and as Superiors over Councils.
In the reforming of the Calender, Gregory XIII. did an act of an Universal
Monarch, which the Popes had never done in the ages of their greatest
insolence. They have deposed Kings of England, and in France Henry III. and
Henry IV. They have laid an Interdict upon the Commonwealth of Venice, and the
Kingdom of Portugal. In a word, Popery has had great prosperities, that have
comforted it under its disgraces. But as for the blow or stroke which God is
ready presently to give it, it will be a dispatching blow, it will be a vintage
that shall spoil it of all its fruits, and utterly take away all its beauty,
the Winter shall come upon it, and its desolation shall be irrecoverable. This
is the substance of the vision, let us view the circumstances.

And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto
the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp
sickle. J. Christ himself often appears in the visions of the Revelation.
This personage like unto a man, is probably the Son of God, found in fashion
as a man, on the account of his Incarnation; the golden crown which he wears on
his head, does prove that it is he; though he executes his judgments by his
Angels, notwithstanding he often himself appears on the scene of the World in
the book of the Revelation.

He is probably the Hero in the sixth Chapter, who appeared sitting on a white
horse, Chap. 6.2.
and had a bow, and a crown was given him, and he went forth conquering and to
conquer. He is the same who appears again in the 19 Chapter, sitting a second
time upon a white horse, and was called faithful and true, and in righteousness
does he judge, and make war. He always sits upon something that is white;
sometimes upon a white horse, sometimes upon a white cloud. White is the symbol
of innocence and mercy. A white cloud is a throne of mercy, a red cloud is that
of justice. But mark, it must be some grand work; for which Jesus Christ
himself comes; for the Holy Ghost does not bring him upon the stage for some
mean matter. Now since the Apostles age, no work had been done so great as that
of the last age. He had a sharp sickle in his hand. He comes upon a white
cloud, intending favor to his children, but with a sickle for his enemies.
'Twas a great mercy to his own, when he took them out of Bahylon, the last age.
But 'twas a terrible stroke of a sickle to Antichrist.

And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to him that
sat on the cloud; Thrust in thy sickle, and reap, for the time is come for
thee to reap, for the harvest of the Earth is ripe. He who sits upon the cloud,
gives out orders to the Angels, and receives none from them: but he recieves
from his Father, and the Angels may be charged to carry these orders to the
Son. Thus the Angel, who here gives orders to Jesus Christ, speaks not in his
own name, but in the name of him that sent him. The time to reap is come. Their
iniquity is come to its height: Their measure is full.

Another Angel came out of Heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. This is the
destroying Angel, who went through Egypt, the executioner of the judgments of
God; this Angel comes only as a second; for he who sits upon the white cloud,
disappears not, he is the Master, and it is under his direction that this second
Angel gives the last blow to popery.

Another Angel came out from the Altar, which had power over fire, and cried
with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, etc. Here mention is made of
an Angel who has power over fire, and in the 16. Chapter, we find the Angel of
the waters. Shall we conclude, that every Element has its Angel, who presides
over it, and the events which fall out by its means, so that one Angel presides
over the Sea and shipwracks, another over fire and burnings? This seems very
probable to me, for the providence of God makes the winds his Angels, and a
flame of fire his Ministers. The Angel of the fire comes out from the altar,
which popery had profaned by its profane sacrifices and false worship. And
it is the Angel of the fire, who is here employed; to signify, that now the fire
shall consume the Antichristian Kingdom, without any hopes of recovery.

It Is not necessary that the Kingdom of Antichrist should be destroyed with
great shedding of blood.
The wine press was trodden without the City, and blood came out of the
wine press, even unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand six
hundred furlongs. It Is a great question whether the Antichristian Kingdom shall
be destroyed by sword, fire, and bloodshed. I see nothing in the whole
Revelation, which obliges us to believe so: for though in this and several
other passages, the ruin of popery is painted out, in expressions borrowed from
war, slaughter, and bloodshed; yea, in the most terrible and high expressions;
nevertheless, this may very well be understood figuratively; for the
destruction of Paganism is painted out in almost the same expressions by the
Prophets, though it was brought to pass without bloodshed. As the Kingdom of
the Beast was formed without war, by the sottish complaisance of the Kings of
the Earth, who suffered their power to be snatched from them, or rather did
voluntarily surrender it; so this Antichristian Kingdom may perish without
weapon, by a word of two Letters. The Princes of the Earth need only say NO,
and the tyranny of Antichrist will fall to the ground. And as for Idolatry,
which is the other part of Antichristianism, the word and grace of God must
destroy it. Nevertheless, I am willing to submit to the general consent of
Interpreters of both Communions, who unanimously hold, that in the ruin of the
Antichristian Kingdom, there shall be a great effusion of blood, and that
Babylon, the capital City of that Kingdom, shall be laid in ashes. I am willing
therefore to believe, that there shall be some bloodshed, not for any passages
in the Revelation, but for these two Reasons. Rome must be miserably destroyed.
1. The first, that it is not probable that the Pope and his Partisans will
yield without resistance; they will stand out, and in defending themselves will
attaque; in which attaque they shall perish. 2. The second, it seems agreeable
to the Divine justice, that the City of Rome, that for two thousand years is
the Mistress of the World, the tyrant of the universe, which has shed so much
blood, and has bin deluged with so many impurities, should be overwhelmed, and
the World be avenged. Jerusalem who was not guilty of such excess, is ruined by
a dreadful destiny. It Is not probable, that God makes ready a less destruction
for the City of Rome.


Here the last lacking of Rome is foretold,
If this be so, this passage without doubt is one of those that foretell this
bloody Tragedy. The City which is spoken of here, without the City, must be
Rome. But we have said before, and shall hereafter prove, that this word ought
to be taken only for Rome, in conjunction with her Empire. Here it is Rome
alone, and not her Empire. It Is true, but the reason is, that when she shall be
laid waste (in the manner that is mentioned here) she shall have no more any
Empire, all her Provinces shall be revolted, she shall be left alone of her
whole party, so that in this place she ought to appear all alone. And the City
cannot signify any more then the City of Rome; because she shall have no more
any dependent Provinces, excepting that which is called the patrimony of St.
Peter, which Joseph Mede believes, is meant by these thousand six hundred
furlongs. For he says, that the Country that reaches from the walls of Rome
unto the river Po, contains 200 Italian miles, which make exactly 1600
furlongs. If this conjecture be true, (as it is probable) this signifies, that
all the forces which the Pope shall be able to get together, shall be wholly
destroyed without the City, i. e. without Rome, in that part of the Country
which lies betwixt Rome and the River Po.

CHAP. XII.
The explication of that part of the eleventh Chapter, where the last
persecution made by Antichrist is foretold, which is the present persecution
in France, The death of the two witnesses, who shall not be buried, by means of
the succor brought by the enemies of France.

THe first Chapter in the Revelation, where the ruin of Antichristianism is
fore-fold, is the eleventh. We passed over it, for the reasons above mentioned.
We come again to it at present, and place it the last, that we may place it
according to the order of events, We have observed, that there is found in it
an Epitome, or short draught of the whole History of the Church, from the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, until his coming into the World to erect his
Kingdom there. The pure Church of the three first ages is hid under these
words, measure the Temple and the Altar, and those that worship therein; And
the corrupted Antichristian one under the Gentiles, who must tread under foot
the holy City forty and two months. That is, the outward Court; but the Court
that is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not, for it is given to
the Gentiles. This outward Court, as Usher has divinely explained it in his
Prophecy, signifies Christians in appearance, whose Religion consists in the
performance of some external duties of Christiani^y, without having the inward
life, or the true Faith, which should unite them to Jesus Christ. But those who
worship in the Temple, and before the Altar, are those who sincerely worship
God in spirit and truth, whose souls are his Temples, in which he is adored and
honored with the most inward thoughts of their hearts, and who offer unto him
a constant sacrifice, not only of their lusts, but of their whole selves. Thus
this holy man speaks, and I confess, that I see in his words the Character of
the spirit of God. These are the true worshippers, whom God does measure, and
whom he makes account of, and these are those who possessed the Church, during
the three or four first ages. But afterward, the Church became an outward
Court, was filled with feigned worshippers, who made Christianity to consist in
an appearance of piety, and in external Ceremonies. Then God pronounced
concerning this Court, let it be given to the Gentiles for forty and two
months. Then Paganism, Idolatry, the worship of subordinate Gods, Mediators,
and a thousand heathenish Ceremonies were introduced into Christianity. And
this outward Court, these formal outside worshippers, were given up to a spirit
of error and superstition, to begin Antichristianism, and make it continue
twelve hundred and sixty years. We have also in this Chapter the Church under
the Cross, persecuted, and hid in Babylon, in the two Witnesses, who
prophesied, clothed in sackcloth, a thousand two hundred and sixty days. We
have in it the sound of the last Trumpet, and the thousand years reign of Jesus
Christ and the Church: For at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, the Kingdoms of
the Earch become Gods and his Christ's. Lastly, we have in it a remarkable
event, which must come to pass at the end of the reign of Antichristian popery,
and it is expressed in these terms.

V. 7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them.

V. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

V. 9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall
see their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put into graves.

V. 10. And they that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt upon the Earth.

V. 11. And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from God entered
into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which
saw them.

V. 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them: Come up
hither; and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them.

V. 13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of
the City fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to God.

The Witnesses who prophecy clothed in sackcloth are the faithful, who preach
under the Cross.
As to what concerns these two witnesses, i.e. what is signified by them. I have
not changed my opinion since I wrote the book entitled, Lawful prejudices
against popery. Though as to all the rest, the studious attention which I have
used in reading these Prophecies, has given me quite different apprehensions;
I do therefore still believe, that these two Witnesses, who must prophesy 1260
days, clothed in sackcloth, are the small number of the faithful, who during
the reign of Antichristianism, must keep themselves from its corruption, and
condemn its idolatries and tyranny. God calls them witnesses, because these are
they who bore witness to the Truth, which, but for them would have been
forgotten. They prophesy clothed in sackcloth; i. e. they preach under the
Cross. For we must well observe, that these two Phrases, one used in our
language, the other in that of the Holy Ghost; to prophesy clothed in
sackcloth, and to preach under the Cross, are absolutely of the same
signification. He makes them only two in number, to express that those
faithful, who shall preserve themselves from the corruption of Idolatry, shall
be but a very small number. And indeed, experience has too much verified this
prediction. Nevertheless, he makes them two in number, to signify, that however
small the number of true Christians is, it shall notwithstanding be great
enough to support the Truth, and keep it from falling; for in the mouth of two
witnesses every word shall be established.

How these witnesses have power to change water into blood, and shut up heaven.
v. 6.
God ascribes to these two witnesses, power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in
the days of their prophesy, and power over waters to turn them into blood, and
to smite the Earth with all plagues as often as they will. Joseph Mede gives a
very ingenious reason of this, which I believe is very solid, viz. That the
Holy Ghost borrows his Emblems from the histories of the Old Testament, and
alludes unto several Pairs of eminent witnesses, which God raised up at several
times: as Aaron and Moses at the coming out of Egypt; Joshua and Caleb at the
conquering of the promised Land; Elijah and Elisha at the time of the grand
Schism of the ten tribes. Zerubbabel and Jehoshua, at the return from the
captivity. Among these witnesses Elijah and Elisha had power to shut Heaven, to
hinder rain for three years, and to make fire come down from Heaven. Moses and
Aaron turned the waters of Egypt into blood. Joshua and Caleb brought the
people of Israel into the Land of Canaan, and smote the ancient Inhabitants
with a sore plague. To this the Holy Ghost alludes.

But we must further add, that God ascribes to these witnesses. 1. The shutting
of Heaven that rain no in the days of their prophecy, to signify, that during
the 1260 years of their Prophecy, and of the reign of Antichrist, there should
be a great drought of grace, and a barreness of virtues and gifts in the
Church. 2. The turning of waters into blood, and the smiting of the Earth with
all plagues; Because all the heavy judgments of God, that during the course of
these 1260 years, came upon the Antichristian Church, were sent on the account
of these two witnesses, and to punish oppression under which it held both the
Truth and those who were willing to profess it.


Here is foretold a last persecution that must happen before the end of
Antichrists reign.
The seven verses which we even now have read, concerning the persecution, which
these two witnesses must suffer, and the consequent of that persecution,
contain a grand event, which must come to pass before the last fall of the
Antichristian Kingdom. And it is one of the principal circumstances of this
fall. First, we must observe the circumstance of time, and when they shall have
finish their testimony. Mark, this testimony must last a thousand two hundred
and sixty days. My two witnesses shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. Now these thousand two hundred sixty
days, of the prophesying of the witnesses, are the forty two months of the
Antichristian reign; for forty two months make exactly 1260 days. All the
World is agreed, that these are the three years and a half of the reign of
Antichrist, and that Antichrist and these two witnesses are absolutely and
exactly contempories. It Is therefore the very same, as if the Holy Ghost had
said, And when the Beast, or the man of sin, shall have finished his reign of
1260 years, it shall make war against the two witnesses. This is therefore a
persecution of Antichrist against the faithful, and a persecution that must
happen before the end of Antichrists reign.

These words, when they shall have finished, must not be understood as if the
Holy Ghost would say, when the 1260 years shall be finished. For after the 1260
years are finished, there can be no persecution, seeing the Beast shall have
lost his power. So that this persecution must begin and end within the 1260
years, but yet at the end of them, it is the ordinary custom, not only of
Scripture, but of all men, to say, that something comes to pass, when this or
that is finished; because it happens when that things is finishing, and very
near its end. This is therefore the last persecution of Antichrist against the
Church: This persecution has its Characters; 1. It must continue a long time;
Characters of the last persecution.
for it is compared to a war: The Beast that comes up out of the bottomless pit,
shall make war against them. 2. This war or persecution must end in a victory
over the two witnesses, and shall overcome them and kill them. Mark, that God
does not reckon the death and martyrdom, which the faithful suffer for the
Truth, as a victory, that the Devil gains over them; (on the contrary, he
reckons these to be a victory, which they gain over the World and the Devil: He
speaks of Martyrs, when he says, He that overcomes, I will make him sit down
on my Throne.) So that when it is here said, that the Beast shall overcome the
witnesses, this signifies, that he shall make them faint under the trial.
Which thing ought to be well observed, that we may discern the singular
Character of this present persecution, that has conquered and overcome above a
million of souls. 3. This victory of the Beast must prevail, even to a total
extinction of profession: there shall remain no more signs of outward life in
the faithful, who shall stand for the Truth: they shall lie on the ground as
dead bodies. 4. This murder and the effect of this persecution shall be done
in the street of the great City. 5. The death of these witnesses must last
three years and a half, denoted by three prophetic days and a half. 6. During
these three years and a half, the Truth shall remain as it were dead, but not
withstanding not buried: men shall not dare to make profession of it;
notwithstanding it shall be visible; the people who are neighbors of them, who
shall have stain it; shall hinder it from perishing and putrefaction, to which
the bodies that are in the grave are obnoxious. 7. At the end of these three
years and a half, the faithful who are oppressed, and whose profession shall
have been violently suppressed, shall rise again; after that, shall ascend to
heaven, and shall be exalted in the world. 8. At the same time, and after the
exaltation of the faithful, there shall be an Earthquake, i. e. a great
emotion and trouble in the World, and in the Antichristian Kingdom. 9. In this
emotion, a tenth part of the City shall fall, i. e. a tenth part of the
Antichristian Kingdom shall be take away from it. 10. Seven thousand men shall
perish in this Earthquake, and be buried under the ruin of the City, i. e. that
this shall be brought about with some blood shed, (though not considerable) in
that part of the City, which shall be taken away from the Pope and the Popedom.
11. And lastly, within a little while, this tenth part of the City, which shall
be taken from the Popedom, shall give glory to God and be converted.
Behold, what are the Characters of this last Antichristian persecution. Now,
when I search after the time in which this persecution must happen, I cannot
doubt but that it is that in which we now are. After this persecution shall be
over, God will begin to strike those sore blows to destroy the Antichristian
Kingdom, which must be destroyed within 25, or 30. years.

That the present persecution is the last.
That none may wonder, that I speak so positively about a thing which seems to
be as yet hid in futurity; I entreat all equitable minds to consider, that I
have (as I think) with great evidence proved; 1. That the reign of the Popedom
must last 1260 years. 2. That these 1260 years began about the year 450, or
455, and consequently they must end about the year 1710, or 1715. this being
so, we are but 25 or 30 years from the end of the Popish Kingdom.
And if this be so, the present persecution must needs be the last, since there
is no probability, that this present persecution being ended, the calm restored
to the Church, should leave room for another persecution, which must happen
before the fall of the Popish Kingdom. For we must allow the space of at least
20, or 25 years, in which popery shall be persecuted and attacqued, and not be
the aggressor and the persecutor. And certainly, a shorter time cannot serve,
for the utter destruction of this vast Kingdom. For it shall not be destroyed
in a way of violence, but in a way of persuasion; and because the charm that
holds men enchanted, cannot cease in a moment.

The harvest is past a long while ago, the vintage must come speedily.
I have further proved, that the fall of this Popish and Babylonian Monarchy is
divided into two parts, the harvest and the vintage; that the harvest is the
Reformation of the last Age, and the vintage is the Reformation that must be
made in this that is present. Now, the space of time that is already run out
since the Reformation of the last Age, does already equal the proportion of
time, that is between the natural harvest and vintage: and consequently we must
be very near the vintage, i. e. the time wherein God will begin the first
blows, in order to the final destruction of the Babylonian Kingdom. These
things being so, this persecution must be the last, and immediately after it
shall be ended begin the first events, which shall bring the Popish Kingdom to
its final fall.

A time of some length must be assigned for the last fall of popery.
I have lastly observed, that the Holy Ghost has styled these two parts of the
fall of the popish Kingdom, harvest and vintage; to let us understand, that, as
the harvest and the vintage are not reapt in a moment, but require many days,
nay, weeks: so the two overturnings of the Babylonian Kingdom, must not be made
in the twinkling of an eye, but in several years. This has been already
verified in the harvest, i. e. the fall which happened to popery in the last
Age; for this took up five and twenty or thirty years, and more. And no fewer
can serve to complete the ruin of this Kingdom. But if this be so, this must
needs be the last persecution; yea, it cannot last a great number of years
longer. For if the Babylonian Kingdom begin to decline 25 or 30 years before
its last and final destruction, it must begin to decline and fall within four
of five years; supposing that it be true, that it cannot last longer then the
year 1710, or 1715. We must therefore see, if the Characters of this present
persecution that the Church suffers, agree with those of the last persecution
which the Church must suffer from the Beast, according to the Text of the
Revelation. And we are about to find these Characters so agreeing, and like,
that what at first seemed only a conjecture, will be able to become a kind of
certainty.

The last Antichristian persecution, of which this Chapter speaks, must happen
when the witnesses shall be almost at the end of their testimony, and
Antichrist near the end of his reign. Now we have proved, by the Predictions
and Types of the foregoing Chapters, that Antichrist is finishing his reign;
therefore this must be the last persecution: It has already lasted 30 years;
for it began in the year 1655. when the Duke of Savoy undertook to destroy the
faithful of the Valleys of Piedmont; he sent thither Soldiers, who made a
great massacre; but because the time of slaying the Witnesses was not as yet
come, God raised deliverance for them: they defended themselves with success;
and all the Protestant States of Europe, did concern themselves to obtain from
the Duke a Peace for those poor people. A persecution began in Poland a while
after, and the Reformed were involved in the same ruin with the Heretics,
Socinians, and Antitrinitarians: they were driven out of that Kingdom, and were
scattered in Transylvania, Hungary and Germany. At the same time a persecution
begun in France: immediately after the Pyrenaean peace, the project of the ruin
of the Protestants was laid at Court, and has been prosecuted, till it has
been executed, as we see at this day. In the year 1671. began the persecution
of the Churches of Silesia, Moravia, Hungary; the consequents of which are, the
almost utter extinction of the true Religion in the Territories of the Emperor.
The two witnesses will in a little time be dead, through the total extinction
of the profession of Religion.

The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against
them. This Beast is the papacy where ever it is; for it is not only in Rome that
the Beast is found; but it is in the whole extent of the jurisdiction of the ten
Kings. It Is not therefore necessary, that a persecution should be exactly
raised by the Bishop of Rome, that so it may be ascribed to the Beast: it is
enough that it be raised in the extent of the popish Kingdom.

And their bodies shall lie in the street of the great City. It Is evident from
these words, that this last persecution must be raised only within the
circumference of the great City, i. e. the Babylonian and popish Kingdom, in
the Countries where it reigns. On this account, probably those Kingdoms,
Countries and States, who are out of the jurisdiction of the Popedom, and whose
Sovereigns are Protestants, must have no share in it. Further, the Prophecy
says, that the war must be made against the two witnesses, that prophesy
clothed in sackcloth; which is the same with what we call preaching under the
Cross: this therefore only concerns the faithful, who preach and are under the
Cross; so that the persecution must only be raised within the bounds of the
City, i. e. the Babylonian Kingdom, and against those who preach under the
Cross. Holland, Sweden, Denmark, and all other States, which have Reformed
Princes, and where the Reformation is the ruling Religion, shall not feel it.
And we have ground to hope, that the torch of the Reformation shall not be
extinguished. And though at present the King of England is of the Romish
Religion. I dare notwithstanding persuade my self, that his Kingdom cannot be
reckoned as one of the streets of the great City; seeing popery is not the
ruling Religion there, though it be the Religion of him that rules. Therefore I
do not believe, that we must understand the prophesy of Usher in the letter, or
strictest sense, who says, that the persecution must be general over all the
Churches of Europe; for we may understand it of all those where popery does
rule. It Is true, he fore-tells a massacre in England; but besides that, those
who wrote this prophesy from his mouth might be mistaken; it is also possible,
that this holy man, through the violence of his sorrow, went further than the
Spirit did carry him. Notwithstanding, the English ought to remember the
massacre in Ireland: circumstances then were not near so favorable to popery,
as they are now. Men must not trust to this, that the King of England will
never consent to so barbarous an action: I believe he will not; but the Papists
do not trouble themselves about the pleasure of their Sovereigns, when they see
any prospect of advancing their cause by any kind of Methods. Therefore, if the
Protestants be wise, they will not put weapons into the hands of their enemies.

The bodies of the two witnesses shall lie in the street of the great City.
It Is to be observed, that in the Text, it is not in the streets, in the plural,
as the French translation reads; it is in the street, in the singular. And I
cannot hinder my self from believing, that this has a particular regard to
France, which at this day is certainly the most eminent Country, which belongs
to the popish Kingdom. Her King is called the eldest Son of the Church, the
most Christian King, i. e. the most popish, according to the dialect of Rome.
The Kings of France have by their liberalities made the Popes great at this
day; it is the most flourishing State of Europe. It is in the middle of the
popish Empire, betwixt Italy, Spain, Germany, England, exactly as a street or
place of concourse is in the middle of a City. It Is also foursquare, as such a
place, i. e. almost as long as broad. In a word, it is the place or street of
the great City. And I believe, that it is particularly in France, that the
witnesses must remain dead, i.e. that the profession of the true Religion must
be utterly abolisht. This is already done by the revocation of the Edict of
Nantes, and by the enormous cruclties of the Soldiers, who have bin let loose
upon the Protestants, of whatsoever sex, quality and condition. If any stand
firm, they must either leave the Kingdom, or be destroyed. Thus within a little
while, the external profession of the Reformed Religion will be wholly abolisht
there.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and Nations, shall see
their dead bodies, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put into
graves, i.e. The Truth shall be slain, but it shall not be buried. Burial is a
degree beyond death, and is always joined with a total corruption and
destruction. And so it is not an office of charity, which is denied to these two
witnesses; but a degree of ruin, from which they are exempted. The witnesses
shall not be buried, i.e. the Truth shall not be destroyed.
And observe who they are, who hinder their burial; they are not the same with
those who killed them: Those who killed them, are the Inhabitants of the street
of the great City, i. e. those who dwell in the most eminent part of the popish
Kingdom; which at this day is France. Those who hinder their burial, are the
Tribes, Languages, People, and Nations, i.e. several neighbor nations; yea,
it is to be observed, that the Propheey says not simply, The Tribes, Languages
and Nations; but they of the Languages, Tribes and Nations, i. e. some chosen
and elected out of the Nations; the faithful scattered in all the Nations of
Europe, shall hinder the burial, and total destruction of the Reformation in
France.

Nevertheless, this does not wholly exclude those among the Tribes, Languages
and Nations, who are not Elect. For it is probable, that all Europe shall
contribute to hinder France from executing her design of extirpating the Truth.
But this signifies, that the Reformed and the true Christians shall awaken
Europe, (as well that part which is Roman Catholic, as that which is
Protestant) to oblige it to look to it self and its own safety. The enemies of
France shall hinder the destroying of the Reformation.
Languages, Tribes and Nations, always signify several Peoples, and never one
only people. Thus it is evident by this Prophecy, that the people who are
neighbors to France; nay, those who are distant from her, shall stop her in
this furious design, of destroying the Reformed Religion. But after what manner
they shall hinder her, this Prophecy speaks not; perhaps it shall be, by
causing some trouble to France, during which the persecuted faithful one shall
have opportunity of breathing, and of giving a new birth to the Truth. We shall
quickly know whether God is preparing this already; all the Protestants every
where, have united their Interests; and it cannot be doubted, this good
understanding between them which appears, is owing unto the persecution in
France. The house of Austria it self begins to understand its true Interest.
There is ground to hope, that the late Truce, which gave opportunity for this
persecution will not be calm enough to give the Persecutors leisure wholly to
extinguish the Truth. Perhaps, if shall be by another Method, that the several
Nations shall hinder the ruin of the Reformation in France. Without doubt, they
do something toward it, by the shelters and succors, which they afford to the
fugitives, and particularly to the Pastors, whom God reserves, that they may
again kindle the torch of the Doctrine of Truth.

Yea, in France it self, which is the street of the great City, God will
preserve a number of the faithful, who shall hinder the burial of the two
witnesses, and the utter perishing of the Truth. There have been persecutions,
in which the Truth has been as it were quite sunk to the bottom, and buried in
certain places. This must not happen in this last persecution. The truth will
be oppressed; yea, suppressed: but it shall be most clearly discerned, and
those who shall hold it in their hearts, shall be most evidently seen and
known. As in dead bodies unburied they are dead, and yet men do see them as
clearly as if they were alive. This persecution shall not come as far as a
final suppression of the Truth, as happened in the time of the Albigenses, when
not only the Witnesses were killed, but were buried, and disappeared for
several Ages: for tho some of them being dispersed did preserve, and carry the
Truth into several desert places; nevertheless, the body of them was buried,
and disappeared in the streets of the popish Kingdom; which shall not happen in
this last persecution.

And they that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and shall send
gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell upon
the Earth. Observe it well; these are not the same with those who hindered the
dead bodies of the two witnesses from being buried. Those are called, They of
the people, and kindred, and tongues: these are called, They that dwell upon
the Earth: the former hindered the burial out of piety; these rejoice over their
death out of impiety. In this whole Prophesy, the Earth always signifies the
territories and extent of the papacy and Antichristian Kingdom. They are the
Inhabitants of these territories of the Antichristian Kingdom, who rejoice. At
this day we see this Prophecy fulfilled. Popery triumphs every where; yea, they
who live in Protestant States are full of hopes, to see quickly their Religion
uppermost, and nothing is more arrogant and insulting than their carriage. But
in a few years, they shall see their pride brought very low; which we are about
to show in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
The resurrection of the two Witnesses. The Reformation shall within a few
years rise again in FRANCE: after that, it shall be established by Royal
Authority. FRANCE shall renounce Popery, and that Kingdom shall be converted.

THe bodies of the two Witnesses must remain dead only three days and a half,
and after these three days and a half, the spirit of life from God shall enter
into them, and they shall stand upon their feet. In my Prejud, against Popery,
I fixed these three days and a half, upon that space of time which lasted from
the Council of Basil, and destruction of the Taborites, until Luther: during
which time it seemed as if the witnesses had been dead: But I have wholly
abandoned that conjecture, after I had seriously considered it. First, because
in that space of time, the Witnesses were buried as well as slain: it is true,
there continued some remainders of Calixtins in Bohemia, but they deserve not
to be reckoned as a body: Again, it is not usual in Scripture to take a broken
number, as this of three years and a half, to denote an uncertain and
indefinite number, as I observed above: so that I am persuaded, that these
three days and a half, are three years and a half; a day standing for a year,
as the three years and a half are 1260 years, taking a year for a day. It Is
therefore three years and a half, during which the external profession of the
Truth must be altogether suppressed; and after which it shall be raised again
to life. And as I reject my own notions, I would not that any should embrace
those of Dr. More, who has lately wrote upon the Revelation. He will have the
three days and a half here to signify the same thing, which the three years and
a half do, viz. 1260 years of the reign of Antichrist. But truly, he did not
well consider this point, when he wrote this; First, this would be an affected
and very profound obscurity: after he had reduced the 1260 years, to 1260 days,
which make three years and a half, then to reduce the same 1260 years to three
days and a half. We cannot find an example, where the Holy Ghost sets forth the
same space of time, and in the same place, after so different a manner. But
above all, we must take notice, that the Holy Ghost does here in a most exact
manner distinguish these four things. 1. The preaching of the Witnesses, they
shall prophesy clothed in sackcloth. 2. The death of the Witnesses; and after
this, their bodies lie dead in the street of the great City. 3. The duration of
their Prophecy and testimony, they shall prophesy clothed in sackcloth 1260
days. 4. And lastly, the duration of their death; they shall see their dead
bodies in the streets of the City three days and a half.
He that will confound the two last of these, viz. the 1260 years, and the
three days and a half, must also confound the two first, viz. the prophesying
clothed in sackcloth, and the lying dead in the street of the City: but
certainly, nothing is more different then to prophesy, and to lie dead: at
least, it must be supposed, that the Witnesses prophesy while they are dead.
For their prophesying and their death, being exactly fixed on the same period,
denoted by 1260 days, and by three days and a half, they must happen at the
same time. But how can it enter into any man's head, that dead men can prophesy?
And who sees not, that their death does imply a cessation, and interruption of
their testimony? But what need is there to reason about this thing, when the
Text says expressly and in plain words, that the death of the Witnesses must
not happen, until after their prophesying, and their witness-bearing 1260
days? And I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. And when they
shall have finished their testimony, the Beast, etc. shall kill them. And their
bodies shall lie dead three days and a half. There needs no commentary, to let
us see that here is spoken of a persecution, that must happen at the end of the
1260 years, in which the faithful, who dwell within the bounds of the
Babylonian Kingdom, must be brought to an extremity that may be called death.

We are in my opinion certainly in this persecution, which must extinguish the
true Religion for three years and a half: if we will reckon these three years
and a half, from the abrogating of the Edict of Nantes, in the month of
October 1685. the deliverance of the Church, will fall out in the year 1689,
and this is absolutely the conjecture of Monsieur du Moulin, in his
Accomplishment of Prophecies; he hopes, that the persecution of the Church by
the Antichristian party, shall cease in the year 1689.

A conjecture of M. du Moulin, which may prove true, tho built upon false
foundations.
If this should happen, it would be a purely casual event; for the foundation on
which he builds, is altogether void of solidity: he takes these three days and
a half, for six hundred and third years. He supposes, that the whole duration
of Antichrists reign (which is 1260 years) is considered as one week: now a
week is seven days, the half of seven days is three days and a half; and if
this signifies the half of 1260 years, it is 630 years. He supposes therefore,
that the Holy Ghost intended to say, that the persecution made by Antichrist,
shall last the half of his reign. After this, he finds that the first
persecution for the sake of Religion, was that which was raised against
Berenger in the eleventh Age, on the account of his sentiment, concerning the
real presence, in the year 1059. Add to 1059 the number 630, this makes 1689,
in which year all persecution must cease, so as never to begin again: though in
his opinion, Antichrists Kingdom and the Papacy must continue still after this
above 300 years; for he makes them last until the year 2015. It Is plain, his
suppositions destroy themselves, or are not strong. First, it is not true, that
the first persecution on the account of Religion was that, which the Popes
raised against Berenger: that which was raised by the Image-worshippers,
against those whom they called Iconoclasts, or Image-breakers, was more cruel,
and happened a long while before. Again, what probability that the Popedom can
reign or subsist 326 years without persecuting the true Christians, as this
hypothesis supposes? Besides, what is meant by that which is said, that the
Witnesses after three years and a half, must ascend into heaven? After the year
1689. the faithful shall reign and be exalted; and notwithstanding the Popedom
shall last still 326 years, these things are incompatible. Lastly, to take
three years and a half, for 630 years, is a thing that has no example in all
the Prophecies.

The persecution may cease in the year 1689.
Nevertheless, after all this, it is not wholly improbable, that the persecution
may cease in the year 1689. but this depends upon reasons much differing from
those now mentioned. For God, if he pleases, may reckon the three years and a
half, of the death of the Witnesses, from the time of the revocation of the
Edict of Nantes, made in the year 1685. in the month of October: We know not
from what time God will reckon the three years and a half.
but we have no certainty that God will do so. Who knows whether God will not
extinguish the Reformation in all the Countries, where the Dominion of France
does, or shall reach. Without doubt, the Protestant Religion will be
extinguished in Strasburg; which depends upon France, and in other places. But
this not being as yet done, the death of the Witnesses in the reckoning of God,
perhaps must not begin till the time in which this work shall be finished. The
Court of France desires also to extinguish the Protestant Religion in the
Valleys of Piedmont, which are under the Duke of Savoy, and this is now a
doing: France making herself the executioner of those thundering Arrests, which
she had procured at the Court of the Duke: which perhaps is the most singular
example of the spirit of persecution, which was ever seen. All other
persecutors have been content to persecute their own Subjects, or Contrymen.
But behold persons, who after they have reduced the Subjects of their own King,
to the utmost extremities, go and make themselves the Hangmen and Murderers of
the Subjects of Foreign Princes. If the three years and a half of the death of
the Witnesses, must be reckoned from the destruction of these Waldenses; here
is one years delay of the deliverance of the French Churches. Who knows,
whether there be not other Countries, which we do not know, or are not willing
to name, in which the Profession of the Truth must be extinguished, before we
enter upon the three years of the death of the Witnesses? Who knows, if God
will not reckon these three years and a half, from the time in which there
shall not be so much as one in France who stands firm, and is not fallen? We
know not, whether such a misery must come, tho I hope it shall not. There are
as yet in France more then a hundred thousand persons, who either have not
signed, or have repented after their signing. If all these must fall off, there
is yet a long time to tarry. Lastly, who knows, whether God will not begin to
reckon the three years and a half, until other Princes have wholly extinguished
the Reformation in their Dominions? It Is therefore rashness to affirm, that
deliverance must exactly come in such a year. But that which I am persuaded of,
and believe that others may be persuaded of without rashness, is, that we are
now in the last persecution; that this persecution shall be most effectual, as
it is the most terrible that was even see; that the Witnesses of the truth,
that is to say, all preaching of the purity of the Gospel under the Cross, and
under popish Princes, will shortly be suppressed: that, from that time, the
three years and a half must be reckoned, at the end of which we shall see come
to pass the most wonderful events of our days. Many now alive, shall without
doubt see them: for I believe the thing is very near at hand.

Among the considerations laid down by me in the Preface, which induce me to
believe, that this persecution is the last. I mentioned the singularities of
it, I named several such; Behold one, which in my judgment deserves to be
added to the rest. It Is the horrible Edict, which commands, that the new
Converts being sick, shall communicate after the popish way: This is the worst
effect that ever was produced by the spirit of rage and reprobation. And it is
not conceivable, how a Clergy that will be called Christian, can do such
horrible actions. The Edict ordains, that they who will not communicate, shall
be sent to the Galleys, if they recover. There is none who is so mortally sick,
that is sure that he shall dye, and fearing to recover, he will also fear to go
to the Galleys; and this affrighting object, is able to induce a sick man to
communicate without faith, and to worship that which he judges to be a piece
of bread: that is to say, to commit a horrible sacrilege, and an act of
Idolatry, and consequently to damn himself certainly. So that properly this
Edict is a trick of the Clergy, to procure the damnation of all the new
Converts. This is perfectly to imitate that Italian, who, that he might take a
complete vengeance, having his enemy in his power, promised him his life, on
condition, that he would deny God; which having done, he murdered both his
body and soul. Will men never open their eyes, to behold such objects as these?

The Reformation is foretold by three figures, signifying three Methods.
And the spirit of life from God entered into them. These words teach us, how
the Reformation shall be re-establisht in France: for in these Prophecies I
find three ways, by which the Truth is established; or re-establisht; The first
is by lightnings, voices and thunders; thus after the seventh viol was poured
on the air, the Reformation in the last Age was made by lightnings, voices and
thunders, i. e. by the preaching of the Divine Oracles. And the seventh Angel
poured out his viol into the air, and there were voices, and lightnings, and
thunders. In this Prophecy thunders always signify the Divine Oracles. The
seven thunders that uttered their voices in the tenth Chapter; are the Oracles
of God, which ought to be uttered in the sequel. Thus the Reformation was made
in the last Age, in a most sensible manner, by the preaching of the word.

The Reformation shall come into France by way of internal grace.
But behold a second way of reforming: A Spirit of life from God enters again
into the dead Witnesses; i. e. those who are at this day under oppression,
shall suddenly rise up again by a secret operation of grace, and an
extraordinary motion; not by the means of preaching the word, not by the
ministry of some new Preachers, but by a heavenly operation, that shall open
the eyes of them who are as yet in darkness, and strengthen again the hearts of
those who at this day have fallen through weakness. At that time in all
appearance, the yoke of the Persecutor shall be broken, a time of ease shall
come, and all those who at this day groan under the Captivity of Babylon, shall
lift up their heads, and shall improve that season of calm to repair that which
they are now forced to do by violence. It Is, these words signify, a Spirit of
life from God, not from any man, nor by the ministry of any man, but from God,
entered into them, and their zeal was enlivened again. But things shall not stay
there, God is preparing other wonders. There is a third Reformation, which
shall be set on foot by way of Authority, by the Royal power, and this is
expressed in the words that follow.

And the Witnesses heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither; and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them. What heaven, and lifting up to heaven signify in the Prophecies.
In the style of the Prophets, heaven, and lifted up to heaven, is the Throne,
and to be exalted to dignity, greatness and power, even in the language of
heathen Prophets: for Apomasar in his Apostelismata insomniorum, says, If a
King dreams that he sits upon the clouds, and is carried where ever he
pleases, this signifies that his enemies shall serve him. But if he fancieth,
that he is carried up to heaven, where the stars are, this presages that he
shall be lift up above all Kings. The Prophets of God do also make use of these
representations to signify the same thing. Isa. 14.13.
Isaiah describes the exaltation of the King of Babylon, by an ascending up
into heaven. I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the stars.
And Jesus Christ says of Capernaum, that she had been lift up unto heaven, but
should be brought down unto hell. It Is therefore evident, that God does here
signify, that some time after these three years and a half of death, the
Reformation shall be lifted up to a great glory, but not every where; it is only
in that place, which is called the street of the great City, and is after
called the tenth part of the City: for the total destruction of the
Antichristian Kingdom must not happen until some years afterward.

There will shortly be a Reformation in France, by the Royal Authority.
And after; These words signify, that when the Reformation shall be established
again in France, by way of Divine immediate operation, by which the zeal of the
Apostates, and of others who know the truth, but withold it in
unrighteousness, shall be quickened again; some space of time shall pass,
probably some years, before France shall wholly throw off the yoke of popery.
That Kingdom shall not be entirely Reformed by way of Authority, immedately
after out Reformation shall be again set on foot by way of inspiration, and
recovering of zeal. For, and after, signifies an interval of time; but whether
it shall be short, or long, is not expressed; notwithstanding, I see no
likelihood, that it shall be very long, nor do I believe so. They heard a great
voice from heaven. Yet once again, Heaven is the Throne, it is the Sovereign
dignity, which in a State is exactly the same: that Heaven is to the Earth, in
light, in luster, in good or bad influences, in situation, and in elevation.
From Heaven, i.e. from Authority, and the Prince who reigns; they heard a
voice, they received an order; not a small clandestinsilent voice, but a great
voice, i.e. a public command, a solemn Edict; and this voice said to them,
Come up hither. Then the Truth shall get up into the Throne; and as God has
contrary to all probability, given a popish Prince to England, so God will give
a Protestant Prince to France, in spite of all oppositions of the Papists. And
the ascended up to heaven in a cloud, i.e. Their elevation, and that of the
Reformed Religion, shall be made publicly; as the elevation of Elijah, and of
Jesus Christ, who were lift up above the clouds. And their enemies beheld them.
Popery shall not as yet be destroyed in France, when this shall happen. The
Priests, the Clergy, and Monks shall be spectators of this great work: But the
end of popery in France shall come quickly after. For, the same hour-there was
a great Earthquake; mark, the same hour; he says not, and after, as he had
said, to express a space of time between the resurrection of the witnesses, and
their ascending up even to the Throne. But he says, the same hour, to signisy,
that as soon as the Reformation shall be established by a solemn Edict of the
Prince, as by a great voice from heaven, the total destruction of popery shall
happen, as we are about to show.

And the same hour there was a great Earthquake. I will not spend time upon the
signification of this representation, an Earthquake: For it is known by all who
are versed in the Prophets, See Isa. 170 13. and 24.19, 20. Jer. 4.24. and 49,
20.
that in the Prophetic style, an Earthquake signifies a great commotion of
Nations, that must change the face of the World: because Earthquakes do
overturn Cities, Mountains, and wholly change the face of a Country, make
Valleys where there were Mountains, and Hills where there were Valleys, and
Lakes which were dry Land before, and deserts of Countries which were
inhabited; so that it is certain, that according to this Prophesy, in a very few
years, the face of the Antichristian Kingdom shall be changed, but not every
where. It shall be only in the tenth part of the City, which shall fall by this
Earthquake.

The City signifies the Roman Antichristian Empire, and not Rome alone.
And the tenth part of the City fell. This is a passage where Interpreters have
been short sighted, not excepting our Joseph Mede, who often has so quick a
sight. To understand this, we must first know, what the City is. Joseph Mede is
mistaken, together with all the rest, when he understands this to mean
precisely the City of Rome. It Is a truth, which must be held as certain, (being
one of the keys of the Revelation) that the City, the great City, signifies in
this book not Rome alone, but Rome in conjunction with its Empire. The name of
this great City is Babylon. Now it is clear, that Babylon is the whole
Babylonian Kingdom. Come out of Babylon my people. It Is not from the City of
Rome that the Holy Ghost invites his Elect to come out; it is from the Church of
Rome, from the Babylonian Empire. This passage alone, together with that in
this eleventh Chapter, v.8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of
the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
Lord was cruicified, are enough to prove, that the Babylonian City, is not Rome
alone. Our Lord was not crucified in Rome; and if we should here take
crucifying in a figurative sense, for the crucifying of the Religion of Jesus
Christ, this has been sacrificed at Rome no more than in other places of the
Latin Church. In the 14th Chapter, the Holy Ghost describes the fall of this
City of Babylon; Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City; and in the same
vision, he fore-tells the ruin of the Antichristian Empire, under the Metaphors
of an harvest, and a vintage; which proves that this City is nothing else but
the entire Kingdom of Babylon. In the 18th Chapter the Prophet makes a long
description of the desolations of this City, under the Metaphors, of a City of
Merchandise, which had a great traffic, and was filled with pleasures and
delightful things. Now it is certain, that the shameful simony, the wicked
pleasures of the Papacy, have not reigned less in the Provinces of the
Babylonian Kingdom, than in the Capital City; from whence it is again evident,
that the City signifies the whole Antichristian State. Lastly, the constant
opposition, between the Holy City, and the great City, proves that the City
includes the whole Antichristian Church, even as the Holy City signifies the
whole Christian Church. De Launay has confessed this in the eleventh Chapter
of the Revelation, and in the 16th: but no exception is to be made; every where
the City, and the great City Babylon, signifies the entire Kingdom of the
Papacy. And the reason of this is evident, old Rome made her whole Empire to be
one only City, by means of that right of citizenship, which she bestowed on all
who were of some considerable quality, though they dwelt in the Provinces. The
citizens of Rome dwelt in all Countries; now where the citizens of a City
dwell, there is the City: this made Rutilius say,

Dumque offers victis, proprij consortia juris
Vrbem fecisti, quod prius Orbis erat.
Thus it goes exactly in the Church of Rome, which has re-establisht the Roman
Empire. All those who are members of this Church, are citizens of her capital
City. The Church of Rome, is but one City.
Persons of all Nations are admitted into her Senate, or College of Cardinals.
The Tribunal, which is called the Rota, is constituted of Counselors, taken
out of all the Provinces, which pay subjection to Rome. Every Forreigner may
come to be a Cardinal, and every Cardinal may come to be Pope. Therefore, there
are properly no Foreigners in that State, no Papist is a Forreigner to the
Church of Rome, and that which they call the holy See.

That which has deceived Interpreters, v. 9, 1^.
is the 17th Chapter, where the City is called the Woman, which sits on
seven Mountains; and that great City, which reigns over the Kings of the
Earth. This, say they, is the City of Rome, and the Papists. themselves do
grant it, and without doubt it is Rome, and we have above proved it; but it is
Rome conjointly with her Empire. Babylon signifies the whole Antichristian
Empire, and this Antichristian Empire, is said to sit upon seven Mountains, and
to rule over the Kings of the Earth, Rome must always be considered together
with her Empire.
because this is true of its Capital City. Nothing is more ordinary (not to
add, that it is constantly used) than to denote a whole Kingdom by the ruling
City. Thus; men always spoke of Rome; Rome has conquered the Nations; Rome
has enlarged her Empire to the end of the World; this signifies, that the
Roman Empire has subdued all Nations, and extended its bounds even to the
utmost parts of the Earth.

The tenth part of the City is one of the ten Kingdoms, that make up the Empire
of the Papacy. Chap. 17.12, 13.
This being supposed and proved, that the City is the whole Babylonian and
Antichristian Empire; it must be remembered, that this Empire of Antichrist is
made up of ten Kingdoms, and ten Kings, who must give their power to the beast:
The ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings. These have one mind, and shall
give their power unto the beast. From which it is clear, that the tenth part of
the City signifies here one of those ten Kingdoms, under the authority of the
Antichristian Kingdom. A tenth part of the City fell, i.e. one of these ten
Kingdoms, which make up the great City, the Babyonian Empire shall forsake it.
This therefore, is exactly that, which must happen within a little while after,
the three years and a half of the total suppression of the Truth shall be
exspired; and a while after that the Witnesses shall be raised, i.e. after the
profession of the Truth shall be raised to life again in France and elsewhere.

And then, the same hour, immediately after that, the Reformation shall be
established by a Royal Edict, without delay; There shall be an Earthquake, and a
tenth part of the City shall be overturned. Mark that, the Earthquake, i.e. the
great alteration of affairs in the Land of the Papacy, must for that time
happen only in the tenth part of the City that shall fall: for this shall be
the effect of this Earthquake.

Frahte shall shortly fall, not by a ruin of the Monarchy, but by a ruin of
Pepery.
Now what is this tenth part of this City, which shall fall? In my opinion, we
cannot doubt that it is France. This Kingdom is the most considerable part, or
piece of the ten horns, or States, which once made up the great Babylonian
City: it fell; this does not signify, that the French Monarchy shall be ruined;
it may be humbled; but in all appearance, Providence does design a great
elevation for her afterward. It Is highly probable, that God will not let go
unpunisht the horrible outrages which it acts at this day. Afterward, it must
build its greatness upon the ruins of the papal Empire, and enrich it self with
the spoils of those who shall take part with the Papacy. They who at this day
persecute the Protestants, know not wither God is leading them: this is not the
way by which he will lead France to the height of glory. If she comes thither,
it is because she shall shortly change her road. Her greatning will be no
damage to Protestant States; on the contrary, the Protestant States shall be
enricht with the spoils of others; and be strengthened by the fall of
Antichrists Empire. This tenth part of the City shall fall, with respect to the
Papacy; it shall break with Rome, and the Roman Religion. One thing is certain,
that the Babylonian Empire shall perish through the refusal of obedience by the
ten Kings, who had given their power to the Beast. The thing is already come to
pass in part. The Kingdoms of Sweden, Denmark, England, and several Sovereign
States in Germany, have withdrawn themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Pope.
They have spoiled the harlot of her riches They have eaten her flesh, i.e.
seized on her Benefices and Revenues, which she had in their Countries. This
must go on, and be finished as it is begun. The Kings, who yet remain under the
Empire of Rome, must break with her, leave her solitary and desolate.

But who must begin this last revolt? It Is most probable, that France shall.
Not Spain, which as yet is plunged in superstition, and is as much under the
tyranny of the Clergy as ever. Not the Emperor, who in Temporals is subject to
the Pope, and permits that in his States the Archbishop of Strigonium should
teach, that the Pope can take away the Imperial Crown from him. It cannot be
any Country but France, which a long time ago has begun to shake off the yoke
of Rome. It Is well known, how solemnly and openly war has been declared
against the Pope, by a Declaration of the King, (ratified in all the
Parliaments) by the decisions of the Assembly of the French Clergy, by a
Disputation against the Authority of the Pope, managed in the Sorbon, solemnly,
and by order of the Court. And to heighten the affront, the Theses were posted
up, even upon the gates of his Nuntio. Nothing of this kind had hitherto
happened, at least in a time of peace, and unless the Pope had given occasion
by his insolences.

Besides this, Superstition and Idolatry lose their credit much in France.
There is a secret party, though well enough known, which greatly despises the
popular Devotions, Images, worship of Saints, and is convinced that these are
humane institutions; God is beforehand preparing for this great work.

To this it may be objected, that for the last hundred and fifty years, the
Popes Empire has not been made up of ten Kings, because the Kings of England,
Sweden, Denmark, etc. have thrown off his Government; and consequently, France
is not at this day the tenth part of the Babylonian Empire; for it is more then
a tenth part of it. But this is no difficulty: for we must know, that things
retain the names which they bore in their original, (without regarding the
alterations which time does bring along.) Tho at this day, there are not ten
Kingdoms under the Babylonian Empire, it is notwithstanding certain, that each
Kingdom was called, and ought to be called in this Prophecy, the tenth part;
because the Prophet having described this Empire in its beginning, by its ten
horns, or ten Kings, it is necessary for our clear understanding, that every one
of these ten Kings, and Kingdoms, should be called one of the ten Kings, or of
the ten Kingdoms, with respect to the original constitution of the
Antichristian Empire.

Seeing the tenth part of the City which must fall, is France, this gives me
some hopes, that the death of the two witnesses has a particular relation to
this Kingdom. It Is the street or place of this City, i.e. the most fair and
eminent part of it. The Witnesses must remain dead upon this Street, and upon
it they must be raised again. And as the death of the Witnesses and their
Resurrection have a relation to the Kingdom of France, it may well fall out,
that we may not be far distant from the time of the Resurrection of the
witnesses, seeing the three years and a lalf of their death, are either begun,
or will begin shortly.

And in the earthquake were slain seven thousand; in the Greek it is, seven
thousand names of men, and not seven thousand men. I confess, that this seems
somewhat mysterious: in other places we find not this phrase, names of men put
simply for men. Perhaps there is here a figure of Grammar called, Hypallage
casus, so that names of men, are put for men of name, i.e. of raised, and
considerable quality, be its on the account of riches, or of dignity, or of
learning. But I am more inclined to say, that here these words, names of men,
must be taken in their natural signification, and do intimate, that the total
Reformation of France, shall not be made with bloodshed, nothing shall be
destroyed but names, such as are the names of Monks, of Carmelites, of
Augustines, of Dominicans, of Iacobins, Franciscans, Capucines, Jesuits,
Minimes, and an infinite company of others, whose number it is not easy to
define, and which the Holy Ghost denotes by the number seven, which is the
number of perfection, to signify, that the orders of Monks and Nuns, shall
perish for ever. This is an Institution so degenerated from its first Original,
that it is become the arm of Antichrist; These orders cannot perish one without
another.

If any will have it, that these seven thousand, slain, signify, that there
shall be bloodshed, it shall not be great; for the number seven put for an
indifinite number, never signifies a great one. De Launay is very much mistaken
when he says, that the seven thousand, who had not bowed the knee to Baal, ^
King. 19.18.
signified a great multitude; on the contrary the signified a very small
number, indeed the number was so small, that Elijah did not know of them: he
said, I am left alone.

The Kings of France at this day, do lift their authority so high, that nothing
can resist it. It Is therefore probable, The authority of the Kings of Francs
shall prevail over the ruling. Religion.
that every thing will bend under the yoke of their Will when they shall
resolve to break with Rome: and it seems as if the Providence of God was
preparing the way unto this thing, by the Clergies Declaration, confirmed by
that of the King, viz. that Kings depend on none in any thing which concerns
Temporals; and that it is never lawful to deny obedience to them upon a pretext
of Religion. For if this be once fixed, when ever it shall please the Kings of
France to forsake the Communion of Rome, (by this Principle of the present
Bishops) it cannot be allowed, that the People should rebel against them. I
look on that which is happened in England, as another preparation unto this
Event: A King of a Religion contrary to that of the State reigns peaceably; the
reason is, that Providence will accustom the subjects to pay subjection to
Princes who are enemies of the Ruling Religion.

And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. This is
the total conversion and reformation of the tenth part of the City, i.e. of the
Kingdom of France, that shall quickly follow, after the Kings of France shall
have broken with the Bishop of Rome.

V. 14. The second Woe is past, and behold she third Woe comes quickly; namely,
the second of the three Woes, which had been denounced after the sound of the
fourth Trumpet. Chap. 8.13.
And I heard an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, crying with a loud
voice. Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the other
voices of the Trumpet, which are yet to sound. The first of these three woes
was the Grasshoppers, Saracens denoted by Grasshoppers.
who came up out of the bottomless pit with their Head Apollyon, and in Hebrew
Ahaddon. These Grasshoppers are plainly the Saracens, Chap. 14.
Arabians with their Head Mahomet. The second Woe, is the domination of the
Turks, who passed from the other side of Euphrates at the sound of the sixth
Trumpet. And the third Woe is the fall of the Antichristan Empire.


These three great events deserve to be distinguished from all others; for they
have changed, or shall change the whole face of the world.

And the seventh Angel sounded, etc. this which follows, concerns the Kingdom
or reign of Jesus Christ and the Church, and consequently, must be reserved to
another place,

CHAP. XIV.
Observations upon the 17, 18, 19. Chapters of the Revelation, concerning the
fall of Antichrist's Kingdom. A brief Methodizing of the events, which the Holy
Ghost had displaced in the Visions.

THe seventeenth Chapter contains something that relates to the destruction of
Antichrists Kingdom.

V. 16. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate
the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire.

V. 17. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree and
give their Kingdom unto the beast until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

There Is nothing in this passage, that has not been opened, or is obscure.
It Is clear, that these Kings, who through ignorance, or weakness, suffered
their power to be usurped by the Empire of the papacy, shall take it again;
they shall eat her flesh, i.e. shall enrich themselves with her benefices and
revenues; and burn her with fire, i.e. shall abolish the the memory of this
Romish Empire, so that nothing but ashes shall remain of it.

The 18th Chapter is a long description of the ruin of the Antichristian and
Babylonian Empire. I have no need to enter into this Chap. because I find
nothing in it of that which I principally seek, which is, those certain
characters which can inform us of the time of this fall; namely, whether it be
night at hand, or afar off. There is nothing there concerning it, except that
which is general. As to this Chapter, I will say only. First, We must remember
the remarque, which has been often made by us, that Babylon here does not
signify strictly the City of Rome, as most have imagined. It Is the whole
Babylonian Empire, as appears from these words, Come out of Babylon my people.
I do not think, that any great number of Gods people, has come out of the City
of Rome; hitherto we have not seen it. My second remarque is, we must not (as
is usually done) over much press the mystical sense of diverse merchandises,
which are reckoned up, and were sold it that City. I do not believe, We must
not over much seelt mysteries in the particular merchandises of Babylon.
that there is any other mystery in this thing, than that this Babylonian
Empire being set forth under the Emblem of a great City, it was necessary to
represent it as a City of great commerce; for that is inseparable from great
Cities. Not but that these merchandises, and the many instruments of Luxury and
pleasures, which are said to have been in this City, do not very fitly signify,
and according to the design of the Holy Ghost, both the Simony and debaucheries
of this corrupted Church in the general. But I believe not that it is necessary
to enquire particularly what is meant (for example) by the silk, the precious
stones, the fine linen, etc.

The burning of Babylon must not be understood literally.
My Third Observation upon this 18th Chapter is, we must not interpret literally
the Metaphors of burning, fire, blood, and slaughter, which the Holy Ghost set
before us. Certainly, these are not the Methods which God makes use of to
establish his Kingdom. I think indeed, as I have already said, that God will
suffer Rome to be sacked, as he suffered Jerusalem to be: I further believe,
that this great change in Religion, will not be made without blood shed, as it
happened in the last age. But seeing the City, in this Chapter, and generally in
the Revelation, take in the whole Babylonian Empire, we must not imagine that
all this great circuit of Countries shall be laid desolate.

The 19th Chapter is the last in which mention is made of the destruction of
Antichrists Kingdom. The ten first Verses of this Chapter must not be disjoined
from the foregoing Chapter, for they are only the continuation of it; The
solemn rejoycings of the Elect, after the ruin of Babylon, and the consummation
of the Christian Church, here below upon Earth.

The eleven last Verses of the Chapter, contain a wonderful vision, wherein
Jesus Christ appears sitting upon a white Horse, having the titles of
faithful, of true, of the word of God, of King of Kings, of Lord of Lords. He
gathers his armies together, to fight against the Beast, and against the false
Prophet. An Angel stands in the Sun, and calls to all the fowls of Heaven, to
come and eat the flesh of those men that must be slain in that great battle,
which was to be fought. On the other side, the Beast and the false Prophet
gather their forces; the battle is fought; the Beast and Kings are overcome; he
is taken with his false Prophet; both are cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, together with all those who had worshipped the Image of the Beast. And
this is magnificent, and the Figures are lofty. But there is nothing new in
this; and in my judgment, it is nothing but a recapitulation of the foregoing
visions, concerning the ruin of Antichrists reign. The vision of the eleventh
Chapter is an Epitome of the visions that follow, and this is properly an
Epitome of the visions which went before; therefore I do not judge it necessary
to insist upon it. Especially, seeing nothing is found of that which we seek
for; namely, the signs and marks by which it may be known, when and at what
time the reign of Antichrist must end. It Is in the 11, 14, and above all in the
16th. Chapter, that we find the Characters of this end, and of the time in
which it must come to pass. Therefore it was necessary only, that we should
insist upon those Chaters.

The slaughter and murders in the 19th Chapter, must nor be understood
literally.
I will only make the observation upon this Chapter, which I made upon the
foregoing. That we must not understand literally the expressions of war and
destroying, that are used here: for example, that Jesus Christ must tread the
wine press of the wrath of God, that he must give to be eaten by the fowls, the
flesh of Kings, of Captains, of mighty men, of Horses, of free, and bond, etc.
These are Metaphors borrowed from war, and must be understood surably to the
nature of this spiritual war, which Jesus Christ must make against Idolatry,
Superstition, Heresies, and Tyranny: his quarrel is with these, and not with
men. Besides the reasons alleged, we have here a convincing one, that the
Instrument of so many victories, and which must make such a slaughter, Verse. 15.
is the sharp sword, that comes out of the mouth of him who sits upon the
white horse. And the remnant was slain with the sword of him that sat upon the
horse -- and all the folws were filled with their flesh. Now all know, that
this sharp sword, that comes out of the mouth of Jesus Christ, is the Word of
God; a spiritual sword, which must act only spiritual slaughters, and which
does not destroy the lives of men, but their manners and Idolatries. So that I
fear, lest those are mistaken, who hope to render to Babylon that which we have
received form her; and in the cup which she has filled, to fill to her double,
i. e. to give her blood for blood, torment for torment. This is not the spirit
of the true Church.

I have now done with this subject, and I think there remains but one thing to
do, that I may give a clear Idea of our prophecies, and that is, to Epitomize
and rank, according to the order of time, the various events which relate to
the ruin of Antichrists Kingdom, which the Holy Ghost displaced and confounded,
to the end that the prophecies might not be clearer than God did intend they
should be. As for the seven plagues of the seven viols, they are perfectly
ranked according to their order, and according to their times.

A commendious Methodizing of the events which must bring Antichrist's Kingdom
to its ruin.
1. The first plague of the first viol, begins about the year of our Lord 900.
it lasts almost 150. years, and ends under the Popedom of Leo IX. about the
year 1050. 2. The second and third plagues, which are the Croisades, begin at
the end of the eleventh age, and end at the going out of the thirteenth, in the
year 1270. or 1292. For till then some of the Latins kept possession in
Palestine, so that they take up the space of about two hundred years. 3. The
fourth plague begins before the Croisades; but if we please, we may place its
beginning where the foregoing ends. This fourth plague is the increase of the
Papal yoke, and this Period beginning at the year 1270, shall continue until
the year 1378, when the consequent of the fifth plague begins, namely, the
weakening of the Papal reign by the schism. Therefore this Period will contain
108 years. 4 The fifth plague is the removing of the Popes to dwell at Avignon,
and the grand Schism of the West. It begins in the year 1305 and lasts until
the year 1440. This Period being a little jointed within the former, shall last
130, or 135. years. 5. The sixth plague, which is the passage of the Turks into
Europe, and the desolations which they made in the Popes Dominion, and in the
Latin Church, beginning toward the end of the fourteenth Age, about the year
1370. and lasting until the siege of Vienna under Charles the fifth in 1529,
this Period will be 150 years. 6. The seventh plague beginning about the year
1520, and lasting until the end of our Age, and the beginning of the next,
must last about 190 years. This last Period is longer then the rest, because
God intended to subdivide it into three other Periods. 7. The first Period of
this last viol, is the harvest, which lasted 30, or 40 years, from the year
1520, until 1560, when all the Countries, which were to be Reformed, had
embraced the Reformation. 8. The second period of this seventh viol, is that
season and state of rest and victory, which the Papacy regained, and this
period lasts from 1560, or 1570; for since that time Popery has received no
considerable check, but rather has much prevailed; it has made war against
the saints, had has overcome them. 9. Toward the conclusion of this second
period of the seventh viol, a sore persecution must happen. The Witnesses
clothed in Sackcloth, i.e. the faithful, who are under the Cross, shall be
oppressed, and remain dead in the street of the great City for three years and
a half. That is, the profession of the Truth shall be wholly suppressed: but
the Truth it self shall not be buried, nor laid in the grave, nor forgotten.
10. At the end of the three years and a half, shall begin the third period of
the seventh viol, which the Holy Ghost calls the vintage. This is the total
ruin of Antichrists Kingdom, and this period shall last 20, or 25 years; it is
probable that it will begin about the year 1690, or a little while after. 11.
the first thing, which shall be done in the third period of the seventh vial,
is the Fall of the tenth part of the City, i. e. of the Kingdom of France,
which shall break with the Kourt of Rome, and wholly change the face of
Religion in that Kingdom. This is the first action of the vintage. 12. The
Beast and the false Prophet, the Pope and his Agents, shall rally all their
forces: but God shall muster all his together, and give the last blow to
Popery: then the Beast and the false Prophet shall be thrown into the lake, and
plunged into the bottomless pit: Babylon shall wholly fall; and it shall be
said, she is fallen,, she is fallen.
CHAP. XV.
The Reason why in this work we speak of some things so positively. The linking
together of our Principles, suffers us not to doubt, that we now are at the end
of the reign of the papacy.

IN the first Edition of this work, I did here finish what I had to say about
those events past and future, which concern the ruin of Antichrists Kingdom.
Second Editions have this advantage, that they may be suited to the pallates of
the Readers, of whom a trial has been made. And (were it possible for me to do
it) I would gladly use this piece of prudence, with respect to a Remarque,
which very many have made; namely, that in this discourse we speak over
positively, and which too much confidence, concerning things which at the most
ought to be propounded only as conjectures. Perhaps some time or other men
shall know the principal reason, which made me speak in so confident a manner,
and with such tokens of assurance. In the mean while I desire their attention
to several things which I have to say.

There are some things, that are propounded only as strong conjectures.
The first is, That I do not speak so confidently, as it is believed, concerning
the most part of those things which are yet to come: for example, I say not
down the exact time of the resurrection of the witnesses. I do not say, that it
shall be exactly in such a year; for I have declared, and do still declare,
that I know not from what time God shall please to begin, the reckoning of the
three years and a half; Not but that I strongly hope, that God intends to begin
it at the time of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes: but this does not rise
to a full assurance. That which concerns the rising again of our Reformation by
way of inspirations, the approaching Reformation of France by way of Authority,
the fall of the tenth part of the City, i. e. of France, which shall forsake
the papal Kingdom; this I say seems to me to be more than a conjecture, I
confess it; and if things should fall out otherwise, I should be very much
mistaken. But however, if the fall of popery should begin in some other place,
I would ingenously confess that I was deceived, That the Countries, Kingdoms,
and States, which are not under the papacy, ought not to be accounted the
streets of the great City, and that they must not feel an persecution, seems to
me more than probable, and I believe it. But notwithstanding, I declare, that I
do not make it an Article of faith; and if it should fall out, that God should
send his desolating scourge upon all the Reformed Churches in Europe, without
excepting the places where our Religion at this day bears sway; I grant that
men will have right to accuse me, that I have guessed wrong, but not that I
made rash conclusions. And truly, when I consider the horrible looseness which
every where prevails, I confess, that I cannot but fear lest Good should throw
all into the same furnace.

What is propounded as certain.
Behold therefore, what I assert, namely, that this is the last persecution,
which Antichrist must raise against the Church, and that we are near the end of
the twelve hundred and sixty years (which is the Period of his Empire,) and
that in the beginning of the next age, this Empire must see its end. If I
should be mistaken nine or ten years, and that this Empire should (instead of
ending in the year 1710, or thereabouts) run on until the year 1720, I do not
think that any could justly treat me as a false Prophet, and accuse me of
rashness. Many will not forbear to judge me rash, because I propound my
conjectures about these things as certain conclusions. To this I have a second
thing to say, That none has reason to be offended, that I am possessed with,
and persuaded of that, which I think I evidently see, and that I find the
proofs of what I propound convincing to my self. I should do ill to demand of
others the same assurance, and oblige them to entertain the same persuasion; I
declare the contrary in express terms: I am well content (as I have said) that
my Readers should account these assertions to be conjectures, provided that I
may have the liberty to believe what I see, or what I believe I see in the
writings of the Prophets. Besides, it seems that there is no great necessity of
punishing me for this pretended rashness; seeing if so be that I am mistaken,
Time is preparing for me a mortification sore enough. Let us leave Providence
to work: it will discover who is guilty of rashness and fond credulity.

Our principles must be considered.
The last thing which I would say for my justification is, that before any
condemns me of rashness, as to what I hold, that we are at the end of the 1260
years of Antichrists reign, my principles must be duly weighed, and that not
each apart (as perhaps some have done) but conjointly. Behold the principles
and their connection. 1. The first is, that the papacy is the Antichristian
Empire of which these Prophecies speak. 2. That Idolatry is the principal
Character of this Antichristian Empire. 3. That this Empire of the Beast must
begin when the Roman Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms, and when that Heads
(the Emperors) which was in the Apostle Paul's time, was destroyed. Here are
three principles, which I know not how any Protestant can doubt of. We shall
presently see whither they will lead us. 4. My fourth principle is, that I have
hit the truth in the explication of the seven viols, so that stinking ulcer in
the first is the horrible corruption of the Church of Rome in the tenth Age.
The Sea and rivers of blood in the two following plagues, are the Butcheries
acted by the Croisades, The increase of the Sun's heat in the fourth plague, is
the increase of the papal authority: the Eclipse and darkning of this Sun in
the fifth plague, is the grand Schism between Rome and Avignon: the Kings of
the East, who pass over Euphrates, in the sixth plague, are the Turks, who pass
over the Bosphorus to invade the remainder of the Greek Empire, and a part of
that of the Latins: and lastly, the dividing of the great city into three
parts, in the seventh plague, is the dividing of the Latin Church into three
Communions, Papists, Lutherans, and Reformed. I lay down as a principle, which
I cannot doubt of, that I have it the mark in the explication of these plagues.
But this ('it is said) seems rash, to assert so confidently that which can only
be a strong conjecture. Men may object what they please against this
exposition, but I cannot recant it. And I desire the World seriously to
consider only these two things. 1. That my explications very well agree with
the words and Metaphors of the prophecy. 2. That it is impossible that chance
should produce an explication so universally lucky.
It must be remembered what we said concerning the Epistles to the seven
Churches, on the question, whether they are Prophetical? We granted, that there
are some passages that agree well with the applications which are made: but we
observed, that these applications are far from being universally true: it is
therefore chance that produced those lucky agreements. But if any one comes,
who shall make such a measured division of times, and such a just application
of these times, and the events in them, unto the Characters with which these
seven Churches are marked, so that nothing is defective; then I shall remain
perfectly satisfied, that this last Interpreter has exactly hit the truth; it
will be no longer a conjecture. Let me therefore be permitted to remain
persuaded, that I have hit the truth as to the seven plagues, seeing they so
perfectly agree with tho events which are past.

My fifth Principle is, that I have not been less happy in hitting the true
sense of the harvest and vintage in the fourteenth chapter. A man must be
blind, if he sees not, that these are the two parts of the fall of Babylon.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city; and immediately after, this fall
is divided into harvest, and vintage: I cannot hinder my self from seeing, that
this signifies the first fall of Popery, by a first Reformation, which
certainly is come to pass: and the final fall of Popery, by a second
Reformation, which must come to pass. None can, I think, seriously consider the
perfect agreement between the representations and the Original, but be will be
persuaded that it is so.

6. My sixth and last Principle is, that we are in the last Persecution which
the Church must suffer, from the Kingdom of Antichrist. And this last
conclusion, so naturally and necessarily flowers from the foregoing ones, that
none can acknowledge the preceding, but he must likewise own the truth of this.
Let us now see whither these Principles do lead us.

All our Principles lead us unto the eighteenth Age to find the end of
Antichrists reign,
If the Papacy be the Antichristian Kingdom, then certainly the period of 1260
prophetic days, or 1260 years (which are assigned to the duration of the
Kingdom of the Beast) belong to it. If the principal Character of this Kingdom
is Idolatry, it is clear, we must begin to reckon the duration of this Kingdom
from that time in which Idolatry was set up in the Church. Now it is certain,
that the Idolatrous worship of Relics and of Saints was fully established in
the fifth Age: Reckon 1260 years since the fifth Age, this will bring you to
the beginning of the eighteenth Age.

If the Empire of the Papacy be the Empire of the Beast, we must begin it at
the time when the Roman Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms: Fore the Holy
Ghost speaks so in express and clear terms. Reckon 1260 years, since the
division of the Roman Empire into ten Kingdoms, which was done in the fifth
Age, and this will lead you to the eighteenth Age.

If the Roman-papist See is that man of sin, of whom St. Paul speaks in the 2d
Chap. of the Epist. to the Thessalonians, we must reckon the 1260 years
(assigned to his Empire) from the time that the Imperial dignity which held at
Rome, ceased to hold, ^. 6, 7.
or withhold, which happened in the fifth Age. Reckon again your 1260 years
since that time, and you will see, that you fall upon the eighteenth Age.

If we have hit right in explaining the seven viols, and the seven plagues, the
last viol has been poured out since the time of Luther, and its influence is
running still, according to the proportion of the preceding viols; it cannot be
running out above two hundred years. Reckon again by this rule, and you will
fall into the eighteenth Age.

If the harvest and the vintage in the fourteenth chapter, are really the first
and second part of the fall of the Antichristian Papacy, which must be produced
by as many Reformations, then the Reformation in the last Age must have been
the harvest: lengthen as much as you please the space of time between the
harvest and vintage, you cannot make it longer than two hundred years. Reckon,
and you will fall upon the eighteenth Age, the find there the vintage, and the
final ruin of the Papacy.

Lastly, if all that we have said is rational, it is impossible that this should
not be the last persecution: for the Reformation cannot be raised again so as
to fall down a second time, seeing we have proved, that the Period of 1260
years is about to expire: therefore reckon this persecution as the last, and
make it to be as long as you will, provided you observe the measure which God
has set to the longest persecutions that the Church has suffered, and this
however will bring you unto the eighteenth Age.

Observe, I pray you, how many things do bring you to this eighteenth Age.
Admire the meeting of so many paths, which do all bring you to the same point.
And remember this undoubted Principle, that it is impossible that false
conjectures should hit right in every thing.

I entreat above all, the Roman Catholics to consider seriously this
Principle. How can they persuade themselves, that system of lies and false
suppositions should hang well together? That we should find in their Roman See
exactly all the Characters, which are given to the man of sin, to the Beast in
the Revelation, to spiritual Babylon, to the whore clothed in scarlet; that ^ve
should meet with the Characters of the Papacy in its birth, exactly in the time
that the Prophets have marked out for the birth of the Antichristian Kingdom;
that we should find so exact these seven great judgments of God, denoted by
seven plagues; that God should exactly at this time permit, that F. Maimbourg
should publish one history upon another, of the declining of the Empire, Of the
Croisades, Of the Schism of the Greeks, Of the great Schism of the West, Of
Lutheranism, and Of Calvinism, for this purpose, to raise our attention unto
these great events of the seven plagues, which without this, perhaps none would
have thought of. I earnestly beseech them (I say) seriously to consider this
heap of circumstances, and to tell me in their Consciences, whether Chance can
produce and agreement of above a hundred or two hundred points, relating to the
same subject. None can ever make this reflection seriously, but he must be
convinced.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the thousand years reign. That in all the past time, there is not a time to
be found, wherein Satan has been bound. Four heads of arguments to prove this
reign. The first is, the fifth Monarchy, so plainly promised to the saints.

WE have done examining that which relates to the fall of the Antichristian
Kingdom. That we may keep our word, that we gave in the Title of our second
part, we must now enquire, what must happen to the Church after that great
event. This laid down in the 20 chapter of the Revelation, in these terms.

v. 1. And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand.

v. 2. And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil and
Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

v. 3. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal
upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled; and after that he must be loosed a little season.

v. 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto
them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus;
and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his
image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands;
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

v. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand years were
finished. This is the first resurrection.

Behold the Text, which is the subject to so many doubts, and so many
controversies! Behold that which has made the pretended Heretics, who are
called Chiliasts, and Millenaries. I mean not those Chiliasts, who have
believed a thousand years reign of the Church, during which time it must enjoy
(according to their opinion) the carnal and sinful pleasures of the world:
these were filthy spirits, which came out of the Dragons mouth.

A distinction between carnal and spiritual Millenaries.
But as for those, who believe, that after the ruin of Antichrist, and before
the end of the world, God reserves to himself a period of a thousand years, in
which he must reign by himself and his people, pour out upon them an abundance
of his spirit, bring al Nations to his knowledge, govern them with a golden
scepter, and no longer with an iron one, secure them from all evil, and from
all danger of corruption: as for these, I say, the time is coming, and that
very shortly, that men shall be ashamed that they have branded them with the
names of Chiliasts, of Millenaries, and fifth- Monarchymen. I have former by
observed, that there is something that is surprising and divine in the due
understanding of Prophecies. We wonder at the strange stupidity of the Jews,
who do not discern in their own Oracles, our Jesus and their Messiah. We are
Astonished at the dismal blindness of the Papists, who do not see the Beast and
Antichrist in that which they call their Holy See, and their Holy Church. God
has had reasons, why he has given these men eyes that they should not see,
and a heart void of understanding. Certainly here is the same thing. There must
be a blindness greater then can be imagined, It Is surprising that men have not
seen in the Scripture the Reign of Jesus Christ on the earth.
in those who see not this Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the Church, which must
make the seventh Period of the world. There is something supernatural in this
blindness. I had this favor from God, that I saw this Reign in the Scriptures,
ever since I was able to read and understand them, without having read either
any Commentaries upon the Revelation, or writings of the Millenaries. I hope to
make out the truth of this Reign with such clearness, that if shall be
difficult to shake any doubt of it.

It is impossible to find in the time bypast. room for the Period of a thousand
years, in which Satant must be bound.
First, it is agreed on all hands, that within the duration of the Church, we
must necessarily find a Period of a thousand years, in which it may be said,
that Satan has been bound, i.e. hindered in his designs, which are seduction
and persecution. This it too plain to be denied. But where shall we find this
Period? I am sorry to see so great, so learned, and so holy a person as Usher
Archbishop of Armagh, to place this period of a thousand years within the time
of Christ's Incarnation, and the eleventh Age. How can any one say, that the
Devil was bound during that space? Is it with respect to seduction? In the
three first Ages did he not seduce men? Were not the Pagans seduced? Their
Religion, was it not the Ruling Religion? There were Christians, I grant; but I
am persuaded, that they were not the fiftieth part of the whole Roman Empire.

In the succeeding Ages, has he not set on foot that grand seduction, that is
called the Beast, the False Prophet, the Kingdom of Antichrist? Has he not
brought Idolatry into the Church, the abomination into the sanctuary, such
tyranny, pride, and corruption of manners, that there was never greater among
the Pagans? With respect to persecution, has he been bound; how much blood
has shed? how many Butcheries has he acted? how many Massacres? what a great
number of Martyrs? Can it enter into any man's thoughts, that this should be
called the Period of Satan's binding? He was never so broken loose.

The falsity of their hypothesis, who begin them at Constantin.
What do those gain, who come three hundred years lower, and hold, that Santan
began to be bound at the time of Constantin? They must upon that principle,
place their ending at the year thirteen hundred, and so include within their
Period of the thousand years the rage of the Beast, who has fed upon the blood
of the saints, the seductions of the false Prophet, who makes the Image of the
Beast to be worshipped, and the whole world to run after him, who obliges all
men to bear his mark upon their foreheads, who makes war against the Saints,
and overcomes them. In one word, they must take in, into their Period of
Santans binding, that space of time, in which the Revelation sets forth the
Dragon as broken loose, giving his power to the Beast, and devouring the whole
world. Once again, this is a blindness which I cannot conceive.

If there was no other argument against these two Hypotheses, this alone would
be enough to convince me of their falsity; namely, the terrible confusion into
which these Authors do put the Visions of the Revelation. To any one who has
studied them, it is evident, that the Prophet has observed the Order of
History, at least in the gross of events. He had several visions concerning the
same thing; and in the order of these vision, the order of all their
circumstances does not always, in every thing, agree with the order of events,
and this we have observed, and cleared. But I say it again, the gross is
always according to the order of history: this order is observed in the
Revelation, that the birth and progresses of Antichrists Kingdom are laid down
before its fall. Now the Authors we have spoken, do make St John guilty of a
Parachronisme of two thousand years. After he had finished the narrative of the
ruin of Antichrist, and gone through a Period of 1260 years, which if we add to
them the space from the Incarnation of Christ, unto the revelation of the son
of perdition, make almost two thousand years. After this, I say, they make him
on a sudden to go back as far as the beginning of the Christian Church. Is
there any other instance of such confusion in this book? Let them show it. What
mean those words, After this (so the French version) which begin the 20
Chapter, and denote always not only the succession of visions, but of times?
This work is already large than I intended to make it; but notwithstanding I
cannot forbear to lay down a few of our arguments, there are so many, that one
might crush the contrary opinion with number: but I shall only urge the
principal ones. I shall open as it were four springs of arguments, Four springs
of arguments that demonstrate the trath of Christ's reign upon earth.
which I shall leave every man liberty to sound and dive into, contenting my
self with producing them, and drawing from them the principal evidences, which
clearly discover this future reign of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The firs spring is the fifth Monarchy* promised to the Saints.
My first spring, or source of arguments, will be in the Prophecies that speak
of a fifth Monarchy reserved for the Saints. It Is impossible to find a rational
sense in them, without supposing this thousand years reign. There are two
remarkable ones in the book of Daniel; In the 2. Chapter Nebuchadnesar sees a
statue, whose head was of gold, the shoulders of silver, the belly of brass,
the legs of iron, the feet and toes partly of iron, and partly of earth. The
Prophet interprets to him these four metals of the statue, that they are four
great Monarchies. The iron legs, by consent of all, signify the fourth
Monarchy, which is the Roman. The feet and the ten toes, partly of iron, and
partly of earth, signify the ten kings or Kingdoms, which were to divide the
Roman Empire, and weaken it at the same time. And whereas thou saw the feet
and the toes, Dan. 2. v. 41, 42.
part of potters clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided, but
there shall be in it of the strength of iron, forasmuch as thou saw the iron
mixed with miery clay. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part
of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken. These ten
toes are the ten Kings, which were to make up the Kingdom of Antichrist, and
reign together with him, in the last Period of the Roman Empire; during the
1260 years marked in the Revelation. Now hat happens at the end of the reign of
these ten Kings, and of the fourth Monarchy? v. 44.
And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left to other
people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever.

Behold a fifth Monarchy, different from the ten Kings, The Monarchy promised
to Christ, cannot be placed in the Ages by past.
which must break them in pieces, and must continue after them for ever, i.e.
until the end of the world. It Is granted, that this Kingdom, that shall never
be destroyed, is that of Jesus Christ. But is it not as clear as the day, that
this Kingdom must not appear until after that the ten Kings and the ten
Kingdoms shall have been broken 'in pieces by this fifth Monarchy. I confess, I
have nothing to say to them who are incapable of beholding this evidence; and I
do not conceive how it can be said, that we must go back beyond the ten Kings,
that we may place the Monarchy of Jesus Christ before them, when the Prophet so
plainly places it after the ten Kings. Is it not expressly said, that his fifth
Monarchy must break in pieces and destroy these ten Kingdoms? How therefore can
it go before them, or have its duration parallel to theirs?

In the seventh Chapter of the same Prophecy, we have the same four Monarchies,
under the Images of four Beasts. It Is confessed, that the fourth Beast, that
had ten horns, is the Roman Empire. all our writers grant, that these ten
horns, that signify ten Kings, are the ten Kingdoms, into which the Roman
Empire was divided after the time of Valentinian the third, and that those ten
horns reign together with the little horn, which is Antichrist. When the
Prophet had seen both the fourth Beast, and the three first wholly destroyed,
and their bodies burnt with fire, he adds, And I saw in the might-visions,
Chap. 7. v. 13.
and behold one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, and came
unto the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him, and there was
given him dominion, and a glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And to
the same purpose in the explication of the vision. v. 24.25.
And the tend horns out of this Kingdom, are then Kings that shall arise, and
another shall arise after them, and he shall be diverse from the first, etc.
And he shall speak great words against the most high, and shall wear out the
saints of the most high, and think to change times and laws; and they shall be
given into his hand, until a time, and times, and the dividing of times, etc.
All are agreed that Antichrist is here intended, and all Protestants grant that
this is the Papacy, and that its reign is to last 1260 years. Now what is to
happen after this time, and times, and a dividing or half a time? v. 26.
But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume,
and to destroy it unto the end. Behold the destruction of Antichrists Kingdom.
Immediately after the Prophet adds, And the Kingdom, and dominion, v. 27.
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and all dominions shall serve and obey him. Behold the reign and Kingdom of the
Saints, and a reign which succeeds to that of Antichrist. In truth, we must
give the lie to the Holy Spirit, if we suppose, that we must go back two
thousand years before the end of Antichrists reign, to place the beginning of
this reign of the Saints and of Jesus Christ. Here we have the Son of Man
coming in the clouds of heaven, after that the four Beasts, i. e. the four
Empires, have been broken to pieces; to receive the Kingdom from the hand of
God his Father, and reign for ever until the end of the world. We must speak
without any judgment, The fifth Monarchy cannot be understood of the Kingdom of
glory after the day of judgment.
if we say, that this everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ, is to be understood
of the heavenly reign, after the end of the world, and the last judgment. For
the Apostle St Paul says in plain terms, that Jesus Christ shall then reign no
longer, and that he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father.
Besides, Daniel speaks of a Kingdom that is to be under the Heavens, and not of
one that is above them. Further, it is a mere triffling, to mingle eternal
things with temporal, and bring down the Heavenly Kingdom of Paradise into the
rank of earthly and temporal Monarchies, by making it to be a fifth Monarchy.
Thus it is plain, that the Prophet treats here of a Kingdom, that indeed is
heavenly on the account of its purity, but is earthly on the account of its
Seat, and because it must be upon earth.

I am willing to join unto these Prophecies, only that in this 20th Chapter of
the Revelation, which is so clear, that it needs not any commentary. The
Prophet says expressly; After this (so the first verse is rendered in the
French) i.e. after the last victory over the Beast, and his false Prophet, the
Devil shall be bound, and the Saints shall live and reign with Christ a
thousand years. But 'twill be objected, that this passage is too plain, and
this very thing makes our sense of it suspicious. The Prophets are not wont to
express future things so clearly. But if this reason holds, the Jews are not to
be blamed, for rejecting our Oracles concerning Jesus Christ; for example,
this, A Virgin shall conceive a Son; and this other, And thou Bethelehem -- out
of thee shall come a Ruler, etc. and the whole 53. Chapter of Isaiah, and that
Prophecy of Daniel, that Messiah must be cut off, but not for himself; And that
very clear Oracle, he shall make his soul an offering for sin. For it is
evident, that these Oracles, are not less plain in speaking of Christ, and the
circumstances of his birth, his life, and his death; than those in Daniel and
the Revelation, which speak of the thousand years reign. Others instead of
confessing, that this Text is too clear to be understood in the literal sense;
say, that it is too obscure, and must be explained by others that are more
clear. Truly I do not conceive, how men can speak at this rat. It Is obscure,
because it says the contrary to that which these Gentlemen imagine, and because
it is inconstant with their Hyphotheses.

CHAP. XVII.
The second spring of Arguments to prove the thousand years reign, is the reign
promised to the Jews. The promises made to them, have not been fulfilled, but
must be. The conversion of St. Paul is a Type of that of the whole Nation.

THe second spring of my Arguments shall be the Prophecies and Oracles, which
promise unto the Jews extraordinary blessings, a reign upon Earth, a prosperity
that shall be visible to all Nations; yea, an elevation to a Kingdom unto which
all Nations must pay homage. These Oracles are without number: we must only
produce some of them. Isal. 2.2, 3, 4. Sacred Oracles that promise great
prosperities to the nation of the Jews.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. 3. And many people shall
go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of is ways, amp;c. And he shall judge
among the Nations, and rebuke many people. And in Chapter 25, v. 8. He will
swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all
faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth,
for the Lord has spoken it. And in the beginning of the 32 Chapter. Behold, a
King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment. And a
man shall be a hiding place from the storm, and a covert from the tempest. And
in the 41 Chapter, v. 8. But thou Israel art my servant, Jacob whom I have
chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend, etc. v. 10. Fear not, for I am with
thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee; yea, I will
help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness, v.
12, Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them, even the men that contended
with thee, etc. v. 15. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing
Instrument having teeth, thou shall thresh the mountains, and shall make the
hills as chaff. In the 43. Chapter, verse. 1, 2, 3, etc. But now thus says the
Lord, that created thee O Jacob, and he that formed, thee O Israel, Fear not,
for I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by name; When thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee -- For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy Savior
-- Fear not, for I am with thee, I will bring thy seed from the East, and
gather thee from the West; I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South,
keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the
Earth. And in the 44 Chap. v. 2, 3. Thus says the Lord that made thee, and
formed thee from the womb, who will help thee. Fear not O Jacob my servant; for
I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I
will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine Offspring. And
in the 45 Chap. v. 14, 15, 16, etc. Thus says the Lord, the labor of Egypt,
and merchandise of Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come
over unto thee, and they shall be thin, they shall come after thee in chains,
they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make
supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee, and there is none else,
etc. v. 23, 25. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every
tongue shall swear. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and
glory. In the 49. Chapter throughout, and especially from the thirteenth Verse.
Sing, O Heaven, and be joyful, O Earth, and break forth into singing, O
mountains, for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his
afflicted. But Sion has said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me: Can a woman forget her sucking child, etc. Thy children shall
make haste, and thy destroyers, and they that made thee waste shall go forth of
thee. Lift up thine eyes round about and behold, all these gather themselves
together, and come to thee; as I live, says the Lord, thou shall surely cloth
thee with them all as with an ornament, and bind them on thee as a Bride does,
etc. Then shall thou say in thy heart, who has begotten me these, seeing I
have lost my children and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and
who has brought up these? Behold, I was left alone, these where had they been?
etc. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers,
and they shall bow down to thee, with their face toward the earth, and lick up
the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, for they shall
not be ashamed that wait for me. One might transcribe the whole Prophet, for he
is filled with these great promises. Read the 54, the 61, the 65, the 66, and
above all the 60 Chapter, where he speaks to Jerusalem, Arise, shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; For behold, the
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord
shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles
shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up
thine eyes round about and see: all they gather themselves together, they come
to thee; thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy
side. Then thou shall see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and
be enlarged, because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, and
the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, etc. And the sons of the
strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee;
for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. All
the rest of the Chapter has the same strength, and the same sense.

These Oracles cannot be applied, to the resettling of this people after the
Babylonian captivity.
We ask, when these Oracles have been fulfilled? was it, when this people was
brought back out of the Babylonian captivity? But how can any man speak at this
rate? what extravagant figures would these be? Because this people rebuilt the
City of Jerusalem, and the Temple, and formed a petty State in Syria, under the
Maccabees; could any one say, that their. Empire should be as large as the
whole world, that all the Kings of the earth should pay them homage, that their
children should be without number, etc? Besides, have not all these Oracles a
Character of spirituality, which shows us, that God promises to give the Jews
light, knowledge, holiness, righteousness? Thy people also shall be all
righteous, says the Prophet. But it is well known the government of the
Maccabees was not of this nature. It Is therefore certain, yea, it is owned by
all that are able to pierce into the spirit of the Prophets, that all these
blessings have relation unto the times of the Messiah.

Let any one tell us, what blessings the Nation of the Jews has received by
the Messiah? These Oracles have not been accomplished since the coming of the
Messiah.
For almost two thousand years, this miserable Nation is scattered throughout
the Earth, it is the excrement, the curse and offscouring of all; it sighs
under a long and cruel captivity. Matters shall they then go off thus, the end
of the World will come; the Jews shall perish in their miseries! If this be so,
certainly all these Prophecies are cheats; the Holy Spirit has deceived this
Nation, all their Oracles are false, and God has born them up with vain hopes
for this is trifling with God and men, to say, that these promises were
accomplished in that small number of Jews, who were converted to Christianity:
When those Jewish Christians were so bad Christians, that they only served to
found a cursed heresy, and sect; which has born the name of Ebionates and
Nazarens.

'Twill without doubt be said, that the Jews shall have the fulfilling the
these great promises, through their return and calling, which will be at the
end of the World. Indeed it is a Position in true Christianity, that the Jews
shall be called again. A thousand Oracles (some of which we have cited) promise
this. The Miracle, by which God does preserve this Nation, proves it, as I
think most irresistably. For lastly, it is a thing that has no example, and
cannot be imagined, that God should for two thousand years preserve this
people, scattered among other Nations, yet without mixing it self with them, or
learning their manners, their Religions, their fashions, which all other
dispersed Nations do. This plainly speaks, that God preserves them for some
great work. Now this being supposed, that the Jews shall be converted, if
presently after, the World shall end, and if neither the present Jews nor their
posterity do enjoy the glorious advantages that are promised to them, how shall
they see the effects and accomplishment of so many Oracles?

Here are infinite millions of souls of Jews, which perish for seventeen
hundred years together, only a small number of this people shall be saved in
the last years of the World. Is this enough to answer those great Idea's,
raised by the magnificent promises made to this Nation?

The Messiah was promised to the Jews and hitherto he has only brought evil
upon them.
Besides, we must observe, that the Messiah belongs to the Jews, he was promised
to the Jews; this Nation from its very original has been fed with the hopes of
the Mesiah's coming, as of such a good, which was too great to be described. At
last he comes, and this people (instead of seeing those great promises
accomplished) sees their Temple burnt, their capital City razed, their Service
abolisht, their posterity dispersed throughout the world, and made the
execration and contempt of mankind. Thus the Messiah, the glory of their
Nation, brings them nothing but shame, desolation, and infinite miseries, which
have no parallel in any other people. All the advantage they have is, that at
the end of the world, some thousand of Jews shall be converted, and escape the
being damned. If this be so, I confess that I understand nothing in the
Providence and Oracles of God.

There must therefore come a time, that shall be the reign of the Messiah and
the Jews, in which this Nation shall be exalted (as has been promised them)
above all the Nations; they must reign in their Saints, Prophets and Apostles.
Otherwise I am bold to say, that all the Oracles given to this people are
cheats, and were given only to be a snare to them.

But some will say, all these glorious promises have been accomplished in the
Church, These Oracles have not been accomplished in the Church taken from among
the Gentiles.
which has been gathered among the Gentiles. It Is she, who has enlarged the
cords of her tents; whose children have been called from all the parts of the
World. To her must be applied every thing which is said, to make the Church
great and glorious. But do they no perceive, that in the Oracles before us, the
Gentiles are evidently distinguished from the people of Israel: Israel rules
over the Gentiles; the Nations must rejoice in her light: All Nations must come
day and night unto mount Sion, and to the City of Jerusalem. The Kings of the
Gentiles must be her Protectors, her nursing Fathers; Sion must suck their
milk; Sion must be served, the Gentiles must serve her. In a word, let all
these Oracles be viewed, and it will be seen that the people of Israel must be
the ruling, the chosen, the Holy people, and that the Gentiles must be made
happy, because they shall be incorporated into this Israel.

Besides this, how can this thought be entertained, that all the terrible
threatenings, that have been denounc't against the earthly Jerusalem, (and
against the people of the Israel, according to the flesh) have been accomplished
in the literal and strict sense, upon her and her children: and that the
promises of grace and glory have not, must not be accomplished, but only
typically in those foreign Nations, with whom she has really no communion. I
should as soon choose to say, that some advantageous promises made to the
French were fulfilled, because they were made good to the Spaniards: Jews, and
Gentiles have always been in a direct opposition: the grace promised to the
one, is not the grace belonging to the other. 'Twas foretold to Israel, that
God would scatter them in his anger, and disperse them throughout the Earth,
that they should see sad days, in which they should be without a King, Hos. 3.4.
and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. This has been fulfilled in the letter,
and strictest sense. At the foot of these threatenings (which are in almost
every page of the Prophets) we like wise read of great and emphatical promises
of resettling, return, of a glory, a reign, and of an Empire. The threatenings
have had their accomplishment upon the Jews, and shall the promises have theirs
only upon the Gentiles? This is not probable at all. And that certain calling
of some; Jews, which (they say) must be at the end of the World, is not
sufficient to salve the veracity of God.

We need only consult the 63 Chapter of Isaiah, where the present State of the
Jews in painted in such lively colors, that it is not possible to mistake. But
they rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit; Cha. 63.10.
therefore he was turned to be their enemy and fought against them. Behold
their sin, it is the sin against the Holy Ghost; this is to be well observed. To
vex the Holy Spirit, to quench the spirit, to sin against the Holy Ghost, to do
despite to the spirit of grace, are the same thing in the style of the new
Testament. And here Isaiah fore-tells, that this people in their Apostasy from
God, will vex his holy spirit, i.e. will sin against the Holy Ghost. This is
exactly the sin with which our Savior reproaches them, in the 13th of Matthew.
It Is an unpardonable sin, that is not forgiven either in this World, or in that
which is to come. That Generation which was contemporary with Jesus Christ,
has been punished with eternal torments; their crime was never pardoned to
them; yea, their children bear their iniquity in the wilderness, for forty
years. See, in what language the Prophet paints out the punishment, which the
Jews lie under at this day. v. 17.
Why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy
fear? The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while, our
adversaries have trodden down thy Sanctuary. We are thine, thou never barest
rule over them, they were not called by thy name. Here we have 1. The dismal
hardening into which God suffered them to fall. The present state of the Jews
foretold in an admirable manner.
Why have thou made us to err from thy ways. 2. Their long expulsion and exile
out of their own Land; the people of thy holiness have possessed it but a
little while; our adversaries have trodden down thy Sanctuary. 3ly The total
abandoning of this nation by God; We are as those among whom thou bear uo
rule (so the French version) 4ly And lastly, the continuing impiety of this
Nation; Thy name is not called upon by us (so the French version.)
Nothing of all this agrees to the Babylonish captivity, it was not long, it
lasted but 59 years, it was not attended with Induration; on the contrary, this
people was so touched with this terrible correction, that after that time they
never returned to that Idolatry, which had brought such great punishments upon
them. And those records which we have concerning their conversation in their
captivity, (as the books of Ezra, Nehemiah and Esther) inform us, that they
repented very seriously, and in their captivity did not partake of the
impurities of the Gentiles; It cannot therefore be said, that God did not bear
rule over them, and that his name was not called upon by them during this
captivity. It Is therefore the present captivity of the Jews, which the Prophet
describes here.

But what says the afterward, and as a consequence of this captivity, I will
mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, v. 7,
8. After the present state of the Jews, God promises them all glorious estate.
according to all that the Lord has bestowed on us: and the great goodness
toward the house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them according to his
mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses. For he said,
surely they are my people, Children that will not lie, so he was their Savior.
If the Jews have nothing else to look for, but the conversion of some thousands
of them who shall not be damned; could it be said, that the goodness is great
that is bestowed upon the house of Israel, and that God will deal with them,
according to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses? If we compare the whole
Nation, which for almost two thousand years was to be loft, would such a
conversion deserve to be counted any thing?

Above all, we must take notice in this 63 Chapter, that the six first Verses,
represent in a magnificent manner, the bloody victory of a Conqueror. Who is
this that comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is
glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength, I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine
apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the wine-fat? I have
trodden the wine press alone, and of the people, there was none with me: for I
will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the
day of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. And I
looked, and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to
uphold: therefore my own arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld
me. And I will tread down the people in my anger, and make them drunk in my
fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth. Ordinarily this
passage is interpreted of the Passion of Jesus Christ, and I do not oppose that
it should be applied to it by a pious allusion.

The victory over Antichrist fortold in the 63 of Isaiah. and in the 19th of
the Revelation.
But I much wonder that none has discryed its true meaning, and that none has
perceived that the same event exactly is foretold here, and in the 19th of the
Revelation from the 11th verse to the end. It Is so plainly the same thing, that
the expressions are in a manner the same. It Is clear that the Holy Ghost
alludes to this passage of Isaiah, when he says, Revel. 19.^5.
And he treads the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.
The figures are the same, borrowed from war, slaughter, combats, and bloodshed.
So that without doubt, the same thing is signified in both places: Namely, that
great victory that the Lord Jesus must gain over all the enemies of the Church;
(before the period of the thousand years.) An unbloody victory, and which must
be gained by the sword of his mouth, i. e. his Word: But it is represented under
the figure of war, according to the custom of the Holy Ghost, who paints out
spiritual victories, with colors borrowed from temporal ones.

Now I would fain know, for whom this victory discribed by Isaiah, must be
gained? Without doubt, it is on the behalf of the people of the Jews; it is to
the Jews that he speaks, the year of my Redeemed is come; and presently after
follows that which we have cited, I will mention the loving-kindnesses of the
Lord, etc. which belongs to the people of the Jews, and cannot belong to any
other. It Is therefore for the Jews, and on their behalf, that the great battle
in the 19th of the Revelation, shall be fought; 'twill be to get a crown for
them, and to raise them upon a Throne. Therefore this Nation is not in so great
an error, as men have hitherto imagined upon the subject of the nature of the
reign of their Messiah.

It is certain, that it must advance their Nation to very great glory. But they
are mistaken. 1. In that they have not owned the Messiah in his state of
Humiliation, and will not, till his glorious Appearance. 2. They doubtless
mistake in the nature of their Kingdom, fixing thereto too much of what is
Temporal; whereas it shall be very Spiritual, and not at all consist in
commanding over Nations, to assemble them for War, to receive of them Tribute
and Subjection.
It will rather consist in this, that this Nation shall be the most glorious of
any in the World, the most zealous, the most Holy, which shall give Pastors,
and it may be, Governors to all other People.

In this we have the true reason, why in the book of Revelations there is
nothing formally spoken of the Recalling of the Jews. It would have been a very
surprising thing, that the Holy Ghost should have omitted one of the most
considerable events of the Church, in a book of Prophecies, containing the
History of it. So our Interpreters would willingly find it every where, and
really can find it but in very few places; The reason is, because it is only to
be met with in the 20th Chapter of the Revelations, and in the 11th Chapter of
that Book. The Kingdom of the Messiah and of the Saints, which is spoken of in
those places, is that Kingdom which is to be given to the Holy People,
according to the Prophecies of Daniel; for in the style of the Prophets, there
is no other Holy People, but the People of Israel: So that the Jews are to be
the principal part of the fifth Monarchy.

This is the Kingdom that was promised to Jesus Christ by the Angel, who
foretold his birth to the B. Virgin. God will give him the Throne of David his
Father. I would feign know how that Oracle has been accomplished. The converted
Gentiles, of whom Jesus Christ has been King for sixteen hundred years, are
they the Kingdom of David; while the Jews, who are Children and Brethren of
David, are the avowed Enemies of this Kingdom? It may well be said, that Jesus
Christ has received a Kingdom, whereof that of David was the figure; but that
does by no means satisfy.

But what does the Answer of our Lord Jesus Christ to his Apostles signify?
They demanded of him, I. Christ promised his Apostles to re-establish the
Kingdom of the Zews.
Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom again to Israel? Jesus replied, by
remitting them to another time; It Is not for you, says he, to know the Times
sand Seasons, which the Father has put in his own Power. If the Kingdom should
never be restored to Israel, why does not our Lord tell them so? and why does
he hold them in suspense? if the Kingdom of Israel be nothing else than the
Calling of the Gentiles and our Christian Church, why does he refer them to a
longer time; saying, that God has reserved to himself the knowledge of that
Time? that was a thing should be effected within a few years in their own time,
before their eyes, and by themselves, Lastly, why has he commanded us to pray
daily, Thy Kingdom come, since that Kingdom is already come? for by that
Kingdom cannot be understood the eternal Kingdom of Paradise, where Jesus
Christ, so far as man, is only the first Subject. They say, it is the Kingdom of
the Father we pray for, i. e. of the Heavenly Paradise, the Eternal Kingdom.
But we need only read what follows in the Lords prayer, to be assured that it
must be understood of a Kingdom upon earth. Thy Name be hallowed, Thy will be
done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. That clause on Earth, as in Heaven, is
common to all three Petitions. Thy Kingdom come upon Earth, as it is already
come in Heaven.

It Is reasonable to think, that God has reserved a time for the Kingdom of
grace, which has not yet 12-ken place.
So great a difficulty have these Gentlemen, the Antimillenaries, to conceive a
Kingdom of God upon earth; and for my own part I find as great a one, not to
conceive it. How can we reconcile it to the wisdom and goodness of God, to have
abandoned and forsaken the World, thorowout all the duration of it, without
preserving a certain time in that duration for himself and his own Kingdom? Now
when was it, that God did reign in the world by his Kingdom of grace? It was
not in the first World before the Flood, where wickedness prevailed to that
degree, that obliged him to destroy it by the Deluge. It was not in the Time
from Noah to Moses; for in those Ages Idolatry sprung up, increas't and
multiplied. Much less in those Ages from Moses to Jesus Christ; for the Devil
reigned every where, oftentimes not excepting that little corner of the Earth,
which God had reserved to himself. It is not from the Appearance of Christ to
that of Antichrist; for saving about one hundred years, since the Emperors were
Christians, Paganism has always been uppermost, and the prevailing Religion.
It cannot be since the birth of Antichrist; for the 1260 years of his reign,
are the Empire of the Beast, and of the Dragon; and this will lead us even to
the end of the World, according to these Gentlemen. And the course of the World
will be finished, and God and his Kingdom of Grace have found no place in it. I
confess, that in all ages God has saved some persons, but that is not to
Reign; for Truth and Grace have never yet ruled, and been uppermost. They never
had the Empire, the number, and the multitude of their side. The number of
wicked and worldly men has always carried it. How much more reasonable then is
it to conceive, that God, after having abandoned six periods to the World and
the Dragon, has at least reserved one seventh to himself, wherein Truth and
Grace shall rule and prevail, whereas in the other preceding they have been
suppressed.

The conversion of the nations and of the Jews, shall form the Kingdom of
Christ.
I find nothing more odd and singular than the Hypothesis of these Gentlemen;
They acknowledge that all the Nations, hitherto under Infidelity, shall be
converted; St. Paul has expressly said it, in the eleventh Chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans; according to them also, the Jews are to be converted.
Behold the fairest Empire of Grace which can be imagined! why should we make it
fall as soon as it is raised, and make the World it self to end soon after? Is
it not more reasonable to conceive, that God will preserve the Church in that
glorious state for several ages, to enjoy as it were the fruit of his Labors,
and see the Intelligible World completed, and brought to its perfection.

Since the Jews and the fullness of the Gentiles are to be brought in to J.
Christ, as all the World grants, is it not reasonable, that in that period of
the reunion of all People, that they who have been an holy People, to whom we
owe the Patriarchs, and the sacred Oracles; for observe it, there is no one
book of the N. Testament, any more then of the Old, but was made by a Jew; is
it not just, I say, that that Nation should then have the Pre-eminence above
all other Nations? There is then, in my opinion, a Kingdom of God to be
expected, and this Kingdom is that of the Messiah, the Kingdom of the Jews, The
Reign of the Messiah, which is not yet come; for to speak properly, we cannot
say that Christ has hitherto reigned upon Earth: His party as yet has been in
no place or part of the World the prevailing ruling Party; the wheat has been
always buried in the Tares; The Kingdom of the Jews, promised by the Prophets
so often, and in so many different manners. And these two Kingdoms, that of the
Messiah, and that of the Jews, are to take place at the same time. It Is true,
we may compute the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, from the fall of the Kingdom
of Antichrist: and it is manifest, that from that point God will reckon the
thousand years. Nevertheless the Kingdom of Christ cannnot be well said to be
come, till all Nations shall be converted; now the Jews are not to be converted
till the last of all People.

J. Christ has not yet reigned upon earth, in a proper sense.
Joseph Mede has a reflection thereupon, which I confess I am pleased with.
It Is but a Conjecture, but I find it to be very well framed: It Is this, that
the Conversion of St. Paul, a zealous and bigoted Jew in the highest degree,
is the Type of the future conversion of the whole Nation. 1. He was a great
zealot for the Law, and a furious Persecutor of Christianity. The Jews are also
very zealous for Moses, and irreconcilable enemies to Jesus Christ. 2. Paul
was converted, not as other men, The conversion of S. Paul's a type of that of
the Jewish nation.
by the bare preaching of the Gospel, and the sight of Miracles, but by the
glorious appearing of Christ to him from Heaven. It Is likewise very probable,
that the Conversion of the Jews will not be in an ordinary way, as by
preaching; for the Hearts of that People are under an invincible obduracy. So
that it is likely that Christ will convert them by some glorious and surprising
apparition, and will appear clothed with those Characters the Prophets have
given him, that they may no longer be able to disown and refuse him. 3. Those
who accompanied St. Paul saw indeed the Light, but Christ did not appear to
them: the Gentiles and Christians, who shall then be, may have some part in
that glorious Apparition, but it may be shall not see it all. 4. Paul was
instructed by way of inspiration in all Mysteries, as soon as Jesus Christ had
appeared to him. The Jews shall have their minds enlightened, and the vail which
is now on their hearts shall be taken away; and on a sudden shall see clearly
into the Oracles of their Law and Prophets. 5. St. Paul was the last of the
Apostles who was converted: the Jews will be called the last of all People. 6.
Paul after Conversion was the most zealous of any: the Jews when converted
shall be the most affectionate and zealous of all Christians. 7. St. Paul
converted, becomes an Apostle, and the instrument of the conversion of the
Gentiles: the converted Jews shall complete the conversion of the most remote
Pagan Nations, in the utmost corners of the World.


This doubtless is that admirable return of the Jews, and their advancement to
the Sovereign dignity of the Church, which Ezekiel represents in the 37.
Chapter of his Prophecies, under the Image of a Resurrection. This also is that
which St. Paul calls Life from the Dead. Ezekiel saw a large Valley covered
with dead Bones. These dead Bones are the House of Israel, says the Holy
Spirit. They came together, and sinews and flesh came upon them, and the Spirit
of the Lord entered into them. The Prophet speaks farther, in the following
Chapters of the Victories this renewed Israel should obtain over Gog and Magog,
the Enemies of the Church. After which in the nine last Chapters, he makes a
figurative description of this Kingdom of the Jews, and of the Messiah, and of
the Church perfected upon Earth, under the Emblem of a magnifick Temple,
whereof he describes the Parts, the Apartments, and several Buildings, the
Altar, Priests, Victims, the Land of their possession, and a new division of
it. This in my opinion is the mystery of the nine last Chapters of Ezekiel,
Chap. 45.
which have appeared so unintelligible to most Interpreters. I conclude this
Chapter, by saying, that the Papism makes it hereby plain, that it is the true
Kingdom of Antichrist, by their cruel persecution of the Jews.

That Mystery of iniquity comprehends nothing of the Mystery of Godliness, and
sees not that God has reserved that Nation, to manifest in them his greatest
wonders, and consequently that they ought not to be destroyed by flames, as in
Spain, and in those Countries where the inquisition is in force.

CHAP. XVIII.
The third Head of Arguments for the future Kingdom of Christ and the Church.
So many Prophecies which concern the complete Victories of Jesus Christ, the
Holiness of the Church, and its perfect prosperity, which have never yet been
accomplished.

MY third Head of Arguments, to show, that we are to expect a Kingdom of Christ
upon Earth, are the Prophecies not yet accomplished, and which cannot be
fulfilled, unless such a Kingdom do come. This would be a large subject, and
yield matter for several books, and those good ones too, whereby the World
might be informed of several things they know not. But this Book is larger
already then I would have had it. I shall therefore content my self briefly to
show, and endeavor to persuade, that there must be a Time which we have not
yet seen, for the fulfilling of several Prophecies, which were delivered on
purpose to describe the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and give us the Characters
of it.

The most ancient Oracles are not perfectly fulfilled.
The most ancient and most remarkable of all the sacred Oracles is that, which
God himself pronounced to Adam, The seed of he Woman shall bruise the Serpents
head, and ^hee shall bruise his heel. It Is agreed that the Head signifies
Empire and Power. So that Prophecy imports the victory of Christ and his
Children over the Kingdom of the Devil, and that they shall destroy it. Now
this is a promise not yet accomplished in the History of the Church; we have no
age wherein it could be said, that the Kingdom of Christ prevailed over that of
Satan. It is an observation we cannot mind too much, that we must carefully
distinguish here between Life, and Kingdom or Reign. Life signifies existence;
but Reign imports actual Domination and Rule. Jesus Christ, it is true, in every
age has had a party subsisting in the World, and in that respect has been
victorious over all the attempts of Satan, whose end was to destroy him: and
it is some kind of victory over an Adversary, to prevent him from attaining his
end; but this can never be called a full and complete Victory. It is necessary
to that, to be the predominant prevailing Party, whereas that of Jesus Christ
has always been oppressed, either by Paganism, or by Mahometanism, or by
Antichristianism. Such a time therefore is to be expected, wherein the party of
true Christianity shall prevail over and utterly extinguish the Empire and
Kingdom of the Devil.

All the nations of the earth have not been blessed in Christ. 49 Genesis
The second Prophecy is that which was given to Abraham, In thy seed shall all
the Nations of the Earth be blessed: which signifies, that the righteousness of
Christ, shall spread it self over all Nations; to the same sense is that other
Prophecy, Shiloh shall come, and to him shall the gathering of the People
belong. It Is true, almost all Nations have been invited to the knowledge of
God: many have been actually brought to it; but many have not yet been called,
much less converted. And among those Nations which have been converted, the Bad
has so far exceeded the good, that it cannot be truly said, that the multitude
of the People belong to Christ. Nevertheless, I am confident that shall come to
pass, and that the number of the Good shall one day as much exceed that of the
wicked, as now the number of the wicked does that of the Good.

But that these Oracles are not accomplished, we shall be fully convinced, if we
proceed to those Prophets who were sent on purpose to Characterize the Kingdom
of J. Christ. Among whom the Prophet Isaiah shines as a Sun among the Stars. It
would be necessary to make a just Commentary on all his Book; to make it plain,
that what he foretold is not come to pass: For most of his Prophecies have for
their object this glorious and blessed state of the Church, in its last Period.
But to be as short as may be, I shall reduce all that he has said of the
Church under the Messiah, to these two Articles. 1. Its Righteousness and
Holiness. 2. Its Peace and Prosperity; and shall make it evident, that neither
the one or the other have been fulfilled to that degree which they ought to be
fulfilled, according to those Prophecies.


For the Righteousness and Holiness of the Church, Chap. 11.6, etc. Prophecies
of the future Holiness of the Church.
the Prophet Isaiah says, That the woolf shall feed with the Lamb, and the
Leopard lie down with the Kid; the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them. The Cow and the Bear shall feed,
their young ones shall lie down together; and the Lion shall eat straw like the
Ox; And the sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp; and the weaned
Child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den. They shall not hurt nor destroy
in all my holy Mountain: for the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. Behold the most ravishing and fair
description of it that can be seen. It amounts to a return of the State of
Innocence. It Is plain the Prophet borrowed his Characters of it from that Happy
state of the first Man, wherein he was filled with the knowledge of God and his
Righteousness. And during which the brute Animals were innocent, kind, and
gentle, as himself. It Is also undeniable, that this Prophecy respects the days
of the Messiah.

But I would fain be told sincerely, whether this oracle has ever yet been
accomplished? in what time, in what place, in what age or generation of the
world? It will doubtless be answered, that it was in the Apostolical Church,
and in the time of the Apostles; for only in that newborn Church could it be
said, that there was none to hurt or destroy, that Wolves, and Lions, and Bears
became Lambs. The Prophecies which fortold the great holiness of the Church are
not accomplished.
Yet even in that newborn Church Wolves and Lions might be found. But it
cannot be of that Church which the Prophet there speaks, because he speaks of a
time, when the knowledge of the Lord should fill the Earth, which then it did
not. For this great Holiness, this admirable union is represented to us only in
the Church of Jerusalem Moreover, we see not that this lasted for any
considerable time. There is a great deal of difference between the Church, in
the first Chapters of the Acts, when Believers had but one heart and one soul;
and the Church we read of toward the end of the same Book where were false
zealots who opposed St. Paul for having preached to the Gentiles. Besides,
Isaiah speaks not of the Holiness of some particular persons, but of a general
Sanctification. That a time shall come, when Righteousness shall universally
cover the societies of men, as the waters cover the bottom of the Sea. I know
well enough that the Prophets do oftentimes make use of the figure called
Hyperbole. But in truth, the Hyperbole here would be forced, and carried too
far, and would not be intelligible, if the Holy Spirit should so describe the
Church of the first Ages, where we some Incestuous, some Adulterers, some
Heretics, Schismatics, Apostates, and all sorts of crimes. We need but read
the writings of St. Cyprian, De Lapsis.
to be assured, that in the good days of the Church, there were already things
very horrid and abominable. Every one may think as he shall please, but for my
own part, I expect from this prophecy, such an age wherein Holiness shall as
much exceed vice, as vice now does exceed and overtop virtue.

We read also in the same Prophet, Chap. 32. v. 15, 16.
that the Spirit shall be poured from on high upon us, and the wilderness be a
fruitful field, and the fruitful field a forest. Judgment shall dwell in
the wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the fruitful field. The work of
Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. An high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be
called the way of Holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be
for those: the wayfaring men, Chap. 35.8, 9.
though fools, shall not err therein. No Lion shall be there, nor any ravenous
beast shall go up thereon, Chap. 54.13, 14.
it shall not be found there. All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and
great shall be the Peace of thy Children, thou shall be established in
Righteousness. Chap 59.21, 22.
This is the Covenant I will make with you, says the Lord, my Spirit that is
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, or out of the mouth of thy seed, nor of thy seeds seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth and for ever. And they shall call them, Chap. 62.12.
the Holy People, the redeemed of the Lord; and thou shall be called, sought
out, a City not forsaken. Chap. 31.33.
Add to this the Prophecy of Jeremy. This shall be the Covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel; I will put my Law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People,
and they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of
them unto the greatest, says the Lord. These Prophecies speak four things; 1.
They paint out the State of the Church under the Messiah. 2. They describe it
by a more then ordinary Holiness, that shall every where be poured out. 3. By a
persevering Holiness to which no return to vice, or no apostasy shall succeed.
For it is said, the Spirit of God shall not depart from them, or their seed, or
seeds seed. 4. Lastly, This is a Holiness, whereof the Jewish Nation is to have
the chiefest part. For it is to that People, and concerning them that God speaks.


Now I demand, whether any one can show me that age of the Church, wherein such
an Holiness, which answers the Idea given us by these Prophecies, can be found,
where we shall meet with a persevering Holiness? If the Church for any time
has been pure, that has not continued from one Generation to another; yea,
let such an Age be named, wherein the Israelitish Nation did partake of this
Evangelical Holiness. Has not that People been always obstinate, unbelieving,
Enemies to Christ, without faith in respect of men, as well as in reference to
God? we must than open our eyes, and confess, that there shall be a Kingdom of
Holiness, such a one as shall fill all Nations, and not subject to those
unhappy Revolutions, that by corruption have changed the face of the Church
from year to year. Thus far Righteousness and Holiness.

Next we are to consider the Peace and Prosperity of the Church, Glorious
Prophecies of the peace of the Church.
whereof the Prophets speak more largely, and in an higher strain, because
under the Images of Temporal Prosperity, they set forth that Spiritual
Prosperity, which we have spoken of under the names of Holiness and
Righteousness. Concerning Peace, Is. 2.4.
the Prophet Isaiah says, that they shall beat their swords into
Plough-shares, and their Spears into pruning hooks: that Nation shall not rise
against Nation; neither shall they learn war any more. Concerning its future
Prosperity, he says, c. 41.18, 19.
The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
unstop't, the lame shall leap as the Heart, and the tongue of the Dumb shall
sing for joy. I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the midst of
Valleys. I will make the wilderness a Pool of water, and the dry Land springs
of water. I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar, the Pine, the Myrtle, and
the Olive Tree; and I will set in the desert the Fir Tree, the Pine, and the
Box-tree together. c. 49.10, 11.
They shall not hunger, nor thirst, neither shall the heat or Sun smite them:
for he that has mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water
shall he guide them. I will make all my Mountains a way; c. 55.12, 13.
and my high ways shall be exalted; ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth
with peace. The Mountains and the Hills shall break forth before you into
singing, and all the Trees of the Field shall clap their hands. Instead of the
Thorn, shall come up the Firr-tree; and instead of the Bryer, shall come up the
Myrtle-tree: and it shall be to the Lord for a Name, and for an everlasting
Sign, that shall not be cut off. The Sun shall be no more thy Light by day,
neither for brightness shall the Moon give Light unto thee; Is. 60.19.
but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory.
The Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self: for the
Lord shall be thine everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning shall be
ended. Is. 54.9.10.
This shall be as the waters of Noah unto me; for as I have sworn; that the
waters of Noah shall no more go over the Earth, so have I sworn that I would
not be wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee: for the Mountains shall depart, and
the Hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall
the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee.

What is meant by all these prophecies.
All these and the like Expressions, which we read in the Prophets do import. 1.
A profound Peace, which shall never be interrupted by war. 2. Plenty and
Abundance of all sorts of Goods. 3. An Exemption from all Evils. 4. Such a
Prosperity, where are Riches, and Plenty, and Joy. 5. A Felicity that is not to
be interrupted by the return of Calamities.
This must be fixed, that all these Prophecies respect the State of the Church
under the Messiah: for as to those who endeavor to turn them to another sense,
and apply them to the Temporal blessings of the Jews, I cannot consider them as
Christians, but reckon them enemies to Christianity.

These promises have not been accomplished.
We must therefore search for the accomplishment of these Prophecies in the
History of the Church: that no such thing can be found there, the
Antimillenaries themselves confess. For they constantly tell us, that these
thousand years of Rest are altogether inconsistent with the orders of Divine
Providence, and the condition of the Church, which is appointed to be always
calamitous and afflicted upon Earth; that Sorrow and Suffering, Persecution and
the Cross, do inseparably belong to it; that we must judge of what is to come
by the History of what is past. It Is true, in the three first Ages, the Church
was under the Cross of the Pagans, in the fourth under that of the Arrians, in
the fifth she began to sink into superstition, and has remained overwhelmed
with it during the whole reign of Antichrist. Where then shall we place those
happy days the Prophets promise? It Is trifling to apply those promises of Peace
and Tranquillity to certain little intervals of Quiet, which from time to time
the Church has had in some places; for it would be a very ill use of
Rhetoric, and a strange force put upon figures, to represent so imperfect a
calm, by such terms as give us an Idea of the greatest and most perfect
Prosperity imaginable. Moreover, the Prophets speaking of an endless Peace, to
which no affliction shall succeed, it must be such a one as is like the waters
of Noah, which shall never return to cover the Earth, it must be a peace so
firm, that though the Mountains be overthrown, shall never be changed.

These Prophecies not accomplished by the spiritual graces which the Church has
received
We may not say, that all this has respect only to spiritual Graces, the
stability of God's Covenant, and the Joy of the Faithful. I will not deny but
the Holy Spirit may have some reference thereto; but it is false, that those
spiritual favors (in that weak degree wherein we see them at this day) can
comprehend the full signification of such great Expressions, which clearly
import a peace in reference to Earth as well as Heaven. Add to this, that
though these Promises should not be applied but to Spiritual Blessings, there
must yet be a new Kingdom and a new Age for the fulfilling of them; for we have
never yet seen any, wherein Spiritual Peace and invisible Graces have been so
abundantly poured out, to satisfy in any measure the greatness of such
Expressions.

CHAP. XIX.
The fourth Head of Arguments, for the reign of a thousand years, are the
Types. Four Types of this Period; the Principal is the seventh day of the
Creation, which is not an immediate Type of Eternal Rest, but of the Peace of
the Church on Earth.

I Come now to the fourth Head of Arguments. viz. the Types. They as well as
the Prophecies are Pictures and representations of future Events. They are not
vain speculations of Divines: and the Great wits that look upon them to be so,
approach very near to Impiety. It Is very certain, that God has been pleased to
shadow forth his Mysteries in certain dispensations of his Providence. Saint
Paul teaches us, that Hagar the servant of Sarah, Sinai a Mountain in Arabia;
were Types of the legal Institution. As Sarah and Sion were also Types of the
Covenant of Grace. That Melchisedeck was a Type of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
in general, that the Law had shadows, of which the substance is to be found in
Christ. The Types therefore are no false or deceitful Light whereby to judge,
in case they be rightly used. Now I pretend, that all the Types make for the
Reign of Christ before the end of the World.

We may find a great number of them. The Captivity of Israel in Egypt was
certainly a Type of that bondage under which the Church should groan, The
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, figured that of the Church from under the
bondage of Antichrist.
during the Reign of Antichrist. The Antichristian Empire is therefore called
Egypt. Now after the Israelites were come out of Egypt, they entered into
Canaan, the Land flowing with Milk and Honey; which did certainly prefigure the
happy State of the Church, after all her enemies should be subdued. It Is
supposed, that the Land of Canaan was the Image of that great and Eternal
Dwelling, to which the faithful should be transported, after the last
judgment. I deny it not. But you must know, 1. Type; the Rest in the Land of
Canaan.
that in the Old Testament the descriptions of the future Blessedness of the
Church, by Emblems, Types, Figures, and metaphorical resemblances, have not
their immediate relation to Eternal Blessedness. St. Paul has told us, that
eye has not seen it, nor ear heard it, nor can it enter into the heart of man
to conceive: and consequently it is not that which the H. Ghost would
immediately describe, because he would that we should be kept ignorant of it.
So that those Descriptions have an immediate relation to the flourishing State
of the Church in the last Period; and by analogy they may be transferred to the
blessings of Paradise.

2. Type; the Rest after the Babylonish captivity.
The Captivity of Babylon was doubtless another Type of the Captivity of the
Church under Antichrist; and therefore the Papacy is called the City of
Babylon: and after that Captivity, the People returned to their own Land, and
lived peaceably there. So doubtless the Church being delivered from the bondage
of Antichrist, shall return to its rest here on Earth.

3. Type; the Rest after the persecution under Antiochus.
The Persecution of Antiochus was also a Type of the Persecution which the
Church has suffered under Antichrist. Now after the three years and half of
that Persecution, the People of the Jews returned to the possession of their
Temple, and rose to a more flourishing condition than they had ever been in
since their coming out of Babylon.

4, Type; the number seven, which is so often mentioned.
I leave these and many other Types which may be found, to insist on one which I
find to be very evident and convincing. It Is that which may be found in the
number of seven. 'Twill be granted that this is a mysterious and sacred number,
and that it signifies perfection: It Is on this account it is mentioned so often
in the Apocalypse; There are seven Churches, seven Stars, seven Candlesticks,
seven Spirits, seven Lamps, seven Eyes, seven Horns of the Lamb, seven Plagues,
seven Trumpets, seven Thunders, seven Viols. So in the Books of Moses, the
seventh day is Holy; and the seventh year, was the year of Rest; and the seven
times seventh year, was the great Jubilee; The living Creatures entered into the
Ark by sevens; the firstborn of every beast remained seven days with its Dam;
the male Children were to be seven days old, before they were circumcised; the
Candlestick of the Tabernacle had seven Lamps; a Woman after her uncleanness, a
Leper after he was cured of his leprosy, were to be purified for seven days. It
would be too long to recite all the Examples of this nature which might be
mentioned; for the number seven is almost every where to be found.

For what reason is it so? who sees not that this number signifies Completion
and Perfection? and of what can it signify the Perfection, if not of the
greatest work of God, that for which all his other works were wrought, that is,
the Church? If then the 7th the be every where sacred, why is not the seventh
Period, reckoning from the creation of the World, also sacred, and a Period of
perfection? It will be said, the number seven is sacred because of the seventh
day, which was consecrated to the service of God: but why has God chosen the
seventh day to be holy, and a day of rest for man? is it not plainly to
signify, that the seventh day, or the seventh Period of the Church, shall be a
time of Holiness, Tranquillity; and Peace?

The 7th day of the Creation, a type of the seventh period of the Church.
The seventh day, they farther tell us; was consecrated to Rest and Holiness;
because God created the World in six days, and rested on the seventh. Behold,
now we are at the Spring Head, and can rise no higher; but here also we shall
find an excellent Type of our seventh Period. It Is here I would ask with
boldness, Wherefore God created the World in six days, and rested on the
seventh? Why did he not employ five days, eight, ten, or twelve in the work of
Creation, but precisely seven? Certainly, the infinite wisdom of God will not
permit that he should do any thing without reason. Here is this reason, because
he intended to hold the Church in an imperfect state for six Periods of Time,
laboring in that great work for which he made all others, and causing it
successively to pass through seven degrees.

We must not say that the Sabbath, the seventh day, on which God rested, was
the image of that great Rest into which the Church is to be brought, after he
shall have completed it upon Earth; for the seventh Period ought to bear
proportion to the other six; whereas Eternity has none with Time, much less
with one day. So that the seventh Period cannot be the Eternal Rest. It must be
a Time that bears proportion to the six preceding Periods; As then after six
days of labor, God finished his work, by a day to which he affixt Holiness and
Rest as its Characters, there must likewise be for the Church, after six days
of sins and sufferings, one last day, that is to be distinguished by those two
Seals; Peace and Holiness, upon Earth. Not but that the Sabbath is also a
figure of the Eternal Rest; but it is because these thousand years of Peace and
Holiness on Earth, shall be the image of that perfect Peace and Holiness which
the Church shall enjoy in Heaven; and so it is a mediate Type of the Eternal
Rest. These thousand years, I confess, have no proportion with Eternity, but it
is not to be a Type in the duration of the Time, but in respect of the state of
Peace and Holiness, Images of the Celestial Peace. So these thousand years may
be Types of the Heavenly Glory: but the seventh day could not be the immediate
Type, because of what was said before. Because the seventh day of the Creation
is a Period of the same nature with the six preceding, and which by consequent
ought to bear proportion to them.

It will be said, that It Is easy to make these suppositions, hut difficult to
prove them. But I have a sure Method for the proof of this, when the several
parts of a System support one another, even therein they are proved: in an
Hypothesis that is false, there is always some part inconsistent with it self.
Now I will make it evident, that the seven days of the Creation, do perfectly
answer to the seven Periods of the Church; that in every one of those days such
works were wrought, which were exact Emblems of the Events which have happened,
and of the things which were done, in every Period of the Church, answering to
every day. If I make it evident, that in the six Periods of the duration of the
Church which are past, we have seen those things which were painted out by the
six days of the Creation; so that the first Period contains that which was
figured by the work of the first day, the second Period that of the second, and
so of the rest; if, I say, I can do this, methinks it will then be proved, that
what was done in the seventh day of the Creation is the image of that which
shall be done in our seventh Period of the Church. The parts of this System do
admirably support one another, the System it self will be its own proof. This
is that I am about to do, by giving here the full explication of this
wonderful Type of the Creation, in which we may say, that God has concealed
some of his greatest mysteries under an adorable obscurity, which has never
hitherto been perfectly cleared.

CHAP. XX.
The Type of the Creation has not been well explained: We must make a System
of it. Principles to establish that System; the division of the duration of the
Church into seven Periods, answering to the seven days of the Creation.

The Type of the Creation is difficult to be expounded.
IT must needs be, that the Mysteries of the Type of the Creation are not
obvious, and easy to be explained, since from the time they have been inquired
into, they have not hitherto been perfectly discovered. There are many things
sensible therein, that appear at first view, and are obvious to all the World;
as the Light of the first day, signifying spiritual Illumination; the Sun of
Righteousness, in the Sun that was created on the fourth day. Adam as the
figure of the second Adam. Eve, the Image and figure of the Church. There needs
no labor to search into those Mysteries, for the Holy Scripture does clearly
enough instruct us therein. But for the doubtful Mysteries, those especially of
the second, third, fifth, and sixth days, I know not whether they have hitherto
been met with.

A judgment upon the Type of the Creation, as explained by Placaeus.
There has nothing appeared on this subject so handsome and ingenious, as that
which has been done by Placaeus. However I may be confident, without being
rash, that he has not discovered the true Mysteries thereof. The first fault
he is guilty of, is, that he did not make a System of those Mysteries, and of
the seven days of the Creation. This is the reason why he does not maintain his
ground, but runs presently into things improbable. There is nothing more lively
or more taking than that which he has conceived concerning the first three
days. In the first he finds the Illumination of man being ignorant: in the
second the work of Justification of man being a sinner: in the third the
Sanctification of man being unholy: and it must be confessed, that so far nothing
could be more happy, and argue greater strength of Imagination. These are
excursions out of the way, it is true; but they are ingenious. They are
perticularly furprizing to those, who know that this great man always addicted
himself to disputations against Heretics, which he managed after the way of
the Schools, than which nothing does more dull the fancy, and cause a barren
imagination. When he comes to the fourth day, it is no longer so, and he is not
so happy, he cannot but see there Jesus Christ and the Church, in the Sun and
Moon, as all others pretend; but he is sufficiently puzzled to make the
connection between this fourth day and the preceding ones. He is yet less happy
as to the two last days. He would have the Birds and the Fishes of the fifth
day to signify the service of God; that the Fishes do signify good motions of
the heart, and the Birds visible and outward acts. In the Beasts of the field
created on the sixth day, he finds the Christian virtues. All this is forced,
and however he stretches his fancy to get through it, yet he does not succeed.
It may be said, without doing him any injustice, that except the three first
days of the Creation, there is nothing at all well conceived in that work of
the Types.

The other fault of Placeaus, is that he took for the object of his Type of the
Creation, Man to be delivered from misery, Homo a miseria liberandus: whereas
it is certain, we must look there for the Church to be established, Ecclesia
Constituendae. This is the great work of God, next to his own glory; it is the
chief and only end of his works. 'Twas for the sake of the Church that he
created the World, and made all things; about this he has been employed from
Everlasting, and will be so to Everlasting. It Is the Spouse of Christ, it is his
other self: we ought to find her every where, as God has given her some place
in all his works. Particulars were made for the Church, and not the Church for
them. Therefore we ought not to look for the Type of the deliverance of Man in
the Creation, any farther then we can therein find the Church, in which men are
re-establisht and delivered. I therefore find my self obliged to proceed
farther in this inquiry, finding nothing at all in that which has been said by
others, wherein I can perfectly acquiesce. But that I may not fall into the
same faults which I have observed in others, it is necessary that good
Principles be laid down, and a well connected System made.

I. Principles there is certainly some mystery in the work of Creation.
I. The first of our Principles is this, That every thing is full of mysteries
in that great work of the Creation. I suppose this principle, because it will
be generally granted by those for whose sake I write: as for those who will
have nothing to be found here, but the Letter and the History, they deserve not
to be considered. If their opinion be no Heresy, it comes very near one: it is
unworthy of a Divine, and I am bold to say, unworthy of an understanding
Christian. He must very little have studied the Divine conduct, who does not
take notice of its depth, and that incomparably more is concealed than
discovered. Methinks the Jewish Cabalists have a good remark upon it; they say,
God has made three Worlds for one another: and that he has put his Signet and
his Seal upon the superior World, in such a manner and with such a force, that
its impression descends to every thing, even to the lowest in this inferior
World. I leave the proof of it to men of Contemplation, and am not at leisure
for the present to make it out, but it seems certain and apparent to me, God
himself in his essence is that exemplar and original seal, he has every where
imprinted the seal and image of his essence; in the World of Glory, in that of
Grace, and in the lowest also that of Nature: therefore it is that the Divine
image appears every where, and every where the same; for it is the same seal
has penetrated all those different things. Deus solet uno sigillo varias
materias signare, said Renchlin. There are three sorts of People who read the
Scripture. The simple and ignorant, who are altogether so; studied and deep
Divines, who only are truly Divines; and those who are but superficial ones.
The first are the Lambs, born to eat the grass which grows on the surface of
these fields: I do not impute it to them as a fault not to penetrate farther.
But I know not how to pardon those pretended Divines, who tear out the very
heart of the sacred Scriptures, in the Mysteries and Divine depths therein, and
leave it nothing but a bare superficies. Let us give but two Examples of this
Maxim of the Cabalists, that God has imprinted a seal of himself and of his
Mysteries, which reaches to all matters. The first is that of the Trinity of
Persons in a unity of essence, whereof we have a lively image in the World of
Spirits, by the essence, intelligence, and will, which is found in every
Spirit, whether separate or united with matter: and another lively image of it
in the three dimensions of matter, longitude, latitude, and profundity, which
are three distinct dimensions, and yet make but one only and most simple
extension. The other instance is in the mystery of the Incarnation, and the
personal union of the Divine uncreated nature with the humane; a mystery
whereof we see a lively image in the Incarnation of those souls which God
unites with matter. These things deserve very well to be thought of. Besides,
that the Holy Ghost has sufficiently declared himself concerning these
Mysteries. He has shown us one part, that we may imagine the rest. He says,
that the light of the first day, is the image of that Action, whereby God
causes the light to shine in the darkness of our ignorance. The Scripture
calls our Lord the Sun of Righteousness, by allusion to the Sun in the Heavens;
a second Adam, with reference to the Creation of the first Adam; the marriage
of Adam and Eve an image of Christ and his Church. Heaven is called Paradise,
by allusion to the Earthly Paradise. In a word, there are an hundred things in
the work of Creation, whereof no natural reason can be given: there must be
some therefore which are mysterious. Why (for instance) did God create a Chaos,
before he put in order the several parts of the world? why he rank't them all
in six days time, no more or less? why he created not the Sun but on the fourth
day? why the Plants were created before the Sun? and why the Fishes and Brids
before the Beasts of the field?

2. Principle; the sensible World an image of the intelligible.
II. Our second Principle is this, that the sensible World is the image of the
Intelligible; and this Intelligible World is not a World of Platonic Idea's.
It Is in the Church, where every thing is to be met with by analogy that is
found in the sensible World. There is an Heaven, there is an intelligible Sun,
which is God, there are Spirits which are the intelligible Stars, there is an
Earth, Plants, Fruits, and also wild Beasts, enemies of this World. The
Scripture leads us by the hand in these paths, by the continual use of figures
borrowed from the sensible World, to signify those parts of the intelligible
one. From this principle we may conclude, that the creation of the sensible
World is the image and Type of the Creation of the intelligible World. And
consequently that the Creation of the World is the Image of the different
degrees, by which God has made his Church to pass through, to bring it to
perfection.

3. Principle; God divided the times into several periods.
III. Our third Principle is this, that in every System composed of Events,
there are several Periods to be considered. This is the Spirit of the Prophets;
God divided the times into seven Trumpets, seven Seals, and seven Viols. Upon
this Principle it cannot be doubted, but the seven days of the Creation are as
many Periods of this Intelligible World, through which they are to pass to
arrive a perfection.

4. Principle; the same images ought every where to signify the same mysteries.
IV. My fourth Principle is this, that the H. Ghost ought constantly to fix the
same Mysteries to the same Images in all the parts of the Creation. For
Example, the Waters should every where be the same thing, and signify the same
Mystery; which is a Principle that was not at all heeded by Placaeus. In one
place he makes the Waters to be Sin; in another to be the Passions, well
ordered and gathered together in Christ. In a third place, it is meant of the
Heart sanctified and serving God; it is a fault that is most obvious, and which
alone is sufficient to prove that he had no System, that they were only loose
thoughts which shined separately, but did not mutually illustrate each other.

The fifth Principle; the mystery must not destroy the Letter.
V. I will add a fifth Principle, that in this Mystery we should not, as some
do, destroy the History. There is nothing more dangerous, if a man gives
himself the liberty to deny matters of fact, and to turn all into pure
allegory, there then remains nothing certain in the Scripture. Libertins may
then doubt of the whole, and we shall no longer be able to distingnish those
places, where the relation must be taken according to the Letter from those
where the Letter shall be false, and where there is nothing but mystery. We
must suppose the Type to be in the matters of fact, if the Events prove false,
the Type is null.

These Principles being laid down, I thus form my System. The Creation of the
sensible World, being an Image of the Creation of the intelligible World, we
must divide the time, in which God has formed the Church into seven Periods;
but those seven Periods are not precisely distinguished, each of them to contain
a thousand years, as has been formerly supposed, from those words of St.
Peter, a thousand years with the Lord are as one day. There is some difficulty
in the division of those Periods, and after having well condered it, I divide
them thus. 1. The first Period is from Adam to Abraham, which is almost two
thousand years. 2. The second is from Abraham to Moses, which is between four
and five hundred years. 3. The third Period is from Moses to Jesus Christ:
which it between fourteen and fifteen hundred years. 4. The fourth is from
Jesus Christ to the rise of Antichrist: that is between four and five hundred
years. 5. The fifth is from the rise of Antichrist to his Completion, that is
between five and six hundred years. 6. The sixth is from Antichrist complete to
his Destruction, which is between seven and eight hundred years. 7. The seventh
and last is from the Ruin of Antichrist to the end of the World, this will be
about a thousand years.


The great inequality that there is between these several Periods as to their
duration, ought not to make any difficulty. We must not reckon things according
to the time, but compute the time according to the things. The time wherein
nothing is done is reckoned for nothing. The Periods of the Church must be
computed by the great changes which have therein happened. Now it is exactly in
these six points, that the Church has changed its face. From Adam until
Abraham there was no change in the face of the Church; by Abraham it began to
assume a new form, she had then Sacraments; and the distinction of People
began. By Moses the Church took another form, quite different from the
Preceding. By Christ she became incomparably more perfect. By the rise and
growth of Antichrist, the Church was entirely changed. By Antichrist's being at
the Height, the Corruption was also at the Highest; and at length by the fall
of Antichrist, she must put on another face.

This being supposed, that the seven Periods answer to the seven days; we must
observe in every of those Periods such Events, and such things as answer to the
several works of the Creation done on every day; so that what was made on the
first day, may resemble that which happened in the first Period of the Church:
and that which was done on the second day, be the image of what happened in the
second Period, and so of the following. If we find a perfect correspondence
between the Copies and the Original, between the Types and the things which we
pretend were represented by them, we shall have reason to believe, that it is
some what more than a sport of wit, or the effect of Fancy and Imagination,
which is the next thing we are to consider.

CHAP. XXI.
The Explication of the Mysteries signified by the Chaos, by the Creation of
Light, by the separation of the Waters, and by the Creation of the Plants. The
first days of the Creation, and the three first Periods of the Church.

I Intend not to stay long upon what is well known, and has been said already:
and therefore shall speak but little of the Chaos. We see plainly, that this
confused Mass, without form and void, which was properly nothing but a vast
Abyss, covered with darkness, was the image of that sad estate, to which sin
had reduced the World. It was without form, spoiled and defaced by sin, for it
had nothing at all of beauty. It way confused; for every thing there was in
disorder, that which should have been above was below; God was blasphemed
instead of being worshipped, and self-love had placed the Creature on the Throne
of God. It was empty and void; for nothing that was good could be found in the
World. It was covered with darkness; for a stupid ignorance might be observed
to reign there. This was the state of the World; out of which the Church was to
be drawn, as a new World, God was doubtless the Creator of unshapen Mass; and I
doubt not but we have an account of its Creation in the first Verse. In the
beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. It Is not, as is commonly
thought, an abridgment of what is more amply and by particulars related
afterward. It Is the Creation of the Chaos, called Heaven and Earth, because it
possessed that place which the Heaven and the Earth now do possess, and because
it contained the matter of them. This is plain enough by the second Verse, and
the Earth was without form and void, etc. It Is the description exactly of that
Earth, which he was speaking of in the first Verse.

Why it is not said expressly that God created the Chaos.
Nevertheless, though God created the Chaos, it is but implicitly said so; for
Moses says not, that God made the Earth without form and void. Which may
import, that though God do govern that which we call the wicked World, and that
enormous Mass is not formed without his Providence; nevertheless, he will not
be acknowledged the Author of it, because he is not the Author of Evil. God
appoints no certain day to this Chaos, which is the Image of the corrupted
World. 1. Because this Chaos has its reign and extention during the whole six
days of the spiritual Creation; Why the Chaos has no assigned day.
for it is the perpetual fund whence God draws all the parts of the intelligible
World, which is his Church, as the Chaos was the fund from whence by little and
little God drew all the parts of the Universe. 2. God assigns it no particular
day, because it is the Empire or darkness, into which the Light and the day
cannot enter.
He produced not the Chaos by a Fiat, saying, let there be a Chaos, as he
created the Light; because the Word of God does not make the wicked World by
its efficacy; this World produces it self by its own corruption. Lastly, he
gives it not his Approbation, he says not, and God saw that it was good; he
blesses it not, as he did the works of the six days, because God sees nothing
good in the carnal World; instead of blessing it, it is under his curse.

Waters in all the Type of the Creation signify People.
In the mean time, the Spirit of God moved upon the waters. Waters in the
Language of the Prophets and of the Types do signify People. This we have
observed before; and is too well know to need to be proved. This we must
remember that Waters signify People in all the Type of the Creation. The Spirit
of God moved on the waters of the Chaos, to prepare that matter, to bruise and
reduce it into little parts, and to introduce the dispositions to receive that
form which he intended to give it. God intending to draw his Church out of the
World, and from among the Nations, has presided over them by a wise
providence. What is signified by the Spirits moving on the Waters.
If he had entirely abandoned the World to it self, after the entrance of sin,
it had been impossible to draw thence the intelligible World. It would have
fallen into a total deprivation of Light, Equity, and Goodness; and into that
Spirit, which the Scripture calls, a spirit of slumber, past feeling, and a
reprobate sense; But the Spirit of God has presided over these Waters; he has
preserved and kept up in the World some fragments and remainders of Light,
Conviction, Conscience, the knowledge of God, the distinction of right and
wrong, and the apprehension of future rewards and punishments. We may see every
where this motion, this action of the Spirit of God on the Waters, that is, the
People of the World, even to the approach of the fourth Period, which is that
of our Lord Jesus Christ; God was then about to give a Form to the Church, to
this intelligible World, which (properly speaking) it never yet had. Then he
caused in the World such things as would dispose to this great work; he
prepared his matter by the study of Philosophy, which drew men from that
stupidity, that before rendered them incapable of receiving the Light of Truth.
He dispersed the Jews, who carried every where the knowledge of the true God,
and made an infinite number of Proselites. He caused the Bible to be turned
into the Greek Tongue, which then spread and prevailed in the World; and guided
the Heathen insensibly to a dislike of their Idols, and their Religion. This is
the Mystery of the Chaos.

The Mysteries of ^he first day of the Creation.
In the first day, God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. The first
day answers to the first Period of the Church, which lasted from Adam until
Abraham. 1. By what did the first day begin? by Light. Jesus Christ the Messiah
is the Light, which inlightens every man that comes into the World: It Is from
him that the Creation of the intelligible World takes its beginning; from the
first moment that Light has shined in that famous Oracle; The seed of the
woman shall bruise the Serpents head. The first day has two parts, It was
Evening, and it was Morning; the Light of the Evening was the first, but the
dimmer of the two, the Light of the Morning was the second, but the clearest.
The knowledge of Christ began by that Oracle, The seed of the woman, etc. The
Period ended in Abraham, by the same Light, viz. the knowledge of the same
Messiah, but proposed less obscurely in that prophecy, And in thy seed shall
all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. This was the Morning; for the Light
began to increase. 2. By whom was this Light produced? By the Word of God, His
Eternal Word. He said, i. e. by this Eternal Word, by his infinite Wisdom, by
the fruit of this understanding that God manifested to Adam and Abraham, this
Light to conduct and guide them. 3. This Light preceded the Creation of the
Sun. This knowledge of a Redeemer was given to the first World, before the
Messiah its Sun was produced, before the Word was incarnate. 4. The Light which
appeared on the first day is originally the same with that which was put into
the Sun: The seed of the woman revealed to Adam, is the same with the word made
flesh many ages after. 5. The Light of the first day was doubtless obscure, its
seat in the illuminated Waters, was not yet well prepared; the Earthly parts
were not separated, and the Light could not have a very free passage through
that thick matter. In the first Period of the Church knowledge was but dim,
People were not yet well disposed to receive it, it had not yet entered into
them. 6. After all, to what purpose was the Light of the first day? to
enlighten a Chaos, The Church before Abraham was without form.
and an unformed Mass. To what end also was the Knowledge of the first Period,
from Adam until Abraham? to inlighten a Chaos, and that Chaos was not only in
the World, but in the Church it self; for then the Church had no form; she had
no Pastors, no Priests, no Flocks, no Assemblies, no Solemn days appointed, no
Sacraments, no Holy Scripture, no Discipline, no Censures. Every head of a
family was both Prophet and Priest of his own house. Here was an Idolatrous
family; there just by was another family where God was worshipped. It was a true
Chaos; so the Jews say well, that the Church was two thousand years, be thohou,
in the Chaos, and two thousand years under the Law. The Patriarchs made their
Feasts as they thought fit, on what day they pleased, and invited whom they
pleased. 7. God made the distinction between the Night and the Day. He
separated the Light from the Darkness; for he is the Author of that distinction
that is between the World and the Church, between the good and bad; yet it is
not said that he made the night, because God is not the Author of Evil. 8. He
made this distinction from the first day; because from the beginning of the
World, and in all ages, there is a separation between those who are of God, and
those who are of the Devil. 9. He made that separation of that Light and
Darkness, of the Night and the Day, but he blessed it not; he says not, and He
saw that it was good. In like manner, God does not bless and approve the
separation of the World from the Church, tho he has made that distinction,
because it carries with it in respect of the World, curses, crimes, and
miseries. 10. He began with the Evening, which belongs to the Night, and is
apart of it, because he draws light out of darkness, and begins the composition
of the Church by some degrees of imperfection.


The Mysteries of the second days; the first division of the People.
In the second day God made the Firmament, or Expansum, that it might separate
the waters from the waters. Here begins the second Period of the Church, which
lasted from Abraham until Moses: let it be remembered that Waters always
signify People, it is necessary it should be so, that the Spirit of God may be
uniform and like unto it self. If the Waters are People, the work of separating
the Waters must signify the division of the People. 1. In the first day the
Waters were mixed and confounded both among themselves, and with the Earth: so
in the first Period from Adam until Abraham, the People were confused and mixed
one with another. God had not yet made choice of any certain peculiar People.
Among all Nations there were some Holy, and some who were Enemies of God, were
to be found every where. 2. But in the second day, God began the work of the
separation of the Waters, i. e. that in the second Period should begin the
distinction of the People. He took Abraham, drew him out of his own Country,
set him apart, and gave him the seal of his Covenant. 3. But this work of the
division of the waters was effected in two days, this work of the division of
the People is also accomplished in two Periods; from Abraham unto Moses, from
Moses unto Christ. 4. The separation of the Waters made on the second day was
but imperfect, God only separated the Waters which were above, i. e. the
Clouds, from the Waters which were beneath, i. e. the Seas. The distinction of
People in the second Period, from Abraham unto Moses, was but imperfect; for we
must not imagine but that God did preserve some Elect from Abraham unto Moses,
besides those in the family of the Patriarchs, to think he did not is injurious
to the mercy and wisdom of God. There were then at that time some of the
faithful scattered in all places. But as the family of Jacob became a great
People, so by little and little the Spirit of God withdrew from other Nations.
From the time of Moses there was yet some little remainder of that Spirit among
other Nations; as is evident by Balaam, who was, it is true, a very wicked man,
but yet was not a false Prophet. But when the race of Abraham became a great
People, and had a Country apart to themselves, then the Spirit of God withdrew
altogether from the other Nations, and then was made a perfect division of the
People. 5. In the separation of the Waters that was made on the second day, the
Waters which were above, i. e. the Clouds, were nothing in comparison with
those beneath, i. e. the Seas. So in the second Period, wherein was a division
of the People, the superior Waters, which were the family of the Patriarchs,
were nothing in comparison with the rest of mankind. And hereby we have the
reason why in that great work of the Creation God would make so much account of
so small a matter as the Clouds are in nature, even to assign a particular day
for their creation. It Is because they were the Image of the families of the
Patriarchs, who were very inconsiderable for their number, but yet were to make
so great a figure in the History of the Church. 6. The superior Waters were
little or nothing as to their extension, but had this advantage above the
waters which were beneath, that they were near Heaven: so the families of the
Patriarchs little in number had this advantage, to be admitted to secret and
special communion with God. He conversed with the Patriarchs, as a man with his
intimate friend. 7. The Clouds are lifted up to so high a place by the rays of
the Sun, and the attraction of Heaven: the families of the Patriarchs were
advanced to that glory of being distinguished from all others, by the mercy of
God. 8. The Clouds are the fruitful springs, whence proceed the rain, the
fruitfullness and blessing of the Earth: God would make the Patriarchs the
springs of blessing to the Church, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed. Therefore the Jews did always in their prayers make mention
of the Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 9. God put the Firmament,
or Expansum, between the upper and lower Waters; it is that large vacuity of
Misery and sin, which separates the World from the Church. 10. From the Clouds
it is easy to fall into the lower Waters, but the Waters which are beneath rise
with difficulty to the Clouds. The fall is easy from the Church to the world
and sin, but it is difficult to pass from the world to the Church.


In the third day was made a perfect separation of the waters, i. e. that work
of the separation of the Waters was finished, and this is the reason why God
blessed not the work of the second day. We must not look for a Mystery in that,
or imagine that on that account the waters must needs signify sin. God blessed
not the work which he had not yet finished. We find no Benediction in the second
day, but to make amends we meet with two in the third: for those words, and God
saw that it was good, are repeated twice; it is because in that third day we
find two works, the completing the separation of the waters is one, and the
Creation of Plants another; and God said, Let the waters that be under the
Heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry Land appear. It Is
an image of a perfect separation of People into one place, i. e. into the
World, which is a great and vast abyss, full of darkness and impurity: into
that I say, let the Waters run, there let the reprobate People gather together.
2. And let the dry Land appear: the holy People who till now had appeared mixed
with the men of the World; let them appear separate from all other People. 3.
The World is represented by the Sea, the Church by the Earth and dry Land, so
since that time in the style of the Prophets, and of Preachers, the Sea has
always been an image of the World. The Ark of Noah, which floated on the waters
of the Deluge, is the Emblem of the Church beaten by the waters of this world.
Jesus Christ sleeping in the Ship which was tossed by a Tempest, is the Image of
the Church, where Christ seems to be asleep while she is beaten and afflicted
by the World. 4. The Sea is the habitation of Monsters, the world is the
residence of the wicked, where we may see Monsters of covetousness, of
Ambition, of Impurity, and violence. The greatest Animals upon Earth are not to
be compared with those which live in the waters. There are disorders to be
found in the Church, it is true; but they are nothing in comparison with those
which are in the world. 5. The face of the Waters is barren, and produces
nothing, whereas the superficies of the Earth is fruitful. The World does
inwardly nourish Monsters, and in its outside produces no solid good, or true
virtue. 6. The Earth is the Synagogue of the ancient Church, she is incompast
with waters on all sides, the People and Nations of the World. 7. She is
continually afflicted by them; and if we regard the violence of the waves, one
would think she should be overwhelmed. 8. Nevertheless she stands her ground,
and remains victorious. 9. The waters of the Sea have no settled foundation;
they are always in motion, but the Earth is fixed, the People of the world are
unstable, always changing. The Church is a Land that has its roots in the
foundation of the world, in God's eternal decrees. 10. The Sea makes a
frightfull object, especially in a Tempest; but the Earth presents our eyes
with an agreeable diversity of Mountains and Hills, of Trees and Flowers, of
Fruits and Blossoms. The world is a deformed spectacle by reason of its
disorders, and uniformity of its faults. But the Church shows us an agreeable
diversity of gifts, greater and less, of virtues, of good works, of good
Fruits; for the Plants and Fruits are to the Earth, that which virtues and good
works are to the Church. The Plants have their roots in the bowels of the
Earth, they appear on the outside of it, they serve for ornament and use, and
need the kind influences of Heaven to make them grow. All this agrees well to
the virtues and good works of the Church. God said, Let the Earth bring forth
Grass, as if the Earth produced Plants by its own virtues: it is because he will
have us act, as if our virtues proceeded from our selves, as if we were the
Authors of 'em, that he might thence take occasion to reward us for 'em. But
among the Plants of the Earth which are thus good and useful, there are some
hurtful ones, some poisons among the good Fruits of the Church, there are some
wicked works. 12. Lastly, the nearer any Land is to the Sun, the better its
Fruits; the nearer any Church to God, the Sun of Righteousness, the better its
works.


CHAP. XXII.
Explication of the Mysteries of the four last days of the Creation,

THe fourth day answers to the fourth Period of the Church. 1. In this fourth
day God created the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. It Is easy to take notice
therein of Christ the Sun of Righteousness, of the Church who derives all her
Light from the Sun, and the of Teachers of the Christian Church, which are as
the Stars of the Intelligible World. This alone should open all men's eyes, and
make it evident, that we ought to search after the Church throughout the whole
work of Creation: for this is the Key of the whole Mystery. This fourth Period
is from Jesus Christ unto the birth of Antichrist, i. e. till the middle of the
fifth Century. In this Period we have the Sun of Righteousness, so Jesus Christ
is called by the Prophets, and Evangelists, John c. 1.
The Light which inlightens every man that comes into the world: So by the
Apostles, The Father of Lights, in whom is no shadow of change, James 1.
i. e. a Sun that has no Tropicks. The Parrallel of the Moon with the Church
The Parrallel between Jesus Christ and the Sun is too manifest and easy to
make, to be long insisted on. I will rather speak somewhat of the Moon, which
is an admirable Emblem of the Church. 1. The Moon has all her Light from the
Sun; The Church has all her Beauty, Holiness, Virtue, and Glory from I.
Christ. 2. The Moon retains some spots, and those considerable ones, in her
borrowed Light; the Church has many great and plain defects in her virtues. 3.
The Moon has no fixed Light, she often changes, and is sometimes more and
sometimes less enlightened. The Church remains not long in one state, she is
always rising or falling, she loses some of her Light, and then receives
more; she defiles herself, and then is cleansed, and has Periods almost as
regular as those of the Moon. 4. The Moon, besides her constant and periodical
decrease, suffers Ecclipses, and sometimes total ones. The Church, besides her
ordinary declensions, is sometimes so Ecclipst, as not to appear, which is more
or less according to the inundations of Herely, or the corruption of manners.
5. It Is not the fault of the Sun, but of the Moon it self, that these Ecclipses
happen, she plungeth herself in the shadow of the Earth, and so deprives
herself of the Sun. The Ecclipses of the Church by the loss of Truth or virtue
happen in like manner, because she falls into sin and falsehood, which is shadow
and darkness, the product of Earth and Hell. Your sins have separated between
God and you. 6. When the Moon is Ecclipst, she becomes black, and puts on a
frightfull Aspect; when the Church suffers herself to lose the Light of the
Sun, her visage becomes deformed by her disorders and crimes.


Why does not the Church appear but in this fourth Period, since she was
created from the beginning of the World? so the Moon which was a figure of the
Church, should have been created on the first day. I answer, that the Church
may also be found in the three preceding Periods: but in the first and second
day, it is a Land covered with waters. The Church is mixed and confounded with
the People of the World, and even covered and hidden among'em. In the third she
appears as a dry Land that is visible, but as yet it is but Earth, producing
Plants and Fruits. In our fourth Period, she is advanced from the quality of
Earth, to the dignity of the Stars, she becomes a Moon, a luminous body, which
may be seen afar off, which spreads its rays throughout all the world.

Stars of six magnitudes images of the six orders of Teachers.
In the fourth day there were also Stars, which are of six different magnitudes,
from the first to the sixth. In our fourth Period we have several Teachers, as
shining Stars, but they lessen by degrees. The Apostles are the Stars of the
first magnitude, Apostolic Persons were Stars of the second magnitude, their
Disciples who lived in the second Century, were Stars of the third, the Doctors
of the Church in the third Century were Stars of the fourth magnitude. Those of
the fourth Century were of the fifth magnitude. Lastly, in the fifth Century
when the good days of the Church ended, there were more Teachers, more Stars in
number, but they were but of the sixth magnitude; their Light began to be
obscured by mixing with the darkness of Superstition and Heresy. After them in
the following Ages, we see no Stars but under a Cloud, the witnesses covered
with sackcloth, Christians concealed and hidden among the multitude of those
who were sunk into error and Idolatry.

In this Period there is also another sort of Stars; viz. Confessors and
Martyrs, who shined as Stars of the first magnitude, and the common sort of the
Faithful, who are truly Stars, though but of the sixth magnitude. Lastly, in
the fourth Period, we find Planets, wandering Stars, Apostates, Iudas's, and
such as Hymenaeus and Philetus, who concerning the Faith made shipwreck.

Mysteries of the 5th day.
We proceed to the fifth day of the Creation. The fifth Period is that from the
rise of Antichrist to his Completion, from the fifth Century to the eleventh.
In the fifth day God said, Let the waters bring forth Fishes abundantly, (or
moving Creatures which have life,) and Fowl that may fly above the Earth in
the open firmament of Heaven. Behold, two sorts of Creatures, Birds and Fishes,
and they are to be Emblems of men, who should rule in the fifth Period of the
Church. It may be the name of Bird may prove a good Omen to some, one would
think we should find something of good there, because Birds are a kind of
Celestial Creatures; but we must remember, that in the two following Periods,
we shall meet with nothing that is good, because they belong to Antichrist. If
there be any thing good in these two Periods, it is the remnant of the fourth,
for all is evil that belongs to their particular Character. So that by Birds we
understand men of rash and daring spirits, who would pierce beyond the Clouds,
attempting to reach unto God himself, and have done violence to his Holy
Mysteries by their bold Inquiries. Such was Arrius, who would dive into the
mystery of the Eternal generation of the Son, and was there stumbled: Such was
Macedonius, who would fathom the Mysteries of the Procession of the Holy
Spirit, and not being able to effect it, made him a Creature, as Arius did the
Son. Such was Eutyches, who not being able to fathom the Mysteries of the union
of the two natures in Christ, did confound them. Such was Nestorius, who lost
himself in searching into the manner of the Union of the humane Nature with the
Divine Person, and so established two Persons in Christ; and I know not how many
more such Birds there were, men of bold and daring spirits, who did great
mischief to the Church. We need but consult History to be informed.

It Is true, among those Birds there were some whose flight was happy enough.
The fourth and fifth Centuries produced some Eminent Doctors in comparison of
the preceding. The first Doctors of the Christian Church after the Apostles
were but poor Divines, they could fly but a little way. There is more Divinity
in one piece of St. Austin, then in all the three first Centuries, Origin
excepted, who was the Eagle of his Age. But those Birds who made some happy
flights, were yet guilty of great faults, and often lost themselves by
endeavoring to go too far.

The Fish of the fifth day are Antichrist and his followers.
The other sort of Creatures are Fishes. Creatures that make their abode in the
waters, that swim and descend into the Deep; Creatures among whom there are
some of a monstrous bigness; Creatures that live upon filth and mud, and are
the lively image of the second sort of People to be seen in the fifth Period,
which is that of Antichrist rising and growing to perfection. We there see the
great Leviathan of the Abyss. Antichrist himself the Monster of the great
waters, who devours all the other Fish, and subjects them to his Government;
There we see all the followers of Antichrist, Fishes of the second order. All
these Creatures, i. e. all these men, 1. Have their abode in the waters, which
denotes a Collection of much People: they have the multitude on their side;
they reckon it their honor, they glory in it. 2. They descend into dark
Abysses; for whereas the Doctors of the fourth and fifth Century would be too
knowing, those of the following ages fell into a most stupid Ignorance; They
descend into the darkness of superstition: and as for the most part Fishes
adhere to the rocks or to the mud; so those false Doctors addict themselves to
Creatures, and rise not toward Heaven, where is the Creator.
In those times sprung up the adoration of Relics, the invocation of Saints,
the worship of Images; and even the sublime wits, who are the Birds of the
fifth Period, who fly so high by their lofty speculations, as did Gregory of
Nazianzen, and Ambrose of Milan, do sometimes fall from their elevation into
the mire of a carnal and superstitious worship, as Eagles after a flight into
the highest regions of the Air, fall down, as it were in a moment, to fix upon
Carrion.

Lastly, Fishes puddle and roll themselves in the mud and slime: a good Emblem
of that dreadful corruption into which the last ages of this fifth Period were
plunged, viz. the nineth and tenth: we have already spoken of that corruption;
and you need but look back to what has been said, to perceive how justly we
may compare the men of those Times to Fishes that live in mire and dirt.

Some will doubtless make an objection here on this account, that God is said
to be the Author of these Birds and Fishes. Which there is no reason for in the
thing represented by the Type, because God is not to be looked upon as the
Author of the Heresies, Idolatries, and corruption of the Papacy. I might
reply, that no Typical relations ought to hinder, but that God may be said the
Author of, and give his blessing to those Creatures which were good, in respect
of their natural being; he did not bless the Chaos, it is true, but it was
because that in its natural being it was neither fair nor good, no more than in
its typical relation. But if any will that the mystery be carried farther, it
may be observed, that God says, Let the waters bring forth every moving
Creature, etc. It Is the waters that immediately produce'em. To the same effect
as he said before, Let the Earth bring forth Plants. For this end, that God
would our works should be reckoned as our own, that we might receive the
rewards of them. So the waters, i. e. the multitude of degenerate mankind, are
said to produce those corruptions, and false Doctrines, that they might suffer
the punishments annexed to'em, and that it might not be imputed unto God. But
it will be said, that God blessed these works, He saw that it was good. Once
more I may ask, why should not God approve those Creatures, which in their own
natures were good; and which were typically to represent such Events as the
Providence of God would appoint for his own glory? For doubtless the false
Teachers, who corrupted the Christian Religion in the fifth Century, must come
within the decree of God, as such things whereby he would glorify himself.

Mysteries of the sixth day.
In the sixth day God made two works; 1. Insects, creeping things, and
four-footed Beasts. 2. The Man and the Woman. This sixth day answers to the
sixth Period of the Church, from the tenth Century to the Period of the Reign
of Antichrist.
These four-footed Beasts, Insects, and Creeping things cannot be thought to
signify any thing that is good; under Creeping things are comprehended
Serpents, venomous and the most accursed Creatures: among Insects, are
Caterpillars, and a thousand other hurtful Creatures: among four-footed Beasts
are Wolves, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, and Bears, all cruel and bloody Creatures,
which live upon prey. This is the true Character of the Men, who lived in the
sixth Period of the Church, which is the second of the Antichristian Empire.
There we meet with Men like Bloodsuckers, Caterpillars, Worms, devouring
Insects, that ravage, and consume, and destroy, and gratify their Covetousness
by a cursed Simony. There we meet with Doctors like Serpents and Basilicks, who
poison by their very breath, and spread the venom of their false Doctrines,
with piercing, sharpened tongues; I mean the Schoolmen, who with subtle
Arguments, whetted and set in order, as so many darts and spears, diffuse
Heresy, Impurity, Poison and Idolatry.

Moreover, we there meet with wild Beasts, bloody and cruel Men, who delight in
blood and slaughter, and glut themselves therewith, as so many Lions and
Tigers. We may there see multitudes engaged in an Holy war against Infidels;
who went to the Holy Land to conquer it, but carried with them the Lions Tooth;
for they rent and devoured every thing which came in their way. Especially may
we there take notice of those cruel Persecutors of the Church, killing,
burning, and committing outrage and massacres in all places. This should be
carefully observed, that we meet with Birds and Fishes in the fifth day;
answering to the first Period of Antichrist, or the fifth of the Church; and
some of those Creatures live upon the spoil, but do not prey upon Man. We do
not see that Birds and Fishes go out of their own Element, to fall upon men,
and destroy them. So in the fifth Period there were, it is true, some Heretics,
and a great corruption; but there was not much persecution, little blood spilt
at that time upon the account of Religion. That sort of rage began not to be
much employed; but since the eleventh Century, in the sixth Period.

Mysteries of the creation of the Man and Woman.
In the same day God created the Man and the Woman, who are the Images of
Christ, and of the Church his Spouse. The Parrallel between the first and
second Adam, and between the Woman and the Church, has been made so often, and
is so easy to make, that I need not dwell upon it; and therefore shall only
take notice, that the Type does exactly correspond with the Mystery. At the end
of the sixth day God finished his work, he then gave the last stroke to it, by
the Creation of the Man and the Woman, an Emblem of Christ and his Church, and
of their Union. In the sixth Period (near the end whereof we now are,) God will
complete his Church by the ruin of Antichrist; and bring the Kingdom of Christ
upon Earth to its perfection. This should be well remembered, that the Church in
the Type of the Creation appears under four Emblems. 1. As the Earth buried,
and covered under waters. 2. As a dry Land, above the waters, and bearing
fruit. 3. As a Moon enlightened by the Sun. 4. And lastly, as the Woman.
And our Lord Jesus appears there under three Emblems. 1. As the Light of the
first day, without or before the Sun. 2. As the Sun. 3. Under the Emblem of the
Man.
The Church in her first state, before the Law; was as the Earth under water,
she was obscure, and as it were buried among the Nations. In her second state,
under the Law, she was as a discovered Land; distinguished, and known, and
bearing fruit; but yet she was but Earth, i. e. not very considerable. In her
third state, under the Gospel, she appears as a Moon, a rival of the Sun,
imitating his Light; and therein she is more glorious than the Earth. This is
the Apostolical Church so glorious, and full of knowledge. In the fourth state,
she appears as the woman, taken out of the side of Adam, closely united with
him, being one Body and one Flesh. It Is in the last Period that she shall be
more united to Christ than before. In the fourth Period she is as the Moon, and
notwithstanding the nearest approaches of the Sun, there remain vast distances
between them. But toward the end of the sixth Period, and throughout the
seventh; her union unto Christ shall be immediate and intimate as that of a
Wife with her Husband; therefore the Church in this seventh Period is
represented as a Spouse which was to be brought to the Lamb.

On the other hand, Jesus Christ appears under three Emblems. In the fourth
Period, as a Sun, which scatters the darkness of Idolatry, Paganism, and
Ignorance, that covered the face of the Earth. This Sun is placed in the fourth
point, just in the middle of the seven, to let us know, that he is the Center
of the Church; the Sun which gives light before and behind, to the preceding
Ages, and to those which follow him. Toward the end of the sixth Period, and
throughout the seventh, he is A man; to whom God gives dominion over the Fowls
of the Air, the Fish of the Sea, and creeping things, and four-footed Beasts,
i. e. That Christ in this last Period shall be Lord and King, who shall rule
over the Birds, tame the boldest and most aspiring spirits, who mount even unto
the Heavens, he shall humble them, and keep'em within the bounds of their duty:
over the Fish of the Sea, to deliver'em from their corruption; over Creeping
things, to destroy the influence of their poison: over wild Beasts, to tame
their fierceness, and render them meek as Lambs. In the first day Jesus Christ
was figured but by a dim Light, because in the first Period of the Church, he
vouchsaf't her but a very imperfect knowledge of himself.

This methinks is the Mystery of the six days; which way well serve as a
favorable omen in reference to the seventh day, The mystery of the seventh day
of the Creation.
because every thing therein seems to accord well; what then is wanting to the
World, after the works of the six day, to render it perfect? Holiness and
Rest; and these are the two Things which God added on the seventh day.
Holiness, for he Sanctified the seventh day, and thereby the rest of the World.
Rest, for till then God had been at work, and the World in Motion. Now God gave
the World that Rest which it wanted, in that he himself rested on the seventh
day. All this is an admirable Emblem of our seventh Period, for the sake
whereof all this explication of the Type of the Worlds Creation has been
given. During the six days, God made the Church to pass through several
changes, he will bring it to perfection at the end of the sixth, by the ruin of
the Antichristian Kingdom, and by the Conversion of all Nations. What then is
wanting to it? Rest and Holiness. Rest, for hitherto she has always been in
toil and Travel. Holiness, for she has always been imperfect. We must therefore
look for a seventh Period, which shall be a Kingdom of Rest and Holiness,
wherein the Church shall no more be persecuted, either by Fire and Sword, or by
Heresy and Idolatry; wherein also there shall be a plentiful effusion of the H.
Spirit, to produce a great degree of Holiness and Sanctification among men.

This mystery shall be accomplished upon Earth.
We must not say, that the accomplishment of this Type will be found in Heaven,
where is Rest and Holiness, and that therein is the mystery of the seventh day.
I say again, that cannot be meant; because this seventh Period must be of the
same kind and order with the other six. We even now observed, that the Sun was
created on the fourth day, there are three days before, and three after,
exactly in the middle of the seven, to signify that Christ the Son of
Righteousness is the Center of the intelligible World. If he be the Center of
the seven Periods, he must certainly have an equal reference to all the points
of that Circumference. Now what relation can he have to the seventh day, if
Eternity be meant by it? In that Eternal abode Christ shall have no more the
relation of a Center, a Sun, and a King. For St. Paul tells us, that then God
shall be all in all, and Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom again to his
Father. Moreover, it is certain there ought to be a proportion between the
seventh Period, and the six foregoing ones: Now there is none between Eternity
and the duration of the Church upon Earth. And lastly, I am bold to say, that
the ancient Types were not established by God immediately, to figure Heavenly
Things, but only the Graces and Favors of God in this World, under the Kingdom
of the Messiah; You cannot show me any one of the ancient Types, which has an
immediate relation to the glories of the Heavenly Paradise. The marriage of
Adam and Eve was the immediate Type of the Union between Christ and his Church,
in the Kingdom of his Grace. It did only mediately typify their Union in the
Kingdom of Glory. By consequence this seventh day, which all acknowledge to be
Typical, must have its immediate relation not to the Sabbath of the Church in
Heaven, but to its State of Rest upon Earth.

CHAP. XXIII.
A farther Confirmation of the future prosperity of the Church upon Earth. The
21, and 22. Chap. of the Apocalypse interpreted: that in those Chapters the
Church is described as victorious upon Earth, and not as Triumphant in Heaven.

WE may not pass from the Apocalypse, without saying somewhat concerning the
last Chapters. If we needed another Head of Arguments to prove our notion of
the Reign of Christ for a thousand years, and the Triumphant state of the
Church upon Earth, before its final glorious Triumph in Heaven; we might be
furnished from these last Chapters. For they are not, as is commonly supposed, a
description of the Church in Heaven. The Prophecy of the nine last Chapters of
Ezekiel, is the same with that of the last Chapt. of the Apocalypse.
They exactly answer to the nine last Chapters of the Prophecy of Ezekiel. That
Prophet in those nine last Chapters, sets forth in a figurative manner the
condition of the Church of Israel after its restoration; their glorious
Kingdom, and the wonderful Peace they should enjoy after their return; which
return or recalling was to be after the fall of Antichrist. St. John gives an
account what the Church shall be after with relation to that Fall, after it
shall have bin accomplished; so that both these Prophets describe the Church, as
to the same Period, and the same condition. This will easily appear, if we
briefly run over that which remains of the Apocalypse. It cannot be questioned,
but that our Prophet concludes the 20th Chapter with a description of the last
day of Judgment. The war of Gog and Magog follows upon the reign of a thousand
years, to the revolt of Gog and Magog succeeds their defeat, after their defeat
there is nothing but the last day, which shall come and surprise the World in
the twinkling of an eye. This is signified by those words:

V. 11. Chap. 20.
Then I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the
Earth and Heaven fled way, and there was found no place for them. White as well
as Purple is a Royal color, and withal a Priestly; for the Priests were
clothed in white. The Holy Priest's garments on the day of Expiation, according
to the tradition of the Jews, were called Bigdei Lavan, white garments. In like
manner he that sat upon the Throne is our King and Priest. The Earth and the
Heaven fled from his face; for they shall be burnt, that they may be renewed.

V. 12. And I saw the dead small and great stand before God, etc. It Is a
description of the last Judgment, to the end of the Chapter; all this is plain.

The 21. v. 1.
Chapter begins with these words, And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth; for
the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away. The first Vision of 21
Chapt. to the 9th V. respects that which follows the end of the world.
These words do evidently allude to what he had said just before, and the
Heaven and the Earth fled away. As that was interpreted of what should happen
at the last day of Judgment; it is clear, that these new Heavens and this new
Earth must be understood in a literal, and not a figurative sense, for the new
World after it has been refined by fire. And so the description we read of
here, even to the ninth Verse, is that of eternal Rewards and Punishments. It Is
true, that which is spoken of the H. City, v. 3, 4.
of the new Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her Husband; of the Tabernacle of God with men, of his dwelling with them, and
they with him, and that God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and that
there shall be no more death, or sorrow, or crying, or pain: All this, I say,
might very well be applied to the Church as victorious upon Earth; but this
description is determined, by what precedes and by what follows, to Eternal
Glory; by that which precedes, which is the description of the last day of
Judgment, and by that which follows, which is the description of everlasting
Punishment; but the fearful and unbelieving, etc. v. 8.
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.

The 9th v. begins a new Vision.
The ninth Verse begins a new Vision, and a more particular description of the
blessed Reign of Christ upon Earth. In the same manner, as the H. Spirit, after
he had in the 13th Chapter given an enigmatical and general description of the
Antichristian Empire, under the image of the two Beasts, gives a more ample
account of it in the 17th Chapt. So having in the 20th Chapt. described the
reign of Christ, though in few words, he set forth that reign more at length
afterward, that state of the delivered Church, under the image of a great
City, called Jerusalem, as after having set out the Antichristian Church under
the image of a Beast, and of an Empire, he represents it under the Emblem of a
great City, called Babylon.

V. 9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven
Viols, full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, come hither;
I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife. It Is in all likelihood the last of
those seven Angels, who had poured out the Viols, and the same who showed unto
the Prophet the great City, the mother of Fornications. Cha. 17.1.
Then came one of the seven Angels unto me, which had the seven Viols, and
talked with me, saying; Come hither, I will show thee the Judgment of the
great Whore, that sits on many Waters. As it was this seventh and last
Angel, who had the Viols, by whom the ruin of Antichrist was effected; it does
most properly belong to him to show Babylon fallen, and Jerusalem rebuilt.

V. 10. And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain, and
showed me that great City, the Holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from
God. This is somewhat like what the Devil did unto Jesus Christ, when he
carried him up into an high Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms of the
world: what the Devil makes appear by illusion, St. John sees by vision. That
he was carried, or seemed to be carried, up into an high Mountain, makes it
plain, that the Jerusalem he was to be made see from thence, was here upon
Earth, and not the Triumphant Church in Heaven, though it be called the Holy
Jerusalem descending out of Heaven from God. She shall be descended from
Heaven, because she shall abound in Graces which come from thence: she is
called the great City, and it is the first time she is so called. It Is a
detestable name, which in all the preceding Prophecy is given only to Spiritual
Babylon. But it is on this account, that then the Church shall possess the
multitude of the Nations, as Antichristianism does at present.

V. 11. Having the Glory of God, and her Light wus like unto a stone most
precious, even like a Jasper stone, clear as Cristal.

V. 12. And had a Wall great and high, and had twelve Gates, and at the Gates
twelve Angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve
Tribes of the children of Israel.

V. 13. On the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three
Gates, and on the West three Gates. In the description of this City, we have
every thing that is rich and precious, all signifies its great Holiness,
excellent Virtues, and perfect Peace; for they are the substantial Goods and
real Treasures of the Church. It had a great and high Wall, by that is meant
Divine Protection; which shows also that it is the Church upon Earth, which is
spoken of; for the Church in Heaven has no need of walls, being out of the
reach of Enemies.

And had twelve Gates. We have observed before, that the number Twelve is
frequently to be met with in this description, and that it is a sacred number
because of the twelve Patriarchs, the twelve Tribes, and the twelve Apostles;
the Gates are the entries into this City, and so denote the recalling of the
Jews according to their twelve Tribes, from that great dispersion they are now
under. The recalling of the Jews foretold.
That these twelve Gates have a particular relation to the People of the Jews,
is plain by what follows, That on the twelve Gates were written the names of
the twelve Tribes of Israel. For by those Tribes of Israel, we may not
understand the Church of the converted Gentiles, they have a distinct place in
what remains of the description of the new Jerusalem. So the twelve Gates at
the four Cardinal points of the World, East, North, South, West, are to the
same effect as what God had said in another place, I will call my Sons from
far, and my Daughters from the ends of the Earth; I will say unto the North
give up, and to the South keep not back.

At every one of those twelve Gates are twelve Angels; These are the twelve
Apostles, called Angels or Pastors, who whether they shall be raised from the
dead or no, shall by their preaching and Doctrine guide the Jews to enter again
into the Church, and open the gate unto them. For they are here described as
Keepers of the Gates, who both open and shut them.

V. 14. And the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the names
of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. The protection, safety, and the Wall of the
Church, depends on the foundations whereon she shall be built. Those
foundations are Articles of Faith and Christian Verities, according to the Idea
of St. Paul, who says, there is but one Foundation, which is Jesus Christ; but
on this foundation some build Hay and Stubble, but others Gold and precious
Stones. ^ Cor. 3.
These precious Stones and this Gold, signify Pure Doctrine, as the Apostle
does sufficiently explain it. These are the foundations of the Church, which is
built upon Truth. The Prophet gives twelve for the number of these foundations,
because of the twelve Articles of Faith contained in the Creed; on these
foundations were written the names of the twelve Apostles; because they were
the persons who published the Gospel, and maintained those Articles of faith by
their preaching, and by their blood.

The Holy Ghost in what follows describes these foundations, and assigns a
precious Stone to each of 'em.

V. 19. And the foundations of the Wall of the City were garnished with all
manner of precious Stones; the first foundation was Jasper, the second Sapphire,
the third a Chalcedony, the fourth and Emerald.

V. 20. The fifth a Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the
eighth Beryl, the ninth a Topaz, the tenth a Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a
Iacinth, the twelfth an Amethist.

If we had leisure and time to spare, we might compare the twelve Articles of
the Christian Creed to those twelve Stones, and see wherein every Article of
Faith might symbolize with every Stone. Supposing that the Holy Spirit had
regard to the order, in which the Church has placed the twelve Articles. But I
fear lest we should herein go beyond the intention of the Holy Ghost, and
deliver things rather curious than solid; for the true design and scope of
Figures and Mysteries is lost by stretching them too far. I suppose the design
of the Holy Spirit, is only to show us in general, how valuable and precious
are the Christian Verities. They who let go those Truths unto Heretics, and
reckon the Secinian Heresies to be tolerable, are far from esteeming them thus
precious; and do not sufficiently understand the worth and excellence of Truth.
I now return-to the description of the Heavenly Jerusalem, i. e. of the Church
in its last Period here on Earth.

V. 15. And he that talked with me had a golden Reed to measure the City, and
the Gates thereof, and the Wall thereof.

V. 16. And the City lies foursquare, and the length is as large as the
breadth: and he measured the City with a Reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the
length and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

V. 17. And he measured the Wall thereof 144 cubits, according to the measure
of a man, that is, of the Angel.

V. 18. And the building of the Wall of it was of Jasper; and the City was pure
Gold, like unto clear Glass.

What it is to measure in a prophetical sense.
To measure, is to make account of, to esteem, to reckon among things that are
considerable. Wherefore in the eleventh Chapt. St. John was ordered, to measure
only the Temple and the Altar, and those who worshipped there. Not to value or
make account of any but true Believers. But for the outer Court, it was said
unto him, Measure it not, I have left it unto the Gentiles. As to the outward
part of the Church, make no account of it, for the Paganism of Antichrist and
Popery shall be there established, and shall reign for the space of 42.
Prophetic months, i. e. 1260 years. Here the H. Spirit measures the Holy
Jerusalem throughout, not only the Temple and the Altar, but the Court that was
before abandoned to the New Pagans; and not only the Court, but the whole City:
to measure the City, the Gates thereof, and the wall thereof; It Is to signify
that in this last Christian Church of the last Period, every thing therein shall
be Great and Good, worthy to be esteemed, and measured, and reckoned as things
of value and consideration. Men do not measure waste and barren Heaths, sands,
and rubbish; it is not worth the while: but Palaces, and fruitful grounds,
vineyards, and orchards, and the buildings of a City. This is the mystery of
the measure.

But observe the difference between the Circumstances of the first measure in
the 11th. Chap. and those of this second here, besides those we have already
taken notice of.

1. That the first measure reaches only to the Court and the Altar, that was
the Christian Church for the 3 first ages, as has been said; but here the
measure extends to All, and even to the City, which denotes the Primitive
Christian Church to be very inconsiderable, compared with the Church of this
last Period.

2. It Is S. John that received the Reed in the 11th. Chap. to measure the
Temple and the Altar; there was given me a Reed like unto a rod, and the Angel
stood, and said, rise and measure the Temple. But here it is an Angel that
measures; an Agent of an higher order than the Apostle.

3. Lastly; S. John has only a rod given him, a reed to measure with; a weak
Justrument and of little value: but here the Angel measures with a Golden reed.
All which sets forth the great excellence of the Church in this last period,
that it should surpass even the Primitive Church, as much as a city exceeds a
Temple, an Angel a man, or a Golden Rod an ordinary cane or reed.

The city was built foursquare; the square is an emblem of Rest, because that
figure of all others is most proper to keep firm; which signifies the
tranquillity and immutable Peace of this Church. The square also relates to the
number Twelve, which occurs so often in this description: for 12 is a square
number, that shows three on all sides. Three, a number of perfection as well as
seven, to signify that on what side soever you look upon this Church, whether
in regard of its Holiness, or Knowledge, or Peace, or Glory, she shall be every
way perfect. These are the four sides of the square, Holiness, Knowledge, Peace,
and Glory; and this Perfection she has from the number Twelve, viz. from the
twelve Apostles.

He measured the City with the Reed 12 thousand Furlongs. This is not to be
understood of the circumference of her Walls, or of their diameter, or their
Height, but of the whole Body of the City taken together, as a Cube that
contains 12 thousand furlongs, counting every thing. There are 12 foundations
which are the 12 Apostles, or rather the 12 Articles of faith. Every foundation
answers to a thousand Cubits, i. e. that every of the Apostles by his doctrine
and preaching, did increase the Church, and contribute to its building, and to
the gathering of the saints, in the same proportion, which a foundation of one
cubical foot, or therabouts, has to a thousand furlongs. This signifies the
great Increase and multiplication of the Church.

The length, the breadth, the Height of the City were Equal, that is, it was in
all accounts a perfect Cube: throw a Die where you please, it will always find a
place to rest. So shall be the Church of the last period, what ever Commotions
may happen, she shall not lose her rest, nothing shall be able to destroy or
hinder it. Interpreters have no reason to make an objection here, that a City
that is as high as large would be a monstrous pile; for every thing here is
beyond the ordinary rules among men, to signify that this Holy Society shall
not be governed as Humane societies now are. Besides this, the great Equality
of this City in all its dimensions, seems to me to denote that admirable
Equality between all the Saints, which shall take place in the seventh period
of the Church; not that all difference of Conditions shall be absolutely laid
aside; there shall still be superiors and Inferiors, Rich and Poor, some to
Govern, and others to obey; but those great distances between men's conditions
shall then be filled up by Charity and Love; whereas now they are enlarged and
widened by Pride and vanity.

Then he measured the Wall, 144 Cubits. Here is the number 144, which is sacred
because of the number 12 which is its Root; it is easy to apprehend why the
Wall is 144 Cubits, it is because it is raised upon 12 Foundations; and the wall
of the City had twelve Foundations. Build upon twelve, raise another number by
multiplying this by it self, and you make 144. for 12 is the square root of
144. Every building of the Church is raised upon the 12 Apostles, and in its
raising she is multiplied, as in building upon 12, you make 144. and these 144
Cubits are not to be taken for the same thing with the 144 thousand who were
marked, which are the whole body of the Saints. These 144 Cubits are in the
walls of the City, and not in the whole City. This wall is that which gives
protection to the City and the Church; it is Truth, and the Holy Ministry, by
whom that Truth is preached; so that the 12 Foundations are the Principal
Pastors with the Truths they teach, viz. the 12 Apostles: and the 144 Cubits
are the whole Evangelical Ministry, built upon the 12 Apostles as their first
Teachers. He measured the wall, according to the measure of a man, i. e. of the
Angel: that denotes, that the Angel in giving to a wall one hundred forty four
Cubits, founded upon twelve, has therein followed the ordinary way of
Computation among Arithmeticians, who by multiplying twelve by it self, make
one hundred forty four.

And the building of the wall was of Iaspar, and the City was of pure Gold like
unto clear glass. The distinction of men according to their different qualities
is conveniently and commonly enough made by the Emblem of Metals; men of low
and base Spirits, sunk into degeneracy and vice, are well represented by Lead.
Iron is the Emblem of Cruel and hard-hearted persons, who are void of Pity.
Brass does well enough represent such as glitter and make a show of more than
they are or have: for Brass imitates the color of gold, but is short in value.
Silver is an Emblem of those who are in some sort virtuous, but not in the
first rank. Lastly, Gold is the Emblem of such spirits as are pure, solid,
firm, and truly virtuous. This is that which the H. Ghost would teach us, that
the Church, in this last Period, shall be made up of such persons, as are of
sincere and approved piety, of a virtue that is bright and solid; therefore the
City is said not only to be of Gold, but of gold clear as Crystal.
Nevertheless, as in every Church, the Ministry ought to possess a more eminent
degree of Christian virtues than others; the wall, which signifies the Ministry
of the Church in the seventh Period, is said to be of Iaspar, and precious
stones, more valuable than gold.

V. 21. And the 12 Gates were of 12 Pearls, every several gate was of one
Pearl. We have seen how the 12 Gates signify the 12 Apostles; the Guards,
Guides and Porters as it were of the Church: we might easily discover a
resemblance between the Apostles and Pearls; but it is sufficient to understand,
that the design of the H. Ghost is to show that these 12 Men are of an
inestimable value. All the riches of the world cannot be a sufficient price for
12 Pearls, big enough to make 12 Gates of Cities: and herewith we must know,
that when the spirit of God puts so high a price upon weak men like our selves,
when he calls them Iaspars and precious stones, the Gates and Foundations of a
City, he does not look upon 'em in themselves, but considers them with that
treasure of the Gospel committed to their charge.

This Gospel is the Pearl of great Price, which when one had found, he went
his way, and sold all that he had to purchase it. This is the Treasure of which
S. Paul speaks, when he says, we have this treasure in Earthen vessels. The
Apostles, with Evangelical truth in their Breasts, are the 12 foundations, the
12 Gates, and the walls of the City. They are Every thing with this; for Truth
is every thing; and without it they are nothing.

V. 22. And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are
its Temple. This must be understood as the words of another Prophet, who
speaking of the Church in this period, says, Every man shall not teach his
Neighbor, for they shall be all taught of God; which does not import that the
Ministry shall be abolisht, but that the increase of Knowledge shall be so
great, that ordinary men might rather be Teachers, than need to be taught:
doubtless there shall be Temples to the end of the world, and places set a part
for public worship. But it shall hardly be necessary to distinguish places for
divine service, because God shall be every where served in perfection. The Lord
and the Lamb shall be its Temple. God shall dwell in them, and they in God; the
union of holy souls with God shall be most intimate and reciprocal.

V. 23. And the City had no need of the sun, nor of the moon to shine in it:
for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Here the
sun and the Moon do signify created lights which cause a succession of day and
night, and these Luminaries are Emblems of the manner wherein the light of Grace
is now dispenst. There is now a mixture of Light and Darkness, of Day and
Night, in the same Church, and in the same soul. It shall no more be thus in
the Church of the seventh Period; The air of that Church shall be always full of
Light. God shall abundantly impart knowledge to the Souls of the Saints, in a
more immediate manner, without any created Luminary.

V. 24. And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the Light of it:
and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

V. 25. And its Gates shall not at all be shut by day: for there shall be no
night there.

V. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations into it.

V. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, or
that works abomination, and a lie, but they who are written in the Lamb's
book of Life.

Here is the perfect and complete calling of the Gentiles, who shall join
themselves with the converted Jews, to compose this glorious Church. The Holy
Ghost seems to intimate, as if there should be none but the Elect, and no
Reprobates. At least, if there be any Hypocrites, that their number shall be so
small, as not worthy to be counted.

Then he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. It Is so well known that water in the
Scripture style signifies grace and the Divine Spirit, that it is needless to
remark it. Ho every one that thirsts, come to the waters; out of his belly
shall flow living waters: but he spoke of the Spirit, which they should receive
who believed on him. So that the River which proceeds out of the Throne of God,
is that vital Spring of Spirit and Grace, which God will most plentifully
dispense to this Church. It is the same River which the Prophet Ezekiel saw
coming out of the Temple: Chap. 47.
at first it was no higher then the anckels, but by little and little the
increase was such, that you must be obliged to swim to pass over it. It Is the
Emblem of that measure of Grace, which is always progressive, and in theses
last and happy days, shall flow as the Sea.

V. 2. In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the River, was
there the Tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the
Nations. This is almost copied from Ezekiel, so that we may see it describes
the same thing. Ezekiel said, that on the bank of the River, were very many
trees on the one side and the other, fruit trees, whose leaves shall not fade,
neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed, it shall bring forth new fruit
every month. This farther denotes Grace, which is our meat and drink, to
satisfy our hunger, and quench our thirst, which is the Manna in the
Wilderness, and Water out of the Rock. The fruits of this tree shall be for the
healing of the Nations. Ezekiel says, the leaf thereof shall be for medicine.
v. 12.
That Grace which shall be our food, shall also supply the use of Physic.
Every one may see here a manifest allusion to the Earthly Paradise, to its
Rivers, and to the Tree of Life that was there. To denote that the Church in
this her last Period shall be a true Paradise, where plenty and abundance of
all blessings may be met with. It Is of this reign, and of this last Period of
the Church, that the last part of the eleventh Chapter, is to be understood. We
have already seen how that Chapter is an Epitome of what shall befall the
Church. In the first part, we have a short account of the happy state of the
Church during the time of its purity. In the second, the reign of Antichrist is
described, and the last persecution which the Church shall suffer. And in the
Third, we have the glorious state of the Church after she has subdued her
enemies. This is the Prophecy.

V. 15. Chap. 11.
And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying,
the Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.

V. 16. And the four and twenty Elders, who sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, and worshipped God.

V. 17. Saying, we give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast,
and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great Power, and have
reigned.

V. 18. And the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the Time of the
dead that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy name, small and
Great, and should destroy them which destroy the Earth.

V. 19. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his
Temple the ark of his Testament, and there were lightnings, and voices, and
thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great Hail.

We have observed, that the seven Trumpets followed upon the seven seals, and
were not contemporary with them: the seven seals carry the Prophecy almost as far
as the fall of Paganism unto Constantine, the first Christian Emperor.

The seven Trumpets divide the rest of the Time, between Constantine, and his
Christian Successors, to the end of the World. And the seventh Trumpet that
sounds here, is the beginning of the last Period; which comprehends the fall of
the Empires of the World, and particularly that of the Antichristian Kingdom,
or the Papacy.

The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices. These are voices of
Acclamation and joy. That Thunders and Lightnings are joined to those voices,
signifies the preaching of the Gospel.

And the four and twenty Elders, who sat before God on their seats, fell upon
their faces, and worshipped God, saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God
Almighty, etc. It Is the Song and subject matter of thanksgiving, wherewith the
Holy People should praise God, during the reign of a thousand years, when God
shall have subdued all their Enemies. Observe here, that the four and twenty
Elders appear alone, and begin the Song; whereas in the first Vision the living
Creatures begun the Song, and the Elders followed 'em. It Is not to exclude the
living Creatures and the Ministry, in the last Period of the Church; but to
signify, that then the People shall be so filled with the Divine Spirit, that
they shall not need to wait the inspiration and assistance of the Holy
Ministry, to engage them to praise God, and perform holy duties.

The Nations were angry, and thy wrath in come; i. e. the Nations of the
Antichristian People, have executed their malice and fury, and thou have
avenged it by destroying their Empire. And the Time of the dead that they
should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy Servants the
Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great. This
does not signify the last judgment, or the last Resurrection.

It Is the first Resurrection, the Deliverance of the Church, her coming to the
expected Kingdom. This is set forth after the same manner in the 20th Chapter
of the Apocalypse, as has been already seen, The Time of the Dead to be judged;
he says not, the Living and the Dead, or all the Dead; but speaks of the
Church, which lay as dead during the reign of Antichrist, and shall rise again
when that Kingdom is destroyed. The Dead shall be judged. And how? it is God
will reward the faithful and the Church by giving them Peace and a Kingdom.
It Is a judgment of Grace, and of Beneficence. He speaks not of eternal
Rewards, as appears by what follows: and to destroy those, who destroyed the
Earth. Which is not a proper term to signify eternal punishments, wherein
nothing is destroyed: men continue under them for ever: so that the ruin of the
Antichristian Empire must be here meant.

V. 19. Chap. 11.
And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple
the Ark of his Testament. The Ark is the sign of God's Covenant with the Jews;
so this Prophecy of the Ark in the Temple of God, signifies the recalling of
the Jews. The Temple of God was open: The Church shall be open to all Nations,
all People shall resort to it; and among others, we shall see that People, who
derive their Glory from the Ark of the Covenant.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Characters of the Kingdom of the Church. Eight are certain, and five
doubtful. What shall happen after this Kingdom. What is meant by Gog and
Magog. There shall probably be a lesser kind of Antichrist a little before the
end of the World.

HAving confirmed the Truth of this Reign of Christ upon Earth, we ought now to
consider the Nature and Characters of it; they may be divided into two Classes;
some that are doubtful, and others certain. It is fit that we begin with the
certain. We are not to reckon among the Characters of this Reign, either the
fall of the Babylonish Empire, or the conversion of the Jews, or the conversion
of the remaining Gentiles. For these three things are to go before it. They can
never be brought about, but with confusion and Tumult. The Popish Empire cannot
fall, but it must cost blood, and make a mighty noise. The conversion of the
Jews must needs be attended with great Commotions among the People, and it may
be violent contradictions. It Is likewise impossible to conceive, that the
Conversion of the Gentiles can be brought about, without the utmost endeavors
of the Devil to hinder it: he will raise all his forces every where, to hinder
the last establishment of this Kingdom of Christ, as he did in the first Ages
of the Christian Church. So that we cannot doubt, but he will cause great
opposition, not only by words, but it may be blows. Now this cannot belong to
the Kingdom of Christ, whereof the principal Character is Sovereign Peace.
Insomuch that we thus conceive of it. 1. The Papal Empire shall fall. 2. After
that some years will be necessary to abolish Sects and Parties, and compose the
differences among Christians. 3. That after this, many Heathen Nations, and the
Jews shall be converted; for it cannot be thought, that they should be
converted, while Christians are so much at variance among themselves, and
seeking the destruction of one another. 4. After the Conversion of the Jews,
the remainder of the most remote Nations shall also be converted; Now for all
this there must be time; for should we think that God will act in a more
miraculous manner in this, than in the establishment of the first Christian
Church, Wherefore as the Christian Church was near an hundred years in its
first settling, no less will be necessary perfectly to resettle it; and then
shall that blessed Kingdom come, which we expect; not but that there is some
probability, that God may begin to compute the thousand years from the fall of
Antichrist, even before the Conversion of the Jews and Gentiles, and so the
fall of the Antichristian Kingdom, and the Conversion of the Nations, may in
some sort be comprehended within the Reign of Christ, for a thousand years.
But when we speak here of the Kingdom of Christ, we speak of it as in its
perfection, which will not be till after these things are come to pass.

An extraordinary effusion of the Spirit the first certain Character. Chap.
2.28, 29.
The first certain Character of this reign of Christ, is the plentiful effusion
of the Spirit of God upon men. The Prophecy of Joel to this purpose, is one of
those, which is but in part accomplished hitherto, I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, your old Men
shall dream dreams, and your young Men see visions; also on the servants and
the handmaid in those days will I pour out my Spirit. That lesser effusion of
the Spirit, which the first Christians experienced, is not enough to fill up
the Sense of this Prophecy. 1. Because that did not extend very far; the number
was not great of those who did partake of it. 2. That did not last but a little
while, for even before the death of the Apostles, the extraordinary gifts of
the Spirit became rare; So that what was then, was properly but a presage and
type of that large effusion of the Spirit, which should be in the last Period
of the Church; not that all men shall then become Prophets, and be inspired;
but all shall be assisted and led by an extraordinary and all-powerfull
influence of the H. Spirit.


The second Character great Holiness.
2. From this first Character will arise a second, viz. great Holiness. Great in
respect of the degrees, and of the extent of it. In respect of degrees; for
such as shall then be Holy, shall be incomparably more so than any are now, who
are reputed such: and as to the extent of it, because the number of Holy
persons shall be greater. Nevertheless, it is not to be understood, as if men
shall then be altogether without sin, for they must dye. There must therefore
be some remainders of sin; even the Holy Apostles did not cease to be Men, by
being Saints. The like shall be in reference to men in this last Period.
Neither is it to be hoped that all men without exception, shall then be holy;
but it is credible, that the number of the Good shall exceed that of the Wicked,
as much as it is now inferior to it. By Good men, I intend not those who are
commonly called Honest men; of such there is yet a considerable number in the
World; but such as shall be distinguished by an extraordinary Piety, and
Holiness; The number of such is now but very small; but the greatest part of
Men shall then be so. And for the Men of another Character, they shall then be
as rare as now they are common. This great Holiness of Men in those days, is
abundantly proved by the many Prophecies already mentioned, and which certainly
have not hitherto been fullfilled.

The third Character, Purity of worship and Doctrine.
3. From thence follows a third Character, viz. Purity of worship and Doctrine.
Corruption in Religion follows the corruption of manners. God cannot permit
that any Church which is greatly corrupted in manners, should for any long time
preserve Purity of Doctrine and worship; and therefore we find in the Papacy
that natural conjunction of a great Idolatry, with a great corruption in
manners. So on the other hand, God cannot suffer that a Church that is eminent
for Holiness, should decline from the Purity of Religion; wherefore we may be
confident, that the Church in its last Period, shall not admit any alteration
in the purity of its worship, or of its Doctrine, or in any thing of its
Religion. There shall no Heresy be received in that Church; and I am persuaded,
that Pelagianism, which is now so common, shall be quite extirpated; for then
all men shall be full of God, and perceive and acknowledge him in every thing.
Whereas the Pelagians, who prevail in so many places, do not see and own him
any where, but make a God of Man, by making him Independent. These men are far
enough from having a right Idea, of a Being infinitely perfect. I dare say,
that God is not much in those men, who feel and perceive so little of God.

4. Character. Great Peace.
4. The fourth Character of this Reign of Christ, is a Sovereign Peace. This is
plainly revealed by many express Prophecies. That the Wolf shall feed with the
Lamb, and swords be turned into ploughshares, and men shall not hurt or destroy
one another. The Art of War which sprung from Hell, shall return thither.
Nothing but the corruption and wickedness of the World does now make it
necessary. The Devil of Covetousness, and of Ambition, the spirit of Revenge,
and the like, shall return to the bottomless pit, whence they came. And it
shall no more be a point of honor to know how to massacre mankind, to storm
Towns, and gain Battles, and destroy Countries, and cover the Fields with dead
Bodies.

5. Character, Deep Humility.
5. This shall be a Kingdom of Humility. All those vain Titles, which now serve
for ornament and pride, shall then be vanished. Brotherly Love shall make all
men equal; not that all distinction, and all dignities among men shall cease.
This Kingdom is no Anarchy; there shall be some to govern, and others to obey.
But Government shall then be without Pride and Insolence, without Tyranny, and
without Violence. Subjects shall obey their Rulers, with an humble spirit; and
Governors shall rule their Subjects, with a spirit of meekness and gentleness.

6. Character, The abolishing of unlawful and vain Arts.
6. All those Arts which now serve the Pride and Vanity of mankind, shall then
be abolisht. It Is a mysterious and deep design of God, that his Providence
permits the Reign of Vanity, in the place of Charity, which is retired and
gone. What a multitude of People are maintained by this Reign of Vanity? for
how could the Poor subsist, without the vanity of the Rich, who will have
stately Houses, gaudy furniture, pompous garments of Gold, Silk, Point, Lace,
and fan^^ deliciously, and keep many attendants, and domestic Servants? by all
these does subsist that great Company of Artificers, Goldsmiths, Painters, and
those that work in Tapistry, in Stuffs of Wool, Gold and Silk, Cooks,
Pastrymen, Architects, Tailors, and such as make Point and Lace, etc. These
comprehend above three quarters of the World, and all these must dye of hunger,
if the several branches of humane vanity were not as so many secret and
underground channels, whereby Divine Providence distributes food and
nourishment to so many persons. They therefore who would cut off all this
Vanity, before the season of returning Charity, do confound the times and
Characters of the different Periods of the Church. These are the Vanities of
the World, and while the World reigns, they must have their course; but it is
certain withal, that as soon as the Reign of Charity shall return, all these
shall be quite banished.

7. Character, The return of Charity.
7. And this is the seventh Character of the reign of Christ on Earth, that
fervent charity shall be restored, and supply all the necessities of inferior
persons. By this a thousand Channels shall be opened for the relief of the
Poor, like those of vanity: And they who now live upon the Vanity of worldly
men, shall then live upon the charity of the Saints. Inferiors are now vain and
proud as well as Superiors, they learn and derive their vanity from that of
those above 'em: and as Diogenes trampled under his feet the Household Stuff and
pride of Plato, with a greater Pride and his, so oftentimes the Pride and
vanity of those, who grow rich by the vanity of others, is greater than that of
the Rich themselves. It shall not then be thus; Every man shall be content with
what is necessary: so that they to whom God shall have given plenty of wealth,
shall make no difficulty therewith to supply the necessities of the Indigent. A
community of Goods shall then take place, like that which was seen in the first
years of the Church at Jerusalem. Not that Men shall lose their property in the
Goods they have, but every one shall dispense largely to such as need. As they
who gathered more Manna than the rest and nothing over, and those who gathered
less, had no want: That which thus happened in the Wilderness, was not only an
Emblem, but a true Type of what shall be in this last Period of the Church.
They who have more than others, in regard of possession, shall have no more
than others, in respect of Use.

8, Character. Uniformity, in worship and Religion.
8. The face of the Church, as to the external part of it, shall be uniform in
its worship, in its Government and Ceremonies. For that diversity and mixture
of colors which is at present, proceeds not from the Spirit of God. This
uniformity it may be shall not be such as to remove every little difference:
but there shall be none left that is essential, none that may be called evil;
all that which savors of Pride and Tyranny, shall be banished from the
Government of the Church; and that which serves only for Pomp, shall not be
admitted into its Ceremonies. Thus much for the certain Characters.

1. Doubtful Character. Christ shall descend from Heaven.
1. The doubtful Characters are; First, The Descent of Christ into this World,
to reign visibly here. The Prophecies of Saints John and of Daniel seem to
import thus much. The latter says, that the Son of man, i. e. Jesus Christ,
came to the ancient of days, and that Dominion and a Kingdom was given him. And
St. John says, that the Saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years. I
would not be too confident, that this ought to be understood of a visible
descent and abode of Christ upon Earth; yea, I do not believe it probable. But
to me it seems very Evident, that this Reign shall begin with some miraculous
appearance of our Lord in his Glory. After which he shall go back to Heaven,
and from thence govern this victorious Church. Mr. I. Mede, and others after
him, would make this reign of Christ for a thousand years, to be the Day of
Judgment, and that within this time shall be the Resurrection of the dead.
Others say, that the Resurrection, and last Judgment, shall be before this
Reign of Christ; but I dare not determine that.

2. Doubtful Character, whether all earthly Powers shall be abolisht. Dan.
7.11, 12.
2. It is likewise dubious, whether all the Powers of the World must then be
abolisht. Which those words of Daniel seem to signify, The Beast was slain, and
his Body destroyed, and given to the burning flame. Concerning the rest of the
Beasts, they had their Dominion taken away; yet their lives were prolonged for
a season and a Time. Beasts do certainly denote States and Empires; so that it
seems as if all Sovereign Power, i. e. Monarchical, should be taken away; and
that Christ alone should rule by his Vicegerents. I leave this undesided. But
to me it seems probable, that the government of the World, shall assume the
ancient form of the Commonwealth of Israel: That it shall be a Theocrasy: that
God will establish Judges and Governors, by a a particular instinct of the
People and their guides; that he will instruct them in his will by inspired
Persons, whose orders shall be punctually followed.

3. Doubtful Character. whether the Martyrs shall be raised. Rev. 20.4.
3. It Is also uncertain, whether the Martyrs shall rise, to be the
Administrators of this Kingdom. It Is true, St. John seems to say so in express
words, and the Souls of those who were beheaded for the Testimony of Jesus,
etc. shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years. Though I have some
difficulty to be of that opinion, yet I know not what to answer to that Text;
for if it intend only the deliverance of the Church in general, under the
Emblem of a Resurrection; what need was there to mention only the Martyrs? It
is said, that the discourse is not of Bodies, but of Souls: and that the
original word does not signify to rise again, but only to live: and the Souls
of those who were beheaded shall live. But first, it is well known, that Souls
dye not, and consequently cannot be said to rise, but as they reassume their
Bodies. 2. The learned know also, that the Soul is often put for the whole
person, especially when the resurrection is spoken of, witness that passage,
Thou will not leave my Soul in the Grave. Lastly, I am not subtle enough to
discern the difference, between living again, and rising; I always thought they
were two words of the same import. And I think it were easy to prove, that
those who have been beheaded, cannot live again but by a Resurrection. It Is
true, in the fourth Verse it is only said, they shall live; but it is plain by
the fifth Verse, that to live and to live again, in the Text are the same
thing. For it is added, that the Rest of the dead should not live again, till
the thousand years were accomplished. The other dead men spoken of, v. 4. must
then live again at the beginning of the thousand years. Farther, without this,
I know not what our Lord Jesus Christ would say to his Apostles in those words.
Verily, I say unto you, that you who have followed me in the regeneration,
Matthew. 19.28.
when the Son of man is sat on the Throne of his Glory, you shall sit upon
twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. What ever sense is given
to these words, I cannot find any thing that gives me satisfaction. Should it
be understood of the last Judgment, to the same effect, as St. Paul speaks, We
shall judge the World, and we shall judge the Angels; that seems to be but a
small matter, that deserved not to be so solemnly ushered in, with a verily I
say unto you. For after all, it is but in a figurative sense that we shall then
judge the World, by approving the sentence of Christ, who alone shall be the
Judge. Moreover, I know not why our Lord should restrain that judgment to the
twelve Tribes of Israel, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; for the Saints,
as the words are taken, shall judge the whole World: even the wicked too.
Wherefore it cannot be said, that the Church is to be understood by the twelve
Tribes of Israel. Once more, the Saints shall judge the World more than they
shall the Church; for besides their approbation of the sentence given against
the World, they shall bear witness against them, which they shall not do in
reference to the Church.

I do not find much more reason for another sense of this Text, which some of
late have given it. They say the Time of the Regeneration, is the Time of the
Church from Jesus Christ to the end of the World. That during all that time,
for 1600 years, the Apostles have sat as it were on Thrones, to judge the
Church, because we consult them, and have recourse to their Oracles. But, 1.
It Is a strange abuse of words, to call by the name of Regeneration such
corrupted times, as those of the Church for the last twelve hundred years. 2.
It Is to take the words in a very figurative sense indeed, to call that which
the writings of the Apostles do at this day, sitting upon Thrones, and judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel. 3. Lastly, I know not why the twelve Tribes of
Israel should come into this promise, and why they only; since they are
altogether excluded from the Covenant; and are not governed by the writings of
the Apostles.
I confess then, that I find nothing therein but what is obscure.

But all is plain, if by Regeneration I understand the happy Reign of Peace,
and Righteousness, and Charity. For the Church must be greatly renewed to reach
that blessed state. Then indeed, the Son of man shall be sat on the Throne of
his Glory. He shall then have the full Dominion, whereas now he reigns as it
were but by halves: and after the end of this World, he shall reign no longer;
for then he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God his Father. If we
suppose that then the raised Apostles, shall be at the head of the twelve
converted Tribes, and shall govern them, and send their orders by them to the
rest of the World, according to which all other Governors throughout the Earth
shall manage themselves. If I say, this be supposed, no Text can be plainer.
The word Thrones will then be taken in its natural signification, and to Judge
will signify the same, as it does throughout the Scripture, perticularly in the
book of Judges, where we read that Iephta, and Sampson, and Samuel, judged
Israel so many years. Lastly, by this means we shall understand why the twelve
Tribes of Israel are mentioned: it is because the Apostles are to have a
particular care and oversight of them, as being their own People, although
their authority shall be universal. I confess this seems to me most probable.
Nevertheless I determine nothing, but suspend my judgment.

4. Doubtful Character. Whether Jerusalem shall be rebuilt.
4. I leave it also as doubtful, whether Jerusalem shall be rebuilt, to be the
seat of Christ's Kingdom; to say the truth, as I believe that the Jews shall
meet together in their own Country, I see no reason why they should not rebuild
the City of Jerusalem. Which being rebuilt, will doubtless be the most
illustrious City in the World; and if you will, the seat of the universal
Empire; not of an Earthly Monarchy, that has its Armies, Tributes, Customs,
Forts, and Governors, spread throughout the Earth; but it shall be the
principal seat, whence shall flow the Orders and Oracles of Jesus Christ,
whereby the whole World shall be governed.

5. Doubtful Character. The duration of this Kingdom.
5. Lastly, I will not determine, how long this Kingdom shall last. A thousand
years are expressed: oftentimes determinate numbers are put for indefinite. But I
see no inconvenience will follow, if we take that number in its natural
signification, and I am of that opinion.

After this Reign of a thousand years, there is a great Event to be brought
about, set forth in these words.

V. 7. Chap. 20.
And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his
prison.

V. 8. And shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters
of the Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle; the number of
whom is as the sand of the Sea.

V. 9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of
the Saints about, and the beloved City: and fire came down from God out of
Heaven, and devoured them.

What shall happen after the thousand years explained.
I see but one sense can be given to this: that you may comprehend it, you must
know, that we are not to take those promises of the conversion of all Nations,
and of all men in particular, in such a strict and rigid sense, as to admit of
no exception. I have already told you, that the Church shall then as far exceed
the World, and the Good the wicked, as now the World and the Men of the World
do the Good. Therefore there shall then be some remaining people not converted.
They shall be suppressed and kept under during the thousand years, and shall not
molest either the Peace or Purity of the Church. But at the end of this Period,
their numbers shall be increast, and become very considerable. And before the
end of the World, a cruel persecution against the Church shall arise from them;
and because the number of three and half is fatal for persecutions, it is not
unlikely that this shall also last three years and half before the end of the
World. During three natural years and half, the Sanctuary was shut up, and
profaned by Antiochus. For three years and half, Jesus Christ preached in an
afflicted state: for three prophetical years and half, the two witnesses
prophesied clothed in sackcloth: for three prophetical days and half, i. e.
three natural years and half, these two witnesses should remain dead in the
streets of the City.

So to me it seems probable, that the last Persecution, after the thousand
years of Rest, shall last three years and half, and then may come the
Antichrist of St. Irenaeus; whom I will so far honor, as to believe that he
had learnt the Mystery of this last Persecution from some Apostolical Persons,
which he confounded with the reign of the Apocaliptical Beast, for 1260 days.
Neither is it improbable, but that the Ringleader of this last Persecution may
be a Jew: for there is no mean to be found among that People, they are all
either very Good or very Bad. They who shall live when the Jews shall be
converted, shall be able to Divine something of it. For if they then see a
remnant of obstinate Jews, cantonize themselves in some corner of the World,
and resist the general stream of Conversion, there will be some ground to
believe, that this shall be the first bud of that Great Rebellion, which the
Providence of God reserves for the end of the World. And so it may be there
shall arise a Jew, as St. Irenaeus said, pretending to be the Messiah, who
shall persecute the Church, and reign for three years and half before the end
of the World, and be destroyed within a few days before the last Judgment:
This shall be the Diminutive of the great Antichrist, which should not be
confounded with the Man of sin, of whom Saint Paul speaks, nor with the Beast,
in Revel. 13. nor with the Woman, chap. 17. nor with Babylon, chap. 18. The
Fathers who lived near the Apostles time, it may be heard some discourse of
this, and that probably gave occasion to the mistake. This is the most that can
be said with any pretense of reason, to excuse St. Irenaeus, and those of the
Ancients who followed him, in the description of Antichrist. Gog and Magog are
names borrowed from Ezekiel, which in my opinion do not signify the same People
in both places. Here it denotes in general the Enemies of the Church.
Nevertheless, I know nothing concerning it with any great certainty.

CHAP. XXV.
An Answer to the reasons of the Anti-millinaries, against the Reign of a
thousand years.

ACcording to the Method of a Regular Disputation, I come now to answer the
Reasons of the Anti-millinaries. But most of them are so weak, that they hardly
deserve to be considered; but that the mention of 'em will serve as a further
proof, to confirm the truth of our seventh Period. For it is a very good
Argument for any opinion, to be supported on the one hand by powerful and
weighty Reasons, and to be opposed on the other by weak and slender ones. Those
Gentlemen have the plurality of voices on their side, and are doubtless men of
worth and learning. It Is nevertheless true, that they have suffered themselves
to be born down with the stream, without much minding it.

First Objection. Christ not to come, but at the day of jugdment.
1. First, they say, that the Scripture speaking of Christ's second coming,
never speaks of any other than that, when he shall appear in the Clouds of
Heaven, attended with Angels and Archangels to raise mankind, and judge the
quick and dead. Whereas we suppose a kind of a clandestine coming of Christ, to
settle a Kingdom upon Earth, which the Scripture knows nothing of: for it
speaks of no future Kingdom of Christ, that is yet to be, save that which he
shall have in Heaven, after the distribution of Eternal Rewards and
Punishments. I answer. 1. These men suppose by this Argument, a Kingdom of
Christ in Heaven after the last judgment; but there is no such Kingdom,
neither shall there ever be any; on the contrary, St. Paul does expressly tell
us, that he shall then cease to reign, and give up the Kingdom into the hands
of his Father. 1 Cor. 17.
So that since we are assured from Scripture of Christ's coming to reign, it
must be before the end of the World; for the Kingdom of Christ the Mediator
shall then be finished. 2. It Is supposed in this objection, that the Scripture
speaks of no more than one coming of Christ, which shall be accompanied with
the voice of the Archangel, to summon the Dead to judgment. This is plainly
to suppose the thing in Question: and those who have read the foregoing
Chapters, with attention, and without prejudice, will still believe, that there
is a first coming of Christ, and it may be a first Resurrection. 3. Lastly, who
can be certain, that this coming of Christ, to establish his Kingdom upon
Earth, shall not be in that manner, with the voice of an Archangel, and in
great magnificence and Glory? Who can prove, that at that first coming of
Christ he shall not raise some of the dead, as St. John seems expressly to have
foretold? all the little reasons pretended from Convenience and Inconveniency,
which are here alleged, will have much ado to resist the evidence of so
express a Text; and of that, Matthew. 19. Verily, I say unto you, that in the
Regeneration, when the Son of man shall be sat on the Throne of his Glory, you
shall also sit on twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.


2. Object. Christ is to remain in Heaven, till the end of the world.
2. The next thing alleged, is that the Heavens are to contain Jesus Christ
till the restitution of all things. The restitution of all things, that they
say is the End of the World; and so Jesus Christ must be confined to Heaven
till the end of the world: and consequently, shall not come to settle a Kingdom
upon Earth for a thousand years. If this were true, that Christ must stay in
Heaven till the end of the World, might he not destroy his Enemies, give Peace
to his Church, and govern it in Peace by his Prophets and Servants, without
coming in Person from Heaven? Moreover, in case our Lord should for a short
space come down from Heaven, to establish a Kingdom for a thousand years, and
to give his seal to the Conversion of all Nations, by some glorious Apparition,
returning back to Heaven immediately after; might it not be said,
notwithstanding this, that the Heavens shall contain him till the end of Time?
So small an interruption of his abode in Heaven could not hinder, but that the
heavens may still be reckoned the place of his abode. Lastly, how will they
prove, that by the Restitution of all Things, the end of the World is to be
understood? on the contrary, that end is represented as the Overturning, and
not the Restitution of all things. The Heavens, the Stars, the Elements shall
be burnt up, and destroyed by fire. It Is true, after this there shall be new
Heavens, and a new Earth; but the Scripture does more frequently describe the
end of the world, by an universal confusion, and Overturning, than by the new
Heavens which shall follow. And the new Heavens in most places of Scripture
signify the Renovation of the Church, in its last Period of a thousand years.
So that I hardly make any doubt, but that by the Restitution of all things,
Chap. 8. Acts, we are to understand the Establishment of the Church, before the
end of the World.

3. Argum. Peace and Prosperity are not to be the Lot of the Church.
3. The third Argument of the Anti-millenaries, is this, that such a state of
Peace and tranquillity, as we promise to the Church, does not at all agree with
what the H. Scripture speaks of the Persecution and afflictions, that the
Church and the Faithful are always to meet with in this World. 1. Ought not
this to be mutually granted, that the whole is to be denominated from the major
part? for six thousand years the Church was to be persecuted, and in a low
Condition; and in a seventh Period, she shall have Rest: And shall we count it
strange, that the Holy Ghost does for the most part, speaking of the state of
the Church here below, as a low and miserable condition, and that he says very
little of her state of Glory; since the difference between the first and second
state, is as six to one? 2. I answer, that they suppose that which is not true,
viz. that the Scripture speaks of the Church, as being always in a state of
suffering. On the contrary, more places can be brought wherein her Prosperity
and Peace are promised, than of those where she is threatened with calamity and
persecution. We may see the truth of this in the preceding Chapters, where I
have shown that Empire, and a Kingdom, Peace, and Prosperity, are promised to
the Church of Christ, in such a manner as has never hitherto been fulfilled.


Object. When Christ shall come, the Church shall be most corrupt.
4. After this, they tell us, that when God describes those Times, which shall
immediately precede the end of the World, instead of representing them as a
golden Age, they are painted out as an Age of Iron and darkness. Iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold; false Prophets and false Christ's shall
arise, they shall work signs and wonders, to deceive if possible the very
Elect. Math. 24. v. 12.24.37.
The coming of the Son of man shall be as the days of Noah. When the Son of man
shall come, Luke 18. c. 8.
he shall not find faith upon Earth. And 2 Ep. Thessal. 2. chap. it is said, the
Lord shall destroy the man of sin, by the brightness of his coming. But all
this is grounded on a false supposition; viz. that there shall be no other
coming of Christ, but for the last and final Judgment, which is not true: the
coming of Christ here spoken of, is that to settle the Peace, and Glory, and
Kingdom of his Church; and we may be certain, that this is meant in almost all
the Passages, where the coming of Christ is spoken of. It is true, that when
Christ shall come to destroy the Antichristian Kingdom, he shall not find true
Faith upon Earth, that is, very little of it. Experience confirms this; for we
are now in that very time. Farther, when Christ shall come the third and last
time, for the last Judgment, it may well be, that there shall be a great
scarcity of faith and piety in the World at that time: for Gog and Magog shall
be increas't, there shall be a great seduction upon Earth, and a great
affliction upon the Church. So that these Prophecies shall have their
accomplishment whenever Christ comes. They were fulfilled at his first coming,
when he came in the flesh; for the Church was then exceedingly corrupted; and
so at his second coming, when he shall come to destroy the Antichristian
Kingdom: For in our days, there is a very great corruption, and shall be at his
third coming; for at the end of the world, there shall be an Insurrection
against the Church, and against the Son of God.

5. Object. The day of Judgment would not then be unknown.
5. It will farther follow, say these Gentlemen, that the Hour and the day of
Judgment would not then be unknown, as our Lord J. Christ has said it is. For
if just after the fall of the Antichristian Empire, the reign of Christ for a
thousand years must take place, we likewise know, that at the end of that Reign
of a thousand years, shall be the day of Judgment. First, you must know, that
our Lord J. Christ says not, that the day of the last Judgment shall be always
concealed: he only says, that no man then knew it; concerning that day, says
he, knows no man. That depends on the fixing the time of the 1260 years, for
the reign of Antichrist. Now no man knew for certain, at that time, when the
1260 years should begin. God did not permit that it should be well known, till
this last Age, which is as also the last of the reign of Antichrist for 1260
years. Moreover, after having well fixed the Epoch of the birth of Antichrist,
that we may discover his end, yet can we not thereby come to the exact
knowledge of the day of Judgment. 1. Because we know not whether the thousand
years of the reign of the Church, must begin just at the end of the 1260 years
of the reign of Antichrist. We may say the contrary, without saying any thing
that is improbable, that the thousand years are not to be computed, but from
the complete establishment of the Kingdom of Christ. 2. We cannot tell whether
the Period of a thousand years is to be exactly so much, neither more or less;
for the H. Ghost is not so critical and precise, and often makes use of a round
and certain number, to signify one that is uncertain, unless when he makes use
of a broken number, as three and half; for then we cannot doubt, but we are to
reckon exactly so much.
So that these two things being always doubtful, we can never know the precise
time of the Judgment day.

6. Object. The world would then last a long while.
6. After this, they say, that if the Church must reign a thousand years on
Earth, the World is yet to last for a long time, which is not likely it should,
because the Apostles even in their days spoke of the end of the world as a
thing approaching, and near at hand. We are in the last times, says St. Paul.
The coming of I. Christ is at hand, says St. James. My littie children, It is
the last time, says St. John. They ought to confess, that these passages make
against them, instead of being for them. The Apostles called their Days, the
last times, and the last hour, and yet almost two thousand years have passed
since. Those Texts therefore must not be taken in too rigid a sense. We have
spent one Chapter on purpose in this Book to explain those Passages.

7. Object. The Scripture speaks but of one Resurrection.
7. Lastly, they tell us, that according to the Scriptures, at the coming of our
Lord J. Christ, All the Dead must be raised at once, the Righteous and the
Wicked: which agrees not with the supposition of the Millenaries, who would
make one part of the Dead to rise at the beginning of the reign of a thousand
years, and the rest at the end of it. But how can any one say, that the
Scripture says that, when it speaks the quite contrary; that one part of the
Dead must rise first, which is the first Resurrection; and that the Rest of the
Dead are not to rise till the thousand years are fullfilled? There are some
passages, it is true, wherein the Resurrection of the Good and Bad is spoken of,
as that which shall be at the same time; and so it shall accordingly be: for
this first Resurrection will be but of a very few, viz. of the Ancient Martyrs.
The remainder of the Faithful shall not be raised, till the end of the World.
Many Dead were risen with Christ, when he rose, and are certainly with him,
body and soul in Heaven. Notwithstanding this, the Scripture speaks of the
Resurrection of all the Dead, as a thing deferred and adjourned to the last
Day: because one little Exception destroys not a general Rule. It Is strange
that these Gentlemen find so much difficulty in this first Resurrection!
Methinks they should remember, the many Saints who were raised with Christ. Why
may not Christ raise some of the New Testament Saints, at the coming of his
Kingdom, as well as raise some of the Ancient Patriarchs, when he rose from the
Grave? However, notwithstanding all that I have said on this subject of that
first Resurrection, I once again declare, that I am not sollicitons to decide
it. Therefore I have and do again place it among those things which are
doubtful. I am informed, that the learned and famous Prof. Mr. Witsius of
Vtrecht, has thought fit to declare his mind on this subject, in some public
Lectures. I am told, that he agrees with me concerning a great change, which is
to be in the Church, before the end of the World, with respect to Manners,
Union in Doctrine, and the spreading of the Christian Faith, as well among the
Jews, as among the Nations which as yet are Pagan. He is also willing, De X
Tribubus Israelis. c. 9.. 1. and cap, 11. 17,
that the Jews should hope to return to their own Land, and rebuild Jerusalem.
I would ask no more, and am more rejoy't to meet with the concurrence of so
great a man in that which is Essential, than I can be troubled that he differs
from me, concerning that first Resurrection: for I must acknowledge, that I
meet with very great difficulties about it. But when I look upon it on that
side, and in that manner, as I have represented it, I find it to be very
probable: Nevertheless, I am far from being fully persuaded of the Truth of it,
as I am concerning those Ar^^cles wherein we two agree.

These I think are all the Objections wherewith these Gentlemen oppose us. For
I regard not what they say, when they tell us, That this Reign of a thousand
years is a Jewish vision, a Fancy derived from the impure Fountain of their
Traditions. This is to declaim; and not to prove. It Is not impossible but there
may remain something that is good among the Traditions of the Jews; at least,
St. Paul and St. Jude believed so. The first learnt from their Tradition the
names of the Magicians of Egypt, who opposed Moses; and likewise those words
of Moses, I exceedingly quake and fear, which we no where read in the Old
Testament. And St. Jude learnt from thence the combat of Michael the Archangel
with the Devil, for the body of Moses; also the Prophecy of Enoch. They urge
likewise against us a multitude of ancient and modern Authors. But I had rather
give credit to Justin Martyr, and Papias, who might have seen St. John, than to
all those who have wrote since. God has his particular reasons, why he will
not that the Prophecies should be understood in every Age.

FINIS.

