THE Last Efforts OF AFFLICTED INNOCENCE: Being an account of the PERSECUTION
OF THE Protestants of FRANCE.

AND A Vindication of the Reformed Religion from the Aspersions of Disloyalty
and Rebellion, charged on it by the Papists.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for M. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel Street near the Piazza
in Covent Garden, 1682.

TO The Right Honorable WILLIAM EARL of BEDFORD, Lord Russel, Baron Russel of
THORNHAUGH, Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My Lord,
IT IS a strange Question asked by St. Peter, Who will harm you, if ye be
followers of that which is good? a Question that intimates Innocence, an
effectual Protection against wrong and violence: But he had been taught the
Doctrine of the Cross, he had seen his divine Master, the Arche-type of
Immaculate Purity and Innocence, basely betrayed by an Apostle of his own,
contumeliously abused by a Rabble he had infinitely obliged, Blasphemed by an
Impious Soldiery, scoffed and laughed at by profane Governors, and under a
color of Justice, by the cursed Arts of his malicious Enemies, formally
Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed as a Traitor to Caesar: This was an instance
so clear, it was impossible not to be convinced by it, that Innocence and
Goodness instead of protecting men from injury, expose them to it: And lest
those he writ to, might, (by the Question he had asked) mistake themselves into
a confidence, that Innocence would secure them from Persecution, the inspired
Penman obviates the Error, by applying himself immediately to instruct them in
their conduct, when oppressed with Calumnies and Wrongs.

That Golden Age is long since past, when an Universal Innocence secured every
one from injury: The World has since been in a State of War: Inoffensiveness
is no longer a sufficient Guard, and by the Law of Nature the weaker yields to
the more powerful. The Innocence of the Lamb cannot secure him from the
Violence of Wolves, or Subtilty of Foxes; The greater Fish devour the less. The
harmless Dove is the daily food of the Birds of Prey; and Man not content to
have the Fish of the Sea, the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of the Air a
Sacrifice to his pleasure, is so maliciously bent to worry his own kind, as if
he thought himself created for the ruin of his Fellow Creatures, particularly
of Man. Craft and Malice raise themselves Trophies on the Ruins of Innocence,
and the Nimrods of the Earth triumph in the Spoils of their Inferiors, and
place their Glory in Oppression and Violence.

This State of War being very uneasy, reason had recourse to the Expedient of
Laws, and Constitution of Governments, to retrieve in some measure, by Religion
and Justice, the irreparable loss of Primitive Innocence and Natural Goodness.

But those ill Inclinations that made Laws necessary to restrain their
Malignity from breaking into act, no sooner found the Hand tied up by Laws from
violent Attempts, but the Head was employed to elude those Laws by subtilty and
artifice, to render that which was designed the protection of the Innocent, a
Snare to catch them in; to make Law an instrument of Oppression, and Justice it
self a Minister of injury. A State no less dangerous to man in his civil
Capacity, than that ill habit of body, that turns the most wholesome food into
poison, is dangerous to his nature, consuming and ruining it by that very
aliment that should have repaired and preserved it.

Such is the State of that Government, where a prevalent Faction does by color
of Law and pretense of Religion, destroy the Religion and Rights of their
Adversaries; who are therefore the more miserable, because they suffer unjustly
under a form of Justice.

Such, My Lord, is the State the Protestants in France complain of at this day:
The Enemies of their Religion had vowed it is Extirpation: They had tried the
force of Inhumane Cruelties and unheard of Butcheries to destroy the Professors
of it: Finding it impregnable by open assault, they apply themselves to effect
by art and subtilty, what they had in vain attempted by force and violence, and
to destroy by Law what they had found proof against Fire and Sword, Torture and
Massacre. They procure Edicts for demolishing their Churches, rasing their
Oratories, and shutting up their Schools, or converting them to other uses; the
very method used with so much success by Julian the Apostate, for rooting out
Christianity.

The Protestants alarmed at the Proceedings of their Enemies, armed with
authority, and vigorously using it to their ruin, apply themselves by Petition
to their King, for redress of their Grievances, and preservation of the
Privileges granted them by the Edicts and Arrests of his Illustrious
Ancestors: That great Prince moved with the justice of their demands, grants an
Edict, That no violence be done his Protestant Subjects on the account of
Religion. Their Enemies not discouraged resolve to pursue their point, and
under specious pretenses of Piety, obtain authority to labor the Conversion of
Protestants, to visit their Sick, to examine their Children, and to receive
their Declaration at seven years old, what Religion (the Reformed or Roman)
they would choose to be instructed in: They improve this Authority so
effectually and scandalously to the destruction of the Protestants, that laying
aside the antiquated means of instruction and argument, they took a new method
for Conversion, making use only of Threats to frighten, of Promises to seduce,
of Money and Immunities to bribe, and (where these means failed) of force to
compel Men, Women, and Children into that Catholic Church, which turns all
into Fish that come into its Net, and ensures all who go to Mass a safe Arrival
in Heaven.

The Protestants sensible of the abuse of the Authority of their King, contrary
to his intentions, prepare a second Address for relief; but coming to present
it, found all Avenues blocked up, no access to his Majesty, no redress in his
Courts, the Ministers of State prepossessed to their prejudice, and themselves
looked upon as Enemies to the State.

My Lord, It was the artifice of their Enemies to represent them such to that
ambitious Monarch, too generous and compassionate to persecute good Subjects,
but extremely jealous of his Authority. So the Jewish Priests finding Pilate
convinced of our Savior's Innocence, and inclined to acquit him, suggest, he
had spoken against Caesar, etc. and prevailed with that Judge to Condemn him
for Treason, the greatest of Crimes, who upon a solemn hearing, declared he had
found no fault in him.

The greatest Affliction to an innocent Sufferer is aspersion of Guilt;
Tortures may crack his Sinews, mangle his Limbs, and destroy his Body, but
false Aspersions wound the Heart, distract the Spirits, and rend and tear the
Soul in pieces. His Innocence may support him against the pains of Racks and
Gibbets, but the torture of Calumny is intolerable.

This, My Lord, is the Case of the Afflicted Protestants: They have for their
Religion patiently submitted to the Persecution of their Enemies: But they not
content to have stripped them naked, forced them to seek a livelihood in
foreign Regions, and live on the Alms of people unknown, endeavor to rob them
of their sole support, the reputation of their Innocence; by persuading the
World, they are men of Rebellious Principles, Enemies to Government,
particularly Monarchy: This of all their Sufferings is the only one they are
impatient of, and could not submit to without a Defense.

My Lord, The Sufferings of the French Protestants, the injustice of their
Persecution, the ill consequences that may attend it, and the clearing of their
Loyalty, are the principal Subjects of the following Discourses: The three
first particulars are peculiar to those of the Reformed Religion in France: The
last so far concerns the whole Protestant Party of Europe, as the common Enemy
charges them all with Principles of Rebellion: The Author, though he apply
himself chiefly to vindicate the Reformed of France, has not forgot to add
somewhat in justification of other Protestants, and, by a just Translation of
the Crime, laid the Guilt of Rebellious Principles and Practices at the doors
of their Enemies.

The sight of misery, especially undeserved, melts a generous soul into pity
and compassion; but of all the Sufferings our nature is subject to, those
undergone for Conscience and Religion are the most glorious, and best deserve
Commiseration; when out of sense of Duty to the Sovereign of the World, for an
inward and innocent satisfaction of mind, and hopes of pleasure purely
spiritual, invisible and fature, men slight all the pleasures of sense; and
with true Magnanimity, not only contemn worldly advantages, but cheerfully
endure the smartest Afflictions and Tortures: Criminals have that benefit of
the Laws they offend, they are allowed to plead for themselves: An Innocent
Sufferer has right to Compassion and Favor, especially a Sufferer on the
account of Religion, and who, on that account, has been forced to seek in
strange Countries, the right denied him in his own. Such, My Lord, are these
Protestant Exiles, who barred access to the French King their Lord, fled for
refuge to the Throne of our most Gracious Prince, who in Commiseration to the
distressed Protestants, has made his Kingdoms a general Sanctuary, where they
who could not have justice, quiet, or security at home, find safety,
protection, and favor, with the benefit of Laws, and kind influences of a
Government infinitely more Gentle than those they were born under.

My Lord, It Is the Glory of the Mighty to protect the Innocent: Nothing makes
power look so venerable and divine, as employing it aright. The highest
pleasure and best fruit of greatness is the conscience to have used it well:
That excellent Prince who esteemed the day lost wherein he had not obliged some
of his Inferiors, was the Darling of Mankind: His memory is blessed to this day,
when others who moved in the same Sphere, but made ill use of their greatness,
are mentioned with abhorrence: Persons of eminent dignity and power draw the
eyes of inferior mankind, as those Luminous bodies that move in the upper
Regions, which all look at, but with aspects different as the Apprehensions
they have of them: Those they conceive of a malignant nature, they look on with
horror; but those they apprehend benign and good, they behold with pleasure
and delight, with hope and confidence, with respect and veneration.

My Lord, Allow me the liberty to tell your Lordship, that among the Stars of
the greater magnitude in our Horizon, the Distressed Protestants fix their Eyes
on you, as one of no less Propitious than Powerful Influence: Their envious
Enemies have endeavored to blast their Reputation, and by Calumny and unjust
aspersions to rob them of the benefit of that justice they might pretend to at
home, and to represent them unworthy any favor abroad: This obliged them to a
Vindication of themselves in their own Language: But that being not universally
understood in this Kingdom (where they are so nearly concerned to stand right
in the opinion of the most loyal and best Reformed Church of the World) I
thought it not altogether unuseful to them, to have their Defense published in
English for general satisfaction: The same malice that assaulted their
Innocence by unjust Aspersions, will be too apt to cavil at their Vindication,
and cry down their defense: The Justice of their Cause, without the assistance
of a powerful patronage, may be too weak to protect them. And for The last
Efforts of Afflicted Innocence, The just Vindication of Persecuted Protestants,
what Patronage more suitable, what Protection more agreeable than His, whose
noble Extraction and generous Temper naturally incline to pity the miserable,
to protect the Innocent, and succor the injured? Whose integrity and soundness
in the Protestant Religion, have rendered him eminent for piety, virtue, and
worth; and whose ample fortune, dignity, and honor, no less justly than
signally distinguish him from other Men? And for that this Character belongs
peculiarly to your Lordship, be pleased to excuse the liberty I take to beg,
these Discourses may appear in English, under your Lordships Auspicious Name;
and that you will believe, nothing but the luster of your great Qualities, and
the glory of your Name, appearing so proper to protect and grace a Tract of
this nature, and the opinion of your goodness and condescension to vouchsafe it
that honor, could have inspired me with this presumption. For which I humbly
beg pardon, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and most Devoted Servant, W. Vaughan.

TO THE PROTESTANT ENGLISH READER.
Suave mari magno jactantibus aequora ventis,
Eterra magnum alterius spectare Laborem:
Sed tua res agitur Paries ubi proximus ardet.

Reader,
I Presume you sensible of your happiness, in being born and bred a Member of a
Protestant Church, wherein Piety is consistent with sound reasoning, and a Man
may be Religious without forfeiting his Senses or renouncing his Judgment: I
doubt not but you esteem it a Blessing to be subject to a Government the best
constituted of any, and Laws so equally tender of the Prerogative of the
Sovereign and Privilege of the Subject, as best conduces to the common welfare
of both; and you must be unworthy the Name I addressed you by, if you do not
value it as the greatest Blessing on Earth, that the Church and State are under
the Protection and Government of a most Gracious and Excellent Prince: But that
which the Subject of the following Discourses prompts me particularly to mind
you of, is the immediate source of our envied felicity, that our Prince is not
only most gracious, most wise and most just, but that he is a sincerely
Protestant Prince. A favor of Heaven to which we principally owe the
preservation of our Rights, sacred and civil, the exercise of our Religion and
benefit of our Laws: The miserable condition of the Protestants in France, who
sigh forth their just but fruitless Complaints in the following sheets are an
Evidence too clear and too sad; That Edicts and Arrests, Privileges and
Immunities, Liberties and Laws are too slight a Bulwark to secure Protestant
Subjects the exercise of their Religion, and enjoyment of their Civil Rights
under a Prince of the Romish Persuasion: These Persecuted Protestants the daily
objects of your Charity, are the Successors and Descendants of those of the
last Age, to whose Loyalty and Valor Henry the fourth of France acknowledged
himself much a Debtor, for the Diadem of that Kingdom, which the Monarch now
Regnant there wears with so much Glory, and the Catholic Liguers labored so
vigorously and scandalously to rend away from the Family of Bourbon. It was in
consideration of that Fidelity, and as a Princely Mark of his favor, and
acceptance of the eminent service they had done him; that Prince, (no less
truly than nominally great) confirmed to them the free exercise of their
Religion, with ample Immunities and Privileges ratified with all solemnity of
Law requisite in such cases: All Europe is witness, the present Protestants of
France have not degenerated from the Loyalty of their Ancestors, but have
served their Prince with all imaginable Fidelity and Zeal for the Glory of his
Crown: The World admires the Royal qualities of their Monarch; his Conduct
proves him a Prince every way great: He is particularly famed for strictness of
Justice and profoundness of Wisdom. His Protestant Subjects who are lashed so
severely by the rod of his Authority, declare him a person of a generous Temper
and sweet Disposition, a Man that abhors Cruelty and Violence, and is one of
the best natured Princes under Heaven: Rome, to her sorrow, finds him no Bigot,
though a Roman Catholic, yet the Protestants of France are persecuted with
that rigor and extremity, they think it a happiness to purchase with the loss
of all secular enjoyments the freedom of their Conscience, and by a voluntary
exile to find in strange Countries that Justice and Peace they cannot have in
their own. Poor Hugonots! What can be a sufficient Guarranty, for the exercise
of your Religion, which Edicts in its favor obtained on weighty and just
Considerations, and ratified with all the solemnity of Law, the loyalty of its
Professors, the merit of your Ancestors, the innate goodness and wisdom of your
Sovereign cannot secure! If Persecution be your Lot under the Reign of a
Monarch so Generous and Sagacious, so free from Superstition, and so full of
Heroic Qualities as your Lewis the 14th, cease to complain of the Murders and
Massacres under Charles the 9th and Henry the 3d; and arm your selves with a
Christian expectation of greater Sufferings, and more fiery trials of your
Patience and Loyalty, when it shall be your misfortune to see the French Crown
on the head of a weak, illnatur'd or Bigoted Prince: Your present King has
bravely defied the Thunderbolts of Rome, and vigorously attacked its usurp d
Supremacy, yet permits you to be rigorously handled; what usage must you expect
from a Superstitious Soul, that will receive the Dictates of the Pope as
Oracles of Heaven, and hazard Crowns to merit the title of a true Son of the
Church, in executing Commands, the most dishonorable and bloody the malice of
Priests or interest of the Papacy shall impose upon him? Impute it singly to
the good nature of your King, that Fires are not kindled, and Gibbets set up to
destroy you as in former Ages; the malice of your Enemies is not abated, and
your Religion, the cause of your Sufferings, is the same as then; but your King
has a Soul too noble and tender to command Innocents to be tortured and burnt;
a Spectacle Charles the 9th made his Divertisement and Pleasure: How miserable
must you be under a Prince that shall delight in your Sufferings, and think it
not just only, but meritorious to extirpate you, when you are thus sharply
persecuted under so great a Monarch, who had the goodness to declare he would
willingly sacrifice his right hand for (what he calls) your Conversion? Had
your sage and wise Prince so much tenderness for you, that he would have
sacrificed the instrument of so many glorious Achievements, the Darling of his
noble and ambitious soul, for that which conceives your good, and yet is
imposed upon by the arts of your Enemies to connive at your ruin, and permit
his authority to be abused to warrant and countenance those Violences and
Outrages his Soul abhors, and his eyes cannot endure a sight of? Preserve, as
you do, your Loyalty to your Sovereign, admire his Virtues, and extol his
Goodness: Triumph in the clearness of your Innocence, that the Enemies of your
Religion own not any cause of your present Persecution, but your King's
Pleasure, that there shall be but one Religion in his Kingdom: But lament the
unhappiest of his Education in a Religion of Principles, so unnatural, it would
take away that variety God and Nature have unalterably established, no less in
the Opinions and Judgments, than in the Tempers and Faces of Men; so
tyrannically, it would enslave all Mankind to its Tenets, though never so
absurd; so wildly ambitious, it would usurp that Sovereignty God has reserved
to himself over the judgment and conscience, and force Men, contrary to both,
to comply with its Superstitions, and become Traitors to God by a profane
Hypocrisy, that they may appear good Subjects to the Pope by an outward
Conformity to his Impositions; so irrational, it would persuade men to put out
their eyes to be guided by it, to abjure their Senses and renounce their
Reason, to be governed by its Dictates: Bewail the malice and subtilty of your
Enemies, that has perverted your Prince, from a Father of his faithful
Subjects into a Persecutor of Protestants, an Oppressor of the Reformed Church;
inspired him with a Cruelty it found not in his Nature, and surprised him to
permit Violences and Outrages to be committed upon you, which are no less
contrary to his judgment than they are to his goodness.

But the Moon has her spots; Solomon and Alexander were not free from
miscarriages, and the sagacious malice of the enemies of Protestants, quickly
finds out those weaknesses in the Souls of the best Princes they have access
to, which they impose upon, and manage to the prejudice of the Reformed
Religion: They knew the French King of too good a nature to permit general
Massacres, or delight in Cruelty exercised on his Subjects; they were sensible
he is not a Bigot, to be persuaded to yield up the Lives of his Subjects to the
pleasure of the Pope, or the interest of his Church; nor so silly to believe
the God of the Christians can be pleased, as some of the pretended Vicars of
Christ have been, with slaughter of men. They observed so much Justice and
Equity in his nature, he would be scandalized at a proposal that would have
engaged him, contrary to Law, and without color of Justice, to violate the
rights of a loyal and numerous party of his Subjects; they apprehended him too
sensible of the interest of his Crown, to approve of a Conduct that would
oblige him to oppress millions of Subjects, to whom he ought to be and had
often declared himself a Father; and by Persecution of Innocents to depopulate
his Kingdom, which he found too thin planted to serve his great designs: They
considered him too jealous of his Authority, to allow any subject or party, how
great soever, to attempt without permission from him, upon any privilege or
right of their Fellow Subjects: But they knew that Achilles impenetrable in all
other parts, was vulnerable in one, that the Fort is not impregnable which has
one weakness by which it may be mastered: They were at a fault, but pursued
their Game, and at last hit the Scent. They considered the French King an
Ambitious Prince, jealous of his authority, and as impatient of a Traitor as of
a Superior: They confess it inhumane as well as unchristian to murder
Innocents, and Massacre men for differences in opinion, which they could no
more help than those of their constitution. They admit the Popes invading the
Liberties of the Gallican Church, an Usurpation not to be tolerated by so great
a Monarch; they own it unworthy the Justice of so excellent a Prince, to
violate the Privileges granted his Subjects by his Ancestors; they grant it to
be against the interest of the State, to lay waste his Provinces, and
depopulate his Countries by forcing his Subjects into foreign parts: But they
conceive it just to punish Criminals; they think it both expedient and
necessary to root out Traitors and extirpate Rebels, to destroy Vipers which
eat out their way through the Bowels of their Mother, to exterminate those
Subjects, who to support a Faction and maintain a particular interest of
Religion, would ruin their Country; and while he carries the terror of his
Arms into Foreign Regions, would put all the Provinces of his Kingdom into a
Combustion, and oblige him to withdraw his Forces from prosecuting his Rights,
and advancing his Glory by Conquests abroad, to quench with the blood of Civil
War the flames that would be kindled in the heart of France: That their zeal
for his Service and Glory, had discovered in his Kingdom a Seminary of such
Monsters, which must be suppressed: That they were numerous and powerful, and
they durst not attack them without particular Commission and the favor of his
Authority: That they were a Race of Traitors, who envyed the glorious success
of his Arms, and malign'd his Triumphs, men of Rebellious Principles, that
sucked in Treason with their Milk, that were Enemies to Government, especially
Monarchy that insisted on Rights, and pretended to Privileges independent of
his pleasure: That presumed to think his Authority bounded by Laws, and that
his Will is to be controlled by Edicts, and directed by Councels: That those
upstart Innovators of the pretended Reformed Religion, were the men they meant:
That Seed of Heretics, that Hydra of Apostates, the Glory of whose ruin was
reserved for his Reign: That the Rights they pretend to by Law, may by Law be
destroyed: That the illness of their Principles has forfeited their
Privileges: That the Roman Catholics had a Law, and by that Law the Hugonots
ought to be destroyed: That a Monarch without Dispotical Authority cannot be
great: That blind obedience in the Church is a preparative absolutely necessary
for Arbitrary Government in the State: That those Innovators allow the use of
private judgment, presume to censure the actions of their Superiors, and
dispute the Commands they ought to obey.

Talibus insidiis! By such Delusions as these, by such artifice and cunning,
was that Prince imposed upon, to permit them to be persecuted as dissaffected
to the State, whom he loved as his best Subjects: And the same time he opposes
the Usurpations of the Pope, and shakes off his yoke; he is persuaded to
deliver up to the fury of Papists his Protestant Subjects, whose greatest
Crime, is their having renounced the pretended Supremacy of the Roman See: And
to prevent the redress they might expect for their Grievances from the Justice
and Clemency of their Prince, when rightly informed by their humble Addresses,
their Enemies have so prepossessed him to their prejudice, they are barred
access to his Throne, denied Justice in his Courts, and their Petitions of
Right, rejected as Criminal, and stigmatized with the odious Title of insolent
Remonstrances:

The Defense of the French Protestants against the Charge of Rebellious
Principles and Practices, is partly the Subject of the subsequent Discourses: I
pretend not to anticipate their Apology, by saying any thing for them, but
desire the Reader to peruse what they say for themselves; and that he will
learn by their Misfortunes, to value the happiness of being subject to a
Protestant Prince, and wish and endeavor, as far as is consistent with Piety,
Loyalty, and Justice, to render that Happiness perpetual: Modern Rome pretends,
no less than the Ancient, to Empire and Sovereignty: This pretended to Empire
over the Body and Estate that sets up a claim to a spiritual Sovereignty over
Souls, to serve the design of exercising a Temporal Dominion over Persons and
Possessions: Modern Rome, impatient of a Rival in Authority, has long
considered the Reformed Church as old Rome did Carthage, an Enemy without whose
extirpation it could not safely subsist, and has Decreed an irreconcilable
and eternal Hostility against it. And where Hostility is Decreed, the Maxim is
current, Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat? Fraud and Force are equally
allowed for the Destruction of an Enemy: Carthage might more reasonably have
expected sincere and perpetual Amity from Rome, than those of the Reformed
Religion may expect from the Papacy, which looks upon them not only as Enemies,
but Rebels and Apostates, and solemnly devotes them to Destruction here, and
Damnation hereafter.

If these Inferences seem ill grounded or uncharitable, and inconsistent with
the Principles of Christianity, allowed by those of the Roman Religion, let it
be considered, whether that Religion has not long degenerated from a Guide to
eternity into a mere instrument of State, and is not principally made use of to
support the Grandeur of the Papal Chair, and the Luxury of his Court: That it
thinks not it self sufficiently supported without an Inquisition, to root out
Dissenters under the title of Heretics; and where the prudence of Princes has
kept out the Inquisition, and denied the Pop^^ that color of Law to
exterminate their Subjects the Protestants have been murdered by wholesale in
general Massacres, since they could not be re-tail'd to Death by Information
and Process. That it makes subjection to the Pope necessary to Salvation; that
it declares Protestants, Heretics, and reputes Heretics, Outlaws and Enemies
of Mankind, with whom no Faith is to be kept. These are the genuine causes of
the Miseries of Protestants under Princes infected with the Doctrine of Rome;
hence proceed those Violations of Privileges, breach of Edicts and Laws in
their favor, denial of Justice and ruin of their Fortunes and Lives: What Law
can bind a Prince, who thinks it not only lawful but meritorious to break it?
How hardly shall a Subject have that benefit of Law, which his Sovereign holds
himself obliged to deny him? But if Princes would consider, that the Religion
of Rome has Pardon in store for the greatest Crimes, but none for that of
denying the Roman Supremacy, that Sin against the Holy See not to be forgiven:
That it allows service done that See, not only an Atonement to expiate the
Guilt of the greatest Villainy, but meritorious to gain him a Crown in Heaven,
who will expose himself by the blackest of Crimes to support the Popes temporal
Crown in an exigence: That the Profession and Practice of the Roman Religion by
Roman Catholic Princes, has not been able to secure their Lives from being
made a Sacrifice to the Pleasure of the Pope and the interest of his Church, by
the hands of Roman Catholic Assassins: Did Princes consider this, neither
those who have been bred up in that persuasion could think themselves safe in
the Possession of their Crowns, without a dependence on the Pope and a
submission (unbecoming a Prince) to his Dictates and interest. Nor could any
Prince bred up in a Reformed Religion, (which owns the Supremacy of Kings
immediate under God, and makes Loyalty an indispensable duty from the Subject
to the Sovereign) be ever seduced to change it for a Religion, which has
furnished a Monk to murder Henry the third of France, (not only a Popish
Prince, but a Persecutor of Protestants) and a Ravillac to assassinate Henry
the fourth, who having escaped the fury of the Catholic Arms, while he
continued a Protestant, fell by the hands of a Popish Villain, after his
Perversion to the Popish Religion.

THE LAST EFFORTS OF AFFLICTED INNOCENCE.
The First Discourse: Between two Gentlemen, the one of Provence, the other of
Paris, etc.
The Provincial. YOU will not deny, Sir, but it is my fate to surprise you. I
cannot imagine this second Enterview less surprising than the former. A years
absence had given you hope, you were rid of a troublesome Companion; But he is
come again.


The Parisian. Persons of your Merit and charming Conversation are not to be
called troublesome: Surprises of this kind are always agreeable. But where have
you been since our last sight of you?


Prove. Soon after our second Discourse, I had advice by Letter of urgent
affairs hastened me into Provence, where I spent near a twelvemonth: But my
business in Provence could not make me so forget the Charms of Paris, but I am
come again to take a second taste of the pleasures of it, though perhaps to
your trouble: I have found again my Hugonot Gentleman, who has staid all this
while at Paris, and probably takes more delight in it than I.


Par. I perceive, he has not failed to entertain you afresh with the state of
his Religion, the Subject he was so full of the last year. And generally, the
Gentlemen of his persuasion, when at liberty, can hardly speak of any thing
else, every day affording them new matter of Discourse.


Pro. I confess, my Hugonot never meets me, but he speaks to me of it; and with
such Triumph and Joy, as if he had stopped your mouth and mine; and that we had
nothing to answer the Reasons he brought to prove, That the Conduct now used
against the Hugonots, is not only contrary to the Rules of Morality, and that
Integrity we ought to practice in observing our promises, but destructive of
the true interest of State. And, Sir, to your misfortune, I remember very well,
you concluded our last Discourse with these words; These Gentlemen, said you,
have taken time to think of their Objestions; it is fit, we should take time to
think of our Answers; it is enough for this day, that we have given them a
hearing. This, Sir, is a formal engagement you cannot recede from. You must
furnish me with Weapons to defend my self, or rather resolve to engage them
without a second: For I find my self not able to bear any longer a part in the
Action: I have a treacherous memory, and forget half what is said to me. Every
one pleads his Cause in Person with more Vigor and Success, than by Proxy: You
will be pleased to hear them speak, and I beg it of you.


Par. You have by your Merit gained so absolute an Empire over me, you may
command any thing in my Power: I am easily persuaded to enter into Discourse
with Persons for whom I have entertained an Esteem, upon the Character you have
given of them.


Pro. Since you have been pleased to receive my proposal in so obliging a
Manner, I will confess the whole truth, and let you see I had that Confidence
in your kindness; I have taken the Liberty to appoint my Gentleman and his
Lawyer their Rendesvouz at your house; they will be here in half an hour. I
knew this to be your day of repose, and came before to see if you would receive
us, and if I found you not at leisure to hear and to speak to us, I could have
persuaded my Gentlemen to take a turn in the Thuilleryes.


Par. They shall be very welcome, and so shall any that comes with you; as soon
as they are come, a Lacquay shall have order to stand at the door, and tell all
that ask for me, I am not within. But, Sir, since you will engage me to day in
a formal Combat, I will deal freely with you. I am not of opinion we should
engage our selves to answer particularly all they have said to you; and you
reported to me, That Method is fit only for the Schools, and would turn our
Discourse into Wrangling and Pedantry. If you will be advised by me, we will
raise a Counter-battery: Let us put them on the Defensive, and see how these
Gentlemen, who would prove, the safety of the state depends on their
preservation, can reconcile with this Maxim the danger they have heretofore put
this Monarchy in; for, I aver it, that in threescore or fourscore years they
have ten times brought the State to the brink of destruction by the disorders
they have caused, and the Wars they have raised in it.


Pro. You say well, Sir, that is their weak side, and I join in opinion with
you, they are to be attaqu'd there.


Par. But to the Business of our Answer; have you not seen a Writing published
not long after our last Discourse, entitled, A Letter from a Churchman to a
Friend? It was Printed at Brussels by Francis Foppery. It Is the very thing you
want, being a full and pertinent Answer to all the Complaints contained in the
Petition they intended to present to the King.


Pro. You may believe, that having had a design these twelve Months past to be
perfectly informed of this great Affair, I have not failed to furnish my self
with that Piece: I have read, and brought it with me, believing it might be of
use in the Subject we are to examine. But what is your judgment of it?


Par. I say, he has written like a man of sense, and considered well what he
said: And to tell you my mind, I look not on this Author, as an Author without
Mission and without Call, as a private Person who of his own head published a
Libel against the Hugonots; 'twas a business designed: That unknown Writer was
put on by the same persons that constantly solicit the King to ruin the
Hugonots, or by the Agents of the Clergy.


Pro. If I may be allowed to add to the Judgment you have given, I could wish,
that Writer had in some particulars weighed better what he said, and dealt more
ingenuously. For instance, where the Hugonots complain, That in ten years three
hundred of their Churches have been demolished, that Author answers, This is
quickly said, but hard to prove; Page 6.
for we aver, that there have not been forty of their Churches demolished
within these ten years: If we are called to justify this, we cannot do it: I
know that in the Province of Poitou alone, near forty Churches have been
demolished. And if that Paper was written by Order of the Clergy, as you
conjecture, I wish they had taken care not to contradict themselves: In the
Assembly of the Clergy at Paris in May last, where the Bishops at Court had
Order to debate the affair of the Regale, and the matter in Controversy
between the King and the Pope; The Agent of the Clergy who opened the Assembly,
said in his Harangue, that the King had demolished an infinite of Churches:
Infinite, (according to Mr. Churchman) is confined in very narrow bounds, being
reduced to forty. But I heard a knocking at the door, and am much mistaken if
it be not by our Gentlemen; they are the very Men.

The Hugonot Gentlemen. I know not, Sir, what you may think of us, who,
strangers as we are, come boldly into a house so considerable as yours, without
having asked your leave; especially since we are come with a set design to
quarrel the Master of the House, and oppose his sentiments. We have reason to
fear we shall not be very welcome; But there stands a Gentleman by you has
undertaken we shall; if we have presumed too far, he is to bear the blame.


Par. Persons of your Civility are welcome in any place. And as to the
Declaration of War you have made against me at your entrance, I am not afraid
of it; there is no danger, Sir, of any blood to be lost in our Quarrel; I am of
Opinion, whoever is vanquished will not be troubled at it: I apprehend your
meaning from the Discourse I have had with this Gentleman, who has given me an
account of what passed betwixt you and him.


Pro. My dear Friend, I am resolved to be even with you to day: You have taken
a second who is abler than I. And I shall engage you with a man too hard for
you both. God grant, your Defeat be so happy, as to dispose both of you to
Conversion: You shall have no more to do with me, you are in good hands; take
my word for it, I will henceforward be only a hearer.


The Hugonot Lawyer. Since the Gentleman accepts the Challenge with so good a
Grace, he will not be displeased, if I pray we may go into his Study, which
doubtless is well furnished; for I foresee we shall have occasion in our
Discourse to have recourse to some Books.


Par. With all my heart Gentlemen, we will go where you please, my Study is but
indifferent, but I believe we shall find there all the Books we shall need.

They go into the Parisians Study, and after a turn or two take their seats,
and proceed in their Discourse. By what I have heard from this Gentleman, who
has procured me the pleasure of seeing you, I conceive, Gentlemen, you approve
not of the Design the King has to reunite the Religions in his Kingdom, and
are not pleased with the Means he makes use of.


Hug. Law. Sir, We have more respect for the King, then to presume to judge of
his Conduct and condemn it: But we cannot but see, that those who give his
Majesty the Counsels on which the Conduct against us is grounded, are the
greatest Enemies of the State. All the Jealousy of the House of Austria, all
the Forces of Spain and of Germany, will never do France so much mischief as
these Politic Bigots.


Par. You have an ill opinion of our zealous Catholics; Methinks, the name you
give them is not suitable to them. Besides, it has something of Contradiction
in it; you call them Politic Bigots. Devotion is seldom joined with Policy:
The Politicians of all ages have been always opposite to the Bigot and Devout.


Hug. Law. Really, sir, they may very well be called Bigoted Politicians, when
their Devotion and Zeal for the Ruin of the poor Protestants is a mere piece
of Policy; their lives and their manners prove it clearly: There are some among
'em, to whom we do too great an Honor, if we think they believe there is a
God. I have known some Intendants of the Provinces, who had no Religion at
Paris, but became on the sudden in their several jurisdictions very zealous
Persecutors of the Hugonots. May there not be found among those of the Council
of Conscience some Persons for whose Piety, you Sir, would scarce pass your
word? I mean Bishops that keep Concubines; Monks, that are become Courtiers and
Effeminate, and these Complacent directors of Conscience, who approve of all
Actions, so the Protestants be destroyed, the Protestants; the light of whose
Doctrine is too piercing and clear, and exposes too much the vileness of the
Actions of their Persecutors, reproaches their Conduct, and torments them in
the very use of their pleasures. Is true Devotion consistent with maxims of
Morality, so loose as those of our greatest Persecutors? But so runs the
stream; thus men make their Court, it is the Mode, and all the World follows it.


Par. I easily believe, there are men of the Character you have given. But I am
persuaded there are of those Saints (or Bigots as you call them) who are really
devout. And I am clear of opinion, they are not Enemies of the State as you
say: They conceive unity of Religion the greatest good imaginable, and that it
would be the Glory of the King to procure this good to France. And this I take
to be the Principle they build upon, and the ground of their Actions.


Hug. Law. I am of Opinion, Sir, those men may very well be called Enemies of
the State, whose Conduct tends directly to its ruin; who inspire into his
Majesty's Subjects a mutual hatred, which obliges them to look on one another
as Enemies. After that the late King Lewis the 13th. of glorious Memory, had,
by the Method he took to appease the late Troubles, taken away the fear the
Protestants were under, that there were designs not only against their
Liberties, but their Lives, it may be affirmed, the hearts of those of either
Religion were so perfectly reunited, it was impossible for the Enemies of the
State to find a breach to enter at. But the King has been made to tell us in
one of his Arrests, that the Kindness and Patience he had had for his Subjects
of the pretended Reformed Religion, had heightened the adversion of his
Catholic Subjects against them. The Aversion the said Catholics have always
had against the said Religion, and those who profess it, has been increased by
the publishing the said Edicts, Declarations and Arrests. It is really very
necessary, the King should be informed, that contrary to what he has been made
believe, the Edicts of Pacification had established a perfect peace between
both Parties, and that happy union has been considerably altered, since the
considerable Breaches that have been made of those Edicts. The Roman Catholic
resumes that spirit of Animosity he formerly had; he looks on the Protestant as
a Victim ready to be sacrificed to his pleasure, and justifies by the Conduct
of his Superiors, the Aversion he has for his Countrymen and fellow Subjects:
The Protestant on the other side looks on the Roman Catholic as an Enemy who
endeavors to ruin him. He is full of diffidence, and mistrusts every thing: He
dares not speak, nor open his mind freely: He is afraid of being questioned for
a Word: His Bowels are shut up against the poor Roman Catholic, to whom he
used to be very open-handed: And he cannot forbear saying to himself, does
Charity oblige me to feed an Enemy to day, who, perhaps will take away my Life
to morrow? The poor Hugonot in every Village looks upon his Magistrates and
Superiors as men authorized to watch all occasions to destroy him. The
Magistrates think themselves obliged to be harsh and severe to those who are
hated by the Court. They tell us every day, we have Order to humble and
mortify you: You may expect what you please, but expect no favor. Heretofore
the saying was, you shall have Justice done you, but hope not for more. Alas!
It Is long since we have been in a Condition to expect any favor. We should now
be very well satisfied, could we have Justice done us; for Justice requires men
to keep their Promises: We should esteem our selves happy enough, if permitted
to enjoy peaceably the Privileges and Liberties confirmed to us by so many
Promises, Edicts and Arrests. You cannot believe it in our Power to look upon
our approaching ruin, without being troubled the same time to see others
rejoice at our fall. The injuries and reproaches the Hugonots receive from the
insulting Roman Catholics pierce to the heart, and make deep wounds which
bleed afresh every day. In a word, that sweetness of Commerce and fair
Correspondence that reigned among the Subjects of France is broken and lost,
and instead of mutual Confidence, nothing appears but a general fear and
universal mistrust: The Tumults in several places, the demolishing and burning
of Churches, the Seditions raised against the Protestants, the injuries done
their Persons for two years past, are convincing Proofs of what I allege. And
matters were carried on with so furious have, the King found himself obliged to
stop the Torrent of these Violences by an Arrest. You are not ignorant, Sir,
how necessary it is for the peace of a State, that the Inhabitants of a Kingdom
be united among themselves by the Bonds of Amity.


Par. It Is for that very reason, Sir, the King would reduce all his Subjects to
one Religion: By suffering two different parties in a State, you sow the Seed
of immortal Divisions: You know the troubles the Guelfes and the Ghibellines
caused in Italy; they that would maintain the peace of a State, must suppress
the very Name and Memory of Factions.


Hug. Law. It Is not with Sects in Religion as with Factions in the State, the
case is very different. Factions of State may be suppressed by good Conduct,
and destroyed by time; yet a considerable time is necessary for doing it; the
Example you have mentioned of the Guelses and Gibellines sufficiently proves
it: Those Factions reigned several Ages; nor could the Name be extinguished but
after hundreds of years, and the desolation of Italy by the fury of the
Parties. But to take away the difference of Sentiments in Religion is a more
difficult task. Fire and Faggot, Gibbets and Axes signify nothing; this
appears clearly by the History of the last Age. We must bear with a mischief we
can neither prevent nor remove, and nourish Peace between two Parties which
cannot be destroyed, but may be preserved by permitting the difference, and
maintaining a War between them: This seems a Paradox, but is not so difficult
as you may imagine. Provided the stronger Party oppress not the weaker, it is
certain the weaker will have for the stronger a kindness and value for the
Toleration indulged; And the stronger will permit it self to be won by the
kindness and grateful acknowledgments of the weaker: It Is a matter tried and of
fresh Experience. Every one knows the Union the Catholic and we Hugonots lived
in, before they inspired the King with a design to destroy us.


Par. This method of preserving Peace is not so sure as you imagine. But I
could heartily wish a true remedy could be found for the greatest mischief in a
State, which is, the Disunion of its Members, and the Animosity reigning
between the Subjects of one Sovereign.


Hug. Law. You will grant me then, Sir, that those who blow up the fire, and
revive these Animosities, are great Enemies of the State. And this they are
evidently guilty of, who inspire into the King, Sentiments of Rigor and
Severity against the Reformed. But, alas! The matter is yet more sad; they are
not satisfied with endeavoring to take from the King all the goodness and
kindness he once had for us; but they labor all they can to root out of our
hearts the Love, the Respect, the Veneration and the Tenderness we have for our
King. I aver it, we love our King even to adoration; we are so clearly
convinced of his sublime Qualities, it adds infinitely to our grief, to find
our selves so ill thought of by a Prince, for whom we have so much Zeal and
Admiration. Is it in the power of Man to love and to fear at once the same
person? Oh! how shall we do it? We are told every moment the King has a design
to destroy us: He is represented to us with his Sword in his hand ready drawn
for our ruin. It Is Published, it is Printed, that if he live so long, as by
course of Nature it is presumed he may, he will see our Religion at an end.
Process verbal of the Assembly March and May 1681.
If God preserve to us this great Prince, so long as all good People ought to
wish, he will utterly suppress this Monster in his Kingdom. What means this but
to cast us into a general Consternation, with design to stifle and destroy the
love we have for our Prince, and to make us look on his Life, as the greatest
of our misfortunes? They must have a great stock of Regeneration who can love
those they esteem their Enemies; yet all means possible are used to persuade us
the King is the greatest Enemy we have. As to the Consternation, they have
attained their ends; it is general and so great, it cannot be greater. Yet
hitherto the Love we have for our King, stands firm against this horrible
Consternation, because we have yet some hope the King will permit himself to be
moved by our Prayers and Patience. And if disappointed in this, we will apply
our selves to God for Grace, not to do any thing contrary to our duty.


Par. To tell you the truth, they slight you so much now adays, they value not
at all your Love or your Hatred.


Hug. Law. Ah, Sir, say not so; I know well enough those are the Sentiments
they would inspire into his Majesty. But to a Prince so sage, and so good as
ours, it cannot be a matter of indifferency to be beloved by his Subjects.
Oderint dum metuant, (Let them hate so they fear me) is a word for a Tyrant. I
am sure, the King cannot endure the thought of having in his Kingdom two
millions of Subjects, who should obey him only out of a slavish fear. He is the
common Father of his Country, and I cannot but believe he takes us all for his
Children.


Par. You have no great reason to think so, to deal ingenuously with you, the
King takes you not for very good Subjects; and means have been used to make him
sensible, you are troubled at his Victories, and that you fear the success of
his Arms and Designs, no less than every good Frenchman loves and prays for it.


Hug. Law. It Is true, Sir, this is the Character they give of us to the King,
and endeavor to persuade us to believe to be true; for by the usage we have at
their hands, and the Speeches they give out of us, they labor to make us
sensible, that the Grandeur of the King will be fatal to us, and that having
humbled all his Enemies, he will employ his Forces for our ruin; they would
persuade us, that our present sufferings are but an effect of former Threats.
The King, say they, is become the terror of his Enemies, and the delight of his
Subjects; he fears nothing. And having not now any other employment for his
Power, will force you headlong into Ruin. Ah! Sir, if we were so unhappy (as
we are represented) to behold with trouble the Glory of the King, it would
become them to study to reclaim us by changing their Conduct. For what can give
more trouble to a good Prince, than to think he has in his Country a great
number of his Subjects obliged to lament his Victories, to mourn amidst the
public Joys, and to look upon the Prosperity of the State as fatal and
pernicious to their private Concern; being assured when the State has not
other business, it will turn its whole Force against them? If we believe one
God, and one Providence, we ought to be persuaded, that God is moved by the
Vows and Prayers of men, and that the most unanimous Prayers are the most
Efficacious. It Is the Interest of a Prince to use all his Subjects with equal
kindness, that the Union of their Hearts, and Harmony of their Prayers, may
bring down the Blessings of Heaven on the State. But there cannot be a greater
Calumny and Falsehood, than to affirm we are troubled at the Prosperity of the
State. Has any one of those of our Religion, who have had the Honor to serve
the King in his Armies, been guilty of Cowardice or Baseness whatever? Has any
of them fought with less Zeal, appeared less Brave, or done less for the
Victory than others in the Army? What signs are there we are not pleased with
the public Prosperity? What Cause have we given for any to think so? The truth
is, they describe us such as they would have us to be, and such as they who
accuse us would be, if they were in our Case: But God gives us the Grace to
retain true French hearts, to rejoice at the Grandeur of the King, and to leave
to Providence the success of our private Affairs.


Par. It Is true, you have cunning enough to put a good Face on your Matters,
and to color your Designs with appearances of Loyalty, but you have in your
hearts a hidden inclination to revolt.


Hug. Law. But is it fit to charge the Innocent with the blackest of Crimes
without Proof? It Is said we have a secret disposition to Rebellion. How do they
prove it? What do they mean by it? In my Opinion, the Design of Rebels is to
change the form of Government of a State, as the Fanatics did in England by
Cromwell, or to call in a stranger into the Country, and submit to new
Dominion. I know but these two ends of Rebellion; for to make Insurrection for
Insurrections sake, to raise Tumults for no other end, but to make a busle, is
a Design fit only for Fools and Madmen. Can we be liable to the least
Suspicion of the former? Have we given by any of our Actions, any color to
believe we desire a change of the present form of Government, and to see the
Monarchy turned into a popular State? What should we get by it? Can we promise
our selves greater safety, when exposed to the Authority and Fury of so wild
and unreasonable a Beast as the Multitude? As to the second, what advantage can
we expect by changing our Master? Are we desirous to be under the Dominion of
Spain? Do men think we shall gain by the shift? Or do they believe we have such
Maggots in our Brains, as to desire the English may abandon their Isles, and
come once more and conquer our Continent? Or that the Hollanders quitting their
Marshes, should possess themselves of this Kingdom? Nothing but Frenzy can make
men capable of Chimaeras as these; so that they who charge us with being
Enemies to the State, have as little sense as Charity in their Censure.


Par. I perceive by my friends eyes, he burns with impatience to propose his
Objections out of a Book in his hand.


Hug. Law. What Book is it?


Pro. It Is the Letter of a Churchman to a Friend.


Hug. Law. I know it very well, without hearing more of it; I have read that
Libel, and easily comprehend what Objections may be raised out of it: But, Sir,
give us leave, before we enter into that great affair, to finish what we have
begun. The Apology you obliged me to make, has put me out of my way; for we
began, with proving that the Enemies of the Reformed, are Enemies of the State.
I have already made it appear, by showing, that they disunite the Kings
Subjects, that they root out of the Kings heart, the Fatherly kindness he had
for us; and endeavor to root out of ours, the Love we have for the greatest of
our Kings. This concerns the Vitals of the State; it attacks the Principles by
which it subsists: For the bond of Love between the King and his Subjects, is
that which unites all the parts of this great and vast Body. But it is fit I
represent to you those horrible Calamities these Enemies of France would plunge
the Kingdom in. They would bring back again the last Age, and revive the Reigns
of Henry the 2d. and Charles the 9th. In a word, they would set up new Gibbets,
and kindle new Fires against the Reformed. Can France expect a great Mischief?


Par. You Are much mistaken Sir, there is no such intention. Some Zealots may
desire such a thing; but the King has not any such Design.


Hug. Law. I believe you Sir, We know the Goodness and Clemency of the King,
and that he naturally hates all Violence. We see every day the Prudence of his
Ministers. But men are led where they never had intention to go; they are moved
by degrees to revoke all the Edicts of Pacification. If Matters be carried on
with that Violence they have been for some years, and especially within few
months past, the Business will be quickly at an end, they will shortly persuade
the King, three fourths of the Hugonots of his Kingdom are converted: They will
tell him, the residue is nothing, or not worth the thinking of; And so prevail
with him to suppress the Edicts. Thus shall near two millions of Souls remain
debarred the exercise of their Religion: It Is a violent State, in which
Consciences cannot stay long: The Ministers shall be forbidden to Preach on
pain of death: Yet they will Preach, (as before in the like case) in Caves, and
Woods, and Cellars, and Darkness. And instead of preaching in a few places,
they will preach in every place. It cannot be, but they will be discovered,
exercising a Religion prohibited by the State, and incur the Penalties to be
inflicted by the late Edicts. And according to the Severity of those Penalties
they will be Imprisoned, Banished, Hanged. Consider how much it will grate the
good nature of the King, to see himself obliged to permit his Subjects to be
put to a thousand Tortures, for no other reason but having a desire to serve
God. I foresee Matters may be carried yet farther. Among two or three hundred
thousand Persons able to bear Arms, remaining still of that Religion, it is
impossible but there is a great number of Fools, impatient and desperate: In
plurality of Voices, Fools are always too hard for the Wise, who are often
obliged to permit themselves to be carried away with the stream of the major
Vote. Such heady and impatient People, instead of Submitting, will Mutiny, make
Parties, take up Arms. And then will the King be forced to draw Rivers of Blood
out of the hearts of his Subjects.


Par. Ay, Ay, Sir, there is great cause to fear you you are in a powerful and
formidable Condition: Where are your Chiefs? where your strong Towns? Where
your Money? Where your Foreign Allyances? You have nothing to support you, but
the indulgence of our Kings.


Hug. Law. Pardon me if I tell you, you do not apprehend me; my design is not
to put you in fear, but move you to pity. I do not say, but the King may with
all the ease imaginable, dissipate the Forces of any Faction that should rebel
against him. I am fully convinced of it, not only by your Reasons, but some
stronger Arguments. You say the Reformed have neither Chiefs, nor Towns, nor
Money. Have you forgot that saying of the Poet, Furor arma ministrat? Fury
never wants Weapons, they who have no Towns, may take some. Those who want
Money, may Rob and Plunder. Despair can effect what Valor and Courage never
durst undertake. A State that has lying close in its Bowels two millions of
Malcontents (though but Women and Children, and the dregs of Mankind) is in
danger of suffering terrible Revolutions. After the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew, the Hugonots had none to head them. Dandelot was dead, the Admiral
assassinated, all the Flower of their Nobility murdered, and the Princes of
the Blood Prisoners, yet they never spoke bigger, never insisted on higher
Terms than then. But I expect not any benefit to the Reformed from such
Revolutions, because God never blesses the designs of defending a Religion by
Arms, of Rebelling against our Prince, and making War under pretenses of Piety:
The furies of Civil War being absolutely inconsistent with Charity. Such heady
and impatient people by taking Arms will act against the Principles of
Religion, and (I aver it) particularly against the Principles of the Reformed:
They are to expect no other success, but to be massacred by the People and the
Arms of their Sovereign: They would occasion (as heretofore) millions of
Innocents to perish with them. The King would certainly master them, but would
be grieved to see his Countries drowned with the Blood of his Subjects: What
greater misfortune than this to a Prince so good-natured as ours? Besides, a
State busied in reducing rebellious Subjects, is in a manner abandoned to
strangers; who fill and tear it in pieces with Factions, foment Divisions, take
advantage of Disorders, and draw Blood from all parts of it, while it self
opens the Veins on every side. Those Gentlemen who constantly solicit the King
to Rigor against us, are certainly weary of the prosperity of the State; they
have no mind to see France any longer the most flourishing Kingdom of Europe:
They would bring back that Age wherein the Realm divided against it self,
called in the Duke of Parma, the Flemings and Spaniards to enrich themselves
with the pillages of the Towns, and desolation of the Provinces.


Par. I see, Gentlemen, the alarm you have taken, has stirred your fancy, and
put you in a heat: You go on too far, and too fast, there is a design to Ruin
you; it is confessed, but it is by undermining you by degrees: Those very men you
call Enemies of the State, have no mind to see the effusion of your Blood.


Hug. Law. Were those men guilty of no other mischief, but a design to deprive
the King of such a multitude of faithful Subjects, they very well deserved to
be called Enemies of the State. I hope those of the Reformed Religion will
never permit themselves to run into the Extremities I spoke of; But they will
do all they can to go seek in other Countries, the peace and the quiet they are
denied in their own. I have told you already their Consternation is great and
universal. And all the considerable persons of our body seek only a Gate to go
out at, and a means to remove out of his Majesty's sight the Objects that
displease him.


Par. I cannot think they would be much troubled at your departure out of the
Kingdom.


Hug. Law. Whether they would be troubled I know not, but I very well know they
would have cause enough to be troubled. The Count de los Balbazes during his
stay at Paris, being in company of several Ministers of foreign Princes, they
fell in Discourse of the Conduct of the Court of France, as to the Hugonots. He
exclaimed against the Policy of the Cabinet, and said, that for the good of the
State it mattered little what Religion the Subjects were of, provided they were
Loyal and dutiful to their Sovereign; that a like Conduct had turned some
States belonging to the King his Master, into vast Deserts and Solitudes by the
expulsion of the Moors; who were a remnant of Jews and Mehometans, multiplied
and spread over the Provinces of Castille, Valentia, and Andalusia. They had
been baptized, and to escape the Inquisition, made profession of Christianity,
but privately used the Worship of their Ancient Religion. Upon some false
advice given Philip the second of Spain, of a great design the Moors had
against the Christians, they were expelled the Country. They were not
permitted to carry any thing away, but some Commodities of Spain, but were
forced to leave behind, their Gold, and their Silver, as well as their
immoveables. This was executed with extreme Rigor: There went out of Spain
twelve hundred thousand Men and Women; the greatest part whereof perished
several ways; Spain having been well drained of men by sending Colonies into
America, was so exhausted by this great Evacuation, it is not repeopled to this
day. And that Country which was heretofore one of the fairest of Europe, is
now a vast and barren Desert, and the Spaniards feel at this day the smart of
their Barbarity. God grant a like misfortune happens not to France, and that it
make not it self desolate by an expulsion of two millions of her best
Inhabitants: I cannot think those who endeavor it are much her friends.


Par. However, Sir, I am of Opinion the persons you speak of, take themselves
to be as great lovers of their Country, as you, or any of your Party; And if
the matter be disputed, I very much question, whether you will carry the Point.


Hug. Law. I find all I say to you, does but vex, without convincing you. But
you will excuse the Expressions of miserable persons, who have not the Liberty
to speak in Public; they may be allowed at least to complain in Private, and
when they can do it without danger. Since you are not pleased with a Discourse
tending to demonstrate, that the Enemies of the Reformed of France, are Enemies
of the State, I will trouble you but with a word more on that Subject: You
cannot but believe that Foreign Allyances are of some importance to France.
You understand the Politics so well, you cannot be ignorant, a State without
Allies is not capable of doing great things. This makes Princes labor
perpetually to break those Engagements their Neighbors have with their
Enemies, and to persuade them to espouse their Interests. The greatest part of
the Allies of France are Protestants: The Swisses, the Elector of Brandenburg,
the King of Swede, and heretofore the Hollander, who perhaps may again renew
his Alliance. But can you believe to use the Protestants of France as they are
dealt with at present, a proper means to engage strictly the Protestant Allies
of the Crown?


Par. I do not see the King finds any great difficulty in making Allyances with
protestant Princes, or that they concern themselves much, or trouble his
Ministers with your pretended Calamities.


Hug. Law. The King is now in so elevated a Condition, that all comply with
him. Yet the private disgusts of his Allies are still in being, though they do
not appear: They are Seeds that will certainly spring up sooner or later.
States are not always in a flourishing Condition; when Fortune declares against
them, old grudges break out. It Is not to be imagined, men can, out of Policy,
wholly divest themselves of love to their Religion, and become altogether
insensible of the Calamities they suffer whom they call Brethren, though the
present State of Affairs may oblige them to dissemble. It Is very well known,
the Allies I have named, have heretofore concerned themselves in our
Calamities, though far less than those we now endure: It Is not their
Affections, but the Times are changed. The English naturally hate the French,
and find new reason to hate them in the rigorous Proceedings of the Catholics
of France against the Protestants there, who profess the same Religion with the
English: To prove that strangers are somewhat concerned for our Calamities, I
need but read the Letters of his Majesty of England to the Bishop and Mayor of
London; they are newly published, and you will not repent your reading them,
being Letters worthy the Piety of that Prince, and capable to clear him from
any unjust suspicions that might have been had of him in respect of his
Religion.

His Majesty's Letters to the Bishop of London, and the Lord Mayor.
To the Right Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved
Counselor, HENRY Bishop of London.
CHARLES R.

RIght Reverend Father in God, Our Right trusty and Well-beloved Counselor, We
greet you well. Whereas We are given to understand, that a great number of
Persons, and whole Families of Protestants in the Kingdom of France, have
lately withdrawn themselves from thence, to avoid those hardships and
extremities, which are brought upon them there for the sake of their Religion,
and have betaken themselves into this Our Kingdom as a place of Refuge, where
they may enjoy the liberty and security of their Persons and Consciences. And
whereas most of them, if not all, having been forced to abandon their native
abodes and accommodations in haste and confusion, must needs be in a great
measure destitute of means for their present subsistence and relief: We being
touched with a true sense and compassion of their deplorable Condition, and
looking upon them not only as distressed Strangers, but chiefly as persecuted
Protestants, very desirous to extend Our Royal Favor, and Protection toward
them, not doubting but all Our good and loving Subjects will be also willing
and forward on their parts to afford them what helps and comforts they can in
this their day of Affliction. We do therefore in very especial manner recommend
their Case unto your pious Consideration and Care, hereby requiring you,
forthwith to give Directions unto all the Clergy of our City of London, and
parts adjacent, that in their solemn Congregations upon the next Lords day, or
as soon as may be possible, they represent the sad state of these poor People,
and by the most effectual Arguments of Christian-charity, excite their
Parishioners to contribute freely toward the supply of their necessities. We
shall not need to press you in this behalf, well knowing your Zeal in so good a
work, which will be no less pleasing to Us, than We are sure it will be
acceptable to Almighty God. And Our further Pleasure is, that you take care
that the Moneys so collected (which We expect should be forthwith returned into
your hands) be distributed in such manner as may best answer those ends, for
which this Collection is intended. And so We bid you heartily farewell. Given
at Our Court at Windsor the 22d. day of July, 1681. In the Three and Thirtieth
year of Our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command, L. Jenkins.


To Our Right trusty and Well-beloved Sir Patience Ward Knight, Lord Mayor of
Our City of London.
CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. Being given to understand
that very many Protestants, and even whole Families, finding themselves under
great Pressures and Persecutions in the Kingdom of France, for the sake of
their Religion, have chosen rather to leave their native Country and
Conveniences, than to hazard the Ruin of their Consciences, and therefore
great numbers of them are come, and more are endeavoring every day to come
into this Kingdom for Shelter and Security. We are very desirous that here they
should not only meet with all kind Reception, but also with that Benevolence
and Charity which may in some reasonable measure contribute toward their
present Relief and Comfort in this their Affliction. To which end, We have
signified Our Pleasure to the Bishop of London, requiring him to give
Directions unto the Clergy of that Our City, and places adjacent, to represent
the sad Condition of these poor People in their solemn Congregations, and also
to excite their Parishioners to the free and cheerful Relief of their
distressed Brethren. But as we cannot have too many hands employed in so good a
work, so We have thought fit to recommend the same unto you also, that by your
encouragement and endeavor, Our good Subjects inhabiting in that Our City, may
be induced and obliged to a more than ordinary demonstration of their
compassion and liberality on this Occasion. And so We bid you heartily
farewell. Given at Our Court at Windsor the 22d. day of July, 1681. in the
Three and Thirtieth year of Our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command, L. Jenkins.



The Hugonot Gentlemen. YOU know without doubt, that the King of England
proceeded further in our favor; declaring all the persecuted Protestants (who
should come into England) Denizens of his Kingdom. And that all those who
should transport their effects thither in Merchandise, should import them
Custom-free; and whereas the Collection for the French Protestants in England
was at first made only in the City and Suburbs of London, the King has
commanded it should be made throughout the Kingdom. Nor is it England alone
opens its arms to receive the distressed Protestants of France; They are
entertained in all places of Europe: The Duke of Hanan has offered to receive
four hundred Families; Swede and Denmark, tho very remote, declare themselves
ready to embrace the scattered Remains of the Protestant Churches of France.
The Charity of England toward them is very edifying, yet I confess, I am not
equally satisfied with all other Protestants who might afford Refuge to their
persecuted Brethren: I have seen some of them returned as Persons in despair
from places where they had promised themselves support, resolved to hazard all,
and run again into the temptation they had fled from; being so scandalized with
the cold reception and hard usage they had found, that they were ready to
hearken to the solicitations of the Missionaries.


Hug. Law. I confess, the carriage of some strangers toward our persecuted
Protestants appeared to me quite contrary to the spirit of Christianity: And if
it continue, what will become of so many poor Peasants and Tradesmen, who groan
at this day in search of the means to have liberty of Conscience? What will
become of so many eminent Persons, who will be obliged to quit their Country
naked and destitute, to follow Jesus Christ, and can carry nothing with them,
but their Lives and their Consciences? What can be more Lamentable, than to see
how cold men's Charity and Zeal is? It Is more deplorable than the Persecution.
What is become of that spirit of our Ancestors, that made them have all things
common among them? That rendered every private Person sensible of the public
Calamity: In the beginning of the Reformation, if those Protestants, who were
in peace and safety, had done nothing for those who were under Persecution, the
Light of the Reformation had been long since put out in most places of Germany,
the Low Countries, and France.


Hug. Gent. Men's Charity, I hope, will be awakened again to do something for
God and themselves: For, in truth, the Compassion the Protestants in safety
should express for their afflicted Brethren of France, is but a good Office
done to themselves. There is not a Protestant State Neighboring on France, but
is under apprehension of its Arms, and has cause to fear it may one day feel
the miseries the Reformed of this Kingdom groan under now: Wherever the King
carries his Arms, those wicked Counselors who persuade him to ruin our
Religion, will carry their Counsels, and make use of the Fortune of this great
Monarch to accomplish their designs. This may give them who at present are in
safety, cause enough to fear they may not always continue so. It would become
them to merit a Compassion they may one day stand in need of, by exercising
Compassion toward those who are actually in misery. But above all they ought
by Works of Mercy, and the Exercise of fervent Charity, and strict Union among
themselves, to divert the Wrath of God that threatens them; and to endeavor to
escape the greatest of Misfortunes, the loss of Liberty, and oppression of
their Consciences. I cannot forbear adding, that the Children of this World are
wiser in their Generation, than the Children of Light, and that their Zeal not
only upbraids, but may justly make us ashamed of our coldness: It Is difficult
to express the great pains the Roman Catholics take, they spare no cost to
make Converts, as they call them. There are very considerable Funds assigned
for the Maintenance and Encouragement of those they have persuaded to change
their Religion. The King allows out of his Revenue, vast sums for gaining and
recompencing these new Converts: We have known lewd Women converted big with
Bastard Children, who had Pensions of four or five hundred Livers allowed them.
It Is a Prodigy to me, that we are not willing for the support of poor
distressed Protestants, to be at that expense they of the other Party are at,
for perverting of Souls. I wish, all Protestant States would imitate the
principal Towns of the Low Countries, which give Lodging in a manner gratis to
all those who fly thither for Refuge; besides immunity from Parish-Duties and
Charges levied for the use of the Town, and furnish with Money and Goods those
that have none, till they are in a Condition to subsist by themselves, and make
great Collections in their Towns for that purpose.


Hug. Law. Though all that could be wished, is not every where done for those
who leave their Country to save their Souls, yet sufficient is done to make it
appear, that the Kings Protestant Allies and Neighbors, are much grieved at
the ill usage of their Brethren; and that disgusted with the present Conduct of
our Ministers in that Point, they long for an Occasion to show their
Resentment: I cannot imagine upon what account our Ruin can be looked upon as
advantageous to the State: I will not trouble you with a repetition of the
Reasons we gave the last year, to convince the King of our inviolable Fidelity,
and consequently, that he is concerned to preserve us no less than any other of
his Subjects: I make no question, but you have heard all our Remarks on that
Subject.


Par. Yes, Gentlemen, I have heard them, and think it needless to insist
further on that point: Time will show who are in the right, you or we. Counsels
are justified or condemned by the Event: Unfortunate Valor is branded for
Rashness, and fortunate Rashness commended for Valor. If the Mischiefs you
foretell happen to the State according to your Prediction, it will be judged you
were in the right; but if a way be found by fair means, and without effusion of
Blood, to bring you again into the bosom of the Church, you will be obliged to
acknowledge our Conduct, not altogether so imprudent as you imagined; therefore
without looking further into the future, I will consider only the present, and
must say, I do not see what great cause you have to complain. You will find it
a hard task to persuade us you are miserably and rigorously dealt with, when we
see you in full peace, enjoy every man his Estate, and the fruit of his Labor:
I will not mince the Matter to you, by denying all we can shall be done for
destroying your Religion, but with exception of your Persons and Estates which
shall be spared: Is not this fair, and ought you not to rest satisfied?


Hug. Law. Ought we not to rest satisfied, say you? Sure, Sir, you take us for
People whose God is their Belly, who believe not a future State, but place all
their happiness in present enjoyments. The Principal is taken from us, our
Religion and the Liberty of our Consciences, and you would have us remain
content with the residue. And what is that residue, you say, shall not be
meddled with? Our Estates and our Persons: Are not our Persons meddled with,
when they exercise a thousand Cruelties, and commit infinite Outrages to make
us change our Religion; when they strip us of all means to live, when they
reduce us to a necessity of starving, or turning, by declaring us incapable of
employment, and excluding us from all Offices and Professions, and from the
exercise of all Trades we could get a livelihood by: When Gibbets were set up
in every corner to hang us on, and Fires kindled for burning us, we were
allowed the choice of going to Mass or of dying. Are we not reduced now to the
same choice by their taking from us all means of living? Are we not in as bad a
Condition as heretofore? We must dye or change our Religion: It Is true, the
death now proposed is not hanging or burning as formerly, but I am not yet
resolved, whether is more eligible to dye in a moment on a Gibbet, or pine to
death by a long train of Miseries.


Par. You are not wanting to your selves in setting out to the height the
misery of your condition; But leaving out the figures and aggravations of your
pathetical Descriptions, the rest will signify little.


Hug. Law. Do you call it Figure and Aggravation to be in our condition,
expecting every day the thunderbolt of a new Arrest for demolishing our
Churches, and depriving us of the Liberty of worshipping God Almighty? You
complain to this day of the Outrages committed upon your Churches and Images in
the heat of the Civil War: If our Churches were destroyed by Violences as
those, we should have the Comfort of being able to preach on the Ruins of them,
and hope to see them rebuilt when the Kingdom should be at peace. But we lose
all, not only our present Possession, but all hopes for the future. We are
forced to grieve at heart for Calamities for which there is no Remedy: I say,
to grieve at heart, for it is Criminal for us to make the most innocent
complaint. Perish we must, and under a Formality, and appearance of justice: Be
our Defense never so good, what evidence soever we produce in our favor, we
are still in the wrong, our Possession is unjust, and has no right to ground
it. They are not satisfied with taking away our Estates, but they brand us for
Usurpers: How prodigiously bold is the Libel in your hand, to challenge us to
show one Church demolished that was a Church at the time limited by the Edict,
when nothing can be more notorious than that (of the great number of places of
Religious Exercise lately interdicted) perhaps there are not two that can be
any way suspected to have been set apart for that use since the Edict of Nants.
This is clear by the Tables of our Ancient Synods, where we find a greater
Number (by half) of places for Religious Worship, than we have at this day. We
had them at the time the Edict was made, else how could they appear in Acts of
the Synods past at that time? By the Edict we are to continue in peaceable
Possession of all we then had, and what we then had, is now taken from us
contrary to the express terms of the Edict, and all the rights of Possession
and Prescription. For besides their Arrests ex part, wherein they pretend we
have Liberty to make our Defense, yet condemn us unheard, they extort from his
Majestys Declarations that ruin us, that reduce us to Extremity, and run us
into Despair.


Par. Pray, Sir, which are those ruining Declarations?


Hug. Law. I need not tell you Sir, what they are: They are too public to
escape the knowledge of a Person so well acquainted as you are with the World:
There are Volumes made of them, and our good friends of the Clergy cram their
Studies with Collections of them. They set up the Title of them in Triumph;
Arrests passed against the Hugonots by the Solicitation of the Clergy of
France: Our late Calamities are so grievous, they make us forget the former: Do
but call to mind the Declarations published against us within twelve months
last past, and you will see whether our Complaints are but figurative and
pathetick Aggravations.


Par. Those Declarations are not very many.


Hug. Law. They are not quite as many as the weeks in a year, but half a dozen
more such would quite undo us: Have we no cause, think you, to complain of the
Declaration that orders the Judges or others appointed for that purpose, to go
visit our sick at the point of death, to know what Religion they will dye in?


Par. What harm in that? Every man may die of what Religion he please: Those
that visit you, put no force upon you, but ask you a Question or two and leave
you.


Hug. Law. The fault I find with it, is, that it opens a gap for all sorts of
Seduction and Violence. By the Declaration, every door must be opened to the
Magistrate; he enters attended with a Curate, and a Missionary: The Arrest
excludes not the Relations of the sick from hearing them examined: It neither
orders them to withdraw, nor orders the Examination to be taken in their
presence. But a Law must always be favorably interpreted: And that the sick
may be at liberty to speak their thoughts, their Friends and Relations must be
put out of sight: By this excellent Construction of the Arrest, they get the
sick person into their hands, force the Husband from the bed of his Wife, and
the Wife out of the Arms of her Husband, the Child from his dying Father, and
the Father from his Child: Having cleared the Room and secured themselves from
fear of a Witness, they promise, they threaten, they frighten a dying wretch
and load him with injuries: they take advantage of the disorder of his
faculties occasioned by his sickness, and the fright he is in to see so many
new Faces about his Bed. A word ill placed, and unwary expression (the effect
of a high Fever or Frenzy) is laid hold on, as sufficient ground for Mr.
Curate to cry aloud, Mr. -- or Mrs. -- is willing to dye a Catholic: Upon
this, the sick person is taken into their care, his Kindred and Friends removed
from him, and he made believe, he is perfectly converted. By this Artifice he
gives up his last breath amidst Crosses, and Tapers, and Images and Crucifixes,
and other Utensils of a Church, into which they say he is entered, though he
knows nothing of it. When he is dead, they bury him with like Pomp, they take
away his Children in their Infancy, they ransack his House and leave his Family
desolate.


Par. The Arrest neither says, nor means any such matter.


Hug. Law. I know not whether the Arrest have any such meaning: Perhaps his
Majesty who passed it, had not: But I am sure this was their meaning who
obtained it: It appears by their practice pretended, pursuant to it: Till our
days, a man's House was his Castle, and private habitations were inviolable
Sanctuaries; Where every one (taking care, not to offend against Law) had free
permission to do what he pleased, at least, had the Privilege to dye
undisturbed. But now we are not allowed to live in quiet, or to dye so: Our
Enemies have in this particular invented a new kind of Cruelty, unheard of even
in the Ages of Persecution and Martyrdom: If in those days men were obliged to
live in the Emperors Religion, they were permitted to dye in the Christian: Can
any thing be imagined more cruel than the usage we find? A sick wretch in his
last Agonies struggling with death, has need of more strength than his own to
maintain the Combat: The smoothest Calm, and greatest Tranquillity of Spirit is
little enough to put him in a Condition to face those Terrors that usher in the
last moment of his Life: It Is some comfort to a man in that case to breathe his
last in the Arms of his Wife, or Embraces of his Children: They cherish and
help him, he gives them his blessings: Amidst these mutual Offices of Charity
and Tenderness, all their hearts melt into Tears: The one and the other desire
privacy and quiet to vent their grief, and give free course to their just
Lamentations. A Magistrate enters with all the Clergy of a Parish at his heels:
The House is filled with noise and bustle: A crowd presently gathers at the
door, and with horrid noise and prodigious outcryes, grate the Ears of the
dying Man: At this very time and in these Circumstances, he who has scarce
strength enough left to breathe out his Soul, must engage in a Conflict he was
hardly able to maintain when in perfect health: He must answer; he must study
and ponder what to say; he must consider how he may escape the Snares laid for
him in captious and ambiguous Questions; he must sustain the shock of Threats,
and encounter the influence and power of Authority. He must, for his Comfort,
have the patience to hear an ignorant Curate, who to demonstrate our Religion
false, shall use no other Argument, but that of repeating a hundred times in a
quarter of an hour with a furious tone, that if he dye in that Religion, he is
damned as a Devil; instead of his dear Children and Friends, he must be content
to see about him a company of men, whose Eyes sparkle with rage, and whose
Tongues (if he persevere in his Religion) thunder out Reproaches.

The Condition of a dying man ordinarily disarms the fury of an Enemy, who
having given the mortal Wound, gives the man leave to dye in peace. Are the
miseries of our Life so few, that we must be denied a quiet death? You have,
doubtless, heard what happened in the Fauxboarg St. Marcell, since this
Declaration: A poor Woman being very ill, through the violence of her Distemper
ralk'd idle: That very time the Commissioner and Priests enter her Chamber,
turn out her Relations and Friends who assisted her, make her say what they
please, and go their ways to fetch the Consecrated Bread and Oil for extreme
Unction. That none in their absence might get into the Chamber, they lock the
Door and take the Key with them. The Woman in the mean time coming to her self,
was frightened to see a Cross standing at her Beds feet: She presently guessed
what had happened in her Fever; she rises, and designing to get away, runs to
the Door: finding it locked she resolves to go out at the Window, too great an
adventure for one in so weak a Condition. Endeavoring to get down, she fell
from the third story, and lay dead with the fall on the Pavement. A more
lamentable Accident could not have happened, except that at Ville dieu, a
Village of Poitou some months since: The Curate and Churchwarden went into the
House of an old Man who lay sick; they turned his Children out of doors,
threatening them furiously, if they came near the House, they should hang for
it: The poor Fellows frightened with Persecutions they had already endured,
retired into the Woods, and durst not approach the House: In their absence, the
Persecutors teased the old Man several days: But he had the Sense and Courage
to resist their Tentations, who finding at length they could not prevail,
quitted him: The poor man left thus without help, was starved to death, and was
found dead, having eaten his hands.


Hug. Gent. You have told your story, give me leave to take my turn, and
acquaint you with one I heard but a few hours before I came hither: In
Mompellier, two Maids, the one sick, the other in health, renounced our
Religion in one day; she that was sick had done it in the height of her Fever:
Being come to her self and hearing what had passed, she was so grieved, she
fell again into her Frenzy, and flung her self out at a Window: The other who
was in health had no sooner committed the fault, but she repented it: She
protested, she had been surpised, and could not live in the Religion they had
newly made her embrace. Having made this Declaration, she was put into a
Covent, where she found a Well, into which she threw her self: Such are the
natural Consequences of the Declarations procured against us.


Par. If this be true, why do you not complain? Justice will be done you.


Hug. L. Justice, Sir! Of whom shall we demand it? Of the Magistrate, in whose
presence these Outrages are done. Of the Sovereign Courts? Which take pleasure
in making our Yoke the heavier. Of the Ministry? Who pretend they believe not a
word we say. Of the King? Who will not give us the hearing.


Par. If this Declaration be executed with Moderation and Equity, what cause to
complain of it? For since you are allowed to live in quiet, and at the end of
your Life, are asked only what Religion you will dye of, what can be more
clear, than that without any intention of Ruining you, great care is taken of
your Salvation, and that it is heartily wished for?


Hug. Law. Can you believe, Sir, that those who have solicited and surpised
his Majesty to make this Declaration, have done it out of Love to our Souls,
and Care of our Salvation? I make no doubt, but use was made of that very
pretense to induce the King to it, His Majesty being incapable of a base
thought or mean design. But I am too fully convinced, those who first suggested
it to the King, have very small care of the Salvation of our Souls. There are
many of them have no care of their own, how then should they take care of other
men's? Others of them have such animosity against us, that if they saw us at
Hell-gate, and had it in their power to thrust us in, they would certainly do
it: But, to speak in cold blood: Let me persuade you on this occasion to make
use of your usual Sagacity: How can you imagine, those who solicited this
Declaration, aimed at the Salvation of men's Souls? Why should they think, that
a man who all his Life long has been of the Reformed Religion, should desire
at his death to turn Roman Catholic? If this man had had any such thought, it
should have been made appear in his Life: It Is far better living than dying in
your Religion: For that which you call Conversion, makes a man capable of
Employment and Office, it opens him the way into Dignities and great places, to
Gain and great Fortune: What can be more evident, than that a man disposed to
turn Catholic, would, for the reason I have intimated, not stay till his
death, but do it in his lifetime, and as early as he could? But a man in his
life has perhaps a care of his reputation, or is clogged with Interests that
oblige him to dissemble; but at his death he slights such respects, he breaks
all such bonds, knowing that though he has lived for others, he must die for
himself. This were a good Argument in a Country where the Roman Catholic
Religion is prohibited: but in France where it is predominant, where it makes
use at this time of its advantages with a high hand, a man has all
encouragement imaginable, with all the freedom he can wish, and probable hopes
of extraordinary recompense, to declare at any time his inclinations to quit
our Religion: Perhaps those Gentlemen were of opinion that God inspires many
people at the hour of their death, who, should they recover, would constantly
follow the notions they are then inspired with. True it is, Sir, you know we
live in an Age of Miracles and extraordinary Inspirations! We find them very
numerous! Most of those who persecute us have great faith for Inspirations! In
a word, if this Declaration extended only to those who in their life have made
appear some inclination to alter their Religion, it might be thought the desire
of their salvation occasioned these visits: But these visits are made to all,
without exception to them who all their life-long have been most firm and
resolved. I would gladly know what new illumination an old firm Hugonot can be
supposed to have from a plain single question asked by a Magistrate in a civil
and gentle manner? and if none, whether there be not some other design in the
business? Is the asking of such a question looked upon as a powerful instrument
of the Holy Spirit for the conversion of an Heretic? Have we any Presidents of
Conversion by such means? It Is clear then that the Declaration strictly pursued
according to the Letter, is not of any use to make a man change his Religion;
and it is equally clear that they who solicited that Declaration, being men of
sense, did not in the least design by it the conversion of dying men, or the
salvation of their Souls.


Par. I would fain know what other design they could propose to themselves in
it.


Hug. Law. It Is not hard to guess; the Clergy has a design to load us with
miseries, and to render our Religion odious to us by a multitude of calamities
attending it: The happiness of Mankind here on Earth consists in the pleasures
of Life and Liberty, to die quietly: they have already found out a thousand
ways to render our lives miserable and unpleasant, and invent every day new
means to continue them so: there wanted nothing but a means to trouble us at
our death, to make our yoke insupportable: And they have hit upon it in this
Declaration. Besides, having very small hopes of converting (as they call it)
Fathers or Mothers, or any person at the age of discretion, they levelled their
design against Children and Infants: To compass this, they could not have
invented a more effectual means than that they are furnished with by this
Declaration, whereby if they can but make believe a man died a Roman Catholic,
they make themselves Masters of all the Children he left under age. To bring
this about, it was necessary to open a passage to the Beds of the Dying: it was
necessary to have liberty of entrance into any house, which could not be had
without the authority of the Sovereign: the Kings goodness permitted him not to
grant all they desired (and had obtained by the Declaration in 1666. since
revoked in part, and in part mitigated by that of 1669.) which was, that the
Curates should have liberty to enter any house to persuade the Sick to change
their Religion. They attempted afresh to revive this Article; but disappointed
of their ends, they rested satisfied with what was granted them, which was,
that the Judges should go into the houses of the Sick to know what Religion
they desired to die in: they thought it sufficient for their purpose, if they
could by any means get men's doors open, after which they would take the liberty
to enter whether leave were granted them or not. It has happened accordingly;
for this (we see) is the course taken, which puts the Sick into horrible
agonies, and their Families into terrible frights.


Hug. Gent. I see you are of their opinion who hold they have a design to seize
upon our Children.


Hug. Law. Alas, Sir, can you doubt of it? if the Declaration against the dying
had not sufficiently convinced you; if the Arrest that prohibits the Midwives
of our Religion to lay any woman; if the permission granted to the Midwives of
the Roman Catholic Persuasion to baptize our Infants as soon as they are born,
had not given you cause enough to support it; I believe you will not require
clearer demonstration than the late Declaration so much talked of; by which
they are empowered to take from us our Children at Seven years old. A terrible
Declaration to Fathers and Mothers: A Declaration will make us take the
resolution to throw our selves at the Kings feet, to beg of him that he will
take away our lives, or allow us the liberty of our Conscience and our
Children, or leave to go naked out of his Kingdom, to live dispersed through
all Countries of the world till we pine to death.


Par. The Declaration orders no more, than that at Seven years old Children
shall be of age to choose their Religion. Is this such a matter to be exclaimed
at? The Declaration of the Children shall be received, but no violence offered
them.


Hug. Law. Is this a matter to be exclaimed at, say you! Pray Sir show me in
History one Example of such a Persecution, one President of a Grievance of this
nature, that denies Parents the liberty to instruct their Children in their
Religion. Was it ever heard of, that Children should have power given them to
make choice of their Religion at an age they are incapable to distinguish
between black and white; an age to be persuaded to any thing with a Plum or an
Apple; an age to which the best Arguments are the finest Rattles to play with?
No Violence, say you, shall be offered the Children: Is it not a violence and
wrong to the Parents, to have their Children seduced and taken away from them?
What need of Violence to be used against Children of that Age which are easily
persuaded to any thing? The Violence is done to the Parents, whose Children
shall be taken away from them, as soon as seduced to declare themselves
inclined to be Roman Catholics: In a word, On what account soever Children
shall be forceably taken out of the Bosoms of their Mothers, never to return;
Can you call it a small Matter, a slight Business, against which there is no
cause to exclaim?


Par. Once more I affirm it, the Declaration says not, your Children shall be
taken from you.


Hug. Law. I confess, it does not: Yet they who are entrusted with the
Execution of it, will do it. And the Declaration was desired and obtained for
no other end. Shall I prophecy to you the issue of this Declaration, as I have
been your Historian, in giving you an account of the Consequences of that which
concerns the sick. It shall be presently given out, there is no Violence
designed. Order shall be given by word of mouth to the Magistrates, not to
permit any to be done. The Priests in a while will not at all regard these
Prohibitions, though perhaps at first they will observe some measures, and
content themselves, (it may be) with engaging (by Oath in Confession) all the
Women, particularly those of mean condition, as the Servants in our Families,
to endeavor all they can to seduce the Children, by Promises and private
Instructions, and all other means useful to that purpose: For a Hobbyhorse, a
Child will be made to say, he has a mind to go to Mass: Two Witnesses shall be
ready to swear it: The Child shall presently be taken away, never to be seen
again by the Parents: Yet they must pay an extraordinary rate for the Board and
Instruction of the Children taken away: Thus will they kill two Birds with one
stone; take away the Children, and ruin the Parents, to force them by Poverty
to quit their Religion: In a short time they will proceed farther; they will
find a pretense to enter our Houses: They will have received News from very
good hands, the Children have a great inclination for the Catholic Religion,
but that their Parents are harsh to them for it: They will enter by Authority
from the Magistrate, and (...) out the Parents and Relations: Having the
Children alone, they will say what they please: The holy Spirit will inspire
them in a moment, and dissipate those thick Mists of Calvinism, that darkened
their tender understandings. It will on the sudden make them so clear sighted,
they will in a moment discover all Catholic Truths; and must presently be
locked up in Cloisters, to be educated there till they come to maturity
sufficient to resist a Father and Mother, and proof to the persuasions of
Friends, and influence of Relations.


Par. This, I grant, is already so obvious, that I shall make no scruple to
acknowledge it. You perhaps may be permitted to dye in your Religion, but care
shall be taken to bring up your Children better. And this is the principal
means to be used for destroying your Sect.


Hug. Law. We see it very clearly, Sir, The Arrest against our Midwives, that
which orders the Magistrate to visit our sick, and this last Declaration have
put it out of doubt; and you call this Sir -- It Is a Proceeding you will be
puzzled to parallel in the most barbarous Countries and Ages of the World: It
violates the most sacred and most venerable Laws: It ruins the Foundation of
Authority, by destroying the Paternal, which is the most Ancient, the most
Just, the most Venerable, and the ground of all other: Probably, Sir, you have
seen the Memoires and Petition we presented to the King on this Subject: The
many injustices of that Declaration are so fully made out by the Petition I
mentioned, I will forbear enlarging on them here: They are Injustices that fly
in our Faces: Can we be silent where nature speaks? Is there a greater cruelty
than to rob Parents of their Children? It Is a mutilation that puts us to
ineffable Torment: It Is an usage unthought of in the Age of Torture and
Massacre: And will you say still, we have no cause to complain? we are not put
to extremities? You may believe, Sir, that in taking away our Children they
tear our very Bowels: And that the Punishments we formerly endured, are nothing
to this: The Consequences of it you will see surprising and horrible: The
tenderness of Mothers, the Sentiments of Religion, and the Fury of Anger, mixed
together are a Compound, capable to produce terrible Effects. I fear you may
see examples of Fury equal to those of the Jewish Women, who finding their
Children were to be forced from them to be baptized, destroyed both the
Children and themselves to prevent it. It Is a new kind of Torment will
dispeople France more than all the Massacres of the last Age: For all those
among us who love their Religion, will certainly endeavor to save themselves
by retiring out of the Kingdom, though it were sure they should perish in the
Attempt: Good God! What a spectacle will it be to see the Children violently
taken away from their Parents! What Cannibal heart can be hard enough to endure
the sight of Mothers bathed in Tears, covered with their own Blood, scratching
their Faces, tearing their Hair, beating their Breasts, Sighing, and Groaning,
and making hideous outcryes after those who rob them of their Children, calling
them Hangmen, Robbers, Villains, and other opprobrious Names, dictated by
extremity of Fury raging in the tender Soul of a Mother.


Par. I cannot deny, but the Catholics themselves were surpised at this
Declaration, and that it has in it something repugnant to the Laws of Nature:
But great designs, how just soever, cannot be executed without using some
unjust means: The wisest Politicians are often obliged to do some ill that the
may attain a greater good. The King has a mind to have all his Subjects
reunited in one Religion. The design is excellent, but cannot be compassed
without use of violent means.


Hug. Law. Pray, Sir, tell me, Had not the Christian Emperors a design to have
their Subjects all of a Religion? Did not they wish Paganism destroyed? This
sure was as excellent a design as the ruining of Calvinism: But did they take
the like Course to attain the design? Before and in the Reign of Theodosius the
Great, the Empire had embraced Christianity almost an Age. The Provinces, the
Cities, the Armies, Rome it self was full of Christians: Yet the Senate of Rome
was almost all Pagan, and by the Mouth of Symmachus pleaded before the Emperor,
to dissuade him from demolishing the Altar of Victory that stood at the Gate of
the Senate House. Yet these Senators were not turned out, nor did any lose his
Office for being a Pagan. Symmachus, as zealous as he was for Paganism,
received from Theodosius the honor of the Consulship, the highest Office of
the Empire: We do not read that the Children of Pagans were taken from them in
those days, or had Liberty given them at seven years old to turn Christians
against the will of their Parents: The Piety of the Theodosij and the
Constantines never moved them to act in favor of the true Religion such a
violence against nature: They did not in that Age understand it lawful to do
ill, that good might come of it: The Impiety and Fury of the Persecutors of the
Church never suggested such a thought: The Counselors of that Apostate Emperor
who went so dexterously about destroying the Christian Religion, were but
bunglers to our Clergymen of the Council of Conscience, who surprise in a
manner so ruinous to us, the greatest Prince of the World. Julian destroyed the
Schools of the Christians, and shut up their Churches, but it never entered his
thoughts, to take away their Children at seven years old to be brought up in
Paganism: Every rational man holds it a Maxim, that Religion is not to be
imposed by Command, but taught by persuasion. You have read the Book of Father
Nicolai the Jacopin, entitled, De Baptismi antiquo usu Dissertatio duplex: In
the second Dissertation he tells us, some Schoolmen hold, that Jews and
Infidels may be compelled to be baptized. But it is hellish Divinity, a Maxim of
Executioners and Inquisitors: These sottish Divines ground their Doctrine on
some Examples, as that of Chilperic, who commanded the Jews to get themselves
baptized, and imprisoned one of them to compel him thereto, as Gregory of Tours
reports. Aimoyn writes, that Dagobert obliged them to it upon pain of
Banishment: The Capitulars of Charlemain tell us, that Prince punished with
death the Saxons who refused to turn Christians: But Father Nicolai makes it
appear, Conc. Tolet. 4. Can. 57. de Judaeis, Ann. Christi. 633.
these were particular actions never approved by the Church. He quotes the
Council of Toledo, which disapproved the Violence used by Sisebut in Spain
against the Jews, in obliging them to be baptized on pain of Whipping and
Banishment. He shows further, that the Penalties ordained against Jews and
Infidels, were not so much to force them to turn Christians, as to punish them
for Crimes otherwise committed: At last he proves, there is not in the
Primitive Church any president for this Practice of compelling Jews or Infidels
into Christianity. Much less may you find an Example of the new kind of Cruelty
exercised against us: If you meet with some Ordinances that command Infidels to
turn Christians, yet you will never find any Christian Prince made a Law for
taking from Jews and Infidels their Children, and hindering them to be
instructed in their Religion.


Hug. Gent. Yet, Sir, if I mistake not, I have read in the Memoires and
Petition you mentioned, that a King of Portugal, called Emmanuel, ordered all
Male Children of Jews under fourteen years of Age to be taken from them, and
instructed in the Christian Religion.


Hug. Law. It Is true, but you are to observe, the Example is single, that it is
modern, being a President but of the last Age, when the Church was very
corrupt, and that it proceeds from the infernal source of the Spanish and
Portuguess Inquisitions. In a word, he that reports it, though a Bishop, had
not the power to forbear saying it was a Jewish Course and unjust in the
Execution, that it had not any foundation of Law or of Religion, though it
seemed to proceed from a good intention, and had an appearance of Piety. It Is
Ozorius Bishop of Algarves, who wrote a great Volume in twelve Books of the
Life of Emmanuel, the second King of Portugal. The Story is so pat, and the
Reflections of this Bishop so proper for the present Conjuncture, I cannot
forbear reading to you a Translation I made yesterday of the whole passage,
though somewhat long. This Historian having repeated at large the reasons of
those who were for permitting the Jews to live peaceably in Portugal, Ozorius
lib. 1. rerum Emmanualis. Anno. 1497.
and the contrary Arguments, goes on thus. Emmanuel approving the latter
Opinion, ordered all Jews and Moors who would not embrace Christianity to quit
the Kingdom, and appointed a day, after which those who should be found within
the Realm, should be made Slaves, etc. The day drew near: The Jews with great
diligence prepared for Embarquing: Emmanuel troubled to see so many thousands
persist obstinate to Damnation, that he might at least be instrumental for the
Salvation of their Children, bethought himself of a Course good in the
Intention, but unjust in the Execution. He ordered all the Jews Children of
fourteen years and under, to be taken from their Parents, and secured at a
distance to be brought up in the Christian Religion: This could not be done
without terrible agitation and trouble of men's minds: 'Twas a horrible
spectacle to see Children forced out of the Bosoms of their Mother, and
wrench'd out of their Fathers Arms in which they were locked. The Parents were
ill used and cudgelled to make them let go their hold. Every place echoed
lamentable Cries, the Women complaining so loud, their Voices reached Heaven.
Many of the miserable Fathers were so moved at the atrocity of the Action, they
flung their Children into Wells. Others were so desperately enraged, they
killed themselves: To add more Calamity to this miserable Nation, they were
denied leave to pass into Africa: For the King very desirous to bring them to
Christianity, thought to induce them to it, partly by hope of Good, partly by
fear of Ill: so that, though he stood engaged by his word to permit the Jews to
embarque, he put them off from day to day, in hopes, time would make them
change their Resolution and Religion: This was the Reason, that though at first
there were three Ports in Portugal appointed them to embarqueat, they were
afterward prohibited to embarque at any but Lisbon. This brought into that
City an innumerable multitude of Jews: While they were shamm'd in this manner
in the business of Embarqueing, the day came, on which all that should be found
in Portugal and would not turn Christians, were by the Order to remain Salves.
The Ports were shut, so that a great number remained, who chose rather to
change their Religion (sincerely or feignedly) than to be all their Life
subject to slavery: They turned Christians and were baptized: After which they
had their Liberty, and their Children restored, and spent the rest of their
days very quietly in Portugal: This Action was not agreeable to the Maxims,
either of Religion or Law. For with what justice will you endeavor to force
men's spirits to receive Mysteries they slight, and have a perfect Aversion for?
You would fetter men's understandings, and rob their Wills of their Liberty.
It Is impossible to be done, nor does our Savior approve of it. He requires a
voluntary Sacrifice, and will not accept of forced Service: It is not his
pleasure that Violence should be done to men's understandings, but that their
Souls may be fairly inclined, and their Wills won to a love of his Religion: To
proceed in this manner, is to encroach on the right of the holy Spirit, and
attempt that by humane Power, which Grace alone is capable to work in men's
Souls, which yield at last to his holy Inspirations: It Is only the holy Ghost
can illuminate men's Understandings, and invite and persuade them into a
Confession of the Name of Jesus, and into the Communion of Saints, when we
reject not his Grace with obstinate ingratitude: To conclude, can any thing be
more manifestly opposite to the Spirit of Christianity, than to expose so many
and so Venerable Mysteries, things so truly holy and divine, to men under
suspicion, and evidently profane? We never consider, how we force those who
hate in their Souls the Christian Religion, to commit the highest Crimes they
possibly can against Jesus Christ.

It cannot be denied, but these Reflections are sage and judicious. It Is the
Light of Reason breaking out of the midst of Darkness: It Is good sense flowing
from its proper Spring, expressed by the mouth of a Portuguess Bishop living in
a Country, groaning under the Tyranny of a severe Inquisition. Can you
believe, this Portuguess Bishop could have approved of the last Declaration,
that gives way to the seducing of a Child by a Bartholomew Baby, and then
taking him away out of the Arms of his Mother? It makes me groan to think this
Declaration may reach to Constantinople. I cannot but fear the President may be
fatal to the poor Christians in the East, and that the Turk will tread the
steps of the Council of Conscience at Paris: What a Desolation will follow, if
the Infidel Princes will seize the Children of the Christians? Will not
Christianity by this means be quickly destroyed throughout their Dominions? The
Turk exacts a Tribute of Children from Greece, which that poor Nation thinks an
intolerable slavery: But what will it be, if the like be practiced in all
Mohammedan Empires, and not one Christian Child secure in their Countries?
Whereas now, when one is taken out of the Family for tribute, they remain
assured of the Possession of the rest.


Hug. Gent. Among all the Reasons in the Petition against this Declaration,
none affected me more, than that which shows, that Children of seven years of
Age were never by any Law in any Age of the World, made subject to Orders of
Courts, and Formalities of Justice: But if you compare the Declaration against
the Relapsed, with that which concerns the Children, you will meet with
Children of seven years old, who, having been regained by their Parents, shall
be Imprisoned, Examined on interrogatories, Confronted with Witnesses, and
Condemned to make honorable amends by walking bare-headed, and barefoot
through the Streets, with a burning Link in their hands to the seat of Justice,
and asking pardon for their Crime. It Is a spectacle all Europe will rejoice at
for the Novelty: As for the Reasons in the Petition grounded on his Majesty's
Word and Arrests, which had appointed the choice of Religion to be made at the
Age of fourteen, they are now silly Arguments: True it is, they might have
passed for good in the Golden Age, but in ours, Men glory in the breach of
their Promises, and value themselves upon not keeping their words.


Par. Gentlemen, I confess, what you speak of is a little severe, but you do
not consider whom it concerns.


Hug. Law. Sir, It concerns not his Majesty, as you think. We know the Kings
intentions are good, and that he sees not the Consequences of what they Act in
his Name. But you will allow us to complain of those who surprise his Piety,
and of a Clergy who would incroach into their hands the principal management of
the State: We see clearly their false Zeal will ruin us, but it will also
reduce the Kingdom to extremitys. When Princes frame their Conduct by the
Maxims of Monks and Jesuits, they ruin their States: Witness the Affairs of
Hungary: The Emperor possessed by those false Zealots, took from the
Protestants all their Estates, and gave them to the Jesuits. He has banished
their Ministers, demolished their Churches, and expelled them the Kingdom. Can
you choose but admire this excellent policy of the Jesuits? At the very doors
of the Turk they reduce Christians to such extremity, they have no way of
safety, but to throw themselves into the Arms of Infidels. And now, that the
Grand Seignior is at peace with Muscovy and Poland, you will see how he will
employ his Forces, and what will be the Consequence of the Counsels of the
blessed Fathers of the Society of Jesus: They are at this day Masters of
Europe, they govern all Princes, and are absolute in all Courts: But it may be
observed, that Europe has reason to look on this day, as the Eve of her
Destruction. Germany will perhaps be a Prey to the Turk, England a Theater of
Fury, and France with all the puissance of the Genius that governs it, may fall
into a condition I dread to imagine; for if they Arm the hand of our Sovereign
against us, and persuade him to spill the Blood of his Subjects, the State must
be weakened, by having drawn from it the most faithful and truest French Blood
in its Veins.


Par. I am a Catholic, but none of those who are for Monks and Clergymens
intermedling in Civil Affairs: Their business is to pray to God for the
prosperity of the Kingdom; it is certain, that matters are but very little
mended since these good men wriggled themselves so deeply into Courts.


Hug. Law. But do you not admire, Sir, the boldness of the Jesuits, and the use
they make of it at Court by the man they have there at his Majesty's Elbow?
They were banished France by Arrest of the Parliament of Paris, being clearly
convinced, they had by the hands of John Chatell attempted to murder Henry the
4th. This Prince fearing a stab from them, called them in again by an Edict in
January 1604. One Clause of the Edict was, They should be obliged to keep one
of their Society, a French- man Born and sufficiently Authorized, to attend the
King, to serve him for a Preacher, and to be answerable for the Actions of the
Society, that is, That there should always be a Jesuit attending at Court, as
an evidence that all those of his Society were looked upon as disturbers of the
public Peace, as Murderers of Kings, and Enemies of the State, one of whose
Chiefs the Court would have always in its Power, that he might be responsible
for the attempts of his Fellows, and remain as an Hostage to receive such
Punishments as the Criminal enterprises of his Society should deserve: This is
the natural Character which from Father Cotton to Father Le Chaise ought to be
given, according to the intention of the Edict, of all the Jesuits that follow
the Court. A Character that ought to make them ashamed, and keep them
continually humble: Instead of which, they are become Masters of the
Consciences of our Kings, the Tyrants of the Church, and, we may say, of all
France: This gave occasion to Monsieur de Mezeray, to make this judicious
Remark, That this Condition annexed to the Edict, Tom. 6. Hen. 4. An. 1604.
instead of branding them, as they imagined who got it inserted, procured them
the greatest Honor they could desire. Philip of Macedon was awaked every
Morning by a Page, who told him, Remember you are a man: I wish our cruel Enemy
were awaked every Morning with these words: Remember you are here to be
answerable for the Doctrine and Actions of those, who teach, that Kings may be
assassinated when disobedient to the Pope, and inspired these detestable
Sentiments into John Chatel, and Clement and Ravaillac, and William Parry,
Robert Catesby, Thomas Percy, and other Murderers of our Kings, the Kings of
England, and the Princes of Orange in the last Age and this.


Par. I see you are no Friend of that good Father, and it must be confessed he
is not much yours.


Hug. Law. We find by experience, he is not much our Friend: And, (the more
unhappy we) he has as much Credit with the King, as Hatred for our Party. It
seems the King cannot refuse him any thing. Was any thing ever seen more
terrible, than the Arrest he had obtained, whereby our Ministers and Elders
were prohibited on pain of Corporal Punishment, to go into any House, by night
or by day on any occasion, but to visit the sick: By this Arrest as soon as a
man was an Elder, he was excluded from the Company of all those of his
Religion. His Majesty looked on this as so strange a surprise, that he thought
fit by another Arrest to explain this, and declare it was not his intention to
hinder the Ministers and Elders to visit their Flocks. I will give you another
instance how this man abuses his Credit: The King upon the Complaint of his
Subjects of the Religion of diverse Violences, burning of Churches, and other
Outrages done them, passed an Arrest in May 1681. Prohibiting any Violence by
Word or Action, to be done to the Reformed. A poor Minister of Poitou, in one
of his Sermons, gave God thanks for having inspired the King with this Equity
and Clemency: Father Le Chaise had news of it by Letter, and presently obtained
another Arrest, which orders those to be informed against, who (in their
Interpretations of this Arrest) should say, That the Exhortations made in the
Kings name to the People to change their Religion, are not according to his
intention: You are to observe, Sir, that the Exhortations made in the Kings
Name in Poitou, are no other than strange Menaces, and extraordinary Outrages.
And to prevent their being stopped by his Majesty's Arrest, the Sieur de
Marillac, and Father le Chaise thought fit to annul it by another Arrest, which
will give way to all the Exorbitances his Majesty designed to hinder by this.


Par. It has been observed, there has been for some months past, an
extraordinary Emotion amongst you: What Is the Reason of it?


Hug. Law. The Reason Sir? It Is because we see things hurryed on faster than we
imagined: To tell you the truth, we have been long sensible of a Design laid to
ruin us; but fancied, they would not have gone so roundly to work with us: We
lulled our selves asleep, in hopes the Affairs of the State might occasion a
change in ours. But ever since last Summer, we looked upon our selves to be
very near Destruction. The suppressing our Colleges and Academies, convinces
us effectually, we have not long to continue in the Kingdom; for if the King
were willing we should stay, he would allow us our Ministers, and permit us to
enjoy places necessary for Instruction.


Hug. Gent. Now you mind me of it, have you seen the Arrest against the Academy
of Sedan? if you have, you cannot but think them out of their Wits who draw
those Arrests, making one of the wisest Princes of the World speak so
ridiculously: They make the King say, he had granted the Hugonots of Sedan an
Academy for instruction of their Children, and that they had abused his Grant,
by receiving strangers into their Academy: Have you ever seen an Academy
strangers were denied access to? I admired at the confidence of these Penners
of Arrests in publishing falsities so gross. I was wishing to see the Edict of
Reunion of the Principality of Sedan to the Crown: I find it repeated there
five or six times, that the King Confirmed to them their Academy with all
Rights and Privileges they enjoyed under their Princes: Is not the King Master
of it? Is not his Pleasure reason enough? Why then are such notorious falsehoods
imposed on the World?


Hug. Law. I was more astonished at the Declaration, that gives all Hugonots
who will turn Catholics, three years respit for payment of their Debts: It
will be easily granted, they have not in this been very tender of the Honor of
the King, or of their Religion: Can any thing be more shameful, than to invite
People to Conversion by turning Bankrupts, and solicit them to turn Bankrupts,
by promising, that the Catholic Religion shall serve for a Sanctuary to
protect them in their Cheats? There is not a dishonest Tradesman in France, who
having three years respit, cannot in that time make over his Estate, abscond or
run away a little before the three years are expired, and cheat all his
Creditors: This open's a gap to all those frauds that destroy Commerce, and lay
Families desolate: These are the Nets the Fisher of the Gospel casts into the
Sea, to catch men for Jesus Christ. But I return to the Gentleman's Question,
who asked, whence proceeded that strange fright we appear to be in for some
months past? Besides the suppression of our Academies; Besides the Declaration
that gives Children liberty at seven years of Age to change their Religion, we
know it too well, that those Bigots pressed for four or five more, and hoped to
obtain them before the end of the year. One to force us to kneel before the
Host: Another to forbid us using any Trade or Mystery: A third to oblige us to
permit our Children to be baptized, and our Marriages blessed by the Priests,
under pretense of acknowledging your Baptism and Marriages effectual: This is
the fatal Blow, the total Revocation of the Edicts of Pacification: This Alarm
was spread all over France. The Protestants thought themselves at their last
Prayers: Every one considered how to get away. They were all upon the Wing, and
are ready to depart as soon as the Blow is given.


Hug. Gent. The Declaration which gives Children liberty at seven years of Age
to choose their Religion, has made the King lose in three months time above
fifty thousand Subjects: A Declaration that shall forbid us the exercise of
Trades and Mysterier, will empty the Kingdom of near a Million, and one that
shall impose on us a necessity to kneel before the Host, will send all the rest
packing: And so the State will be soon rid of the Hugonots: Whether this be
suitable to the Kings intentions, I know not, but know very well it is not for
his interest: If we had not the courage voluntarily to leave our Country, a
Declaration that shall force us to kneel before the Sacrament, will make us
abandon all. And it shall be in the power of a Priest, to make all the Reformed
in his Parish run away. You know what happened at St. Hippolite: The like will
be done every where else.


Par. I do not very well know that story, but have heard something of it.


Hug. Gent. I am not exactly acquainted with the Circumstances; the Substance
is this. St. Hippolyte is the capital Town of Cevennes, inhabited wholly by
People of our Religion: Those of yours being so few there, that the Priest in
his Pulpit cannot sometimes without a solicism address in the usual Phrase, my
Brethren: The Clergy resolved to ruin this Church of the Reformed: The Priest
took the Sacrament to be carried to a sick Person, in the very moment that the
Reformed were coming out of their Church on a day of Devotion: He rushes into
the midst of the Crowd, lays hold on the first he met, and forces him to kneel;
the rest slip away, some on one side, some on the other: The Priest continues
bawling, and requires them to kneel. He stays as many as he can, to hinder
their escape; and strikes some with the Cross he had in the other hand: This at
last procured him some blows, and it was the thing he desired: He informs, and
(it being a business concerted) had his Witnesses ready. Upon these
Informations, the Court orders the Church of St. Hippolyte to be rac'd, never
to be rebuilt; and to weaken the Party, banished twenty or five and twenty of
the most considerable Families of the Town: That which is remarkable, is, that
the Priests who raised this Sedition, is, as I am told, expelled the Town. By
this it is acknowledged, he was the first Author of the disorder: Yet the
Reformed are punished, as if they alone were guilty. I have not met with so
rigorous a punishment for such an Offense: When the Arrest for adoring the
Sacrament shall be past, the like will happen in all other places, as did at
St. Hippolyte. You will hear of nothing but Outrages, and Blood shed, and
Imprisonments, and Proscriptions and Punishments: A forced adoration of the
Sacrament has not any precedent in Christianity. 'Twas the Pagan only would
have compelled the Christian to adore what he did not believe to be God. This
is to usurp a Power over Conscience, to require us formally to abjure our
Religion, and to exercise the cruellest of Tyrannies over men. It Is making them
Idolaters, Profane and Hypocritical all at a time: Idolaters, by forcing them
to adore what they esteem not to be God. Profane, in kneeling by way of
Adoration, to that which in their hearts they despise and scoff at: Hypocrites,
in worshipping outwardly, what they do not inwardly: In a word, it justifies
all the Violences of the Infidels against the Christians. A great Minister said
not long since to one of our Party, who told him of this Arrest we were
threatened with; does it not become the Piety of the King, to cause all his
Subjects to adore the God he adores? A Turk may use the same Argument in Turk^,
And would not such a proceeding utterly extirpate the poor s^atter'd Churches,
that groan in the East under the power of the Infidels? We see we are within an
inch of destruction. The wisest course, in my opinion, will be to withdraw
before the Blow is given: What think you, Sir, will all this come to? What are
we to hope? What are we to fear?


Par. To deal freely with you, I believe you have not long to subsist; there is
a settled design for extirpating your Religion: All the Edicts in your favor
will be in a short time revoked. Some of you will leave the Kingdom, and the
King will not be much concerned at it: The rest will stay, and return into the
Bosom of the Church in few years: You see what Progress has been made in
Poitou in few months: Fifteen or twenty thousand Persons are already converted.
And when the Edicts are all revoked, there is no doubt, but the business will
be perfected with greater Expedition.


Hug. Law. Ah, Sir, Methinks you might have spared speaking of your Converts of
Poitou! The Subject is matter of Terror to our Religion, and of small Credit to
yours. If you design to have the Hugonots converted, as they were in that
Province, it is no other than composing a Church of Rogues and Villains, and
reviving in our days the age of Persecution: In a word, never were so much
baseness and cruelty mixed in one Action as in the Practice made use of for
those numerous Conversions.


Hug. Gent. That, Sir, if you please, shall be my task: You will not deny me
the pleasure of telling a story, which probably I know better than you: I have
Friends in Poitou who inform me of all, and am well acquainted with the
Deputies of the Province. I believe I know some Circumstances you may be
ignorant of.


Hug. Law. I shall most willingly give you the hearing, Sir, if these Gentlemen
will do so too.


Hug. Gent. First then, you are to know, that the Publisher of the Gazetts
swells extremely the number of these Converts: If you account them half or two
thirds of what the Gazett speaks, you may perhaps account them more numerous
than they are. But the falseness of the Calculation is not the thing I intend
principally to insist on: I confess the number of the Revolted is prodigious,
and that so many Persons have in so short a time changed their Religion,
without Instruction, without Preaching, without Disputes, without knowing why
is perhaps a thing not to be paralleled in any Age. But that you may cease
admiring at it, I must acquaint you with the whole matter: First you are to
know, that the Province of Poitou is the heaviest charged with Taxes of any in
the Kingdom, and consequently the poorest: Nothing can be poorer than the
Peasants there. I need not tell you, that meanness of Condition abases the
Spirits, and takes away men's Courage, it dulls their Wit, puts out the very
light of their Understanding, and makes men degenerate almost into Beasts. For
ten years last past, effectual Orders have been given, that the Peasants living
at distance from considerable Towns, should not be instructed; their Churches
have been rac'd, and their Ministers taken away. Ignorance joined with the
extreme Misery of their Condition, and Slavery has made them Brutish, and
capable not only of meanest thoughts, but the most base Actions: The Intendant
Marillac, a Person who had not thriven very well in the World, applies himself
to the Bigots, the Jesuits and their Patriarch, Father La Chaise, for repairing
his broken Fortune. This man according to the Orders of those he had sold
himself to, began at first with the lesser Temptations: That is, he walked
through the Province with his Purse in one hand, and his Sword in the other.
But at last, the Myrmidons he had picked out for his assistants with some
pitiful Priests, passed from Village to Village entering every House, beginning
with Threats, and ending with Promises. They told the poor Wretches, the King
would have but one Religion in his Kingdom, that whoever refused to turn
Catholic, should be used with the utmost Severity and Rigor: But those who
would change their Religion, should be well paid and live at their ease.
Accordingly they fall a bargaining with those rascally Wretches; some valued
themselves higher than others: One among the rest held out stoutly several days
for ten Groats; they offered him a Pistol, he stood out stiffly, and would not
bate them a Farthing of four Crowns: At last they gave him his price: This
shameful Trade was driven in so scandalous a manner, that these Convertors had
provided a multitude of Printed Acquittances, with Blanks for the Names and the
Sums; which Blanks were filled with the Names of the new Converts and the Sums
they received, in order to the giving an account to the Treasurers of the
Chamber of Accounts of the Conversion, whereof the Sieur Pelision is President:
These Sums amounted not to much, for some of the Converts had not above
sevenpence wrapped up in a piece of Paper. But for recompense, immediately after
their Conversion, they were discharged of Taxes, and freed from Quartering
Soldiers, and all public Payments: On this Rock split a great number of those
Wretches, who feared the sight of the Collectors of Taxes, as of so many
Devils, and looked upon the Privilege of exemption from payments as their
Sovereign Good, and chiefest Felicity: You may hear the account the Gazett
gives, how those Conversions were made: I have in my Pocket that of the 25th.
of April 1681. It Is in the Article of Poitiers: The Sieur Marillac, Intendant
of this Province, applying himself continually with a great deal of Zeal to the
work of Conversion, arrived the 28th. of the last month at St. Sauvan, with the
Sieur Rabreuil, Vicar General to our Bishop. He received there advice of
importance concerning those of the Religion, and went away the 20th. from St.
Sauvan, to hasten to the place from whence he had the News: He received there
the abjuration of an incredible number of Persons. Afterward they returned to
Poitiers, and the Bishop much affected with the fruit of this Voyage, sent
Missionaries into those parts to instruct the New Converts.


Hug. Law. Perhaps, Gentlemen, you observe not how new this Method of
Conversion is: I assure my self in all your reading, Sir, you have scarce met
with any such Convertors. Our Savior understood not this way of Conversion:
For had he known what belongs to it, instead of his twelve Apostles and seventy
Disciples, he would have sent so many Intendants, such as the Sieur Marillac:
All the World would have been Christian: To trouble our selves with Preaching
to the Peasants, that is filly piece of business: Show them Money in one hand
and a Cudgel in the other, you make them Saints in a quarter of an hour; and
shall convert more in a month, than St. Paul with his Preaching ever did in
twelve. Heretofore in those simple Ages of Primitive Christianity, men made it
their business to instruct before Conversion, to make them know and believe
before they made Profession, and often Catechis'd them several years before
they were admitted to the Mysteries of Religion: But the Gazettier tells us,
Monsieur Marillac understands better the Mystery of Conversion; he knows how to
convert numbers in a trice, and afterward sends Missionaries to instruct them.


Hug. Gent. Pray, Sir, Let us not make it a Subject of Mirth; those of our
Party have no cause to laugh at it, but to shed Tears, and Tears of Blood:
Monsieur Marillac has no been always so careful as the Gazettier tells us. I
know from good hands, those wretched Converts who have been made to abjure
their Religion, have not been at all instructed: A Gentleman of Quality, a
Roman Catholic, assured me the other day with an Oath, that being at the
Intendants, he saw there about two hundred Peasants, who were come purposely to
complain they knew not what Prayers to make, for they had been forbidden to say
their old Prayers, and not taught any other; so that since they had been
compelled to be Catholics, they had no Religion at all: The bishop of Poitiers
one day in good Company rallied these Conversions, calling those new Catholics
Monsieur Marillac's Converts: But this is not all.

The Intendant Marillac having tasted the sweet of these Conversions, and
finding Promises and Threats ineffectual to bring about as many as he desired,
resolved to make use of more violent Means: He and his Agents had quickly
scumm'd off (out of our Society) those base Souls who had no Sentiment of
Religion, and were capable of selling their Consciences to him that bid most.
The number of these Wretches was not sufficient to satisfy the eagerness of
this Converter. He caused Troops to come to Poitou, and Quartered them upon
those of the Religion only, and gave them Order to commit the worst of
Outrages, till they had forced their Hosts to go to Mass. He sends Advice to
the Inhabitants of a Borough or Village, that within such a time they were to
change their Religion, or to receive a Garrison: The Soldiers he Quartered
lived at discretion, being Masters of every House they entered: Masters, Horses
and Grooms must all be maintained as they please: Besides this, great
Contributions must be every day paid; to one, two Crowns, to another, four, to
another eight: And to prevent being charged any more with converting People,
without having instructed them, a Capucin or two are placed in Garrison with
the Soldiers, and the Inhabitants assess'd at three Crowns a day for their
Maintenance: And because these Monks by the Rules of their Order are not to
finger any Money, the Soldiers receive it for them, and give them an account:
Here then is a Garrison composed in a very singular manner of Soldiers and
Capucins: But these unusual means are but suitable to that extraordinary end
they are designed for; that the People may not any way dispose of their Goods,
the Intendant has published an Order, wherein he forbids them, on pain of
forfeiting four hundred Livers, to remove any thing out of their Houses: And
that they might not by absenting from their Houses escape the Cruelties
designed to be exercised there, he has on like Penalty forbidden them to
absent when the Soldiers come in. You may believe, the movables of a rich
Peasant cannot hold out long to bear such a Charge: When the Movables are eat
up, the Soldiers proceed to Sale of the Land, under pretense, the owner has
transgressed the Orders: Poverty is a great Temptation and you cannot wonder
many weak Souls yield to it: Yes, these poor Wretches would think themselves
happy, could they come off with the loss of their Goods. All manner of Outrages
are committed against their Persons. The Horsemen commonly enter the Buroughs
with their Musquetoons in hand crying aloud, Now for the Hugonots, now for the
Calvinists: They have at the But of their Musquetoons a little wooden Cross,
which by force or surprise they make the People kiss; and having told those
that have kissed it, that they are become Catholics, they presently drag them
away to Church: As soon as they enter a House, they make it ring again with
execrable blasphemies and terrible Oaths, threatening all the mischiefs they
design to do, if they of the House go not immediately to Mass. And they are as
good as their words; for they take the Master of the House and burn the soles
of his feet with a gentle fire. They torture others with Vices and other
Instruments to screw in their Thumbs: They have hanged up some Women at the
Rafters: Some have escaped death by their Neighbors coming in and cutting the
Ropes. They bind Men on Benches, and drub them on the Soles of their Feet, as
the Algerines do their Slaves, and the Turks their Spahies. In a Village near
Niort they took three Women, bound them fast to Benches with their Faces
upwards, and poured in Water at their Mouths; but they had the strength to
resist this cruel Torture: If a Husband yield to any of these Tentations, his
Wife must follow him whether she will or no: She is dragged to Church with her
Hair about her Ears, and sometimes carried thither in a Swound: Others have
been made lay their hands on a Book without knowing what they did, and were
afterward told they had taken an Oath on the Evangelifts, that they would go
to Mass: Others have been taken in Sheets, carried to Church, and sprinkled
with holy water. Whereupon it is pretended they are become Catholics; and if
after they go to hear a Sermon of our Ministers, they are, without course of
Law, carried to Prison, and starved there to death. The Intendant in other
places has not given himself this trouble. He has thought it sufficient to
send for the Inhabitants of a Borough, and tell them. Children, go into the
next Room, and give your Names to my Secretary. The good Folks do what they are
bid, give in their Names and go their ways: The List is sent to the Curate of
the Parish, with Order to receive the Abjurations of all those whose Names he
finds there: If afterward these People say, they made not any Promise, they
are cruelly bastonadoed, and frequently to death. I dare not engage further, in
giving you the particulars of the Cruelties exercised by the Intendant and his
Myrmidons, by the Soldiers and Judges of the Places, for fear, of making too
long a digression.


Hug. Law. You may do very well, Sir, to particularize a little, and give us
the Names of the Places and some of the Persons concerned; these Circumstances
would not a little confirm the truth of the Relation.


Hug. Gent. If these Gentlemen please, I will relate part of what I know, and
will be as brief as I can. In the Borough of Aulnay in Poitou, the Intendants
Deputy caused a Child of fourteen years to be arrested and imprisoned to make
him change his Religion. In the same place Huchard, one of the Intendants
Assistants, and principal Instrument of his Violences, accompanied with a
Sergeant and a Friar, arrested and imprisoned a Widow called Jeanne Micheau,
on no other account, but to make her change her Religion, being a Woman of the
Age of threescore and twelve. Two days after the Intendant came in Person,
caused the poor Woman to be brought before him, and having solicited her very
powerfully to change her Religion, he remanded her to Prison because she
persever'd, and ordered her to be put into a Dungeon, where her own Children
could not speak to her. He suborned Witnesses to charge her with a false Crime,
and condemned her upon the Deposition of those false Witneses, though neither
cross examined nor confronted. Ac the same time he caused a Woman big with
Child to be imprisoned, who was forced to change her Religion to save her
Child, in evident danger to be lost by her miscarrying in that inconvenient and
horrible place she was put in. He caused several others to be imprisoned for
the same purpose, that is, to make them change their Religion; some yielded,
others held out: At a place called fontain Chavagne, Marsaut President of the
Election of Niort attended with two men, would have the Credit of making
Convertsfter the Intendants method. He went into several Houses, particularly
into Daniel Giraults; and without more ado, fell presently upon the Men and
Women cudgelling them lustily, led them out to Mass, and made them lay their
hands on a Book to abjure their Religion: They made their Complaint to the Duke
de Vieuville Governor of the Province, who was so far from doing them Justice,
that he gave them no Answer: The same Marsaut has frequently put his naked
Sword to the Throats and Breasts of the Hugonots to make them change their
Religion: And when he met with People in the Country, he made them declare
what Religion they were of, and if they said they were Hugonots, he caused them
to be soundly beaten till they abjured their Religion. In a Borough where
Horsemen had been quartered and exercised all the Cruelties I have mentioned,
one of them surpised a Woman, and without the least pity of an Infant sucking
at her Breast, he trod her and the Child under foot, because she had resisted
three Priests and two Horsemen who would have dragged her to Church. The
Outrages committed by the Soldiers in the Parish of Echire are incredible. A
Lieutenant Reformade upon the refusal of one Abraham Bourdet to go to Mass,
first broke his Cudgel in beating him, and then drew his Sword to run him
through, which he had certainly done, had not fear (which gives men Wings) made
the poor Men leap over a high Wall, so that he escaped to the wonder of those
who saw him. At Challusson in the same Parish, the Soldiers having persecuted
to extremity a poor Widow called Mary Rambault, she thought to run away by
night and save her self. A Soldier runs after her, takes her, and having
bruised her grievously with his Cudgel, and butt-end of his Muskettoon, he took
her by the Throat and would have strangled her, had not another Soldier less
cruel than he, taken her out of his hands. Having not been able to kill her
thus, he resolved to discharge his Musquettoon in her Body, but his Comrade
having on the sudden mounted the muzzle of it, he missed his blow with that, he
flew upon her, seized her by the Hair, disfigured all her Face, and left her
drowned in her Blood and her Tears. The Cruelties exercised in the Parish of
Vouille are not less: That same Marsaut President of the Election of Niort went
into every House with the Curate and some Sergeants, and made those he met fall
on their knees, and having laid their Hands on a Boo, they went their ways and
reported to the Intendant, that those People had promised on the holy
Evangelists to turn Catholics, and the poor Wretches were forced to perform
what they never promised, or be cast into a Dungeon. In the same Parish of
Vouille, Men and Women were dragged above half a League to Church: 'Twas there
they tortured two young Maids, and forced them to turn Catholics. In the
Parish of St. Christine, Huchard the Intendant of Poitou's Executioner with the
Provost of Niorts Lieutenant, carried a Woman Prisoner into the Castle of
Benet. And having put Money into her Pocket, pretended she had received it for
changing her Religion, though she protested the contrary. In Littiere a Village
of Poitou, the Converting Soldiers having taken a Girl of fifteen years of
age, to make her change her Religion; drew their Swords upon her, put them to
her Throat, threatening to kill her if she would not go to Mass. The Maid
refusing, the Soldiers took Fagots they found in the Court, and made a Fire to
throw her in: The Father and another of his Children coming to rescue Fer, the
Soldiers threw them all three into the Fire, where their Clothes were burnt,
and their Skins scorched in several places, and they scarce escaped alive out of
the Flame. This poor Man's Name was La Gau, and he made his Complaint to the
Consistory of Lusignan, where he left it under his Seal: Thus are Conversions
made in the Province of Poitou. You are not to imagine I have told you the
thousandth part of what has been done there. I have confined my self to one
instance of every sort of Punishment and Persecution inflicted on the miserable
People there. For in all places of the Province, they have exercised almost the
same Violences; the Contagion of this cruelty has passed into Saintong, and
the Country of Aunix, where the Sieur de Muin Intendant of Rochefert has
committed the same Outrages and greater, suitable to his harsh and untractable
nature, and the mortal Enmity he has always professed against the Hugonots. So
that observing the Connivence of the Court at all Marillac had done, he made no
doubt of being countenanced and justified in proceedings of like nature, and
resolving to outdo what had been acted in Poitou, he exercised Cruelties
beyond Imagination. In the Buroughs of Mauze, Surgeres, and all others about
Rochelle, he dispersed all the Congregations, interdicted the Ministers, robbed
their Houses, plundering and carrying away all their Goods, Burnt, Beat,
Imprisoned or put to Flight all those who would not change their Religion.
Those who resisted these horrible Persecutions wereforc'd to save themselves in
the Woods, and to live there on Grass like Beasts of the Field. The poor
Country People, who by reason of their poverty are destitute of help, were at
first the most exposed to these Violences. But now they spare not any, but
without respect to Quality or Birth exercise the like Cruelty on all; I that
speak to you have seen at Paris three men (who looked like Gentlemen, and said
they were of Quality) that swore their Persecutors had wound about their Necks
Flax and Tow, to which they set fire, and let it burn till half stifled, half
burnt they said they would go to Mass. A Lady of a considerable Estate and
Family had in her House a Domestic, who had changed his Religion and turned
Protestant above four and twenty years since: The Intendant of Rochefort
resolved to have this Man with his Wife and Children, to force them to return
to the Roman Catholic Religion: He demanded him of the Lady, and sent the
Grand Provost to have him away: All this would not do, the Lady stood out
stiffly, and said, she would not deliver her Domestic, without special Order
from the King: The Intendant mad to see his Course stopped by a Woman, vowed her
ruin, and procured from Court Letters under the Signer with several Blanks,
which he intended to fill up at his pleasure, for seizing the Lady and her
Children, who, to escape his Violences, were all forced to run away hastily out
of the Kingdom. If the Gentry give any relief to the poor persecuted People of
their Parishes, they are presently banished their Houses and prohibited coming
near them. But that you may better comprehend how they use the Nobility. I must
read you a Letter of a Gentleman of the Province of Poitou.

A Letter of the Marquess of --
SIR.
NEver was any thing so unjust as the Persecution I have suffered from Monsieur
Marillac Intendant of Poitou, and Pelerin his Deputy by his Order: Pelerin
begun it the 15th. of September. 1681. by quartering two Captains, six
Lieutenants, one Quartermaster, and sixteen Horsemen in my Territory of --
which was more than five parts of all the Company to be quartered in the Parish
of Rouille, though the said Territory is not a fourth part of the Parish. By
this beginning he made appear the design he had to ruin me. However I forbore
not the same day to give the Officers a Visit, and treated at Supper and lodged
at my House two of the Commanders, who did me the honor to accept of my
Invitation. On the morrow being at the Gate of my back-Court, with two of these
Officers, and five or six Cavaliers, a Sergeant of Rouille served me with an
Order of Monsieur de Marillac's in these words, Reneatus Marillac, etc. Upon
advice given us of the practices and suggestions of the Sieur's -- -- -- Father
and Son, We Order that Information be given by us to his Majesty's Council of
the Conduct of the said Sieurs -- -- -- And in the mean time, we Order them to
retire from the House of -- -- -- -- and not to return within two Leagues of
it, until it shall be otherwise ordered by his Majesty. The Sergeant writ my
Answer, wherein I declared, that the matter of Fact charged in the Order was
untrue: Of which Answer the Sergeant gave me a Copy signed with his hand: The
next day as I was in my Vineyard at the end of my Garden with one of these
Captains, Pelerin passed in the Highway close by us, without saying a word,
having with him a Quartermaster, and seven or eight Horsemen: He went into the
Base Court of the Castle, where he found my Daughter, whom he approached very
uncivilly, telling her, he commanded her to open the Chamhers, the Closets, the
Grannaries, and all that was in the House, otherwise he would break them open.
My Daughter having answered very civilly, she had not the Keys, and praying him
to let her see his Order, he replied angrily, that he was the Intendants
Deputy, and had his Orders in his head: You have, adds he, but five parts of
the Company in your Territory, I will this day send the rest hither, and reduce
you to the Condition I would have you in, and carry away liy force of Arms all
that is in this Castle: Then calling up those that were with him, he led them
to the Gate of my Out-house for Husbandry, and finding the Doors and Windows
shut, he quartered two Horsemen there, by a Billet directed to an old Servant
of mine, whom I had long kept there. Soon after he sent thither a
Quartermaster, and more Horsemen with Order to seize all that was in the
House: Which Order they executed punctually. And to vex (as much as was
possible) a Maid of Quality and Honor, they lodged in my House the Wenches
that followed their Troop, which my Daughter was extremely concerned at: When
she saw the House was to be plundered, she sent on the morrow to my Nephew de
la Ralliere to entreat Pelerin to cease this disorder and affront. The Answer
he made to his civil request, was saying to the Quartermaster and Horsemen
that were with him these very words with a furious Tone, Take that man, which
they did immediately, and took away his Sword; and at the same time another of
my Nephews, with a Gentlentan that waited on my Son, and another of my Children
under fourteen years of Age, who were walking in the Hall, not dreaming of any
such thing, were Arrested by Pelerin's Order. True it is, these last were set
at Liberty within an hour: But he sent to the Provost of St. Maixaut, (who, as
I learnt after, was in Ambush near my House to take me) that he must come and
carry away Monsieur de la Raillier to St. Maixaut, which he and his Archers
with Musquettoon in hand accordingly did, and put him in Prison, with order
that no one should speak with him.

Monsieur de Marillac's principal design was to have me Arrested, and he was
vexed to the heart at the disappointment. This made him give new Orders to the
Provosts of the Province, and the People he has about him, to use all their
endeavors to take me by any means: And thinking I would be the Sunday
following at the Sermon at Lusignan, to make the Affront more public, he gave
Order to a Provost to put himself in disguise, and Arrest me in the Church, but
I had notice of his intent, and went not to Church.

Perhaps, Sir, it will be hardly believed, that a Person of my Age, and (if I
may be allowed to say it) of my Birth should be without cause or pretense
exposed to the humors of a passionate man, and be forced to seek Sanctuary
abroad. If the Lives of my Ancestors and mine have not been signalized with
those Dignities to which Gentlemen of merit may reasonably pretend, yet I dare
affirm, that they have in several considerable employments, spent their Blood
in the Service of our Lawful Sovereigns, when Monsieur Marillac's Ancestors did
all in their Power, and stirred up the People to place the Crown of our Kings
on the Heads of their Subjects. I may add, that in my particular, I have not
failed to do the State some Service, which I can prove by authentic Marks of
acknowledgment received from Court, during the late Troubles: Yet under the
necessity I find my self to get out of the reach of Monsieur Marillac's Malice,
who has resolved to ruin me and my Family, and declared as much with a great
deal of Passion, it is a Comfort to me, he cannot in the least reproach my
Conduct. I have all my life, not only received his Majesty's Orders with
profound submission, and faithfully obeyed them, but have always had a great
deal of respect for any employed by him, and have constantly inspired the like
Sentiments into my Children. The only Cause of Monsieur Marillac's hate, and
the sole Crime he can charge me with, is my being of the Reformed Religion;
that I and my eldest Son have complained at Court, of the Violences done by his
Order to those of the Religion, and that I joined with others, in signing the
Complaints against Pelerin's Extortions: If the terrible Disorders and Outrages
committed against the Protestants in Poitou, compelled them to make me
acquainted with their Complaints, and to send my Son to the Court, to apply
himself to the King for protection; ought he for this to lay (as he has done)
a formed design to ruin my Family? Or can he accuse us of Calumny? One of the
greatest Ministers his Majesty imployes, who had the goodness to hear us, and
you, Sir, know well enough, we offered on forfeiture of our Lives, to justify
the truth of our Charge: We desired a Commission of Inquiry, to be directed to
the Bishop of Poitiers, a Prelate of known integrity, whom, I can truly say, I
never saw: Could Monsieur Marillac have any suspicion of him? Monsieur
Marillac, who assumes the Quality of an Apostle, and applauds those, who
compare him to St. Paul, and say, St. Paul never made so many Converts as he:
This in my Opinion, would have been a fairer way to clear his reputation, and a
more legal Method to justify him, then affecting (as he did) to be Judge in
his own Cause, and employing Provosts, Assessors, and others of his Train with
Promises and Threats, Money and ill usage, to prevail with Men to retract the
Complaints they had made of his Exorbitances, and the Outrages he had done
them, and were still done by his Order in Poitou: It Is a proceeding, I never
saw practiced or approved in any Court of Justice: Much less will you approve
his employing (as he does) in making his Converts no other for the most part
than Blasphemers, Men branded by Justice, and of a scandalous Life.

I am obliged to tell you farther, that since the last Orders he received, he
appears with more Courage, and acts more vigorously than ever: He banishes whom
he pleases, and shows those who have access to him Letters, he says, of a great
Minister, who commands him to carry on things to what points he thinks fit, and
promises all he does shall be justified at Court: He shows also Warrants under
the Signet, which, he says, have been sent him with Blanks, to put in what
names he pleases: Yet we scarce believe all this to be true, though we see some
Gentlemen Imprisoned, others Banished, and particularly, I am forced to absent
my self to avoid the farther effects of his anger, having already had my House
plundered, and my House of Husbandry made a place of Debauchery. And by express
Order of an Assessor of Poitiers, this Assessor having lately obtained the
Conduct of Troops, and marched in the head of them, has taken into his Train
Robbers and Outlaws, who come with Carts to take away all that the Horsemen
have not consumed in the Houses they have been quartered in: They drive away
our Beeves and all our Cattle, and sell, for twenty times less than they are
really worth, the Corn, the Hay, and generally, all that belongs to those of
the Reformed Religion: Yet these poor People are forced to maintain the
Soldiers in all their Excesses and extravagant Expenses, and they in
recompense, without the least formality of Justice possess themselves, not only
of the Goods of those who are frightened away from their Houses, but of those
who stay at home to maintain them; and having seized the Goods, they sell them
publicly, and give discharges to the buyers.

This, Sir, is the lamentable Condition of the Province of Poitou, which all
things are now in a fearful Confusion. I am very well assured, such courses as
these are directly contrary to his Majesty's Intentions; and that he will not
approve of them: Yet, because we cannot inform his Majesty of our Grievances,
but by your Ministry, I take the Liberty to promise my self, Sir, that you will
be pleased to take the pains to speak of them to the King, and to the Marquess
de Louvois, and to desire his Majesty to take my Family into his special
Protection, without which, it cannot be safe. I must also entreat you, Sir, to
procure from his Majesty an Order, to what Judge he shall think fit, to inquire
into, and inform of the Plunder and Robberies committed on my House and Lands:
His Majesty will not deny me the Justice of his special Protection, without
which, my Family cannot longer subsist in this Province, after the terrible
menaces of Monsieur de Marillac, which have already taken effect: If you will
be so kind as to desire it for me and my Son, we may continue with safety in
our Houses in the Province, and shall be infinitely obliged to you: When you
undertake it, I humbly beg your pardon for the trouble I put you to, and am

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, etc.


But to acquaint you with something yet more horrible, they begin to degrade
those Gentlemen that refuse to turn Roman Catholics, and strip them of all the
privileges of Nobility. There is in the Neighborhood of Niort a considerable
Family, which came off very well in all the actions brought for twenty years
past against the Nobility, to show by what Right they held the Privileges and
Exemptions they pretended to: This Family having obtained several Arrests in
confirmation of their Nobility, and the Privileges annexed to it, the Informer
thought fit to appeal from a Sentence of the Intendant, given in favor of the
Family. It was observed at the Council (to which the Appeal was made) that the
Family was numerous, and had so many Branches, it filled the Country. This was
looked upon as a favorable opportunity, to gain at once many considerable
Persons to their Party. The Gentlemen were all solicited to turn Catholics,
and promises made to some of them of full Companies in Service, besides Money
and Favor. The eldest of the Family had the baseness to yield, and obtained an
Arrest in these Terms. Having seen the Evidences and Abjuration of -- made
before Father la Chaise, we confirm him in his Nobility, and discharge him of
all Taxes: And we allow a months time to the rest of the same Name and Family,
to make the like Abjuration. After which time they shall be foreclos'd, etc.
and made to pay the Taxes asses'd on them with all Charges. The proceedings of
this Suit were all showed me by a Gentleman of two or three thousand Livers a
year, who is now reduced to extremity, his Estate seized, himself degraded, and
deprived of the Privileges of Nobility, because he abjured not his Religion,
as required by the Arrest.

I will acquaint you with another very special sort of Persecution: The last
year an Arrest passed, whereby the King prohibited the Catholics to embrace
the Protestant Religion, and forbad the Protestants to receive any Abjuration
of the Catholics, under pain of being interdicted the Ministry, and having the
Church demolished, wherein any Catholic should have been received into the
Profession of the Reformed Religion. At a place in Poitou called la Mott, a
Servant Maid a Roman Catholic, was persuaded by some Rascals, to go with the
Protestants to receive the Sacrament in their Church: The Intendant upon
notice, sends for the Minister and Elders, and tells them, that though it
appeared not, that Servant Maid had abjured, yet there could not be a more
certain sign she had been received amongst them, than that she had received the
Sacrament with them. Hereupon he made a great noise, interdicted and expelled
the Minister, and threatened to have the Church pulled down. And if such Courses
be allowed, what Church can be safe? How easy a matter is it for the Curates,
the Monks, and the Intendants to send Rascals to receive the Sacrament among
us, without our being able to hinder them? They durst not for some time commit
these horrible Outrages in the great Towns, where the Protestants were
numerous, for fear of provoking them to some desperate Act: But now they
resolve, all places shall fare alike: Niort, Chatellheraut, and Rochelle have
already felt the effects of their Fury. There is not any kind of Outrage, but
has been, and is done to the Inhabitants of those Towns: They write from that
Province, that there is not a Protestant left in Thouars; and generally the
Inhabitants of the Towns, as well as the Country, declare aloud, nothing but
an absolute impossibility of getting out, shall stay them in the Kingdom. But
such is their Cruelty, the Ports are guarded with all strictness imaginable: If
any one embark, and they know it, presently they romage the Vessel, take him
and imprison him: I have with me an Original Writing, of those poor Fugitives
who were lately taken and imprisoned, which I will read to you.

WE whose Names are underwritten, Prisoners, as well in the Prisons Royal of
the City of Rochell, as in the Tower of the Lantern, not only in our own Names,
but the Names of those of us who cannot write, being in all, three and thirty
Persons professing the Reformed Religion, do hereby certify; that having been
forced some weeks since, to leave the Province of Poitou, the place of our
Nativity, our Houses and all our Goods, by the unheard of Cruelties and
Outrages exercised by Order of the Intendant Marillac, against all those of the
said Religion, who will not abandon it and turn Roman Catholics; we retired
destitute of all conveniences and necessaries for subsistence into the said
City of Rochell, in hopes to find there some relief in our distress, and an
easy passage into England: Being arrived at Rochell with great pains and toil,
several of us having Wives and sucking Children, after some days stay in the
said City, we treated with one Mesnier a Merchant of the same City, who hired a
Vessel of purpose to transport us into England, and actually took on Board the
said Vessel, ever since the 20th. of the last month above one hundred and fifty
Persons of us, who remained in the said Vessel two days ready to set Sail.
Which coming to the knowledge of the Judge and Attorney General of the
Admiralty, they sent Guards aboard the Vessel, riding within Musket shot of the
Harbor: Which Guards forced us all ashore, having first plundered some of us of
our Clothes, and made some of us Prisoners, whom (after their Confession taken)
they enlarged without entering their names in the Goalers Book: Since which we
continued at Rochell aforesaid, as well for recovering the Money we had paid
Mesiner for our passage (which he absenting himself, we could not obtain) as
for finding out some sure means to transport our selves into England, our
intention being not to return home, where neither our Persons nor our
Consciences can be in safety, all things being there in ruin and desolation:
But accompanied every where by our misfortune, we were so unhappy, that the
Civil Magistrates and Lieutenant Criminal of the said City, who could not
endure us, made diligent search for us, in all their Houses who had had the
Charity to harbor us; and having found us, they put us into Prison, where we
continue since All Saints day; and had been starved to death, but for the
Charitable relief of several good People, who sent us Victuals to save us from
perishing with hunger, having two days lain on the Boards, some of us half
naked, having been taken out of Bed, and not allowed time to put on all our
Clothes. The said search having been made between the hours of nine and ten in
the Evening, when some of us were in Bed, whom they forced to get up and go to
Prison, where we continue as Criminals: What they will do with us we know not,
nor are we conscious to our selves of any Crime, unless it be that we make not
profession of the Roman Catholic Religion, for which, we think, they intend to
trouble us: Because every day, and almost every hour we are vexed and tormented
with the visits of the King'd Advocate of this City, and several Monks, who
make us the fairest and richest promises imaginable, if we will change our
Religion. And on the contrary, threaten us terribly if we persist in our
Profession. And though we are hoarse with telling them, we will by the grace of
God persevere in our Religion, and that we will dye rather than forsake it, yet
they leave us not, but torment us incessantly. Therefore we conjure all good
Christians, not to forsake us in the miserable Condition we are in, but that
they will endeavor our enlargement, as well as continue their Charity for our
subsistence. We pray God, that he will every day pour on them greater measures
of his choicest Blessings, and we entreat them not to forget us in their
Prayers, and that they will join their Complaints to ours, and lay them at his
Majesty's feet, that we may obtain from his Clemency, such Order as is
requisite for our Liberty.

Dated at the Tower of the Lantern in the City of Rochell, where we are
Prisoners, Nov. 4th. 1681. Tousot, M. Moussault, aged sixty years. Daniel
Pivet, Jean Coussemean, Francis Bourcean, Lewis Bomilet, John Mentauban, Peter
Guery, James Piron, Peter Moinault, J. Michau, James Haullice, John Gouriault,
Reyneere.


I confess, this proceeding appears horrible to me, and that it puts me in mind
of what Ozorius told us of the Condition of those miserable Jews, who had the
Ports of Portugal shut against them, and were constrained to remain slaves in
that Country. In the Age of Massacres, every one was at liberty to go out of
the Kingdom. If this Course of retaining these persecuted Wretches be
continued, there is cause to fear, they will break out at length into some
desperate Action; that they will burn their Houses, and set fire on the Towns.
The Resolution, I confess, is violent and furious, but Wretches in Extremity
bid adieu to their Reason. What think you in your Conscience, is not this an
open Persecution, and equal in Cruelty to that of past Ages? What difference
will you make between the Reign of Charles the 9th. and Lewis the 14th. the
greatest of our Kings?


Par. If Matters be thus, why do you not complain? It Is very well known, the
King loves not Violence: He will certainly do you Justice.


Hug. Law. How, Sir, are you ignorant that we complain, but cannot be heard? Do
not you know well enough, that the Province of Poitou had Deputies here, who
represented to the World the lamentable Condition of the poor Hugonots there?
In a word, Have you not seen the Petition they presented to the King? I have it
here, and will read it to you.

To the King.
SIR,
YOur Subjects of the Religion, P.R. of Poitou, most humbly show to your
Majesty, that they are in extreme desolation, by the unheard of Violences
exercised against them for their Religion, by Order of the Sieur Marillac
Intendant of the Province: They have formerly exhibited their Complaints to
your Majesty, who was graciously pleased to declare, it was not your intention
any force should be used to deprive them of the Liberty of Conscience granted
them by your Edicts. But their Grievances and great Sufferings having since
been infinitely augmented, they are constrained to come again to cast
themselves at your Majesty's feet, to implore your justice, having begged leave
to inform you, that they are dealt with as declared Enemies, that their Goods
and their Houses are pillaged, their Persons assaulted; and it is published
aloud, the Sieur Marillac will have it so, that he commands it, and that it is
to oblige your Petitioners to change their Religion. Your Soldiers, Sir, whom
your Laws require to observe the strictest Discipline, are made choice of to
execute all these Enormities. Instead of Quartering them indifferently upon all
your Subjects, they are Quartered on those only of the Religion, P. R. And when
they are so Quartered, not content with ruining their Landlords by the
excessive Charges they put tem to for maintaining them, not content with large
Contributions of Money exacted from them, not content with frightning them with
execrable Oaths and horrible Blasphemies, when they refuse going to Mass, or
hearing the Sermons of the Capucins Quartered by Order, on those of the
Religion, they are soundly Beaten, they are Banged and Cudgelled: Women have
been dragged by the Hair with Ropes about their Necks: Others have been
Tortured: Old men of fourscore years have been fast bound on Benches. Their
Children who would have comforted them, have been abused before their Faces.
The most moderate of these Soldiers hinder the Tradesmen from working at their
Trades, they rob the poor Laborers of what should maintain them, and make
public Sale of their Goods, that being reduced to beggary, they may be sorc'd
to change their Religion: Others of them seeing neither Threats nor Bastonades,
nor the horror of a violent Death, presented every hour to their Hosts by naked
Swords and Pistols, ready charged, laid to their Breasts, could prevail with
them to quit their Religion, put them in Sheets, carried them to Church, and
having sprinkled them with Holy Water, pretend they are Roman Catholics, and
that in case they return to their former Religion, they shall be guilty of the
Crime of Relapse, and which is yet more strange and unparalled in any Age,
these poor Wretches are not allowed the liberty to complain. If they apply
themselves to the Sieur Marillac, he stops their mouths without hearing them.
They are presently imprisoned without Warrant filled, and without any form of
Justice, and are kept Prisoners without being proceeded against. And to
frustrate the Complaints exhibited to your Majesty, the Provosts and Sergeants
have gone from House to House, and forced the Complainants to withdraw their
Complaints: If any Gentlemen take upon them to speak of these disorders of
which they have been eyewitnesses, they are answered haughtily, they are to
meddle with their own Business. Otherwise they will be put into a place of
safety: So that this miserable People would think themselves utterly undone, if
they were not persuaded, that a Conduct so contrary to your Laws and the Rules
of Christianity, will not be approved by your Majesty Prostrate therefore, at
your Majesty's fiet, they pray with a profound respect, that you will look upon
them with a favorable Eye, and hearken to their just Complaints, the truth
whereof they offer at the peril of their Lives, to prove before any Judge it
shall please your Majesty to nominate: It Is from the sole Protection of your
Majesty, your Petitioners can expect an end of so many Outrages, and an
enjoyment of that Tranquillity they presume to promise themselves, under the
Reign of the Greatest and most glorious Monarch of the World. May it therefore
please your Majesty, to appoint Commissioners, before whom your Petitioners may
prove the Matters of Fact abovementioned, with their Circumstances and
Dependances. And in the mean time to Order, that the Soldiers be dislodged, to
the end your Petitioners may be at liberty to get in their Harvest: Or if it be
your Majesty's Pleasure that they remain in the Province, that they may in that
Case be Quartered indifferently on your Subjects of both Religions, that the
strong may support the weak, and those who are most able, may bear the Burden
as those that are least: That you will enjoin them to live in the Order of
Discipline, and require their Officers to see it done, on pain of being
accountable for all the Disorders their Soldiers shall commit; that you will
prohibit the Soldiers, and all others to exercise any Violence against your
Subjects of the Religion, P. R. under pretense of making them change their
Religion, upon pain of being punished as disturbers of the public Peace. And
that you will be pleased to Order, that those of the Religion, P. R. who are in
Prison, may be forthwith proceeded against, or set at Liberty. And your
Retitioners shall continue their Prayers to God for the health and prosperity
of your Majesty, and the Royal Family.


If you have a mind to see other pieces as authentic as this, I will read you
two Petitions; one intended to be presented to the King, the other presented to
the Parliament of Guienne.

To the King.
SIR,
YOur Subjects of the Religion, P. R of Marennes Santonge, and the Government
of Brouage, prostrate at your Majesty's seet, most humbly show, That although
they have always behaved themselves according to your Majesty's Declarations
and Edicts, and are fully persuaded it is your intention, that your Petitioners
should live in Peace, and not have any force put upon their Conscience: Yet so
it is, that the Governor of Brouage ceases not with his Carrison to go from
House to House, and from Village to Village, to compel all manner of ways those
of the said Religion to go to Mass, forceably dragging some of them to Church,
threat-ning to kill others if they refuse to abjure, and Quartering Soldiers
in their Houses; which they plunder, and sell your Petitioners Goods, forcing
them to abandon all, to go seek elsewhere, that quiet they cannot find in their
Country.

This, Sir, was done in the Borough of Dhier near Bruage; they bound Blanchet,
a Ship-Carpenter, to a Table, forced stones into his Mouth, and whetted his
Teeth with Flint.

They carry several Persons to Church, and having made them put their hands on
a Book, they pretend they are thereby become good Catholics, and oblige them
to Sign an Abjuration of the Religion, though no other means of Persuasion or
Constraint have been used to reduce them to it.

They have acted extreme Outrages upon Chadenne Marinier, Ardouin and Rambert:
And one Voyer, having fled for Refuge to Marennes, was followed by a Sergeant
and four Soldiers, who publicly gave him several blows with the flat of their
Swords, and beat him on the Stomach with the But end of their Guns. And having
made him so weak he could not go, carried him to Prison in a Cart.

In the Village of Breuil, la Menardiex, and others the Soldiers of the said
Garrison, and entered the Houses by force, carried away and sold openly the
Goods of those who were fled thither for refuge, to save themselves from the
Outrages they had seen done to their Neighbors; particularly to Ardouin, le
Comte, Hervy and Baudry.

At Peufeucie, the Officers of the same Garrison put their Swords and Pistols
to the Throat of one Chasseriau, and said they would kill him, if he would not
change his Religion, and say his Prayers: Chasseriau having kneeled and said
his Prayers, the Officers called him a thousand names, and beat him
outragiously, because he would not change his Religion.

In the Borough of Marennes, several Persons are every day imprisoned without
the least formality of Justice. The Goods of Fougeron Captain of a Ship were
taken away in the same manner: Soleil was beaten and imprisoned, because he
would not abjure: And all the Inhabitants of those places are threatened, all
manner of Violence shall be used to force them to go to Mass.

These Outrages, Sir, and those committed in the Isles of Oleron, la Tremblade,
and Soubize, force your Seamen and others of the Religion, P. R. to leave the
Kingdom. Your Petitioners demand Justice of your Majesty, and have so much the
greater hopes of your Clemency, because they have been always most obedient to
your Orders, and made appear on all occasion a constant Zeal, and Fidelity to
your Service, for which they are still ready to sacrifice their Lives and
Fortunes. All the favor they beg, is the Liberty of their Conscience. That
your Majesty will be pleased to put a stop to the Violences done them: And that
they may live in your Kingdom, according to your Edicts and Declarations. And
your Petitioners shall continue their Vows and Prayers for your Majesty's
Sacred Person, and the prosperity of your Reign.


A Petition presented to the Parliament of Guienne by the Inhabitants of the
Isels of Santonge, in the Government of Brouage.
THe Inhabitants of the Isles of Santonge, in the Government of Brouage, making
profession of the Religion, P. R. humbly praying, show, that although according
to his Majesty's Edicts and Declarations, and an Arrest of Council of the 19th.
of May last, they ought to live in full Liberty, as well s others the Kings
Subjects. Yet so it is, that the Sieur de Carnavalet Governor of Brouage
aforesaid, accompanied with part of the Captains of his Garrison and many
Soldiers, exercise horrible Violences against your Petitioners, plundering
their Houses, giving them blows without number, with the But ends of their
Muskettoons and Pistols, dragging them by the Hair, burning their Beards, to
force them to change their Religion. By reason whereof, your Petitioners are
obliged to have recourse to the Justice and Authority of this Court, that
Commissioners may be sent and deputed out of the body of the Court, to inquire
into the truth of the Premises, and to direct the whole proceeding therein, to
the end a stop may be put to these inhumanities, so contrary to the King's
Will, and the public Tranquillity, it being impossible to find upon the place,
Officers who will pass any Act against a Governor: In Consideration whereof,
may it please this Court, favorably to grant that your Petitioners Complaints
may be recorded, and that such of your Lordships as you shall think fit, be
sent and deputed to go upon the places to inform themselves of the truth of the
Premises, and direct the proceeding to be had for suppressing the said
inhumanities, and in the mean time, to take your Petitioners into the safeguard
and protection of the King and this Court: And you will do well.

Signed. Chaille, pursuant to my Procuration. Bonnin, pursuant to my
Procuration. J. Pavillon, pursuant to my Procuration.

Signed. Lartiguet, Procurator.
Subscribed thus. WE whose Names are underwritten, having not been able to
obtain a day for hearing the said Petition, nor to have it ssignified to the
Court, have personally carried a true Copy thereof to the Attorney General, who
took and received it in presence of Monsieur Dalon, Advocate General. At Reole,
September. 8th. 1681. Signed. Bon nin, J. Pavillon, Chaille.

Can you believe, Sir, If these things were Fables, men could have the
impudence to present them to the King, and his Ministers, and his Sovereign
Courts?


Par. But what was the effect of all these Petitions?


Hug. Law. The Effect, Sir? 'Twas this: Order was given to the Deputies of
Poitou, to go out of Paris in four and twenty hours, and not to return: The
Intendant writ from the Province, that all we informed at Court were Fables: He
sent Horsemen with Pistol in hand, to force those who had changed their
Religion, to give it under their Hands, they had done it voluntarily and
unconstrained: This second Violence more cruel than the first secures him
against all: The Court is informed of these Subscriptions, and call our
Deputies Rascals and false Informers: Not but that the Court very well
understands how Matters are carried: They know very well, that the Intendants
Guards and Retinue are not Preachers able enough to Convert such Multitudes by
their Discourses: Miracles are ceased: And the King has too clear a sense, to
think such numerous Conversions are made Naturally, and without Violence:
Whence should this new illumination come, I pray? Or why should it be peculiar
to the Province of Poitou? Yet at Court they pretend not to believe a word we
say, to the end they may give permission to all Practices against us, yet be
able to say, if any Violence be acted, it is without Order of the Court: Since
September last they have labored more than ever, to Publish it is not the
Kings pleasure any Violence should be used. His Majesty has had the goodness
to say as much to several of his Governors and Intendants: In the mean time,
it is certain, that in the Provinces of Santonge and Poitou, the Violences and
Outrages you have heard, are not only continued, but increased. The Sieur
Marillac finding himself authorized by the connivence of the Court, has
tripled his Fury. I will tell you a very true story, which will teach you what
to believe of the mitigation so much talked of. Four Soldiers Quartered in one
House, having sacked and consumed all the Goods in it, and committed all
Violences imaginable, to make the Master of the House change his Religion, took
his two Daughters, both grown and handsome, they lock them up with themselves in
a Rom, and threaten if they resuse to turn Catholics, they must suffer the
greatest Extremities; and, to be as good as their words, they put them into a
posture to receive the worst Outrage that can be done to a civil Woman: To
prevent which, they changed their Religion. I know very well, his Majesty would
be so far from Countenancing such an Action, that he would abhor it, if he knew
it. Neither do I believe Monsieur Marillac so mad, as to Command such
Brutality. But this lets you see what a loose hand is held over the Insolence
of the Soldiers; to what point they extend the Permission granted them, to act
what Violence they please, provided they oblige the Hugonots to change their
Religion. In a word, you may judge from hence, what you are to believe of the
Mitigation they tell you of: Ask me not again, Sir, as you did awhile, whence
proceeds that terrible fright we are observed to be in for some time past: We
see coming toward us that Scourge which now Afflicts Santonge and Poitou: We
understand well enough, they will not open a Persecution in all places at once;
this would make too great a noise: But when they have laid these two Provinces
desolate, they will pass into another: They scatter and lay wast all our
Congregations in one end of the Kingdom, and in the other, tell us, we shall be
dealt with better far than we imagine, that we are to blame to take the Alarm,
and ought not to think of leaving the Kingdom: That is, that we are a File of
Wretched men marked out for death; while those at the one end of the File are
Hanged or Shot to death, those at the other end are spoken fair to, and made
drink, to amuse them, that they run not away, but may, when the rest are
dispatched, be Hanged as the others. They began with this poor Province of
Poitou, because it is bounded on one side by the Sea, and on the other side
borders on all the Provinces of France, so that the wretched Inhabitants have
no way to escape out of the Kingdom. And it is certain, those who will permit
themselves to be surpised, and neglect the opportunity of getting into a place
of safety, will one day dearly pay for their Imprudence and Security.


Hug. Gent. Your Reflections have interrupted me in the Course of my story. I
have many things more to acquaint you with, which will give you further Light
into the Character of this Persecutor who Ravages Poitou. He spreads, and
causes it to be spread abroad every where with inconceivable boldness, that
it is the King's intention, there shall be but one Religion in his Kingdom. If
any one chance to say any thing to the contrary, what Religion soever he is of,
he is punished for it. It happened, that three Roman Catholics said, the King
had not declared himself as fully in this particular, as 'twas reported he had;
they were all three Imprisoned for it. A Man of the Religion having taken an
occasion to ra^ly these Conversions made for Money, and having said, the King
was too wise to be at great expense to carry on an Action so base as that, of
Bribing People out of their Religion, was Imprisoned and Condemned to go
bare-head and barefoot, with a lighted Torch in his hand through the Street,
followed by the Executioner to the Court of Justice, to beg Pardon for his
fault: But I have one thing more to tell you, by which you may better know what
a Person he is I am speaking of: He went to Dinner at the Marquess of Verac's,
a Gentleman of note in the Province. While they were at Dinner, the Intendant
gave Order, the Inhabitants of the place should assemble at the Cross: After
Dinner he took his Coach, got up on the streps of the Cross, and said to the
Peasants assembled, Children, you are to know, it is the King's intention there
shall be henceforth but one Religion in France: Turn Catholics: Whoever does
so, shall have cause upon all occasions to praise the King's Bounty: Those who
refuse shall experience his Severity: To prove what I say, see here, your Lord
the Marquess of Verac come along with me to change his Religion: Whereupon the
Marquess (who is a very honest man, and a very good Protestant) stepping up
immediately to the same Cross, said to the Peasants: Children, The Intendant
does but jest with you; The King has no design to revoke his Edicts: And it is
not true that I am come along with him, or have any design to change my
Religion.


Hug. Law. This is surprising, and sufficient of it self, to make out the
Character of the Man. I cannot tell, Sir, what you think of these Conversions
of Poitou: But as for me, I confess, that assuming the Sentiments of a
reasonable Catholic, I could not forbear being of the Opinion of Ozorjus
Bishop of the Algarues. That nothing is more opposite to the Spirit of
Christianity, than a Conduct of this Nature, that exposes so many Mysteries and
holy things to men suspected and evidently profane. Can you choose but
tremble, Sir, to think that at this day in Poitou, thousands of those who are
forced to go to Mass, and prostrate themselves before that which you call Our
Lord, detest and look upon that as an Idol which they pretend to adore: When
they are sick, they bring them the holy Oil, and make them take the Sacrament
after your manner: They obey with their bodies the Violence used, but they
think very Profanely of those things you esteem so Holy. It Is, in your
Opinion, an enormous Crime these Wretches commit; yet it is your Zealous
Catholics are the Cause of these horrible Prophanations of your Mysteries:
When Violence is used to force men to Lock up in the bottom of their Hearts
their sentiments of Religion, it produces the effect of that Violent and
inconsiderate Zeal of Emmanuel the second King of Portugal, who compelled the
Jews to turn Christians, as I told you: The Jews professed themselves
Christians, but continued Jews in their Hearts. Their Children inherited their
Dissimulation and Religion. Hence it is, that half those Portuguese, who, to
avoid the Inquisition, are Christians in Portugal; no sooner set foot in
Holland, but they are Jews: Those Hugonots who have been forced to turn
Roman Catholics, will inspire into their Children their Religion, and the
disquiet of their Spirit: These Sentiments will be transmitted from Generation
to Generation, as a Seed of Rebellion, that will always incline this People to
shake off the Yoke imposed on their Conscience, as Soon as they have
opportunity. So that by the Course now taken, instead of gaining Servants to
God, you raise Enemies to the State. And I had reason to say, that by the
Method now used for Conversion, you will make you a Church of Rogues and
Villains, of Atheistical and Profane Rascals, destitute both of Religion and
Honor: Conversion at this day is a Cloak to cover Debauches, and the most
abominable Enormities: Let the most infamous of men profess himself a
Catholic, he is presently become a right honest man: That Church which claims
the title of Holy as proper to it self, opens her Gates to Bankrupts and
Cheats, and exhorts men to become Bankrupts by turning Roman Catholics, which
is a sure Means of Pardon and Oblivion for all Sins, and in a word, a Salve for
all Sores, a Remedy for all Evils.


Hug. Gent. Give me leave to tell you a little story, not impertinent to the
Purpose which I had the other day from an Officer: You know, it is now every
ones business to make Converts: It Is the employment of Gentlemen and Officers
of War, as well as of the Bigots: A Soldier of the Garrison of Friburg, having
committed a considerable Robbery, was imprisoned for it. He had wit enough to
know, it would go very hard with him, unless he could find Favor. The first
Question asked him in Prison, was, what Religion he was of; to which he
answered, without the least Hesitation, he was a Hugonot. Presently flocked
about him all the Devotes of the Town, and, in the Head of them, Madam de
Chamilly the Governor's Wife. Never Martyr made a more resolute Defense than
this Soldier, who was looked upon as a Hugonot, would sooner Burn than turn.
Monsieur de Chamilly the Governor of the place, came in Person to the Prison,
spoke home to the Soldier, and made him understand, it would go very ill with
him, if he did not turn Catholic: The Soldier was not a whit moved at all
this: But at length he began to relent and yield to the gentle instances of the
Lady Governess. Yet not without entering into a formal Treaty, for fear of a
surprise, and being hanged when converted. In short, they gave him all the
security he desired for his Life, and they kept their words. When the Soldier
was got clearly off, his Comrades made it appear he had never been a Hugonot,
but to the day of his imprisonment had always been a Roman Catholic: Madam de
Chamilly was so vexed when she knew it, she would have had the Soldier tried
again for his Crime: But the business was over, he had obtained his Pardon, and
the Matter was past bringing about.


Par. Sir, I see you will not have opportunity this day, to make use of the
Arguments in your little Book: These Gentlemen make great Complaints, and are
not wanting in words to express them. Let me advise you to put up your Book in
your Pocket: Methinks, our Discourse has been so long, it is now time to take a
little Breath. But to interrupt as little as may be a business we are all so
much concerned in, I think we may do well to proceed in our Discourse, and
finish to morrow.


The end of the First Discourse.
The Last Efforts OF AFFLICTED INNOCENCE.
The Second Discourse.
Prove. Cath. GEntlemen, you shall not escape me to day: We have given you leave
to Attack us, and must now see how well you can defend your selves: That
Gentleman jeered me, that I was obliged yesterday to put up again my Book in my
Pocket: But I Will take it out now, and you shall, if you please Gentlemen,
presently give your Answers to the Objections of my Author.


Hug. Law. You Author, Sir, is none of the Greatest: He is a Scribler of
Libels, a man without a Name, one that hides himself in a Corner, to shoot as
us like a base treacherous Fellow, when most of the World beside glory to
appear eminent among those who destroy us. But we will put upon him the Value
you please: If we cannot answer him, it will be our fault, having had time
enough to provide for it: Every seditious Monk and hotheaded writer have made
the same Objections against us: These things have been a hundred times charged
upon us, and as often answered: But I am very sensible, they are concerned now
more than ever, to insist upon and maintain these Calumnies: It Is no wonder to
see them endeavor to stain the Reputation of those they use as Enemies of the
State: Our Loyalty is a continual Reproach to our Persecutors: We cannot be
surpised to see them Laboring so earnestly to blemish it.


Prove. This, Sir, is beating the Air, and complaining without Cause: That which
I have to say and to read to you, is certain and indisputable matter of Fact:
Hear what our Churchman says. These Gentlemen have gained themselves no more
advantage by adding, They had never been so unfortunate to render themselves
unworthy of those Concessions: For if I were allowed to call to mind, and
relate here what passed in the Reign of Lewis the 13th of triumphant Memory,
they would find it very difficult to persuade the World of the truth of what
they say: We may see by the Edicts published on that occasion, to what point
the disobedience of those Gentlemen had reduced that great Prince: You may read
what follows, and see the terms the Edict of Niort of 27th. of May 1621. is
penned in, where the King complains of Exorbitances committed by those of your
Religion, of Politic Assemblies, of Rebellions, of taking up Arms, of Orders
sent into the Provinces, to seize his Majesty's Revenue and Finances, of
Commissions given for making great Guns, and for raising of Soldiers: You will
meet with the sieges of Montauban, Rochell, Montpellier and Privas, and many
actions of Rebellion committed by you in the late times, when you would not
obey the King's Orders, whereby your Churches were to be demolished, and you
were prohibited to preach in certain places: But hear what he says after: To
which they add, as if they were the most miserable People of the World, that
without looking back into times long since past, their present Condition is
very different from that they were in some years ago: We know very well these
Gentlemen sigh for those times, they call, longsince past, in which they were
so formidable: It Is true, we are not now in the times of their Enterprises of
Ambois and Meaux, and those other attempts of theirs, when they called in the
English and the Rheiters to their assistance to Sack all our Provinces, to Rob
and pull down our Churches, to surprise the Towns of greatest importance, to
give Battle within view of Paris, and in sight of their King. The Battle of St.
Denis, in 1567.
And when they were not ashamed to propose to Charles the 9th. to disarm first,
if he would have peace with them; and to send back for that purpose those six
thousand Swisses he had called in for the safety of his Person, and of the
State. Here, Sir, in few lines is a great deal of business, you will not easily
rid your hands of.


Hug. Law. I Will do my endeavor, Sir, I very well know, that a hundred Authors
before yours, charge on us as a great Crime the Civil Wars of the last Age, and
of the beginning of this. But if you will give us the hearing, we will examine
who ought to bear the blame of them.


Hug. Gent. Sir, Before you answer this Anonymus Author, I think you may do
well to speak a little to what I read to day in a Book of Dr. Arnaud,
entitled, The Overthrow of the Morals of Jesus Christ by the Calvinists: I see
it on the Table there, and will, if you please, read you the passage. The first
Christians had no other Arms but their Faith and their Patience: Book 1 Chapter 5.
Nothing could ever move them to use force for ruining Idolatry. But as for
them, as soon as they saw themselves in a Condition to resist the Powers
ordained by God, they filled Europe with bloody Wars, they changed the
Governments of States, broke down the Images, polluted the Altars, burnt the
Churches, and profaned the most holy things. You know this Monsieur Arnaud
has gained himself a great Reputation among his Party: And what he says is of
more weight, than what is said by an Author without Merit and without a Name.


Hug. Law. The Charge is the same, though the Accusers are different. By
answering either, we answer both. Save that Dr. Arnaud aims farther than the
Anonymus Churchman, and lays his Accusation general, against all the Reformed
of Europe, as if they had kindled a War and altered the Government, wherever
the Reformation was introduced: The generality of this Charge deserves a
particular Consideration, and if these Gentlemen please, I will let them see
how unjust it is.


Par. We shall gladly give you the hearing. It Is a thing we had to say to you,
in Justification of the Conduct of the Ministers against you, and of the design
the King has to destroy you. And I explain it thus: You are naturally inclined
to a Republican Government, you hate Monarchy, and your Sect has not made
appear that Spirit of Rebellion that animates it in France alone, but in the
Low Countries, in Germany, in England: And generally in all places where it is
established, you have shaken off the Yoke of your Lawful Princes, and settled
your Religion by taking up Arms against your Sovereigns.


Hug. Law. If a Gentleman so clearsighted as you, can charge us so unjustly,
what Equity can we expect from those ordinary understandings which are guided
wholly by prejudice? To hear you speak, one would think we had in every place
set up the Standard of Rebellion: And that like Mahomet we had established our
Sect by force of Arms. The ground of all this is no other, but that in the time
of our Reformation, the Low Countries withdrew themselves from under the
Dominion of Spain; and the Protestants of Germany had some engagements with
Charles the 5th. To let you see the injustice of this Complaint, I must entreat
you to take a short view of the States, where our Reformation is established;
and you will see whether it has entered every where by Arms and Rebellion. As
to England, all the World knows, the Reformation was introduced there by
Authority of the Sovereign, not by popular Sedition: Henry the 8th. shook off
the Yoke of the Pope, and enfranchised his Kingdom from the Tyranny of the
Court of Rome. Edward the 6th. his Son and Successor finished what he began.
Mary the Daughter of Henry destroyed all her Father and Brother had done, and
brought the Kingdom again under the Dominion of the Roman Church: Elizabeth her
Sister overthrew all Mary had done, restablish'd the Reformation of the
Protestants in all her Dominions, and strengthened it by a Reign of above forty
years. Swede was reformed under the Authority of Gustavus Erikson, whom your
most Catholic Writers cannot reproach with any thing, but his banishing the
Roman Religion out of his Countries. He was descended of the Ancient Gothish
Kings, and Grandchild to Charles Chanut King of Swede. He was chosen King of
Swede, by all the States of that Kingdom with universal joy, and great
acclamation, as having merited that Honor by the great Service he had done his
Country, in delivering it from the tyranny of the Danes: This then was no
usurper, but a Lawful King: A Prince of so much goodness and wisdom as Swede
ever had. He Reigned happily thirty seven years, and in acknowledgment of his
Merit, the Swedes made their Crown hereditary in favor of his Children, which
had before been Elective. This Prince reformed Religion in his Countries
without Violence, without Threats, but by fair and gentle Means, without a
Sword drawn, or drop of Blood shed: Denmark received the Reformation the same
time under Frederick and Christiern the 3 d. his Son without Violence, and only
by the Authority of these two Princes. The last Roman Catholic King of Denmark
was Christiern the 2 d. whom F. Maimburg, in his History of Lutheranism
describes as a Monster. He assured himself the Conquest of Swede by the most
inhumane and barbarous Action History ever mentioned. That is, by Massacring
the Senate, and all the flower of the Nobility of the Kingdom at a Feast he
invited them to: This Tyrant was driven out of Denmark by his Subjects there,
who called in Frederick Duke of Holstein, and placed him on the Throne. This
Frederick was a Prince as eminent for wisdom, and renowned for goodness, as
Christern the last who made profession there of the Roman Catholic Religion,
was infamous for his Wickedness, Treachery and Cruelty. For proof of this
truth, I rely not on a Witness liable to suspicion, but on Father Maimbourg, in
his first Book of the History of Lutheranism: I have already made out a
considerable number of the Reformed Countries, where it appears the Reformation
was not introduced by revolt of the Subject, but established by Authority of
the Sovereign. The Swisses were a free State before the Reformation, and
therefore at liberty to make choice of their Religion, and may be added to the
number of Countries reformed without Rebellion.


Par. Let me advise you, Sir, to stop there: For if you step but a little
further, you will come to Geneva, your Metropolis and your Rome: And I believe,
you will find it a hard task, to justify their manner of changing the Ancient
Religion there: They expelled their Bishop, deprived the Dukes of Savoy of the
ancient Rights they had in the City, erected themselves into a sovereign
Republic against all sorts of Right, Humane and Divine.


Hug. Law. I think, Gentlemen, you have no cause to suspect the History of
Geneva, lately published by Monsieur Spon: He affects a sincerity not very
pleasing to the Protestants: They of Geneva have judged it so little favorable
to them, they have prohibited the sale of the Book in their City. And it has
pleased the Enemies of the Protestants so well, they have given it high Elogies
and magnificent Approbations: However I will rely on what that Author says. If
you read that History, Sir, you will find the Bishop of Geneva was not in any
Age Sovereign of the City; true it is, he had some rights over the temporalties
of it, as some Bishops of France, (particularly those who are Dukes, Earls, and
Peers of the Kingdom) have over their Sees and Episcopal Cities, as the Bishop
of Strasbourg had there, as the Elector and Archbishop of Cologne has over
that City: But these are not rights of Sovereignty: The Bishop of Geneva never
was a Sovereign Prince, but the Syndic and Council of the City have always been
Sovereign Magistrates in Civil Affairs: The Historian tells you further; the
Duke of Savoy never had any lawful right over the City of Geneva: They have had
Judges who were called Vidons; but the Judges had jurisdiction over no other
but Savoyards, settled in the Territory of Geneva: And 'twas by mere sufferance
of the Genevois, the Dukes of Savoy had a right of Jurisdiction over the
Savoyards in their City. It Is confessed, the Dukes of Savoy have sometimes kept
their Court in Geneva, but without any Authority, other than the permission of
the Syndics and Council of the City. This Author informs you also, that the
Dukes of Savoy resolved at any rate to make themselves Masters of Geneva, got a
Creature of theirs, Peter de la Baum to be made Bishop. This man, being a
Traitor to the City, he ought to have protected, did all in his Power to bring
it under the Tyranny of the Savoyards: Those who most vigorously opposed this
Enterprise, and obliged him first to retire, were very Zealous
Roman Catholics. They put themselves under the protection of the Canton of
Fribourg, which had been, and was then of the Roman Catholic persuasion. The
Doctrine of the Reformed was preached in the City, many were converted, the
Bishop returned to oppose them. He had a great Contest with the Senate about
some Prisoners, he pretended, belonged to him, in prejudice of the Council of
the City, who was judicially possessed of their Business: The Council carried
it against the Bishop, and remained Masters of the Prisoners, the subject of
this Controversy was matter of Jurisdiction, not of Religion. The Bishop
having lost the Cause, withdrew out of the City. He was so far from-being
expelled or driven away, that his Authority was owned there a long time after.
But discovery being made of several Conspiracies of this Bishop, tending to an
absolute suppression, both of the Religion and Liberty of the City, being then
for the most part reformed, his Authority at last expired in a little State he
was not able to manage; the free People of it having made choice of a Religion
contrary to his.


Par. It Is easy, in so short an Account as you give, to cover truths with
falsehoods: the matters of Fact are for the most part disguised: And it would
not be difficult to give them another Face, which would represent this
Enterprise a mere Rebellion: But 'twill be too long a digression to enter into
particulars of this nature: We had rather hear what you can say in favor of
your Protestants of Germany.


Hug. Law. I say, Sir, there is no reason to accuse them of Rebellion against
their Sovereigns. It Is perhaps the League of Smalcald you would lay to their
Charge: It was, Sir, a League defensive only: F. Maimbourg shall witness it.
They concluded, says he, Hist. Lutb. lib. 3. An. 1531.
their League of mutual defense against all those who would trouble them in the
exercise of their Religion. The same Author tells us, that if the Protestant
Princes had any design to prevent the Emperor, and take up Arms before him,
Luther opposed it. And the Letter he writ on that Subject to the Elector of
Saxony, may be seen at this day at the beginning of the first Tome of Luthers
works: Is there any thing more natural, than to unite in order to common
safety? This League was not made by Rebels and seditious Subjects, but by
Sovereign Princes: It Is very well known, the Emperor is not Master of the
Empire, which is a Confederation of several States united under one Head, yet
reserving to themselves-their Liberty and Sovereignty. In matters of Peace and
War, Impositions, raising Armies, and all other Acts of Sovereignty, the
Princes and free Towns do what they please: They make War one against another:
They end their differences as they please, and enter, when they think fit, into
Interests contrary to those of the Emperor: If the Emperor attempt any thing
against the Privileges of any Member of the Empire, they remedy themselves by
Arms, without incurring the penalty or name of Rebels. Who knows not this, must
be a stranger to the History of Germany: The Golden Bull is express in it.
Declaring, that if the Emperor violate any Right or Privilege belonging by
that Bull to the Members of the Empire, the Princes Ecclesiastical and Secular
have Power to oppose him, and cannot on that account be charged with Rebellion:
Nor can the Protestants of Germany be charged with Rebellion for entering into
the League of Smalcald. Which was not more against the Emperor, than against
all other who should persecute them. True it is, these Confederates ten years
after had War with Charles the 5th. but were forced into it: They did not take
up Arms first, the Emperor formed a design to destroy them, and they were
obliged to defend themselves: Besides, there is nothing more false, than that
this was properly a War of Religion. That was only a pretense by which Charles
the 5th. engaged Pope Paul the 3d. in the League against the Confederates of
Smalcald. The Pope indeed would have it pass for a holy War, undertaken for the
destruction of Heresy. The Emperor on the contrary published a Manifesto,
wherein he professed, That the War he was entering into, was not a War of
Religion: That this appeared clearly by his permitting liberty of Conscience to
the Lutheran Princes and Soldiers, who faithfully served him in his Armies,
and that he had not entered into a League with the Pope, otherwise than as a
Prince who assisted him against the Common Enemy: It Is certain he had in his
Army many Protestant Princes, particularly, Maurice and Angustus Dukes of
Saxony, and Albert and John Marquesses of Brandenbourg. Charles whose Ambition
knew no bounds, had no other design, but to destroy the liberty of the Empire,
and to make it Hereditary in his Family: This appeared by the consequence of
the War, wherein though he had all the good Fortune he could hope for, he
performed not a tittle of what he had promised the Pope: He endeavored not the
destruction of Lutheranism, but having taken the Confederate Towns, put them to
great Ransoms, and drew from them vast Sums of Money, and huge quantities of
Ammunition, but left them at full liberty to profess what Religion they
pleased. The Pope perceiving himselfabus'd, he called home his Nephew and his
Troops, which returned miserably scattered into Italy. All the Benefit he
reaped by this War, was vexation at heart, for having assisted Charles to
oppress Germany, and having opened him a way for oppressing Italy: But how can
it be imagined, Charles the fifth undertook this War out of Zeal to Religion,
when, if he was of any Religion, he was perhaps more a Lutheran than a
Roman Catholic. Which there is just cause to believe, because Ponce de Leon
his Confessor and depositary of his most secret thoughts, in whose Arms he
expired, was condemned to be burnt as an Heretic by Philip the Son of Charles:
I see on your Table, the Abridgement of the History of France by Mezeray, the
first Edition. Let us see, what he says, the last Age thought of it. This
Author is a Roman Catholic and judicious: He is read by all, and you cannot
suspect him: Philip, says he, Ann. 1559.
At his arrival into Spain, caused to be burnt in his presence at Seville and
Valladolid, a great multitude of those they call Lutherans, Men and Women,
Gentlemen and Churchmen, and the Effigies of Constantius Pontius, Confessor to
Charles the 5th. who attended him to his death. It Is no wonder he was not
afraid to stain the Memory of his Father; for, if some may be credited, he was
about to have an information put in against him, and to have his bones burnt as
an Heretic. And that he forbore this proceeding for no other reason, than that
his Father had been an Heretic, he was thereby divested of his Estates, and
consequently, had no right to resign them to his Son. Philip indeed appeared a
great Zealot for his Religion. But if you will believe the Germans, the
terrible hatred he had against the Protestants, proceeded not so much from his
love to the Catholic Church, as from his violent resentment against the
Lutheran Confederates, who opposed the Design of Charles the 5th. to make him
associate of the Empire with Ferdinand his Brother, whose Successor in the
Empire Philip aspired to be. But to return to our Subject, I say, the Germans
fought for their Religion and Liberty by Power inherent in the Princes of the
Empire, who are as much Masters of their States, as the Emperor of his: Maurice
of Saxony effected what Frederick could not. He recovered the Liberty of
Germany, and broke the Yoke under which it groaned. Having thus justified the
Protestants of Germany. I know of no other but the States of the United
Provinces, who are charged to have changed their Religion, to set up and
maintain a new form of Government.


Par. Ah! Sir, as for them, I advise you for your credit, not to engage in
their defense: It Is so publicly notorious, they were Subjects of Spain, and
that in changing their Religion, they changed their Master by as plain a
Rebellion as ever was in the World, I am so much your Friend, I would not have
you undertake their Cause.


Hug. Law. No, Sir, I will not undertake it: Grotius de antiquitate Reipublicae
Batavicae.
It Is done to my hand. Read what the learned Grotius has writ of the Original
and Government of the Provinces of the Low Countries: Read their Historians,
read ours. You will find these People never were absolutely Subjects of Spain,
that the Earls of Holland never were their absolute Masters, that the
Government was mixed, partly Aristocratical, partly Monarchick. These
Historians will tell you, the Provinces of the Low Countries were reformed long
before they took up Arms against the King of Spain; that in the first Wars
there was an equal, if not a greater number of Roman Catholic, than of
Protestant Lords and Towns engaged against the Catholic King. That the States
chose the Duke of Alanson, a Son of France, a Roman Catholic for their Master:
That before that Election, they had submitted themselves to Archduke Matthias
a good Roman Catholic: You will see there, that the horrible Cruelties of the
Duke of Alva fore'd this poor People beyond the bounds of patience: That Tyrant
boasted he had destroyed by the hands of the common Executioner eighteen
thousand Persons, and had made the Confiscations of the Condemned, amount to
eight millions of Gold yearly. You may, if you please, read in Mezeray's
Abridgement, who is neither Hollander nor Hugonot, Ann. 1557.
That before the Duke of Alva left Spain, they arrested the Marquess of
Berguen, and Floris de Mentmorency Montigny, who were gone from the States of
the Low Countries, to make their Remonstrances to King Philip: The former dyed
of grief, or was poisoned; the other was Beheaded, though both were good
Roman Catholics: By which it appeared, the Council of Spain had formed their
design against the Liberty of the Low Countries as much (at least) as against
their new Religion. If you have a mind to hear any more of the Low Country
Wars, let us read Mezeray in the same place: This year, said he, They make the
beginning of the Low Country Wars, which lasted till the Peace of Munster
without intermission, other than that of the Truce agreed by the mediation of
Hen. 4th. The fear of the Inquisition was the principal Cause of the War. The
Inquisition was extremely pernicious and insupportable to the Flemings, for
besides the two violent rigors it exercised against those who had embraced the
new Opinions, it broke off all Commerce, etc. The very Clergy was no less
displeased at it for the seven newly erected Bishoprics, taken out of the
Metropolitan Diocesses of Rhemes, Treves and Cologne, and the Bishoprics of
Liege and Munster; because they had appropriated to these new erected
Bishoprics the richest Abbeys of the Low Countries, and bestowed them on
Prelates at the Devotion of the Council of Spain: So that under pretense of
maintaining the ancient Religion, the Spaniards labored to establish an
absolute Dominion in Provinces, which owe but a limited Obedience according to
their Laws and their Privileges: This, Sir, was the true source of these Wars,
wherein not only the Lay-subjects of both Religions, but the Roman Catholic
Clergy of the Low Countries, were engaged against the King of Spain for the
preservation of their Liberty. Read Strada, whom you cannot suspect of
partiality in our favor, and you will discover through all the Disguisements
of that Author, that it was not Religion, but the Cruelty of the Spanish
Government, was the sole Cause of the revolt of those Provinces: If all this
will not satisfy you, I will give you leave, Sir, to brand the memory of our
Kings, who maintained the Rights of these Provinces, thought their Cause just,
and supported them against the enterprises of a Master, who had lost his just
Rights of Lawful Sovereignty over them, by endeavoring to be their Tyrant.


Par. I see we shall never agree in this point: We were better return to our
Civil Wars of France, wherein those of your Religion have spilt so much Blood,
and appeared always of a Spirit inclined to Rebellion.


Hug. Law. If you think we have nothing to say for our selves, you are very
much mistaken, Sir: We have so many things to answer, we know not what Method
to put them in, nor how to comprehend them in few words: The Wars you would
charge us with as a Crime, have been Civil Wars, of the same nature with others
raised in the Bowels of a State, by the discontent of the People, and the
jealousy of the great ones; to which, Religion was but an accidental
ingredient: This, Sir, I undertake to prove evidently by History. But before I
enter on that, I beg leave to make some Reflections: Is it not a great piece of
injustice, in those who read the History of the last Age, to fix their eyes on
those thirty years only, which passed between the death of Henry the 2d. and
that of Henry the 3d. without taking notice of the forty years elapsed, during
the Reign of Francis the 1st. and Henry the 2d? If they charge us with having
been engaged in the Civil Wars those thirty years, ought they not to commend
the patience we had for forty years before? Admit it, we were afterward more
impatient than we ought; however it is true, that for almost half an Age, we
patiently endured unheard of Cruelties, without seeking any means of Revenge or
Defense. During the Raigns of Henry the 2d. and Francis the 1st. the Land was
overflowed with our Blood, the Prisons were full of our poor Captives, the
Executioners were employed in nothing else but burning and quartering those
poor Wretches, who were not guilty of any other Crime, but praying to God in a
Language they understood, and refusing to adore any thing, but what they knew
to be God: There is no sort of Cruelty but was exercised upon them; they were
burnt; they had their Members plucked off with hot Pinsers; they were racked
and put to all sorts of Tortures; they were buried alive: There were horrible
Massacres committed upon them: Such were those of Cabrieres and Merindol,
wherein they rased Houses and Towns, laid waste a whole Country, cut the
Throats of several thousands of Persons, and caused others to perish by Famine
on the Mountains. The Court made it a divertisement to see the horrible
Torments these poor People suffered. You shall hear the Account Mezeray gives
of it. There was, says he, a general Procession at Nostredame, Mezeray's
Abridgment, etc. Ann. 1548.
where the King assisted, to declare by this action the Zeal he had to maintain
the Religion of his Ancestors, and to punish those who would change it. This he
confirmed by the horrible Torments of many miserable Protestants, who were
burnt at the place of Execution in Paris. They were hoys'd up with a Pulley and
an iron Chain, and then let fall into a great fire. This was often reiterated:
The King was so pleased with it, that he fed his eyes with this Tragic
Spectacle: And it is said, the horrible Cries of one of these Wretches affected
him so, that all his Life after, he was from time to time haunted with a very
troublesome remembrance of it: I should scarce have reported this, had the
Relation been made by any Author not a Roman Catholic, for it would have been
looked upon as false and incredible. Those horrible imaginations that from time
to time persecuted Henry the 2d. did not reform him. His Reign was stained
throughout with the Blood of his Protestant Subjects: In all places of the
Kingdom, Fires were kindled and Gibbets set up to destroy them. The Duchess of
Valentinois, that King's Mistress, making great advantage of the Confiscations
of the Protestants, served as a fury to awaken his Cruelty every moment: That
lascivious she-Wolf thirsting after the blood of the Faithful, and with a
ravenous Appetite coveting their Estates, demanded their death as a recompense,
for those criminal favors she was so liberal of to her King and her Pages: If
these poor People met at night in a private House for Instruction and Comfort,
they were surpised, and used as Sorcerers found at a Sabbath adoring the
Devil. To add a Persecution more cruel then the rest, they published Calumnies
against them, blacker then the Devil had ever invented; they renewed against
them all the old Accusations of the Pagans against the Primitive Christians:
They charged them with strange Crimes, says Mezeray; it was said, they roasted
little Children, Mez. Abr. An. 1557.
and having made great Cheer, put out the Lights, and turned the place into a
Brothel; a great number of them was burnt. In all this time did any one take up
Arms? Perhaps they were so weak, you will say, they durst not; I am of Opinion,
the Reformed were as numerous about the end of the Reign of Henry the Second,
as at the beginning of the Reign of Francis the second, when the first Troubles
began: It Is not to be imagined, that vast multitude of People was converted in
five or six months; there were at that time of the Reformed Religion, some
Princes, several great Lords, many principal Officers of the Crown, and of the
People an infinite number. Mezeray tells us, that in one of their Meetings they
surpised some of the Queens Maids of Honor; yet not one of the Reformed
thought of making any defense under the Reign of this Prince, who persecuted
them with Fire and Sword: Can you wonder, that having been driven to extremity
by long and continual Violences, they had no more patience, but at last
endeavored some means to save themselves from the fury of their Tormentors?


Par. You know the primitive Christians did not so; they had no other Weapons
but their Prayers and Tears, to defend themselves against the Persecutions of
the Pagan Emperors.


Hug. Law. I wonder Sir, how those of whom you have borrowed that Reflection,
dare produce the Example of the Primitive Christians. It Is true, the Primitive
Christians had not any Arms to defend themselves; nor had they any to attack
with: They did not burn Heretics, but labored their Conversion. There is not
a more certain Character of a false Church, or false Zeal, then Persecution,
Violence, and Fury: There have sat on the Imperial Throne, Constantines and
Theodosii, as well as Decij and Diocletians; but a Constantine or a Theodosius
never made use of Arms against the Pagan Religion, which had made so many
Martyrs: It Is not out of Charity alone, that Christian Princes ought to forbear
attacking a false Religion with punishment and torture; but out of Prudence the
Church only can have Martyrs, and ought not to be robbed of the Glory of that
Privilege, and that powerful argument for proof of her Doctrine: Nothing
raises a greater prejudice against the constancy of true Martyrs, then the
obstinacy of Heretics, who persist in their Opinions to Death. Our Accusers,
Sir, are very unjust in their proceeding with us; to have the Sword in one
hand, and the Faggot in the other; to cover Towns and Countries with dead
Bodies; to destroy pell-mell the Innocent with the Guilty; to shed the blood of
Infants; Women and old Men having one foot in the Grave; to commit Massacres;
to drown France with the blood of its Inhabitants; to Burn, Quarter, and invent
new Torments: This is laudable Zeal, merit of the highest degree, that raises
men to be Saints, equal with St. Dominick. But if a poor Hugonot lift up his
Arm to put by the blow that is made at him, this is fury and rage, and the
fruit of a spirit opposite to that of the true Church: I cannot forbear
applying to this purpose, what St. Athanasius said to them who reproached him
with making his Escape; If they think it a shame to me, to have made my Escape,
let them be ashamed to have forced me to it by their Persecution. When Men run
away, it is an argument of the Cruelty of those they run from: We fly not from
the Gentle and Courteous, but the Bloody and the Cruel. There is no defense
where there is no Persecution. I confess it, Men are Men; the love of Life is
strong and powerful, the inclinations and Counsels of flesh and blood prevail
often over those of strict Piety. Were it true, that our Fathers took up Arms
to save their Lives, it is a weakness they ought to be pardoned for, in an Age
which may very well be called an Age of Fury.


Par. In my opinion, Christian Virtues ought to be constant; what is done out
of a principle of virtue in one time, ought to be done in another, for true
virtue is always the same; Perseverance is the Character and the Proof of its
truth: Had those of your Religion endured out of a principle of Christian
Constancy, the ills done them under the Reigns of Francis the first, and Henry
the second, it is probable the same Constancy would have accompanied them under
the Reigns of Francis the second, and Charles the ninth.


Hug. Law. The same virtue, Sir, uses a different Conduct at different times.
Francis the first, and Henry the second, were Princes at full age and of years
of Discretion; they acted as they thought fit, their own Faculties were their
Guides, there is no doubt but God had established them for the exercise and
trial of his Church in her new Birth. They were Persons of a Character, against
which we were not permitted to lift up a hand: But Francis the second was a
Child, a weak Child, incapable of business, and governed by bloody Princes, who
in his Name did what they pleased, and would have extirpated the House of
Bourbon and the whole Protestant Party. Charles the ninth took the Scepter in
hand at an Age he was as little capable to Govern as Francis the second: It Is
certain, Subjects are not obliged to bear the Grievances done them by those who
usurp and abuse the Royal Authority, with the same submission they ought to
receive the Miseries they endure, by the ill use Kings make of their proper
Authority. Hence it proceeds, that the Reigns of most of our Kings in Minority,
are troubled with Civil Wars, when those who have possessed themselves of the
Kings Person, abuse his Name, and the People think not themselves obliged to
submit to a Tyrannical Power newly usurped: We observed not nor acknowledged in
the Princes of the House of Guise, any Character that could oblige us to suffer
their Persecutions they declared and acted against us, much less could we
acknowledge any such Character in the Pope, his Substitutes, or his Clergy, the
first Authors of our Miseries. These were our Enemies, these were the Party we
engaged against, a Party that had no right to use us so barbarously. 'Twas not
against our Kings, but this sort of People, we first took up Arms. True it is,
our Kings coming afterward to their Majority, found themselves engaged
beforehand to prosecute our ruin; and we having our Swords in our hands, made
use of them to avoid the violence and fury of their Ministers. But we never
wanted either Love to their Persons or Faithfulness in their Service: In the
heat of the Civil Wars, our Hugonots had constantly true French hearts, and an
inviolable Fidelity to their Kings. We are reproached with the coming in of the
English and the Rheisters into France. Those who introduced them never designed
to make them Masters of the State; but I can prove it by a hundred Evidences,
that the League which opposed us, had a design to take the Crown of France from
the lawful Heirs, and to bring the Kingdom under the Dominion of Spain. In the
first Civil Wars under Charles the ninth, the Princes had obliged themselves to
give Havre de Grace to the English for security: The Hugonots had no sooner
obtained Peace, but they labored with more Zeal then any other Subjects of
France to regain the place. Mez. Abr. An. 1563.
Mezeray gives you an account of it: All the French, says he, applied
themselves with extraordinary ardour to recover the Town: The Hugonots were
more forward and eager then the Catholics, to purge themselves from the
Reproach cast upon them of having introduced Strangers into France. In the late
Wars for Religion, the Rochelois reduced to the last Extremities, were
solicited by the Duke of Buckingham to yield to the King of England, and
acknowledge him their Sovereign; and in case they would do so, he promised they
should be succored in a far better manner then they had been. They rejected
the Proposal with contempt, and chose rather to expose themselves to all the
Rigors of their Prince highly incensed, then to enter under the Dominion of a
Stranger: I could produce many such Examples to prove that our Hugonots though
in Arms were never guided by a Spirit of Rebellion, but took care only how to
save their Religion and their Lives: But enough of these Reflections. If you
think fit, we will now come to the principal matter, and consider of those Wars
which are charged on us as a very high Crime.


Par. In arguing, men turn things as they please; our business now, is matter
of Fact and Historical Relation, which must be done without shift or disguise,
that the truth may appear. Pray, think of that, Sirs, and do not enlarge your
selves in useless Reflections.


Hug. Law. It Is my intention to do as you advise, you shall have no Harangues
from us, I will only relate plain matter of Fact. And that my Evidence may
neither be suspicious nor obscure, I will make use of no other then Monsieur
Mezeray's Abridgment, which I have in my hand. I will lay aside the History of
T^uanus, as written in a learned Language, because I will not say any thing but
what all the World may examine the truth of. They reckon six Wars from the
first taking up Arms in the beginning of the Reign of Charles the ninth, till
the end of the Reign of Henry the third, that is, that Arms were so many times
taken up after the Rupture of the Edicts of Pacification obtained by the
Reformed. Our principal business will be to justify the first taking up Arms by
the Princes, of which the rest are but Consequents: This first War cannot be
better defined, then by saying, it was formed by the jealousy of two Partys, in
dispute not about Religion but the Government: That it was fomented by
Katherine de Medicis Regent of France, under her Children in their Minority,
and that it was maintained by Zeal for Religion, which came in by the By, and
made it so cruel and barbarous, nothing being more furious and brutal then
false Zeal. We will examine the Rise and Progress of these two Parties: Their
first rise must be taken from the last years of the Reign of Henry the second,
which was after the loss of the Battle and Town of St. Quintin; Mez. Abr. Ann.
1557, 1558.
the old Constable Montmorency and his two Nephews, the Admiral Chatillon, and
Dandelot his Brother, were taken Prisoners there: The greatest and bravest of
the Nobility of France being all perished or made Prisoners in those fatal
Engagements, the Duke of Guise at his return from Italy was looked upon as the
sole Tutelar Angel of France. They would have given him the Title of Viceroy:
But thinking it too ambitious, they gave him the Title of the Kings
Lieutenant General within and without the Kingdom, which was verified in all
the Parliaments. The Constable, it is known, was the Favorite of Henry the
second, who loved him to that degree, that after his misfortune and
imprisonment, unfortunate as he was, yet at his return to Court the King made
him lie in his own bed. But his Absence was fatal to him and his Family: The
Duke of Guise rendered himself necessary to the King, and as Mezeray says, the
misfortune of France was the happiness of the Duke of Guise, and the fall of
the Constable was his Exaltation: The Duke of Guise had in all his Enterprises
the success, every one knows. He recovered Calais from the English; he took
Thionville; he married his Niece the Queen of Scots, to the Dauphin, who was
afterward Francis the second. Fortune abandoned the Constable, and sided with
the Duke of Guise. Read the words of Mezeray, from that very time the jealously
between these two Houses, tended to the forming two contrary Parties in the
Kingdom, as will appear. This is the first Seed of the Civil War, wherein
Religion had not any part: Thence forward, the House of Guise used all its
power to destroy Montmorency's Party. The Duke met with the pretense of
Religion luckily by the way: Admiral Chatillon, and Dandelot his Brother, the
Constables Nephews, were suspected; the Spaniards increased the Suspicion, by
saying, that at the taking of St. Quintin, they found Heretical Books amongst
Dandelots Baggage. Henry the second being a violent Persecuter, caused him to
be arrested, and committed him Prisoner to Blaise de Montluc, a Creature of the
Duke of Guise; this was a matter agreed on by the Guises and the Spaniards,
with design to weaken the Constable by the loss of his Nephews. But they missed
their aim, the Constables favor brought Dandelot clear off, and gained him his
Liberty: And the Authority of Henry the second, kept the two Parties in an
appearance of Peace during the rest of his life, which was not long; but in the
beginning of the Reign of Francis the second, the Discord broke out. Mezeray
will tell you in the beginning of this Reign, the cause of the Civil War: A
Multitude of Princes, says he, and of puissant Lords, is an infallible cause of
Civil War, when there wants Authority powerful enough to keep them within the
bounds of their duty: This was the misfortune of France after the death of
Henry the second. From the time of his death, the Factions formed during his
Reign, began to appear, and to fortify them the more, unhappily met with
different Parties in Religion; a great number of Malcontents, who longed for
change, and, which is more, many Soldiers and Officers of War, who having been
disbanded were desirous of Employment at any rate: Methinks that by this
Relation, Religion is not the cause of the Troubles; but the cause of them were
the Factions of Princes and great Lords, who meeting with Parties differing in
Religion, made use of them to serve their designs. In the same place that
Author makes it appear, the two Parties fought not for Religion but for Empire:
On the one side were the Princes of the Blood and the Constable; On the other,
the Princes of the House of Guise; and between both, the Regent, who by turns
made use of one to beat down and destroy the other, that she might Reign. The
Princes of Guise having got into their hands the Person of Francis the second,
a weak Prince, governed under his Authority in a tyrannical manner. The Princes
of the Blood, Antony and Lewis de Bourbon, who ought to have had the management
of Affairs during the Kings Minority, could not endure that Strangers should
enjoy an Authority and Honor belonging of right and properly to them. These
Princes were ill used; Antony of Bourbon King of Navar, came to Court, but was
slighted, they did not so much as give him a Lodging, and he might have lain on
the Pavement, had not the Marshal of St Andrew received him. The Princes began
with the Pen, and caused several Writings to be published, to make it appear
that the Laws of the State admit neither Women nor Strangers to the Government;
that during the Minority of the Kings, this honor belongs to the Princes of
the Blood; That the Guises were not natural French; that it was dangerous to
commit to them the Government of the State, because of their Pretensions on the
Kingdom, in saying, they were descended from Charlemaign. At last, Lewis of
Bounbon Prince of Conde, resolved upon a dangerous attempt, to gain Possession
of his Rights, which the weakness of his Brother the King of Navarr abandoned,
and gave up to the Princes of Guise. He designed to seize the Person of King
Francis the second, and remove the Guises from Court. The Admiral and Dandelot
were of the Party, and the Prince of Conde was the Head: But because the
success of the Enterprise was doubtful, they would not appear in it: La
Renaudie was entrusted with the management of this great design, which goes
under the name of the Conspiracy of Amboise, which our Churchman, whose Book
you have in your hand, makes such a noise about; there cannot be a greater
injustice then to charge our Hugonots with this Affair. It Is certain there were
engaged in that business as many Roman Catholics as Hugonots; or if the number
of Hugonots were greater, it was because there were more Malcontents of their
Party; the Chancellor de l' Hospital was one. I have read in good Authors, that
La Renaudie was a Roman Catholic, yet I will not undertake to justify it:
It Is agreed on all hands that all the Officers who had received Indignities at
Court, and been unjustly expelled thence, engaged themselves in the Enterprise,
to be revenged of the Princes of Guise. There was at Court, says Mezeray, a
great number of Persons out of all the Provinces, particularly Soldiers and
Officers of War, demanding Pay or Reward. The Cardinal of Lorrain who had the
management of the Finances, was much troubled with them, and apprehended a
Conspiracy in their multitude: This made him publish an Edict, commanding that
all those who followed the Court to demand any thing, should retire on pain of
being hanged on a Gibbet, which was publicly set up for that purpose: A great
part of those who had served in the Armies disgusted with this Indignity,
turned against the Cardinal. Thus you have an account of what persons that
Party was composed, which would have destroyed the Princes of Guise, where
there appears so sensible and so clear a cause of Revolt, it is not worth our
pains to go in search of a hidden one: On the one side, the Rights of the
Princes of the Blood, which they were resolved to maintain; on the other side,
the design to be revenged of the grossest affront that ever was put on Persons
of Quality, by setting up a Gibbet to hang them on, for no other cause but that
they desired to be paid for the blood they had lost, are so visibly the causes
of this Conspiracy, that it is ridiculous to make Religion the only ground of
it: The chief of all the Malcontents was Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde:
And though he appeared not in the Enterprise, and several of the Conspirators
denied to the Death, his being privy to it, yet it is certain he was. Mezeray
tells us, That the Prince of Conde going to Court, met at Orlians the Lord
Cipierr, who told him the Plot was discovered: And that nevertheless the Prince
continued his Journey. By this it appears, the Prince knew of the Plot. A
little before, the same Author tells us, the Conspirators had chosen him for
their Head, but not to bear any part in the action, which was to be carried on
by La Renaude under his Authority. The Princes of Guise were fully convin'd of
it, for they no sooner got the Prince of Conde in their power, but they caused
him to be proceeded against, and Senten'd to be Beheaded.


Par. We will suppose, Sir, that you can prove the Conspiracy of Amboise, was a
Conspiracy of all the Malcontents; that a Prince of the Blood was the Head of
them, and that your Hugonots were not more deeply concerned in it, than others;
what is that to the purpose? Is a Criminal less guilty for having Accomplices?
Is it allowable on any pretense whatever, to enter into so Criminal a
Conspiracy against your King?


Hug. Law. Against our King? Ah, Sir, you will never be able to prove that: All
our Historians bear these pretended Conspirators Witness, they had no design
against the King, or the Regent, but only against the Princes of Guise: Read,
if you please, what Mezeray says. They resolved to present their Petition to
the King, and to seize the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorrain, and
exhibit Articles against them. This was their design: But who, adds Mezeray,
could have secured the Princes of Guise from being killed upon the spot, or
that the Malcontents would not have made themselves Masters of the Persons of
the Queen Mother and the King? It Is certain, it was laid to their Charge, they
would have attempted both. It was laid indeed to their Charge, but not proved;
of twelve hundred Persons who perished on this occasion, there was not one they
could get to confess this, though use was made of most violent Tortures to
force them to it. Monsieur de Thou gives them this Testimony: Thuan. Hist. Lib.
24.
Not one of the Conspirators was convicted of any attempt against the King or
the Queen, but only against Strangers, who governed all at Court in a
tyrannical manner; that is, the Princes of the House of Guise. Can you think
it, Sir, so great a Crime for the Princes of the Blood, and the Chief Officers
of the Crown, to endeavor to gain their natural places and lawful Authority,
by taking forceably an Infant King (and weak, when Major) out of the hands of
Tyrants, who were going to hang up his Majesty's good Servants, to establish
the Inquisition in France, and to burn the true hearted French at the Stake?
The Prince of Conde and the Admiral were, in my opinion, Names that carried
Grandeur and Authority enough in them, to oppose very lawfully the Tyrants of
France. Your Churchman in his Book, tacks the Enterprise of Meaux to that of
Amboise, as if they were both of one nature. We are not now, says he, in the
time of the Enterprises of Amboise and Meaux: The man has forgot both the
Author and the end of the Enterprise of Meaux: The Head of it, was the same
Prince of Conde; the end was to remove from about the King the same Tyrants,
who under the name of Counselors, made Charles the ninth commit Violences
which exceeded those in former Reigns, and to violate Edicts and Treaties, he
had by solemn Oaths obliged himself to observe, and made use of the seeming
Peace granted to the Party of the Princes, for hatching the most horrible and
blackest Treasons that ever have been heard of. After the first Civil War, the
Peace was made by the Edict of the 18th of March 1563. this Peace served only
as a Cloak for a Cruel War made with more safety against the Reformed after
they had been disarmed: The Reformed made their Complaints to the Prince of
Conde and the Admiral: But these two great great Men answered, Mezeray. 1567.
says Mezeray, That they must endure any thing rather than take up Arms again:
That second troubles would render them the horror of all France, and make them
the Object of the Kings hatred. This was their Resolution; but when a Principal
Person at Court had given them express advice, it was resolved the Prince and
the Admiral should be taken, the former to be kept perpetual petual Prisoner,
the other to lose his head on a Scaffold; by the advice of Dandelot, the
boldest of the three, they resolved not only to defend themselves, but to
attack their Enemies with open force: And in order thereto, to remove the
Cardinal from the Kings Person. This, Sir, was the design of the Enterprise of
Meaux, and I have told you the Motives of it. I would advise those who for this
Enterprise would charge the Prince of Conde with Rebellion, that they would
think well of it: The Hero who at this day bears the same name, whose veins are
filled with that Illustrious Blood, is an Evidence sufficient to convince the
World, we may retain our Love to our Country and Fidelity to our King, without
loving those who abuse the Infancy of our Kings, by making them Arm against the
Liberty and Lives of the Princes of their Blood: If the Prince of Conde opened
this second War by the Enterprise of Meaux, it was because he had not any other
way to save his Liberty and his Life.


Par. The Enterprise of Meaux has made you pass from the Conspiracy of
Amboise, to the second Civil War, without touching on the first, which is the
principal, and you promised to justify.


Hug. Law. Well, Sir, I will, if you please, return to my Task. The first War
was not a War of the Hugonots alone, but it was a War of Antony and Lewis of
Bourbon: The two Brothers, Antony and Lewis of Bourbon, says Mezeray, came not
to the Assembly of Melun; for two months before, Antony retired into Gascoign,
and his Brother went thither to him. Being then in more safety, they provided
for their Affairs, and projected means to make themselves able to dislodge the
Guises. The Design took wind, they were drawn to Court, and their Persons
secured; a strong Guard was placed on the King of Navarr, and the Prince of
Conde imprisoned; his Process was made, and by a terrible Arrest framed by the
Guises, he was Condemned to lose his Head. Was there ever so strange and
unworthy a proceeding, that Strangers should Condemn to Death, the second
Prince of the Blood? And can it be thought strange, that a generous Prince
should seek means to be revenged for so horrible an affront? He escaped
miraculously by the death of Francis the second, whose Authority the Princes of
Guise had abused. The King of Navarr redeemed himself by yielding the Regency
to the Queen: The Constable Montmorency fell off from the Princes, because they
would have called him to account for the vast Gifts made him by Henry the
second. Then was formed the famous Triumvirat between the Constable, the
Marshal de St. Andre, and the Duke of Guise; whose principal design was to
efface the Name and Memory of the Family of Bourbon: But if the Constable was
against the Princes, the Marshal Montmorency, his Son, and Governor of Paris,
was for them though a Catholic; by which it appears, that Religion was not the
cause of those Troubles: The Queen Mother ambitious to Reign absolutely, and
alone, was weary of the Tyranny of the Princes of Guise. And to ruin their
Party, she openly favored the Party of the Prince of Conde. The Queen Mother,
says Mezeray, to reward the Services the Admiral had done her, granted or
pretended to grant him assistance on several occasions: She caused an Edict
very favorable to the Hugonots to be published in 1562. She proceeded yet
further, and caused the Prince of Conde to Arm. In this very Page, Sir, our
Historian reports, that the Duke of Guise being come to Paris with Twelve
Hundred Horse, entered the Town at the Gate of St. Denis, through which the
Kings make their solemn Entry: The Queen perceiving his design to take the
Government from her, writ to the Prince of Conde, then retired to his House,
recommending very affectionately to him, her Son, the Kingdom, and her self. If
you look upon the following Page, you will see she sent for the Prince, who
having got all his Friends together, took his Journey to go to the Queen, and
passed the Seine at St. Clou. This, Sir, was the first taking up Arms, and the
beginning of the first War; which was kindled by the Divisions of the great
ones, and the unhappy policy of Catherin de Medicis. The Prince of Conde sent
to the Princes of Germany the Original Letters of the Queen Mother, wherein she
prayed him to deliver her and the King out of Captivity: The Regent who put
Arms into the Prince of Conde's hands, reaped not the benefit she expected from
them, but was retained in slavery with the young King, by the Tyranny of the
Guises, and carried to Paris against her will. Can you wonder, that a Prince of
the Blood, of great Courage, and in Arms at the Request of the Queen, should
pursue his point, and endeavor to be revenged of the Guises who had almost
brought his Head to the Scaffold? Can you think it strange? The Protestants
immediately made themselves of the Party of a Prince of the Blood, who had so
justly taken up Arms to defend himself from the horrible Violences and Outrages
of his Enemies; for then was the time, Sir, when the Massacres of Vassy, Seus,
Auxeure, Cahoy, Tours, and a hundred other places were perpetrated: Then it
was, that the Parliament of Paris passed an Arrest, whereby they gave order the
Hugonots should be killed wherever they were found. It was not Henry the
second commanded these Cruelties, but the Tyrants, who abused the Authority of
an Infant King: Christian Morality does not Condemn a lawful defense against
those who unjustly attack us.


Par. Your Party kept not within the bounds of mere defense: They made violent
Attacks, they proceeded to Extremities in their fury, beat down and profaned
Churches, broke down Images, killed and tormented Priests. You are not ignorant
what horrible Cruelties were exercised by your Baron of Adrets.


Hug. Law. I pray, remember, Sir, I am not obliged to justify any more then the
first taking up of Arms. I will not justify any thing was afterward done; when
men have once taken Arms in hand, they become deaf to Piety and Reason. The
Prince of Conde did all he could to hinder these Disorders: There is not one
among us but Condems the Conduct of that time full of Exorbitance and Fury. But
I will undertake, Sir, to justify the Outrages committed by our Hugonots on
your Churches, Images, and Priests, when you shall have justified the Barbarous
Inhumanities of your Catholics against our Hugonots. Can you approve of that
action of the Provincial, who finding at Briguoles a Sister of his that refused
to go to Mass, caused her to be Ravished by the Cordelier who carried the
Cross, and by all those who would take that Brutal Pleasure; and afterward
caused her to be Burnt with flaming Lard, which he procured to be dropped upon
her? Can you approve of what was done at Tours, where three hundred Persons
were flaid, and then beaten to death; young Women stripped naked, Ravished in the
Face of the Sun, then killed; Men cut up alive under pretense of finding Money
swallowed into their Bellies? Can you approve of what was done at Orange? Where
some were killed with many gentle blows of Ponyards, that they might be the
longer a dying; others were Impall'd; some Burnt; others Sawed; Women were
hanged at the Windows, and the Infants out of their Bosoms dashed against the
walls; the old Men being drawn up in rank, to see this horrible Spectacle
before they were Massacred. This is not the thousandth part of Actions I could
relate like these. The Answer of the Baron of Adrets to those of our Party, who
reproached him for his Cruelty, was; It Is not Cruelty to be Cruel to them who
have first been cruel to us; the first is called Cruelty, the second, Justice:
And to clear himself of the Imputation, he reckoned up many thousands who had
been killed in cold blood, and put to Tortures never heard of before: When you
have justified all this, I will undertake the justification of our Breakers of
Images and Profaners of Churches. I have something more to say to you. Be so
kind to justify the Conduct of the Spaniards, who are so Catholic and so
devoted to the Holy See; make us a little Apology for what they did at Rome,
when taken by Charles de Bourbon, under the Command of Charles the fifth. Let Us
look into Fa. Maimbourgs History of Lutheranism, which I see on your Table: He
will tell you, Sir, these good Catholics were Cruel and Profane beyond
Example in History. It Is impossible, says he, to express all the Outrages
committed in that lamentable Pillage: It infinitely exceeds in all sort of
Crimes, what the Goths and Vandals heretofore did when they sacked Rome;
nothing was spared but Deformity and Poverty: All things else became the prey
of a Conqueror, the most brutish that ever was. If you please to read on, you
will find that the Spaniards and Italians, by the relation of their own
Historians, were more cruel and covetous then the German Lutherans. To
conclude, if you will undertake to defend all that has been done by your
Catholics in Wars for Religion, I will entreat you to justify the horrible
Enormities committed in the East by those Croisado's who left their Countries,
their Estates and their Children, to go and adore the Sepulcher of Jesus
Christ, and recover the Holy Land out of the hands of Infidels. I must entreat
you to hear the reading of a Passage out of the Byzantine History, which I
translated last night, foreseeing I should have occasion to make use of it in
my defense on this Article to day. Nicitas Chroniates in the Life of Alexius
Ducas.
Into what Method shall I digest the horrible Crimes committed by Execrable
Men? Shall I begin with their Outrages on the venerable Images they trod under
foot; or those committed on the Relics of Holy Martrys, which they threw into
the nastyest places? Or shall I speak of that which is as horrible at this day
to hear, as those were to see at the time they were acted? The Divine Body and
Blood of our Savior were split on the ground and thrown in the dirt; those who
could seize the rich Cases the sacred Vessels were put in, secured the Vessels
in their Pockets, and made use of the Cases for Cups and Trenchers. True
forerunners of Antichrist, acting before hand what he should commit, etc. In
pillaging the Churches, the Holy Vessels were their prey; and the Mules and
Beasts of burden were brought to the Church doors; where, the Pavement being
slippery, they often fell and bruised themselves to death, so that the holy
places were defiled with the Blood and Dung of those Beasts: Amidst all these
Disorders, to the greater affront of Jesus Christ, there sat on the seat of
the Patriarch, a Woman laden with Sins, a Minister of Furies, a Servant of
Devils, and Mistress of Sorceries, Enchantments and Poysonings, singing Impure
Songs, and dancing Lascivious Dances: Hear the Authors Reflection: It Is
evident, these People abuse us, in saying they are going to Conquer the Holy
Sepulcher of Christ, when they discharge all their fury against Christ himself,
and with the Cross they carry on their Shoulders, violate and profane the Cross
of Christ, for a little Gold and Silver: Now, Sir, if you please, you will
yield me up these Saints and Devout Croisado's as not to be justified in the
Actions I mentioned, and I will be excused from justifying those actions of the
Hugonots, and confess the Outrages they were guilty of, were effects of the
fury of War, and not the fruits of a true Zeal of Religion.


Par. You know well enough, Sir, we do not approve of all our Catholics may
have done against you in these Civil Wars: Our wisest Authors look upon the
Massacre of St. Bartholomew, and others like it, as actions to be condemned,
and the shame of France to all Posterity.


Hug. Law. To think otherwise and to be wise, Sir, are hardly consistent. For
the Providence of God declared it self so signally against the Authors and
Executioners of those abominable Counsels, we cannot but see it: Mezeray
observes in his History, That the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorrain,
were Massacred at Blois, in the same Hall were the first Council was held to
deliberate of the Massacre of St. Bartholemew; the principal Executioners
whereof, Anna 1572.
were the Guises: The same Author tells us, Another Council had been held for
the same purpose at St. Clou, in the house of Gondy, where the Duke of Anjou,
who afterward was Henry the third, presided. And that afterward, that
unfortunate Prince was assassinated in the same Chamber, in the same place, and
on the same day, by Clement the Monk; the whole World knows the Tragical Death
of Charles the 9th. whose blood gushed out through all the Pores and Passages
of his Body: If you would know what that signified, read those five Lines
Mezeray has placed over the Picture of that Prince at the beginning of his
Life.

Unhappy Counselors of Murders and Massacres,
Tormented ever with Stings of sharp Remorse!
Behold the dire Effects of your Advice,
A Young and Vigorous King yields his last Breath,
Swimming in streams of his own blood to Death.
The Characters of Divine Vengeance are equally visible in the death of Henry
the third: He died in his one and fortieth year, being the flower of his Age,
and in the midst of a Reign the most promising and hopeful for Glory and
Renown, France ever saw: He died by the stroke of a Lance in the Eye, at a
Turnament, that is, a Sport: He who had often made it his Divertisement to feed
his Eyes with the horrible Spectacle of the Torment of Hugonots, he caused to
be burnt; he who had promised with horrible Oaths to see Ann de Bourg burnt, as
soon as his Daughter's Wedding and his Sister's should be over. Events like
these are very proper to prove, that there is a God in Heaven who sees the
Actions of men, and renders to every one according to his Works.


Par. These Reflections serve only to stain the Memory of the Dead: Let their
Graves be their Sanctuary to secure them from our Censure. Leave intermedling
with the Judgments of God, and sum up the substance of what you have to say in
justification of your Wars for Religion.


Hug. Law. The sum of all, is this, Sir, That these Wars were not originally
Wars of Religion, but Wars of State: Wars, to which the two Factions of
Montmorency and Guise had given birth; Wars, wherein the Roman Catholics were
of contrary Parties as well as the Hugonots: For you see (in the pursuit as in
the beginning of the War) the chief Roman Catholic Families of the Kingdom,
engaged in the Party of the Princes of the Blood, and put into the List of
those whose Throats were to be cut: The Marshals Montmorency and Cosse, and
Biron Grand Master of the Artillery, were no Hugonots: Yet Mezeray tells you,
they were in the List of those who were to be Massacred at Bartholomew-Tide:
That the Marshal Montmorency's being at Chantilly absent from Court, saved the
Life of his three Brothers: That Cosse was saved by the Intercesions of Madame
Chateau Neuf Monsieur Mistress; and that Biron Grand Master of the Artillery,
saved himself, by pointing some Culverins toward, etc. It was not the Zeal of
Religion only animated these Furies, but Avarice, and Ambition, and a desire to
Reign without a Rival: Hence it came, that a great number of Roman Catholics
were Butchered with the Hugonots. Read Mezeray's words: This Deluge of blood,
swept away abundance of Catholics, who were dispatched by order of the
Sovereign Powers, or the instigation of private Persons. To have Money, or a
good Office, or a revengeful Enemy, or an Heir longing to be in possession, was
to be a Hugonot: The Duke of Guise, as great a Catholic as he was, saved,
during the Massacre, above a hundred Hugonots in his Palace, whom he thought he
could gaint o his Service. Had all the Hugonots been willing to have placed him
on the Throne, as he thought those hundred were, he would have saved a Million
of them, and would have been their great friend and Protector. So true is it,
that the Ambition of the great ones, was the cause of these Wars on the one
side and the other: Has not the Duke of Alanson Brother of Charles the ninth
and Henry the third, been seen at the head of Thirty Thousand of these
Malcontents? Yet he was no Hugonot, nor ever favored them of the Religion:
Were not Marshal Danville and several other firm and professed Roman Catholics
engaged for the same Party? By which it appears, all those Wars were the Wars
of the Discontented in general, whether Catholics or Hugonots. To Conclude,
Sir, for justifying our Hugonots in these Wars, I can prove they had not any
design but to preserve themselves, the State, and the Illustrious Princes of
the Family of Bourbon now Regnant: On the contrary, the opposite Party was a
Spanish Faction, who covered their Designs with the Specious Vail of Religion,
but were Enemies to the State, and would have put the Crown upon the Heads of
Strangers.


Par. As to the last Article, I pray Sir engage not in the proof of it.
Repetitions are troublesome to the Speaker, and no less tedious and unpleasant
to the hearer. This Gentleman has acquainted us with what you have to say on
that Subject: for he has endeavored to prove, the faction of the Guises would
have taken away from the Branch of Bourbon, their Lives and the Crown, to bring
France under the Dominion of a Stranger. It Is possible there might be some such
design, but the faults of others do not justify us: If the faction of the
Guises had Criminal designs, are you therefore more innocent?


Hug. Law. Sir, that which has been said by us on this Subject, is not the
hundredth part of what may be said to prove, the faction of the house of Guise,
which called it self the Holy Union, and went under the name of the League from
the year 1576. to the year 1600. was altogether Spanish, and an Enemy to the
State; and that our Party which was wholly opposite to the other, was
altogether French. But I will comply with your desires, and say no more of it,
provided you will in requital answer a question I am going to ask you. What
reason you Gentlemen of the Roman Catholic Religion have to Condemn the
Protestants for their pretended Rebellions against their Princes, on the
account of Religion?


Par. It Is on this Ground: That Subjects owe absolute obedience to their
Sovereign's in all things: That the Sovereign is Master of the Religion of his
Country: And that Subjects have no right to demand toleration of a Religion
different from that of the State.


Hug. Law. You have answered just as I expected: And according to these Maxims
you argue very right: For if a Prince is absolute Master of the Religion of his
People, as of other their Concerns; if Subjects are obliged to follow always
the Religion of their Sovereign, doubtless there is reason to charge them with
Rebellion, who with Arms in their hands, desire to be tolerated in the Exercise
of a Religion different from that of the State. But, Sir, have you thought well
of the Maxim you proposed? Do you remember it is the Maxim of Hobbs in his
Politics? You know how famous Spinosa was for Impiety: He was for allowing
every one Liberty to think and speak what he pleased concerning Religion, yet
attributes to the Sovereign an absolute Authority over the Religion of the
State: You know these two men are an Object of Execration to all Divines, and
that they are generally looked upon as great Enemies of Religion: And amongst
all their Maxims, this in particular has been looked upon as one of the most
Pernicious: Consider a little, how far it may be carried: If the Prince be
Master of Religion, you Catholics must be Reformed in England and Holland, and
so must the Lutherans in Denmark and Swede, and the Christians of the East must
turn Mahometans in Persia and Turkey: If therefore this may peradventure be a
false Maxim, as certainly it is, is it so great a Crime to be of a Religion
different from that of the State? And if you are of a Religion different from
that of your Prince, is it a Crime to obtain from him a toleration to exercise
it in private or public.


Par. Either you misapprehend me, or I have not well expressed my self: I
design not to assert, the Empire of Kings extends to the Conscience, or that
they are Masters of the Religion of the heart: I know very well we are to obey
God rather than Men: I coufess it allowable, and frequently necessary to be of
a Religion different from that of our Prince: In a word, it is no Crime to
desire permission of the Prince to make public profession of a Religion
different from his: My meaning was, that the Prince is Master of the External
part of Religion: That if he will not permit any Religion but his; when we
cannot obey, we may die patiently without making other defense than our
Sufferings: Because true Religion ought not to make use of force and Arms for
its establishment: Princes are infinitely to blame when they violently oppose
the Establishment of the true Religion, but they are, answerable only to God
for it.


Hug. Law. In this sense, I confess, your Maxim is pious, and bears the
Character of the Primitive Christian Morality: And now, Sir, I have you where I
wished you: I ask you with confidence, what ground you Roman Catholics have to
charge us with the violation of this Maxim? If you think it good, why d' you
not observe it? If you observe it not, why make you such ado, why clamor you
so much against others, who do not observe it? You may very well be allowed,
Gentlemen, to make the like Objection against the Reformed. You, who are of a
Religion, whose History, if written, would be a continual Series of Rebellion
against Sovereigns, of Attempts against their Authority, Conspiracies against
their Lives, and Assassinations committed upon their Persons, for the sake of
Religion, and under pretense of maintaining it. You know the History of past
Ages and the present, and cannot be ignorant that when a Prince meddles never
so little with what you call the Estate, the Immunities and Privileges of the
Church, though these things concern not the grounds of Religion, he is called
impious, an Heretic, and a favourer of Heretics, and permission is given to
rebel against him. For an Abbey; for the Revenues of a Bishopric taken into the
hands of a Prince; for the Rights of Regale; for Nomination to some Benefices
what a bustle is made, what extravagant Insolences are not committed? According
to that pious Maxim upon which you ground your Charge against us, and so
cruelly prosecute it; those who labor for the maintenance of Religion, are to
be merely patient, and ought not to make use of any means that may diminish or
endanger the Authority of the Prince. But will you cast your eye upon the
Conduct of the League, that Holy Union, which in 1576. appeared under that name
for the preservation of the Catholic Faith? You will see how they observed
this Maxim. The first honor Monsieur Mezeray does them, Mez. Abr. 1576.
is to call them a great Faction, and the first Achievement he attributes to
them, is, that they had suppressed the Royal Authority. In a short time, says he,
it was evident, this Faction having taken root in almost all the Provinces, put
forth Branches so high, it covered and almost stifled the Authority Royal:
'Twas this League engaged the whole Kingdom into a Party, whereof the King of
Spain was the Head, and made the French sign a Treaty of Union against the
Authority of their lawful Prince. 'Twas this League forced Henry the 3d to sign
at the States of Blois this Holy Union; So that from King, says Mezeray, he
became the head of a Cabal, and instead of being the common Father, declared
himself an Enemy of one part of his Subjects. 'Twas this League, which in
derogation of the Royal Authority, went to stab the Favorites of Henry the 3d
almost in his bosom. And that poor Prince disarmed of his authority, took
pleasure and comfort in erecting Statues, and setting up Monuments for those
they had robbed him of by their barbarous assassinations: 'Twas this League
endeavored by all means to render Henry the 3d odious, by insolent Sermons, by
Confessions, wherein the Monks inspired their Penitents with an aversion
against their Prince, and imposed on them for Penance, a necessity to hate him.
'Twas this League, 1584.
says Mezeray, which having heated the Zealous, stirred the Factious, and
persuaded the Princes, began to rise, to List Soldiers, to make Assemblies, to
choose Chiefs, at whose Summons by Billet, though they owned not themselves
Heads of the Party, those who were Listed were obliged to repair to several
places of Rendezvous. 'Twas this Holy Union treated the same year with the
Spaniard, and made a League Offensive and Defensive to Exclude from the Crown
its Lawful Heirs. 'Twas this League seized against the Kings Authority all the
Towns it could take in the Kingdom: And not content with that, would have had
permission from Rome, to attempt the King's Life, and for that end made Fa.
Matthew the Jesuit take so many Journeys, that he was commonly called the
Courier of the League: Compare this design with the Enterprises of Amboise and
Meaux, and see which is the more Criminal. Our Protestants are accused for
having endeavored to free our Kings from the slavery they were kept in by
Princes Strangers, yet you are well pleased that the same Princes Strangers
should attempt their Lives: 'Twas this League brought the Rheiters into France
in 1585. 1588.
'Twas this League unworthily chased away their King from his Capital City at
the Barricade of Paris, and obliged him to save himself by night in great
disorder, that he might escape being shut up in a Closter, shorn a Monk,
perpetually Imprisoned, and perhaps Murdered. 'Twas this League called their
Prince Tyrant, excommunicated him, blotted his Name out of the public Prayers,
and caused Arms to be taken up against him on all sides, after the death of the
Princes of Guise. In fine, 'twas this Holy League made for the preservation of
the Catholic Faith, that assassinated the King at St. Clou, by the hands of a
Jacobin Monk. Shall I proceed to expose other horrible actions of this Holy
League, and what they did to hinder Henry the 4th from enjoying the Crown that
belonged to him? It Is not necessary, the memory of it is fresh, and all the
World knows it: When you have recollected what you have heard, I cannot tell
whether you will think it prudent in a Roman Catholic to hit us so confidently
in the teeth with that Maxim; that Religion ought not to be defended by Arms;
and that under pretense of Religion, nothing ought to be done that may any way
hurt the Royal Authority.


Par. Sir, give me leave to tell you, this Invective is unjust: You charge our
Religion with the Crimes of particular men: Do you believe the actions of the
League were agreeable to the Principles of the Catholic Religion?


Hug. Law. If I did you injustice in that point, I did but requite you in kind
for the like injustice you had done us: For you would make our Religion
answerable for all the disorders happened forty years together in the Civil
Wars of France, the last Age. Were it true, that Motives of Religion only had
engaged the Reformed in those Wars, yet those Disorders ought not to be imputed
to the Reformed Religion, whose Doctrine persuades not, nor inclines men to
Revolt. But I affirm it, Sir, I do your Religion no wrong, if I lay to its
charge all the Disorders and furious Enormities of the League. Because the Pope
the Head and Author of your Religion was the Author and Promoter of that
League; because there were public Rejoyceings at Rome, and Te Deum sung for
the Bartholomaean Massacre: The Sieur du Maurier, Author of the Memoirs of
Holland will inform you, that there is to be seen this day at Rome a piece of
Picture, wherein is drawn the Massacre of the Admiral, with these words,
Pontifex probat Colinij necem; the Pope approves of the killing of Coligny.
This Massacre was committed before the League was hatched, and openly owned,
though it was then formed, and acted with a furious vigor: The assassinate of
Henry the 3d was approved by the Court of Rome. Public Elogies were made in
praise of him who committed the Assassinate, and public Invectives against him
that was murdered; this Prince, as well as Henry the 4th his Successor, was
Excommunicated by the Pope: Their Subjects were absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance, and all the Powers of Europe raised against them. All this, Sir,
may we justly impute to your Religion, because the Religion of Rome, and the
Italian Divinity spread throughout Europe, authorize these Rebellions against
Princes, when the great Article of your Religion is concerned; which is,
Obedience to the Pope. It Is the Pope assumes a power to deprive Kings of their
Crowns, and to transfer their Estates to others; It Is the Pope authorizes the
assassinates of Kings and sacred Persons, when these facts are perpetrated
pursuant to their Bulls of Deposition; it is the Pope usurps the temporal Estate
of the Emperor in Italy, and under pretense that the Emperors had lost their
Right by Heresy, made himself Sovereign of the City of Rome. It Is the Pope
styles himself Superior to Kings, and makes Crowned heads stoop to kiss his
feet; it is the Pope trod on the necks of Emperors, applying to himself those
words, The young Lion and the Adder shall thou tread under thy feet; it is the
Pope has drowned Germany with blood, arming the Father against the Son, and
the Son against the Father, to force from the Emperors the right of
Investiture into the great Benefices. The times are much altered since the
Popes called themselves the Emperors most humble Servants, and said they were
but dust and ashes in their presence: I see there the Works of Gregory the
Great, and could let you see in them the Style of the Popes in those days, when
they writ to the Emperors; but I had rather let you see it in the Margin of
Father Maimbourgh's History of Lutheranism: You will allow me who am a Hugonot,
the pleasure (which is not small) to take out of the Margin of a Jesuits Book
those words of St. Gregory, which the Ministers have so often quoted; Hist.
Luth. lib. 11. Ann. 1530.
Ego vero haec Dominis loquens, quid sum nisi pulvis and vermis, ego indignus
famulus vester? I that take the Liberty to speak thus to my Lords, what am I
but dust, and a Worm, your unworthy Servant? You will do us a pleasure to read
the Text of Fa. Maimbourgh. This holy Bishop forbore not to execute what had
been commanded him, having remained satisfied with making a most humble
Remonstrance to the Emperor his Master in a Letter extremely submissive. This
vexes you, Sir, as it pleases us; I confess our joy may be taxed of some malice
but it is a matter so rare and so singular to hear a professed Jesuit, and one
under the fourth vow, speak thus of a Pope, you will pardon us for being
pleased with it; but the days are long since gone, when they spoke thus at
Rome: The Popes have since those days assumed and exercised a Power to Depose
Emperors and Kings, to declare them Tyrants, to raise their Subjects against
them, when they do any thing the Popes pretend to be contrary to Religion: This
is a matter so publicly notorious, it has been proved a hundred times. Now
Sir, I will dare your Roman Catholics to charge us with our pretended
Rebellions, and having maintained our Religion by Arms; and give me leave to
tell you, I wonder the prudence of your Churchman, and the interest of his
Party, permitted him to renew the memory of our Wars for Religion; for he might
have easily foreseen, we would not fail to expose to public view so many
horrible Conspiracies those of his Character and Religion every day plot and
carry on in those Countries where the Supremacy of the Pope is not
acknowledged: If we acted a part in the Civil Wars of France, they cannot
reproach us with having designed the murder of our Princes, and actually
assassinated them. We have never been charged with having designed and
endeavored to blow up with powder a whole State in a moment, not only the head
but all its principal Members: We are now under great Sufferings in France; but
amidst all our Sufferings, we glory that our very Enemies bear witness of our
Fidelity and Innocence; but the Martyrs of your Churchman, those poor
Catholics, he laments and bewails, that they are cruelly put to death in
England, under pretense of a pretended Conspiracy, are sufficiently convicted
to have been tampering with as horrible an Enterprise as any has been designed
this Age.


Par. We have done with that, Sir, let us hear no more of it, I pray, whether
the English Catholics be guilty or not, let not us inquire further; this
Gentleman has said as much on that Subject as you can; do not attack us, you
will find work enough to defend your selves; you think you have said enough,
but you have not spoken a word of the last Wars you raised in the Kingdom; the
Wars of Montauban, of Rochel, etc.


Hug. Law. As to the Plot in England, you shall not escape so; you shall hear a
great deal more of it, if you please; I know all this Gentleman said to you of
it, he told you what he knew, but not all that may be known of it; such order
is taken to hinder the transportation of authentic Copies of the Trials of
those Criminals into Foreign parts, we scarce know any thing of them; so that
you are not to admire this Gentleman seemed not thoroughly instructed: But
because that formidable Pamphlet you took out of your pocket, charges us to
have occasioned a Persecution against the Catholics in England, under pretense
of a pretended Conspiracy, you must allow us to justify our selves a little
more fully, and to add to what we have said, what is since come to our
knowledge; but, If you please, I will first speak a word or two to the last
Wars of Religion in France about the beginning of this Age: I am for plain
dealing, I will never call evil good, nor good evil; I am of their number who
cannot approve of these Wars, nor make it their business to justify them. The
places of safety which had been given us were the seeds of this War; the King
was desirous to have them put into his hands, the Hugonots were obstinately
bent to retain them: It was ill done, without doubt they ought to have restored
them, and to have relied on the Providence of God and the King's Justice. Yet
this we have to say for our selves.

First, It Is not just to charge a whole body of men with that which was done
but by a part: Perhaps three fourths of all the Protestants of France were for
a Submission: These doubtless would have carried it both for Number and
Prudence, but they were the weakest of the Party: The turbulent Spirits were
Masters of all their Forces and Arms.

Secondly, We say the Religion of great men keeps them not from being
ambitious: They reign in Confusions, and make themselves formidable by raising
Troubles, they abuse the simplicity of the People, and make them pay for the
Follies and Crimes of those who abuse them: This was one cause of the last
Wars; we had great men of our persuasion, who being in the head of a great
Party, made themselves formidable at Court for the strong places they were
Masters of. These men foresaw that by the change of Affairs designed at Court,
their Credit and their Pensions would be lost; they did all they could to bear
up themselves, and engaged in their Quarrel the people, whose Zeal is always
sufficiently ignorant and ill enough guided. Methinks some charity ought to be
had for people who have no ill intention, but only the misfortune to permit
themselves to be seduced, by mistaking interests of Religion: It must be
considered also that most of those who took Arms were frightened into it: Our
Enemies who desired nothing more than to see us rise, that they might take that
occasion to destroy us, caused Rumors to be spread, that there was a design to
massacre all the Hugonots; that it was agreed by a secret Article in the Treaty
of Spain, and of the Marriages lately made: The pressing so earnestly to have
again into the King's hands the places of strength given by his Father to the
Protestants, heightened our suspicion. The horrible Image of the Massacres and
Torments of the last Age, was fresh in memory; many had been Spectators, and
some had been Sufferers in those horrible Tragedies. The fear of seeing like
days again drove them out of their Wits, and hurried them into a design to
prevent Calamities that appeared otherwise inevitable: This is a truth to which
the late King of glorious memory bears witness in his Declaration of the 10th
of Nov. 1615. And that great Prince found in that Source of the War, a reason
to excuse it. When he says, The poor people having too lightly believed there
were designs against their Lives, had precipitated themselves into this
Enterprise, thinking themselves forced into it for their just and lawful
defense: Besides, if you consider with what Spirit our Protestants were
animated in the last Wars, you will find some cause to excuse them; perhaps
there was in their Conduct somewhat of the spirit of that Governor who writ to
Tiberias, The Empire is yours, my Government is mine. That is, they were
jealous of their Liberties and Privileges to that degree, they would not have
them infringed in the least; but you cannot with justice charge them to have
been animated with a Spirit of Contempt, or hatred, or revolt against their
Sovereign. All their design was to Cantonize themselves to preserve their
Religion; this only excepted, they were always ready to sacrifice all for the
Grandeur of their King and the good of the State: This is acknowledged more
than once by the Roman Catholic Historians. After all, these Troubles ended
about threescore years since cannot be at this day a lawful Cause for revoking
the Edicts of Pacification; because our Kings have defaced the memory of those
Troubles by so many Declarations, and have confirmed by their Royal words
frequently and solemnly given us, the favors they had granted us. Good God!
where is that integrity? what is become of that sincerity and good faith men
ought to practice? Will they never call to mind that there is in Heaven a God
faithful to his promises, who threatens vengeance on those who violate Treaties
and Alliances?


Par. Gentlemen, I cannot endure you should make such a noise about pretended
breaches of words. Is not a King always Master of his Arrests and Declarations?
Is any thing more ordinary than to see that revoked at one time which has been
established at another? Is a Prince charged to have dealt falsely or deceitfully
when he charges or revokes some Laws he had made?


Hug. Law. Let me entreat you, Sir, not to permit your self to be misled and
imposed upon by that sorry argument so often brought against us: Consider, I
pray, there is a great deal of difference between Sumptuary Laws, or
Regulations of Proceedings in Suits Criminal or Civil, and Treaties bona fide
made with Subjects, and People who are or enter under the Dominion of a Prince.
A Sovereign may revoke Sumptuary Laws and alter the forms of Proceedings which
have been heretofore, but are not now useful to the State, because they are not
Treaties; he made not these Laws irrevocable, he was not engaged, he did not
promise any he would not revoke them, but in the Edicts of Pacification, our
Kings treated with Men in the presence of God, they engaged themselves to allow
them some Liberties and preserve them: They promised this solemnly without
reserving a Power of Revocation. It cannot be denied, but the Council of France
is universally blamed, for looking upon all Treaties made with those who are,
or enter under the King's Dominion as Toys to play with and deceive the simple,
and false Dice to cheat those who mean honestly and act fairly. For those many
years the United Provinces have had in their subjection Bolduc and Mastricht,
Cities wherein the Roman Catholics have all manner of Liberty, and the
Burgesses great Privileges, they have not failed to observe to a tittle the
Treaties and Capitulations agreed on. I heard read the other day the Record of
what was transacted upon the voluntary surrender of Sedan to the King: There
cannot be a thing fairer than the Privileges the King grants to the Town and
the Religion then predominant there: Nothing more solemn than the manner of
their mutual engagement, by an Oath of Fidelity on the Subjects part, and on
the part of the Sovereign, by the Liberties he allows them; but the memory of
all this is vanished. When we mention these Treaties at Court, all the answer
we have is, The King's mind is altered. This Conduct (which is observed in
matters of State as well as of Religion) does France a greater injury than can
be imagine d; it renders the French Government intolerable, at a time when
France would have it appear the most easy: The People of Flanders and the
Franche Comte lately conquered, retain to this day an affection for Spain, and
groan under a Yoke which is not at present very heavy; it is because they know
the Privileges and Liberties they enjoy, shall not last long; there is more
danger than you think of in this manner of proceeding; for the World never
wants some Factious Spirits who mind not that other men's sins cannot justify or
excuse them in theirs; they forget that the faults of Princes against their
Subjects do not authorize Subjects to rebel against their Princes; they
frequently say to one another, We are not obliged to keep our words with him
that breaks his with us: Fregit fidem, frangatur eidem. You see you have
carried us a great way from the place we were at; but you will think it fit,
Sir, that we return thither again, and speak now of the Conspiracy in England.


Par. You are strangely in love with that Subject. Let me lead you where I
will, you are still for returning thither. And what shall you get by it? All
you can say is overthrown in one word: It is constantly denied there is one
word of truth in all that story.


Hug. Law. It Is for that very reason, Sir, we return so often to that Subject.
Can you think it fit we should patiently endure our selves to be charged to
have invented by the most Diabolical malice that ever was conceived, a Romance,
a Fable (such as you suppose the History of this Conspiracy to be) out of a
formed design and of set purpose to destroy the Honor, the Estates, and the
Lives of Millions of innocent Persons? What proof have we ever given, that we
are capable of so horrible a Treason? I know very well, you will object the
same to us, and ask what color there is to believe, that you Catholics could
have conspired to massacre Millions of Innocents: And that it is as probable the
Protestants have invented this Plot to destroy the Catholics, as that the
Catholics have entered into a Conspiracy to destroy the Protestants: But, Sir,
the presumptions are far stronger, if not altogether for us: It Is not to be
found in History, we ever plotted infernal Devices like this, to destroy our
Countrymen, or charged them with such black Crimes to ruin them: On the
contrary, the History and memory of Men yet living, inform us, it is ordinary
with the misguided Zealots of your Religion to make Parties and enter into
Conspiracies for exterminating by Poison, Fire, and Sword, those they call
Heretics. So that it is more just to charge your Catholics with a Crime
ordinary with them, than to charge us Protestants with a wicked action, which
no Age can show we ever were guilty of.


Par. You suppose that which we say is a Calumny; that it is ordinary with us to
endeavor to get rid of Heretics by Poison, Fire, and Sword.


Hug. Law. Alas, Sir, have you already forgot all I said to you but now, and
you never contradicted? I mean, all those Massacres and Torments you have put
the Protestants to; if you speak of Conspiracies, take but the pains to read
your own Authors, they will sufficiently inform you. It Is the policy of your
Bigots to deny confidently the clearest matters of fact, and things most
notorious and generally acknowledged; the method they take is not altogether
ill, for if they cannot deceive the World, they will impose upon some; but this
hinders not the Catholic Historians (who value themselves on their honor and
sincerity) to give us relations of things as they really were: To this day your
English Catholics deny the Powder Plot in 1605. and maintain it was an
invention of Cecils: Notwithstanding all this, Mezeray has ingeniously given
us the History of that Plot, without regarding in the least the impudence of
the Conspirators, who said (as at this day) 'twas a Crime falsely charged upon
them to take an occasion to destroy them: If you will not believe me, here is
Mezeray, read him; Jan. 1606.
The greatest part of these last (says he) retired to Calais, where the King
had commanded the Governor to allow them refuge; those who governed his
Conscience having presently persuaded him, 'twas a pure Persecution raised by
the Ministers against the Catholic Religion. It Is their custom, you see, to
conspire, and stoutly to deny the Conspiracy discovered; but the evident
proofs, every day produces, make out the truth of this last Plot, and the
falseness of their Assertions who deny it.


Hug. Gent. Sir, before we enter on this business, I pray I may be allowed to
make my Confession: I confess that the last year when I discoursed this
Gentleman about our affairs, I was not thoroughly informed of the State of those
in England: For instance, I said, Oats and Bedlow were not turned Protestants;
I have since learnt the contrary, and that they turned Protestants as soon as
they had given in their Depositions; being convinced by our Divines, that
Religion which authorized such designs, could not be the true. But I pretend
not that this does in the least invalidate their Testimony, they were the
honester men for turning Protestants; but let them have been of what Religion
they will, if they believe there is a God and a Hell, it is not imaginable they
could be so desperately wicked to damn themselves in a frolic, by inventing so
long and horrible a story against millions of Innocent people: And as I was ill
informed concerning the Religion of Oats and Bedlow, I was no better informed,
as to the number of Witnesses who made Oath in that business. Of all the Trials
of the Conspirators having read only two or three, I knew none of the Witnesses
but those two against whom the Jesuits of St. Omers published so many Libels. I
said not a word to you of the Depositions of Prance, Dugdale, Jennison,
Dangerfield, and several others; and the truth is, they endeavor to persuade
us on this side the Sea, that all this great affair hangs only on the Testimony
of two pitiful Rascals; but by the Trials of the other Conspirators, we have
seen the Depositions of Dugdale, who said he had seen a Letter of Whitebread,
Provincial of the Jesuits in England, wherein he advised one of the
Conspirators, to make choice of bold and desperate men to execute the design,
and that it mattered not whether they were Gentlemen or not: This Dugdale has
sworn he was engaged into the Plot by Gavan, and several others; that he knew
of several Meetings at Boscobel, at Tixal, and other places, where my Lord
Stafford, my Lord Peter's, Levison, and many others were present to find out a
means to destroy the King and set up Popery; that afterward Harcourt the
Jesuit, made choice of him to be one of the Assassins; and that Gavan another
Jesuit, had often endeavored to persuade him it was not only lawful but
meritorious to kill any one for the advancement of Religion; that he fetched
proofs out of Scripture, and instanced Garnet for an Example, whose Relics
had wrought Miracles; and that he assured him he should be Canonized for this
action. If this be compared with the Trials of Barriere, John Guignard, John
Chatell, and Ravillac, and with the History of Garnet the English Jesuit, whom
they have made a Martyr; and you reflect upon the Chamber of Meditations into
which the Jesuits put them, they would prepare for such extraordinary actions;
it will appear this Evidence has not the air of fiction, and that nothing is
more agreeable to the ordinary Conduct and Principles of the Jesuits. The same
man swears, Harcourt the Jesuit was the first gave him the news of Sir
Edmundbury-Godfrey's death, in these words, This night Sir Edmundbury-Godfrey
has been dispatched. In Langhorn's Trial he says that Ewers the Jesuit had
differed with him about the Murder of Godfrey: Dugdale having told the Jesuit,
he would be hanged if this spoiled not the whole business, the Jesuit answered,
that Godfrey was a great Persecutor of Night-walkers and lewd people, and it
would be easily believed one of them had murdered him in revenge. In the same
Trial he deposes, that in the Conferences the Jesuits of the Plot had with him,
he learnt they were to have an Army in readiness for a Massacre when they had
assassinated the King; that once they were in a mind to begin with the
Massacre, but afterward altered the project: In Wakeman's Trial the same
Witness deposes further, that my Lord Stafford had promised to pay him
beforehand five hundred Pounds Sterling, to kill the King with Pistol,
Poniard, or otherwise; that Ewers the Jesuit when he showed him Harcourt's
Letter, which brought the news of Godfrey's Death, said, That Godfrey was grown
a little too inquisitive, and that they had done well in killing him. Prance
another Witness deposes, That Harcourt the Jesuit paying him for an Image of
the Virgin, told him there was a Plot against the King's Life; that Fenwick,
Ireland, and Grove had said in his presence, there should be in readiness an
Army of fifty thousand men to establish the Catholic Religion; and that my
Lords, Powis, Bellasis, and Arundel were to command it. That when Prance
complained the poor Tradesmen would be ruined, and have nothing to do in a time
of War; it was answered, He need not trouble himself for that, he should have
employment enough, to make Images for the Churches. The same Witness in the
Trials of Green, Berry, and Hill, gives in his Deposition the whole Story of
the Murder of Godfrey: He says, That to agree the manner of that Murder, they
had several Meetings at an Alehouse at the sign of the Plow; that they labored
much to persuade him it was no Crime to kill a turbulent and over-busy man;
that the project being agreed they had dogged Godfrey several times; that at
last about nine a Clock at night, the Conspirators having observed Godfrey
returning from St. Clements, Lawrence Hill went to the Gate toward the street,
and meeting Sir Edmund, entreated him to come and part two men who were a
fighting by the Waterside; that Godfrey having followed Hill, when they had
him at the end of the Pales, Hill flung a cord about his neck and strangled
him; that Green finding he was not quite dead, wrung his neck about; that
having kept the Corpse some days, and carried it from place to place, at last
they laid it a cross a Horseback, carried it into the fields, and threw it
into a Ditch, having first run his Sword through his body. Robert Jennison
another Witness in Wakeman's Trial deposes, he had heard Ireland one of the
Conspirators say, that the Roman Catholic Religion was to be shortly set up in
England; that there was but one person could hinder it, and that they could
easily poison the King; that the same Ireland being told by the Deponent, that
the King went a Hunting and a Fishing with a very thin Guard, said he should be
very glad they were rid of the King: In Stafford's Trial, the same Jennison
deposes, that in the Meetings of the Priests and Jesuits he had been at, he
heard them say, It was necessary for the Good of the Catholic Religion, to
alter the Government, and to reform it after the model of France; that Ireland
a Priest had solicited him to come along with him to help him to dispatch the
King; that the same Priest had asked him, if he knew any brave and resolute
Irish-men fit to give that great blow. That being in Harcourt's Chamber with
many other Jesuits, he had heard them say, that if C. R. would not be R. C. he
should not be long C. R. the meaning whereof was, that if Charles Rex would not
be a Roman Catholic, he should not long be Charles Rex; that they made him
take the Sacrament and an Oath of Secrecy, and than discovered to him the whole
Plot. In the same Trial Smith declares, that having been born a Protestant,
Abbot Monutague and Father Gascoyne had labored at Paris to make him a Roman
Catholic; telling him, that in a short time the Catholic Religion should be
the praedominant Religion in England; that having designed to go to Rome, and
passing through Provence in his way to Italy, they had obliged him to many
Conferences with Cardinal Grimaldi, who at last persuaded him to turn
Catholic; and that he was made Priest: That Cardinal Grimaldi told him, he had
Correspondence with many great English Lords, that he was very well assured the
Roman Catholic Religion should be prevalent in England; but that there was one
man they must be rid of, and that was the King; that in truth he was a good
Man, but however he must be made away, because he was an Obstacle to their
Designs: The same Witness says, that having left Provence, he went into the
English College at Rome, where he continued long; and that he heard the
Jesuits say in their Sermons and ordinary discourse, That the King of England
was not truly King, because he was an Heretic, and that whoever killed him
should do a very meritorious act. And when he and five or six more were ready
to leave that house, the Fathers earnestly exhorted them to maintain that
Maxim, That People are not obliged to obey the King of England. And that they
should take care to instruct accordingly in Confession, all those they should
find capable to enter into this great design. There is another Witness, Dennis
by name, a Roman Catholic, and a Jacobine Monk; and such at the time of his
Deposition, having neither quitted his Religion nor Order. This Monk deposes,
that being in Spain at Madrid, in the Chamber of James Lenck an Irishman,
Archbishop of Tuam; this Archbishop told him, That Dr. Oliver Plunket was to
be employed very speedily to procure Succors from France, to be sent into
Ireland for maintaining the Catholic Religion in Ireland and England, and that
be the Archbishop would in a short time go in person into that Country to
advance so pious a work. The same Witness deposes, that the Earl of Carlingford
s Brother caused great Sums of Money to be levied in the Covents; and that they
said openly, this money was designed for the bringing over an Army into
Ireland, when time should serve. Edward Turbervil, another Witness, swears
expressly, That Stafford being lodged at Paris at the corner of Beaufortstreet,
the Deponent came to him, and stayed with him several days: That Stafford
having taken an Oath of Secrecy from him not to discover what he should trust
him with, he told him at last, they were in search of one to kill the King of
England, who was an Heretic, and consequently no King, but rather a Rebel
against Almighty God, and that he solicited him to undertake this great Action.

Here Sir, are a great many Witnesses besides Oats and Bedlow, who swear as
home as they: Can any reasonable man imagine, there can be found so many
Infernal Spirits (as here are Witnesses) capable to invent so horrible a
Calumny to destroy a Religion and all that profess it? And if it were possible
to suborn one Witness or two, have you ever seen a president of such a
Subornation that has gained so great a number of Witnesses? Besides, what is
there improbable in this History of the Plot? Is it not the Spirit and Custom
of your Bigots and blind Zealots to use such means as these to promote their
Religion? Read the Life of Queen Elizabeth, and you will find she was no sooner
delivered from one Conspiracy, but another was framed against her. The words of
Stafford who passes for a Martyr among you, are remarkable.

In his Speech to the Lord High-Steward, Stafford's Trial, page 200.
and the Peers, his Judges, he declares, That he did believe, those of the
Roman Religion had (since the Reformation of the Church of England) entered into
several most wicked and most dangerous Conspiracies; particularly the
Conspiracy of Babington, and that of the Earl of Westmorland, or the Northern
Rebellion raised by the Papists in Queen Elizabeth 's time. He declares
further, That he believed, there was a wicked Conspiracy in the Reign of King
James, wherein some of the Conspirators were Roman Catholics, and some
Protestants. And that after this followed that execrable Plot, called The
Gunpowder-Treason: And when Sir, could they have made choice of a more
favorable time wherein to revive and reduce into practice those bloody Maxims,
than a time when they assured themselves, and were fully persuaded, they should
find a King of their Religion in the Person of his Royal Highness? It Is true
the King of England has been favorable to them in tolerating them; but they
were notsatisfy'd with this, and having lost all hopes of prevailing with him
to turn Roman Catholic, they looked upon his Life as a great Obstacle to their
Designs, for it made them lose time, and they had reason to fear the
Protestants in the interim might discover the design; so that it was their
interest speedily to make away a King, who possessed the place of him from whom
they promised themselves a full re-establishment of the Roman Catholic
Religion in England. Recollect the Evidence, add to it the Letters and Memoirs
that were seized, and the Murder of Godfrey, and I will justify it, a man must
have the Forehead of a Jesuit to deny there was a Plot. The Memoirs and Letters
are very numerous, you may read them in the printed Trials; particularly you
will find a great Collection of them printed with Stafford's Trial. But, pray
Sir, remember Coleman's Letter, I spoke to you of last year; that alone is
enough to stop the mouths of those who dare say this Plot is an invention of
the Protestants. To which Calumny we will constantly oppose, as an impenetrable
Buckler, the words of that Letter, acknowledged by Coleman to be his. We have
here a mighty work upon our hands, no less than the Conversion of three
Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the utter subduing of a Pestilent Heresy which
has domineered over great part of this Northern World a long time: Coleman 's
Trial, page 69. I said not a word to you of another Letter as plain as this,
which you may see in Ireland's and Grove's Trials, where you will find words to
this effect. Every one had notice not to make too much have to London, nor to
be there long before the day appointed, nor to appear much in the Town, before
the Congregation was ended, for fear of giving cause to suspect the Design.
This Letter does not tell us what was the design of this famous Assembly, but
it lets us see, they had some great design in hand, and the Plot being
discovered at the same time, it is not hard to guess what it was: It has been
proved before the House of Commons, that upon the first discovery of the Plot,
one of the Lords accused to have had a hand in it, writ to another of the same
Lords then in Staffordshire, that their designs were discovered, and that he
should use his best endeavors to conceal all such their Catholic Friends as
were concerned in that affair. This Letter was found by a Justice of the Peace
in the house of that Lord to whom it was directed, upon the search made for
Arms in Roman Catholic houses, and was produced to the Commons in Parliament
with all the Witnesses, to whom it was showed the moment it was found.


Hug. Law. You have reason to wish, Gentlemen, that my Friend here had not been
any better instructed than formerly in these matters, but had still continued
under his mistake; that Oats and Bedlow had not changed their Religion, but
remained Roman Catholics after the Plot discovered; for the pains he has
taken to inform himself, have made him acquainted with many particulars which
cannot please you, since they make it clearly appear there was a Plot.


Par. We might have easily known all this already, being taken all out of those
Trials printed in several Languages; but since you make use of them, you will
allow me to do so; and give me leave to ask you whether the clearing of
Wakeman, the Queen of England's Physician, be not an evident proof that all
your Witnesses are false Witnesses? For they are in effect no other. Oats and
Bedlow charged Wakeman to have treated for fifteen thousand pounds, for
poisoning the King: Here are two Witnesses, enough to Condemn a Man. Here is in
question one of the principal Crimes laid to the charge of the pretended
Conspirators, their design to make away the King, yet this man is acquitted by
his Judges. It necessarily follows, your two famous Witnesses were taken for
false Witnesses; and if they were not to be credited against Wakeman, why
should they be credited against the rest?


Hug. Law. Do not say, Sir, that the clearing of Sir George Wakeman is a proof
of his innocence, or of the falsehood of the Evidence; say rather, that the
Chief Justice who sat at that Trial, has been since impeached before the
Peers of England in Parliament; and had the Parliament continued sitting,
perhaps that Judge had smarted for it: The King was not very well satisfied of
Wakeman's innocence after his Acquittal: For that Poison Merchant having had
the confidence to appear at Court after his enlargement, the King caused him to
be turned out with shame.


Par. There is one thing sticks still very hard with me as to this Plot; that
of twelve or fifteen Persons who have been executed for the pretended
Conspiracy, not one confessed himself guilty in the least. When Men are ready to
appear before God, the Mask falls off it self; the fear of Hell softens the
hardness of their hearts: You shall not see a Malefactor but discharges his
Conscience at his death; if some of them were hardened enough to deny to the
death, yet sure one or other of them would have confessed something; but there
has not been one of them who did not protest to the last he was innocent.
Consider after what manner died Stafford, and Plunket, the Primate of Ireland,
who were Persons of Honor and Quality.


Hug. Law. It surprises me, Sir, to hear you make their obstinate Silence an
Argument of their innocence; every day we see Criminals, who to save their
Credit, and have the pleasure of saying they dye innonocent, resist the most
violent Tortures: Yet you cannot comprehend, how Men who have long fortified
their Courage, and prepared for an Enterprise, the most dangerous that may be,
have the power to keep till death, a Secret, on which depends not only their
Honor, but the preservation of all the Roman Catholics in England: Had they
confessed themselves Guilty, they must have named their Accomplices; and in so
doing, they would have destroyed an infinite number of People, and rendered
their Religion abominable in the World, by making it appear, it inspires into
its Votaries such horrible Sentiments, and gives Birth to such furious designs:
These Considerations are of weight and strength sufficient to keep the weakest
of Men from revealing a Secret of this importance. When the Powder Plot was
discovered in 1605. not one of the Conspirators confessed; and nothing had ever
been proved upon them out of their own mouths, had not the Judges had the
ingenuity to cause Garnet and Hall to be imprisoned in two Dungeons, where they
could speak to one another; and in the Wall between the Dungeons, there was a
place they placed two Witnesses in, who heard all the Prisoners said, and gave
so exact an Account of their Discourse, that they confessed all: But would you
know the cause they keep their Secrets so well? It Is the horrible Oath they
impose on all those who enter into such Conspiracies: Read Mezeray, where I
have left him open. The last of January, eight of the principal Conspirators
were executed at London for High Treason; not one of them accused the Priests
or the Monks, for they were obliged to Secrecy by terrible Oaths. To satisfy
you fully in this particular, I will let you see the form of the Oath
administered to all those who entered into this last Plot. There is a Copy of it.

The Oath for the Plot in England.
I Whose Name is underwritten, do in the presence of Almighty God, and of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, the Blessed Archangel Michael, the Blessed St. John the
Baptist, the holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and all other the Saints in
Heaven, and of you my Ghostly Father, declare from the bottom of my heart, that
I believe the Pope, the Vicar General of Jesus Christ, to be the sole and only
Head of the Church upon Earth, and that by virtue of the Keys, and the power of
binding and looseing given to his Holiness by our Lord Jesus Christ, he has
power to Depose all Heretic Kings and Princes, to put them out of their
Office, or kill them. And therefore I will from the bottom of my heart defend
this Doctrine and the Rights of his Holiness, against all sorts of Usurpers,
especially against him who pretends to be King of England, because he has
falsified his Oath made to the Agents of his Holiness, by not keeping his
promise to Establish the Holy Roman Catholic Religion in England. I Renounce
and Disavow all manner of Promise and Submission to the said present King of
England, and all obedience to his Officers and inferior Magistrates; and I
believe that the Protestant Doctrine is Heretical and Damnable, and that all
those who do not forsake it shall be damned: I will assist with all my power
the Agents of his Holiness here in England, to extirpate and root out the said
Protestant Doctrine, and to destroy the said pretended King of England, and all
those his Subjects, who will not adhere to the Holy See of Rome, and the
Religion there professed. Moreover, I promise and declare, that I will keep
Secret, and not divulge directly or indirectly, by word or by writing, or other
Circumstance whatsoever, what you my Spiritual Father, or any other engaged in
the advancement of this Holy and Pious Design, shall propose and give me in
charge; and that I will diligently and constantly promote it; and that neither
hope of Reward nor fear of Punishment shall make me discover any thing relating
thereto; and that if I be discovered, I will never confess any Circumstance of
it. All these things I swear by the most Holy Trinity, and by the Blessed Body
of God, which I intend to receive presently, and that I will accomplish and
inviolably perform them all; and I call to Witness all the Angels and Saints of
Heaven, that such is my true intention: In Witness whereof, I receive the most
holy and Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist.


Hug. Law. Well Sir, and what say you of this? This comes from good hands; from
a great house allied to that of England: But had it fallen from the Clouds, we
might have known it by the Character; had it been a forged piece, it must needs
have been made by a Roman Catholic, and one deeply versed in the Cabal of
these blind Zealots; for there is not a Protestant, and but few Roman
Catholics, who understand the style and conduct of this Cabal with so much
perfection, as he must have done, who should invent this form of an Oath. And
now, Sir, you may, if you can, draw from the silence of the Conspirators an
Argument against the truth of the Plot.


Par. Since you are so much for answering, I should be very glad, Sir, to hear
what you have to say to the business of my Lord Howard, and the Earl of
Shaftsbury: This last will be shortly convicted of having suborned Witnesses
against the Queen of England, and the Duke of York, to make them Accomplices in
the Plot. May not he who would have suborned Witnesses against the Queen and
first Prince of the Blood, be rationally presumed to have suborned Witnesses
against five or six pitiful Priests?


Hug. Law. We hope, Sir, the innocence of the Earl of Shaftsbury will save him.
Perhaps it will be objected, he may be more for a Republican Government, than
may befit the Subject of a Monarchy; but we cannot believe him capable of the
base actions he is charged with. If he miscarry, he will not be the first
innocent person has perished by the malice of false Witnesses: Can any thing
be clearer, than that this Charge against him is a Counter-battery raised by
your Catholics? Nothing can be more proper to make men suspect, that all has
been said of the Plot, is merely fictitious, than to produce men to testify,
Endeavors have been used to suborn them: For if Endeavors have been used to
suborn them, why not to suborn others? I wonder only this act of the Tragedy
began so late: It Is true, we may see something of it in Wakeman's Trial and in
Dugdale's Depositions: For this Witness tells us, he had seen a Letter sent
from Paris to St. Omers, from St. Omers to London, from London to Tixal,
wherein it was advised, That the Presbyterians should be accused of a Design
against the King's Life, which would oblige those of the Church of England to
join with the Catholics to destroy the Presbyterians. Observe now the Event of
this Counsel: The Earl of Shaftsbury is looked upon as the head of the
Presbyterians; the Presbyterians are the great Enemies of the Conspirators, and
labor with most Zeal the Discovery of the Plot. We must destroy their Credit,
say you, and charge them with the blackest of Crimes; and who are the Witnesses
made use of against the Earl of Shaftsbury? They are all Roman Catholics: Can
you think it a hard matter in a business where the safety of a whole Party and
of the Roman Religion is at stake, to find five or six persons who will
Sacrifice themselves to save the honor of their Religion, and the Life of
their Patriarchs? And how do they Sacrifice themselves? Their Ghostly Fathers
persuade them, that to bear false Witness against Shaftsbury, the great Enemy
of the Roman Church, is so far from being an offense to God, that they do him
very considerable Service in it. So that instead of one or two, I believe they
may find a hundred false Witnesses in this affair; and this is the cause honest
men are so much in fear for the Life of that Lord. But let us suppose things to
be as you would have them; let us put the Case that Shaftsbury is the most
wicked of men; does it follow, that because out of hatred to the Roman
Religion, and for Excluding the Duke of York from the Succession, he would have
suborned some Witnesses against the Queen and the Duke; he must therefore have
framed and invented this long train of Conspiracies and that multitude of
particular matters of Fact, Letters, Meetings, and Consultations, that appear
in the History of the Plot? Does it follow, that because he would have suborned
Witnesses, he must therefore succeed in it? Or if he has had the fortune to
find one Wretch or two capable to be Suborned, is it probable he could have
found out so great a number? Has he searched England and Ireland all over, to
scum out for his purpose all the Rascals capable to give and maintain a false
Testimony? How many Witnesses have been produced about the Plot in Ireland?
Has the Earl of Shaftsbury Suborned them too? Is this probable, Sir, or will
any man believe it?


Par. This probably is all you have to say to us about the Plot in England; I
think it high time to put an end to our Discourse, it has been somewhat long;
you may well be weary of speaking as we are of hearing.


Hug. Law. We should have had much more to say to you, if we were allowed to
speak, and could produce all the proofs the Cabal has found the means to bury:
Had we but seen Plunket's Trial, we could without doubt have added many things
to what you have heard: And if it were in our power to discover the Mysteries
of the Irish Plot, we should certainly stop their Mouths, who say, the reason
of our ill usage in France, is that the King may revenge the Outrages, done to
the Roman Catholics in England.


Hug. Genesis Gentlemen, if you please, before we make an end, because I am in the
humor of making Retractations and Confessions, I will confess to you, that
speaking last year of the death of King Charles the 1st, and how great a share
the Jesuits had in his Death, I gave you but a very imperfect account. I have
since searched into the bottom of that affair; and, if you please, will
acquaint you what I have learnt. Du Moulin's Answer to Philanax Anglicus. page
58.
I must tell you then, that it is known when the late King of England was
Beheaded, there was a Roman Priest a Confessor, who having seen the King's
Head cut off, flourished his Sword, and with Demonstrations of extraordinary
joy, cried out, Now we are rid of our greatest Enemy. There is proof, that the
News of the King's Death being come to Roan, and discoursed in a great Company
of men very well instructed in the Mysteries of the Zealous Cabal; one of them
spoke thus: Page 58, 59.
The King of England had promised us at his Marriage, that the Catholic
Religion should be reestablished in England, and because he put it off from
time to time, we often called upon him to perform his promise; we were so
plain, as to tell him, That if he did it not we should be forced to make use of
means to destroy him: We gave him fair warning, and because he would not follow
our advice, nor keep his Word with us, we have kept ours with him. A Gentleman
of honor, a Protestant, who was in the Company, gave me this Relation. The
Author who produces this Proof, produces also a Letter from a Secretary of
State, who was actually in the Service of the Crown, when the Accusation was
brought against the Jesuits about the Death of the King; this Secretary, whose
name was Morris, in answer to a Letter from the Author of the Accusation, says
to this purpose. I am not allowed, nor does it become me to make Conjectures,
or draw Consequences from the Orders his Majesty gave me concerning you, beyond
what he has precisely expressed. You know in what trust and capacity I served
his Majesty, Page 64.
and what it was my duty to say, and whereof to be silent: But this I may
safely say, and will do it confidently, that many Arguments did create a
violent suspicion, very near convincing Evidences, that the Irreligion of the
Papists was chiefly guilty of the Murder of that Excellent Prince, the Odium
whereof they would now file to the account of the Protestant Religion. The same
Author adds, That a Protestant, a little before the King's death, met upon the
Road from Roan to Diep, a Company of Jesuits, who taking him for a Catholic,
told him they were going into the Army of the Independants in England, and that
they would make work enough there. An English Lady at Paris, being seduced by a
Jesuit, turned Roman Catholic; soon after came the news of the King of
England's Death: The Jesuit visiting the Lady, found her all in Tears for this
lamentable Accident. Madam, says the Jesuit smiling, you have no reason to
lament what has happened, the Catholics are delivered of the greatest Enemy
they had, and his Death will be much to the advantage of the Catholic
Religion. The Lady angry at this discourse, sent the Jesuit packing down
Stairs, and conceived such horror against the Roman Catholic Religion, she
would never after endure to hear speak of it. A very understanding Man visiting
the Monks at Dunkirk, that he might sound them what they thought of the King's
Death, said, That the Jesuits had labored much to bring about that great work:
A Monk answered, That the Jesuits always assumed to themselves the credit of
every great Work; but that their order had contributed to this as much if not
more than they. It Is certain there was an universal Joy in all the English
Seminaries on this side the Sea, for the Death of the King: They thought
themselves so sure of their Designs, that the Benedictines were taking care how
to prevent the Jesuits from possessing themselves of the Lands belonging to
their order; and the Nuns quarreled among themselves who should be Lady
Abbesses: To conclude, the same Author reports, That he offered to prove in due
course of Law, Page 61, 62.
his Charge against the Jesuits for the Death of the King; but that he was
unwilling to publish his Proofs before hand, lest those who were guilty of the
Charge, might have opportunity to get them out of the way or destroy them. I do
not understand English, but I got a Friend of mine who does, to Translate me
this Book, being, an Answer to a Book, entitled, Philanax Anglicus. I remember
these Particulars in it, which, in my opinion, sufficiently prove, that the
Charge of the King's Death on the Roman Catholics, is not altogether
groundless; but I begin to be sensible we abuse your patience: Therefore,
Gentlemen, we will break off here, and take our Leaves.


Prove. I wished them gone a quarter of an hour ago: The Lawyer, as he took out
of his Pocket the Oath he gave us to read, dropped a Paper I took up, and having
half opened it, I spied written a top, To the King: I folded it up again and he
never perceived me: I long extremely to see what it is: Let Us read it.


To the King.
SIR,
YOur Majesty may very well be surpised to see at your feet an unknown Person,
who having made his way through the Crowds about your Majesty, is come to
expose himself to the splendor of Rays so glorious as yours. The high State
your Majesty is in, deprives of course the greatest part of your Subjects of
the Liberty to present themselves before you; but the Sentiments endeavored to
be inspired into your Majesty, to the disadvantage of your Subjects of the
Protestant Religion, keep them at greater distance, and absolutely take from
them the advantage of appearing before you, to present to your view the true
pourtrait of their Miseries; to prevent being dazzled with the Luster of your
Throne, they have put a vail between themselves and Your Majesty, and have
drawn a Curtain, behind which they may make their Complaints, by a voice out of
the Ground. If this voice have the good fortune to reach Your Majesty's Ear, be
Graciously pleased to give it Audience, and to look upon this private unknown
Person as a poor Wretch, who in the name of Millions of other Wretches is come
to Expose to Your Majesty's view their common Calamities, and to have an end
put to their Miseries by Your Majesty's Justice and Mercy: Their Miseries are
extreme, had they been but ordinary, we should have submitted with silence; It
will not be believed, that under the Reign of the greatest of our Kings, of him
who was born for the Glory and Happiness of France, there is so great a number
of miserable Persons within an inch of Despair; but it is Your Goodness, Sir, is
the cause of our Calamities, by giving way to the malice of our Enemies, by
permitting it self to be surpised by the Counsels of our Persecutors. These
ill Counselors, Sir, forgetting or not knowing the true Interests of Your
Majesty, arm Your Majesty against the faithfullest of Your Subjects; against
People who by Birth, by Inclination, by Interest, and by their Religion, are
obliged to adhere inseparably to Your Majesty: The blood which was heretofore
spilt with so much joy, to gain to Henry the 4th that Crown Your Majesty now
wears with so much Glory, circulates in our veins, and burns with impatience to
be shed in Your Service: But our Enemies, Sir, who are in truth the Enemies of
the State, force us to cease to be Your Subjects, to seek other Sovereigns, to
live in another Air, and to people the Estates of Your Neighbors, who perhaps
will shortly be Your Enemies; they hurry us out of our Country, and labor to
stifle in our hearts those Sentiments of Love and Respect for Your Majesty,
which Nature had so deeply rooted there; they will pull down our Churches, they
rob us of our Liberty to serve God, they take from us all means of Livelyhoood,
they plunder our Goods, they force our Children from us, they consume our
Houses, and in some Provinces abuse our Persons, they Imprison us, they put us
to the Rack, they Torture us, they beat us to death, they Hang, they Burn us
without course of Law: The Instruments that Execute these Outrages are Your
Soldiers, who in the heart of Your Kingdom commit Enormities, humane Nature
would abhor, if committed in an Enemies Country, and in the fury of War: They
possess the Souls of Your Protestant Subjects with a Spirit of terror and
fear, by showing them Your Majesty's Arm always lifted up for their ruin: Thus
they endeavor to make us hate him as a Tyrant, whom by duty and inclination we
love as the best of our Kings. We know very well, Sir, that to surprise Your
Majesty they make use of an apparent Piety, and mind you of the Name, Your
Majesty bears, of Most Christian, to inspire into Your Majesty those Sentiments
so disastrous and pernicious to us; but in the Name of God we Conjure Your
Majesty to consider, that those Councels of breach of promise and of violence,
are absolutely contrary to the Spirit of true Religion. Nothing can be more
agreeable to Piety than Integrity in our actions and just performance of our
promises. We lived in a profound Peace under the shadow of those Edicts Your
Majesty has so often and so solemnly confirmed to us; these Counselors, Sir,
engage you in a Conduct steered by that horrible Maxim, all true Christians
detest, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics: They render Your Majesty's
Justice and Truth to Your Promises suspected to all Strangers, who cannot but
doubt the stability of any Treaty to be had with you, seeing the Promises made
to your Subjects violated in so cruel a manner: The Declarations obtained every
day by surprise from Your Majesty; stain the most Glorious Reign France ever
saw; not only by the mortal Wounds they give to Your Majesty's Justice, and
your truth to your Promises, but by open violations of the most sacred Laws of
God and Nature. All Europe looks with astonishment on the Permission granted by
the wisest of Kings, to annul in his Kingdom Paternal Authority, and to see
Children armed to Revolt against their Parents, in an Age they know not what
Revolt is: Your Majesty is too clear-sighted, not to discern that Crimes and
ill means are not the paths by which Souls ought to be led into the true
Religion; those who lay Siege to Your Majesty, and make you take Resolutions so
dismal to Your Subjects of the Protestant Religion, carry all with a high hand,
without any regard to their honor, or the glory of the greatest of Kings; to
induce them to that which they call Conversion, they invite men to turn
Bankrouts, to rebel against their Superiors, to falsify their words, to be
Hipocrites and profane; for those they draw in by hopes of not paying their
Debts, or of Impunity for any Crime, and those they force to turn by Bastonade,
fear of Poverty, and other Violences exercised upon them, cannot but become
Hypocrites and profane, detesting in their hearts those sacred things they are
forced to reverence in appearance. Your Majesty is told, the Parents are ill
Christians, but their Children will be good Catholics; but we conjure Your
Majesty to consider, the false zeal of our Persecutors makes as many Criminals,
as it pretends to make Catholics; and that by the Law of God, Children are
punishable for the Crimes of their Parents; the unhappy Parents look upon them
as Tyrants, who fetter their Consciences; they are Rebels in their hearts, and
will never let slip any opportunity to be revenged for the Oppression they are
under; how can it be hoped, God will bless the posterity of those base
Wretches, who for fear of some Temporal Punishment, or hope of some
inconsiderable advantage, Renounce a Religion they believe to be true, and
harbor in their hearts Rebellion against their Sovereigns? These Sentiments
will be transmitted to their posterity; for it is natural for Parents to
inspire their thoughts into their Children. Thus Your Majesty shall see
continued in Your Kingdom a Generation of Malcontents, of Dissmblers, of
Profane, Rebellious, and ill Christians; such will be the good Catholics begot
of those Parents, who are at this day forced to change their Religion. Among
this wretched Multitude there will doubtless be some, who totally forgetting
their duty, will take desperate Resolutions, and choose rather to die in a
violent manner, than to live reduced to a condition wherein they betray their
Conscience and suffer a thousand Calamities; and it cannot but infinitely
grieve Your Majesty's good Nature and Clemency, to see your self forced to
revive the Age of Massacres: Our zeal for Your Majesty's Service holds out
hitherto against the sense of our present Sufferings, and the fear of future
ills; Your Majesty has not in Your Armies by Sea or Land, an Hugonot Officer
who is not ready to sacrifice his Life in Your Service: There is not Your
Kingdom a Protestant who does not venerate, (I may say adore) Your Majesty, as
the brightest Image God has given of himself to the World; we hope, they will
always look upon the Thunderbolts that come from your hand, with that respect
and fear they regard those that fall from Heaven; but we hope also, Your
Majesty in imitation of that Divinity, whose Image you are, will pity so many
miserable Persons who groan under their Sufferings, without murmuring against
the hand that causes them. Especially, when you consider these Wretches have
all Europe to witness their faithfulness to Your Service; and the World sees
them free from the least stain of Rebellion: Your Majesty will not permit us to
be persecuted any longer for no other reason, but because, as it is supposed, we
are not illuminated. Alas, Sir, it is a Grace that depends not upon our selves,
it is not a thing within the power of Man, nor is it an effect of fear,
punishments and tortures. We doubt not, but if Your Majesty would take the
pains to cast Your Eye, upon the Arrests and Orders exhorted from Your Majesty
against us, and the Consequences of them, they would appear dreadful and
horrible; Your Majesty should see Trade interrupted and spoiled, Your Towns
desolate by the desertion of the Inhabitants, and a great breach in Your State
by the loss of so many considerable Members of it ready to fly out of it; you
should see your Neighbors enriched and fortified by the spoils of Your
Kingdom, France in many places, become a vast Desert, and a considerable number
of unhappy Consciences, groaning under a cruel Servitude they are reduced to;
You should see a People in despair, capable of the most violent Resolutions
against themselves. We hope, Sir, that God the Protector of Afflicted
Innocents, will lay open all these Considerations to Your Majesty's Eyes, that
you may act as the common Father of Your Subjects: We remember, Sir, that kind
and excellent Expression of Your Majesty, not long since; That You considered
us all as Your Children, and would have given Your Right Hand for our
Conversion: Here we see Your Majesty in Your Natural state, and admire the
genuine goodness of Your temper, and are persuaded it is not without violence
you are obliged to arm Your self against us, as if we were Your Enemies. When
Children have attained the age of discretion, their Parents use only the ways
of persuasion to reduce them to Duty; because the heart is not won but by fair
and gentle means, and our Spirits naturally abhor and resist force. We hope
therefore, Your Majesty will again awaken Your Paternal Compassions toward
those Children whom you look upon as gone astray; and that you will leave it to
Heaven and it is Grace, to reduce them into the right way, if out of it, and
that You will not permit our Consciences to be dragged into Paths which we are
not persuaded are right: It Is this hope alone, Sir, keeps us from falling into
despair, this only supports us; this will ever make us most earnest Petitioners
to Heaven, for the preservation of Your Royal Person, for Your Glory, and the
good Success of all Your Designs.


Prove. What think you of it, Sir?


Par. I am not surpised at it; these poor People are so restless in their
misery, it is no wonder they toss and tumble themselves every way; but they are
very simple, if they think they can find a way to convey such a Paper to His
Majesty, the Avenues are all blocked up. And should it come to the Kings Hands,
he is beset round with those shall take effectual order he shall not alter his
Mind: I should think it best to let them have it again, but that if you restore
it, they will bevex'd we have seen it. It Is better pretend we know nothing of
it, nor say a word of it to them; they will think they have lost it elsewhere.


Prove. I will be advised by you. Farewell, Sir, it is high time to leave you to
your Repose.


The Printer to the Reader.
The Copy of the following Letter being come to my hands, I thought it not
improper to be communicated to the Public, because it concerns the present
State of the Religion in France, the Subject of this Work.
SIR,
YOu desire I would inform you, what you are to believe of the Reports spread
in the Province you are in, of the great Mitigations lately happened (as it is
said) in the Affairs of our Religion. A Man cannot write with much certainty of
these matters, yet I will venture to comply with your desires; never were
Reports more groundless than those, for matters are so far from being
mitigated, they begin to be worse than ever: The business between the Bailiff
of Charanton and the Gentlemen of the Consistory, is revived. You know, without
doubt, that the King upon the Petition they presented him, had ordered the
Bailiff not to proceed any further, and gave them leave in the mean time to
apply themselves if they saw cause, to the Parliament for Remedy; but within
these five or six days the Chancellor said to the Deputy-General, it was much
wondered the Consistory had not sued forth an Appeal from the Sentence of the
Bailiff, that they must look to it; for if they would not appeal, the King
would take off the Prohibition, and give the Bailiff leave to proceed: What is
the meaning of this, but to let us see they intend to Exterminate us? for
questionless you remember, one Article of that Sentence was, that we should pay
the Sacrament such respect as is due to it. Whether what was said to Monsieur
Ruvigny will take effect, I know not; but you know well enough, that in what
concerns us, they do not their business by half, but go through with their
work. The Provinces of Poitou and Aunix are in a condition that deserves all
manner of Compassion, all acts of the most Barbarous Cruelty are exercised in
those Countries; the Relations we have thence would break your heart: It Is
true, the Troops are drawn out, which is the only ground I know for the reports
of mitigation; but the Forces were drawn out of Poitou, for no other reason,
but because there was business to employ them elsewhere, or to lay the noise
the violence of their proceedings raised in those parts: In all other points,
the Persecution in those Provinces is not at all abated; from Poitiers to
Rochelle, there is not a Minister to be seen; and in all that Province,
formerly full of places for Religious Worship, there are not six places but the
Churches are shut up, or the Ministers silenced; all those Churches which were
appendants of Manors, the tenure whereof gave Right to the Lords to have
Religious Worship performed there, were all shut up on the sudden: The
Ministers of other Churches yet standing, are some confined, others banished,
others silenced, and most imprisoned, Monsieur Bossatran Minister of Niort, and
seven of his Elders, are Prisoners at Rochelle; The Sieurs Paumier, D'Isle,
Champion, Le Pain, Du Son, Loquet, Ministers of St. Maixaut, de la Motte, de
Mougon, de Fontenay, de Marennes, and many others, have had Sentence pronounced
against them, that their Goods shall be sold, or are imprisoned, or fled, or
banished; one is confined to Vezelay, another to Bezomson, others to other
places, so that in all these Provinces you can hardly find one officiating
Minister; this new kind of Persecution is exercised upon pretense, that the
Ministers gave Certificates to those who are gone out of the Kingdom; they
Prosecute with that Cruely those who give relief to these miserable Fugitives,
that Burgesses of Rochell have been imprisoned and fined for giving them a
glass of water. The Marquess of Dompierre, a Gentleman of Note, has been a
long time Prisoner for harboring forty or fifty poor men, who were in search
of means to set themselves at Liberty, from the tyranny exercised upon their
Consciences. It Is true, the Intendant Marillac has not any Soldiers left; but
he stirs not abroad without his Deputies and his Guards, who act the same
Outrages the Soldiers did: He sends before him his Harbingers into the
Villages to frighten them; when arrived, he calls before him the Inhabitants of
the Protestant Profession, exhorts them to obey the King's Orders and embrace
his Religion; those who carry his Orders about, observe no Measures, Menaces,
Promises, Troubles newly raised or revived, Discharges, Officers pay, easing
those who have been over-rated in Assessements, and money distributed, have
made an infinite number of Revolters: The Shepherds are smitten that the flocks
maybe scattered. The Ministers of all Churches held by right of Tenure, are
taxed in assessments to the King, that they may be forced to desert: The
violence is so terrible and excessive, by the Taxes they assess for payment of
Offices (as they call them) that the Country is not eased in the least by the
Soldiers being drawn out; those who the last year were taxed but at thirty
Livers, have this year been taxed by the Intendant at five or six hundred. Thus
all are obliged to desert, and if any one leave his house he is carried to
Prison, under pretense he was going out of the Kingdom. It Is certain that
nothing but an inability of getting out, has retained in the Provinces any
Person of the Protestant Religion; and you may be assured, that the next Spring
Millions will follow you into strange Countries; they who cannot go out at the
Door will leap out at the Window, and trust the mercy of the Waves to convey
them to some Vessel at Sea: God grant the poor Wretches may in foreign parts
meet with tender Hearts and Compassionate Souls; these reports of mitigation
are raised by our Enemies, on design to cool the fervor of that Charity, those
Protestant Countries which enjoy the Peace God has taken from us, exercised
toward our fugitive Brethren; and those Enemies are in the midst of us as well
as among our Adversaries. We have among us some wretched Traitors who spread a
Report, that we shall shortly see a great change of Affairs; that there shall
be a Reformation in France, not of us, but a Reformation of far greater value
and importance, and therefore we are not to think of leaving the Kingdom. These
Men catch new hold, when others let go theirs, and fancy grounds of fresh
hopes, where others see nothing but cause of Despair: You understand well
enough what such Persons think, and what is to be expected from them. This,
Sir, you are to believe of the mitigations you have heard of: What I have now
told you is truth, of which I have been an Ocular Witness, being lately
returned out of the places where the Facts have been committed; you see there
is cause to wish your Gazetteers had better Information or better Intentions,
and would not Stuff their Gazettes with News grounded on intelligence
altogether false: We have had a flying Report that Marillac will be recalled,
but it is as true as the rest. Expect not he shall be Revoked till he has
completed our ruin in the Province of Poitou; the design of this Letter was
only to inform you of the particulars you desired to know; I will not make it
longer, but Conclude with assuring, you I am,

Sir, Your most humble and obedient Servant.
Paris Jan. 20. 1682.
A Catalogue of Plays, Printed for R. Bently and M. Magnes.
1. FArtus, or the French Puritan. 2. Forced Marriage, or the Jealous
Bridegroom. 3. English Monsieur. 4. All mistaken, or the Mad Couple. 5.
Generous Enemies, or the Rediculous Lovers. 6. The Plain-Dealer. 7. Sertorions,
a Tragedy. 8. Nero, a Tragedy. 9. Sophomisba, or Hannibal's overthrow. 10.
Gloriana, or the Certe of Augusta Caesar. 11. Alexander the Great. 12.
Methridates, King of Pontus. 13. Oedipus, King of Thebes. 14. Ceasar Borgia.
15. Theodocious, or the force of Love. 16. Madam Fickle, or the witty false
one. 17. The Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters. 18. Esquire Old Sap, or the
Night Adventures. 19. Fool turned Critic. 20. Virtuous Wife, or God luck at
last. 21. The Fatal Wager. 22. Andromecha. 23. Country Wit. 24. Calesto, or the
Chaste Nun. 25. Destruction of Jerusalem in 2 parts. 26. Ambitious Statesman,
or the Loyal Favorite. 27. Misery of Civil War. 28. The Murder of the D. of
Gloucester. 29. Thestis, a Tragedy. 30. Hamblet Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy.
31. The Orphan, or the Unhappy Marriage. 32. The Soldiers Fortune. 33.
Tamberlain the Great. 34. Mr. Limberham, or the kind Keeper. 35. Mistaken
Husband. 36. Notes of marrow by the Wits. 37. Essex and Elizabeth, or the
Unhappy Favorite. 38. Virtue Betrayed, or Anna Boloyn. 39. King Leare. 40.
Abdellazor, or the Mares Revenge. 41. Town Fop, or Sir Timothy Tawdery. 42.
Rare an tout, a French Comedy. 43. Moor of Venice.
FINIS.

