A JOURNAL OF THE King's March from Hilsburgh. TO His MAJESTY'S Happy Entering
DUBLIN, On Saturday, July the 5th, 1690.
Honored SIR,
MY former gave you an Account of what passed that was remarkable from the
King's Landing to the 21th of June. The 22th being Sabbath Day, the King
decampt from Hilsburgh, and made his Advance to Lough-Brick lane, where he
continued his Camp that day, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday following, and on
Thursday advanced to the Newry, where the Camp continued only one Night. At Two
the next Morning made an advance toward D^ndalk, and encamped the Army on the
same Ground where the Enemy Encampt when they made that great Appearance
against us last Winter. The King on his Arrival here divided his Army, having
one pa^^ under the Command of Lieutenant General Douglass, to collect the
D^nish and Western Forces, with some Addition of the other English Forces, and
to March by the way of ^^^mag^^, and on Friday they met his Majesty at the Camp
of the (...), and being joined, makes the greatest and most formidable Body of
Horse, Foot, and train of Artillery that was ever seen in this Kingdom.

His Majesty was pleased to order the Major General Kirk, with three Regiments
of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse and Dragoons, to make their advance before the
Army, on whose approach the Enemy not only quitted a very advantageous Pass,
which they had fortified through the Mountains, in their passage betwixt Newry
and Dundalk, though the Sabbath Day before they made some advantage of that
very Pass; and on the Major-Generals further advance, they as tamely quitted
the Town of Dundalk, after they had spent their whole Winter in making a strong
and regular Circumvallation about that Town, and had made that destruction of
the Buildings, that what was left, was indeed but a strong C^^^adel; yet this,
as well as the aforesaid Pass, they left without the least opposition, and drew
the whole body of their Army, consisting (as was reported) of 35000, to their
Garrison of Atherdee. And finding his Majesty, and his Army Encamping in this
place, within six Miles of their Army, and they hearing Lieutenant General
Douglas to be (...) they new (...) Army toward Drogbedah, and by two in the
Afternoon left Atherdee, as they had before Dundalk, without ma^^ng any, or the
least defense. Their ^^ng being, as is reported) told by one esteemed among
them a Cunning-Woman, That if he stayed the next Morning, his Army would be
heaten by King William's Army: And one of their Generals telling them, Their
King's (...) ^er to strengthen himself, to secure the Boyne; a River that
environs almost Forty Miles round.

The 28th, an obscure Irish Man and Woman making Enquiry for the King's
Quarters, were apprehended, and being searched by the private Soldiers, and
finding both to have Poison about them, without further Enquiry, the Soldiers
having half hanged the Woman, she confessed a French Captain gave them both the
Poison, and advised them to poison the Springs near the King, or where those
about him use to Drink: This Confession and the Poison found upon them, caused
the Rabble, without further proof, to hang both outright.

The same Morning the King went to view Atherdee, which as Dundalk, is left
standing, but the Buildings all wasted, and left without an Inhabitant.

The 29th of June, at Two in the Morning, the King decamped, and marched toward
Drohedagh unto Atherdee.

The 30th the King by break of day decampt, and encamped that day on the
North-side of the Boyne, right against the Enemy, and within reach of their
Cannon, which had like to have been of fatal Consequence, his Majesty being
struck with one of the Balls upon his right Shoulder, which carried away Coat,
Wastcoat, Shirt, and razed the Skin; notwithstanding which, the King continued
on Horsback until Dinner, and after some Application made, mounted again until
night.

Tuesday, July the first, the Army being drawn up at their several Posts, Count
(...) Pass, when Eight Squardrons of Horse defended it, but he soon beat them
off, passed the For^, and draw up his men on the other side.

After which, with a little loss all the Passes were gained, and our Army got
on the other side, engaged with the Enemy, whose Foot made no great Defense:
the Horse did well, and made a good Retreat, being carried of by Count Ca^zun.
In Conclusion, the King Routed them from Hill to Hill for seven Miles round,
and having obtained an entire Victory, slept that night in the Princes Coach. I
shall not trouble you with Particulars of this great Action, for that you have
it by Express; only must tell you, we have lost the never to be forgotten
General, his Grace the Duke of Schonbergh, and Mr. Walker late Governor of
Londonderry, both shot in gaining a Pass by Noon.

Wednesday July the 2d, the King and all the Army blessed God for their
Victory; and his Majesty sent Summons (...) Dr^^^edagh, which on Thursday the
3d. surrendered upon Discretion. In were two Regiments, and vast Stores.

The same day the Duke of (...) entered the City of Dublin with six hundred
Horse, and a Body of Foot, where he was joyfully received, and is made
Governor.

On Friday the 4th the King marched for Dublin, and Encampt in the Park, two
miles short thereof, where his Majesty's Tent is set up, etc.

On Saturday his Majesty entered the City, and was received with all possible
Demonstrations of Joy from a delivered People. His Majesty caused all Persons
to be set at Liberty, and other Matters, and returned to the Camp that Night.
And as a Person of Quality says, who was in Dublin on Saturday at Three a
Clock, the King did intend on Sunday to heat a Sermon preached in Dublin, and
to Dine in the City, of which our next Letters will give a particular Account.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A True Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French, upon the
English Prisoners of War. Being a Journal of their Travels from Dinan in
Britany, to Thoulon in Province: And back again. With a Description of the
Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and their
Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the Number of the Men that died
under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the places of their
Deaths and Burials: With an Account of the great Charity and Sufferings of the
poor Protestants of France: And other Material Things that bap^ed on the Way.
Faithfully and Impartially performed by Richard Strutton, being an Eyewitness,
and a Fellow Sufferer.

Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Baily.

London: Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey. 1690.


