A JOURNAL Of what has past in the North of IRELAND, Since the Landing of the
Duke of SCHOMBERG, to the Surrender of Carrick-Fergus; together with the Rates
set upon all Provisions that are brought to the Market Town, or to the Camp. In
a Letter from one that was an Eyewitness to all those Matters.
Licensed,

J. F.
1689.


SIR,
THE General having caused a Post Office for to be Erected at Donohodee for
sending Letters to England, by way of Port-Patrick in Scotland, this comes that
way, and is to disscharge my promise (the first Oppertunity certain that I
had,) to you of what has occurred since our Arrival.

The Garrison of Carrickfergus, no sooner saw our Fleet, but they Burnt all
their Subburbs: Seized all the Protestants in the place. Made fast their Gates,
and put themselves in a posture of Defense.

About Three in the Afternoon, Tuesday, August 13th. the General with that part
of the Fleet that was with him put into Bangor, on the other side of the Lough,
over against Carrickfergus; and that Afternoon Landed all the Soldiers, and
forthwith sent Parties to Killaleigh, Hilsborough, Lissnegarvey and Bellfast,
in which places they found not one Papist to resist them, but all biding them
Welcome with such Presents of Food as the Ravenous Papists had left them. And
this Night the General with the rest, Encamped near Bangor. Wednesday 14th.
Early in the Morning, his Grace Decamped to Bellfast, and Encamped there until
the remainder of the Fleet came to him, which was not until the 19th. And then
they Landed their Men at Bellfast, where having Refreshed themselves, on the
21st. they Marched toward Carrickfergus, Eight Miles; the General at the same
time ordering the Men of War, which were Seven or Eight to draw up before the
Town, and as soon as they saw the Army by Land come before it, to Play on it
with their Cannon.

Accordingly about Six in the Afternoon they began, and continued Fireing until
the Army had raised their Batteries, one upon the East, and another on the
North side of the Town, where was a vast Number of Horses, and other Cattle,
all which fell into the Soldiers hands as an Encouragement to go further. Capt.
George of the Lord Lissburns Regiment with great Courage and Bravery, fetched
off a very Great Booty of Horses and other Cattle, out of an Orchard under the
very Walls. Indeed such was the (...) and Courage of all, that those were (...)
were first Admitted to places (...).

The Batteries being Finished, the Cannon and Morters began to Play that Night,
and continued Playing until next Morning viz. Thursday 22.

When the General for want of a Trumpet, sent Early in the Morning a Drum into
the Town, to Demand a Surrender upon Disscretion, which they Refused to do
otherwise then with Bag and Baggage, Musquer and Sword, Drums Beating, Trumpets
Sounding and Colors Flying, and a Convoy to Conduct them safe to their own
Party.

To which the General returning no Answer; About Eight in the Morning, they
sent out an Officer to desire his Graces Resolutions, to those their Peremptory
Demands. To which his Grace Answered.

THat he came hither in the Names, and by Order of their Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary, to Restore the Subjects and Laws of this Their Kingdom
of Ireland, (which had been long Abused and Corrupted,) to their due State and
Current. And that pursuant to Their said Majesty's Natural Inclinations and
Desire, to Avoid as much as possible Effusion of Christian Blood. He, as Their
Majesty's General should do all that in him lay for performance thereof: And in
Order thereunto Assured them, if they would Surrender without further Trouble,
and Swear Feality to Their said Majesty's, deliver up their Arms and
Serviceable Horses, and what Else they had Taken from the Protestants; they
should not only have their Lives and Liberties, but Equal Protection to Each of
Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects; But if they then Refused to Accept those
Gracious Offers, he had Aquitted himself of the Blood should be Spilt, could
not afterward Grant them the like Terms, but would Endeavor to Reduce them by
Force of Arms. And accordingly they Refused these Terms; the General Ordered
the Cannon, Bombs and small Shot forthwith to play again upon them, which they
did without Intermission.

The Parley aforementioned, was no sooner over, but there came into the Camp
500 Horse from Enniskilling, some without Boots and Pistols, others with
Pistols but without Carabines, some with one Pistol and a Carabine without a
Sword, others without all, with only a Fowling Piece or Fire-lock, most of
their Horses small and poor, yet such have been the Courage and Actions of
these Men as is scarce Credible, especially (of which you have heard e're this)
the Routing 3000 under Maccarty, Taking him Prisoner, and Killing double their
ow Number: These brave Men the General made Welcome, and will soon be better
Armed and Accoutred.

In the Evening I Marched into the Camp; and through the Whole, and found the
Lord Lissburns, and a French Regiment Marching with Faggots, Shovels,
Pick-Ax's, and such other Implements, besides their Arms, to Relieve Two other
Regiments in the Trenches. The General himself until Twelve at Night, was
Marching up and down in Person, giving Necessary Orders, and going even to the
Batteries, and no more Concerned at the Enemies Bullets Humming and Whizing
about his Ears, then if it had been Music of Peace.

I saw my self several of the Enemies Bullets fall close by him, and went even
into the Trenches.

I staid in the Camp all Night, to please my Eyes and Ears with the Sight and
Noise of our Bombs, Cannon, and small Shot, which continually played on the
Town, like incessant Showers of Hail, with which they beat down the Gate on the
North side of the Town, and great part of the Wall adjoining, and much of the
Halfmoon by the Castle, and as a Drummer, and others, who stole out, said
killed their principal Gunner, by dismounting a piece of Cannon upon him, while
he was levelling at our Battery on the Half Moon, and about a Hundred others;
much damnifying the Houses.

About 5 next Morning ( Aug. 23.) I returned to Bellfast, and find that a
Protestant may already safely, and without any Danger, march throughout the
whole Province of Vlster, which is one fourth part of the Kingdom, with only a
Stick in his hand, not a Papist being any where to be found in it, except about
2000, who are fled to the Red Glin, between the Mountains, about Twenty miles
Northward of this place, for fear of being dispoild by the Protestants (who
they have so served already:) They have few or nor Arms, except half Pikes and
Skeanes, with which they hoped to secure themselves from the Violence of the
Country people, until they can procure pardon and protection; which I am told
the Gederal is about ordering for them.

To our great Surprise, and no less Joy, we found the whole Country full of
Corn, and all manner of Provision, whose plenty you may guess at by the
following Table of Rates set up at the Market-Cross of this place, and the
which is so satisfactory that while I was Transcribing it I hard the Sellor
say, it was enough in all conscience, and almost double what they got before
our Landing. Vera Capie follows

Rates fet upon Goods and Victuals to be sold in the Camp, before
Carrickfergus; and all other places hereabouts.

l. s. p. q. Wheat, the Barrel, cantaining 32. Winchester pecks, or two
Winchester Barrels. 0 13 00 Malt, the Barrel, containing 44 Winchest. pecks,
or 2 Barrels and a half. 0 15 00 Old Oats by their Mault-measure, the Barrel at
0 10 00 New Oats the same Measure, the the Barrel 0 06 00 Oatmeal, the Peck,
containing Sixteen Quarts, 0 01 00 Fresh Butter, 18 Ounces to the Pound, 0 00
02 Salt Butter, 16 Ounces to the pound, 0 00 02 New-milk-Cheese, a pound, 0 00
01 1 Scim'd-milk-Cheesd, a pound, 0 00 01 New-milk, 2 quarts for 0 00 01
Scim'd-milk, or Butter-milk, 4 quarts for 0 00 01 Brandy, a quartern, 0 00 03
Hay, a Hundred weight, 0 00 08 Fresh Beef, a pound, 0 00 00 3 Mutton, a pound,
0 00 01 Geese, a piece, 0 00 08 Hens a piece, 0 00 04 Eggs, 8 for a 0 00 01
White-Bread, 15 Ounces for 0 00 01 Household, or Oat-Bread; 20 Ounc. 0 00 01
Aquavita, a quartern, 0 00 02

To which all Persons are hereby required to Conform at their Perril; and if
any conceal their said Goods, and keep them from the Market, in expectation of
greater Rates, the same shall be seized.

We have no certain Account of the Enemies Army; but it is confidently
reported, they are now at Lurgan Race, and have made from thence and the Neury
some Scouts as (...) as within Six Miles of Dromoore, and are about 30000
strong; but so cowardly, that they dare not approach further this way: But it is
believed upon our Approach will Retreat, and Retreat, till they have no more
Room left for it. The Country, all hereabouts, offer their Service, as one man,
to the General, to go against the Enemy; but as yet, but here and there a man
has been accepted.

The 23 d. in the Afternoon, the Garrison sent out an Officer, with Offers to
Surrender, upon the Terms formerly offered them: But the General refused so to
do, or otherwise than upon Discretion; and that unless they sent out all the
Protestants safe and well he would put every Papist to the Sword he should
take. This they also rejected; and the Cannon and Bombs have played all last
Night, and this Morning; as I was writing hereof, I saw the Town on Fire: So
that by the next you may her of its Surrender, unless it comes to you sooner by
Sea. I am Yours.

POSTSCRIPT.
JUST now comes Advice the greatest part of the Town is burnt, and have beat a
Parley Three times, but the General will not hear until they send safe all the
Protestants out.

Mr. Paterson, Surgeon to the Ld. Lissburnes Regiment, was last Night killed
in the Trenches.

Belfast, August, 25th. 1689.
LONDON, Printed for E. Goldin in the Strand, 1689.


