SOME OBSERVATIONS Upon the LIFE of Reginaldus Polus Cardinal OF THE Royal
Blood of England.

Sent in a Packet out of Wales, By G. L. Gentleman, And Servant to the late
MAJESTY of Henrietta Maria of Bourbon, Mother to the present KING.

-- Majora canamus: Non omneis arbusta juvant humilesque Myricoe.

Virg. Ecl. 4. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn,
1686.

EPISTLE To his Worthy Friend Mr. THEOPHILUS EVANS.
THe different aspect of Countries, wheresoever I traveled, was still
grateful; and Nature, in her various forms and dresses, like so many
diversyfied scenes and representations, always pleased me; but never more, me
thinks, than here in Wales: Where in a lofty and stately Situation, having the
Ocean on one side, and the flat Campaign on the other, she seems, as it were,
delighted in her self, and to look about her with a sort of comely Majesty. The
rich and fortile Vales, (as they call them) with their misty exhalations, foggy
vapors and fat offerings, had formerly, instead of feasting me, only stupifyed
with a lethargique dullness, my wit and senses. Which here with the pure and
subtle air of a supremour Region are reinvigorated: and entertained with so
many various Objects of profitable use and meditation, that I cannot well
express them. The low, flat, pastoral Country, which I lately left, seems now
to my imagination like some calm, dead water; than which, nothing is more
odious or tiresome to an active sturdy Vessel: which ever best appears in a
proud, imperious and tempestuous Sea. Which kind of pompous and majestic
aspect, I, methinks, at this present enjoy among these lofty Mountains; Not to
be considered without some excellent remarks. For the strange precipitation of
waters, in vast currents, from such places not over-topt by others, is to be
admired as scarcely comprehensible. So that the artificial cascades of Ruelle
and Versailles are but faint shows and shadows compared to these impetuous and
natural Cataracts. Besides, their excessive latitude confutes and destroys the
earths Eternity, asserted by the perversity of some Philosophers. Which
otherwise at this time could not appear in so unlevel'd a posture, though the
substance of these Mountains had been adamantine.

Sir, I was delighted, with a kind of ravishment, in the midst of such pleasant
thoughts, which your last Letter, on a sudden, has utterly dispersed, and left
me in a mourning solitude. For, the good old Knight you say, is irrefragable,
and earnestly insists upon some speedy Accomplishment of what I once promised
concerning Reginaldus Polus. To whom, I hear, he has some remote Relation, by
reason of the Princely Blood of Wales being commixt with that of the Royal Line
in him. It Is strange, a person so generous, so remiss, so indulgent amongst his
Tenants, should be so severe and rigorous to me; and that no confession of a
debt should avail without immediate payment: Especially where he knows such
occurring difficulties, which by such weak undertakers as my self, cannot be
overcome. He thinks it, perchance, a prone and easy matter, with advantageous
language, to reduce this noble Of spring of the Royal Family into favor again
among his Compatriots; not considering the present posture of the times, where
the hearts and minds of people are in that high, violent and malignant
fermenmentation, which no rational, persuasive Discourse can mitigate or reduce
to any moderation: Where the ingenuous, candid, Loyal Protestant passes for a
manifest Papist; though the Religion of the latter, (wherein their forefathers
were regenerated) be now more odious among them, than the Saracenical, or any
sort of Paganism. So that an Essay herein, is not, as he esteems it, alike as
to commend the Athenian Socrates at Athens, among persons thus formerly seduced
with false principles, false histories, false doctrines, and still infested
with the same prejudice and passions from thence resulting: but rather almost
of the same nature with the undertaking, to have plausibly commended the Major
African Scipio in the old Carthage, or Hannibal at Rome. However, you tell me,
that he says for my comfort, if I write ill, I shall be in the Mode and
Fashion; if Well, it will be Recommendable: And how noble the attempt alone
will be to restore the memory of this Person, who was the honor of our Nation,
and the Age wherein he lived; when Tully so glorifies himself in recovering the
very Tomb stone only of the great Archimedes. All this only tends to the same
purpose, of leaving no escape or subterfuge, but forcing me to write some
rhapsodous Discourse: Which is all I can perform, and will never satisfy his
critical Judgment.

Had I any dexterity for this Task, I should need no spur or invitation.

For this Cardinal has been along time the only Object of my Affection and
Admiration. My volatile Fancy, which every where else is quickly tired, can
only here insist, repose and dwell. He is my Socrates, my Aristides, my Eastern
and Western Gregory the great.

But having mentioned the former of these persons, I must add, That he is not
only mine, but the Roman Socrates, and that, in an Age, which the Italians
place in parallel and competition with that of Augustus in point of Wit and
Learning. Those rare examples of a sublime Virtue, and Christian Piety, as
Cardinal Borromeus, and others, which followed after, they confessedly owe to
him, as the Reformator of Religion and the Age.

These considerations, as they incite my Affection, so they deter my Modesty:
Especially when I look upon him, as an Object of such diverse Qualities, and so
various Dimensions, which afford no certain limits of Modification. For
sometimes his Devotion imprisons him like an Hermit in a Cell; sometimes some
other qualities enclose him in the Cabinet-Councils of Princes; at other times
he is at a more large restraint in his Study, like an elegant Writer, subtle
Philosopher, and profound Divine: And sometimes again, I find him so wholly
inconfin'd, and exposed to the Sun and Air, as they call it, that no person was
ever employed in more different Embassies, or of higher Nature, and betwixt the
greatest Princes, that in these many hundred years have appeared on the stage
of humane Affairs. But, methinks, the chief scene of the splendid and glorious
part of His Life, was at the opening the ecumenical Council of Trent: where,
as first Legate, he had a rare occasion to shine, and appear in that ample
Posture, which became his divine Person, his Royal Extraction and his admirable
Elocution. Where I shall at this time abruptly leave him, in compliance of our
noble Friends request, to prepare for the next Packet, the Preface to his
Life, as it is in Italian, Latin, and now very common in French.

PREFACE.
THE real passages of this piece are various, like those of a well-contiv'd
Poem, intermixed with surprising accidents, sometimes pleasant, sometimes
horrid, and at last ending in a strange catastrophe. Than which, as the
Critiques say, nothing can be more agreeable to an inconcerned Reader. Of which
condition, I presume most are in this distance of time. The Author is one
Ludovico Beccatelli an Italian, sometimes domestique of this great person, and
afterward advanced to the Archbishopric of Rhaguse for his rare piety and
learning. Which latter partly appears in the artifice of this writing, wherein
he has used a native, graceful and perspicuous eloquence, becoming the learned
age and place wherein he lived. From which our times, with their studied
follies and affectations, have much degenerated. There is not seen the least
mention of him among our Writers, in recognisance of this great benefit, and
our national obligation. However, as it happens in those virtues which reward
themselves, in the choice excellency of his Subject he has not only given, but
received also a never dying memory. I am sorry, I can say nothing else, save
only that I find every where honorable mention of him among the foreign
writers. We owe entirely to him, what we have of the precious remains of this
person: his very ashes as I think, in the foul sacrilege committed in our times
at Canterbury, being sacrificed to the winds. For our late brethren spared
neither King nor Priest in the fury of their zealous preaching and proceeding.
Though this age, like some others, be pestered with swarms of writers, yet it is
prudently observed by my Lord Bacon and others, that there have been ever too
few of this nature. Which whether it happen out of the scarcety of subjects, or
difficulty to express them, I cannot tell. But it is certain, there is nothing
more properly conducing to human happiness. The way to which, though this
preaching age may perchance deny it, being neither so certain or compendious by
precepts, as great examples in this kind, which not only instruct, but also
animate us at the same time. But where to find them, and after to illustrate
them is a tasque of much difficulty. Which I perceive in the case of our noble
Author, who though he brought an eloquence proportionat to the singular
affection, he had for his subject: Yet I find him succumbent, and, as it were,
oppressed with the weight of it. The divine pencil of Plato has set forth
Socrates with what exquisitnes, art or wit could contribut: Yet we imagine
something much above what we read of him. So our fancy must assist us in
forming the idea of this great Cardinal, who crowned all those admired virtues
of the other with a supreme and Christian perfection. In expressing shapes of
singular beauty, and of some luminous objects, the art is often more deficient
then the painter, too much light, which will not be confined, causing in him an
obscure confusion: which happens in the same fashion to a writer from the
resulting splendour of an eminent worth and virtue: which if ever appeared in a
corporeal shape, as the ancients discourse, certainly it was in the rare person
of this Cardinal. As we may see by the powerful attraction and strange effects
of those divine rays which enlightened him; and not only surpised such persons
who approacht him, but drew others out of remote parts into Italy. Where they
were not only captivated, but detained in a manner, I think, unknown to all
antiquity. But, what seems incredible, Italians of noblest quality left their
own Country, rich relations and all temporal respects to come into a northern
climat, where they were sure to be encumbered with various infirmities and
troubles, besides the disaffection and hatred of the people. But all this was
more than recompenst in the constant fruition of his charming aspect, discourse
and company: whom I percieve they would have followed to the very Antipodes, or
where ever he should be: For among the sect (as I may call them) of his friends
and followers I find those most troubled, who survived him. As they found the
first and choicest fruit of life in the enjoyment of him; so death it self
could present nothing so dark or terrible as a separation and deprivance of
him. And yet most of these persons were neither of pedantique or monastique
humor, but of noble extraction and education, and of that Country, whose
greatest stain is, to breed up minds too much addicted to temporal respects and
interest. But to consider what qualities wrought these wonders, let us in short
survay him, and first externally, observing his extraction from the Houses of
York and Lancaster, which produced the comliest and the greatest Princes of
those times. Which rare advantage he made use of in the cultivating his mind,
as other Princes in neglecting this principal part in them, through the false
doctrine and insinuation of flatterers. From the practices of which sort of
domestique cattle, that he might be entirely freed, he early past the Seas,
submitting himself to the institution of the best Masters of Italy. Under whom
though his natural wit was much admired; yet it was always surpast by his
singular industry; so that his progress in learning was stupendous. But that
which most surpised the judicious, was to see a person of so high blood, in
the heat of youth and at his own disposal, which all seems invitations to
corruption, to keep himself pure, chaste, and unstained from all vice, and
besides exempted from all those disordinate affections and passions which so
incommodate our human natures. Which effects though some may enviously impute
to a stupid heavines of disposition: yet this can have no place here in a
person of a sanguine complexion, vigorous health, and such a singular vivacity
of wit and spirit. They are rather to be ascribed to the free election of his
noble mind, and the known domestique valor of his family, which he a person of
the long robe showed in this trampling all vices and passions under foot; and
so according to the rule of nature and religion keeping original slaves in a
continual vassalage. The ancients observed two sort of virtues, wherein we
chiefly approach our celestial origin; the one contemplative in matters most
worthy of human knowledge; the other consisting in actions chiefly conducing to
the general good. In Polus we find a rare commixture in this kind, and all the
moments of his life thus happily divided. As if from his infancy he had
proposed this the universal scope of his intentions, in which consists the
Soverain perfection: to which so few in all Ages have arrived. For as the
finest earth cultivated with skilful hands and choicest seeds, scarce ever
produces fruits without some intermingled weeds: So the singular excellency of
nature and education seldom exempts us from all sorts of imperfections. Yet no
defect has hitherto bin observed in the life or actions of this Cardinal,
exposed in so much light to the curious inquisition of so many nations: which
advantage we owe to his exile and memorable proscription. The confines of our
Island were too narrow a space for so sublime and boundles a virtue. So that
fortune herein seemed to prepare him the noblest Theater of the Universe, for
his rare eloquence, erudition, and other eminent qualities to appear in a fit
luster for the benefit of mankind. Which being composed of several and opposite
tempers, could never from one example draw so various and manifold advantages.
For no excellent qualities though incompatible in themselves found any discord
in him, as magnanimity and humility, fortitude and modesty, frugality and
magnificence; in fine, such a tenor of mind, that it is unknown with what
fortune most suitable. For at all times I remarque in him a constant serenity,
like that of the ethereal region, unaltered with any aspiring vapors of
ambition or dejecting clouds of adversity. When a price was set upon his head,
and the cursed undertakers provided; and the Earth conscious of the future loss
seemed, as it were, to tremble at the horror of the act, he himself rested,
with a stupendous indifferency, wholly inconvern'd. What so honorable, so
glorious a present can Heaven or fortune bestow on us like a Principality,
especialy where the votes and suffrages are free? yet Polus refused this,
profer'd to him by a Senate of Princes, or at least the greatest men that ever
appeared since, in that place. Besides he was at that time in want, in exile,
divested of his total patrimony; and had only received this, as the just and
innocent acquisition of his merit, superior to any of that age, though fertile
in great persons. When I consider the circumstances herein, this seems to me an
act of a nobler temper and elevation of Spirit, then what I have ever read. But
to be short, there is no virtue intellectual, moral or Christian, to which at
his birth he seems not to have had a rare disposition, and in process of time
perfectly habituated. If it be thus, some will ask, why his memory thus long
lies interred with his ashes. I answer, because the popular judgment in England
has bin a long time strangely corrupted by some Demagogues. So that they have
bin very ill esteemers of the worth of great persons* especially those of the
Royal Blood. Which that we may sufficiently demonstrate, let us consider some
occurrents in the late head of his Family, because passages are fresh, and not
yet, as the fashion is, historicaly corrupted. If his royal birth and fortune
had not cast a crown upon him, his rare endowments of mind and body, and
excellent virtues might have challenged it in a popular or aristocratical
election. To which I chiefly attribute his ruin, by the rule of contraries; as
being directly opposite to the hypocritical and vicious manners of the times.
We hear of no Prince persecuted with so violent and obstinate a hatred by his
implacable adversaries. Who in their impious designs could be prevented with
no kind of anticipating oaths; nor represt with any humane, natural or divine
obligations. Nay, but the last preparative of a voluntary perjury invented to
accomplish his destruction, exceeds all imagination. For who could fancy in his
thoughts a sort of creatures visibly stamped with the impression of humane form,
who just before the robbery, should voluntarily enter into a solemn league to
preserve the person, whom they destined to utter ruin; a pactise unheard of
till this latter Age. I speak this because some regarders of events, have
suspected some human deficiency in the King to have exposed him thus to Fortune
and his Enemies which is a manifest error, for he had both the moral and
politic Virtues of an Excellent Prince and that in no mean degree. But how
could he, (conscious of his own worth, and high meriting of the public)
imagine the future Eruption of that Villainy in his days, which never showed it
self in the world before? Some have brought in Religion, as a principle actor
on the scene of these affairs: but the error is easily discoverable, and the
grounds of such discourse will be found fallacious. Unles we mistake a profound
hypocrisy, or a volatile religion, changeable with the humor of fickle times,
for a serious profession of faith. The truth of this assertion, though to some
strange at first, will manifestly appear; if we consider, how the old
Protestant and Roman Catholic were the only Christian Religions, which ever
this Nation publicly embraced. Now in these different professions their late
Majesty's were as sincerely zealous, as in their mutual affections. So that
both parties boast of them as admirable examples in different kinds. Yet it is
not known, which was the greater object of hatred to the same enemies. For
though the Queen escapt the public scaffold, yet perchance 'twas through her
flight and exile. For after declaring her a Traitor, they barbarously sought to
tare her in pieces with their canon at Burlington, without al respect due to
her birth, or very sex. Now in the mentioned case of religion, and not rather
mutual excelency in virtue, these occurrencies could not have hapend, for
otherwise hatred on the one side must with a necessary sub-alternation have
encreast affection on the other. It Is not to be wonderd therefore, if the same
causes have bin prejudicial to the reputation due to the memory of this
Reginaldus Polus. Among whose other virtues a clear, constant sincerity of mind
was the least observable, because this, with many other excelent qualities, was
formerly habitual to the nation. Nature was observed to imprint an ingenuous
candor in our looks, uniform to that of our hearts.

At the first appearance of the English beyond the Alps, the Italians derived
the name Angli from their angelical aspects. To which, the frank sincere
integrity of their minds was correspondent. Hence proceeded that mutual love
and generous hospitality unknown to other nations. So that whoever informed
with this notion had arrived among us in the late times, would certainly have
thought our island had bin absorpt (as it is said of one of the Cyclades) and a
new England started up in the room. For insted of Monarchy, he would have
found a wild anarchie spiritual and temporal, the preachers being scarce
distinguished by sexes; insted of sincerity, perfidiousnes; of hospitality,
treachery; of faith, perjury: insted of religion, a sacrilegious superstition;
and insted of those abovementioned looks, a cloudy forehead, distorted eyes,
with a worse distorted heart, from all the courses of equity, justice, and
honor. We owe the original cause of these changes to hypocrisy, transplanted
hither from foreign parts, where I am sorry the soil has proved so fertile. For
nothing sooner induces, as we have seen by the sudden improvement, atheistical
impiety. This was the secret engine, by which at first the ruin of the best of
Princes was procured, and then his murder; and afterward a Hydra set up in his
place, and at last a Barabbas to show and make manifest in all fashions, that
the true Anointed, and a Man according to God's heart, could not be according
to the hearts of these people. Al these vile, wicked, and cursed practices were
followed with such a confirmed, public and obstinat impenitence, that it
raises at present horror and amazement, not only in all sober Christians, but
al others, who have not clearly divested themselves of their humanity.

The English nature and disposition in it self certainly excels that of most
nations, as being capable of al sciences, and more easily applicable to that
sort of virtue and piety, wherein others find much reluctance. But there is no
temper, which by false opinions, especialy in religion (which swarmd here in
the royal absence) by education and discipline will not be corrupted. Hence it
is that the noble actions and monuments of magnificent Founders and Benefactors
have not only bin defaced, but defamed among us by an ungrateful posterity.
Which has bin alike injurious to the most illustrious eminence of this
Riginaldus Polus, but with less effect, his reputation soaring in another
region, above the reach of their Malice. For our suburbian Chronicles allow him
no other attribute, than that of a barbarian, a monster, and idolater. Sure
it is with the public damage of the Country, that such mechanique spirits
should be thus the judges and disposers of the price of merit in noble men. But
since the disorder is such, and they have acquired general reputation among no
vulgar persons, I cannot pass them over with that scornful neglect, which they
deserve, without some prejudice to that of the royal family, and the general
honor of our Country concerned herein. In opposition therefore to their abuses,
out of many, I shall produce some few testimonies; which I desire may be perused
circumstantialy in the greatness of the persons, and as the effects of no
flatery or interest, being chiefly after death, with such profusion of praises,
from a nation so jealous and cautiously abstemious in this kind to al
strangers, besides himself.

Ex Pauli manutii Epist. a Pium quartum e Medicea familia Principem.
Quae cum per se maxima sunt, and curandis Christianae Reipub. vulneribus
utilissima; tum vero ponderis accedit plurimum ab eximia scriptoris innocentia,
doctrina, dignitate. Quis enim quibus animi bonis, quibus industriae ingeniique
ornamentis abundaverit, qui denique vir, quantusque fuerit Reginaldus Polus,
aut ignorant; aut si quam modo tantarum laudum partem habet cognitam, non earum
memoria, and desiderio vehementer commovetur. Potestne quisquam tam inops a
judicio, tam aversus ab humanitate, tam plane ferus esse ac ferreus, qui non
intimis eum sensibus dilexerit. Cujus non modo in studiis, in moribus, in
sermonibus, sed in ipso plane aspectu omnis probitas, omnis luceret bumanitas.
De religione vero, deque Christiani hominis officio quid senserit, and
judicarit, non aut in uno alterove libro ita ostendit, ut in aliis unquam
dissenserit: aut ita scripsit, ut aliter viveret, aut ita vixit, ut interdum
sibi non constaret. Sed omnia literis ab illo prodita, sine ulla exceptione
semper laudarunt, hodieque laudant boni, and sapientes viri; quorum directa ad
verit atem ipsam, id est, ad unam Dei gloriam sententia nec obtrectandi studio,
aut invidia flectitur, nec malevolentia, aut ambitione mutatur. Vitae vero
totius instituta, and excellentem in omni action, omnique fortuna pietatem,
utinam quam facile noverunt, tam libenter imitarentur multi. Opes, honores,
clientelas, Regum maximorum gratiam and benevolentiam qui assequuntur, proxime
ad felicitatem putantur accedere. At ille haec omnia apud Henricum Britaniae
Regem, and jure propinquitatis, and multo etiam magis sua virtute cum
possideret, ultro contempsit, ne turpissimas Regis actiones, and adversantem
Christi Vicario sententiam probare, aut etiam adjuvare cogeretur. Patavii diu
vixit, quanquam erat habitu naturae prope divino, liberalibus tamen disciplinis
vehementer deditus: Et cum eloquentiae atque philosophiae pari studio
flagraverit, in utra tamen magis enituerit, non facile est existimare. Illud
certe constat, qui vel meliora, vel ornatiora scriberet, hac hominum memoria
extitisse neminem. Quanquam id ei propositum fuit, eo direxit cogitationes
omnes, atque curas, ut philosophiae scientiam non tam scriptis, quam vita
ostenderet. Itaque major atque excelsior Patavii in tenui and humili fortuna
fuit, quam cum in regno omnibus copiis, and ipsius maxim regis gratia
floreret. Hic nimirum verus est, ac praestantissimus optimorum studiorum
fructus, si qui a seipso pendeat, si temporum vicissitudines non extimescat, si
adversus hominum iniquitates, fortunaeque injurias ratione and vertute pugnet.
Quam in Polo constantiam and sapientiam fuisse quis ignorant? Metuendae erant a
rege potentissimo insidiae, metuenda vis propterea quod, suscepta Ecclesiae
causa, luculento illo de Pontificis autoritate libro, susceptum simul a se
gravissimum ejus odium intelligebat. Deserebatur etiam quotidie magis a re
domestica. Nemo tamen eum dejecto, aut demisso sensit esse animo, nemo unquam
vidit tristiori vultu in sermonibus, in consuetudine, in convictu: in tota
denique vitae ratione tranquillitatem mentis, quam habuerat antea, perpetuo
retinuit. Nec defuere, quae nunquam speraverat, ac ne cogitaverat quidem,
tantis debita virtutibus praemia. Nam cum ita viveret, ut in uno Deo omnia
poneret, caetera quae mortales admirantur, infirma, caduca, inania duceret:
cumque in illa Patavini gymnasii celebritate domesticis otii sui fimibus
contentus, paucorum admodum consuetudine uteretur: brevi tamen (ut sibi viam
facile virtus aperit) ita manavit fama de admirabili ejus prudentia,
temperantia, doctrina; ut ad aures Pauli tertii Pont. max. pervenerit. Qui cum
ea esset mente praeditus, ut nemo unquam magis de ornanda egregiis Cardinalibus
Ecclesia cogitaverit, and eo judicio, ut nemo in delectu erraverit minus:
commotus multorum indubio sermon, Reginaldum Polum, disciplinae Christianae
renovandae caussa, cum praestantibus aliquot viris ad Urbem accivit: eumque
Paulo post non petentem, non optantem, prope etiam recusantem Cardinalem
creavit. In hac dignitate, cum alios antea, tum seipsum vicit omni genere
laudis. Omitto fingularem illam, cui par oration reperiri milla potest, in caede
matris acerhissima fortitudinem atque constantiam. Unicum illi contraommes
injurias, omnesque calamitates conscientia praesidium fuit; and in aduersis
rebus jam antea didicerat esse fortis. Gravitatem eximiam, pari comitate
conditam, mansuetudinem prudentiam, benignitatem in sublevanda miserorum inopia
non attingo; communia sint haec, in quibus tamen principua quadam land Polus
txcelluit. Venio ad id quod a Cardinalis persona postulatur. Nam ubi primum
sacerdotio est ornatus amplissimo, non ille mentem, ut multi, cum fortuna
mutavit: non sericam vestem, non argenteam supellectilem, non deuique illustrem
aliquam, aut optimam provinciae praefecturam appetivit. Sed contempta prorsus
rerum hnmanarum specie, divina studia, quae antea non leviter attigerat, toto
pectore complexus, de tuenda Pontificii juris majestate, de augenda inter
homines Dei gloria, de illustranda veritate dies noctesque cogitare coepit.
Quantum in ea philosophia, quae a sensibus ducitur, erroris insit, atque
obscuritatis, cum antea non ignorasset, tum vero totus ad came philosophiam
traductus, quae caelestium bonorum cognitionem parit, clarissime perspexit. I
am illam, quae colligitur ex rhetorum praeceptis, eloquentiam, in qua praeter
coeteros floruerat, neglexit penitus, inanem duxit, cum librorum voces, non
durium voluptati servientes, sed ad intimas animorum parts incredibili quadam
suavitate penetrantes, exaudivit attentus. Nec vero quidquam habuit antiquius,
quam ut a sanctissimis Ecclesiae legibus discedentes, quoquomodo ad sanitatem
redirent: cum ipse multos cohortatione sua, consilio, doctrina, nonnullos etiam
lenitate quadam ad meliora cons^ia converteret. Incidit tempus, cum de
sufficiendo post obitum Pauli tertii Pontificis successore Cardinalibus
deliberatio esset: affuit Polus ita sedato animo, ita cupiditatis and
ambitionis expers, ut majore Collegii part Pontificatum ad eum de ferente, non
statim assenserit, differendamque rem tantam in posterum diem censuerit: fore
enim; si probaret Deus, eundem post aliqot horas Cardinalium consensum: sin
minus, omnino sibi quod Deo displiceret, placere nihil posse. Scripsit etiam in
eo Conclavi praeclara quaedam de officio Pontificis: quae cum aliis ejus
libris, quos Joannes Moronus Cardinalis ob summa erga sedem Apostolieam merita,
perpetuamque vitae innocentiam clarissimus, accurate servavit, propediem in
lucem proferentur. Quibus in libris, cum spirare adhuc men's illa divini hominis
and vigere videatur, afficimur non tam praeceptis atque docrina, quam
recordatione tautarum virtutum, quas in illo vidimus.


Ex Jacobi Sadoleti Cardinalis, Epist. 10. lib. 5.
DE consuetudine and convictu Poli nostri tantum te capere voluptatis, quantum
scribis and minime miror, and tuum de illo judicium vehementissime probo. Quid
enim esse potest homine illo humanius, cruditius, sanctius? Eum ego cum hac
iter haberet, paucis illis horis vix degustare quidem potui: sed tantas tamen
in illo omnium ornamentorum divitias tum mihi persplexsse visus sum, ut postea
illum non amore modo, sed insigni quadam observantia semper sim prosecutus. Nam
cum illa mihi amabilia in eo sunt cognita, ingenium probitas, literae, in
quibus ille non mediocriter excellit, tum id praeterea admiratione summa dignum
(quod ego primum statuo omnium) quod cum tanta generis amplitudine and
nobilitate tanta naturae bonitas atque humanitas juncta sit. Itaque quanti
fieri a me putas, quod a te scriptum est, nomen saepe meum versari in
sermonibus vestris? Ego vero vobiscum, o amicissimi homines, and animo semper
and cupiditate illa sum, ut si detur facultas, vobiscum vivere potissimum
velim. Etenim si essemus una, Deus immortalis, quantas and quam varias
caperemus suavitates? quae studiorum cunjunctio? quae communicacio voluntatum?
qui denique ardor existeret animorum? ut ad illa praeclara atque sancta
philosophiae adyta copulati introiremus.


Ex ejusdem. Epist. 13. lib. 5.
POlus ad me scribit uberrimis elegantissimisque literis, multa illa quidem
digna illo ingenio and sanctissimis ipsius moribus, sed plurimum and praecipue
de te, quem ipse admodum cuperet ad Theologiae studia jam aliquando animum
adijcere.


Ex ejusdem. Epist. 20. lib. 12.
QUanquam quod ad suavitatem amicitiae and familiaritatis attinet, multorum
mihi amicorum vicem praestat vir clarissimus Polus, qui apud nos complures jam
est menses: quo homine cave mi Bembe quenquam existimes aut dulciorem in
congressibus, aut fideliorem in consiliis aut sanctiorem in omni part vitae
optimisque moribus existere: praeterea summae ipsum doctrinae, summique
judicii. Sed quid ago? tibine ego eum laudo, qui tibi ipsi melius notus est,
quam mihi? illud affirmare possum, hoc illius sermones mihi etiam gratiores
esse and jucundiores, quod in magna copia and varietate rerum, de quibus
colloquimur, saepe nobis de te in loquendo incidit mentio, in qua diutius
commorari solemus, Priulo praesertim tuo materiam and copiam sermonibus
suppeditante.


Ex Epist. lib. 14.
ADventus huc Poli amplissimi collegae nostri, and magnum mihi dolorem attulit,
ut tu quoque futurum videras, and non minorem etiam voluptatem. Videre enim
hominem amicissimum utrique nostrum, summa ipsum virtute, summa temperantia
modestia, sanctitate vitae praeditum, sane jucundissimum mihi fuit. Eundem
autem videre tot appetitum injuriis, atque alienae impietatis and crudelitatis
scelere, in tantas and tam graves conjectum calamitates, certe non mediocriter
mihi molestum accidit: cum praesertim non amici solum in eo incommoda, sed
Christianae etiam Reipub. vulnera uno and eodemtempore, dolere and miserari
cogerer. Atque ipse quidem, quo animi robore, and qua erga Deum pietate munitus
est, ferebat res adversas fortiter atque constanter. Ego vero qui nequaquam
simili virtute praeditus sum, cum me afflictarem in ejus acerbis casibus, illo
ipso consolatore sublevatus sum, cui me afferre solatium magis oportebat. Atque
is unum diem apud me cum fuisset, ita a me discessit; ut praeter pristinammeam
de illo opinionem no vam etiam admirationem suae spectatissimae virtutis in
animo relinqueret.


Ex ejusdem. Epist. 11. lib. 15.
QUod enim me cum Polo meo, tua opinione sententiaque conjungis, homine summa
eruditione, summa pietate, summa prudentia praedito: optasque denos utriusque
nostrum similes, si fieri possit, existere: quorum fide, vigilantia, consiliis
afflictae Christianae Reip. subveniatur: est quidem hoc and tuae probitatis, ac
religionis maximum argumentum and ejus opinionis, quam de me habes conceptam,
indicium insigne. Veruntamen scito, cum jamdiu sit, quod ego virum illum, and
colo and admiror, nunquam autem me optare esse ausum, ut cum eo compararer:
tantum sat mihi duxisse, si illius modo persequi vestigia, vel procul
observando atque imitando possem. Itaque habeo eum in vita and in disciplina,
and in omnibus forensibus senatoriisque actionibus, ducem ac magistrum: Quem
quod tu quoque tam studiose laudas and probas, perjucundum id mihi est,
propriumque ejusdem praestantis animi tui, de quo jamdudum loquor.


Ex ejusdem. Epist. 9. lib. 16.
QUomodo ergo hoc lues? opinor si and literas mihi miseris, and doctissimorum
hominum contubernalium tuorum Aloysii Priuli, Contarini and Marci Antonii
Flaminii acta aliqua ad me perscribes. Nisi forte omnem tuam mentem,
cogitationemque rerum caeterarum, illa prope immensa suavissimi hujus comitatus
voluptas sic obruit, ut despicere in partem aliam non queas: praesertim, omnium
hominum long and virtute and comitate and prudentia praestantissimo, Polo,
tuos oculos animumque complente: quod si est ita, ignosco tibi equidem, neque
te amplius ullo crimine accers^.


Joannes Casa in vita Petri Bembi Cardinalis.
CUltus est Romae Bembus, cum a bonis plerisque omnibus Contareno, Sadoleto,
Cortesio, Morono Cardinalibus amplssimis, hominibusque eruditissimis: tum vero
praecipue a Reginaldo Polo, homine, Dei immortalis, dubio procul, beneficio, ex
ultima usque Britania ad nos vecto, vel de coelo potius, si modo dictu fas est,
lapso; cujus de laudibus, quamquam de tam praeclara ac divina virtute nemo
satis digne unquam loquetur, alius mihi profecto dicendi locus dabitur. Hoc
certe haud facile in praesentia dijudicare audeam; plus ne eam insulam, multis
vulneribus Christianae reipub. per summam impietatem infligendis, nocuisse
dicam; an quod in illo solo talis tantusque vir ortus and procreatus sit, unde
verae, planeque Christianae pietatis, vitaeque exemplum peteremus; profuisse.
Is igitur cum Bembo familiarissime vixit, etc.


Which Bembus speaks somewhere to him, as I remember, in this manner; Tu vero
long ornatior atque illustrior factus, non Italiam modo, sed Britaniam etiam
tuam, atque ipsum coeli verticem tuarum laudum splendore fac impleas. As if his
eminent virtue, like the surprising light, of some new Comet, without a
parallax, was to shine universaly in all parts, for the benefit of mankind.

SUPPLEMENT.
THE comendations of these great persons, I know, are of little account and
validity in Countries under the domination of Zuingle, Calvin, and Beza. But
al learned and civilized spirits rise up with a kind of reverence at the very
mentioning of Sadoletus, Bembus and Contarinus, etc. Whose Names stand already
consecrated to al posterity in the histories of their times. They lived in a
happy, glorious age, which not only revived, but, I may say, accomplished the
noble arts, and sciences of the ancient Greeks and Romans, which are now
universaly and much degenerated. For in painting we see no pieces like those of
Raphael, Michel Angelo and Titian, or their very Scholars, in the three famous
schools, at the same time of Rome, Florence, and Lombardy. And what is very
remarquable, the Statuarian art appeared in perfection, and was extinguished in
the very same person of the forementioned Buonaroti. Elocution in all her
dresses either Historical, Oratorian or Poetical, scarce ever appeared more
majestique, polite or floride with all her artificial colors, beauties and
graces. The above cited persons Contarinus, Casa, Polus, Sadoletus and Bembus
were very eminent in this princely, commanding faculty, as adapted thereto by
their extraction (which was very noble in all, though only royal in Polus) by
their learned education and natural excelencie of wit. They have left us rare
monuments in all kind of Eloquence, wherein the old Greece and Rome ever boasted;
but have proceeded no further, like over-cautious Pilots not venturing in
unknown Seas. Where however they knew others more rash and les expert would at
the last hazard. For being al Churchmen and honored with Episcopal dignity,
they have left us no rule, art, or method of preaching; nor any example, to
look upon, like a canonical picture of Titian, and trace thereby the futur
model and general lineaments of a regular sermon. Which neglect in these our
Master-guides has bin of great damage and detriment not only to their own age,
but also that of their posterity, leaving us in the dark and ignorance,
nevertheles rashly venturing to put and push forward with hardy boldness, not so
much as like blind men, groping to find out the true way. To illustrate and
give some light to this Parodoxical discourse, let us consider, what the
moderate and judicious Spaniard, Ludovicus Vives says. Than whom, after his
Countriman Quintilian, no one has better censurd the life's, actions, and
writings of men. He was conversant in most Countries, where human literature
florisht, and sometimes in Corpus Christi College in Oxford, and therefore his
censure falls particularly on no place or persons, which was this, in his famous
book de Causis corruptarum artium.

-- Recepta Christiana pietate, passi sunt Principes, quod universis in commune
conduceret, ut Presbyteri ad populum de rebus sacris loquerentur: ita sacri
Concionatores priscis illis Oratoribus successere, sed dissimillimo successu.
Nam quanto illos-superamus rebus, tanto partibus omnibus eloquentiae, tota vi
persuadendi, sententiis, argumentis, dispositione, verbis, genere orationis,
action inferiores sumus. Cujus rei culpa divisa est inter dicentem and
audientem. Olim qui dicebant, erant callentissimi usus and totius prudentiae
communis, and tractandorum animorum peritissimi artifices. Qui nunc dicunt quam
dispares, imperiti, ignari vitae, imo communis sensus: qui sint affectus, aut
quemadmodum vel impellendi vel revocandi omnino nescij. Nec cui rei quae verba,
quod genus orationis sit adhibendum norunt, omnia bent convenire omnibus rati.
Sententias habent plumbeas, frigidas, jacentes, segnes quae animos dejiciant
potius quam excitent: argumentatiunculas colligunt ab illo exercitio
scholastico, quae ventilant quidem, and titillant interdum, nunquam feriunt aut
caedunt. Dispositio fusa and dissipata: nihil dicunt suo loco: actio
immoderata: nihil pro re aut tempore: non in voce, non in oculis and ore, non
in manu and digitis, non in gestu and statu corporis universi: quae illi ita
habent cognita, ut nulla esse arbitrentur, nec interesse saltitent dicentes, an
sedeant. Jam auditores habebant illi olim acutos, attentos plerosque eruditos,
nunc socordes, segnes, peregrinantes, animo rudes atque imperitos, etc.

Italy at this time florisht in eloquence and polite learning, more than at
present; and as for our Cisalpine Countries, I leave them to the pleadings of
no mean advocates Sir Thomas More, Erasmus and Budaeus, etc. As for the first
of his animadversions, touching the excessive disparity betwixt our Preachers
and the ancient Orators, whom they succeed: I think there is no disagreement
amongst the Learned. Nor how far we excede them in the noblenes, variety and
amplitude of subjects; which the Mysteries of our religion in a copious manner
afford us. Yet all this has produced no considerable effect, nor any thing to be
put in parallel with those precious relics of Antiquity; richly embellishing
with a pleasant variety, for the most part trivial, temporal and profane
subjects. In our French travels, you remember, the common Sermons much deceived
our expectation, with their long repetitions, tedious circumlocutions and
ayerie expressions, under which there was no solid sense or fundation of matter
methodicaly disposed, wherein the ancients were admirable; which defect made the
words (as it usualy hapens) fly and flutter about our ears, with a great deal
of insignificancie. Which however are poured forth with a confident readiness
and a great volubilitie, the Preacher never otherwise appearing armed and
provided, than with his hankerchief, insted of prompting papers, so contrary to
the custom of the English, who are nothing inferior in wit, and of a better
memory. At our return home, having seen King Charles the first in his writings
often complaining and ascribing his ruin to the Pulpit; we presumptuously
thought to have retriv'd the ancient Eloquence rising amongst us there again,
in a formidable Majesty. For the admirable effects of this renoun'd faculty
being known to be good and bad: we have here seen the latter, higher and of a
more cursed nature, than what Antiquity can show. For where shall we find among
them, so great and virtuous a Prince soberly murdered with cold hands in
Public, so incomparable a Queen and numerous issue either miserably wandering,
banished or imprisoned; in fine, the Religion and State wholly subverted by the
voluntary swearers to defend both. Now, to this vast demolishment and downfall
of three Kingdoms, if you imagine in fancy to find proportionated Enginers,
you will be much deceived. For Hugh Peter's, the chief Architect among them, had
in his looks, behavior and discourse more the fashion of a Buffoon, then the
face, habit and authority of one of the ancient Orators. As for the rest of his
Brethren, we will pass them over in silence, as being his inferiors, and for
our own credit sake; that the nature and paultry condition of our Antagonists
may the better remayn indiscover'd It Is strange to think, how a noble Kingdom,
acquired by the invincible hands of so great a Conqueror, should in process of
time fall thus by the wretched tongues of so vile, mercenary and ignominious
Gowmnen. There was nothing more foolish or frivolous, (setting aside the
Treason) in form and matter than their disconcerted Sermons: nor indeed more
ridiculous, unless it was the action and pronuntiation, which was with an
odious noise and utterance through the nose, yet appearing very musical and
grateful to their most attentive and pressing Congregations. Their general
custom was, to pick out of the Scripture some obscure Text, which they mangled,
insted of dividing, into fragments, and certain diminutive particles, which
were converted at last into so many positive points, strangely pricking and
tickling the currupted fancies of their Audience. In whose opinion and
judgment, they would often destroy al Prelacie and Popery in the same breath.
Which, by virtue of former Scriblers in this kind, was as easily done; as the
body of their Sermons composed out of Common places and Concordances. Their
Epilog and terrible Peroration was usualy included within the seven hills of
Rome there furiously baiting the horned beast, and Antichrist. Which however
many times were their best friends and assistants, at a dead halt and stand;
when al their Hebrew, Grec and Latin; and their last uses, doctrines and
applications failed them. Which sort of sorry shifts and poor inventions, to
waste time, are only the lazy customs of these latter days, unpracticed by the
Ancients. Whom we cannot sufficiently admire, with their artificial methods;
sometimes analytique, sometimes of an opposite nature, and sometimes mixed; yet
ever producing admirable effects: Which subtle ways were very well known and
practiced by my Lord Bacon, and are the hidden reason why so may of his
discourses instruct, improve and please the readers in general, like a
legitimate piece of Architecture very often surprising, incomprehending, and
ignorant fancies, which can give no reason of their ocular delight and
satisfaction. Some of these discourses therefore have past the Alps, and found
approbation in an Italian dress, from the exquisit judgments of that Country.
Whereas it is best for most Sermons to rest satisfied with the applause of their
first Audience; whether it be in City, Court or Country. The open light and air
are very improper and hazardous for them, as being usualy Creatures of a week
fabrique and constitution: something not unlike in nature to the fading
compositions in Music of our days, which scarce ever survive the Author, and
so disorderly thrust one another out of date, that the younger style gets
place. Which ever falls out contrary in the just and lawful productions of noble
spirits, wherein we always see precedence in antiquity rather giving authority
and prerogative, than causing any kind of detriment or deminution. However I
hear of late, that there are started up among us, excellent Preachers of al
Religions, who with choice matter curiously elaborated, and with a free noble
delivery, set of with looks and gesture suitable to the subjects and passions
represented, are likely to work marvelous effects, and reduce again the happy
first days of King Charles the first. Which appears the more probable, in that
I understand, these worthy persons are for the excelent, moral and pacifique
doctrine of the old Grec and Latin Homilies, having laid aside al
Controversies, which are most improper for Pulpits: and serve rather to
irritate, than heal or compose our minds too much already fester'd and
exulcerated with so many late seditious contentions of al sorts. We are only
fit now for a peaceable quietness, like such patients, to whom the prudent
Physician prescribes a weathering repose alone, with the use perchance of some
waters to purge and wash away certain scurvy, malignant humors. The matter of
Controversy has bin drained to the bottom on all sides and hands, ever since
my Lord Bacon's days, as he himself testifies: So that now there is nothing
left, but filthy lees and dregs for new Operators. And therefore, like a sage
Lawyer, as well as great Philosopher, he disswades any father progres in such
contentions, fruitles and endless in a Country, where there is no Tribunal of
judicature erected, or will be admitted by either sex. If any, by reason of the
difficulty and variety, find themselves unfit for those noble, profound
sciences, which he often proposes; yet have an itchy, buisy spirit, which must
be in some action; there are many other more ingenious occupations and
employments, to take up their time of leisure, if aptly followed, as the
various and delightful operations in Chymistrie; and so many excelent
inventions and practices, lately discovered at home and abroad, in Experimental
Philosophy, with several other accessory and subservient parts of
Philosophical learning in general.

POSTSCRIPT.
As concerning the above cited Testimonies.
THe fame of Paulus Manutius, Bembus, and Sadoletus, is spread among the
learned of al nations; but this of Casa has not taken so large a flight, nor is
much conversant in Northren parts, unles among Travelers. To give therefore
some credit to his testimony, and make it more authentic, we will hear, in the
first place, Muretus, speaking in this manner.

-- Neque immerito commendati sunt, aut is qui pauca quidem scripsit, sed in
scribendo omnium politissimus maximeque, limatus, idemque ab omnibus ineptiis
remotissimus fuit Joannes Casa, etc. This expression ab ineptiis remotissimus,
among others, as he elsewhere testifyes, reflects on the conceits and Batavian
jests of Erasmus, in his praise of Folly and Dialogs, etc. which sort of sauce
and seasoning, some scholars have grossly mistaken for pure Attique salt and
wit. The noble Tridentine Historian speaking of this Casa, says, As his
brother was formidable with his sword; so he was with his pen. His Oration to
the great Emperor of his time, is imagined to be the first piece of true
genuine eloquence, which has appeared since the days of Augustus; and
therefore I wonder it has found no Translator. But perchance it would not
please, since instede of the figures, tropes and schems, in a solid discourse,
and other graces of the Ancients, we are now so delighted with gingles,
quibles, and trifling conceits in a frothie, incohaerent matter, interlarded
with a nauseous multiplicity of citations, in diverse languages. Which, for the
most part, are only sorry, servile shifts, pedantique arts, and odious
deformities in speech and writing, introduced by some modern Orators: and
nothing conducing to the true delight or benefit on the one side, but much
assisting and concealing the supine ease and lazines of the cunning practiser
on the other side. Whereas an orderly discourse should, with a certain
analogy, imitate the works of nature, or of art in perfection; where al parts
have ever a congruous and conspiring union as well as uniformity among
themselves. As for example, in a Dorique composition, either in music or
architecture, any thing Jonique, though excelent in it self, would be vicious;
and so al enterlacings and embossements, which are like frequent citations in
speech, though otherwise splendid, would be here offensive to the senses and
understanding of a wel-bred Gentleman. But let us pass to this short Character
of Bartholomeo Zucchi in his Idea of a perfect Secretary.

Questi e quel Giovanni della Casa Gentilhuomo Fiorentino, che ha lasciato in
dubio, in qual lingua egli scriuesse meglio, o nella Latina o nella Toscana, e
nel verso e nella prosa: Cosi fu mirabile nell'una e nell'altra. Ha scritto
poche cose, o almeno poche vanno attorno, le quali il faranno piu immortale,
che le molte, che hanno publicate alcuni. Son tutte belle, tutte eccellenti. Fu
e Segretario di Cardinali, e impiegato in gravi affari. Dopo essere stato alcun
tempo Prelato molto stimato nella Corte Romana, hebbe l' Arcivescovato di
Benevento, nel quel grado si mori.

Englished thus.

This is that John de la Casa a Florentine Gentleman, who has left in doubt, in
what language, he was most dextrous and excelent: whether in Latin or Italian;
or Verse or Prose. He was so singular and admirable in all these faculties. He
has writ few pieces or at least few pass current as his genuine productions.
Which however will more immortalise his name, than the voluminous works of
others. Every thing proceeding from him is rare and excelent. He was Secretary
among the Cardinals, and employed in affairs of great consequence. After having
bin a Prelat of great estimation in the Court of Rome, he was advanced to the
Archbishopric of Beneventum, in which condition he dyed.

Monsieur Balzac, whose follies and affectations in his young days, corrupted
not only the the spirits of his own Country, but many also of those abroad,
seems at last to have had a mature judgment: which perhaps is the reason, why
his latter books please less, and remain every where untranslated. However out
of the value I have for them, I shall pick out here something concerning our
present subject.

En Italy il s'appelle Monsignor de la Casa, il estoit Gentilhomme Florentin,
de tres bonne et tres ancienne maison. Il auoit este nourry petit garzon a la
Cour de Rome, ou d'abord il eut l'approbation de tout ce qu'il y auoit
d'honnestes gens. Il a escrit en prose et en verse, en l'une et l'autre langue
auec tell succes, qu'il fut admire des Orateurs et des Poets de son temps, au
dessu desquels il s'estoit eleue. Torquato Tasso l'a tant estime qu'il a voulu
estre son grammairien. Et j'ay leu, sur un des sonnets de ce Monsignor, une
lecon, que ce poet recita, si'l m'en souvient bien dans l' Academie de
Ferrare. Cet excellent homme est^it d'une sante assez vigoreuse, il vescut dans
le loisir tantost de Rome et tantost de Venise: et neantmoins il n'a laisse en
toute sa vie, qu'un liver de l'espaisseur de deux almanachs Cest n'est pas
qu'il eust, l'esprit sterile, et qu'il cultivast une terre ingrate. Car jamais
homme n'apporta au monde de plus grands avantages, ni plus de disposition a
l'eloquence, etc.

Englished thus.

In Italian he is called the Signor de la Casa, being a Florentine Gentleman of a
most noble and ancient race. The education of his unriper age was at the Court
of Rome, where on a sudden, he gained the approbation of al persons of merit
and honor. His prose and verse in both languages was so happy and succesful, as
to make him admired by the Orators and Poets of his time, whom he much surpast.
Torquato Tasso valued him at so high a rate, that he vouchsaft to become his
Grammarian. And I have read, if I well remember, a lesson upon a sonnet of this
Signor which this Poet recited in the Academy of Ferrara. This excelent person
was of a sufficient and active health, and enjoyed a happy leisure sometimes at
Rome, and sometimes at Venice. Yet al his life has only afforded us a little
book no thicker in bulk, than two Almanacks. The reason of this proceeded not
from the sterility of his spirit; or that he cultivated a barren and ungratful
soil. For never man was born with more natural advantages, or endowed with a
better disposition for Eloquence, etc.

The memory of Monsieur Blazac has not faild him; for the lesson here mentioned
(which I have by me) was recited in this manner: and there was a kind of civil
war between the two Academies of Ferrara and Florence at the same time, when it
was composed be Torquato Tasso. Who was, without dispute, the greatest and most
universal Poet, that has appeared in any known language, since the death of the
Roman Virgil. And yet here he acts the inferior and subservient part of a
Grammarian, Scholiast, Comentator. Which condescension in so Princely a Poet,
is the greatest which I have ever heard: and crowns with an everlasting honor
the memory of this Signor de la Casa. From hence we perceive of how high a
value, is this large Encomium of Polus, from a person of so rare merit, and
otherwise, as we have seen, so penurious of his choice and precious Ink. What
is spoken here of this Giovanni della Casa, seems devious and episodical, as to
our subject; but I could not omit it, out of respect and gratitude, for the
great honor, this noble Florentine has done our Country, in the person of this
royal Cardinal, to whom we will now return in this following relation of Le
Sieur Maurier.

REnaud Polus, Cardinal and Archeveque de Cantorbie, estoit fills de Richard
Polus Cousin Germain du roy Henry VII. and de Marguerite fille de George Duc de
Clarence, friar du roy Edouard IV. La nature luy avoit done un excellent
esprit, qu'il avoit cultive soigneusement and beureusement dans les plus
celebres Academies de l' Europe, ou il se'stoit fait d'illustres amiss, and sur
tout en Italy. Comme il avoit de la naissance, and du scavoir, de l'esprit,
and de l' habilite, tout le monde l' honora en Angleterre: and le roy Henry;
VIII. ne fut pas des derniers a luy fair des avances de bienveillance and
d'estime. Renaud Polus en temoigna bien de la gratitude. Mais il ne put jamais
adherer, par une lasche complaisance, au desirs injustes de ce Prince, qui pour
satisfaire une passion brutale, viola toutes les loix de l'honneur, and de la
religion, introduisant, par un renversement deplorable, le schism and
l'heresie dans son estat. Polus fut contraint de sortir du royaume. Ce^st dans
ce temps q'uil se crut oblige d'escrire au roy, un traite de l'union de
l'eglise: Et ce zele genereux passant pour insolence and pour temerite dans
l'esprit d' Henri, il promit cinquante mill ^escus a celuy qui luy apporteroit
sa test. Le Pape Paul III. qui l'avoit cree Cardinal en 1536. luy donna des
gardes. Henri en temoigna un deplaisir extreme, and ne pouvant se vanger sur la
person de ce Cardinal, il fait mourir sa Mere and diverse de ses Parens, and
le persecutast luy mesme dans toutes sorts d'occasions. Le genereux Polus
supporta la mort des siens and la desolation de sa famille, ayant tant de
constance and de courage, qu'il merita des eloges des plus illustres Ecrivains
de ce temps and l'admiration de toute l'Europe. Il pardonna aussi aux trois
Italiens and a deux Anglois, qui l'avoient voulu assassiner. Cependant il fut
employe en diverses legations, and envoye au Council de Trente. Apres la mort de
Paul III. les Cardinaux voulurent le mettre sur le siege pontifical, and il fut
le seul qui s'opposa a cette exaltation glorieuse. Sa mort fut un coup fatal
and pour la religion and pour le royaume, elle arriva seize heures apres celle
de la Reyne le 25 Nov. de l' an. 1558. Les Auteurs, mesme les Protestans,
donnent les eloges a son esprit, a son scavoir and a sa prudence: and tout le
monde avoue q'uon vist peu d'egale bonte pour les hommes, ny de semblable zele
pour Dieu.

Englished thus.

Reginaldus Polus Cardinal and Archbishop of Canterbury, was Son of Richard
Polus Cousin germain to Henry the seventh. His mother was Margaret daughter of
George Duke of Clarence, brother of Edward the fourth. Nature had given him an
excelent spirit and wit. Which he carefully and happily enricht in the most
famous Academies of Europe: where he gained the friendship of many illustrious
persons, but especialy in Italy. As he was eminent in birth, wit, knowledge,
and activenes of spirit; so he was much beloved and honored at home; and King
Henry the eighth was very forward in applauding and showing the singular esteem
he had of him. Wherein Polus was never backward in a ready demonstration of his
humble gratitude. But however, could never adhear, and submit, with a servile
compliance to the injust desires of this Prince, who to satisfy a carnal
appetite, broke the laws of honor and religion, introducing a deplorable
confusion into his Kingdom. Out of which Polus was constraind to depart. In
this time of absence, he thought himself obliged to writ a treatise to the
King, concerning the general union of the Church. But this general Zeal passing
for an insolence and rash enterprise in the spirit of King Henry, he set a
price, and promised fifty thousand Crowns, as a reward, to him who should
present him with his head. The Pope Paul the third, who had created him
Cardinal in the year 1536. preserved him with Guards, appointed for his safety.
Which put the King into so great a passion and choler, that being unable to
revenge himself upon the person of this Cardinal, he made his Mother dye a
violent death, with many of his kindred; neither leaving to persecute his
remaining person also, in all sorts of occasions. The generous Polus patiently
sufferd the death of his nearest allies, and the desolation of his family, with
so great a constance and courage, that it merited and procured him the
testimonies and admiration of all the noble Writers in Europe of his time. He
pardoned also three Italians and two Englishmen who would have assassinated
him. He had the fortune to be employed in many Embassies of several kinds, and
to be sent Legate to the Council of Trent. After the death of Paul the third,
the Cardinals would have placed in the Pontifical Throne; and he himself was
the person alone, who opposed this glorious exaltation. His death was a fatal
blow to the religion and kingdom, which happened sixteen hours after that of
the Queen in the year 1658. The Protestants themselves give elogiums to his
wit, learning, and prudence. And al agree that there scarce ever appeared so
great a zeal for the service of God, nor charity and affection for that of men.

The learned Mr. Camden, a person of another religion, as being a worthy old
Protestant of the old Church of England, seems to approve of these
commendations, and verify this last passage in these words.

Eodem quo Maria obijt die, post pauculas horas Polus Cardinalis,
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis expiravit, Vir quem pietas, doctrina and
integritas multo magis, quam regij generis splendour illustrarunt; licet ille
Georgij Ducis Clarentiae fratris Edvardi quarti Regis Angliae e filia nepos
fuerit.

His persecution, with the tragical desolation of the Family, and the cruel,
unnatural destruction of the members by their proper head, is thus described by
Gratianus.

Nam Henricus, cum ei omnia tentanti, ac ne maximis quidem parcenti sumptibus
intercipere Polum non successisset, implacabilis irae atque acerbitatis suae
impetum in Margaretam Poli matrem avertit. Ea erat lectissima and sanctissima
faemina, Edvardi Regis fratris filia. Nec tamen genere, quam moribus,
innocentia ac totius vitae laud nobilior: in cujus disciplina ante Henricus
Mariam unicam filiam educaverat. Tum abreptam in carcerem diu aerumnis ac
miserijs male habitam, falsis etiam nuntijs interfecti Reginaldi filij tortam,
postremo altero filiorumu natu majori, qui simal captus in eadem custodia
habebatur; crudeliter necato, anum ipsam alterum and septuagesimum annum
agentem, palam in foro capitali supplicio afficit, nullum ob crimen aliud, quam
quod Reginaldum genuisset, and de fide Catholicae pietatis decedere recusasset.

Though enough has bin already promoted in this kind, to please and satisfy al
persons, whose Religion allows them any freedom of spirit; yet I cannot think
this following Relation will appear tedious.

Ex L. B.
ILlud autem persuasum habeo, ejusmodi me legentium oculis imaginem
propositurum, quae omnibus iis, quae in Christianum hominem cadere possunt,
virtutibus ornata and expolita appareat. Tantas in hunc Deus hominem ex
uberrimo illo benignitatis suae font divinorum munerum divitias transfuderat.
Atque hae quidem tot tamque insignes Poli Cardinalis virtutes omnibus tota
Europa ita cognitae atque perspectae fuerunt, ut multi etiam, qui eum nunquam
vidissent, ejus nominis studiosissimi atque cupidissimi fierent. Celebre est
etiamnum ejus nomen apud omnes bonos, magnaque cum laud, saepenumero in
sermonibus usurpatur: atque ita gratiosa est apud multos Principes ejus
memoria, ut, si quem in ejus familia aliquandiu versatum intelligant, eum, vel
hanc unam ob causam, benevolentia, complectantur, eique libenter faveant. Tanta
fuit ejus mansuetudo and clementia, ut si quis eum offendisset, nibil de
ulciscendo cogitaret, omnesque injurias facile remitteret, atque condonaret.
Viterbij tres Italos, necem sibi molientes, liberari jussit. Duos item Anglos
Capranicae, quo ipse ob aestivos calores vitandos secesserat, comprehensos, qui
ad eum trucidandum ab Henrico rege ex ultima usque Anglia submissi erant,
necari noluit, cum ad unum se eam injuriam pertinere diceret; nec durius in
illos animadverti passus est, quam ut paucos ad dies ad triremes relegarentur.
Res adversas and calamitates, tam forti magnoque animo semper tulit, ut, ei hac
virtute pares qui essent, paucos admodum memoria nostra fuisse existimem,
superiorem vero neminem. Ejus rei multa possem afferre exempla, sed hoc uno
contenti erimus. Quodam die cum multas ex Gallia, atque aliis ex locis literas
accepisset, mihique mandasset, ut iis respondcrem; tum ego literas in unum
fasciculum colligens, cum quasdem Anglica lingua scriptas vidissem: Ad has
vero, inquam, non est, quod ego respondeam, cum ejus linguae plane sim ignarus.
Ille minime turbato vultu, utinam vero, inquit, eas and legere posses and
intelligere. Laetum, enim nuntium referunt. Ejus ego nuntii cupiditate
incensus, ut me quoque ejus participem esse velit, rogo. Tum ille, equidem
semper existimavi, inquit, Dei beneficio, ejus me faeminae filium esse, quae
tum genere ipso, tum virtutibus primaria esset. Qua de re maximas etiam Deo
gratias habebam. Nunc vero non id solum, verium etiam majori me Dei benificio
auctum video. Matrem enim meam martyrii gloria ornatam esse audio. Nam cum illa
Catholicam fidem nostram constanter retineret, neque eam deserere ulla ratione
vellet, Henrici jussu, septuaginta jam annos natae mulieri caput est amputatum.
Hoc sciliect praemium tulit laborum, quos in educanda ejus filia susceperat.
His verbis, consternato animo cum essem; bono, inquit ille, animo simus: haec
quoque accessit ad caeteros patronos, and advocatos, quos in caelis habemus.
Postea in sacellum, ubi deum precari solebat, secessit; ubique aliquandiu
commoratus est, egressus ad suos eundem semper vultum, eandem hilaritatem
retinuit. Neque vero hoc ille faciebat, aut quod mediocriter matrem diligeret,
aut quod non vehementer ab illa redamaretur; sed ea animi fortitudine, ut
dictum est, munitus erat, ut his fortunae telis de constantia sua dejici non
posset. Sic prorsus nuntium tulit de fratris sui natu maximi nece, cui Rex
caput, una cum duobus aliis ejus Consanguineis, religionis causa, praecidi
jusserat: Sic alias complures calamitates, and res adversas. Atque in his
quemadmodum fortiter se gerebat; ita in secundis rebus humiliter; ut neque in
alteris ullo modo efferetur, neque alteris dep^imeretur. Sic paupertatem
tanquam dives; opes tanquam pauper tulit. Pridie ejus diei quo e vita
discessit, extremae unctionis sacramentum sua sponte ipse, nemine monente,
postulavit, and ad extremum usque spiritum and locutus est, and praeclare sibi
semper constitit; ac tam leniter, quieteque animam ipsam efflavit, ut
dormientis speciem magis, quam morientis, vultus ejus ac totus corporis habitus
referret. Obiit autem, quod sane mirum videri queat, eo ipso die, quo Regina.
Scripto to testamento Aloysium Priulum Patritium Venetum, quem unice amaverat,
and semper fratris loco habuerat, suarum rerum omnium haeredem instituit,
ejusque arbitrio permisit, ut cum alia quaedam ipsius legata distribueret, tum
iis, qui se longinquis e partibus secuti fuerant, sibique ministraverant, tum
aliis; id singulis dom daret, quod cujusque diligentiam promeritam judicaret.
Is cum haereditatem recusaret, neque tamen propterea distribuendorum legatorum
onus suscipere nollet; Rogavit eum Polus, quod etiam in ipso testamento
perscribi voluit, ut aliquam saltem bonorum suorum partem sibi sumeret, quae
tanquam aliquod veteris ac perpetuoe inter ipsos conjunctionis pignus ac
monumentum extaret. Hoc ille plane renuit, seque jam inde ab initio cum in ejus
se familiaritatem contulerat, long alterius generis bona secutum, ex eisque
plurima assecutum esse respondit. Atque ita cum haeres scriptus esset, nihil ex
haereditate capere voluit, praeter duos libellos, ex quibus Polus deum precari
solitus erat, Breviarium vocamus and Diurnale. Atque hic quidem est Priulus
ille, quem initio diximus, anno 1532. Patavii in arctissimam Poli consuetudinem
venisse, neque ab ejus lutere unquam, ex eo tempore, discessisse, sed omnium
itinerum, legationum, laborum comitem ac socium: studiorum item consiliorum ac
omnium periculorum participem fuisse, ut neque ullis honoribus, nec dignitate,
quae illi, cum in patria sua in qua summa est ejus familiae nobilitas atque
amplitudo; tum Romae, non semel proponebatur, a Poli consuetudine avelli
posset, quam omnibus divitiis omnique dignitati facile anteponebat. Post ejus
mortem xx totos menses, quibus ille superstes vixit, in colligendis magno
labor ejus rebus, quae variis in locis disjectae erant, and in illis, summa
cum fide, distribuendis consumpsit.

Englished thus.
But I am verily persuaded, that I shall herein represent to the eyes and
understanding of the reader, an image polisht and adorned with all those
virtues, which can fall within the capacity of a true Christian spirit. The
divine Goodness, with so large an effusion of grace, had enrich't the soul of
this Reginaldus Polus. Whose rare and excellent virtues were so eminently
conspicuous over al Europe, that many, who never saw him, cherisht the very
thoughts, imagination, and name of him. Nay even now any mention or
commemoration of him is very pleasant and delightful among al persons of honor
or worth: and among Princes his memory is still so gracious and prevalent, that
to have bin of his family only, is a sufficient commendation and entrance into
their favor. His peaceable mildnes and clemency was so extraordinary, that
howsoever offended he remitted al injuries, never complotting or meditating any
sort of revenge. At Viterbo he caused three Italian conspirers of his death to
be delivered out of prison. Whilst he was at Capranica retired to shun the
infesting heats of the summer, two English men sent by King Henry to dispatch
him, he would by no means suffer to be put to death, alleging how the injury
pertain'd to him alone, as Judge and Party: Nor would he permit any other
punishment to pass upon them, save only the condemnation to the Galleys, for
some few days. His various afflictions, misfortunes and calamities he ever
sustained with so great a courage, and noble constancy, that certainly this
age has not afforded his equal. To this purpose I could produce many examples,
but let this alone for the present suffice. When on a certain day, he had
received several letters out of France, and many other remote parts, and
ordered me to prepare their answers: so foon as they were collected into
distinct pacquets, perceiving some in English, I told him, I hope, Sir, you
expect not that I should answer these, as being a stranger to the language. He,
not the least changed in looks or color instantly replied; I wish you could
read and understand them both at once, for they import joyful news and tidings.
Withat impatient in my itching desire, I humbly begged, that I might
participate. I always thought my self, says he, the son of a woman as singular
and eminent for her virtues, as extraction: in which respect, I have often
rendered thanks to the divine Goodness. But now I find these former qualities
strangly dignifyed with a noble vantage of quite another and higher nature, by
her being crowned and adorned with the glory of a happy martyrdom. For whilst
she constantly retained her Catholic faith and religion, immovable by any
threats or persuasions, she lost her head upon the Scaffold, at the age of
seventy Years, receiving this reward, for the great pains taken in the
education of his only daughter, from King Harry the Father. When, I amazed with
sudden horror and astonished, startled at this relation; be of good courage,
says he, my Mother has happily encreast the number of our patrons and advocats
in heaven. After this, retiring for some few moments to a Chapel, where his use
was to pray, he strait appears among us again, with the same former looks and
cheerful countenance. Neither did he act this strange unexpected part out of a
tepid indifferency of affection, which he had for her, or she for him (which
was quite contrary in both) but out of a magnanimous constancy not exposed or
obnoxious to these violent attaques and cruel injuries of fortune. No other
alteration was perceived by us in him, at the sad doleful message of the death
of his eldest Brother, who with two other of his nearest allies, lost their
heads upon the Scaffold by the Kings order, for constantly adhearing to their
religion.

These, and many other afflictions, calamities and injuries of diverse sorts he
suffered with the same perpetualy inalterable constancy. And as Fortun could
not terrify him with her frowns; so she could not seduce him with her smiles.
His affairs running prosperously sometimes beyond expectation could never puff
him up beyond his accustomed station; nor turning retrograde on the contrary
cause in him the least dejection. So that his seeming poverty in riches; and
his great satisfaction in poverty were both alike commendable.

Three days before he dyed (of his one accord without any other admonishment)
he desired to have the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, retaining his speech,
senses and understanding entire to the very last moment. He rendered up his
spirit in that gentle, quiet and placide manner, that his face, visage, fashion
and habit of his whole body represented the posture of one sleeping, rather
than dead. That which seems marvelous to some, is that his Queen, and he should
expire both within the compass of the same natural day. In his last Will and
Testament he ordained Aloysio Priuli a noble man of Venice, whom he most
singularly affected, the entire heir of whatsoever he possessed. To whose will
and pleasure he freely transmitted the disposal of certain legacies, gifts and
rewards to such, who had followd him out of foreign parts, and others of his
attendants, according as he thought the merit and diligence of each person
proportionaly required. Whereas this noble Venetian absolutely refused the
total inheritance: he begged and entreated of him the acceptance only of some
part, which might appear, as a lasting pledge and monument of their ever
inviolated love and friendship. This also he utterly renounced, replying, that
when he first courted and insinuated himself into his familiarity, he proposed
in his mind an other sort of riches, goods and treasure, with which now he
thought himself abundantly gratifyed. Thus he the total heir of so considerable
an inheritance accepted of nothing, but only two prayer-books, renderd precious
in his thoughts by the frequent usage of Reginaldus Polus, whereof the one was
called the Roman Breviary, and the other the Diurnal belonging to it. This is
that Aloysio Priuli, who in the year 1532 at Padua contracted that individual
and exemplary familiarity and friendship with Polus, which never afterward
admitted of any separation in adversity or prosperity. He was a constant
companion in all his journeys by Sea and Land, in his tedious and dangerous
embassies, and al other toils and troubles: so unanimously participating also
of al his intentions, purposes, studies and counsels, that he was sensible of
no titles, honors, dignities, which were open and obvious in his own Country,
by reason of the great nobility and prerogative of his family: nor could Rome
her self with her dazzling purple and other allurements ever seduce him from
this habitual society and enjoyment of his friend, a hapines which he so
inestimably valew'd above al others: and whom he survived only the space of
twenty months, which interval of time he wholly employed in the collection of
those goods, which were dispersed in several Countries, and in the just and
equal-distribution of them.

This memorable friendship of Reginaldus Polus and Aloysius Priulus contracted
between persons of so distant and different Countries, certainly excels in all
circumstances, that of Laelius and Scipio, or what ever other examples, the
ancient Greece or Rome or the Barbarians (as they call them) could ever produce.
For that religion which most enriches our minds with the best Virtues, and
devests them of usurping passions, renders them the most susceptible of this
rare and divine quality. Which therefore consequently must always be among the
most excelent Christians. The Philosophers and their followers had the sublime
virtues of this nature in subtle speculation only, which were left for others
to put into real exercise and practice.

I have at present sufficiently, as I hope, refuted some perverse Chroniclers
among us, enemies, as we see, to truth, honor, and the just respect due to royal
families: and have shown how requisite it is for these many years, to look
abroad, that we may understand any truth at home of this kind. The Testimonies
produced are very authentic. Which I have the rather encreast, because
nothing, methinks, can be said too much of so Rare, Divine and Princely a
subject. However I shall now supersede, omitting many Authors of excelent
account, as the French President Thuanus, and the famous Pallavicini, with many
other Italian Writers. Who generaly in their relations, very much extol and
magnify the power of King Harry, able to revive in Italy a custom abolisht
ever since Marius, Sulla and Marc-Antony, in proscribing a great Roman senator
in Rome it self, as well as other parts of the world. Among these Authors, which
I must advertise you, you will often find il Cardinal d' Inghiltierra
mentioned; which you must have a care, not to take for our rich, fat Prelat the
Cardinal Wolsey. Otherwise your mistake will be very gross. For this
Reginaldus Polus, who is thereby signified, and He were as different in quality
and worth, as they were in extraction; the vast, immense ambition of the one,
almost equalizing the most Christian humility of the other, and therefore
vainly coveting and courting with an insolent presumption that Papacy, which
the other with so generous a magnanimity refused.

Now, as I suppose, I have fully satisfied my engagement, though perchance not
the desire or expectation of our obliging friend. What the postscript of your
last letter signifies, concerning some versification on this subject, was never
included in my promise. Yet to be as complyant, as I can, I shall send here two
Epigrams: in the former of which, could I dispense with my self, from being
serious, in so grave a subject, as the sacred memory of this Cardinal, I could
impose upon our friend, acting the jocular plagiary, and make my self pass for
the author; being they seem so adapted to this noted Epitaph, Depositum Poli
Cardinalis. But I can assure you, they were made above a thousand years ago, as
I shall make it appear at our next meeting. As for the latter, they are excelent
verses, made on the picture of this great person, drawn by Titian, and now in
the Farnesian Palace. It would appear almost a madness in me, to write on the
same subject, after Marcus Antonius Flaminius the celebrated Author. I shall
only therefore venture, for satisfaction sake in this kind, to send some
recovered fragments of a Poem, dedicated to the honor of the Heroical Prince of
this age, during the Dutch Wars, and to be prefixed before a meteorique
treatise, not published, by reason of the late rogueries, set here artificialy
on foot among us.

Epigrama primum.
FVnctus honorato sienio, plenusque dierum
Evocor ad superos: pignora quid gemitis;
Reddere Depositum lex est: ideoque petenti
Corpus humo, manes restituoque Polo.
Sumite quod vestrum est, insignia, jura, parentis
Scilicet and titulos: plus satis ^rna mihi haec.
Epigrama secundum
SIvelut egregiae picturae, maxim Pole, Est expressa tui corporis effigies:
Sic divina tuae potuisset mentis imago Pingi, nil oculi pulchrius aspicerent.
MArtia progenies Caroli, quem Gallica nympha
Magnorum soboles regum, conjuxque sororque
Et formosa parens peperit felicibus astris;
Quique tuum tantis animum natalibus aequas;
Cum tua tot cupiant vates praeconiae laudis
Dicere, victuris necnon inscribere chartis;
Hactenus baud facile inceptis timor obstitit ausis.
Me traxit non unus amor, vel causa canendi.
Nam cum perjuri jam factio dira Senatus.
Factio non omnem non execranda per aevum,
Cum superis and patre tuo sibi bella gerenda
Censuit, and victo leges imponere caelo:
Te profugum seeds nostris habitata Camaenis
Excipit, and primae docuit praeludia famae.
Hic primum conscendere equos, fraenare lupatis
Discis, and attonitos cursu proevertere cervos;
Atque alia exerces belli simulacra futuri,
Cujus te posthac docuit Turennius arteis,
Exemplo and monitis magnus Turennius inquam,
Sic ut jam tanto vix cesseris ipse magistro.
Nam tibi cum fuerit teneris maturius annis
Ingenium and robur, vix puber ad arma vocatus
Non finis has tacita dotes torpere sub umbra;
Principibus licet hos mores indulserit oelas.
Si memorare juvat primornm elementa laborum
Ac veluti puerile decus, quis fortius unquam
Aggressus fuerit, repulitve audacior hostem?
Signa magis prompte anteivit, serove reliquit
Sub dio aestivos soles, ac frigora passus?
Vnde tibi nullum imperium Turennius olim
Detraxit, tanti semper securus alumni!
At tua non superat civilem bellica laurum:
Non hinc aut illinc debentur praemia laudis
Inferiora tibi: Cum tu bellique domique
Idem semper eras; eadem constantia vultus
Atque animi laeta sort adversaque renidens.
Quo sumis vultu fasceis, deponis eodem.
Nil nova miraris raptus popularibus auris,
Immemor haud unquam morum vitaeque paternae:
Nec te fixa manent, aut plebiscita refixa.
Libertas, legesque placent; mensuraque recti
Non tibi sunt vires: scelerum victoria merces
Parta, tibi est odio: licet hi jam saecula nostra
Infamant mores: ut dextera fortis in armis,
Promissis sic firma sides: Castrisque foroque
Justitia and pietas una comitantur ubique.
Hic tua non virtus veteris cum laud magistri
Substitit ingenti: sed me per inhospita ponti
Impatiens secum abreptat, non fluctibus istis
Assuetum, ac ultra timidum contendere litus
Cum jam concurrere nostrae
Ausa fuit Batavum classis: non acrius unquam
Pugnatum est: tamen hinc spolia ampla and opima tulisti
Sum Ducum, patriae decus admirabile nostrae
E pelago primus: nam cum Praetoria puppis
Opdamii tecum congressa est; protenus ipsam
Ignivomis globulis attollis in aethera, quamvis
Ingenti sub mole viri, sub mole carinae
Ingemuit pontus. Sic formidare coactus
Oceanum Batavus, sua regna antiqua reliquit,
Ac te sanguineis urgentem fugit in undis.
Ah tamen haud parvo stetit haec victoria nobis:
Nam quam lecta manus prope te juvenumque virumque
Concidit! illa tuis tam digna natalibus ora
Ah visu indignum! sanie sunt sparsa tuorum:
Non autem domitus Batavus, sed victus abibat:
Major colligitur classis post damna, priori.
Nam quibus antiquus, novus ac vix sufficit orbis,
Sic puduit vinci, in ponto dare terga coactis.
Armatas igitur propriis e sedibus urbeis
Emittunt pelago, ventoque aestuque secundo.
Navibus opprimitur pontus: tot carbasa venti
Vix simul impellunt. Jam nobis fortius instant
Robore nec numero paribus: tum flectere gyro
Incipimus laceras puppeis: Et jam tua navis
Strage virum cumulata fere subsidit in undis,
Vela cadunt, pinus fracta est: At non tua virtus
Fracta fuit; sed enim mediis excelsa periclis
Clarius emicuit, revocatque in milite vireis:
Qualis, ubi obductum picea caligine caelum
Cum premitur, Coro Boreaque agitante procellas
Per mare, per terras; soboles si forte refulsit
Ledaea, assumit faciem natura priorem,
Laetior and ridet, subductis nubibus ether.
Jam cocunt naves, ubi te Vexilla ferentem
Regia conspiciunt, medios lapsumque per hosteis.
Nunc iterum redeunt animi, paulo ante sopiti,
Atque irae, quas tu regalia lumina torquens
Accendis; nunquam tanta est data copia famae
Caeruleis campis, virtusque exercita utrinque;
Belga licet primus vireis animosque remittens
Non tua laethiferae jam tandem fulmina classis
Sustinuit, cessitque mari, rursusque subegit
Hos contemptores regum tua regia classis.
O toties invicte malis, terraque marique
Egregium o gentis Britonum per saecula nomen,
Spesque tui generis, nostri and tutela Profundi
Quandoquidem decus and long tibi cessit avorum
Gloria magnorum, patriaeque exempla parasti
Virtutis, quae te summis Heroibus aequat;
Parce pio tandem capiti, and sic prospice nobis:
Communem belli sortem reverere, nec ultra
Prodigus heu animae magnae, patriaeque salutis
Atque tuae, tantis ita te commit periclis.
Cum vero his pridem terris Astraea reducta
Consiliis, placidoque tui moderamine fratris
Otia secum affert, curarum pondere pectus
Expediens, hoc pacis opas tibe some, meamque
Uranien vestris samulam penetralibus altis
Admit: affinis tua men's caelestibus astris,
Satque datum pelago and terris: ne sidera differ
Amplius ac caelos: En haec te lucidalate
Aetheris immensi spatia, astrorumque meatus,
Atque situs, variosque obitus, ortusque docebit.
Aurea quinetiam sua limina pandit Olympus,
Quae tibi pulcher honos pridem pietasque reclusit.
Respice sam qua part mices; seu Signifer axe
Arrisit ru^ilo, magis aut temone Triones,
Qua ^unquam poteris nostris occumbere terris,
Invenies virtute viam: sed pauperis umbrae
Quo feror e tecto, quae me caligine celat
Seclusum vulgo? quo me rapit ardor amantem
O Dux magne tui? cujus perstringere lauds
Hic volui tantum: nos posthac plura canemus,
Quaeque meas coluit musas, florente javenta,
Inclyta clarorum genitrix Limnestria vatum,
Mecum una aeternis condet tua nomina Fastis.
FINIS.

