MONSIEUR JVRIEV'S Pastoral Letters, Directed to the PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE, Who
Groan under the Babylonish Captivity.

Translated out of the French.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball in Cornhill. 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THe violent Persecution raised in France against the Protestants of that
Kingdom, especially after the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, having made so
much noise in the World, and afforded matter of astonishment to all
Christendom, I have wondered oftentimes, that none should take in hand the
translating of Monsieur Jurieu's Pastoral Letters in this Tongue, to acquaint
the World with the Methods made use of in the bringing the Protestants of that
Country to the Church of Rome. They are so extraordinary, that future Ages will
hardly give credit to the History of this present Persecution, especially when
they shall consider, that those who profess themselves Christians, cast off all
the Principles of Morality, degenerate into brute Beasts, devour reasonable
Creatures, their Fellow Subjects, Christians, for no other reason, but for not
believing as they do.

This you will see in Monsieur Jurieu's Letters, in which he gives a
particular, and so faithful an Account of all the Matters of Fact, as they
occur in the Series of the Persecution, that he leaves no room to question at
all what he advances; for he takes a particular care to be well informed of the
Truth, before he commits any thing to the Press; and most commonly he receives
his Memories (as you shall see) either from those who made their escape out of
the hands of their Enemies, or from them who are actually involved in the
Persecution, which we may reasonably believe to be true, being not likely, that
People who suffer for so an holy Profession as the truth of the Gospel of
Christ is, would blemish it with Lies, and wrong their own Consciences with
them; or from the Papists themselves, whose Letters fall sometimes into his
hands. He gives at large the History of the Sufferings, Behavior, and Death of
our Martyrs and Confessors. He answers the Cavils, the Arguments and Sophistry
of the Converters, especially the Bishop of Meaux, so much applauded now
adays; and thus he enables and instructs the ignorant, strengthens the weak,
confirms the standing, exhorts those that are fallen, comforts the afflicted,
and speaks sutably to all the Protestants, according to the Circumstances they
may lie under. In a word, it is the Learned and Pious Monsieur Jurieu whose
Letters I translate; the mention of whose name is sufficient to recommend them
to the public. He begun to write them in September, 1686; and has ever since
continued, and continues still. He gives one every Fortnight; but if one every
Week should come out here, he might quickly be overtaken.

The FIRST PASTORAL LETTER: WHICH Treats of the Methods of Conversion which are
made use of at this day in France.
Dearly Beloved in the Lord, the Grace and Peace of our God and Savior Jesus
Christ be with you all.
BE assured, that we are Fellow Sufferers with you, and that from the Haven,
into which, by Divine Providence we are cast, we cannot without Lamentation and
Tears behold the mighty Storms and Tempests which toss you, and have occasioned
the Wreck of the Ship in which we were embarked. We are very solicitous, as in
duty we are obliged, considering both your and our Circumstances, what to do
for your consolation, and to preserve you from the danger of being seduced. But
we see little probability of this; so that till it please God to open the
Doors, which are at this time shut, we are resolved to speak to you afar off,
in hopes that God will not delay to give us an opportunity to entertain you
nearer. But let us hasten to that which is of greater moment. We do not believe
that the Cross of Christ Jesus which you bear, is the greatest of those Evils
you are exposed unto, that is your Glory. And we perceive by Letters that come
from those who are steadfast in the Faith, God is their Comforter, he has
prevented our Desires, and given success to our Exhortations, tho at a distance
from you; nay, he is gone beyond our hopes, and has wrought immediately upon
your hearts without us, and he is in you a living Fountain of Blessings and
Comforts, more abounding than we could hope. We receive from our Confessors who
are in Fetters, in the Galleys, in Prisons a hundred feet deep, in Torments, in
the dark and noysom Dungeons; we receive, I say, from them Letters, which
strike us with admiration, which renew the time of the Primitive Christians,
and revive the ancient Martyrs, which show us that the greater the Torments you
are exposed unto are, the more God has endued you with strength and courage,
to overcome them.

What we are most afraid of for you, is your being Seduced; the many Examples
we have already before our Eyes give us some apprehensions for all the rest.
Some persons which were accounted the Pillars of the Church, have proved broken
Reeds. The Sophistry of the false Doctors, who set forth all their Cunning and
Subtilty to Seduce, have Perverted the Understandings and the Hearts of many,
from whom we expected an unshaken Constancy. They engage you in Disputes. They
Confound you with matters of Controversy. They put Books into your Hands where
Falsehoods are nourished with all the colors of the Truth. They take from you
all that could preserve you from the Poison of those Venomous Serpents, who are
continually Hissing in your Ears. Our Hands being tied, and our Mouths stopped,
we have the grief to see the Sheep of our blessed Jesus torn and plucked out
from the Sheepfold, to be Transported into the Regions of the Prince of Lies
and Darkness. What is to be done in this Case? It is needless to write any more
Books. There are thousands and thousands already made; and some are newly come
to light, in answer to the pernicious subtilties of those false Doctors. They
strictly guard all the Passages of the Kingdom, that honest Men and good
Christians might not get out, and good Books might not enter in. If one should
make new Books, the same Fate would attend them. The Public would be troubled
with repetitions, and you be without the comfort of receiving any benefit by
them. If we must repeat, at least it must be with some advantage to you.
Wherefore we take in hand to write no more Books, but Letters. Perhaps God in
his favor toward you, will make them fly over those Rampires, which the new
Inquisition has raised upon all the Avenues of the Kingdom; at least there are
some hopes they will more easily overcome the oppositions they make to the
design we have to strengthen you against their temptation.

We will give you these Letters every Month, or every Fortnight, sometimes
oftener according as things shall occur, and your necessities require. We shall
endeavor therein to scatter the illusions, which we know the Seducers make use
of to deceive you. Among whom the Bishop of Condom (at present Bishop of Meaux)
the Converter Pelisson, and Monsieur Nicole, are accounted the chief Champions.
They oblige you to Read over and over continually, The Exposition of the
Catholic Faith, of the said Bishop, to disguise the Romish Religion, and paint
Popery to you. The same Bishop some Months ago Printed a Pastoral Letter,
directed to the new Converts of his Diocese, to the very same end, as to seduce
you, and hide the deformity of their false Religion from your view. They are
not wanting in applauding the slender Arguments of Monsieur Nicole's Book,
Entitled, The pretended Reformed convinced of Schism. In that Book they pretend
to prove that by way of examination, it is impossible to find out the Truth,
and that you cannot meet with it but by submitting your selves to the Authority
of the Church. The Converter Pelisson has renewed the same Arguments in a new
Book: and this is one of the Books, which, those who have been seduced, use to
allege as a source from whence they have drawn their knowledges. These Books
shall be the matter of these Letters, not to examine them thoroughly, but only
to show you the falsehoods of these Doctors, the illusions of their Sophisms,
and the fallacy of what they advance.

We do not intend to confine our selves within the bounds of a dispute, because
we will take care to acquaint you with the most considerable transactions in
this Persecution; and to inform you with the passages of the Life, Death, and
behavior of our Martyrs and Confessors, the most suitable to your Condition,
and fittest for your Edification. Therefore we beseech those who know any thing
of undoubted truth, to give us notice of it, that we may make it public, for
the Edification, and the strengthening of those who want Constancy and Courage.

We will begin by the Bishop of Meaux's Pastoral Letter to the new Converts of
his Diocese. We pass by his preamble, to enter and come to that which is more
to our purpose, that is, the Method, wherewith the Reformed are brought to
their pretended Conversion in France. I do not wonder, says Monsieur de Meaux,
My dear Brethren, if you are returned with so much forwardness, and in great
Crowds to the Church where your Ancestors have worshipped God: the Principles of
Christianity, as I have said already, and the Baptismal Vow did call you back
inwardly to it. These Gentlemen boast themselves of the easy Victory they have
obtained in bringing back those of the Reformed Religion to their Church, that
is to say, in forcing a vast number of people to sign unwillingly an
Abjuration, who are fallen away from the Faith, either by threatenings, or by
the fear of losing their Estates, or by Torments, and the Persecutions of
Dragoons. It is true there had been in this occasion some examples of weakness
that are unaccountable and unparalled. We know, Brethren, these have been
stumbling Blocks to you, and they endeavor to prepossess you with them. They
tell you: if it was the true Religion, why do they not continue steadfast in it.
Some of our Brethren have wrote already, to strengthen you against this
scandal. They showed you that in the first Persecutions, things were carried on
here after the same manner, and that Apostasy was near as general as at this
present time. Since Men in those Ages crowded as fast to offer Incense to
Idols, as in our days they have been seen to make an Abjuration. In all Ages
there had been but few able to bear up against the Violences of Persecution.
The Martyrs are chosen Vessels, into whom God pours an extraordinary measure of
Grace, to strike an astonishment into the Enemies of his Truth, to confound the
weakness of them that fall, and to confirm the Faith of the Weak. There are
Miracles, but if they were frequent and ordinary, they should be no longer
such. If the prospect of so many persons who have yielded to the Violence of
Persecution or to the fear of it, prove a scandal to you; consider not that
part of our History. But look upon the Courage and Constancy of your Ancestors,
who have Established the Reformation in the last Century. Look upon the number
of our Ancient Martyrs in those days. Consider their Constancy, their Christian
Meekness, and Prayers even for their Persecutors. Consider with what Christian
resolution they suffered the greatest Torments. They have been Burnt by
degrees. They have seen their Bowels drop into the Flames before they gave up
the Ghost. They kept them alive by Art, sometimes many days, sometimes several
weeks, in those cruel Torments, and never a repining word was heard from their
Mouths. They Prayed for their Executioners. They gave God thanks. They sung his
praises. They called upon his Name to the last breath of their lives. When they
tell you now a days; if your Religion was True, you would be more steadfast in
it. You must answer, if our Religion was False, its followers would never have
had such an invincible Constancy, and transcendent Love for it, as to suffer
Death for its sake. If this had proceeded from a refractory and stubborn
humor, their pains and their Death had never been attended with so profound an
Humility, with such an exemplary Patience, with such an accomplished Meekness,
with such a burning Zeal, with such a sincere Devotion, so an entire
Submission, and such solid and apparent Joy as it was. The Spirit of Illusion
cannot work these things. These are the Characters of the Spirit of God, these
are the Fruits of Grace. Grace which was never given to Reprobates and
Pseudo-Martyrs.

Brethren, These objects are at a distance and remote from you, and perhaps you
will hardly reflect upon them: but it will be easy for you to consider those
that are before your Eyes. They are able to instruct and strengthen you against
the scandal, which the forwardness of many in forsaking your Religion give
occasion to your Enemies to reproach you with. To this you must oppose, first
above an hundred thousand souls that departed the Kingdom within a year, not
reckoning almost so many more that have come away these twenty years since the
Persecution begun. There are some from among them who have abandoned all their
Estates, Honors, Preferments, Dignities, Ease, and other Commodities of this
life. These were evident proofs there was no such forwardness, and haste to
re-enter into the Bosom of the Roman Church. You must oppose above forty
thousand Prisoners, who lie either in the Prisons, or the Monasteries of the
Kingdom, and who chose rather to suffer in them all manner of evils than to
embrace the Roman Communion. You must oppose Persons of Quality, as Monsieur
the Marquis of Bordage Condemned to the Galleys, and then to a perpetual
imprisonment, Monsieur the Marquis of Musse, who expects daily the same
Judgment, Monsieur the Marquis of Rochegude, and his Sons, Monsieur the Marquis
of Cagny, Monsieur Beringhen, and all his Family, Monsieur the Marquis of
Lange, Monsieur the Marquis of the Isle of Gat, in the Fortress of Angers, and
a vast number of other Gentlemen, who prefer either the Galleys, or the
Prisons, to the Pleasures Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux invites them to, that
is, to join themselves with a Church wherein their Forefathers have not
worshipped God. You must oppose a considerable number of Martyrs and Confessors,
whereof some are in Dungeons that are the very pictures of Hell, so deep, so
dark, so noysom, and so ghastly they are, some an hundred Feet deep in the
Ground: such is the condition of some of our Brethren at Dieppe, at the Haure,
in the Prisons of Humale, and other places; concerning which we may give you in
time a more particular account. You must oppose above six hundred persons who
are actually chained in the Galleys for their Religion. This is an account made
up not by Hyperbolical exaggeration, but given by a Roman Catholic Officer,
employed in Maritime affairs, and living at Marsellis. We have his Letter, and
(without making mention of his name) in time we may produce it. Amongst others,
this is one Article. Here are six hundred Slaves of the Reformed Religion, who
by their patience move the most unmerciful Galleys Captains to compassion. The
number of them must be very much increased since that time, for the Letter is
dated from Marseillis, June 27. 1686. that is to say above two months since;
and doubtless a great many more are gone thither; and indeed we hear that some
say there are two thousand, some give out four thousand. The famous Monsieur
Lewis de Maralles, Advocate of St. Menehoud, was not as yet gone there, for he
departed from Paris in Fetters but the 20th. of July, and came at Dijon but the
30th. of the same month; from whence at last he was brought to Marseillis,
laden with a Chain of fifty pound weight, and troubled with a violent Fever
that never ceased during the whole Journey. He is a Confessor of Jesus Christ,
whom the whole City of Paris has seen at the Tournelle (a Justice-Hall)
over-laden with Fetters of an extraordinary weight, and Preaching from the
midst thereof. All France has its Eyes fixed on him, as upon the greatest
example of Courage, of Piety, and Nicety of Conscience our Age has seen. We
shall give you one day the History of his Confession, and lay open to your view
the Sentiments of his Soul by his own Letters, in which you shall perceive the
Spirit and the Character of the Ancient Martyrs. He is one of the most eminent
Confessors; but not the only, and God raises some every day. The same Sea
Officer who wrote from Marseillis, that there were six hundred Galley
Protestant Slaves, adds, Fifteen days since Monsieur de Lezan, a Gentleman of
Quality, was Condemned to the Galleys upon a very slight accusation, viz. for
being present at some Religious Assembly. The next day they put several persons
to the Rack, in order to draw an Accusation from them against persons of
Quality. These unhappy wretches sustained the ordinary, and extraordinary Rack,
with a Constancy that terrified the Judges, and made the Executioner tender
hearted to such a degree, that the Provost was forced to be all the while in a
threatening posture to make him turn the wheel of the Rack. There was among them
a Student in Divinity, Native of Noyon in Picardy. These are matters of Fact,
the truth of which ought not to be questioned, since they are attested by a
person of a contrary persuasion, who is in the Country, and upon the places
where these Cruelties are practiced. These are Confessors who witness that the
Romish Church does not find that easiness which the Bishop of Meaux brags of,
in making the Reformed re-enter into its Communion. These are examples of
Constancy well worth a serious consideration; since it is far easier to suffer
Death than the ordinary and extraordinary Rack: and these famous Confessors may
justly be styled Martyrs. But will you oppose to the easy victory the
Converters boast of, and which they set out with so much noise and ostentation
to entice you into the Roman Church; will you I say oppose to these Seducers
some Martyrs, who are without exception such? Oppose Monsieur Teissier Viguier,
of Durford in the lower Languedoc, who was hanged some months ago in a place
called Lasalle, only for having served God in some public Assembly. Gisot, who
was Burnt alive at Nerac: this poor Gentleman through infirmity signed to an
Abjuration, either out of fear, or by reason of the Dragoons Persecutions, or
it may be through the feebleness of old Age; (for he was near fourscore years
old,) being fallen sick, God restored him his former Zeal, to make him obtain
the glorious Crown of Martyrdom; he denied to take the Communion in the Roman
way, and declared he recanted the unhappy Abjuration drawn from him by force.
The Priest to put in execution the sentence, that enjoins to to give the
Communion to all sick persons, whatever it cost, forced him to receive the
Host, and put it into his Mouth; the old Man spit it out according to his duty,
and upon this he was Condemned to the Fire to be burnt alive: he went to this
horrid torment with the like joy as did the Holy Martyrs; he was tied to the
Stake without any disturbance of mind; he sung the praises of God in the midst
of the flames to the very last breath; and this Constancy made so strong an
impression upon the minds of all the Inhabitants of Nerac, and struck so great
a terror into the Persecutors Breasts, that they durst not put in execution the
like Sentence, given against one called Fabrieres, of the same Town and
Country, Condemned also to be burnt alive, for having as the aforesaid Gisot
spit out the Host put into his Mouth by force. We have not heard yet that the
Sentence had been Executed; when it shall be so, we shall acquaint you with it.
We have another Martyr of an higher order, viz. Monsieur Ray of Nismes, Student
in Divinity, who after having Preached eight or nine months in the lower
Languedoc, has been apprehended and Condemned to Death, and was Executed at
Baucaire the 7th. of August. The Circumstances of his Martyrdom, his Courage,
his Answers, his Piety are too eminent and extraordinary to be confined in this
narrow compass. We will give you an account of them in the series of this
History, when we shall have gathered from credible Hands, and faithful
Memoires, all the parts of the History relating to this glorious Martyr.

Here are already many things, Brethren, for you to oppose to this Sentence of
Monsieur of Meaux, viz. I do not wonder you are come again thronging, and with
so much forwardness to our Church. But this is not all: tell him for a certain
truth, against his pretended forwardness, that for these four months past in
the Lower Languedoc, in a Country called Cevennes, and other neighboring
places, they continue to assemble almost every day, in the Woods, Caverns, and
among the Rocks. The Dragoons, who commonly find them out, make a slaughter of
them according to their order. They kill, they hang, and drag them into
Prisons; but this avails nothing. Let what will be the consequence, they
continue to assemble. In the Month of June last, toward the latter end, the
Dragoons having found out a Congregation near Nismes, killed many upon the
spot, and hung four upon the Trees. These Executioners withdrew, thinking these
Servants of God durst not come again to the same place. But two hours after
another Congregation was formed in the very same place, about the dead Bodies,
and in sight of the Corpse hanging upon the top of the Rocks. There is no week
but the like Congregations are made, and the like Massacres perpetrated. They
give an account of about threescore persons who have been massacred in a
Congregation made between the Towns of Uses and Bagnols in the beginning of
July. It is reported some Women were ravished, and some others had their
Bellies ripped open. But we keep the particulars of these matters of fact for
another time. For you may be assured we shall write nothing but what is
certain, and of an undoubted truth. Wherefore we have chosen rather to put off
the edification you ought to receive from the stedfastness and constancy of our
Martyrs and Confessors, than to set down some things as true, which may
hereafter prove doubtful or false. It is enough at present to show the Bishop
of Meaux and his Brethren, they have as yet no great reason to boast
themselves, as if they had obtained an easy conquest and victory over us. Too
soon they begin to triumph, not being as yet advanced so far as they imagine
themselves to be; we see already the vanity of his prediction, Within four
months no mention should be made of Huguenots in France. These fair Designs are
brought to naught, and the difficulty will be found at the end.

As for you, Brethren, the Discourse we have entertained you with, and the
Objects we have laid before your eyes, ought to make you ashamed if you have
been so weak as to fall, and excite you to redouble your stedfastness if you
continue as yet standing. But let us see an Article more of the Bishop of Meaux
Pastoral Letter.

None of you, says he, has sustained violence, either in his person, or in his
estate, let them not bring you those deceitful Letters, which Strangers, under
the notion of Ministers direct, under the Title of Pastoral Letters to the
Protestants in France, fallen by the violence of the Torments. Besides that
they are written by some Men who could never prove their Mission, those Letters
do not concern you at all; far from having suffered any Torments, you never
heard a word of them. I hear say the same from the rest of the Bishops; but for
you, Brethren, I speak nothing but what you acknowledge as well as I; you are
come quietly to us, and you know it. There are some Objects, which Men can
never make themselves familiar with. It is in vain to look upon them, they are
always the same, and they ever appear like Prodigies; Maimbourg, Varillas,
Brueys, and a great number of others have been so bold as to say, that the
Conversions were made without any violence. They have been answered upon this
matter, and put to their last shifts so far as to cover with shame impudence it
self. But this is to wash a Blackmore white. These Gentlemen have put on a
brazen Forehead, and are resolved never to blush at any thing. Judge your
selves by this pattern of the good faith and sincerity of your Converters. You,
who have seen your Estates consumed and destroyed, your Bodies abused, your
Neighbors dragged into Prisons, your poor Wifes shaved, and clapped into
Nunneries, the faithful Servants of God cast into Dungeons full of stench and
corruption. Some others were carried into Prisons, where the Water run under
feet; but to keep them from falling into the precipice, they set them upon
small narrow Boards, upon which they were tossed night and day. Others have
been burnt and roasted. Others have been put out of their Wits, and become mad,
for being kept awake without any rest.

All France has seen it: all Europe is witness of it: and yet they have the
boldness to affirm the contrary of what your selves are eyewitnesses. Do you
think these Gentlemen dare not tell you lies upon the Centuries past, when they
entertain you concerning the Tradition, and what has been said and done a
thousand or twelve hundred years ago, since they have no manner of respect for
present truths, and matters of fact, whereof there are almost as many
Witnesses, as Men alive upon earth. In the name of God reflect upon these
things, and consider, when they forbid you an examination, when they tell you
you must believe the Church, that is, these false Doctors who speak to you, you
must give credit to what they say without knowledge: Consider, I say, if there
is any safety to trust people who are devoted and given up to lying, and who
have put off all manner of shame and bashfulness.

Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux has heard from all the Bishops, there was no
Violence practiced in all their Diocesses. I would fain know what Definition
these Gentlemen give of violence, and what they call Torments. Among these
Bishops the Bishop of Aubun could give the lie to the Bishop of Meaux; for he
could not say as he did, viz. That the Inhabitants of his Diocese never heard
one word of torments. He went attended with some Executioners to the Lady S.
Hadre Montbrun, Widow of an illustrious General, who had the honor to command
in chief the King's and the Venetians Armies with so much Glory. This Bishop, I
say, attended by some Missionaries and a Provost, who brought with him two or
three Executioners, furnished with all the Instruments of the Rack and Torture,
could not make good the Bishop of Meaux assertion. If this is false, why do
they not convince the Servants and the Officers of that House of Falsehood, who
have seen it, who told it, and who have written of it? But the Bishop of Meaux
has never done, nor seen any thing like it in his Diocese. Suppose this be
true, it is not strange, and he has no great reason to wish himself joy for
it; since Paris, and the neigbouring places were the last that felt the smart
of the Persecution. All France was stricken with terror, bathed in tears, and
red with blood; Paris and Brie saw nothing round about, but sanguinary Troops,
and Emissaries laden with the Spoils of the Reformed, and covered with their
blood; what wonder is it then, if these dreadful Objects overcame them without
approaching them? since the fear of an imminent danger does as much terrify us
as the immediate sense of a present evil inflicted upon us; nay, some who sunk
under the apprehensions of punishment, with courage sustained it when it was
inflicted. The Dragoons of Bearn, of Aquitain, of Poictou, of Languedoc, of
Normandy made Conversions for the Bishop of Meaux. After this let him boast
himself if he can of his easy Converts.

But I am weary to confute such impudences by matters of fact, which our
Persecutors deny, and by such Witnesses a they reject. But let us see, whether
Monsieur Meaux will contradict himself. He wrote his Pastoral Letter in April
last, a little while before Easter, to invite and prepare the new Converts to
the next Communion; and exactly at the very same time he wrote to one of his
Diocese the following Letter, which is come to hand.

Meaux, April. 3. 1686. Monsieur,
I Continue to write to you without being discouraged at the Answer you made to
my first Letter; I did too well perceive a strange Character, and a Ministers
Style in it to attribute it to you. In a word, I found that it proceeded not
from a Judgment such as yours. But suppose it did, yet would I not cease to
invite you to a return. I saw in a Letter you wrote to Madam V... that the true
Church does not persecute. What do you mean by that, Sir? Do you understand
that the Church it self does never make use of Force? It is very true, since
the Church has but spiritual Arms. Do you mean that the Princes, who are the
Sons of the Church, ought never to draw the Sword God has put into their hands,
to destroy his Enemies? Will you dare say that against the Judgment of your own
Doctors themselves, who have maintained by so many Books, that the Republic of
Geneva could, and ought to condemn Servetus to the Fire, for having denied the
Divinity of the Son of God? But without alleging any Examples, and the
authority of your Doctors, tell me in what place of the Scriptures Heretics
and Schismatics are excepted out of the number of those Malefactors against
whom S. Paul says, God himself has armed the Princes? And if you would not
allow Christian Princes the punishing of such heinous Crimes, because injurious
to God, must not they punish them because they are the occasion of trouble and
sedition in the Government? Do you not see clearly that you are grounded upon a
false Principle? And if it was true, then were the Arrians, the Nestorians, the
Pelagians in the right against the Church, since it were they who were
persecuted and banished, and the Catholics those who then persecuted and
banished them. And at this present time the Catholics who are punished with
death in Sweedland, and in many other Kingdoms should be in the right against
those that call themselves Evangelical, and each of them at his turn should be
in the right and in the wrong, in the right in one place, and in the wrong in
another, and Religion would depend upon uncertainties. But this is too much
upon this Subject to convince as good a Wit as yours. Know only, that when it
pleases God to leave us to our own thoughts, the best Judgments are biassed
with the least appearances. The fear of worshipping Bread stands (according to
your prejudice) upon better grounds. Consider in the mean while (without
beginning a Controversy, that must needs go beyond the bounds of a Letter)
consider, I say, it was the like fear that caused the Arrians, and the
Disciples of Paul of Samosatus, to say that they would not give the Divine
Honors to a Man, to a Child, to a Creature what perfections and privileges
soever she was endowed with. It was human reason, senses and prejudices that
inspired them with those empty fears. Take care that your Religion (after their
example) does not too much depend upon the senses and human reason; in a like
case, and that your noncompliance does not proceed from an habit to follow
their Dictates. However you see your Reformers have done nothing else but
renewing the quarrels ended six hundred years ago, when Berengarius stirred
them, and if you question the judgment given against him, the others with as
much reason may question all the preceding Councils; and here we are to examine
again, all that has been Decreed, as if we did but now become Christians, and
if all that^ our Fathers had Decreed was good for nothing: this shows in a
word, that if Christians, when they cannot agree upon the sense of the
Scripture, do not acknowledge a speaking and living Authority, to which they
submit themselves, the Christian Church is certainly the weakest of all the
Societies in the World, the most exposed to desperate and remediless divisions
to the Novators, and factious Sectaries of all sorts. This is an Objection
which your Ministers with all their subtilty could never Answer; they satisfy
themselves when they allege some examples, wherewith they pretend to prove the
Councils have not always well determined. All those examples are false or ill
alleged; and in very little time you that are ingenious might be convinced of
it. You receive things with too much credulity, without ever examining them:
but without insisting longer upon these things, consider only, if it is likely
that God, who has permitted there should be so many depths in the Scripture,
and that many Schisms should spring from thence among those who make profession
of it, consider, I say, if God has left no means to his Church to compound
them, and if there is no other remedy to heal Divisions, but to let every one
believe according to his fancy, and so lead Men by degrees to the indifferency
of Religion, which is the greatest of all evils. Think, Sir, Think upon this,
Consult your own thoughts, and not your Ministers subtilties, who, let what
will come of it, are resolved to defend their prejudices, rather than be
accounted false Teachers. Nay, this is not enough, ponderate these things; pass
by the places where the Scripture appears a little intricated and difficult. It
is better to see the simplicity of a Brother endeavoring to win his Brother,
than the neatness of an elaborated do all for your person, which I esteem,
which is dear to me, and that I am heartily

Your, etc. Thus signed, J. Benign, Bishop of Meaux.


Having imposed the necessity upon our selves not to go beyond this Leaf: we
put off our reflections upon this Letter, till our next, which we shall give
you in a few days; because this is only as a Preface to the rest. In mean while
we recommend you to the Grace of God, and to his Mercy. Amen.

September, 1. 1686.
FINIS.

