THE JUDGES OPINIONS CONCERNING PETITION to the KING IN PVBLICK MATTERS
See Moors Reports, Page 755 2 Jacobi. Crooks Reports, Page 37 2 Jacobi.


With a Clause of A late ACT of PARLIAMENT concerning the same Subject.

FEB. 13. 2. Jac. In the Star Chamber all the Justices of England were
assembled with many of the Nobility, viz. The Lord Ellesmore, Lord Chancellor
the Earl of Dorset, Lord Treasurer; the Lord Viscount Cranborn, Principal
Secretary; The Earl of Nottingham, Lord Admiral; The Earls of Northumberland,
Worcester, Devon, and Northampton; The Lords Zouch, Burleigh and Knolls; The
Chancellor of the Duchy. The Archbishop of Canterbury, The Bishop of London,
Popham Chief Justice, Bruce Master of the Rolls, Anderson, Gaudy, Walmesly,
Fenner, Kingsmi^, Warberton, Savile, Daniel Y^^ver^o^, and Snig. And there the
Chancellor of England by the Kings Command, after he had made a long Speech
concerning the Justices of Peace, and an exhortation to the Justices of Assize,
and a discourse of Papists and Puritans, declaring that they were both
disturbers of the State, and that the King intended to suppress them, and to
have the Laws put in execution against them, demanded of the Judges their
resolution of three things.

Whereof one was.

To which all the Justices answered, that this was an offense finable by
discretion, and very near to Treason and Felony in desert of punishment; For
this tends to raise Sedition, Rebellion, and Discontent, among the People. To
which Resolution all the Lords agreed. And then many of the Lords declared,
that some of the Puritans had raised a false rumor of the King, that he
intended to grant a Toleration to Papists, the which offense seemed to the
Justices grievously finable by the Rules of Common Law, in the Kings Bench, or
by the King and his Council, or now since the Statute of 3 H. 7. in the
Star Chamber. And the Lords each by themselves publicly declared, that the
King was Discontented with this false Rumor; And the day before had made a
Protestation unto them, that he never intended it; and that he would loose the
last drop of Blood in his Body before he would do it. And that he Prayed to
God, that before his Issue should maintain any other Religion then this that
himself maintains, that he would take them out of the World.

Anno XIII. Caroli II. Regis. WHereas it has been found by sad experience,
that Tumultuous, and other disorderly soliciting, and procuring of hands by
private persons to Petitions, Complaints, Remonstrances and Declarations, and
other Addresses to the King, or to both, or either Houses of Parliament, for
Alteration of matters established by Law, redress of pretended grievances in
Church or State, or other public Concernments, have been made use of to serve
the ends of factious and Seditious persons gotten into power, to the violation
of the public peace, and have been a great means of the late unhappy wars,
Confusions, and Calamities in this Nation; for preventing the like mischief for
the future;

Be it Enacted, etc. That no person or persons whatsoever, shall from and after
the first of August, 1661. Solicit, labor or procure the getting of hands,
or other consent of any persons above the number of 20, or more, to any
Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, Declaration, or other Address to the King,
or both, or either Houses of Parliament, for alteration of Matters established
by Law in Church or State, unless the matter thereof have been first consented
unto, and ordered by three or more Justices of that County, or by the Major
part of the Grand Jury of the County, or Division of the County, where the same
matter shall arise at their public Assize^, or General Quarter Sessions, or if
arising in London, by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, in Common Council
assembled; And that no person or persons whatsoever shall repair to his
Majesty, or both or either of the Houses of Parliament, upon pretense of
presenting or delivering any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, or Declaration,
or other Addresses accompained with excessive number of people, not at any
onetime with above the number of ten persons, group in of incurring a penalty,
not exceeding the sum of 100 pounds in money, and three Months Imprisonment
without Bail or Mainprize for every offense, which offense to be prosecuted,
etc. See the Act at Large.

Anno XIII. Caroli II. Be it enacted etc. That if any person or persons
whatsoever after the 24 day of June 1661, during his Majesty's Life, shall
maliciously, and advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretic or a
Papist, or that he endeavors to introduce Popery; or shall maliciously and
advisedly, by writing, Printing, Preaching or other speaking express, publish,
utter or delcare any words, sentences, or other thing or things, to incite or
stir up the people to hatred or dislike of the Person of his Majesty, or the
established Government, then every such person and persons being thereof
legally convicted, shall be disabled to have or enjoy, and is hereby disabled,
and made incapable of having, holding, enjoying, or exercizing any place,
office, or promotion Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, or any other
employment in Church or State, other then that of his Peerage, and shall
likewise be liable to such further and other punishments as by the Common Laws
or Statutes of this Realm may be inflicted in such cases, etc. See the Statute
at Large.

London, Printed for Thomas Burrell in Fleet Street, 1679.


