SEVERAL SERMONS Preached on the whole EIGHTH CHAPTER OF THE EPISTLE to the
ROMANS.

EIGHTEEN OF WHICH Preached on the FIRST, SECOND, THIRD, FOVRTH VERSES are here
Published.

WHEREIN The Saints Exemption from Condemnation, the Mystical Union, the
Spiritual Life, the Dominion of Sin and the Spirits agency in freeing from it,
the Law's inability to justify and save, Christ's Mission, Eternal Sonship,
Incarnation, his being an Expiatory Sacrifice, Fulfilling the Laws
righteousness (which is imputed to Believers), are opened, confirmed,
vindicated, and applied.

BY THO. JACOMB, D. D.

The FIRST VOLUME of the FIRST PART.

Hoc mihi concedetur nihil unquam fuisse inter homines tam absolutum, in quo
vel expoliendo, vel ornando, vel illustrando, non fieret locus sequentium
industriae.

Calvin in Ep. ad Gryn. London, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be Sold by M.
Pit at the White-Hart in Little-Britain, and R. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown,
and J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church yard, 1672.

To the Right Honorable ELIZABETH CONVNTESSE DOWAGER OF EXETER, My Ever
Honored LADY.
MADAM,
ALthough I know before hand how the prefixing of your Name upon this account
will be resented by your Ladyship, yet I am by so many Reasons thereunto
obliged that I must venture to do it, and cast my self upon your Goodness for
my pardon. This Volume of Sermons (which is but a Forerunner to Two or Three
more) I presume therefore humbly to dedicate to your Honor; which, though in
it self and in your Ladyships esteem, it be a very insignificative thing, yet
however it is a declaration to the World that I am sensible of my vast
obligations to You; and that I would catch at every thing wherein I might
testify how much I am beholden to you. And I hope you will not be offended
with me for the doing of that, which all (who know my Circumstances) would have
wondered if I had omitted. Surely (Madam) those extraordinary Favors which (for
above Twenty Years) you have been pleased to confer upon me and mine, deserve
over and over all those little expressions of humble Respect and Gratitude
which I can possibly make: This Dedication therefore being designed for those
Ends, I beseech you that you will please to put a favorable interpretation
upon it.

But besides this, your Ladyship may upon several Considerations claim a
special interest in this Work, (if there be any thing of good either in it or
by it); One of which I shall not conceal, the rest I must. When I had finished
my Preaching on the Chapter which I have gone over, You was pleased to desire
me (and your Desires are, and ought to be, Commands to me), to publish to the
World what I had done in a private Auditory: which desire of Yours (in
concurrence with my own hopes of doing some good), did very much prevail with
me to engage in this difficult and painful Undertaking, (which was before as
much besides my intention as against my inclination). So that (Madam) you are
in a special manner to be owned in what is here done; and (the truth is) if any
benefit shall thereby accrue to any, it must (under God) upon several accounts
in a great measure be ascribed to your Honor, you having been so instrumental
in the promoting thereof.

Madam, that which once was preached to your Ear is now presented to your Eye:
and it is my hope (and shall be my prayer) that those heavenly Truths, which in
the Hearing of them were not unto you (as well as others) without some
considerable efficacy and sweetness, may not in the Reading of them be unto you
less efficacious and sweet. The Chapter opened is a Summary of Evangelical Duty
and Comfort; through the rich Grace of God you are (in a very eminent manner) a
performer of the One, and through the same Grace of God you are also a partaker
of the Other; and shall (I trust) grow up daily yet more and more to an higher
participation of it. I cannot wish you to be more holy than to do what is here
enjoined, nor more happy than to possess what is here promised.

It pleases the Merciful God (the sovereign disposer of Life and Death, in
whose hands Yours and all our times are), as yet to continue you in the land of
the living: When many, very many of your dear Relations are taken away and are
not, you your Self are yet spared (with a small number of Survivors). I beseech
you give me leave (if you do not give it me I must take it), to pray for the
long continuance of this mercy, that your days may still be prolonged on earth,
and that you may arrive at a far greater Age than what as yet you have arrived
at. You are impatient (I fear a little too much) to be gone; partly from the
dread you have of the infirmities which attend old age, and your weariness of
the world; and partly from the pantings of your Soul to be with Christ and in
the possessing of the heavenly Glory. But (good Madam) I beseech you not too
much haste, no not for Heaven itself; you will have it never the sooner for that.
He that has determined your Days and Months, and has allotted you such Work
to do in your Generation, will have you (let your own thoughts and desires be
what they will) live out that time, and finish that work which he has set you:
be entreated therefore quietly and cheerfully to wait all the days of your
appointed time till your change shall come. Heaven will be the same twenty
years hence that now it is; and the longer you are kept out of it, upon the
doing of Gods work, the better it will be to you at last. It Is one of the
highest degrees of grace that here a Saint is capable of, to be sure of Heaven
and yet, in order to service, to be willing for a time to be kept out of
Heaven; here was the (...). Theodoret.
height of Paul's grace and the excellency of his Spirit, Philip. 1.23, 24, 25.
For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better. Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and
continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith. It Is a Saying of
Ingentis animi est aliena causa ad vitam reverti.
Seneca, It argues a great and generous mind for one to be willing for the sake
of another to return to life again; surely that Christian discovers true
greatness of Spirit, who for the good of Others is willing to continue in this
Life and to be kept out of that which is far better. Madam, your
Serviceableness is known to all but to your Self; many have cause to bless God
for the good which they reap by your means, (who can speak that which it is not
convenient for me to write): it will be a rare piece of Self-denial, for you to
submit (as to your own personal interest) to be a loser if others may be
gainers thereby. Assure your self, many do earnestly beg of God the
prolongation of your Days; You pray for your Death but they for your Life, I
hope in this God will hear them and not you. Your gracious Father has given
you a title to Heaven, has (in a great measure) fitted you for Heaven, and
will in due time take you up into Heaven: it being thus, as to the ordering of
your passage thither and the timing of your entrance into it, all that (good
Madam) you should wholly refer to his good pleasure.

Madam, The Dedication of Book (I very well know) signifies but little to your
Ladyship, Prayer is the thing which you desire and value; wherein should I be
wanting (it being the only requital I can make you for all your Favors) I
should certainly be unworthy and ungrateful beyond all expressions. As God
shall enable me, according to the many obligations which I lie under I shall
never cease to pray for You and Yours. If has pleased the sovereign and
all-disposing God to cut off many Branches which grew from your Stock, yet One
(and the principal One too) is hitherto spared; God grant he may be so long,
and that all Heavenly Blessings as well as Earthly may be multiplied upon him.
And blessed be the Lord you live to see Others who are of You (though not
immediately yet but at one remove), whom God begins to bless with an hopeful
Issue; the best of his Blessings be upon them also! That Honorable Family (to
which you are so nearly related) when so many Great and Ancient Families are
melted away like Snow before the Sun, yet keeps up in its pristine Greatness
and Splendour; and may it so continue from generation to generation till the
World shall be no more! And for your Self (Madam) the God of Heaven bless you,
and recompense into your bosom sevenfold all that kindness that ever you have
shown to any of his: He grant that you may bring forth fruit in your old age
and be fat and flourishing; that you may come to your grave in a full age like
as a shock of corn comes in its season; that as your outward man decays your
inward man may be renewed day by day; that you may never want the light of his
countenance; that you may at the last arrive at that Peace, Comfort, Assurance
which you have so long been praying for; that you may yet be a shining light in
that more public Orb wherein you are fixed, a pattern of Humility and
Condescension, of all Graces and Virtues and good Works to all who behold you;
and (finally) that when you have fought the good fight, and shall have finished
your course, and kept the faith, you may receive that crown of righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give you at that day. These are, have
been, and ever shall be the daily and ardent Prayers of

Madam, YOUR HONORS Most humble and ever obliged Servant and Chaplain, THO.
JACOMB.
SEPT. 18. 1672.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
1. THat I may not be defective either in civility to thee or in common
prudence and justice to my self, it is necessary that I pre-advertise thee of
some things convenient to be known about the ensuing Work; the doing of which
therefore is the design and business of this Preface.

2. That which was the first rise and occasion of it, was this: I having in my
Ministry gone over several of the most weighty Points in Divinity, relating
both to Faith and Practice; and finding my self too often divided in my
thoughts what Text or Subject next to insist upon; upon this twofold
Consideration I resolved to fix upon some continued Discourse in Holy Writ,
where I might have my work cut out for me by the Spirit of God from time to
time, by which being determined I might be freed from self-perplexing and
time-wasting distractions. No sooner was I come to this resolution, but
immediately it pleased God to bring to my thoughts the Eighth Chapter to the
Romans: which when I had a little survay'd in my mind and taken a short view of
the fullness and preciousness of its matter, without any further demur or
hesitancy I resolved also that that should be the Chapter which I would lay out
my pains upon. Accordingly I entered upon it; and (for which I heartily bless
the Lord) he who directed me to that Undertaking was graciously pleased to
assist me in it and to carry me through it.

3. The Excellency of this Chapter being my great inducement to pitch upon it,
it would have been requisite that I should here have endeavored to have set
forth that excellency, had I not in my first entrance upon the work it self
said enough upon that account. To compare Scripture with Scripture (that one
place may give light to another) is a thing very safe and good, but to compare
Scripture before Scripture is a thing that must be done with much tenderness
and caution: I adore every part and parcel of Sacred Writ ( 2 Timothy 3.16.
all being given by inspiration of God and admirably useful to that end for
which it was appointed), and would be very careful how I prefer one before
another. Therefore I do not say that Paul's Epistles are the most excellent of
all the New Testament Writings, or that this Epistle to the Romans is the most
excellent of all the other Epistles, or that this Chapter therein is the most
excellent of all the other Chapters (in which gradation some please
themselves): Yet this I may safely say, that this Epistle and this Chapter for
sublimity of Matter, variety of Evangelical Truths, admirable Support and
Comfort to Believers, are not inferior to any part whatsoever of the Holy
Scriptures. Which if so, I have then pitched upon a Subject very well worthy of
my best Endeavors, and none will blame me for attempting to open so rich a
Cabinet.

4. In digging into this Mine I found it to be so full that it was a long time
before I could get to the bottom of it; for I was two years (and something
more) in preaching over this Chapter. In which time I preached very many
Sermons upon it, but the precise Number I will not mention; because Some from
thence might take occasion to fasten that censure upon me which I hope I do not
deserve; and Others seeing here but Eighteen of so many published, might think
I shall never come to the end of all. Well! though the work was long yet it
pleased God to spare me till I had finished it: I have now entered upon a work
of another nature, whether he will also let me see the finishing of that, (...).

5. Wherein it fares with me much as it sometimes does with Seamen; who after a
long and tedious Voyage are no sooner arrived at shore, but presently they are
seized upon and sent to Sea again, upon a Voyage far more tedious and dangerous
than the former: This is my case, when I had but just set my foot on land and
was got off from one Service which was enough painful and troublesome, by the
overruling Providence of God I was commanded to Sea again, and put upon
another Service far more difficult and dangerous than the former. But I must be
at his dispose who may command me whither and about what he pleases! and it
becomes me with all alacrity to go whithersoever he bids me go, and to do
whatsoever he bids me do.

6. When I had finished my Sermons on the whole Chapter, several Friends
importuned me to print them: whose importunity though I could not well
withstand, yet surely had there been nothing more than that, I had not been
drawn thereby to undertake such a task as I now have. And the truth is, when I
consider my great averseness to Printing, the vastness and difficulty of the
present Work, my great unfitness for it (as upon other accounts so in respect
of my bodily infirmities which daily grow upon me), my sluggish, melancholy
temper, the many divertisements I meet with by other employments; I say when I
consider these things I cannot but stand and wonder how I came to be thus
engaged. I must (upon the whole matter) resolve it mainly into the
overpow'ring, all-determining Will of God, and conclude he had appointed and
cut out this Work for me and would have me do it. I write not this (I can
appeal to the Searcher of hearts) to heighten my fitness for this service or
the worth of any thing that I have done; but only that I may declare the true
Ground of my engaging in the present business, duly acknowledge God in such an
enterprise as this is, and also that I may animate my Faith and Hope in Him for
Assitance and Success; as knowing that what he calls unto he will carry through
and what is of him shall be blessed by him.

7. As soon as my Preaching-work was off of my hands, after a very short respit
I set upon this of Printing: wherein what progress I have made, this Volume
(which I publish as a prodromus to what is yet to come) will manifest. It
contains what I preached upon the four first Verses. Some (I assure my self)
will be surpised, and think it strange that so few Verses should make a Volume
of this bulk and bigness: but I would desire these before they judge to cast
their eye upon the various Heads discussed therein, to weigh the great latitude
and importance of those Heads; and I hope they will then be satisfied that in
the due handling of so many and so material things less could not well be
spoken. I did indeed design at first to have gone much farther, but afterward
I saw (the work growing so much upon me) these Verses were as much as I could
grasp in one Book. And the Apostle ending with them the first part of his
Discourse, ( viz the confirmation of the Predicate in the Proposition, there is
no condemnation, etc.) I thought without any unhandsome disjoining of the Words
I might there break off. What comes after in the following Verses, wherein
there is the illustration of the Subject, who walk not after the flesh, etc.
shall next be insisted upon (if God permit).

8. When I say that what I preached is here published, I would not be
misunderstood; as if I had not varied in the Latter from the Former: for I
acknowledge I have varied very much; and that too not only in Words and
Expressions but (in several places) even in the very Method and Matter. Which
alterations proceeded not only from my infelicity (that I cannot twice do the
same thing in the same way); but also because I found, upon the review of what
I had done, Second thoughts to be necessary. Add to this too, there must be a
difference when we have to do with the Ear and when with the Eye; for that
Style and Method, yea and Matter too, which is proper for the one is not always
so for the other. I hope therefore none will be severe against me because of
these Variations; but if any will be so, let them be sure that they themselves
do wear but the same clothes abroad which they do at home, (which I think few
do).

9. The Matter in the First and Second Verses being (comparatively) more plain
and practical, in going over them I have (to the best of my remembrance) varied
but little: but in the Third and Fourth Verses where the Matter is more deep
and Controversal, there I have varied much more. They point me to Christ's
Natural Sonship, Incarnation, Sacrifice for sin, etc. which excellent Heads I
did not pass over in Preaching without some considerable enlargement upon them;
but had I then so fully handled them as here I do, I should but have tired and
perplexed the generality of private Auditors, and scarce have edified them.
Indeed these are Points (especially if largely and thoroughly discussed) much
more proper for a Reader, whose thoughts may dwell upon them he having them
fixed before him; than for an Hearer, who through the constant succession of
new matter, the slowness of understanding, the weakness of memory, is not so
able to take them in or to judge a-right of them. Upon this Consideration I
have here added and inserted many things which then I omitted; hoping that as
what I then spoke was not too little for Hearers, so that what I now write will
not be too much for Readers.

10. Reader, I hope in the perusal of this Book thou will find, that things of
a practical nature, such as concern Faith, holy Walking, deliverance from Sins
dominion (and the like), have far the greatest room in it: yet I am not ashamed
to own that there are in it several things of another nature (I mean
Controversial); which I neither could nor (in truth) did desire to avoid. As to
Controversies more nice and curious than necessary and profitable, none
delights in them less than my self; (who would love to walk in the midst' of
briars and thorns that has pleasant meadows or gardens to walk in?) much less
d^ I delight to trouble weak Christians with knotty and polemick matters. But
the Controversies which I handle are of such weight and importance, unto which
too the Texts I open did so unavoidably lead me, that I knew not (without
falsehood to my Trust as a Minister of the Gospel) how to shun them. Shall the
Natures, Offices, Sonship, Incarnation, Sacrisice, etc. of our dearest Lord and
Savior be assaulted by daring Enemies, and shall not we (especially when they
lie in our way) defend and vindicate them? And are these the great things upon
which the Salvation and Happiness of Believers do depend, and shall not they
understand how Adversaries attempt to undermine them? yea, so to be able to
answer such Gainsayers as that they may stand firm and fixed upon these Gospel
Foundations? That I might therefore heighten the knowledge and confirm the
Faith of such, I have been somewhat large upon these things; in the managing
whereof if I have done too much for the Unlearned and too little for the
Learned, I am sorry for it.

11. Of all the Controversies with which the Church is pestred, I have (as the
Texts did lead me) most concerned my self in those wherein we have to do with
Papists and Socinians; but principally with the Latter. These (not that I in
other things acquit the Former) are the great impugners of the Christian Faith,
in their denying Christ's Godhead, eternal Sonship, Pre-existence before his
Nativity of the Virgin (wherein they are worse than the old Arrians),
Satisfaction, his being a proper Sacrifice for Sin, the main Ends of his Death,
etc. Against whom therefore I have endeavored to assert and maintain these
high and glorious Truths (which are indeed Truths of the first magnitude). What
thoughts others may have of Socinianism I know not, I know my own: And might I
presume so far as to give advice to my Reverend Brethren in the Ministry, I
would humbly advise them to set themselves to their utmost against it. For it
does not only strike at the whole platform of the Gospel, but (of all other
Opinions) it gets nearest to the very Vitals thereof: this cursed worm grows in
the Gospels best fruit; it is for the poisoning of those Fountains from which
the streams of Life do most immediately flow; whilst many other Errors
endanger but the remoter parts, this endangers the very heart of Christianity:
can we say or do too much to secure Souls from it and to defend the Gospel
against it? God prevent the growth of it in all the Churches of Christ!

12. If in the discussing of these Points I have said nothing but what the
Learned in their Treatises about them have said before, yet however two things
I have done: (1.) According to my duty I have given my Testimony to the great
Truths of God, (let it signify what he pleases). (2.) I hope I have (I am sure
it has been my endeavor) made some things (in themselves dark and intricate)
to be somewhat more plain and intelligible to weaker Capacities: and if I have
done but that, though I have brought no new matter, my pains have not been ill
spent. My Souls desire is that the Professors of this Age may be well grounded
in the Articles of the Christian Faith, and that they may attain to a clearer
insight into Gospel Mysteries than what as yet they have attained to: and if
what is here done shall conduce to the promoting of these most desirable
things, it will be a sufficient recompense to me for all the labor that I have
been at.


13. I observe that many private Christians will read over those Controversies
in a Sermon, which they care not to read in Treatises professedly penned about
them: the Reason of which (I suppose) is this, they meet with that in a Sermon
which they do not in a Treatise; viz. when the Argumentative part is over they
come to something that is practical; the bone being broken they have marrow and
sweetness to feed upon. It has been my care all along in this work to answer
herein the expectation and desire of good Souls, for at the close of every
knotty Subject I have always made thereof some plain and useful Application;
that so I might reach both the Head and the Heart too.

14. So long as the strife lay between an Israelite and an Egyptian the matter
was not very sad, but when the Israelite and the Israelite strove one against
the other then 'twas sad indeed: So here; so long as the contention was 'twixt
Romanists and Socinians on one hand and Protestants on the other, 'twas well
enought; but when Protestants divide and differ among themselves, that is matter
of great sadness. In the Body of this Work I have had occasion only to contend
with the Former, and there I had nothing but comfort; but in the End I was
necessitated to take notice of and to interest my self in a difference between
the Latter (concerning the imputation of Christ's Active Obedience, which
Amongst whom in its proper place (had not my memory failed me) I should have
cited that truly eminent Person Bishop Reynolds on Psalm. 110. page 440. etc.
some are for and some against), and that afflicted me more than all that went
before. For though in my own judgment I am very well satisfied for the
Affirmative, yet it troubles me that I should therein dissent from those whose
Names (as to the dead) I highly honor, and whose Persons (as to the living) I
dearly love. Well! these differences will be till Heaven unite us all: and
blessed be God in this point we may differ salvo Fidei fundamento. I hope we
shall make it to appear to the world that we can dissent and yet love; that
whereunto we have attained we shall walk by the same rule, and if in any thing
we be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto us, (according to that
excellent decision of the Apostle in cases of this nature).

15. But (Reader) I must not detain thee longer in giving thee any further
account of the Particulars treated of in these Sermons; do but thy self read
over the Contents of the several Chapters, and they will in short give thee a
prospect of the Matter and Method of the whole. Thou see already a great part
of my Way hitherto has been somewhat rough and craggy, I hope in what follows
it will be more smooth and easy (bating those passages which some Expositors
conceive Peter referred unto, when he spoke of some things in Paul's Epistles
hard to be understood); however I must take it as it falls.

16. Two things as (to the whole) will be objected against me: the One is over
much prolivity. As to which all that I can say for my self is (1.) The Subjects
insisted upon are so various, lying so near the very heart of Religion, bearing
so high a place in Evangelical Faith, so necessary to be understood by all, and
so desperately struck at by Opposers; that truly for my part I thought (pardon
me if I was mistasten) I could hardly be too full in the Explication,
Confirmation and Application of them. Good Reader! please to read over the bare
Heads I go upon (as they will occur by and by), and then tell me whether so
many and such fundamental Truths could well have been crowded into a lesser
room. But (2.) if this will not satisfy such as are most judicious, it shall
be mended in what is to follow.


17. The Other is, the unnecessariness of this Undertaking so many already
having wrote upon this Chapter. Answ. So many? who or where are those so many?
I wish I could see them: I deny not but that many, both Ancients and Moderns,
have written Commentaries upon it for the clearing up of the Sense of the
Words, (for whose labors I bless God, and shall in this Work endeavor to make
the best improvement of them); but having done that, there they leave off: I
hope I go further than so, not satisfying my self barely to give the Sense and
Meaning of the Text (which is the proper work of an Expositor), but also
drawing out that Sense and making the best advantage of it for things Doctrinal
and Practical, (which is the work of a Preacher). I acknowledge also that some
have particularly and fully wrote upon it in the way which I take, (as Mr.
Elton, Cowper, Parr, Streso, Philips, Binning to the 15 Verse); but not so but
that there is yet room for the industry of Others: there are good gleanings in
this large field yet left for them that shall come after. I will not for my
vindication fly to that common Maxim, Good things we cannot hear (or read) too
often; (...): but I desire so much right may be done me, as to compare what I
have now done with what others upon this Chapter have done before; if I do no
more than they I deserve the severest Censure, but if I do, the Reader then I
hope will be so candid, yea so just, as to let me have his favorable Sentence.
I am conscious to my self of many weaknesses in the work, but as to the charge
(of but doing that which was done before) pardon me if in that I stand upon my
vindication.

18. Sumite matetiam vestris, qui scribitis, aequam Viribus, and versate din,
quid far recusent Quid valiant humeri --
He gave good advice to them that will be printing, who counseled them to
pitch upon such Subjects which might not be above their strength, seriously to
consider before they engaged whether they were able to go through with what
they undertook. I have duly weighed the mysteriousness and difficulties of the
things which I am to write upon, and the more I look into them the more I find
them to be above me; yet for all this I am not discouraged, because I trust I
shall have an higher strength than mine own to help me and to carry me through
all of them, Horat.
so as that some benefit may accrue to Souls: The way of the Lord is strength
to the upright Prove. 10.29. he that has Gods Call needs not to question Gods
Help; and if he will help, the weakest Instrument shall be strong enough for
the highest and hardest work. Retract. l. 1. c. 25.
Austine (that great and blessed man) tells us of himself, he had begun a
Comment upon this Epistle to the Romans but the difficuity of the matter he met
with made him give over: I have in what I have done encountered with some
difficulties, more are before me as to what is yet to be done; but I bless the
Lord I am not disheartened by them, so as to think of giving over the work: 1 Samuel 30.6.
But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God; and (in my present case) I
desire to do the same. Difficulties in the way of service should but quicken
our diligence and heighten our dependence upon God, not take us off from doing
our duty. Yea further I am not without some discouragement as to my external
condition; the Sun (as to bodily Health, and some other Considerations) is
going off from me, (few plants are so situated as to have the Fore-noon and
Afternoon Sun too); but that does not quite discourage me neither. May I but
have the warm influences of the blessed Spirit, and the Sun of righteousness
with his sweet beams yet shining upon me, I trust (though outwardly I decline
and decay) I shall yet finish what I have begun.

19. The Chapter being commonly divided into three Parts I hoped I should have
finished one in each Volume, and so have drawn the whole into three: but these
Four Verses taking up so much room I am forced to allot two Volumes to the
First Part; hoping to grasp the two other Parts in two more. So that in my four
days Journey (as it were) I have as yet gone but one of them; but he that has
been with me in that will (I trust) be with me in the other also.

20. I must not be too bold with God in entitling him to what I do, yet I would
fain hope that it is by his special Providence that I am engaged in this
Undertaking; wherein I should be exceedingly confirmed, might I see these First
Fruits (now published) owned and blessed by him to the profit of many; and with
what cheerfulness should I go on if I might in my first setting out have such
encouragement! Till I be able about this to pass a better judgment than as yet
I can, it will be best for me for some little time to stay my hand (which
accordingly I resolve upon). I am very loath to burden the world with
unprofitable Labors; may I do good, all that I shall do will be too little;
but without that, that which I have already done is too much. Well! Success and
good Issues must be expected only of God and referred wholly to Him: he has
enabled me to do something, which if he please to bless it shall prosper but if
he deny his blessing I have labored in vain. Now (Reader) for the helping on
so great a mercy I beg thy Prayers, yea thy best Prayers; when thou art with
God in secret remember me and the work in hand I earnestly entreat thee: indeed
I need all thy praying help, wherein if thou be wanting thou thy self may
be damnified thereby. If thou will forget me I trust I shall not forget thee in
my poor prayers, that God will bless thee in the clearer revealing of Gospel
mysteries to thee, the fuller illumination of thy Understanding in Spiritual
things, the confirming and stablishing of thee in the great Truths of God, the
daily heightening and perfecting of thy Graces, the sanctifying of all Helps
and Means (public and private) to the furtherance of thy salvation: In a word,
that thou may be the person in Christ Jesus, living the spiritual Life, and
thereby that the No-condemnation and all the other branches of the precious
Grace of God spoken of in these Verses, yea in the whole Chapter, may be all
thine. So for the present I leave thee, remaining

An unfeigned Wisher of thy Spiritual and Eternal Good, THO JACOME.

The following Errata's (partly the Printers, and partly mine Own) thou art
desired (Reader) to correct, as follows.
Page 2. l. 23. for No-condemnation r. Exemption from Condemnation. P. 7. l.
32. r known. P. 66. l. 34. r. God speaks. P. 94. l. 21. r. restraining. P. 123.
Marg. r. Christiano. P. 185. l. 25. dele some. P. 190. l. 5. r. 2 Timothy 2.25. P.
208. l. 9. r. dominion and power. P. 213. l. 3. r. this grief. P. 233. l. 38.
r. Jer. 32.17. P. 241. l. 18. r. Chrysostom. P. 243. l. 4. r. were born. P.
249. l. 10. r. (...). P. 254. Marg. r. Legi. P. 278. l. 24. r. fain. P. 307. l.
24. r. -init. P. 325. l. c. r. speak. P. 347. l. 8. r. other. P. 349. Marg. r.
sciri. P. 354. l. 1. r. is not. P. 374. l. 3. r. on. P. 403. Marg.. r.
desiisset. P. 405. Marg. r. Lombard. P. 408. Marg. r. immortalem. P. 423. l. 3.
r. where. Pa 540. Marg. r. primis. P. 560. l. 23. dele do. P. 580. l. 3. r.
formally. P. 606. Marg. r. Lucium. P. 608. l. 14. r. quoad hoc.

The HEADS treated upon in the several CHAPTERS.
Ver. I. There is therefore now no Condemnation -- Of the Exemption of
Believers from Condemnation. Chap. 1. p. 1. etc. -- to them which are in Christ
Jesus -- Of the Saints Union with Christ. Chap. 2. p. 41. etc. -- who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Of the Holy and Spiritual Life in
opposition to the Sinful and Carnal Life. Chap. 3. p. 87. etc. Ver. II. For the
Law of the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of
Sin and Death. Of the Sinners being made free by the Power of the Spirit from
the Power of Sin and Death. Chap. 4. p. 142. etc. Of the Law or Power of Sin
under which all men are by Nature. Chap. 5. p. 168. etc. Of Regenerate Persons
being made free from the Law of Sin. Chap. 6. p. 202. etc. Of the power of the
Holy Spirit in the making of persons free from the Law of Sin. Chap. 7. p. 227.
etc. Of the Law of Death. Chap. 8. p. 249. etc. Ver. III. For what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh Of the Laws inability to
justify and save. Chap. 9. p. 251. etc. -- God sending his own Son -- Of
Christ's Mission and Gods sending him. Chapter 10. p. 281. etc. Of Christ's being the
Natural and Eternal Son of God. Chapter 11. p. 318. etc. -- in the likeness of
sinful flesh -- Of Christ's Incarnation and abasement in Flesh. Chap. 12. p.
371. etc. -- and for sin, condemned Sin in the flesh. Of Christ's being a
Sacrifice, and expiating Sin thereby. Chap. 13. p. 456. etc. Ver. IV. That the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us -- Of the Fulfilling the Laws
righteousness in Believers. Chap. 14. p. 565. etc. -- who walk not after the
Flesh but after the Spirit. Spiritual Walkers the Subjects of the foregoing
Privilege. Chapter 15. p. 619. etc.

THE Grand Charter OF BELIEVERS OPENED.
ROMANS 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


CHAP. I. Of Believers Exemption from Condemnation.
The Introduction to the Work. The Excellency of the Chapt. Its main Scope and
Parts. How this first Verse comes in. Paul in the preceding Chapt. compared
with himself in this. The Proposition divided into its Parts. The Praedicate in
it [No Condemnation] first opened. Two Observations raised from the Words. The
first spoken to. Seven things premised by way of Explication: As 1. It Is not no
Affliction or no Correction, but no Condemnation: 2. It Is not no Matter of
Condemnation, only no Condemnation de Facto: (this enlarged upon against the
Romanists:) 3. It Is Gods Condemnation only which is here excluded, not the
Condemnation of Man, o^ of Conscience, or of Satan: 4. Of the ^mpo^t and
signific^ncy of the P^r^i^le [Now] in his place^: 5. No Condemnation may be
rendered Not one Condemnation: 6. Of the Indefiniteness of the Proposition with
respect to the Subject: 7. That the Positive is included in the Negative. --
The Observation it self more closely handled. Condemnation opened is to the
Quid Nom^n^^ and the Quid Rei. It relates to Guilt, and Punishment; to the
Sentence and State. It Is either Virtual or Actual. The Point confirmed by
Parallel Scriptures; by a double Argument in the Text. The First is couched in
the Illative [Therefore], which points to Justification and Sanctification
(both of which prove no Condemnation). The Second is grounded upon Union with
Christ. Use 1. To show the Misery of such who are not in Christ Jesus. The
dreadfulness of Condemnation set forth in five Particulars. Use 2. To exhort
all to make sure of No Condemnation. Six Directions touched upon about it. Use
3. To excite such as are in Christ to be very thankeful. Use 4. Comfort to
Believers.

I Purpose (with Gods leave and gracious assistance) in the revolution of my
Ministerial Labors, to go over this whole Chapter. It Is a very great
undertaking! and I am very sensible how much it is above me; I have only this
encouragement I serve a good Master, one who both can and (I trust) will help
me in it and carry me through it, (for he uses to give strength where he calls
to work). And it is no matter what the Instrument is if he will be pleased to
use it: the mighty God by weak means can effect great things; Math. 21.16.
out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he can perfect praise to himself.
Here is indeed a rich and precious Cabinet (full of Grace) to be opened, yet a
Key of small value may open it (if God please to direct the hand). Therefore in
all humble (yet steady) relyance upon him whose Grace alone is 2 Cor. 12.9.
sufficient for me, I shall now enter upon this work (though it be vast and
difficult).

Of the Excellency of this Chapter.
And in the midst of all my discouragements (which are very many God knows), yet
I find my self under a strong inclination to engage in it, when I consider the
transcendent excellency, preciousness, usefulness of that matter which the
Spirit of God lays before us in this Chapter. Who would not be willing to take
pains in a Mine that has such treasures hid in it? where the breast is so full
who would not be drawing from it? I think I should not hyperbolize should I say
of it, Search all the Scriptures (I Will except none), turn over the whole Word
of God from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation, you will not
find any one Chapter into which more excellent, sublime, Evangelical Truths are
crowded, than this (which I am entering upon). The Holy Bible is the Book of
Books, in some (though not in equal) respects this Chapter may be styled the
Chapter of Chapters. From first to last it is high Gospel, it is all Gospel (its
Matter being entirely Evangelical), and it is all the Gospel (either directly or
reductively), in having in it the very sum, marrow, pith of all
Gospel-revelation. It Is indeed the Epitome, Abridgement, Storehouse of all the
Saints Privileges and Duties: You have in it the Love of God and of Christ
displaid to the utmost, and shining forth in its greatest splendour. Would any
take a view of the Magnalia Dei (with respect to his glorious Grace)? here they
lie open before them. Paul in it speaks much of the blessed Spirit, and surely
he was (more than ordinarily) Est Caput aureum and inter omnia hujus Epistolae
illustrissimum; in quo cum de Spirtus muneribus disserere statuisset Apostolus,
Spiritus ipse Divinus pleno numine in ejus pectus illapsus videtur; cujus ideo
suavitate and fragrantia singulis Verbis redolet, charismatibusque diffluit and
exundat. Soto.
full of this Spirit in the penning of it. Blessed be God for every part and
parcel of Holy Writ! and (in special) blessed be God for this Eighth Chapter to
the Romans! O it is pity that it is not better understood through the dimness
of our light, nor better improved through the weakness of our Faith. May I in
my poor endeavors be instrumental (but in the least) to further these two in
any, I hope I shall own it as an abundant recompense for all my pains.

As to the Scope and principal Matter of it, it is Consolatory: there is a vein
of heavenly Comfort running through the whole Body of it; Of its main Scope.
with this it begins, with this it ends, (for it begins with No Condemnation v.
1. and ends with No Separation from the Love of God v. 38, 39); and all the
intermediate parts do exactly correspond with these extremes. The truth is, the
sincere Christian here treads upon nothing but Roses and Violets, there is
nothing but Honey to be found in this Hive, here is Balm in every Line for the
healing of the wounded Spirit. Let such as are in Christ (for that is the
foundation of all) study, weigh, digest, believe, apply, what is laid down in
this Chapter; and let them walk dejectedly if they can.

The Division of it into its Parts.
Divines (who write upon it) commonly divide it into Three Parts: The First
contains in it excellent supports and comforts for the people of God; as
burdened under the relics and remainders of Sin; (and this reaches from the 1
v. to the 17). The Second contains in it further supports and comforts in
reference to the Sufferings, Afflictions which here are incident to the Godly;
(this reaches from the 17 v. to the 31). The Third contains in it those high
and holy Triumphs which the Apostle (in his own person and in the person of all
Believers) makes over both Sin and Suffering; (which reaches from the 31 v. to
the end). In this threefold channel the Comforts of the whole Chapter run:
(this Division of it I shall follow, and accordingly divide my ensuing
Discourse into Three Parts.)

For the First (the supporting and comforting the Saints as burdened under the
relics of sin), the Apostle begins with that, because he very well knew that
sin (to such) is their greatest burden. O nothing lies so sad and heavy upon
their Spirits as this! It was so with Paul himself (as you see Chapt. 7.) and
it is so too with all that are gracious (they having the same Spirit which he
had). All Paul's afflictions without, (though they were very many and very
sharp, see his Catalogue of them 2 Cor. 11.23. etc.), were nothing to his
Corruptions within: the former never made him cry out Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am as the latter did! O this Sin went to the heart of
him and almost overwhelmed him! And so (proportionably) it is with all who
belong to God. For this reason therefore, when the Apostle would comfort
himself and others, he first applies his Discourse to that which might give
ease as to what was and is most burdensome.

In order to which, he First lays down a notable Faith-supporting and
Soul-reviving Proposition: The main Proposition.
then Secondly he amplifies and enlarges upon that Proposition, (which he does
chiefly with respect to the description of the Subject of it). And all that is
contained in this First Part of the Chapter will fall either under the one or
the other of these two Heads.

The Proposition it self is this, There is therefore now no Condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus, etc. In which the Illative [Therefore] shows,
that the Words are an Inference (or Conclusion) drawn from what went before.
Take but that away (though we must not so easily part with it), and they fall
into a Formal Thesis or Categorical Proposition, There is no Condemnation, etc.
I will by and by give you the force and strength of the Illation and show what
it is grounded upon: but at present we are only to consider the Position it
self. No Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus? O great and blessed
words! How appositely, fully, and convincingly does Paul speak to the thing in
hand! What a Basis and Foundation does he here lay for Faith to build upon! Is
the gracious heart burd'ned under the remainders of Sin? what could be spoken
more proper, more effectual for its relief, then to assure it that (though
there may be much Corruption yet) there is no Condemnation? No Condemnation to
them which are in Christ? what a magnificent Conclusion, what a
Faith-strengthening and heart-chearing consideration is this! Here Is Dainties
and Cordials at the very first; no sooner does the Apostle launch out, but
immediately he is in the great deeps of the Grace of God and of the happiness
of Believers.

A great change in Paul.
By the way, I cannot but observe how the case is altered and mended with him:
View him in the foregoing Chapter, there you find him pensive, sad, cast down
under the sense of sin, making sad complaints that he Romans 7.14, 18, 15.
carnal sold under sin, that in him (viz. in his Flesh) there dwelt no good
thing; that the good he would, he did not; the evil he would not, that he did;
(many such indictments he there draws up against himself); and thus it was with
him in that Chapter. But now follow him to this here he is another man, he
speaks at another rate, now you have him rejoicing yea triumphing over sin and
all: From the depth of sorrow he is got up to the highest pinnacle of divine joy;
that eye which but just now was fixed upon his own vileness, is now fixed upon
his great blessedness in and through Christ. And indeed usually it is so with
others too; after Conviction comes Consolation; a deep sense of sin attended
with brokenness of heart for it does (commonly) usher in the highest peace and
comfort to the Soul. After the dark night the day dawns; when the true
Poenitent has been most abased and cast down then comes exalting and lifting
up: (see Job 22.29.) There is (in this respect) -- post nubila Phoebus, a
bright Sun after the thick Cloud, or a Psalm. 126.5.
reaping in joy after a sowing in Tears. Penitential sorrow is (...) (as
Chrysostom. expresses it) the Mother (the Precursor) of inward joy. God will heal
where he thus wound, Psalm. 147.3.
he heals the broken in heart); such as thus Math. 5.4.
mourn shall be comforted; these Joh. 2.9.
waters Christ will turn into wine: As joy in sin will end in sorrow so sorrow
for sin will end in joy. But to return to our Apostle! He had (as to his
outward state) his abasements and his advancements too, (and he knew how to
carry himself under both, Philip. 4.12.
I know how to be abased and I know how to abound): So (as to his inward state)
he also had his abasements and his advancements. Sometimes it is O wretched man
that I am, etc. (there 'twas abasement); then presently it is There is no
Condemnation, etc. (there 'twas advancement.) And let me add, that Paul's
comfort in this Chapter had never been so high, so full (as to himself), so
encouraging (as to others), if he had not in the former Chapter first smarted
under the cutting and piercing Conviction of Sin. O to have one (who but even
now was almost pressed down under Soul-burdens), now saying yet there is no
Condemnation to them, etc. how may this animate and strengthen the Faith of a
poor Christian, when ever troubles of Conscience (by reason of sin) shall be
upon him!

The Prop. considered in its parts.
This being the Proposition I will consider it in its Parts: And so you have in
it

First The Praedicate or the Privilege asserted ( viz. exemption from
Condemnation); There is therefore now no Condemnation, etc.

Secondly The Subject or the Persons described to whom (and to whom only) the
Privilege belongs: And (to take the most easy division of the words at
present), they are described 1. By their Union with Christ (in reference to
their State); they are such who are in Christ Jesus. 2. By their Qualification
or Property (in reference to their Course); they walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit. I conceive, this Clause does more immediately refer to the
persons who are in Christ, and is properly descriptive of them; yet mediately
they may refer to, and be descriptive of the persons to whom there is no
Condemnation, (as I shall hereafter show).


Of the different readings of the words.
If you take the words in the body of them, there is some (yet no very great)
difference in the reading of them. The latter branch [but after the Spirit] is
wholly left out by the Vulgar Translation, (and by those Expositors who follow
it): I know not why unless it be because the Syriac Version did the same,
(which Proinde nulla est Condemnatio iis qui non ambulant secundum carnem in
Jesu Christo. Verse. Sir.
Version in the reading of the Words is not only defective (as to this), but
very harsh in the misplacing of them, There is therefore no Condemnation to
those who walk not after the flesh in Christ Jesus.) Some other such Variations
might be taken notice of, but I Will pass them by.

The General Proposition (being taken in pieces) will afford us these two
Observations: 1. That there is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.
The Obs. raised.
2. That such who are in Christ Jesus (and so secured from Condemnation), this
is their Property or Course, they walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit.


The discussing of these two Points will take me up some time. Of the first
Observation.
I begin with the First; in the handling of which I will 1. chiefly speak to
the Privilege, and only in a general way join the description of the Subject
with it. 2. I will then more particularly speak to that and show what it is to
be in Christ Jesus, or how persons may be said to be in Christ Jesus.
Of the First at this time.

For the better opening of which I must premise these seven things: Seven
things premised for explications.


1. First the Apostle does not say, There is now no Affliction or no Correction
to them who are in Christ, but there is no Condemnation to them who are in
Christ. It Is one thing to be afflicted, another thing to be condemned; God may
(and will) afflict his Children but he will never condemn them; it may be much
affliction yet it is no Condemnation. Indeed God afflicts here that he may not
condemn hereafter: 1 Cor. 31.32. When we are judged we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World. God is so gracious that
he will not condemn, yet withal so wise, so just, so holy that he will
afflict. Grace in the Heart secures from eternal not from temporal Evils. God
cannot condemn and yet love, but he can chasten and yet love; nay, therefore he
chastens because he loves: As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives. And it
may be (even to them who are in Christ) not only bare Affliction, but there may
be something of the nature of Quamvis Deus abso^vit vere poenitentes ab omni
poena satisfactoria propter Christi mortem, non tamen illos liberat abomni
poena medicinali and castigatoria. Davenant. in Col 1.24. See of this Burg. of
Justif. Lect. 4.5.10. Eaxt. Aphor. p. 68. etc. Boltons Bounds etc. p. 163. etc.
Rutherf^. Survay, pa^^^, chapter 31.
Punnishment in that affliction, (though not in a vindictive way, or upon the
account of satisfaction). The nearer a person is to Christ and the dearer he is
to God, the surer he is to be punished (if he sin); Tou only have I know of all
the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for your iniquities,
Amos 3.2. God may pardon and yet punish; temporal punishment is very consistent
with pardoning Mercy. Psalm. 99.8. Thou answeredst them O Lord our God; thou
wast a God that forgavest them; though thou tookest vengeance of them for their
iniquities: God had put away David's sin yet he shall smart for it; his own Soul
shall live but his Child shall dye as a punishment for his sin: (See 2 Samuel
12.13, 14.) The Malefactor may not be condemned to dye, (as to his Life he may
be acquitted), yet he may be judged to be whipped or burnt in the hand for his
offense; so it is here. You must distinguish therefore betwixt no Condemnation
and no Affliction or no Correction; Saints are exempted from the former but not
from the latter.

2. Secondly, The Apostle does not say there is no Matter of Condemnation in
them who are in Christ, only (as to Fact) he says, there is no (actual)
Condemnation to such. There is a vast difference betwixt what is deserved and
what is actually inflicted; betwixt what is de Jure and ex Merito and what is
de Facto. Take the very best of Saints there is enough and enough in them which
deserves eternal Condemnation; and (if God should proceed according to their
merit) it would be Condemnation over and over again: for (even they) have sin
and commit sin, and wherever sin is there is matter of condemnation. There Is
not a man to be found on earth who (upon this account and in this sense) is not
obnoxious and liable to a sentence and state of Condemnation; for 1 Kings 8.46.
there is no man that sins not; Jam. 3.2.
in many things we offend all; 1 John 1.8.
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us.
Besides those actual sins which break forth in external acts, which are
committed upon deliberation and with consent (of which all are more or less
guilty), I say (besides these) there is in all a corrupt, wicked, depraved
Nature, which Nature puts forth it self in evil motions, sinful propensions,
strong inclinations to what is evil. O that Fomes Peccati, those Motus
Primo-primi (as the Schoolmen call them), those inward ebullitions of
indwelling sin in impure and filthy desires (set forth in Scripture by
Concupiscence)! what shall we say to these? are not they sinful? is there not
in them matter of Condemnation (if God should enter into judgment and proceed
according to the rigor of his Justice and the purity of his Law)? surely yes!
If it be proved that they are sinful, unquestionably then it follows that they
expose a person to Condemnation: now how full are our Divines in the proof of
that! Concupiscence, the first risings and stirrings of Corrupt Nature even in
renewed and regenerate persons are properly and formally sinful, (whether they
consent or not, for Consent is not so of the Essence of sin but that there may
be sin without it; that may have some influence upon the degree but not upon
the nature of the thing it self). Those evil thoughts and motions in the Heart
(with which the best are so much pestred), are not mere infirmities (attending
the present state of imperfection), but they are plain iniquities; there is sin
in them. The Apostle speaking of them sets the black brand of sin upon them
Romans 7.7. What shall we say then? is the Law sin? God forbid! nay, I had not
known [sin] but by the Law, for I had not known [Lust] except the Law had said,
thou shall not covet. The holy Law forbids these inward workings of the sinful
Nature as well as the exterior acts of sin, therefore they are (...) a breach
of that Law, and being so therefore they are sinful. They flow from sin, they
tend to sin, and yet are they not sin? when Lust has conceived it brings
forth sin, Jam. 1.13. This is the Doctrine of our Art. 9.
Church, of the ancient August. lib. 1. contra duas Pelag. Ep. cap. 13. and
lib. 3. contra Julian. cap. 3. (with several others cited in Chamier tom. 3.
lib. 10. c. 10.)
Fathers, of the Body of Vide Cham. tom. 3. lib. 10. c. 4. etc. Chemn. Exam.
Decr. 5 Sess. p. 93. etc. Calv. Instit. lib. 3. c. 3. Daven. Det. Qu. 1. Ward.
Determ. Theol. p. 136. etc.
Protestants; (and they make it good by several Arguments of great strength).

The The Council of Trent anathematizeth all who hold Concupiscence (in renewed
persons and after Baptism) to be sin. Sess. 5. Bellarm. de Amiss. Great. lib. 5.
cap. 7. Valentia de Pec. Orig. cap. 7 and 8. Perer. Quaest. ad Cap. 7. in Ep.
ad Romans Disput. 7, 8, 9.
Papists are wholly of another mind: And whereas it is said here in the Text
[There is no Condemnation, etc.], they carry it so high as to affirm that (in
reference to Original Sin, the depravation of Nature, Concupiscence, the inward
motions and inclinations of the Heart to sin, after Baptism, Faith,
Regeneration), there is no matter of Condemnation or nothing damnable in them
who are in Christ. He that will please to cast his eye upon the Non tam
significat nullam esse Condemnationem justificatis in Christo ob
Concupiscentiam, quam nihil esse in eis condemnatione dignum. Bellarm. de Am.
Gr. lib. 5. cap. 7. Tollitur damnatio quantum ad Culpam and quantum ad poenam:
Primus Motus habet quod non sit Peccatum Mortale, ex eo quod rationem non
attingit, in qua completur ratio Peccati, etc. Aquin. in loc. -- etc. Et
consistit differentia in hoc, quod inillis (justificatis nempe in Christo)
nihil committitur damnabile, propter donum Christi tam externum quam internum;
Intendit itaque per nullam damnationem nullum actum quo meremur damnari -- Et
dixit hoc ad diffetentiam Primorum Motuum, qui sunt etiam apud justificatos in
Christo, ut intelligamus illos non esle materiam damnationis -- Primi enim
Motus non reddunt Sanctos damnabiles tum ob eorum imperfectionem, tum quia
absorbentur a copia Sanctarum actionum continuarum. Cajet. in loc. -- Hinc
patet nec concupiscentiam, nec aliud quippiam in renatis esse peccatum
damnatione dignum. A-Lap. -- Non quod volo, ago etc. ex iis sequitur
involuntarios esse Concupiscentiae motus in renatis ac justis, quibus proinde
ad poenam imputari non possint. Est. -- Quamvis Caro contra Spiritum insultans
molestias exhibeat iis qui sunt in Christo Jesu, nihil tamen est in iis
damnatiois, quia dum non consentiunt, non ipsi operantur illud, sed peccatum
quod per Concupiscentiam habitat in Cord. Soto.
Citations here set down (which are taken especially out of their Expositors
upon the Text), may see that this is the Interpretation which they put upon it.

What? no matter of Condemnation? nothing damnable in them who are in Christ?
this is much too high. Our Adversaries (I suppose) though they deny any merit
of Condemnation upon the forementioned things, yet surely they will not deny
but that sin in its full Act merits Condemnation; if they will be so absurd,
the Apostle plainly determines it, Sin when it is finished brings forth death,
Jam. 1.15. Now is there not too much of this to be found even in Saints in
Christ? and therefore are not they worthy of Condemnation? True indeed, Sin
whether in the conception or in the finishing is not Ad haec respondetur,
dimitti Concupiscentiam Carnis in Baptismo, non ut non sit, sed ut in peccatum
non imputetur. Aug. de Nup. and Conc. lib. 1. cap. 25.
imputed or charged upon them, and so there is no Condemnation; but yet as
considered in its own Nature it merits Condemnation: it does so ex Natura rei,
exjudicio Legis, only it is not so in point of Fact and in Event ex indultu
Gratiae (as one expresses it). Sin is sin in the Children of God, and it merits
Condemnation in them as well as in others; whence is it then that there is no
Condemnation to them? merely from the Grace of God who does not impute this sin
to them. As Solomon told Abiathar he was worthy of death yet he would not (for
some considerations) put him to death, 1 Kings 2.26. so here, the highest in
Grace have that in them which renders them worthy of Condemnation, but yet
(they being in Christ, and thereupon sin not being imputed), they shall not
actually be condemned. This is the true and genuine sense of the words [There
is therefore now no Condemnation to them etc.]; and thus our Non dicit non esse
pec^atum etc. sed remitti propter Eidem in Christum. Melanct. in Dispos. Orat.
ad Ep. ad Romans p. 18. Credentibus nulla est Condemnatio, non per se quidem sed
ex accidenti, (h. e.) ex Dei misericordia non imputantis eis peccata ad
condemnationem. Parens in Resp. ad Dub. 1. -- Notandum est quod non dicit,
Nihil condemnabile, aut (...) sed (...): Non dicit in Christianis nihil esse
amplius peccatorum, etc. sed esse illos condemnationi quae peccato competit
exemptos: Habent quidem and Sancti reliquias peccati veru extra condemnationem
sunt, proptet Gratiam Christi etc. Museul.
Protestant Expositors open them, wherein their Opinions are so far from being
ex Orco excitatae fetched from Hell, (as Disput. 1. in Cap. 8. ad Romans
Pererius with virulency and malice truly ex Orco excitata is pleased to say),
that they are from Heaven, from the God of truth, and fully consonant to the
Word of truth.

3. I premise Thirdly That it is Gods Condemnation only from which such as are
in Christ are exempted: the Universal Negative [No Condemnation] reaches no
further than the supreme, final, irreversible condemnatory Sentence of the
great God. As to this all in Christ are safe; but there is other Condemnation
which they do lie under: Take a threefold instance of this.

1. Men condemn them: I mean the wicked, who are and always have been
condemners of the righteous. The Saints (as assessors with Christ) shall 1 Cor.
6.2.
judge the world hereafter, and the world will be judging the Saints here: the
Saints condemn Sinners by their holy conversation (as it is said of Noah, Heb.
11.7.
He prepared an Ark by which he condemned the World); and they will be
condemning the Saints in that false judgment, those sharp censures which they
are pleased to pass upon them. What more common than for the Godly to have
their persons, practices, strict walking, condemned by a mistaken and malicious
World! O they are Hypocrites, factious, Ezra 4.15.
seditious, turbulent, 1 Kings 18.17.
troublers of Kingdoms, unnecessarily scrupulous, proud, selfish, false,
covetous, and indeed what not! Sometimes the Condemnation is only Verbal going
no further than bitter words, wherein their names are aspersed, the innocence
of their persons sullied, the goodness of their Cause blackened: Sometimes it
rises higher, men condemn Gods people even to the taking away of their Lives,
(as Jam. 5.6. You have condemned and killed the just etc. this is the
condemning of the soul of the poor, Psalm. 109. ult.): though possibly there may
be something more in this expression than striking at the bare natural Life;
for such is the inveterate malice of the wicked against the godly, that they
will be condemning of them even as to their final and everlasting state; they
condemn the Soul of the poor even to Hell it self: thus the condemned world is
a condemning world. But yet God condemns not (neither here nor hereafter): all
this is but man's day and 1 Cor. 4.3.
man's judgment; the righteous God judges otherwise of his people. He Is so far
from condemning them, that he will openly vindicate them against all the
groundless accusations and condemnations of their enemies. 'Twas David's Prayer
to God Let my sentence come forth from thy presence, Psalm. 17.2. (q. d.) Lord!
man does thus and thus pass sentence upon my person, cause, actions; but Lord
do thou thy self pass sentence upon me, that I am sure will be as just and
righteous as the sentence of my enemies is false and malicious; and do not keep
thy Sentence about me to thy self, but let it come forth from thy presence that
the world may see and know what I am, and what thoughts thou have of me. It Is a
very gracious promise that in Psalm. 37.32.33. The wicked watches the righteous
and seeks to slay him, the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn
him when he is judged; ( i. e. though man condemn God will not). He will not
always let such as are upright with him lie under the worlds Condemnation, he
will clear up their innocence as the light of the noonday; probably he may do
this for them here, but certainly he will do it at the Great day: and certainly
too (which is more close to my business), though men are very free in their
condemning of them as to their present concerns, yet God will not condemn them
as to their State for eternity.

2. Sometimes Conscience condemns them: For this Conscience bears the place and
office of a Judge in the Soul, and therefore it will be passing Sentence with
respect to men's state and actions; and its Sentence often is in a condemnatory
way; If our heart condemn us not; then have we confidence toward God 1 John
3.21. I, and it is so even with Gods own Children (upon the commission of some
great sin, or under some great darkness of spirit in time of conviction or
desertion); O how forward is Conscience then to condemn and to give in sad
judgment upon them! And truly a condemning Conscience is a very dreadful thing!
be they Saints or Sinners who lie under it they will all find it to be bad
enough; it is a little Hell or an anticipation of Hell; there is no pain in the
body comparable to the torment of a condemning Conscience; a man had better be
condemned of all the World than of his own Conscience. Yet the people of God
have this to comfort them, though Conscience condemns below yet God does not
condemn above: To the wicked, it is a condemning Conscience and a condemning God
too, (O there is the very height of misery)! to the Godly, it is sometimes a
condemning Conscience but never a condemning God; even when that speaks nothing
but Guilt and wrath then God designs nothing but Grace and mercy. The inferior
Judge condemns in the Court below, but the supreme Judge acquits and justifies
in the Court above.

3. Satan too he will be condemning such as are in Christ. He Is a proud
Creature, and loves to be upon the Bench and to assume that Authority and
judicial Power which does not belong to him: O it greatly pleases him to be
judging of the spiritual and eternal state of Believers! he that is but Gods
Executioner he will take upon him to be a Judge. And as his Pride puts him upon
judging, so his malice puts him upon condemning: there is not an upright person
in the world, upon whom he either does not or would not pronounce a black
Sentence of Condemnation. He Is condemned himself, and he is altogether for the
condemning of others too. Especially when he meets with a poor troubled Soul,
how does he bestir himself with his dreadful judgings to discourage and
overwhelm that Soul! What? thou a Child of God? no, thou art a Child of Wrath:
what, thou look for Salvation? no, Hell and Damnation shall be thy portion
forever: what, thou pretend to Grace? no, there is not one dram of true Grace in
thee: thou art an Hypocrite, a Castaway, one that must perish forever. The Ex
enditur interdum Condemnandi verbum etiam ad Accusatorem ut idem sit quod reum
peragere, vel efficere ut quis damnetur. Calepin. Ego hoc uno crimine illum
condemnem necesse est. Cic. in Ver. (...). Plutarch. in Vit. Caes.
word [Condemn] in Classical Authors ( Greek and Latin) signifies to accuse
also: the Devil is a great accuser, he accused Job to God; he is styled the
Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. but this will not satisfy him, he must
condemn too (in the higher and stricter notion of the word), he is for
absolute, decisive, irrepealable judgment upon and against the repenting
sinner, (but God will not let him proceed so far, this is his own Prerogative
and he will keep it to himself). Well! condemn he does; and very busy he is
(in special) to condemn those who belong to Christ, where God condemns least
there Satan condemns most; but his condemnation signifies nothing for God
condemns not. Who will regard the condemnatory Sentence of the Jailer if he
stand acquitted by the Judge? so here. But I am too long uon this Head! You see
here is a great deal of Condemnation yet the No Condemnation in the Text is
true; for though Men and Conscience and Satan condemn, yet God condemns not;
and it is his Condemnation only which is here denied.

4. Fourthly, The Particle [Now] is to be taken notice of: there is therefore
[Now] no Condemnation, etc. Magnum est pondus particulae Universaliter
negantis, and Adverbii praesentis Temporis, a Syro interpret male praetermissi.
Beza looks upon this as so emphatical, that he blames the Syriac Translation
for the omitting it: what then is the import and significancy of it in this
place? Answ. I suppose the Apostle does not intend by it to point to any
Circumstance of Time, as namely the present time of Life, or the present time
of the Gospel. Dicit nunc ut intelligamus quod de praesentis vitae statu
loquitur, ne intelligeres quod ratione status futurae beatitudinis excludit
omnem damnationem.
Cajetan applies it to the present time of Life; the Apostle (says he) says
[Now], that we may understand that he speaks of the present Life, and that we
may not think that he excludes all Condemnation only in respect of the state of
the future blessedness. Then the meaning must be this, that the Saints are
secure against Condemnation not only when they shall actually be instated in
the Heavenly Blessedness, or only upon the account of that blessed estate, but
even here whilst they are but in the way and with respect to the present state
of Grace, now there is no Condemnation to them. There is a truth in this
interpretation, yet I shall not close with it.

Others apply it to the Time of the Gospel: Now (that is) when Christ is come,
Now when the Gospel Dispensation takes place, and the Gospel Grace is advanced,
Now there is no Condemnation. A great truth! but it must be taken with some
caution or else it may be the occasion of a great and dangerous Error. What? is
there no Condemnation now in the times of the Gospel? yes surely there is! yea,
the highest and sorest Condemnation is now under the Gospel: Joh. 3.19.
This is the Condemnation, etc. (by way of Eminency). No Condemnation like to
Gospel Condemnation; this is double Condemnation (as the Prophet imprecates
double destruction Jer. 17.18.). And again, was there no exemption from this
till the time of the Gospel? does the Apostle by this Particle confine and
limit this Privilege to those only who now live under the Gospel? God forbid!
Believers under the Law were justified and saved as well as Believers now under
the Gospel; (the Scriptures are exceeding clear in this matter). It Is therefore
a false and venomous Gloss which a great Nunc (i. e.) his temporibus; opponit
haec tempora allati and publicati Evangelii anteactis temportibus, praesertim
sub Lege, quibus omnes in Commune loquendo damnationi subjecti erant; Nunc
autem multis hominibus nulla est damnatio, and (si omnes vellent) nulla esset
omnibus. Slichting. in loc.
Socinian gives upon the words: he brings in Paul a^set^ing the times of the
Gospel against the times of the Law, under which (he says) all speaking of
them in common were liable to damnation; but now (under the Gospel) to many
there is no damnation, and (if all would) there should be none to any. Here Is a
complication of Errors, but I must not engage in the refuting of them: To many
now there is no Damnation? and was it not so even under the Law? O let us
neither make the time of the Law worse than indeed it was, nor the time of the
Gospel better than indeed it is! there was salvation then, and there is
damnation now.

In short, with Pareus I make this [Now] to be only particula (...) a Causal
Particle; it is as much as cum haec ita sint, since things are so (as the
Apostle had made out in his preceding Discourse), there is now (or upon all
this) no Condemnation, etc. It Is the very basis or foundation upon which all is
bottomed; the [therefore] in the Text points to this [now], and derives all its
strength from it; the Apostle crowds the force of all that he had said by way
of Argument into this little word, and lays the whole stress of his Conclusion
upon it; There is [Now] no Condemnation, etc.

5. Fifthly, we read it [No Condemnation], the Original will bear it if we read
it [Not one Condemnation]: (...) is as much as (...); such is the Grace of God
to Believers and such is their safety in their justified estate, that there is
no Condemnation, no not so much as one Condemnation to be passed upon them.
Suppose a condemnatory Sentence for every sin, (I Am sure every sin deserves
such a Sentence, and in point of merit it is so many sins so many
condemnations); yet the Pardon being plenary and full, every way adequate to
the sinners guilt, the exemption of the pardoned person from condemnation must
be plenary and full too; so that if there be not one sin unpardoned there is
not one condemnation to be feared. Jer. 50.20. In those days the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none. It Is an allusion to one
that turns over all his Bonds, searches into all his Debt-books, to see if he
can find any debt due to him from such or such a person; but upon all his
searching he cannot find so much as one debt to charge upon him: So it is with
the pardoned, justified sinner; imagine that God should be inquisitive to find
out some guilt as lying upon him, he might indeed find out enough (as he is in
himself), but as he is in Christ, as he is pardoned and justified through
Christ, so there is nothing to be found against him; and therefore not one
Condemnation. How does this tend to the comfort and encouragement of Gods
people! this makes the Proposition to be very emphatical and highly
consolatory; there is not one Condemnation for them who are in Christ:
Oecumenius opens the words with this emphasis, (...).

6. Sixthly, The Apostle speaks indefinitely with respect to the subject: there
is no Condemnation [to them] which are in Christ Jesus. He takes all such into
the privilege, (for the Indefinite here is equipollent to an Universal). Paul
does not narrow or confine or impropriate this Non-condemnation to himself;
it is not there is now no Condemnation [to me], but he extends it to all who
have an interest in Christ. And herein he discovers much of wisdom (as
Mirabilis sane est Apostoli prudentia, qui cum de vi peccati scriberet, eam
expressit in persona sua, ut intelligeremus etc. Postea vero cum agitur de
auxilio spiritus Christi, inducit personam aliorum, ne cuiquam in mentem
veniret, non quoslibet Christianos frui hoc auxilio Dei, sed tantum primarios
quosdam and eximios, quales fuerunt Apostoli. Pet. Martyr.
Peter Martyr observes); for had he spoken in the Singular number (to me), many
poor weak Christians would have been afraid to have applied this blessedness to
themselves; they would have been ready to object, Ah blessed Paul thou art high
in Faith, eminent in Grace, therefore thou may say there is no Condemnation
to thee: but it is not so with us, we are but poor shrubs, mere dwarfs in Grace,
it is not for us to lay hold upon so high a privilege. To obviate this
discouragement, (says the Apostle) I tell you there is no Condemnation to any
who are in Christ (let them be who they will); this belongs to all such, to you
as well as to my self. True, I am an Apostle you are not so, but then I am a
Believer and so are you: true, I may have more of grace than you, but yet you
are in Christ as well as I, and the Union being common the Non-condemnation is
common too, for that is the ground of this. It Is the same righteousness to all
and upon all that believe, Romans 3.22. it is the same faith (for substance) in
the highest and in the lowest, to them that have obtained like precious faith
with us, 2 Pet. 1.1. it is the same head, and the same union with this head in
all; and therefore it must be the same exemption from Condemnation.

The difference in Paul's expressing himself (according to the difference of the
subject he was upon) is very observable: take him in the former Chapter where
he is bewailing sin, there he speaks altogether in the First person Singular,
and goes no further than himself; (read from the 7 verse to the end and you will
find I and me in every verse): But now in this Eighth Chapter where he is
treating of Privileges, there he speaks altogether in the Plural number (as
taking in the whole body of Believers). Run over it all and except but one
Verse (in which it is true he particularizes himself, The Law of the spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, has made [me] free from the Law of sin and death), I say
do but except this one Verse, and in all the rest you will find the observation
to be true; (but this will be further cleared up hereafter). And elsewhere too
you find him very careful not to engross or confine happiness to himself, but
to extend it to all who belonged to God as well as he himself did: As take but
that one instance 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
(thus far he himself is concerned, but does he stop here and not take in
others? No, it is not enough to him to be sure of this happiness himself, but
he will let others know it shall be just so with them too, therefore he adds) and
not to me only, but unto [all] them also that love his appearing. In the great
blessings of the Gospel (Justification, Adoption, eternal Life), all the Saints
shall fare alike; they are all Gods Children and therefore all shall have their
portion, and the same portion too: Jude calls it common Salvation ( V. 3); and
the same may be said of all other Blessings, it is common Justification, common
Adoption, etc.

7. Seventhly, The Positive is included in the Negative: There Is no
Condemnation, etc. is this all that the Apostle drives at or has in his eye?
(viz.) to hold forth that such who are in Christ shall not be condemned? no! he
aims at something more, namely at this that such are fully justified and shall
be most certainly saved: they shall not only (upon their being in Christ) be
looked upon as not guilty, or barely kept out of Hell, but they shall be judged
completely righteous, and they shall also be admitted into Heaven and eternally
glorified. There is a Meiosis in the words, more is to be understood than what
is expressed; the Privative and the Positive part of the blessedness are to be
linked together, (and blessed be God for both)! Had it been only freedom from
Condemnation that would have been rich and glorious mercy; but when it is not
only that but Justification and Salvation too, O here is mercy in the very
height and Zenith of it! Some enquire why the Apostle expresses it in the
Negative rather than in the Positive? they answer, because Men (generally) are
more sensible of the Goodness of God, in the freeing of them from evil than in
the collating or bestowing of good: No Condemnation more affects than positive
Justification or Salvation. It may be further added, the Apostle thus expresses
it because Negatives usually intend and highten the thing spoken of: as in the
Commandments, such as are Negative carry an higher obligation in them than
those which are Positive, (for they oblige both semper and ad semper too): and
as in the Promises, when they are Negatively expressed, this makes them to rise
the higher in the matter contained in them; as take that Promise (which is made
up of so many Negative) Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor for sake thee;
this is more than if God had said I will always be with thee: So here as to
Propositions, when they are laid down in the Negative, this form of expression
does add both greatness and certainty (at least wise as to us) to the matter of
them. And therefore Paul designing here to set forth the safety and happiness
of Believers with the greatest advantage, he chooses to express it in the
Negative rather than in the Positive.

The Observat. more strictly spoken to.
These things being premised, I come now to the more close handling of the
Point; There is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.

Here I Will show 1. What this Condemnation is (which the persons spoken of are
secured from): 2. I Will make out the truth of the Assertion and give you the
Grounds of it.


Condemnation opened.
1. First it is requisite I should a little open the Condemnation here mentioned.
The word is (...): here in this Verse it is the Substantive; you have the Verb (
v. 3.) and for sin condemned, etc. ((...)); and the Participle ( v. 34.) who is
he that condemns ((...))? Sometimes it is set forth by (...) (as Math. 23.14.
1 Timothy 3.6. 2 Pet. 2.3. Romans 3.8): sometimes by (...) (as Joh. 3.19. Joh.
5.24): sometimes by (...) (as 2 Cor. 3.9.) These several words are
promiscuously used to signify one and the same thing. That here in the Text
(commonly) carries a very black and dreadful sense with it: I do not deny, but
that sometimes it is used to set forth temporal evils and punnishments (as
condemnation to a temporal death, so Math. 20.18. Math. 27.3); but usually it
(as the Verb in this Composition) is expressive of spiritual and eternal evils,
of everlasting death: (so Romans 5.16.18. Mark 16.16. 1 Cor. 11.32). As to its
direct and proper notation it signifies judgment against one, (that is (...)):
it is a forensick word relating to what is in use amongst men in their Courts of
Judicature. To condemn, Proprie judicis est cum mulctam reo vel poenam per
sententiam erogat; it is the Sentence of a Judge decreeing a mulct or penalty to
be inflicted upon the guilty person. Amongst men (for the parallel will
illustrate that which I am upon) the Malefactor or guilty person is indicted,
arraigned before the Judge, judicial process is formed against him, his offense
is proved, upon this the Judge passes sentence upon him, that he is guilty of
that which is charged upon him, and then that he must undergo the penalty or
penalties which are answerable to the nature and quality of his crime, (if that
be Capital he must dye for it): So here, the impenitent, unbelieving sinner is
indicted, arraigned at Gods Bar, process is made against him, he is found
guilty of the violation of the holy Law, and (which is worse) of the contempt
of the Gospel too; whereupon God judges him to be guilty, and upon that guilt
adjudges him to everlasting death: this is Gods condemning or condemnation in
allusion to that condemnation which is amongst men. Pareus makes it to be the
damnatory sentence of the Law, (that Gal. 3.10.
Curse which it denounces upon all and against all because of sin): Grotius
makes it to be that eternal death spoken of Romans 6 ult. (several such Glosses
there are upon it, but all tend to one and the same thing).

Condemnation refers to Guilt and Punnishment.
Condemnation is either [ respectu Culpae and Reatus, or Poenae] in respect of
Guilt or Punnishment (for both of these are included in it). God condemns the
sinner, how? why, first he judges him to be [(...)] guilty of that which the
Law charges him with; O (says the Law) Sinner! thus and thus thou have
offended, such Duties have been omitted, such sins have been committed, such
Sabbaths have been profaned, such mercies have been abused, such tenders of
grace have been slighted, (here the Gospel Law comes in as an accuser too) etc.
Well now (says God) Sinner! what do thou say to this charge? is it true or
false? can thou deny it? what defense or plea can thou make for thy self?
Alas! he is Math. 22.12.
speechless, has not one word to say for himself, he can neither deny nor
excuse or extenuate what is charged upon him: Why then (says God the righteous
Judge) I must pronounce (and I do here pronounce) thee to be guilty. And is
this all? no, upon this guilt the Law pleads for a further Sentence, for the
decreeing and inflicting of the penalty (threatened by God himself, and incurred
by the sinner): Ah (says God) and I cannot deny it, I must be just and
righteous, and therefore (Sinner) I here adjudge thee to dye eternally. This is
Condemnation in the extensive notion of it: if you consider it with respect to
Guilt, so it is opposed to justification; if you consider it with respect to
Punishment, so it is opposed to Salvation. In the former notion you have it Romans
5.16, 18. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift, for the
judgment was by one [to condemnation], but the free gift is of many offenses
[to Justification]; Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men [to condemnation], even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon all men [unto justification of life]. In the second notion you have it
Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be [saved], but he that
believes not ((...)) shall be [condemned]. These are the two things which make
up the Condemnation in the Text, Guilt and Death: from both of which such as
are in Christ are secured; they shall neither be judged Guilty (their Guilt
being done away by Christ, and the Sentence proceeding according to what they
are in Christ, and not according to what they are in themselves); nor shall a
Sentence of eternal Death pass upon them, (for guilt being taken off that would
not be righteous): there is therefore none of this Condemnation to Believers.

Of the Sentence and State of Condemnation.
There is the Sentence of Condemnation and the State of Condemnation: the former
(actively considered) refers to God and is his Act, the latter refers to the
Sinner and is consequential upon the former. The Sentence has been already
opened: the State of Condemnation is the Sinners undergoing of the utmost of
Vindictive Justice, in his eternal separation from God and enduring of
everlasting torments in Hell; (of which you will hear more in what follows).
Neither of these do belong to them who are in Christ Jesus: not the former
(they being now justified), not the latter (they being sure to be glorified). I
shall take in both, yet mainly freedom from the State of Condemnation; the
Apostle (I conceive) had this chiefly in his eye when he here said There is now
no Condemnation, etc. Justification and no Condemnation with respect to the
Sentence are all one, only the one notes what is Positive, the other what is
Negative: now the Apostle in the words inferring No Condemnation from
Justification (as you will see he does by and by), it appears that his eye was
upon something distinct from and consequential upon Justification; and that
must be exemption from the state of Condemnation. There is no Condemnation,
etc. it is as if he had said, such shall not be condemned hereafter, or lie
under that damnation in Hell which will be the portion of Unbelievers: (to this
therefore I shall chiefly speak).

Condemnation Virtual or Actual.
Further, as some distinguish of Justification, it is either Virtual or Actual;
either in Title as to the Sentence of the Word here, or full and complete in
the Sentence which shall solemnly be pronounced by God at the Great day: So we
may also distinguish of Condemnation, it is either Virtual, that which is now
(in the Sentence of the Law or Gospel); or Actual, that which is to come, when
God by Christ will in a public and solemn way pass a condemnatory Sentence
upon men according to the Word; and this shall be at the Last and Great
Judment. You read of the First, Joh. 3.18. He that believes on him is not
condemned, he that believes not ((...)) is condemned already: so v. 26. of
that Chapt. Of the Second Mark 16.16. (and in diverse other places). In both of
these senses also Gods people are exempted from Condemnation; take it Virtually
or Actually, in Titlo here or in the Final Sentence of the Judge hereafter, it
belongs not to them. And this I am now to make good, which was the Second Head
that I propounded to speak to.

The Observe. proved.
The Negation in the Text is so express, so absolute and peremptory, that there
cannot be the least doubt of the truth of it: Indeed as to the application of
this to a man's self (in Hypothesi), so there may be many doubts arising in the
Soul concerning it; but as to the Thing it self (in Thesi), nothing more sure
and certain than it is. You have it asserted not only in this single Scripture,
but in diverse others also: Joh. 3.18. He that believes on him is not
condemned, (neither is nor ever shall be). Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily, I say
unto you (Christ would have Believers fully settled in the belief of this
precious Truth, and therefore he premises asseveration upon asseveration; and
gives you his own Authority for it), he that hears my word and believes on
him that sent me, has everlasting life and shall not come into condemnation,
but is passed from death to life. Read Joh. 3.16.36. Mark 16.16. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

If you look into the Text (for I Will go no further), you will find a double
Argument (or Ground) for the Non-condemnation of Believers.

The strength and import the Illative [therefore] opened.
1. The First lies couched in the Illative Particle, There is [therefore] now no
Condemnation, etc. What does this [therefore] point to? when that is found out
we must then enquire, what there is of strength in it to prove and bottom Non
condemnation upon.

For Answer to this, Expositors do somewhat differ about it: Some make it to
refer to all that goes before from the 16 v. of the 1 Chapt. Est conclusio
totius superioris disputationis a v. 16. primi Capitis, (Beza): It Is a
Conclusion; drawn from all that has been taught hitherto; (Deodate). Others
limit it to some special part of the Apostles foregoing Discourse in this
Epistle: And so some apply it to what he had laid down in the 3, 4, 5 Chapt.
(where he insists upon Justification and proves at large that Believers are
justified, and that through the Righteousness of Christ); which being so, from
this their blessed state and this gracious act of God upon them, he here infers
There is therefore now no Condemnation, etc. Others again make the Springhead
of the Inference to lie in the 7 Chapt. (especially in the close of it): Paul
there thanks God who had delivered him from the body of sin through Christ; he
says with his mind (his renewed and sanctified part) he served the Law of God,
though with the flesh (the carnal and unregenerate part) he served the law of
sin. Now Thus Bucer, Insert ad illud in proxima sectione Gratias ago etc. Thus
Pareus, Illatio est valde vehemens ex praecedenti querela and Gratulatione.
Thus Musculus, Nulla Condemnatio etc. Quare? referendum est istud exordium ad
Gratiarum actionem capitis praecedentis, qua dixit Gratias ago etc. Thus Tolet,
Connexa est haec sententia ultimis praecedentis capitis verbis, and ex ipsis
deducitur. Pendet initium hoc tam saustum and faelix, ex hoc quod ultimo dictum
est in fine praecedentis. (Corn. Mussus.)
from this he draws the Conclusion, There is therefore now no Condemnation, etc.

I (for my part) will not limit the Inference to the One or to the Other, but
I Will take in All; (yet I Will consider the whole in its main Parts, viz.
Justification and Sanctification). The Non-condemnation then of persons in
Christ may be proved by, or is grounded upon,

Non condemnation of Believers proved from their Justification.
1. Their Justification: He that is a justified man cannot be a condemned man,
for these two are contrary and incompatible: If it be justifying it cannot be
condemning, if it be condemning it cannot be justifying. There being in
justification an acquitting, absolving, discharging from Guilt, how can this
consist with the condemning of one as guilty, or because guilty? this would be
a plain contradiction, oppositum in apposito. It Is with Law-contraries as it is
with Physicalcontraries, upon the position of the one there needs must be the
exclusion or negation of the other; now Justification and Condemnation are
Law-contraries, ergo, etc. The Apostle argues upon this ( v. 33.) Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? (and surely there must be charging
before there can be condemning; but there can be none of that, why? because) it
is God that justifies. The Believer being justified (and justified by God too)
he must needs be exempted from Condemnation: He that will not acquit the guilty
will not condemn the righteous, Prove. 17.15.
for both are equally an abomination to the Lord: Now the justified person is a
righteous person (for else what does his justification signify)? and will the
righteous Judge condemn a righteous person?

'Pray (that you may the better perceive how the deduction in the Text is
grounded) look back a little into the Epistle, and see what the Apostle there
lays down concerning Justification. He says (and this is the main Position upon
which he does but enlarge in all his following discourse), Therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith ( chapter 1.16); Even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all
them that believe ( chapter 3.22): Being justified freely by his grace through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, etc. ( v. 24, 25, 26): Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness ( chapter 4.3): Now it
was not written for his sake alone that it was imputed to him; but for us also,
to whom it shall be imputed if we believe on him that raised up the Lord Jesus
from the dead; who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification ( v. 23, 24, 25): Therefore being justified by faith, we have
peace with God thorough our Lord Jesus Christ ( chapter 5.1): Especially read what
the Apostle writes in drawing up the Parallel betwixt the two Adams ( chapter 5.15.
to the end of the Ch.) I say, read and consider what is before asserted over
and over concerning Justification, and then tell me whether the Apostle might
not well thus infer, There is therefore, etc. and whether there be not strength
enough in these premises to bear the weight of the Conclusion There is
therefore now no Condemnation, etc. (for unquestionably the Illative
[therefore] upon which the Proposition is bottomed, like the Handle in the Dial
points to all that the Apostle had been speaking of concerning justifying
Grace).

2. The Privilege is farther sure upon Sanctification: From their
Sanctification:
Such as are in Christ are always sanctified, wherever the Union is with the
Son there is Sanctification by the Spirit: now such as are sanctified shall
never be condemned. Rev. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first Resurrection, on such the second death (or Condemnation) has no power.
Sanctification does not carry in it such a direct and intrinsic opposition to
Condemnation as Justification does, nor is it any meritorious ground of
Non-condemnation: Yet where there is Sanctification there shall be no
Condemnation: for upon this, the power and dominion of sin is taken away, Dum
non essent in Christo and consentirent concupiscentiae, erat illis damnatio;
Nunc autem cum sint in Christo, and repugnent concupiscentiae, nihil
damnationis est illis, quamquam ex carne concupiscant; quia non pugnatores sed
victi damnantur; nec est damnabile si existant desideria ^^rnalia, sed si eis
ad peccatum obediatur. Anselm. (This must be understood of Condemnation in
Event, and that too as grounded upon the mere Grace of God).
vigorous resistance is made against it, the bent of the heart is for God,
there is the participation of the Divine Nature; the Image of God is renewed in
the Soul, the Creature (in part) is restored to that original rectitude which
was before the Fall, (with many such like considerations); upon all which the
sanctified person is secured from Condemnation. God has such a love to Grace
(it being the work of his own Spirit), and to gracious persons (they in
sanctification being made after himself, as it is expressed Ephesians. 4.24.) that he
will never suffer such to perish eternally. Grace merits nothing, yet it
secures from the greatest evils and entitles to the greatest good. Nothing
shall save where Grace is not, nothing shall damn where Grace is, The Sinner
shall not live, the Saint shall not dye. O this Sanctification though it be
imperfect yet how great good does result from it! Paul had sad remainders of
sin in him, but withal Grace was in him; he had his double self, (as the
Moralist expresses it (...)), his renewed self and his unrenewed self: the Law
was spiritual, but he was carnal, sold under sin, what he would not that he
did, what he would that he did not; he was led captive by the Law of sin and
death; (here was his unrenewed self). Yet where he complains most of Sin, even
there he discovers much (if not most) of Grace; he had a sinning Nature but he
allowed not himself in sin, he consented to the Law that it was good, it was
not he that did so and so but sin that dwelt in him, to will was present with
him though how to perform he did not find, he delighted in the Law of God in
the inward man, with his mind he served the Law of God, etc. (here was his
renewed self). Do not these things evidence Grace? was all this spoken in
persona irregeniti (as some tell us)? No, doubtless the Apostle here speaks as
a With my mind I serve the Law of God. Ego, qui in me significo quemlibet
justum sub gratia constitutum. Anselm. Quod meo judicio tantam vim, tantam
emphasin habet, ut illi plane humanae naturae corruptionem ignorare videantur,
si qui sint, qui eam cum tali animi constitutione consistere posse putant, nisi
aliunde sit aliquatenus immutata. Amyral. Consid. cap. sept. Ep. ad Romans p. 16.
( He might have gone higher ^ha^^ aliquatenus immutata).
gracious man, and in the person of gracious men. And what does he infer from
all this? There is therefore now no Condemnation, etc. Oh (says Paul) I have
sin enough to humble me, but yet sin shall not damn me; there is too much of it
in me, but yet it has not my heart, with my mind I serve the Law of God, the
main bent of my heart is for holiness; the corrupt Nature is very strong in me,
but yet it has not its full strength, its entire, unbroken power and dominion
over me, that (through Grace) I am freed from: I am though but imperfectly yet
truly sanctified; and hereupon though I may lie under much trouble here, yet I
am safe as to my eternal state, there is therefore now no Condemnation to me. I
desire it may be observed, that he does not only infer Non-condemnation from
the work of Grace in him (spoken of in the closure of the former Chapter); but
as soon as he had laid down in common this great happiness of persons in
Christ, he presently confirms it (as to himself) from his sanctification, and
the dethroning of sin in him by the regenerating Spirit; For the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death.
And with respect to others he much enlarges upon it, Romans 6.5, 6, 7, 8, 21, 22,
23. Well then! persons in Christ they being justified and sanctified are above
the danger of Condemnation: and these are the two great Pillars upon which the
[Therefore] in the words is built.

From their union with Christ.
The Text affords us another Argument or Ground of Non-condemnation, and that
lies in the Subject it self: There is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ
Jesus, why so? because they are in Christ Jesus; for these words are not only
descriptive of the persons to whom the privilege belongs, but they are also
argumentative, and contain a reason or proof of the Thing spoken of. The
Expression (as shall be hereafter opened) notes that near and intimate union
which is betwixt Christ and Believers. Now shall there be Condemnation where
there is such an Union? what? in Christ and yet under Condemnation? those that
are so near to Christ here, shall they be set at an eternal distance from him
hereafter? will the head be so severed from his members? when Christ is in
Heaven shall a part of him lie in Hell? O no! a limb of Christ shall not
perish. Besides, upon this union there is interest in all that Christ has done
and suffered; he that is in Christ has a right to all of Christ; the
Obedience, Righteousness, Merits, Satisfaction, the Life, Death, Resurrection,
Intercession of Christ, all are his who is in Christ: It being so how can this
person miscarry? The Apostle upon this triumphs over Condemnation ( v. 34); Who
is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us: What
there is in each of these Heads (the Death, Resurrection, Exaltation,
Intercession of Christ) to secure those who are in him from Condemnation, shall
in due time (if God please) be fully made out; but that is not now to be done.
Only (for the further confirming of the Truth in hand) let me a little descant
upon the Question which the Apostle here does so triumphantly propound, Who is
he that condemns? He seems to challenge all inferior Accusers, and bid them
do their worst; he hangs out a Flag of Defiance to all; who (says he) will
attempt, or (in case they should attempt) would be able to carry on such a
thing as the condemning of those who are in Christ? For God himself (who must
be spoken of with all reverence) he will not, for he justifies, and he cannot
justify and condemn too; his justice is satisfied, he has declared that he
has accepted of Christ's satisfaction made in the sinners stead; and he will
not be satisfied and yet condemn. Then (to be sure) Christ will not, for his
great design was to prevent and keep off this Condemnation; this was the very
thing which he had in his eye in his great and most blessed undertaking; he is
so far from doing this himself, that he will not suffer it to be done by any
other. Come to sin, that shall not; for that is pardoned, expiated by the blood
of Christ; that is condemned it self ( Romans 8.3), and a condemned thing shall
never be a condemning thing. The Law cannot, for that is fulfilled by the
Surety, and that is appealed from as not a proper judge, and Believers are not
under it ( i. e. as to its vis damnatrix) but under Grace. Romans 6.14. The
Gospel too will not; because its conditions are performed (though imperfectly,
yet sincerely which it accepts of). It appears then by this Induction, that
there is, there shall be, no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus. So
much for the Proofs or Grounds of the Truth in hand. Observe, that I have only
instanced in those which the Text leads me to, for diverse others might have
been produced, as Gods eternal electing Love, the Covenant of Grace, the
earnest of the Spirit, etc. but these I pass by. Nothing remains but the
Application.

USE 1. The misery of all out of Christ.
And First, This proclaims the misery of all who are not in Christ Jesus: The
Cloud is not so bright toward Israel but it is as dark toward the Egyptians;
the Point is not so full of Comfort to Believers but it is as full of Terror to
Unbelievers. Here Is the very marrow and sweetness of the Gospel for the one,
and yet withal here is the bitterest Gall and Wormwood of the Law for the
other. There Is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ, what more sweet? but
there is nothing but Condemnation to them who are out of Christ, what more
dreadful? Art thou a Christless, graceless, unbelieving, impenitent person? do
not deceive thy self, this exemption from Condemnation belongs not to thee. The
Apostle does not say there is no Condemnation and so break off; but (that none
may flatter themselves, and presumptuously apply that to themselves which
belongs not to them) he puts down the Subject which only is concerned in the
Privilege. Oh! you who are out of Christ, know it and be assured of it, there
is Condemnation to you; you are condemned Joh. 3.18.
already in the Sentence of the Law, and it will not be long before you be
actually, solemnly condemned by the Sentence of the Judge; so many Unbelievers,
so many condemned persons. And if so, is it nothing to you to be condemned?
what a dreadful word is Condemnation? how should we all fear and tremble at the
hearing of it! All the evils of the present life are a mere nothing, mere
trifles to this; put all afflictions, calamities, miseries together, one
Condemnation out-weighs them all: Sickness, pain, poverty, sufferings, all are
light, inconsiderable things in comparison of this. I cannot but stand and
wonder, and be filled even with amazement at the woeful stupidity and security
of Sinners out of Christ; the Condemnation of God hangs over them, wherever
they are or go they are no better than condemned men; and yet how merry,
jovial, unconcerned are they! Good God what shall we say to this! Amongst us,
what a sad spectacle is it to see a poor Malefactor that is condemned by man
and to be executed within a few days, altogether unaffected with his condition?
he spends that span of time which he has to live in feasting, drinking,
trimming and dressing of himself, and considers not that he is a condemned man,
and must dye within a day or two. Ah Sinners this is your State! nay, yours is
much worse, for you are under a far worser Condemnation, even the Condemnation
of the great God, and that too to dye eternally. And yet how do you carry it?
you please the flesh, take your fill of sensual pleasures, you Amos 6.5, 6.
chant to the sound of the Viol, drink wine in bowls, live a merry life,
nothing troubles you; no though the dreadful Sentence of God be passed upon
you, and is ready to be executed every moment, yet all is well in your
thoughts; what prodigious security is this! Dan. 5.5, 6.
Belshazzar in his cups and height of mirth, when he saw the hand writing upon
the wall, this made him tremble. Sinner! thou art at ease, sporting thy self in
thy worldly delights, look but into the Word there is a dreadful handwriting
against thee, there is Condemnation written over and over in broad and legible
characters as thy portion, wilt not thou fear? Surely it is sad dancing over the
mouth of Hell; there is but a breath betwixt thee and everlasting flames, and
yet art thou secure? is eternal misery a thing to be dallied with or slighted?
If men were not downright Haec cura omnes non omnino Atheos necessario
excruciat, and est tristis conscientiarum tortura. Pareus in loc. The
dreadfulness of Condemnation set forth.
Atheists, this Condemnation would affright and startle them. Now do I speak to
any here of you as being under this woeful security? if it be possible to reach
your Consciences and to stir up fear in you, I would desire you to consider
these four or five things.

1. It Is God himself who will be your Judge, and who will pass the condemnatory
Sentence upon you. It Is somewhat terrible to be arraigned and condemned at the
Bar of man, but how much more terrible will it be to be arraigned and condemned
at the Bar of God? what a vast disproportion is here betwixt the Crimes, the
Judge, the Sentence, the Execution, etc. O Sinners when you must stand before
such a Judge, in order to the receiving of such a Sentence, for Crimes so high
and heinous, will you not tremble? Methinks the Majesty, Omnisciency,
Omnipotency, Righteousness of this Judge should strike us all with fear and
dread. There Is no standing before him such is his Majesty, no hiding of any
thing from him such is his Omnisciency, no resisting of him such is his
Omnipotency, no corrupting of him such is his infinite Righteousness. What then
will become of you who are in your sins, but out of Christ? at the Tribunal of
this God you must hold up you hands, be tried and so condemned: is this nothing
to you? And because he will not himself immediately judge the world, but
mediately by Christ ( Acts 17.31.
that man whom he has ordained to this Office), therefore Christ in his own
person shall appear and ride his great Circuit as the Universal Judge, and
every one of you shall be summoned before him to be judged by him: 2 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment of Christ, that every one, etc. And may
not the consideration of this very much heighten your fear? you not being in
Christ how will you be able to stand before Christ? where he is not a gracious
Head will he not be a severe Judge? You must be judged by him whom you so
often, so scornfully have rejected; he will be your Judge whom you would not
have to be your King and Savior; what favor can you expect from him whom you
have so basely used? In what glory will this Judge appear when you shall stand
before him? now you know the glory and solemnity of the Bench adds to the
terror of the Malefactor at the Bar. Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of Man shall
come in his glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
throne of his glory. O to be tried, cast, and sentenced by so glorious a Judge,
in so solemn a manner, this must needs be terrible to Sinners when they see it
and hear it, though now they make nothing of it. Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. And the
Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man, hid
themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains, and said to the
mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand?

2. Think with your selves what this Condemnation is: Men are fearless because
they are thoughtless; did they but weigh and ponder what the things of another
world are, what it is to be everlastingly condemned, they would not be so
secure as they are. Condemnation? what is it? it is (in short) to be adjudged to
eternal death. Men condemn their guilty persons to dye a temporal death, and
that is as high as they can go; but God (being an higher Judge, and greater
offenses being committed against him than what are committed by man against
man), he inflicts a greater penalty, and his Sentence is to dye eternally: he
does not condemn to a Prison, to an Axe or Gallows, (just to dye and then
there is an end of all), O no! he sentences to Death and eternal Death too. And
this is no less, than the loss of Gods love and favor and presence, (which is
the poena damni), and the undergoing of endless, easeless, remediless torments
in Hell (which is the poena sensus), Both are very sad, but Divines generally
give the pre-eminence to the Omnia Gehennae supplicia superabit, Deum non
videre, and bonis carere. Bernard de inter domo. cap. 38. See Bolton of the
four last things, p. 95. etc.
first: The Hell of Hell is the loss of Heaven and of Gods Love. But both put
together must needs make the Sinner extremely miserable, and he that is out of
Christ shall feel both of them. Would you know what this Condemnation is? you
have a sad draught or description of it Matthew. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Every word here
(if I could speak to it) is thunder and lightning; to be thrust from Christ,
and thrown into sire, into everlasting fire, into that very fire which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; O here is misery indeed! Hear me
therefore you who are out of Christ, if you so live and so dye you shall never
see God; and this is not all, for you shall also feel those torments in Vide
Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 49. very full upon this,
comparison of which Stone, Gout, Strangury, Racking by men, the most exquisite
pains here, are in a manner perfect ease, or at least very inconsiderable pain.
And this too you must lie under to ^all eternity; O this is worst of all! this
puts an accent indeed upon this Condemnation, it is eternal Condemnation! This
eternity fills up the measure of the Unbelievers misery, and makes it to run
over; in Heaven it is eternity of joy, in Hell it is eternity of woe. To be
miserable as long as god shall be blessed, to be always dying and yet always to
live, to be always drinking and yet the cup still to continue full, to launch
out into a boundless Ocean of eternal wrath, to lie under evils and to see no
end of them, that when millions of millions of years are over all is (as it
were) to begin again, and the poor creature is but after the efflux of so much
time just where he was at the first, to pass from dying comforts to never dying
sorrows; what tongue can express, what heart can conceive the greatness of this
misery! It Is everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord 2 Thessalonians.
1.9. it is everlasting punishment Math. 25.46. it is everlasting fire Matthew.
25.41. it is the worm that never dies Mark 9.44. it is everlasting chains Jude 6.
the blackness of darkness forever Jude 13. Now (Sirs) what do you think of
this? are you able to bear it? Alas! Is. 33.14.
who among us shall dwell with devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? this made the Sinners in Zion afraid and filled
Hypocrites with fearfulness, and will it not (sooner or later) have the same
effect upon you who are out of Christ? If this Condemnation or eternal Death
was total abolition or annihilation (as some See Calov. Socin. proflig. de
morte aeterna, Contr. tertia, p. 11 13. Cloppenb. Compend. Socinian. cap. 8 p.
134. etc. (With many others).
Socinians make it to be) it would not be so bad; this would be a great allay
to it, for surely (whatever some learned men may say to the contrary) no being
would be more desirable than such a being; but it is not so.

3. The Condemnatory Sentence being once past it will be irreversible and
irresistible. When it is once out of the Judges mouth there is no reversing of
it; as the Penalty is intolerable so the Sentence is irreversible. The poor
condemned Sinner will presently fall upon his knees and most earnestly beg
mercy, but all in vain; all his entreaties, beseechings, tears, wringing of
hands, will avail nothing; time was when he would not hear Christ, and now
Christ will not hear him. Now (to be sure) the season of Grace is over, once
condemned and ever condemned; there is neither appealing from the Judge nor
repealing of the Sentence. And then too (I say) it is irresistible; as soon as
it is past, Christ will have his Officers by him who shall see it put into
execution: his Guard and retinue of Angels shall be ready for this service,
these Matthew. 13.30.
Reapers shall gather the tares and bind them in bundles to burn them, and who
shall be able to resist? The Judge amongst the Jews was to see the Offender
punished before his face, Deuteronomy. 25.2. Christ will not only pass sentence but he
himself will see execution done: Luke 19.27. Those mine enemies which would not
that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them [before me]. And
as there will be no turning of him, so neither will there be either flying from
him or making resistance to him. When man condemns God can save, but who can
save when God condemns? If the Three Children be thrown into the fire God can
take them out, but when the Unbeliever is thrown into Hellfire, or to be
thrown into Hellfire, who then can either hinder or deliver? O come to Christ
and get into Christ betimes! if you defer till the Sentence be past, you must
suffer it and there is no remedy. As God says Is. 43.13.
I will work, and who shall let? So when he condemns and will have his
Sentence executed, who shall let? what can man do to defend himself, or to
hinder God! Job. 31.14 What shall I then do when God rises up? and when he
visits what shall I answer him?

4. The Unbeliever and Christless person will not only be condemned by God, but
he will also be condemned by himself: Self-condemnation will accompany Gods
condemnation (and that is very miserable). Next to being condemned by God,
nothing so sad as to be ((...)) condemned by ones self. When the poor Sinner
shall be upon his Trial, Conscience will accuse as well as the Law, and condemn
as well as the Judge. And as soon as ever the Judge shall have passed Sentence,
Conscience will fall upon the guilty condemned person and say, is not this just
and righteous? have not thou Jer. 2.17.
procured this to thy self? must not such a course have such an end? is not
this the fruit of thy sin? This will highly justify God (for the more the
Sinner condemns himself the more he acquits God), but greatly heighten his own
misery. You read how at the great day there shall be Per apertionem librorum
significatur, ut unicuique conscientia sua (nec enim opus erit testibus
externis) suggestura sit omnem suam vitam. Voss. de Extr. Judicio.
the opening of the books, Rev. 20.12. these books are mainly two, the book of
Scripture and the book of Conscience. As to the latter, men keep it shut here,
but God will open it to some purpose then; and Sinners shall be forced to look
into it, and read over the sins of their lives written there in very legible
characters. And what a sad time will it then be, when as God condemns without
and above, so Conscience shall condemn below and within? Such as are out of
Christ will feel all this to be true, to their inexpressible grief and torment,
if it be not prevented by timely repentance.

5. I might add (which indeed will be but a more particular explication of the
former Head), this condemnation will be the sadder, (especially to such who
live under the Gospel), because they will lie under the sense and conviction of
this, that they have foolishly and wilfully brought all this misery upon
themselves. For (and their hearts will tell them of it) Christ offered himself
to them from time to time, but they refused to close with him; he tendered
pardon to them but they slighted it, (and who will pity the Traitor that dies
for his Treason, when his Prince offered him a pardon and he scorned to accept
of it)? they might have been saved as well as others, would they but have
hearkened to the free, gracious, hearty, often repeated invitations which in
the Gospel were made to them; how often would Christ Matthew. 23.37.
have gathered them as the Hen gathers her Chickens, but they would not; and
therefore now their Souls are lost forever. O Sinner! Hos. 13.9.
thy destruction is of thy self; and the consideration of this will sadly gnaw
upon thy Conscience forever; this is the worm that never dies. The Jews when
they had adjudged a Malefactor to dye, the Judge and the Witnesses used to lay
their hands upon him, and to say thy blood be upon thy own head; (in imitation
of which the Murderers of our Savior said Matthew. 27.25.
His blood be on us and our children): Thus Christ when he shall have passed
the dreadful Sentence of eternal Death upon the impenitent and unbelieving,
he will say Your blood be upon your own heads.

Now is not here enough (if the Lord would please to set it home upon the
Conscience), to awaken and terrify secure Christless Sinners? You who are out
of Christ pray believe me, as sure as God is, and is a just and righteous God,
as sure as his Word is true, so sure are you (if you go out of the world before
you have got into Christ) to be condemned forever. And will you not lay this to
heart before it be too late? is it not high time for you to think of these
things? will nothing awaken you but only the feeling of everlasting flames?
will you not mind the damned state till you be in it? I tremble to think of
that distress that you will be in at the Great day, though now you are quiet
and unconcerned; Undique erunt tibi angustiae: hinc erunt accusantia peccata,
tremeda justitia, subter patens horridum Chaos, desuper iratus Judex, intus
Vermis Conscientiae, foris ardens mundus. Be^n. de Consc.
when your sins shall fly in your faces and accuse you, when the tremendous
justice of God shall affright you, when if you look downwards there is an Hell
ready to receive you, if upwards there is an angry Judge, if inwards there is the
Worm of Conscience, if about you there is a World all in flames: O what a time
will this be? what would you then give to be in Christ? take heed I beseech you
of an after-wisdom.

USE 2. To exhort all to make sure of exemption from Condemnation.
Secondly, I would exhort you to make sure of this exemption from Condemnation,
to labor to be in the number of those to whom there is no Condemnation: It Is
infinite mercy that such a thing is attainable; surely he must be strangely
besotted and utterly void of all sense of eternity, who does not with the
greatest care and diligence put in for a share in this happiness. No
Condemnation? Justification here and Salvation hererfter? what can be so worthy
of our utmost pains and endeavors as these! what pitiful trifles and very
Nothings are all other things in comparison of these! It Is no great matter how
things go at present, if the future everlasting state may be secured! O that
all your thoughts, desires, pursuits, might be swallowed up in this! You dread
such and such Evils here, alas! what are these to the eternal Evils which have
been set before you? you are set upon the worlds good, and what is that to an
endless blessedness in the Vision and Fruition of God in Heaven? think of Hell
and nothing here will be very evil, and of Heaven and nothing here will be very
good. Should you come to a condemned man, and talk to him of the riches
honors, crowns and scepters of this world, Ah! (says he) what is this to me? I
am a poor condemned man; can you tell me how I may get out of the condemnation
that I lie under? then you will say something which will suit my condition: Why
(Sirs!) you trouble your selves about the getting of wealth, the greatning of
your selves in the world, but you do not consider you are condemned men: such
you were as you came into the world, Romans 5.18.
By the offenos of one, judgment came upon all to Condemnation; and there is a
worser Condemnation: for you when you shall go out of the world: O what have
you to do but to get out of this Condemnation? It Is to be feared that the
greatest part of men (not out of any want of mercy in God, or from any thing to
be charged upon God, but merely through their own sin and folly) will perish
therein: you read of the condemning of the world 1 Cor. 11.32. Now therefore
what are you? or what do you do? that you may be exempted from the general
misery. Certainly if you lie in the common State and live in the common Course,
you must perish in the common Condemnation; think of it and make some timely
provision against it. Your Judge deals very graciously with you, he warns you
before hand, tells you how his terrible Sentence may be prevented, nay, he
offers Life and Pardon to you if you will but accept of it; and after all this
will you force him to condemn you? then 'twill be Condemnation with a witness.
I would upon this Consideration be the more earnest with you in the present
advice, because though this Condemnation will be sad enough to all, yet to you
it will be superlatively sad: you living under the Gospel, where the way of
Salvation is set before you, where tenders of Grace are made to you, if you be
not wise and serious in securing the main, this will not only make your
Condemnation more unavoidable, Heb. 2.3.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?) but also more
intolerable: 'twill be Condemnation with an Accent or Emphasis to you, Joh.
3.19.
This is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, etc. The
Scripture speaks of Matthew. 23.14.
greater damnation; 'twill be great damnation to Pagans and Infidels, but
greater damnation to Christians. According to the different measures of that
Gospel Light and Gospel Grace which men live under, so will the different
measures of their future misery be (if they live and dye in impenitency and
unbelief). O how will these aggravate your Condemnation! if there be one place
in Hell hotter than another, that very place shall be yours, (whilst others
shall mitius ardere). Matthew. 12.23, 24.
Thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, etc. but I say unto you, that
it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than
for you.

What persons are to do, that it may be No-Condemnation.
You will ask me, What are we to do that it may be to us No-Condemnation? For
answer to this several Directions might be given and much enlarged upon; but I
will give you only five or six, and be but short upon them.

First, 1. Dir.
Let sin be condemned in you, and by you. For thus the case stands, sin must
either be condemned by you, or you for it; a condemnatory Sentence must pass
either upon the Sin or upon the Sinner: and is it not better, it should pass
upon the Sin rather than upon the Sinner? that it should dye rather than you
should dye? O let not Sin live in you, nor do you live in it! for if it be so,
it will be Condemnation. This sin is the condemning thing; had there been No
Sin there had been No Condemnation; it is that and that only, which makes the
Creature liable to eternal Death; Romans 6.23.
the wages of sin is death. Did not the Malefactor break the Law, by stealing,
murdering, etc. he would not be obnoxious to the Laws penalties; and so it is
here. We violate Gods Law, upon that violation there is guilt, upon that guilt
there is obnoxiousness to punishment and to a Sentence of Death. O take heed of
sin! here lies the evil of it, it exposes to, and ends in eternal Condemnation;
it pleases the Sinner for a Heb. 11.25.
season, and then entails everlasting wrath upon him. Was it not for this, a
Life in sin would be a fine Life, (I must recall my self, a Life in sin a fine
Life? no, was there no Hell hereafter, yet such a Life would be, and is a base,
sordid, cursed Life); but Hell and Wrath and Condemnation and all follow upon
it, and this spoils the pleasures and delights of a sinful Life. Who would not
fear and shun Sin? a Child of God dreads it for the Hell that is in it; me
thinks all should dread it for the Hell that is procured by it. Now therefore
what is your Course? every man's Sentence shall be according to his Course; where
it is an holy course, it shall be the Sentence of Life; where it is the opposite
course, it shall be the Sentence of Death. Bring it down to your selves, do not
you live in sin? may be you are not Drunkards, Swearers, etc. but is there not
some other, some secret way of wickedness in which you walk? some bosom Lust
hid and cherished? do you endeavor after Universal Holiness? these things must
be enquired into, for the No-Condemnation depends upon them. Mistake me not, I
do not say if No Sin then No Condemnation, (as if to be Sinless was the
condition of, or way to the future blessedness, God forbid I should go so high!
for then I should condemn every man in the World); but this I say, no allowed
sin, no reigning sin, no presumptuous sin, no course in sin; and then it is
No-Condemnation. That God who is just to punish for known and presumptuous
sins, is gracious also to pardon sins of infirmity. So that upon the whole, as
ever you desire to see the Face of God with comfort, to lift up your heads
before your Judge at the Great day with joy, to be freed from the Sentence of
Condemnation; I say as ever you desire these blessed things, be holy, live a
godly life, keep sin at a great distance, do not allow your selves in it, but
rather condemn it that it may not condemn you. If any think that the present
good of sin preponderates the future evil of Condemnation, or that they may
live in sin and yet rely upon Gods mercy, (as if he would not condemn them for
it), I heartily beg of God that he will convince them of these soul-destroying
mistakes, that they may not persist in them till Condemnation it self will be a
sad confutation to them.

Secondly, 2. Dir.
Condemn your selves and God will not condemn you. Self-condemnation prevents
Gods Condemnation: There is a Self-condemnation which is judicial and penal,
which pains and torments but yet does no good, (such was that of Cain and
Judas); O there is in some that condemnation from their own Consciences, which
is but a Prolepsis to the condemnation of God at the great day! But then there
is gracious and penitential self-condemnation, (such as that of David upon his
numbering of the people, and also upon his commission of other sins): now this
is that which I would urge upon you. Where the Sinner (upon the sense of the
hainousness of sin) condemns himself, God will not condemn him too. 1 Cor.
11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord: (and so
here as to Condemnation.) The penitent self judger is safe; the Luke 18.14.
self condemning Publican went away justified: when the Sinner justifies, God
condemns, but when he condemns then God justifies. This signifies but little in
the Courts of Men; let the criminal person repent and judge himself never so
much, that is nothing, for all this the Law must be executed upon him; but this
always carries it in the Court of God. O (says God) there is a Sinner, but he
is a penitent Sinner; he has sinned but he is angry with himself for it, he
arraigns and condemns himself for it, well, upon this I Will acquit him; he
condemns below, and therefore I Will absolve above.

Thirdly, 3 Dir.
As you desire No-Condemnation, speedily get your peace made with God through
Christ Jesus. A pacified God is never a condemning God: First our Apostle
says, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God; and then he infers, There is
now no Condemnation, etc. Your first work is to look after the atoning of God
through the blood of Christ; if it be not reconciliation it will be
Condemnation. Are God and you reconciled? is your peace made with him? you have
a reprieve for some time, but have you sued out your pardon? is the breach
(which sin has made) healed and made up betwixt God and you? O (as Christ
speaks) Math. 5.25, 26.
Agree with thine adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, lest
at any time thy adversary deliver thee to the Judge, etc. this is a thing which
admits of no procrastination.

Fourthly, 4 Dir.
Pray that it may be to you exemption from Condemnation. You would have Others,
your Selves, delivered from it, but are you often with God, and earnest with
God about this matter? Of all evils deprecate this as the greatest evil; tell
God, you are willing he should do any thing with you, burn, cut, lance, modo in
aeternum parcat, if he will but save you from eternal misery. This is the thing
you should every day with the greatest ardency be begging of God; Ah Lord! do
with us what thou please, but for thy mercy sake do not condemn us. You are
to pray daily that you may not Luke 22.40.
enter into temptation, surely much more that you may not enter into
condemnation. O be often upon your knees pleading with God, and saying, Lord!
Psalm. 30.9.
what profit will there be in our blood? why should such souls be lost forever?
what will follow upon our Condemnation, but cursing and blaspheming of thy
sacred name? whereas if thou will pardon and save, we shall bless, adore and
magnify thy name forever. If God give you an heart thus to pray for this mercy
(the mercy of mercies), it is to be hoped he will not withold if from your.
It Is good to pray now whilst prayer will do you good; when the Sentence is once
passed, it will then do you no good at all. Is it not much to be lamented, that
there are so few who go to God to plead with him about the everlasting concerns
of their immortal souls? many go from day to day, from week to week, nay from
year to year without prayer; let it be Salvation or Damnation, it is all one to
them: O this dreadful! How seldom are the most of men at the throne of Grace,
beseeching the Lord for Christ Jesus his sake to deliver them from wrath will
be very sad? the end of the prayerless cannot be good. Nay, I have too just
occasion to go higher; there is a sort of persons amongst us, who (instead of
humble, serious calling upon God to free them from condemnation) in their
hellish imprecations they dare to call God to damn them: O prodigious, amazing,
astonishing profaneness! I tremble to speak of it; but O that it was not too
common in our ears! What? do men defy God, and even bid him do his worst? is
damnation a thing to be desired or wished for? do they know what they say? what
if God should take them at their word, and do that in his greatest wrath which
they seem to wish for with the greatest wickedness? O let such take heed lest
God hear them in a dreadful manner! I hope I speak to none of these; you (I
trust) have a dread of God and of the things of eternity upon your spirits; let
exempt on from Condemnation be the matter of your prayer: and do but join the
right manner with the right matter, and this will secure your Souls forever.
God never yet condemned a praying man: he that fears and prays, shall never
feel what he fears and prays against.

Fifthly, 5 Dir.
Make sure of Faith, I mean true, saving, justifying Faith: where that is (yea
but the least dram of it) there shall be no Condemnation. It secures from this,
both as it is the Grace which unites to Christ, and also as it is the great
condition of the Gospel upon which it promises life and salvation. Unbelief is
the damning Sin, and Faith is the saving Grace. If thou be'st a sincere
Believer, it is not only, thou shall not be condemned, but thou shall most
certainly be saved: both are sure from the frequent, often repeated
declarations, attestations, promises of the word: the whole Gospel-revelation
centers in this. God is as gracious to acquit, justify, save the Believer, as
he is righteous to charge, punish, condemn the Unbeliever. He Gratia Dei
speranda est and acceptanda ad normam and propositum miserentis Dei, (reque
enim convenit, or qui^condemnationis reusest, formulas Gratiae praescribat ei a
quo just potest condemnari), sed requiritur, ut praescriptum Gratiae ab allo
accipiat and grato animo amplectatur. ( Muscul. in praefat. ad Ep. ad Rom.)
may set down what condition (or conditions) he pleases, in order to the giving
out of his grace; which when they are performed, he is engaged to make good
what he promises upon them. O therefore get faith! for this is the grand
Gospel-condition; if you believe not, the Gospel it self cannot save you; if
you believe, the Law it self cannot condemn you.

I do not enlarge upon these things, 6 Dir.
because that Direction which is proper to the Text, is this, As you desire
No-condemnation get into Christ: so as to be in Christ Jesus. For they (and
they only) are the persons who are out of the danger of Condemnation. The
Privilege and the Subject are of the same extent and latitude; just so many as
are in Christ are safe, and no more. If thou be one of these, do not fear;
if otherwise, do not flatter thy self with false, presumptuous, and ungrounded
hopes. All that were not in the Ark perished in the common Deluge; all out of
Christ are lost. When it is a Christ it is no Condemnation, when it is no Christ
it is nothing but Condemnation. When the guilty pursued Malefactor had got into
the City of Refuge, then he was secure: O thou poor awakened Sinner fly to
Christ ('it is for the life of thy precious Soul), and get into Christ (the alone
City of Refuge for the poor guilty Creature)! then Guilt many pursue thee, but
it shall never hurt thee. And here I would admonish all to take up with nothing
short of Union with Christ: You are members of the Church, but are you members
of Christ? you are joined to the Church upon Baptism, but are you joined to
Christ by a true and lively faith? here lies your security from Condemnation.
The first Adam has brought Guilt upon us (and consequently Death), how? we
being united to him: So the second Adam frees us from this and makes over
righteousness to us, how? in the same way and upon the same ground (viz) we
being united to him: without this, all that Christ is, has done or suffered,
will avail us nothing. (But I shall more fully insist upon this in that which
will follow).

USE 3. Believers are to admire God for exemption from Condemnation.
Thirdly I would speak to those who are in Christ, to excite them to be very
thankful and highly to admire the Grace of God: What? No condemnation? not one
condemnation? O the riches, the heighths, bredths, depths, lengths of the love
of God! How should such be even astonished because of this inexpressible mercy!
They who deserve millions of condemnations, that yet there is not one
condemnation belonging to them; they that have in them matter enough to condemn
them over and over, that yet they shall never be condemned; how should God be
admired by those to whom this blessedness belongs! Such as are not in this
state, how should they be filled with self-awakening thoughts! such as are in
this state, how should they be filled with God-admiring thoughts! O you that
are in Christ, what will you think of this happiness when you shall see it
accomplished? the truth is, as Sinners will never know, nor ever be suitably
affected with their misery, till they feel it in Hell; so the Saints will never
know, or be suitably affected with their happiness, till that day shall come
wherein they shall be put into the possession of it in Heaven. When God shall
pick and single you out of the common crowd, and shall say I here acquit you
before all the world from all your guilt, I here pronounce you to be righteous
persons, and I will by no means pass a condemnatory sentence upon you; (though
I know what I might have done to you, and what I will do to others): I say,
when it shall come to this, how will your Souls be drawn out (and if you had a
thousand more Souls, how would they all be drawn out), in the adoring and
magnifying of the Grace of God! But something should be done now whilst you are
here, (though but in the hopes and expectation of this felicity). Where there
is no condemnation there should be much thankfulness: How does the Traitor
admire the grace and clemency of his Prince, who sends him a pardon when he
expected his trial and sentence to dye?

And as you must be thankful to God the Father, so (in special) to Jesus
Christ: it is he 1 These. 1.10.
who has saved you from wrath to come; it is he who was willing to be condemned
himself, that he might free you from condemnation; judgment passed upon him [
Is. 53.8.
he was taken from prison and from judgment] that it might not pass upon you;
he was Gal. 3.13.
made a curse that he might deliver you from the curse: when Adam had entailed
guilt and wrath upon you, Christ came and cut off this sad entail, and procured
justification for you. Romans 5.18.
As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all to condemnation; even so by
the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to justification of life.
It Is upon Union with him that there is no condemnation to you; O let your whole
Soul go out in thankfulness to Christ! He as your Surety paid your debt, else
you had been arrested and thrown into prison forever: in him there was nothing
to deserve condemnation, and yet he was willing to be condemned; in you there
is very much to deserve condemnation, and yet you shall never be condemned;
here is the admirable, boundless, infinite love of Christ!

USE 4. Comfort to all in Christ.
Lastly, The main tendency and drift of this Truth is Comfort to Believers: and
what a full breast of Consolation is here for such as are in Christ! No
condemnation to them? this no condemnation is the ground of all Consolation:
what a word is here for Faith and Hope! O magnae spei verbum (as he cries out)!
what a Ut frustra sibi blanditur homo carnalis, si de emendanda vita nihil
sollicitus, hu^us gratiae praetextu impunitatem sibi promittat: Ita habent
trepidae piorum conscientiae invictum propugnaculum, quod dum in Christo
manent, sciunt se esse extra omne damnationis periculum. ( Calv. in loc.)
mighty support is here for poor doubting and dejected Souls! The great thing
that such are afraid of, is Condemnation; but here is that which secures them
from it: the assertion is very express and full, and it is grounded too upon a
sure foundation, there is now no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.
O you that are in Christ, as your thankfulness should be high, so your joy
should be high also! and what will raise your joy if this will not? 'Pray
improve it upon all occasions and be cheerful. Set this against all the present
evils you meet with: God afflicts you, but he will not condemn you; why should
you be troubled? affliction becomes very tolerable upon No-condemnation; what
though it be sickness, pain, loss of Relations, a low estate, so long as the
soul is safe and the main state secured? there may be 1 Pet. 4.12.
fiery trials here, but there is no Mark 9.43.
unquenchable fire to burn in hereafter; O there is comfort. What are the
comforts of this world if we shall be kept out of Heaven, and what are the
crosses of this world if we shall be kept out of Hell? Take the wicked, there is
condemnation at the bottom of all their good; take the Saints, there is
Salvation at the bottom of all their evil. Again, men condemn you; ah but God
will not condemn you: this is but 1 Cor. 4.3.
man's day (where you may have the worst of it), but Gods day is coming and then
all will go on your side. O let it be a very little thing to you to be judged
of man, so long as God does and will acquit. You have Sin in you (too much God
knows), yet it is no condemnation; and if sin it self (it being pardoned and
Rev. 1.5.
washed away by the blood of Christ), if this (I say) shall not condemn you,
what then shall? After Paul's sad complaints of sin, yet he here says there is no
condemnation: Condemn your selves for sin you do, (and so you should do,
provided this self-condemnation flow from Repentance, not from Unbelief), but
the great God (by whose judicial Sentence your everlasting state shall be
ordered) will not condemn you for it. 'Twill be so far from this, that (as some
Hinc fidelium peccata non prodibunt in judicium. Quum enim in istac vita per
sententiam justificationis tecta sunt and ablata, and ultimum illud judicium
confirmatio erit and manifestatio ejusdem sententiae, non esset consentaneum ut
in lucem denuo tum temporis proferantur. ( Ames. Med. lib. 1. cap. 41.)
Divines hold) the sins of Believers shall not be so much as mentioned at the
great day. The Law is a condemning thing; it is so indeed (in it self), but it is
not so to you who are in Christ. You must dye and be judged; but welcome death,
welcome judgment so long as there is no condemnation; why should you be afraid
of these which will only let you see the accomplishment of what is here
affirmed? This is the happiness of you who are in Christ, will you act faith
upon it and take the comfort of it? I would have you live and dye with this
Cordial always by you, there is therefore now no condemnation, etc. And let me
add, it is not only your privilege but your duty to rejoice because of this;
it is not only you may, but you ought to be cheerful: you cannot be otherwise,
unless you either distrust or disparage what is here spoken of. The Sinner has
no reason to be jocund and merry, for he is liable every moment to
Condemnation; the Saint has no reason to be dejected and pensive, for he is
out of all danger of Condemnation. The Sinner is secure as though there was no
Hell, and the Saint is sad and cast down as though there was no Heaven: the
good Lord convince the one, and comfort the other.

I Will close all with two words of advice: 1. Get assurance in your own Souls,
that there is to you No Condemnation. It Is a sad thing to live under
peradventures about this; may be God will save, and may be too God will damn:
to hang in doubtfulness 'twixt Heaven and Hell, is a very uncomfortable state.
Were you but clear in your evidences about this Privilege, you could not but
rejoice. Now in order to this, do but make sure of your Union with Christ, and
that will assure you of No Condemnation.

2. Let this Happiness be a great incentive to Holiness: It Is good to infer
Duty from Mercy: Are you secured from Condemnation? what manner of persons
should you be! How should you differ from others here, who shall so differ from
others hereafter! Though Sin shall not condemn you, yet do you condemn it. I Will
end with an allusion to that of our Savior to the Woman taken in Adultery,
Joh. 8.10, 11.
Woman (says Christ) where are those thine accusers? has none condemned thee?
she said. No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee, go,
and Sin no more.

ROMANS 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation [to them which are in Christ
Jesus] etc.


CHAP. II. Of the Saints Union with Christ.
The Subject of the Proposition next opened. What it is to be in Christ Jesus.
The difference betwixt Christ's being in Believers, and their being in Christ.
Union with Christ a great Mystery. A threefold Union: The Union of Three
Persons in one Nature, the Union of two Natures in one Person, the Union of
Persons where Persons and Natures are distinct. This is Mystical, Legal, or
Moral. Scripture Resemblances by which the Mystical Union is shadowed out. Its
Properties: It Is a Sublime, Real, Spiritual, Intimous, Total, Immediate,
Indissoluble Union. Use 1. For Trial whether we be in Christ. A double
distinction concerning this. Union with Christ is either Material and Natural,
or Spiritual and Supernatural: Either External and Visible, or Internal and
Invisible. How it may be known whether we be really and savingly in Christ.
Some Scriptures insisted upon for the Evidence of this. Use 2. To excite all to
get into Christ. Use 3. Some Directions in order to it. Use 4. Several Duties
pressed upon those who are in Christ. Use 5. Comfort to such in Eleven
Particulars.

TWo things have been observed in these Words, the Privilege, and the Subjects
of that Privilege: I have done with the First, and go on now to the Second.
Here is no Condemnation, (a very high and glorious Privilege); who are the
Persons to whom it belongs? Such as are in Christ Jesus. This I have hitherto
but touched upon in the General; but am now to fall upon the more particular
opening of it.

[To them which are in Christ Jesus]: Here are the two great Names or Titles of
our blessed Lord, Christ with respect to God, Jesus with respect to us; he is
Gods Christ and our Jesus, Gods Anointed and our Savior. But I do not intend
in the least to stay upon these Titles; I Will only speak to that one thing which
here lies before me, (viz.) being in Christ Jesus.

To them [which are] in Christ Jesus: So we fill it up, but in the (...)
Original it is only to them in Christ Jesus. The Words are descriptive; the
Apostle does not design in them, to set down the Meritorious Cause of
Non-condemnation, (no, not with respect to Christ himself); but only to
describe the Persons who have an interest therein: for he does not say, there
is no Condemnation because of Christ, or through Christ, (though that be very
true); but there is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ. I grant that
something argumentative may be fetched out of them, but in their first and main
scope, they are descriptive.

Qu. What is it to be in Christ Jesus? What it is to be in Christ, opened.


Answ. It Is Qui sunt in Christo, (i. e.) qui credunt in Christum, and per fidem
ei sunt insiti. ( Piscat. in Schol. So. Beza.) Esse in Christo Jesu, est fide
Christo adhaerere, Spiritu insitus esse ut membrum Capiti. (Pare.) Conjunctis
fide cum Christo Jesu. (Vatabl.) Qui sunt incorporati per fidem and dilectionem
and fidei Sacramentum. (Aquin.
generally opened by that mystical Union which is betwixt Christ and Believers
through the Spirit and Faith: To be in Christ, it is to be ingrafted,
incorporated, mystically united unto Christ. This Union in Scripture is set
forth, sometimes by the Saints being in Christ, sometimes by Christ's being in
them: Sometimes (I say) by their being in Christ; So here in the Text, and so
in several other places. 1 John 5.20. We are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature. 1
Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, etc. Then it is also set forth by
Christ's being in them; 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Christ is in you except
you be Reprobates? Col. 1.27. Christ in you, the hope of glory. Romans 8.10. And
if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, etc.

The difference betwixt Saints Being in Christ, and Christ's Being in them.
Now I conceive these two Expressions do both point to one and the same thing, (
viz. to the Spiritual and Mystical Union betwixt Christ and Believers): Yet
possibly (as to some Modes and Circumstances), there may be some difference
betwixt them: Which a Reverend Person in a late Mount Pisgah, page 22.
Treatise thus sets forth: Christ is in the Believer, by his Spirit, 1 John
4.13. 1 Cor. 12.13. the Believer is in Christ, by Faith, Joh. 1.12. Christ is
in the Believer, by Inhabitation, Ephesians. 3.17. the Believer is in Christ, by
Implantation, Joh. 15.2. Romans 6 3. Christ is in the Believer, as the head is in
the body, Col. 1.18. as the root is in the branches, Joh. 15.5. Believers are
in Christ, as the members are in the head, Ephesians. 1.23. as the branches are in
the root, Joh. 15.7. Christ in the Believer, implies Life and Influence from
Christ, Col. 3.4. 1 Pet. 2.5. the Believer in Christ, implies communion and
fellowship with Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. When Christ is said to be in the Believer,
we are to understand it in reference to Sanctification; when the Believer is
said to be in Christ, it is in Order to Justification.

Further, this Union in Scripture is set forth, sometimes by the Saints abiding
in Christ, and Christ's abiding in them: Joh. 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you. 1 John 3.24. Hereby we know, that he abides in us, etc. Sometimes, by their
dwelling in Christ, and Christ's dwelling in them: 1 John 4.13. Hereby know we,
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.
Joh. 6.56. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him. Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. Sometimes by
Christ's living in them, Gal 2.20. etc Yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
Sometimes by that Oneness that is betwixt Christ and them, Joh. 17.21, 22. And
some make that (...), that gathering together in one all things in Christ Ephesians.
1.10. to point to this Union. I dispute not about that, but certainly this is
that which is here held forth, when the Apostle says there is no Condemnation
to them which are in Christ Jesus.

It being so, my business then will be (as God shall assist), to discourse of
that admirable and glorious Union which is betwixt Christ and Believers. It Is a
very high, and noble, and excellent Argument; O that I may (in some measure)
reach the greatness, spiritualness, and glory of it! I will not at all insist
upon the proving of the Thing, viz. that some persons are in Christ, or that
there is this blessed Union 'twixt Christ and Saints; for the Scriptures
'forementioned sufficiently prove it, and I do not meet with any who deny it.
Though there are some different Notions about it, and some different
Explications of it, yet all grant there is such a thing: So that my only work
will be, first to open and then to apply it.

And indeed there is great need of the former, Union with Christ a great Mystery.
because this Union is a very profound and abstruse point; it is a mystery (a
very great mystery), a truth which lies very deep, and is not easily to be
understood. All believe it, but few understand it; all grant the quod sit, but
for the quid sit how much are the most knowing persons in the dark about it!
The Apostle speaking of it calls it a great mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. and Col. 1.27.
he sets it forth by the riches of the glory of this mystery (what is that? why)
Christ in you the hope of glory. Indeed it is such a mystery, as that we shall
never fully understand it till we come to Heaven, (where all mysteries shall be
unfolded, and particularly this of the mystical Union). Joh. 14.20. At [that
day] ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you: that
day refers either to the time when the Spirit should be given, (which is
promised v. 16, 17), or to the glorisied state (spoken of v. 19): upon the
effusion of the Spirit men may come to know something of this Union, but it
will never be fully understood by them, till they be in Glory. In the opening
of it (so far as the present state and the height of the mystery will admit
of), I must look into the Word, and keep to that, and fetch all from that; for
it is Revelation and not Reason which here must give us Light. The Word having
revealed it, Reason may be useful (as an Handmaid) to shadow it out by such and
such Resemblances, (thereby to help us the better to conceive of it); but that
which must be our first and main Guide about it; is Scripture Revelation.

Now the Scripture speaks of a threefold Union: 1. There is the Union of three
Persons in one Nature. Of the Union of the Three Pexsons, of the two Natures in
Christ, and of the Mystical Union.
2. There is the Union of two Natures in one Person. 3. There is the Union of
Persons, where yet Persons and Natures are distinct.


1. There is the Union of three Persons in one Nature. This is in the
Trin-Vnity, where you have three Persons united in the Godhead, the Trinity in
Unity and the Unity in Trinity; One in Three (in respect of Nature and
Essence), and Three in One (in respect of Personality). This is that ineffable,
incomprehensible Union, which is between the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in
the same common Nature of the Godhead. Of which the Apostle speaks 1 John 5.7.
There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one. Here are Three, and yet One; Three as to their
distinct Personal Subsistences, and yet One as to their common Nature. This a
Mystery to be adored, not to be fathomed; a The Union betwixt the Three Persons
etc. the knowledge of this, is not, nay cannot be attained unto by the Light of
Nature; No example can illustrate, no Reason (Angelical or humane) can
comprehend the hidden excellency of this glorious* Mystery: But it is
discovered to us by a divine Revelation in the written Word, and our Faith must
receive, and our Piety admire, what our Reason cannot comprehend. ( Cheynel of
the Divine Trin-Unity, chapter ^. p. 19). Vide Aquin. p. 1. Qu. 39. Art. 1 and 2.
Lombard. Lib. 1. Did. 2 and 3.
Mystery much too deep for the Plummet of Reason to reach; he that by Reason
would go about to grasp it, is as foolish as he that would attempt to put the
Ocean into a bucket, or to grasp the Universe in the hollow of his hand.

2. There is the Union of two Natures in one Person: This is that which we
commonly call the Hypostatical Union, or the Union of the two Natures in Christ
(his Godhead and his Manhood), both making up but one Person. You may thus
conceive of it; It Is the substantial, supernatural conjunction of the two
Natures in Christ; the Divine assuming the Humane, and giving it a subsistence
in its self, so that both make but one Person; and yet so, as that the being
and properties of both Natures are preserved entire. As to this twofold Union,
I am not at present concerned to speak to them; when I shall come to the third
Verse, I shall have occasion there to speak to the latter.

3. There is the Union of Persons, where yet Persons and Natures are distinct:
and this is the Mystical Union, The Mystical Union opened.
that which is betwixt Christ and Believers; (this I am only now to speak to).
Concerning which (that you may not mistake the Nature of it), you must know,
here is Union but no transmutation, confusion, or commixtion; here is the union
of persons but not personal union.

1. Here is union but no transmutation, confusion, or commixtion, (I Will put
them together for brevity sake). Believers are united to Christ, but yet not so
as that they are changed or transformed into the very essence or being of
Christ, (so as to be Christed with Christ, as some too boldly speak); or that
he is changed or transformed into the essence and being of Believers: no, you
must not entertain a thought of any such thing. Christ is Christ still, and
Believers are but Creatures still (notwithstanding this Union); though they be
really and nearly united, yet both keep their Natures distinct, and are the
same after the Union that they were before it. As it is in the Persons in the
Sacred Trinity, (...). ( Damasc. de Orthod. Fide lib. 1. cap. 11. page 42).
there is Union but no confusion; they are Essentially one, yet they have their
personal Properties and distinct Subsistences: And as it is in the two Natures
of Christ, they are under a near Union, (they make but one Person), yet for all
this they are (...) (Synod. Calced)
distinct; the Godhead is not turned into the Manhood, nor the Manhood into the
Godhead; they are united but not confounded or converted, for both of them
(even after this Union) do still retain their (...) ( Damasc. Dial. cap. 66.)
essential properties without confusion or conversion: So it is in the Union of
Believers with Christ, (for thus far we may make use of the two former Unions
to open the Mystical Union by, they all agree in This, though in other things
they differ). You may take a lower resemblance of it (if you please); In Man
there is a near Union between Soul and Body, and these two united make up the
man; Vide Nemes. de Not. Hom. p. 97. (...), etc.
yet upon the union the Soul is not turned into the nature of the Body, nor the
Body into the nature of the Soul; they are not confounded though united, they
yet retain their essence and properties distinct; the Soul is the Soul still,
and the Body is the Body still: So it is in the Union between Christ and
Believers.

2. Here is the Union of persons, but not personal union. And here lies the
difference between the Mystical Union and the Hypostatical Union: The
Hypostatical Union is Personal, but not of Persons; the reason is, because in
Christ there are two Natures but there is but one Person: there is this Nature
and that Nature in Christ, but not this Person and that Person in Christ (as
Nestorius held); there is in Christ (...) but not (...), aliud and aliud but
not alius and alius (as the Learned express it). Christ did not assume the Vide
Lombard. Lib. 3. Did. 5.
Person of man but the Nature of man into his Person, Non assumpsit Hominem
Personam sed Hominem in Personam. But now in the Mystical Union it is otherwise;
there it is the Union of Persons but not Personal Union; this I Will endeavor to
clear as well as I can.

In the Mystical Union there is the Union of Persons; the Person of Christ is
united to the Person of the Believer, and the Person of the Believer is united
to the Person of Christ: For Faith being the uniting grace, and this faith
receiving the Person of Christ, Joh. 1.12. Faith is a receiving of Christ
himself, we cannot receive the benefits that come by him without receiving of
himself: as in Marriage the Consent is, I take thee, not I take thine, etc.
Vines on the Sacram. p. 120.
To as many as received [him], etc it must also unite to the Person of Christ.
In the Marriage-Vnion it is person joined to person, and so it is in the Mystical
Union also. How is a Believer said to be in Christ? it cannot so properly be
said, that he is in the graces, or in the comforts, or in the gifts of Christ;
but the meaning is, he is in the Person of Christ; so that this is an Union of
Persons. For (further), this Union does not lie only in some moral or spiritual
acts, qualities, or gracious indowments, (as oneness of will, or oneness of
disposition, etc.) but it lies in the Oneness of Persons. And therefore Nostra
and ipsius conjunctio non miscet Personas, nec confundit substantias; sed
affectus consociat, and confaederat voluntates. (Cypr.)
Cyprian's explication of this Union with Christ is not full enough; Our Union
(says he) with Christ does not mingle Persons nor confound Substances (so far
very true), but it unites affections and wills; (if he meant that this was all,
then it is conceived he came short): there is more in it than so, for there is
besides this uniting of the Affections and Will, the uniting (though not the
mingling) of Persons. The Father, Son, and Spirit are one, not only in respect
of Consent (as some most falsely tell us); but also in respect of Nature and
Essence: Now far be it from me to say, that Christ and the Saints are one in
this sense; yet withal I say, even between them there is an higher Union, than
barely that of oneness of affection and will. (I say no more than what Vide
Zanch. in Cap. 5. ad Ephesians. p. 245. Polan. Synt. Theol. Lib. 6. cap. 35. p. 454.
Hujus Unionis interventu fit, ut tum Beneficiorum Christi tum Substantiae
ipsius fiamus participes, quia beneficia omnia and vis illa vivifica quae
animas nostras sustentat in vitam aeternam, non possunt a Corpore and Sanguine
Christi cui inhaerent, adeoque ab ipso Christo divelli. Trelcat. Inst. Theol.
Lib. 2. p. 189. Bucan. L. C. 48. p. 818, 819. It Is not an Union of Christ with
a Believer in Accidents only, as in Opinion, Affection, in Consent of Mind and
Heart, or in likeness of Disposition and Conversation; but it is an Union of
Substances, Essences, Persons; As Mr. Perkins says, the Person of him that
believes is united to the Person of Christ. Reyn. Praec. p 49.
Others who write upon this Argument generally say).

But (that you may not go too high) I add, this Union is not Personal; it is but
Mystical not Personal. For then, Christ and the Believer would properly and
physically make but one person; and then, it would be so many Believers, so
many Christ's; and then, the Believer would have no subsistence but in Christ,
(as the Humane Nature of Christ has no subsistence but what it has in the
Godhead); and then, he would merit in what he did, (as Christ qua Man did by
virtue of the Personal Union). Therefore we must conclude, that though here is
an Union of Persons, (the Person of Christ in a mystical way being united to
the person of Believers), yet here is not any Personal Union, (they both,
notwithstanding this, remaining several and distinct Persons). These things may
seem (as indeed they are) abstruse and dark to you, I Will come to that which
will be somewhat more plain and easy.

For the further Explication of this Great Mystery, there are Three Things
which I Will speak to: 1. I Will endeavor to open the several Kinds or Branches of
that Union, which is betwixt Christ and Believers. 2. I Will give you those
Scriptural Resemblances, by which it is shadowed and set forth. 3. I Will give you
the several Properties of it.


Union Mystical. Legal. Moral.
1. First; Let me open the several Kinds or Branches of this Union; It Is
Threefold, Mystical, Legal and Moral: A Believer is united to Christ three
ways, Mystically, Legally, Morally. Take any of these singly, and they will not
be enough comprehensive; but take them jointly, so there is all in them.

Of the Mystical Union.
1. First there is the Mystical Union, (so we usually call it): Which may be thus
Vide Bodium in Ephesians. 5.28. p. 786. more fully describing of it.
described, It Is that supernatural, spiritual, intimous Oneness and
Conjunction, which is betwixt the Person of Christ and the Persons of
Believers, through the Bond of the Spirit and Faith; upon which there follows
mutual and reciprocal Communion* each with the other. If this Description be
taken in pieces, it contains in it the most considerable things to be known
about the Mystical Union. For

1. Here is the proper General Nature of it, (viz.) Oneness and Conjunction:
Christ and Saints are united, how? why, in respect of that Oneness and
Conjunction that is betwixt them. This the Scripture-Expressions do mainly
refer to, and clearly hold forth. They are said to be in Christ, and Christ in
them; they are said to dwell in Christ, and Christ in them; to abide in Christ,
and Christ in them; to be one with Christ, as he is one with the Father; (the
several Scriptures which speak to these things have been already cited): They
are further said, to be 1 Cor. 6.17.
joined to the Lord, and to be one Spirit; to be Ephesians. 5.31, 32.
one flesh; Christ Gal. 2.20.
lives in them; he is the Ephesians. 1.22.
Head, they the Members; he the Joh. 15.5.
Root, they the Branches; he the 1 Cor. 3.9, 11.
Foundation, they the Building; he the Ephesians. 5.28. etc.
Husband, they the Wife. All these expressions (I say), point to that Oneness
and Conjunction which is betwixt Christ and Believers, in which the General
Nature of the Mystical Union does consist. 2. Here Is the Qualities or
Properties of this Union: it is a supernatural, spiritual, intimous Union; (to
which I shall speak by and by). 3. Here Is the Subjects of this Union, Christ
and Believers: And that too is set down with this modification, the Oneness and
Conjunction is betwixt the Person of Christ, and the Persons of Believers: (of
which before). 4. Here Is the Media or Vincula Vnionis, the Means or Bonds of
this Union, the Spirit and Faith. 5. Here is also the Effect or Consequent upon
this Union; namely, mutual and reciprocal Communion each with the other: (This
will be opened in what will follow.
Only (at present) let me open the fourth Head, the Means and Bonds of the
Mystical Union. In all Unions there is something which binds and knits Thing
and Thing, Person and Person together; what is it then which binds, knits,
conjoyns Christ to Believers and Believers to Christ? I answer, it is the Spirit
and Faith: The Spirit unites Christ to us, and Faith unites us to Christ.
First, the Spirit is the bond of this Union on Christ's part; for by this he
takes possession of Believers, Christ lives in us not by local presence, but by
the special supernatural operation of his Spirit. Perkins upon Gal. 2.20. p.
216.
dwells in them, lays hold of them, apprehends them (as the word is Phil.
3.12): In De Trinit. and de Poenit.
Tertullians Dialect, Spiritus nos Christo confibulat, the Spirit does join and
button Believers to Christ. And then Faith is the bond or ligament on our part;
Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts (how)? by Faith. Christ lays
hold on us by the Spirit, and we lay hold on him by Faith; he comes to us by
the Spirit, and we go to him by Faith. The Spirit of God does not only discover
and make out the Union of the Soul with Christ, ( Hereby we know, that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3.24); but he works,
promotes, and brings it about. As it is in that Union which is amongst the
Saints themselves, 1 Cor. 12.13.
by one Spirit they are all baptized into one body; So it is in the Union which
is betwixt Christ and them, by this One Spirit they are all made one with
Christ. Therefore (says the Apostle) Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: he means, he has
neither interest in him, nor union with him. And then there is Faith which
unites on our part; for that is the uniting Grace, the Sinew or Ligament which
knits and binds the Soul to Christ; that by which the Soul clasps and clings
about Christ. By faith we apply our selves to Christ, and Christ to our selves;
and that application is the ground of union. So also by Faith we Joh. 1.12.
receive Christ; upon which receiving of him we are united to him and made one
with him. The spiritual ingrafting too is by this, (as you may see Rom 11.19,
20): and this is our eating Christ's flesh and drinking-Christs-blood, upon
which he dwells in us; Joh. 6.56. Thus the Union is brought about both on
Christ's part and on the Believers part; and this is the Mystical Union.

Of the Law-Vnion.
Secondly, There is the Legal or Law-Vnion betwixt Christ and Believers. The
ground of this Union is Christ's Heb. 7.22.
Suretyship; he as the Saints (...), Surety, struck hands with God (as the word
imports), put himself into their stead, took their debt upon himself, and bound
himself (upon their account) to make satisfaction to God: Now from this act of
Christ there results that Law-Vnion which I am upon. Saints (as it is said by
some) are united to Christ three ways, Spiritu, Carne, and Vadimonio; as they
are partakers of his Spirit, as he has assumed their Nature, and as he has
engaged for them as there Sponsor or Surety. You know in Law the Debtor and the
Surety are but one Person; the Law looks upon them as One and makes no
difference betwixt them: and therefore both are equally liable to the debt; and
if the One pay it it is (in the eye of the Law) as much as if the Other had paid
it. So it is with Christ and us; he is our Surety, for he took our debt upon
himself, engaged to pay whatever we owed (as Philem. 18.19.
Paul once did to Philemon for his Onesimus), entered into bond (though not with
us, yet) for us: Upon this, Christ and we are but One Person before God; and
accordingly he deals with us. For he makes over our Sins to Christ, and also
Christ's righteousness and satisfaction to us, he now (in a legal notion)
looking upon both but as One person. And this Consideration is of great use
(and so accordingly it is improved by the Orthodox against Socinians), to clear
up and confirm those great Truths which concern Christ's Sufferings, and the
Believers benefit thereby. For if it be asked, How could Christ, he being a
Person perfectly innocent, suffer (in a penal manner) as he did? he being
altogether guiltless in himself, how could the Father (with justice) fall upon
him as though he had been guilty? Or grant that he did thus suffer, yet how can
any good by his suffering redound to others? I say, if any shall raise such
Questions the Answer is ready, That Christ and Believers in Law are but one
Person; he having submitted to be their Surety, in a voluntary substitution of
himself in their stead and susception of their Guilt: whereupon it came to pass
that their Guilt was imputed to him, (upon which the Father might without the
least impeachment of his justice severely fall upon him); and his
righteousness, merit, satisfaction was imputed to them, (for that being
performed by their Surety, it is theirs to all intents and purposes as if they
had performed it in their own persons). Briefly, upon this Law-Vnion resulting
from Christ's Suretiship, our Sins were very well imputable to him and his
merits to us. This does so exactly fall in with the common notion and case of
Suretyship amongst Men, that I need not any further insist upon the
illustration of it. The Adversaries therefore (who deny that Christ either did
or could suffer in the Sinners stead, or that there is any imputation of his
Merit to Believers), are so pinched with this, his being a Surety, that they
oppose it to their utmost, wholly deny that too, and are feign to make good one
denial with another. (But here I digress)!

Two things I shall add upon this Head, and then dismiss it.

1. That the Oneness of Person 'twixt Christ and the Saints (which has been
affirmed of them more than once or twice, in the opening of the matter in
hand), is not to be carried further than that particular Sense and respect in
which it is affirmed. I mean this, They are not one Person in respect of Nature,
Essence, or any personal Union; only they are so in respect of that Mystical
and Legal Oneness of Person that is betwixt them. And this latter Oneness is
very well consistent with the different Natures of the Subjects united, though
the former is not so. 2. That this Law-Vnion is only proper to Christ the
Second Person. The mystical and the moral Union (in some sense) does reach to
the other Persons; for though the Saints proximately and immediately are united
to Christ; yet the Union is not so terminated in him, but that through him they
are united to the Father too. Therefore it is said Joh. 17.21. That they also
may be one [in us]; ('it is not one in Me singly, but one in Us conjunctly): And
the Apostle says 1 These. 1.1, 2. To the Church which is [in God the Father],
and in the Lord Jesus Christ: (the same you have 2 These. 1.1). So Of the Saints
Union with the Father as well as with the Son, see Burg. upon Joh. 17. p. 586.
Newton upon Joh. p. 450. of the Moral Union.
that Believers (in some respects) are in both, and united both to Father and
Son: But as to the Law-union (arising from Suretyship and Vadimony), that is
only proper to Christ, he of all the Persons being the alone Surety for
Believers.
Thirdly, There is a Moral Union between Christ and Believers: It Is called
Moral from the Bond or Ground of it, which is Love; and the word [Moral] is
used, not as it stands in contradistinction to Spiritual but to Natural and
Physical* I say, the Bond of this Union is Love, for Faith unites mystically
and Love unites morally. Love is an uniting grace as well as Faith though it
does not unite in the same way: therefore it is said, He that dwells in Love,
dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. It Is all for union, and it
produces union: take two persons who love each other, their mutual affection
makes them to be One; there is a real Oneness between Friend and Friend. The
Philosopher very well defined Friendship by One Soul in two Bodies, ((...)): A
Aristot. Ethic. l. 9. c. 3.9.
Friend is but (...), alteridem, another Self. Thus it is in that which is
before us; there is a mutual, reciprocal, hearty Love between Christ and
Believers, he loves them and they love him; and by virtue of this mutual Love
there is a real and close Union betwixt them. The Husband and Wife are One, not
merely upon the Marriage Covenant and external Relation, but also (and chiefly)
upon that Love and Affection that is betwixt them: So it is 'twixt Christ and
Saints. Qui scilicet dilect a Christo vicissim Christum amant: Hocenim est in
Christo esse, non tantum Christo amari, sed and Christum amare. Corn Mussus. --
Qui Coristo incorporati sunt puro and perfecto amore. Idem.
Some therefore open this being in Christ Jesus (or Oneness with him) by Love;
in respect of this Love Believers are in Christ. And so I have opened that
threefold Union which is between Christ and Believers. I have a little insisted
upon the two latter branches of it, but it is the first (the Mystical Union)
that I shall further mainly speak to; for the truth is, this is the Union which
the Gospel principally sets before us.

Scripture-Resemblances by which the Mystical Union is set forth.
The Second Thing propounded, was to instance in those several
Scripture-resemblances by which the Mystical Union is set forth. These are very
many: For this being a very high and mysterious thing, it has pleased God to
make use of various Resemblances for the better describing of it; that he might
thereby make it to us more credible and more intelligible. And it is observable,
how the Spirit of God summons in all Unions (Natural, Relative, Artisicial),
that he might by all of them more clearly and distinctly shadow out the grand
Union betwixt Christ and Saints. Yet I must tell you, though those are very
useful as to the End designed, and are very high (the highest) in genere
Vnionis; yet they all come short of the Mystical Union which they refer to:
they may illustrate it but they cannot reach or equalize it. I will but briefly
go over them, both because they are fully handled by Others, and also because
that which is proper from them to the business in hand, may be dispatched in
few words.

The First is that of Husband and Wife: A very fit and full Resemblance (a See
Dr. Cudworths Union of Christ and the Church shadowed.
Type say some) of the Mystical Union. Upon the conjugal relation there is a
very near and close conjunction: If you please to look to, its first
institution, you will find a deep foundation of Oneness laid therein: Genesis
2.23, 24. This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; therefore shall a
man leave his father, and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they
shall be one flesh. Now Christ and Believers stand in this Conjugal relation
each to the other: he is their Husband, they his Spouse; they are espoused to
Christ their Husband 2 Cor. 11.2. married to Christ Romans 7.4. betrothed to God
and Christ Hos. 2.19. their name is Hephzibah and Beulah Isa 62.4. The
Marriage-Vnion (in the very height of it) the Apostle brings down to Christ and
Believers Ephesians. 5.28, 29, etc. So ought men to love their wives as their own
bodies: he that loves his wife loves himself. For no man ever yet hated his
own flesh: but nourishes it, and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church.
For we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones. For this cause
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall be joined to his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh. Well, what of all this? (he adds), This is a
great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church: As if the Apostle
had said, do not misapprehend me, though I speak so much of the Union that is
betwixt Husband and Wife, according to the primitive Institution, yet that is
not the main thing which I drive at; I aim at an higher Union than that, namely
at that Spiritual Union which is between Christ and the Church. The Husband and
the Wife are one, Christ and Believers are so much more.

Another Resemblance is that of the Head and Members: In the Body Natural there
is a near and close Union between these two; being fastened and joined each to
the other they make up one and the same body. Thus it is with Christ and
Believers in the Body Mystical; he is the Head, they are the several Members
belonging to that head; Col. 1.18. He is the Head of the body the Church: Ephesians.
1.22. God gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his
body: 1 Cor. 12.27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular:
(So Romans 12.5). As truly and as nearly as the head and the members, so truly
and so nearly are Christ and Believers united also.

A third Resemblance is that of the Root and Branches: There is also union
betwixt these; otherwise how should the One convey juice, sap, nourishment,
life, growth, to the Other? So it is with Christ and Believers; he is the Root,
they the Branches: Joh. 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the branches. You read of
being planted and ingrafted into Christ; it is a Metaphor which the Spirit of
God much delights in, in the setting forth of that which I am upon: See Rom
6.5. and chap. 11.17. etc. Also you read of being rooted in Christ, Col. 2.7.
There is a blessed Analogy or resemblance between Christ and Believers and the
Root and the Branches, in point of Union, in point of Influence: The root is
united to the branches and they to it; so is Christ to Believers and they to
him: The root conveys life, and nourishment, and growth to the branches; so
does Christ to Believers.

Another Resemblance is the Foundation and the Building: Here is Union too; for
in a Building all the Stones and Timber being joined and fastened together upon
the Foundation, make but one entire Structure: So it is here. Believers are Gods
building, and Christ is the foundation in that building; Ye are Gods building 1
Cor. 3.9. Other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is
Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. Therefore they are said to be built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. As a man builds upon the foundation, and lays the
stress of the whole building upon that; so take the true Christian he builds
upon Christ, all his Faith, Hope, Confidence is built upon this sure
foundation, (as Christ is styled Isa 28.16. Behold I lay in Zion a sure
foundation): Hence also they are said, As lively stones to be built up a
spiritual house etc. 1 Pet. 2.5. Here Is the Mystical Union under this
resemblance also.

Take but One more, that of Meat or Food: That which a man feeds upon and
digests, it is incorporated and united with himself; it is turned into his own
substance and made a part of himself: The Believing Soul by Faith feeds upon
Christ, digests him, and turns him (as it were) into his own substance; so that
Christ becomes one with him and he one with Christ. Joh. 6.55, 56. My flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. All this must be taken not in
the literal but in the spiritual notion; the eating and drinking is believing,
(so it is to be understood all along in that Chapter): Upon which believing the
Union follows, [he dwells in me, and I in him].

Thus I have (with great brevity) given you those Scripture-Resemblances by
which the Mystical Union is shadowed out: The handling of them in their utmost
extent, is a Subject that would have admitted of great enlargement: but my
business was but to speak to that one thing from them which suits with the work
in hand. In some of the preceding Heads I was in the great deeps; but in this,
I have been in the shallows: there the Elephant might swim, here the Lamb may
wade; there things were not so dark but here they are as clear: therefore I
shall not need to make any further stay upon them.

Seven Properties of the Mystical Union.
I come to the Third Head the Properties of this Union: I Will name these Seven:

First, It Is a sublime Union. And that 1. In respect of its Nature as
considered in it self. Christ and a poor Creature made one? and so made One? O
what an Union is this! We have many Unions in Nature, and some very
considerable; but (alas!) they all come short, and are but poor, mean low
things in comparison of this. Next to the Union of the Three Persons in the
Sacred Trinity, and the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in Christ, the
Mystical Union is the highest. Except but those which I have named, and all
other Unions must vail to it. 2. It Is sublime in respect of its rise, Original,
and production. The more supernatural a thing is the more sublime it is; now
this Union is purely supernatural. What can Nature be imagined to do for the
bringing about of such a thing as this? O surely it is all of the mere Grace of
God! As it is not Natural for the Matter of it, so neither is it so for the
production and application of it. It Is supernatural as to the Thing, and also
as to the Person to whom it belongs. 3. It Is sublime in respect of the high and
glorious Privileges, Effects, and Consequents of it. 4. In respect of its
mysteriousness and difficulty to be known. (Something I spoke to this at my
first entrance upon this Subject). The mystical Union is a mysterious Union; so
mysterious, that we had known nothing at all of it if God had not revealed it
to us in the Word: And even now he has revealed it, yet it is but very little
that we do understand of it. That there is this Union, that is as clear as the
light of the Sun, but what this Union is O that is a thing hidden and locked up
from us. The Union of the Body and Soul in Man is a great mystery; there is
even in that Union that which puzzles the greatest Philosophers; but the Union
of Christ and the Believer, is a far greater mystery. That persons every way so
distant, so divided, should yet be made mystically One, here is a mystery
indeed! a mystery which no finite Understanding (Angelical or Humane) can
comprehend.


Secondly, It Is a real Union: Not a notional, fantastic, or opinionative
thing, something that is merely matter of fancy and imagination, or something
that dull and melancholy persons please themselves with the thoughts of: O
it is not so, but it is a real thing and as great a reality as any whatsoever it
be. You have very many Scriptures which speak to it, under great variety of
Expressions, all of which with the greatest evidence and clearness do point to
it, and cannot be otherwise understood; and yet will you doubt of it and look
upon it as a mere fancy? As really as the members ^^e united to the head and
the head to them; the Wife to the Husband and the Husband to the Wife, the
branches to the root and the root to the branches; so really are the Saints
united to Christ and Christ to them: (for these several Unions do confirm as
well as represent and open the Mystical Union). Nothing in Religion is real if
this be not; take away this Mystical Oneness between Christ and the Soul; and
take away all. Is not the Union 'twixt God the Father and God the Son a real
Union? surely that will not be denied; if so, then this is real also, for Joh.
17.22. The glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one
[even as we are one]. Observe it, it is one even as we are one; but how? not as
to any equality but only as to verity; not as to the modus or qualitas. unionis
but only as to the veritas unionis. This [as] is often but a note of likeness
not of sameness, (so Matthew. 5.48. Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is
in heaven is perfect: So 1 Pet. 1.15, 16): it is so to be interpreted here:
Believers are not one with Christ as he is one with the Father, in respect of
the manner of the Union; but as to the truth and reality of it, so it is as
verily, as truly one with Christ as Christ is one with the Father. It Is an
higher Union 'twixt the Father and the Son, but it is as real an Union 'twixt
Christ and Believers.

Thirdly, It Is a spiritual Union: Not a gross, fleshly, corporeal Union (you
must not so conceive of it); but a divine, inward, spiritual Union. It Is the
uniting of hearts and souls together in an imperceptible way: and the bonds of
this Union are spiritual, (namely the Spirit in Christ and Faith in us; and the
Union is to be judged by that which is the bond of it). The Husband and the
Wife are Ephesians. 5.31.
one flesh, but he that is joined to the Lord is 1 Cor. 6.16, 17.
one Spirit. I have set before you several external and material Resemblances
of it; but the Union it self is internal, immaterial, and spiritual. When
Christ had been speaking so much of it under the resemblance of eating and
drinking, he adds (to prevent mistakes) Joh. 6.63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing: the words that I
speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life: (q.d.) You must take me in
a right sense; in all that I have said I do not intend any fleshly or corporeal
eatiug (as some grossly imagine); I only mean spiritual eating and drinking by
Faith: Neither (says he) would I be thought to speak of any Union that is
carnal and earthly, it is the heavenly and the spiritual Union only which I
design in all that I have spoken.

Fourthly, It Is a near, intimous Union: The Persons here concerned are not only
truly and really, but nearly, closely, intimately united each to the other. The
Union betwixt them is so near, that there is no Union (excepting what has been
excepted) to be compared with it; so near, that we know not how to conceive of
it, much less how to express it; we may borrow some light here and there from
the scattered Unions of Nature, but they all (in point of nearness) are vastly
short of it. In the 1 Cor. 6.17.
Text cited but now the Apostle tells us, He that is joined to the Lord is one
spirit: where he opposes joining to Christ to joining to an Harlot, ( v. 16.)
Of which he says, He that is joined to an Harlot, is one body; and though this
be out of the due course, yet he carries it up to the Marriage-Vnion, for two
(says he) shall be one flesh. But he heightens the Mystical Union with Christ,
he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. This is the highest Scripture
which I know, for the describing of the intimousness of the spiritual Union:
First the Apostle says he that is joined to the Lord: In the Greek it is (...),
he that is glewed to the Lord; it is the same word which is used Ephesians. 5.31. he
shall be joined (or glewed, (...)) to his wife: It speaks the Firmness and the
Nearness of the Union. And then he says, he that is thus joined to the Lord is
one Spirit: what an Expression is this? what could be spoken higher? to be one
Spirit is much more than to be one Flesh, inasmuch as the Union of Spirits is
the nearest Union that is imaginable. The Apostle opposes the spiritual
conjunction 'twixt Christ and Believers, to that carnal conjunction that is
'twixt person and person; he that is joined to an Harlot is one body and one
Flesh; but he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. Saints are not only
Flesh of Christ's Flesh, and Bone of his Bone (by which phrase the height of
the Conjugal Union is set forth, and by which the Quae loquendi Formula ex
literis Veteris Testamenti videtur esse desumpta: Ita enim Fratres and cognati
de se mutuo loqui solent, Os meum and Caro mea. Pet. Mart.
Jews used to express the greatest nearness in consanguinity); but (which is
much higher) they are one Spirit with him. It Is not said, they have one Spirit,
or that Believers are Vide Gr^^ium in loc.
spirited as Christ was, or that they are led, acted, animated by the same
Spirit that he was, (though I conceive that is the very thing intended in the
expression): but the Apostle says (the better to set off the intimousness of
the Union), Christ and they are one Spirit, which is as high as any thing that
could be spoken. Again, Believers are so near to Christ that (in a sober sense)
they may be said to be a part of him; yea, such a part of him that he (as Head
and Mediator) would not be complete without them; for as he is so considered
they are his fullness: Ephesians. 1.23. the fullness of him that silleth all in all:
('it is spoken of the Church, the Body of Believers). Once more, the Union is so
near, that they both have one and the same Name; Christ's own Name and Title is
given to them. 1 Cor. 12.12. So also is Christ: the Apostle means Christ
Mystical, not Christ Personal. Compare Jer. 23.6. This is the name wherewith
[he] shall be called, the Lord our righteousness; with Jer. 33.16. This is the
name wherewith [she] shall be called, the Lord our righteousness: (which is
spoken too of the Church). The Wife upon the Marriage-Vnion loses her own and
is called by her Husbands name; and so it is here: He (that is Christ) shall be
called the Lord our righteousness, and She (that is the Church) shall be called
too the Lord our righteousness: here is communication of names (which speaks
the nearness of the Union). Nay, Christ and the Believer are but Ex quo fit, ut
ipsemet quoque Christus usque adeo arcte noster evadat, and nos vicissim
illius, ut apud Patris Tribunal Christus and Ecclesia (non quidem hypostatica
substantiarum unitione, sed quod ad istam communionem attinet mystica) velut
unum and idem (...), and unus Christus efficacissune censeamur. Bucan. L. Com.
48. p. 821.
One ( mystically though not substantially); and this is the highest of all. O
this is a close and intimate Union indeed!

Fifthly, It Is a total Union: I mean this, the whole Person of Christ is united
to the whole Person of Believers, and the whole Person of Believers is united
to the whole Person of Christ. Christ is not in this or that single Nature but
in both his Natures, not in this or that Office but in all his Offices made one
with them: And they too reciprocally are made one with him as to the whole man,
not as to the Soul only but as to the Body also. The Soul indeed is the
principal Subject of this Union, but the Body too has its share in it;
therefore the Apostle says 1 Cor. 6.15. Know ye not that your bodies are the
members of Christ? As Christ in the assuming of the nature of man took not the
body only, or the soul only, but both, and so united them to the Godhead; so
it is in the Mystical Union, the whole man is knit to whole Christ. And (which
puts marvailous sweetness into it) the totality of this Union (on Christ's part)
reaches to every individual Believer in the world; as the whole Soul is united
to every part of the Body, so it is whole Christ to every Believer.

Sixthly, It Is an immediate Union: Christ and the believing Soul they See
Davenant upon the (...) Colos 2.19. Per has commissuras Christus tangit nos,
and nos tangimus Christum.
touch each the other (if I may so express it, and the Word encourages me so to
do): there is nothing that does intervene or interpose between Christ and it.
In other unions it is not so; there is union between the head and the members
yet all the members do not touch the head; the Foot is at a great distance from
the head though it be united to it; all the parts of the building are united to
the foundation yet they are not all contiguous to it; there is apposition but
no contiguity: But now the Union which I am upon is so immediate, that every
Believer touches Christ (as it were) and lies close and near to him. Which yet
is not to be taken of any Omnis physicus contactus excludendus est. Zanch. in
cap. 5. ad Ephesians. p. 242.
Physical or Local Contact but only of that which is Moral and Spiritual; not
of any immodietas suppositi but only of that immedietas virtutis or unionis
which is through the Spirit and Faith.

Lastly, It Is an indissoluble Union: The knot therein is tied so fast that it
shall never he again untied or loosened. Christ and Believers are so firmly
joined together, that none shall ever be able to part them; all the powers of
Hell with all their united strength shall never be able to disjoyn or separate
one Soul from Christ. As no Non obstat unioni huic intercapedo locorum, five
distantia Coeli and Terrae, qua Christus (qua homo), and fideles peregre ab
ipso versantes disterminantur: Quia unio non est existentia corporis Christi
intra corpora nostra, nec locali contactu, aut inclosione constat. Alting.
Explic. Catech. Part. 2. Qu 76. p. 266.
distance of place does hinder the Union, so no force or violence from Devils
or men shall ever be able to dissolve the Union. And herein lies the peculiar,
transcendent blessedness of this Union above all other Unions: They all may
cease, be broken and come to nothing; the members may be separated from the
head and the head from the members; the tender Husband may (and shall) be
parted from the affectionate Wife; the building may be broken off from the
foundation; the Soul may be divided from the Body: But the Mystical Union
stands fast forever, Christ and a gracious Soul can never be separated: God
has joined them, and Mat. 19.6.
what he has joined together no man shall ever put asunder. There are two
abiding things in the Saints, their Unction and their Union: Their Unction
abides, But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: 1 John
2.27. and their Union abides, for it follows, and ye shall abide in him. Our
Apostle makes his Challenge in the close of this Chapter, who shall separate us
from the Love of Christ? he tells you none should ever be able to do it, ( v.
38, 39): so who shall separate us as to our Union with Christ? none shall, none
can. Possibly the influences of it for some time may be suspended, but yet the
Union it self is not, nay cannot be dissolved. As it was in the Hypostatical
Union, for a time there was a suspending of the comforting influences of the
Divine Nature to the Humane, insomuch that our Savior cried out, * My God,
Mat. 27.46.
My God, why have thou forsaken me? yet for all this, the Union between the two
Natures was not in the least abolished: So here in the Mystical Union; the
sensible effects, comforts, benefits of which may sometimes be kept in and not
appear; but yet the thing it self abides, and so shall abide firm and
inviolable forever. It Is an inseparable, an insuperable Union: Yea, Death it
self, though that be the bane of all other Unions, shall never reach this so as
to put an end or period to it.

And thus I have finished the Heads necessary to be spoken to for the opening
of this admirable and blessed Union: In the clearing of which, I have given you
the Explication of the Subject of the Proposition, There is no Condemnation to
them [who are in Christ Jesus]. I must not dismiss so excellent, so useful a
Point without some practical improvement of it.

USE 1. Of Examination whether we be in Christ.
And first, are they and they only the persons to whom there is No Condemnation,
such as are in Christ Jesus? I would then put all of you upon the most serious
Examination whether you be thus in Christ Jesus. Pray bring it down to your
selves, and ask your selves one by one this question, Am I in Christ? some are
so in him, am I one of them? what is this Mystical Union to me? It concerns you
to be very inquisitive about this, because the grand privilege in the Text
depends upon it: You cannot safely apply No Condemnation if it be No Union. If
you desire a solid foundation to build upon for exemption from Condemnation,
you must make sure of this Union; the happiness and safety of your future state
wholly depends upon your present being in Christ. O that you would be
persuaded, with the greatest diligence, faithfulness, impartiality, to search
and examine your selves about this! The Apostle is very smart upon it 2 Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith; prove you own selves;
know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you (and you in him)
except you be reprobates? (and say I, except you be liable to eternal
condemnation)?

Two Distinctions concerning Union with Christ.
Now* that I may help you in this great Enquiry (viz) whether your have that
very Union with Christ which will effectually secure you from this most
dreadful Condemnation? I must first distinguish about it.

1. Union with Christ is either Material and Natural or Spiritual and
Supernatural: There is a Material or Natural Union with Christ, consisting in
oneness with him in respect of one of his Natures: For he having assumed the
nature of man and hypostatically united it to the Godhead, upon this wherever
the nature of man is there is Union or conjunction with him, (so far as the
participation of one and the same Nature with him will go). The Spiritual and
Supernatural Union is that which has been opened, (viz.) that which is brought
about by the Spirit and by Faith; upon which the Creature is not one with
Christ merely in respect of his Manhood, but he is one with him in an higher
manner, as being also (according to his measure) made a partaker of his Divine
Nature; that is to say, as the Image of God is imprinted upon him, as the
several Graces of the Spirit are wrought in him, as Christ and he are not only
one flesh but also one spirit, both having the same spirit dwelling in them,
and both being animated and acted by one and the same spirit.

Now to apply this Distinction! The first of these Unions is not sufficient to
secure from Condemnation or to entitle to Salvation; for then (that being
Nullus est hominum cujus Natura non erat suscepta in Christo. Prosp. resp. ad
cap. Gall. c. 9. Of this see Cyril l. 10. c. 13. in Joh. Dei Filius quia
suscepit humanam Naturam cum omnibus hominibus conjunctus est, etc. sed ista
conjunctio generalis est, and tantum (ut ita dicam) juxta materiam Pet. Martyr.
common and general) all men living should be saved and none should be
condemned; Even the graceless and unregenerate are men and have that very
nature which Christ assumed; but is this enough for an everlasting state of
happiness? Surely no! It Is true, even this natural union is very precious and
the foundation of great joy and comfort to Believers. O for such to remember,
that Christ has matched into their family, sits in Heaven in their nature, and
is of the same flesh and blood with themselves; this (I say) must needs be very
sweet. The Apostle speaks of it as a very great thing Heb. 2.11. He that
sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one. This ((...)) admits of
various interpretations; I conceive this is the best, Christ and the Saints are
all of one (that is) all of one nature, of one and the same flesh and blood;
for it follows ( v. 14.) Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself took part of the same, etc. and ( v. 16.) For verily he
took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. I
say, this Union is matter of great comfort to Believers; but for Others, who
have nothing more, than that Christ is man, and has assumed their flesh, and
is as they are and they as he, what will this avail them? What is Christ's
taking our flesh if he does not give us his spirit? what is it for him to be
made like to us in our nature if we be not made like to him in his nature?
Christ with the humane Nature is in Heaven, and yet thousands with the humane
Nature are in Hell. O rest not in mere manhood though Christ be man! but get an
higher, a closer, a more special Union with him, or else it will be
condemnation for all that.

2. I distinguish Secondly, Union with Christ is either External and Visible,
or Internal and Invisible. The First is common and general, yet not so common
as the Material and Nartural Union spoken of before; for all are Men, but all
are not Christians: This lies in Church Membership, the participation of
Church Priviledges, living under the Word and Sacraments, passing under the
Baptismal Seal, making of some external profession of Religion, etc. The Second
includes and supposes all this, but has a great deal more in it; it notes real
insition and implantation into Christ. This Distinction is evidently grounded
upon that of our Savior Joh. 15.2. where he says, Every branch [in me] that
bears not fruit, he takes away: (here is the external Union, for here is a
branch which bears no fruit, and yet it is in Christ, how? it must be
understood in respect of Church membership, external profession, etc.) And
every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more
fruit: here is the internal and special Union, that which is (as was said) by
real insition and implantation into Christ. Now the enquiry lies here, whether
you be so in Christ as to be ingrafted and implanted into him? the Former
without this will signify but very little. It Is indeed a great mercy to be a
member of the Visible Church, but this (without a close and special membership
with Christ) will not secure a man's everlasting state: if it be only external
conjunction with Christ here, it may for all that be eternal separation from
him hereafter. What is it for the Branch to be tied or fast'ned to the Stock,
if it does not coalesce and incorporate with the Stock? what is it for a man to
be in Christ's mystical Body, only as the wooden leg or eye of glass is in the
natural body? (where there is apposition but no coalition or union). Certainly
when Paul here tells us There is no Condemnation to them who [are in Christ
Jesus], he means such a being in him, as is more than what is external and
common, or Illi in Christo esse dicuntur hoc loco, non qui mediate tantum and
secundum quid in Christo sunt, nempe, ratione Ecclesiae ipsius quae corpus
Christi mysticum, etc. sed (...) intelliguntur very Christiani, qui immediate
in Christo sunt per Unionem mysticam cum ipsius persona, fide and virtute
Spiritus Sancti, etc. Gomar.
founded upon any such bottom. As particularly, such as is by mere Baptism, (I
mean, when it is the participation of the external sign only, and there is
nothing more). -- (...). Theophyl.
They therefore who open the Words by this, are too large and general. Alas!
Baptism Non loquitur Paulus de iis qui Sacramentum tantummodo Baptismi
perceperunt, quos extrinsecus duntaxat unda alluit, non autem intus in animo
Gratia expiavit; sed eos intelligit qui sunt in Christo Jesu, (h. e.) rem etiam
Sacramenti adepti sunt. Justinian. in loc. Qui sunt in Christo Jesu, i. e. qui
per Baptismum Christum induerunt eique per Fidem and dilectionem incorporati
sunt, factique tanquam viva ejus membra, and tanquam palmites Christo ut viti
insiti. Perer. Disp. 1. in Cap. 8. ad Romans Qui sunt insiti per Baptismum, and
in eo regenerati. Estius.
alone will not do it; there must be something more than the external badge and
livery of Christianity, or else that will come short both of Union here and
No-Condemnation hereafter. O how many are there who are baptized, live in the
Church, are visible members thereof, who yet are far from being inwardly knit
to Christ, and therefore shall perish eternally! This is to be but on the
outside of the Ark, which will not save from drowning. It Is the internal,
special Union which you must look after; whether you be in Christ so as to
receive life, growth, spiritual influences from him, as the branch does from
the root: (Other Unions might be alluded to). It Is very true, that Baptism is
an ingrafting Ordinance into Christ; therefore it is set forth by being baptized
into Jesus Christ Romans 6.3. and Gal. 3.27. you read As many of you as have been
baptized, have put on Christ: and again 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all
baptized into one body: But then it must be limited to such and such subjects,
and as the spirit accompanies it, working therein Faith and Regeneration. So
that the matter comes to this, upon Baptism alone in the external reception of
it you cannot be confident; but if you can find that you are also true
Believers and regenerate persons, then you are right as to your Union, and safe
as to Non Condemnation.

This twofold Distinction being premised and opened in the General, the main
Question now lies thus before us, How may a person know whether the Union in
which he stands to Christ, be internal, special and saving, or whether it be
only external, material and common? It Is a Question of very high import; for
answer to it I shall desire you 1. To fix your thoughts upon the double Bond of
it. 2. To look into some trying Scriptures which lay down marks and characters
about it.


First make your search after and by the Bonds of the Mystical Union, the
Spirit and Faith. As

1. Enquire whether you have the Spirit: for it being the bond of the Union,
it is evident that none can be a partaker thereof, who is not first a partaker
of the Spirit. The Apostle lays it down very expressly, Romans 8.9.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; (that is) he is
none of those who are savingly united to him. Whoever is in Christ the Spirit
of Christ is first in him, (that being the agent by which this blessed In-being
is brought about). I told you, the Spirit is the bond of the Union on Christ's
part; which yet you are to understand, not of the Spirit merely as it resides
in Christ himself, but as it is given and communicated to us; he by his own
Spirit (as poured out upon Believers and dwelling in them) takes hold of them
and joins them to himself. Not that there is any priority of time betwixt the
gift of the Spirit and the Union, for they go together; at the very same
instant wherein the Spirit is received, the Soul is united to Christ: but in
order of Nature, the reception of the one is antecedent to the Union with the
other. 1 John 3.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us by the Spirit which he
has given us: and chap. 4.13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in
us, by the Spirit which he has given us: (Observe it, still the Apostle
grounds the evidence of the Union upon the Spirit as given to the Saints, not
as it resides in Christ himself). O therefore let the serious, inquisitive
Christian put such interrogatories as these to himself, Have I the Spirit? is
he given to me? does he dwell in me? for accordingly as he can answer these
queries, so will he be able to conclude whether he be in Christ or not.

And he that would know whether he has the Spirit, he must examine what he
feels of its great acts in himself: To have the Spirit, it is for a man to be
brought under the great and special effects and operations thereof; (at present
I say no more of it, I hope hereafter I shall). These are various: there is
Illumination; whence he is called The Spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians.
1.17. Quickening; whence he is called the Spirit of Life Romans 8.2. Conviction;
the promise is he shall convince the world of sin Joh. 16.8. he is the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication Zech. 12.10. the sanctifying Spirit 1 Pet. 1.2. the
Spirit enabling to mortify sin Romans 8.13. working a person up to all holy
obedience Ezekiel. 36.27. Now then, what do you find in your selves of these high
and precious operations of the Spirit? here lies your participation or having
of it, and consequently the evidence of your Union with Christ. This great
Spirit is never idle where he is; he is always an active, operative, working
Spirit; is he so in you? does he teach, enlighten, convince, humble, draw to
Christ, raise up the heart to heavenly things, excite to duty, assist in duty?
etc. if so, then he is in you, and you are in Christ; if it be not so, then you
have not the Spirit, and thereupon are none of Christ's.

2. Enquire about the other bond, viz. Soli vere Fideles sunt membra Christi,
idque non quatenus Homines sed quatenus Christiani; nec secundum
regenerationem: ac proinde non secundum ipsam humanae Naturae substantiam per
se, sed quatenus illa in Christo ut altero Adamo renovatur, singulis ejus
partibus nova ac spirituali qualitate Sanctificatis, ut simus novi homines.
Polan. Synt. Theol. p. 454.
Faith. Ask your selves in secret how the case stands as to Faith; say, O is
this precious grace wrought in us? are we sincere and sound Believers? have we
heartily closed with Christ according to the Gospel-offer? have we received
Christ and whole Christ? is our trust, relyance, confidence, for pardon, life,
salvation, grounded upon him and upon him only? do we cast our selves upon his
alone Merits, renouncing every thing in our selves? have we that Faith which is
wrought by the Ephesians. 1.19.
Almighty power of God? which Acts 15.9.
purifies the heart, 1 John 5.4.
overcomes the world, Gal. 5.6.
works by love, is attended with Jam. 2.20.
good works? is it more than a mere dogmatical or historical Faith? than such
an easy, common, presumptuous, false Faith, as that which is in the generality
of men? O that you would herein deal faithfully with your own Souls! let the
search be deep and thorough, go to the very bottom of your deceitful hearts,
bring things to an issue, be sure that you be not mistaken: if the Faith be
right the Union is sure, yea, every thing else is sure; but if that be unsound,
do not flatter your selves, you are not in Christ Jesus; but in the woeful state
of disunion and distance from him.

Thus the Examination must be made from the Bonds of the Union. To clear up the
thing yet further (in order to your passing true judgment upon your selves), I
would direct you to a few trying Scriptures.

1. Let the First be that 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature: what a glass is this for every one of us to see our faces in! The
thing to be known is our being in Christ; and how may that be known? thus, by
our being New Creatures. The Apostle sets it down indefinitely that he may
reach every person, if [any] man be in Christ, etc. This New Creature is one of
the greatest riddles of Christianity to men that have it not: It Is that new
creation which the Soul passes under in the work of Conversion; or that great
and universal change which follows upon Conversion: a converted man is a
changed man, a quite other person than what he was before; he may say (with
Austine) I am not I; all old things are passed away, and all things are become
new, (as it follows in the place alleged). Upon Conversion, understanding,
judgment, thoughts, will, affections, Conscience, heart, tongue, life, all is
new: when the Sinner is turned from Sin to God, he has new Principles from
which he acts, new Ends for which he acts, new Guides and Rules by which he
acts; is not here a wonderful change? Now are you acquainted with this New
Creature? what do you find of it in your selves? it converns you to make sure
of it, for all is nothing without it: Gal. 6.15.
In Christ Jesus (and so in reference to the proof of being in Christ Jesus)
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
Creature; O this is all in all! this must be the sure and infallible witness of
your Union with Christ.

Therefore examine your selves about it: I beseech you look back, compare your
selves with your selves; has any thorough change been wrought in you? are you
not the same you ever were? just such as you came into the world? Can any that
hears me say, O (blessed be God!) it is not with me as it has been: Time was
when I was blind, as ignorant a Creature as any; but I hope now in some measure
I am enlightened; God has shined into me, and set up such a Light in me that I
see what I never saw before, and I see it in another manner than I did before.
Time was when I could swear, curse, be drunk, take Gods name in vain, profane
Sabbaths, etc. but I dare not now give way to such impieties. Time was when Sin
and I agreed very well; but now my heart rises at it, Psalm. 119.104.
I hate every false way. Time was when I had no love for Duty, I lived in the
total omission of it; but now I love Prayer, I love the Word, and all the
Ordinances of Christ are precious to me. Time was when I was all for the world,
my whole heart was taken up in it; but now Phil. 3.8.
I count all but loss that I may gain Christ, now None but Christ, none but
Christ. Can any of you thus speak? here is a change indeed; upon that the New
Creature indeed, and upon that Being in Christ indeed.

There Is a double change which evermore accompanies the Mystical Union.

1. The State of the Person is changed. He, who before he was in Christ was a
Child of wrath, is now, upon his being in Christ, an heir of Grace; he, that
before the Union, was in a state of Condemnation, is now after the Union in a
state of Salvation. 2. The Nature is changed: there is a new Nature, a new Soul
(not physically yet morally) infused into the regenerate person; the 2 Pet. 1.4.
divine Nature it self is now communicated to him: whereupon he does not think,
speak, or act as he did before; he does not love or live as before; he walks in
newness of life (as it is Romans 6.4). This is the change which we are to make
sure of; for assuredly the Lord Jesus will put none into his bosom or make
them a part of himself, but first the New Creature shall pass upon them, to
prepare and make them fit for so near and so close an Union. It Is not
consistent with his honor to take a Sinner just as he finds him, and without
any more ado to own him as a member of himself. There out any more ado to own
him as a member of himself. There cannot be a passage-from one Head to another,
but there must be some not able alteration: Christ will not break off a branch
from the first root and ingraft it into himself, but he will first alter the
very nature and property of it. It Is not in the power of Creatures to change
those whom they take into Union with them: the Husband may take the Wife into
his bosom, but he cannot change her Nature, temper, disposition: As Bernard
says of Moses; Aethiopissam-duxit, sed non potuit Aethiopissae mutare colorem;
he married an Ethiopian, but he could not alter her Ethiopian complexion;
(much less could he alter her inward temper): But Christ can and does thus work
upon those whom he takes into near Union and relation; if he joins the black,
swarthy Soul to himself, he puts a new complexion upon it, he makes it comely
with his own comeliness (as God promises Ezekiel. 16.14). So then by this you may
know, whether you be truly, really, savingly in Christ, (viz) if you be new
Creatures; without the new Creation there is no Mystical Union.
2. Another trying Scripture is that Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's (who are
in him) have crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. This also is a
very close Word, and it speaks this, No Crucifixion, no Union. The crucified
Head will have crucified Members; he that is planted in Christ's person, shall
Romans 6.4.
be planted in the likeness of Christ's death. O is Sin crucified in you? did
you ever set that upon the Cross, which brought the Son of God to the Cross? is
there in you that death to sin which carries some analogy to Christ's death for
sin? is the Flesh (with all its cursed retinue, the affections and lusts
thereof) mortified in you? is the corrupt Nature dead as to its former power
and sovereignty in the Soul? (for that is the crucifixion here spoken of.)
Assure your Selves, Christ will not have a member in him to be under a foreign
power; the Flesh shall not be the Ruler where He is the Head; where he brings
about the Union he will have the Dominion.

My Text too speaks of this Flesh; and it tells you, that they who are in
Christ Jesus do not walk after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Paul here seems
to rise and to go on step by step: would you know who are exempted from
Condemnation? he tells you, such who are in Christ; would you further know who
are in Christ? he tells you, such who walk not, etc. Here then is the
Characteristical Note of all who are in Christ, they live not the fleshly,
carnal, sensual Life, but the spiritual, heavenly, holy Life. Sirs! what is
your walking? it is the Conversation that must discover the Union: do but
reflect upon your course of Life, and that will plainly tell you to what Head
you belong. 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also so
to walk even as he walked: Many will be saying they are in Christ, pretending
to Union with him; I, but do they walk as he walked? do they live the Life of
Jesus? do they conform to his example? He that does not thus do, he may say he
abides in Christ, but he does but say so, it is not so in truth and reality.

3. Take but one place more: Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not
fruit, he takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that
it may bring forth more fruit. As this Text holds forth a twofold Union 'twixt
Christ and men, so it was spoke to but even now; I am only now to consider it
as it may be improved for trial. Some are in Christ, but it is not by real
insition, but only by external profession and Church Membership: which will
avail them but little, for notwithstanding this they are cast forth (as dead
branches), and gathered, and cast into the fire, and burnt, (as you see ver.
6.); and all this befalls them because they bear no fruit. Others are in Christ
in a saving and special way; which is the thing to be enquired after. For the
finding out of which, let me ask you, what fruit does grow upon you? are you so
in Christ as to be fruitful? then you are in Christ indeed. He will have no
dead, barren branches in him, for that would reflect dishonor upon the Root:
All who are united to him shall bring forth fruit; Joh. 15.5.8.
much fruit, good fruit; fruits meet for repentance Matthew. 3.8. fruits of
righteousness Phil. 1.11. fruitfulness in every good work Col. 1.10. And if so,
O how many empty, barren professors are declared to be out of Christ by this
Evidence! Thus I have shown, both from the double bond of the Union, and also
from some notable trying Scriptures, how you may know whether you be really,
internally, specially in Christ Jesus; so as that you may with well-grounded
confidence lay hold upon the Non-Condemnation here pronounced to such. So much
for the first Use.

USE 2. Exhortation to get this Union with Christ.
The Second shall be, to exhort you all to endeavor to get into Christ. O that
you would with the greatest diligence make out after this blessed Union! What
can be so desirable as it? what so worthy of your endeavors as to be one with
Christ? to have a Soul so nearly, so inseperably knit to him, what a great
thing is this? It was exceeding high in Paul's eye, Philip. 3.8, 9.
who counted all things but loss for Christ, etc. wherein? why, that he might
be found in Christ, (i. e.) be in him as his Head, Root, Surety, City of
Refuge, etc. (for the expression admits of these several illustrations, though
I think the last is most proper). Now did he thus highly esteem and value this
being in Christ, and shall we slight and make little of it? Surely (my
Brethren) it is better not to be at all, then to be, and yet not to be in
Christ: better no Union 'twixt Soul and Body, then to have that and yet no
Union of the Soul with Christ. Here Is No Condemnation, but for whom? only for
them who are in Christ; to such there is no condemnation, to others there is
nothing but condemnation (as has been often said): does it not highly concern
all therefore to endeavor to be one of them who are in Christ?

To enforce the Exhortation I Will give you but one Motive (but that will be a
very comprehensive and considerable one): It Is this, Union with Christ is the
foundation of all Good by and from Christ. It Is the fundamental blessing (I
mean with respect to application); there can be no application of what Christ
has purchased without antecedent Union with his Person: it is the very basis
upon which all is built, the leading blessing, the inlet to all the grace of
the Gospel, the ground of all communion and communication. Ah Sinner! thou
can hope for nothing from Christ unless thou be in Christ; without Christ,
and without hope, go together Ephesians. 2.12.

I say Union is the foundation of all Communion. So it is in Nature, so it is in
Grace too: 1 Cor. 1.30.
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: mark it, it is first in
Christ Jesus, and then he is wisdom, righteousness, etc. As it was with Christ
in his Manhood, first that did participate of the Gratia Vnionis, in its being
united to the Godhead; and then after this, all other grace was poured out upon
it: So it is with the believing Soul; it is first taken into Union with Christ,
and then upon that, all blessings, privileges, benefits are conveyed to it.
You know the member receives nothing from the head unless it be united to it;
so it is with the branches in reference to the root; and so here, without union
with Christ there is no justification, no pardon no reconciliation, no adoption,
no salvation by him: for it is a most certain truth, omnis communio fundatur in
unione. If you be one with Christ and in him, all is yours; 1 Cor. 3.21, 22,
23. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death or things present, or things to come, all are yours; and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's. Here Is a vast propriety and possession, but it is
all founded upon Union; we being Christ's, so God is ours, the promises are
ours, heaven is ours, life, death, etc. all is ours. As the Wife upon the
conjugal Union has a right and title to all that her Husband has; so as that
she may say Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caia, (a proverbial speech used among the
Romans at their Marriages); so the Believer being joined and married to Christ,
all that Christ is or has becomes his: but without this Union there is nothing
to be expected by him or from him. It pleases God to deal altogether with men
according to their union, and according to the head which bears them: now there
are two public Heads, to one of which every man and woman in the world does
belong; these are the two Adams (of whom you read 1 Cor. 15.45). There Is the
first Adam, and all the unregenerate Seed are united to him as their head; and
upon their union with this head, they derive nothing but guilt and wrath and
condemnation. Then there is the second Adam, Christ Jesus, and all the
regenerate Seed are united to him as their head; and he (by virtue of union
also) communicates pardon of sin, peace with God, justification, eternal life,
etc. Both of these Adams and public Heads proceed by the Law, and upon the
terms of Union; for Sicut per peccatum Adami non potuissemus peccatores fieri,
nisi fuissemus in ejus lu ^bis, ita per justitiam Christi non-poss^mus
justificari, nisi ci inseramur, uniamur, and unus spiritus cum eo fi^mus.
S^^eso.
the first Adam could do us no hurt, were we not descended out of his loins,
and in him as our common head; and so the second Adam can do us no good, unless
we be made One with him and in him as our head also. If we so be, then there
shall be gracious communications, most blessed derivations from him; but if
not, none of these can be looked for. And who would not now desire to be in
Christ? who would not purchase this privilege with a world? nay who would not
give ten thousand worlds for it? O that you would all make sure of it! Do not
trouble your heads with curious enquiries into some difficulties about this
union; but let this be your business, to make sure of the thing: The poor
low-gifted Christian may get it, though the highest gifted man cannot grasp it.

USE 3. Directions how to get into Christ.
But I must direct as well as persuade! Methinks I hear some saying, How may
this blessed Union be attained? what shall we do that we may be in the number
of those who are in Christ Jesus? For answer to this, I must again refer you to
its double bond and ligament, the Spirit and Faith: and advise you to get both
of them. Would you have Christ to be one with you? then get the Spirit; would
you be one with Christ? then get Faith.

1. First get the Spirit: which may be done by attendance upon the Word and by
Prayer. Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
Hearing of Faith? (the Apostle means the Hearing of the Gospel or the
Evangelical Doctrine). The Gospel does highly conduce to the obtaining of the
Spirit, for it is the ministration of the Spirit 2 Cor. 3.8. Do any therefore
want this Spirit? let them wait upon the Gospel dispensation and publication,
and (through the Grace of God attending that Dispensation) they shall have it.
Let me also recommend Prayer as an excellent means for the procuring of the
Spirit. O Sirs! what will bring you into Christ but the Spirit? and what will
bring the Spirit into you but Prayer? you should be praying for the Spirit,
though you cannot as yet pray with the Spirit. O that you would often go to God
and plead with him for the giving of it to you! Say, Lord we read if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; now Lord we dread the
thoughts of being none of Christ's; O to be out of Christ is a woeful state, and
we perceive that is our state till we have thy Spirit: we hear it is the Spirit
that knits the Soul to Christ, till therefore we are partakers of it we cannot
be knit to him: wherefore we beseech thee to give it to us: O whatever thou
deniest to us do not deny us this good Spirit! Thou have promised Luke 11.13.
to give thy Spirit to them that ask him, Lord upon our bended knees we ask him
of thee, O now make good thy promise to us. I say, do you but thus pray and the
thing shall be done; a good God never denies his good Spirit to the good Seeker
of it.

2. Get Faith also. This is a Grace highly precious and excellent: the Apostle
Peter speaks of several precious things, and Faith is one of them; it is
precious blood 1 Pet. 1.19. it is precious Christ 1 Pet. 2.7. it is precious
promises 2 Pet. 1.4. and it is also precious Faith 2 Pet. 1.1. Now amongst many
other things which make it so precious, this is one; it is the Fidei Gratia
incomparabilis haec est, quod animam copulat cum Christo sicut sponsam cum
sponso, etc. Luther tom. 1.466.
Grace which unites to Christ. The woman consenting to take the man for her
Husband, upon that the matrimonial union follows; so the Sinner consenting to
the receiving and obeying of Christ (which is one great act of Faith), upon
this he is united to him: this (I say) makes Faith so precious. O this is one
of Faith's royal excellences, nothing puts a greater worth and glory upon it
than this great effect. Well then, see that you make sure of it: are you yet
without it? in the sad state of unbelief? You have no share in and can make no
claim to this Mystical Union, so long as it is thus with you; you must be put
into another state, and become true Believers, then 'twill be well. These are
the only persons who are in Christ; we (who believe) are in him that is true 1 John 5.20. For whom did Christ ask of his Father that they may be one even as
we are one? 'twas for them that should believe on him Joh. 17.20. etc.
Therefore let it be your great endeavor to be Believers; for let me tell you,
in the very first moment of believing you will actually be the members of
Christ: the Soul is in Christ as soon as ever Faith is in it. I Will say no more
but only add this, As you desire to get Faith, first get the Spirit; for if you
once come to have that Spirit, he will most infallibly work Faith in you: Of
all the several Graces, he will not let that be wanting wherever he is.

The Uses hitherto have been General, USE 4. Several things pressed upon those
who are in Christ. To admire the Love of God.
I shall now more particularly direct my self to those who are in Christ Jesus.

And first is it thus with any of you? that you are indeed taken into this near
Union with Christ? how should you admire the love of God! I here consider God
personally, and so I would excite you to admire the Love of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; for indeed all the Persons have a great hand in
this Union, and the love of each of them in it is very admirable. The Father
first lays the foundation of it, and then he orders the accomplishment of it:
therefore it is said 1 Cor. 1.30. Of him ( i.e. of God the Father) are ye in
Christ Jesus, etc. and he also is said to call unto the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. The Son is willing to be One with you, what a
condescension is that? and he is the person in whom the Union is primarily
terminated: Then the Holy Ghost brings it about as one great Agent therein: So
that all the three Persons are concerned in the Mystical Union; it is to the
Son, by the Will of the Father, through the agency and operation of the Spirit;
O let Father, Son, and Spirit all be adored by you!

Which that I may the more effectually persuade you to, let the Thing it self
be considered, and how you stand in reference to it. To be in Christ Jesus? so
nearly, so indissolubly united to him? what mercy is this! There are in the
Union many things of a very mysterious Nature, but the greatest mystery of all
is that there should be such a mystery, (I mean, that there should be such a
thing for such poor creatures). O consider, you who sometimes were Ephesians. 2.13.
a far off, even you are made nigh, not only by Christ but to Christ: you who
were so far from being in Christ, that you were even 1 John 5.19.
in the wicked one; and in him you did lie (even as the carnal world does); yet
you are now under a blessed conjunction with Christ. You who by nature Romans
11.17.
were grafted into the wild Olive, are now grafted into and made partakers of
the root and fatness of the Olive tree; O incomparable, transcendent mercy!
That so great a person as Christ (the Joh. 3.16.
only begotten Son of God, Romans 9.5.
God blessed forever, Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his Fathers glory), should stoop so low as to be made one
with dust and ashes: that you who are no better than worms which crawl on the
earth, should be joined to so glorious an Head: that he who did at first assume
your Nature into so near an union with himself, should afterward take your
Persons also, and mystically unite them to his own person: that it should not
only be Matthew. 1.23.
God with you but God in you and you in God; O how will you be able, in some
suitable manner to bless God and Christ for such unconceivable, astonishing
Love as this is! This being in Christ as a limb and part of him here on earth,
will certainly bear a great share in your highest thanksgivings and
Hallelujahs, when you shall be with him in Heaven.

To get the Union more cleared up.
2. Endeavor after a further clearness in this Union. This I would urge 1. With
respect to the Nature of the thing. 2. With respect to your Personal interest
in it.


First, get the thing it self more and more cleared up: that your knowledge of
it may be more full and more distinct. Some further Head knowledge about it
would not be amiss. It Is a mystery, that very mystery which has been hid from
ages and from generations; but it is now made manifest to the Saints, to whom
God has made known the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in
you the Hope of Glory; (as the Apostle sets it forth Col. 1.27): now is it a
mystery which has been hid so long, but is now revealed in the Gospel, and
shall we not labor after a clearer light about it? It being a privilege that
is common to all Believers, there being also such a revelation of it; it is to
be lamented that it is no better understood by us. It Is true, in this life we
cannot hope fully to comprehend it, yet we might know much more of it than
generally we do. Paul speaks of Ephesians. 3.19.
the love of Christ as passing knowledge, and yet he prayed for the Ephesians
that they might know it; ( i.e. that they might know as much of it as was
possible, though all could not be known): the same I say concerning the
Mystical Union. But chiefly

In the Second place, labor to be more clear as to your personal interest in
it. Are not many of God's people very much in the dark about this? often
questioning with themselves whether they be in Christ or not? Is it better with
you? have you assurance of your spiritual conjunction with Christ? As you value
your comfort, your inward settledness and establishment, take pains after this
assurance; so as that with the Apostles evidence and confidence you may be able
to say, 1 John 5.20.
we are in him that is true. Could you but once arrive at this, how great would
your rejoicing be! I have told you, it is a sad thing for a man to get no higher
than a peradventure, with respect to Noncondemnation; now the assurance of that
depends upon the assurance of Union. The Apostle would have Christians know
distinctly how the case stands with them, in reference to their being in Christ
and Christ's being in them: 2 Cor. 13.5.
Prove your own selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you
except ye be Reprobates?

In order to this assurance, you must pray much for the Spirit's witness: for
that Spirit which promotes it, does also discover and give the evidence of it.
The objective evidence you may have in your selves, ( viz. Grace in the heart,
the new Creature, Faith, etc.); but the subjective evidence you will not have,
till the Spirit by a divine irradiation does make out the thing to you.

To maintain the Union.
3. Are you in Christ? O maintain and keep up your Union with him! this is the
abiding in him which he himself speaks so much of; Joh. 15.4. Abide in me, and
I in you: (so v. 5, 6, 7): it is not enough to be in Christ unless you abide in
him. You Will say, is not the Union indissoluble? that which shall never cease? I
answer, yes it is so; yet you may do that which may tend to the dissolving of
it, though through Grace it shall not actually dissolve it: and you may do that
which may utterly deprive you of the sense and evidence and comfort of it,
though the thing it self shall remain firm and sure: it concerns you therefore
upon these accounts to be very careful. Wherein? why, do not sin willingly and
knowingly against God, and do not abate in your constant and fervent
performance of duty; for these things strike at the Union, at the untying of
that knot which God has tied so fast. And if it should once come to that, what
would become of you? No sooner is the branch broken off from the root, but it
immediately withers and dies: could you imagine a Believer to be broken off
from Christ but for one moment, what a withering, dying person would he be! O
Sirs! your life, strength, fruitfulness, comfort, your all is in Christ and
secured by your Union with him; if that should fail, all would fail: do nothing
therefore to endanger it. Joh. 15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it
self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye except ye abide in me: (v.
5.) he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit;
for without me ((...), seorsim a me, separated from me, so Beza renders the
word) ye can do nothing. So long as you preserve your Union you will be strong;
strong to do, and strong to suffer: but if you once make a breach upon that,
you will be no better than Sampson when his Judge. 16.19.
strength was departed from him: what is the cutting off the hair to divulsion
and separation from the head?

4. Improve your Union with Christ. To improve it.
Are you in him? you should always be drawing and deriving from him: So the
member does from the head; and Christ being your head, why do you not live
under more constant, more free and full derivations from him? Why is not this
Union improved, as a standing cordial in and against those faintings and
despondencies of Spirit, which sometimes you lie under? why is not this more
pleaded with God in the midst of sad thoughts and misgivings of heart? (many
other things might be instanced in). It Is too much a truth, all other Unions
are better improved than this great Mystical Union with Christ: the branch
makes the best of the root, and draws from it as though it would exhaust all
its life and virtue; O that we could carry it so to Jesus Christ! even to draw
from him as though we would draw him dry, (if such a thing was possible). We
say in Philosophy, Unumquodque quo prop^us accedit Causae primae eo abundantius
recipit.
the nearer any thing comes to the first Cause, the more abundantly it does
receive from it, (as the nearer a thing is to the Sun, the more it does
participate of its light and heat): now you Believers are very nigh to Christ
Coloss. 1.19.
in whom all fullness dwells), you are even in him; O what full supplies of
Grace should you be fetching from him upon all occasions! why should they want,
or what should they want, who are not only at the fountain, but in it!

5. Such as are in Christ must be very humble. To be humble.
Christians! your Union is very high, but your Spirits should be very low. High
alliances are apt to puff men up; you are highly allied indeed, Christ is your
Head, your Husband, your Brother, he and you are Heb. 2.11.
all of one; yet be not proud. When the Apostle was speaking of the ingrafting
of the Gentile-believers into Christ, he adds, Others by unbelief are broken
off, you stand by Faith, be not high minded but fear; Romans 11.20. the same I
say to you. O ascribe nothing to your selves! do not entertain or give way to
any self-exalting thoughts, never think you can subsist by your selves, live
under a constant sense of your dependence upon Christ; let there not be a
thought in you that Christ is in the least beholden to you; it is the root which
bears you, you do not bear the root, Romans 11.18. You are one with Christ, yet
you come infinitely short of him; he is in you yet above you; 'twould be pride
of the first magnitude to equalize your selves with him. Especially, never
think that (because of this Union) you can merit any thing of God: The Papists
would fain prove the Saints meriting in what they do, from their Union with
Christ; but it is a weak proving of it: and our Divines give a good reason
against it, because the Union betwixt Christ and Believers is only mystical,
and not personal; now it is the personal Union only that is the ground of merit.
O Luke 17.10.
when you have done all, say you are unprofitable! How unprofitable then are
you when you do so little? nay, when you do nothing at all as you ought to do?

6. Be very holy. They who are joined to such an head, To be holy.
how should they live? what holiness can be high enough for such an Union? Will
you pretend to be in Christ, and yet live in Sin? will you dishonor Christ
your head by a loose, vain unholy, unsuitable conversation? How should they 1
Pet. 2.9.
show forth the virtues of Christ who are the members of Christ! Methinks, this
Union with him should greatly sharpen the Soul against Sin, and cause it to
repel all temptations and solicitations thereunto with an holy detestation, as
he once did, Genesis 39.9.
How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? what I? a member of
Christ? one with Christ? shall I do so and so? As for Others, who belong to a
degenerate root, they will bring forth degenerate fruit; but I who am ingrafted
into so noble, so excellent a stock, shall I bring forth no better fruit? This
precious Soul, which was so immediately created by God, and is so immediately
united to Christ, shall that be prostituted to Sin and Satan? This Body too
has its share in this Union, and shall I take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of an Harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15. Surely such who are one with
Christ, should in all things be like to Christ; where there is union and
communion there should be conformity. Christians! if you live as Others do, you
will make the world to question whether there be such a thing as union with
Christ; or at least to think but meanly of it: O therefore as you have received
Christ, so walk ye in him: Col. 2.7. It Is Obedience and holy walking which must
evidence your union, to others, to your selves: 1 John 3.4. He that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: and hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us: And the Union it self
calls for it; 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also
so to walk even as he walked. O how should they live, who live in Christ and
Gal. 2.20. To be heavenly minded.
he in them!

7. Are you in Christ? then be heavenly minded: Such as are in him should be
much with him, in the heavenliness of their thoughts and affections. Our Union
is with our Lord in Heaven, and our Phil. 3.20.
conversation should be with him in heaven also; our Col. 3.1.
head is there, and our Matthew. 6.21.
treasure is there, should not our hearts be there also? what a contradiction
is an earthly conversation to the heavenly union? how sad a thing is it, that a
Believer who is so near to Christ, should yet live at so great a distance from
him? and carry it as though he was rather in the world, than in Christ Jesus.
If thou be glewed to Christ, do not live as one who is glewed to the world.

8. Be fruitful, and very fruitful: To be fruitful.
he that abides in me brings forth much fruit, Joh. 15.4. Christ says it is
so, sure I am it should be so. If you be branches ingrafted into Christ,
there is a special obligation lying upon you to be very fruitful; for else you
will disparage your root, and also frustrate the expectations of him who lays
out much cost upon you, in order to your fruitfulness. The Husbandman (God the
Father) looks for much fruit from such as you: and if you do not answer his
expectations, he will purge you, (that is) he will lay some sharp afflictions upon
you, and thereby make you to bring forth more fruit: He will not take you away
(as he does those who are only externally in Christ), or cast you out for the
fire; but he will afflict you to some purpose: This is our Saviors own awakening
Doctrine Joh. 15.2. The promise is Psalm. 92.13, 14. Those that be planted in
the House of the Lord, shall flourish, etc. they shall bring forth fruit, etc.
O how fruitful should they be, who are planted in the Lord himself?

Saints upon their being One with Christ, should be one amongst themselves.
9. Such as are one with Christ, should be one amongst themselves. Saints are
under a double Union; One with Christ, and One amongst themselves; and the
Latter is as real as the Former, and purchased by Christ as well as the former;
(for the proof of which, read and weigh Ephesians. 2.14. etc.) The members in the
body natural as they are united to the head; so they are also united each to
the other: and so it is here. O that this Union amongst Saints was more
conspicuous and evident! But (with grief of heart be it spoken) little is to be
seen of that, whilst much of that which is opposite to it, is every where too
apparent: what schisms, rents, divisions, are there to be found even amongst
them? is not this spoken of in Gath? are not the great Enemies of Christianity
too well acquainted with it? Now what a sad thing is this, that when they are
all one in Christ Jesus (as it is Gal. 3.28.) there should yet be such
divisions, fractions, and distances amongst themselves? Some Divines make this
to be the matter of Christ's prayer Joh. 17. where he prayed, that all
Believers might be one, as the Father and he were one: (i. e.) that they might
be One in Unity and Concord amongst themselves. Which interpretation (though
the higher Union must by no means be excluded) is very probable, from the
Argument with which Christ twice backs his prayer; That the world may believe
that thou have sent me: It must therefore be some external and visible Union,
of which the world in order to this conviction might take notice; which the
Saints Mystical Union with Christ, is not; but their Union or Unity amongst
themselves, is. And it appears; that upon this very prayer of Christ, there was
a little after great unity and concord amongst the primitive Christians: Act.
2.46. And they continuing daily with one accord, etc. Act. 4.32. The multitude
of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul, etc. (just as Christ
had prayed). And O that the virtue of this prayer might reach us also at this
time! for surely our divisions are so many and so great, our breaches so wide,
that (I think) nothing can or will unite us, but the alone efficacy of Christ's
intercession. A stronger motive to Unity cannot be set before the people of
God, than that which I am upon; they who are so joined to Christ, should not be
disjoined amongst themselves: as they have but one head, and are all members of
the same body, so they should have but Jer. 32.39. Believers upon this Union
should know Christ better than others do.
one heart and one way.

10. Are you in Christ? You should then be well acquainted with him: so as to
attain to a considerable degree of the knowledge of him. Others (who are afar
off from him) may be ignorant of him, but you who are so nigh to him should
know him well. He told his Disciples, that he would Joh. 14.16, 17.
pray the Father, and he would give them the Comforter, etc. Even the spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows
him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you. This was
spoken of the Saints knowledge of the Spirit, but it holds true as to the
knowledge of Christ himself: the world knows him not, but Believers know him,
how does that come to pass? why from this, for he dwells in them, and is in
them, and they in him. O how should the consideration of this Union, excite you
to labor after a clearer knowledge of the Lord Jesus! Persons we live with we
know them fully; Christ lives in you and you in him, what a shame will it be,
if you do not (so far as your capacity will admit of) know him distinctly?
Surely (says Jacob) Genesis 28.16.
the Lord was in this place, and I knew it not: whoever thou art if thou be
a gracious person, surely the Lord is in thee and thou in him; and yet thou
neither know thy Union, nor the Person to whom thou art united. 'Pray, let
this put you upon the daily, diligent studying of Christ, that you may arrive
at higher knowledge of him; Job 22.21.
acquaint your selves with him, and do it thoroughly: upon the intimateness of
the Union there should be intimateness of acquaintance.

Hitherto I have been speaking to such who are in Christ, USE 5. Comfort to
them who are in Christ.
by way of Exhortation; I shall now further speak to them by way of
Consolation: And you that are such, O rejoice, and be exceeding glad, let your
hearts be even filled with joy! what abundance of comfort is there wrapped up for
you in this your union with Christ! it is a flower out of which all sincere
Christians may suck a great deal of Evangelical sweetness. For the setting
forth of which, let me go further than that special-priviledge which the Text
holds forth.

As this speaks the dignity of their Persons.
1. Are you in Christ Jesus? this speaks the excellency and dignity of your
persons. How great and honorable must they needs be, who are thus nearly
united to so glorious a Person as Christ, the Mediator, the eternal Son of God!
Psalm. 149.9.
this honor have all the Saints. It Is no great matter what the world says or
thinks of you; Men vilify you, and look upon you as the very scum and filth of
the earth, (so they did long ago to far your betters 1 Cor. 4.13): The precious
sons of Zion comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed as earthen
pitchers, Lam. 4.2. And it is no great matter, what your outward condition is in
the world, (that may be mean and inglorious enough): I say, these are things
not much to be regarded, so long as you are the members of Christ; you being
so, what a glory and greatness must this needs reflect upon you? Mark that
expression Joh. 17.22. The glory which thou have given me I have given them,
(what glory does Christ speak of? it follows), that they may be one even as we
are one: this is glory indeed. It Is a great honor to be a member of the
Church, (so the good Emperor Theodosius judged of it, who preferred his being
a member of the Church before his being Emperor of the World); but it is a far
greater honor to be a member of Christ. It Is an high expression concerning
Israel, that they were a people near to God, Psalm. 148.14. You Believers are
near to God indeed, for you have not only communion with him who is God, but
union also; you are one with the Father, and one with the Son; you must needs
upon this be excellent and glorious. The excellency of persons and things, is
to be measured by their appropinquation or approximation to that which is most
excellent: then the Saints are the Psalm. 16.3.
excellent in the earth, because they are so near to Christ, the center of all
excellencies. How was the humane Nature advanced and dignified, even above the
Angelical Nature, when it was so nearly united to the Godhead? (as the woman of
mean descent is, when she is matched into some great family): And has not
Christ highly advanced your persons too, by taking them into so close, so
intimate an union with himself? 'Twas accounted, honor for Esther to be taken
into Ahasuerus's Royal Bed, 'twas a far greater honor to her to become his
wife: but this is nothing to the honor which Christ has put upon you, in his
joining and marrying of you to himself. O let him first be adored, who has
thus e^a^^^d poor worms; and then you should know how to judge of your selves,
according to the advancement and dignity conferred upon you by your being in
Christ. As to your Being and Order the Angels are above you; Psalm. 8.5.
Thou have made him a little lower than the Angels; but as Christ has assumed
your Nature and not theirs, and has thus nearly united your Persons to
himself, so they are a little (nay a great deal) lower than you. Let there be
no pride or sinful self-exaltation in you; yet know, how to put a right
estimate upon your selves according to your advancement by Grace. The Saint in
his rags is greater than the Sinner in his robes; for the one is in Christ, and
the other is not; and that puts a superlative glory and excellency upon him.

Believers being in Christ they are safe.
2. Are you in Christ Jesus? then as your dignity is great, so your safety is
great too You need not fear the greatest dangers which threaten you; upon your
being in Christ, even in the Psalm. 23.4.
valley of the shadow of death you are safe. The Evils you dread are either
temporal and external, or spiritual, internal, and eternal; you are secure
against all. That special providence which is over you, secures against the
first; and that special Grace which is in you and toward you, secures against
the last. Isa. 4.5.
Upon all the glory shall be a defense: You upon your Union are a part of this
glory, (for it points to persons as well as things); therefore there is a
defense upon you, to keep off whatever might hurt you. You are not merely a
part of Christ through your conjunction with him, but you are (in regard of his
special and tender affection) as Zech. 2.8.
the apple of his cye: and will he not guard the apple of his eye? He that is
in this Ark must needs be safe in the greatest deluge. The Evil of Evils is
eternal condemnation: but what says the Text? There is no Condemnation to them
who are in Christ Jesus. How can they perish who are one with Christ? will he
suffer persons so united to him, to be miserable? so long as it is well with the
Head, shall it not be well with the Members also? In the Body Natural, the Head
may be safe and yet some of the Members may perish; but in the Body Mystical,
it is otherwise: where all the members are safe in the head, and as safe as the
head it self. O Believers! you may with courage look the greatest dangers,
evils in the face; as knowing, that none of them shall ever reach you, much to
hurt you, because you are so strongly engarrison'd in Christ. (But more of this
in the last branch of Comfort).

Christ sympathizes with those who are in him.
3. Are you in Christ Jesus? Here Is Comfort for you, Upon your union with him,
he sympathizes with you in all your afflictions, and looks upon all done to you
as done to himself. I say, Christ sympathizes with you in all your afflictions;
for he is a sympathizing, compassionate, tenderhearted Savior, (as you read
Heb. 4.15. Heb. 5.2). As there is, by virtue of the Union, a mutual sympathy
betwixt the Head and the Members, the Husband and the Wife; so it is here 'twixt
Christ and you: Isa. 63.9.
in all your afflictions he is afflicted. He that Isa. 53.4.
bore your griefs when he was on earth ( really and properly), he bears them
still, now he is in heaven, (in a way of sympathy). Further, I add he has a
tender sense of what is done to you, and looks upon it as done to himself: and
no wonder, since he and you are but One. He that touches you, touches the apple
of his eye, Zech. 2.8. Sic vocem pedis suscipit Lingua; clamat, calcas me, in
membris Christi Christus est. August. in Ps. 30.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest me? Act. 9.4. When the Saint is persecuted, Christ
himself in him is persecuted. As if any kindness or love be shown to Believers,
Christ looks upon it as done to himself; Matthew. 25.40. Inasmuch as ye have done
it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it to me: So if any
unkindness be shown to them, Christ looks upon it as done to himself. O that
Enemies would be quiet, and let God's people alone, and fear to wrong or injure
them! for they are so united to Christ, so incorporated with him, that they who
strike at them do through them strike at Christ himself.

Will certainly supply them in all their wants.
4. Are you in Christ? He will then most certainly supply you in all your wants.
In temporal wants, fear not Christ will provide: will he suffer that body to
starve which he has united to himself? You are full of anxious thoughts what
ye shall eat and drink, what ye shall put on; Christ would have you Matthew. 6.26.
take no thought about these things: your bodies being in union with him, he will
look after them, so that they shall not want what is necesiary. O Believer!
has Christ thus admirably joined thee to himself, and will he deny thee a
little meat, and drink, and clothing? And then as to spiritual wants, in those
Christ will supply too: Every member in the body from this head shall receive
that grace, life, strength, that is proper for it. The root supplies every
branch with what it needs; Christ will do the same to every believing Soul: and
this is part of that (...), that supply of the Spirit, which you read of Phil.
1.19. This union is operative and communicative: if thou be in Christ, thou
shall most surely have from him Romans 12.3.
that measure of Grace and Comfort, which he sees best for thee. Every Lamp in
the Golden-candlestick was supplied from the two Olives Zec. 4.12. and so every
particular member of Christ, is and shall (as need requires) be supplied from
him. The Apostle tells us 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith: You are
Christ's Joh. 13.1.
own, of his house and kindred, nearly related to him, nay members of himself;
and therefore certainly he will provide for you. And that he will do in all
your concerns, whether outward or inward: that look as you must 1 Cor. 6.20.
glorify God, in you body, and in your spirit, for both are Gods; so Christ
will supply you in your bodies, in your spirits, for both are his.

Death shall not hurt them.
5. Are you in Christ? then you have no reason to be afraid of Death: Though it
be Job 18.4.
the King of terrors, of all terribles the most terrible, yet as to you
there is no cause of fear; why? because it can never dissolve the union that is
betwixt Christ and you; and so long as that abides, death can never do you much
hurt. Hear me thou sincere Christian! do thou live? thou art in Christ;
do thou dye? thou art in Christ; neither life nor death therefore shall be
hurtful to thee: Nay, it is so far from that, that death it self shall be thy
advantage; To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil 1.21. You read of
dying in the Lord Rev. 14.13. of sleeping in Jesus 1 These. 4.14. the Saints
dye, their bodies are thrown into the grave (that vast repository), yet there
they are united to Christ; yea, their very dust is so. This Death cuts asunder
all other knots, but it cannot do so to the mystical knot; it dissolves the
union 'twixt soul and body, 'twixt husband and wife, etc. but it shall never
dissolve the union betwixt Christ and the believing Soul. When the body of a
Child of God shall be no better than a rotten carcass, Christ will say, O yet
this very carcass is precious to me, for it is in union with me! Psalm. 102.14.
David speaks of the Saints favoring the dust of Zion; the very dust of dead
Believers is valued by Christ, insomuch that he will not lose the least atome
of it.

They shall certainly rise again.
6. Are you in Christ? Here Is matter of Comfort as to the certainty of an happy
resurrection. Your bodies may be locked up in the grave for a time, but Christ
(who has the key of the grave) they being united to him, will certainly open
it and take them out: he will raise them up again, and that with advantage too,
for they shall then Phil. 3.21.
be fashioned like to his own glorious body. The head is risen, and the members
shall rise also, by virtue of the union that is betwixt them: Quod praecessit
in capite, sequetur in corpore (as Austine speaks). 1 Cor. 15.20. Now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep: Romans 8.11.
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you. So Joh. 6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And this
is not to be limited to a bare resurrection, there is more in it than so; for
Dan. 12.2. 1 Cor. 15.22.
all shall arise, the resurrection shall be general and universal: But yet
there will be a vast difference in it; 'twill be an happy resurrection to them
who are in Christ, but a dreadful resurrection to others. The wicked shall be
raised by Christ as a judge, in order to their trial and the passing of the
sentence of death upon them; but the Saints shall be raised by Christ as an
head, virtute unionis, in order to the receiving of the blessed sentence of
life. Joh. 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. How should Believers rejoice in this!

Great is the love of the Father to them.
7. Are you in Christ? then great is the Fathers love to you: Take Believers as
they are in themselves, the Father greatly loves them; but now as they are in
Christ, and made one with him, there is an additional love, an higher love
belonging to them from the Father; because they are so near to his own Son.
Therefore (upon this union) God loves them with the same love, wherewith he
loves Jesus Christ himself: Joh. 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, etc. that
the world may know that thou have sent me; [and have loved them as thou have
loved me]. O Believers what a love has the Father for you upon this! And
Christ's own love too is very great to you; for you are his flesh, and Ephesians.
5.29, 30.
no man ever hated his own flesh: yea, he told his Disciples, Joh. 15.9.
As my Father has loved me, so have I loved you. So near an union must needs
be accompanied with a very dear affection: it is not always so with us, but as
to Christ, the strength of the affection from him shall always be answerable to
the nearness of the union with him.

They shall persevere.
8. Are you in Christ Jesus? Here Is Comfort as to your perseverance, stability,
and fixedness in the state of grace. This (upon which all depends) a Child of
God may be fully assured of; for will Christ lose a member? a part of himself?
shall one united to him finally and totally fall away from him? no, that shall
not be. So long as the union is firm and indissoluble, do not fear, (I speak
not against the duty of fear but the sin of fear). It Is not here in and out, in
to day and out to morrow; but it is once in Christ and ever in Christ: there is
your safety. Indeed the Saints stand firm upon several great foundations, (as
the Fathers election, the Heb. 6.17.
immutability of his council, the tenor of the Covenant, etc.) but this also
must be taken in, their inseparable union with Christ. You are not only in
Christ's hands (out of which none shall pluck you Joh. 10.28.) but you are in
Christ as your head, and who shall be able to sever the members from this head?
If Christ should lose a member, he would be imperfect as an head: you are Ephesians.
1.23.
his fullness (as has been said), now he will be Christus plenus, a full
Christ, (as Aug. in Ps. 36.
he speaks); which he would not be, if any of his members should be taken away
from him. If he might lose one, he might then lose another and another, and so
he would be sure of none. O your life is hid with Christ in God Col. 3.3.
therefore it is sure and safe. Take the Saints apart from Christ, the strongest
could not stand; take them as joined and united to him, the weakest shall not
fall. When the first Adam was our head our condition was mutable, in him we
stood upon very slippery ground; but now when Christ is our head, we-stand fast
and firm, Psalm. 125.1.
even as mount Zion never to be removed. It Is but the same Grace now, which we
should have had upon our first creation, (I speak of the kind not of the
degree); yet it is not amissible as that was, because of our union with another
head.

God will hear their Prayers.
9. Are you in Christ? this assures you of the audience of your Prayers: If ye
abide in me (says Christ), ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
unto you^ What an encouraging word is this! God will grant your requests for
the love he bears you upon other accounts; but (to be sure) he will do this for
you, you being under such a near conjunction to the Son of his Love.

Union and Communion go together.
10. Are you in Christ? know then that Union and Communion go together: and is
not this full of comfort? As all communion is founded upon union, so all union
terminates in communion; and the closer is the union, the fuller is the
communion. Union with Christ is a very enriching thing; it interests a person
in all that Christ is or has; this is that fellowship of the Son to which the
Saints are called 1 Cor. 1.9. You being in Christ, his Person is yours: you are
his, and he is yours. My beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. 2.16. Upon the
Covenant relation God is yours, upon the Mystical Union Christ is yours. You
being in Christ, all his Attributes are yours: his wisdom yours to guide you,
his power yours to protect you, his mercy yours to pity you, his All
sufficiency yours to supply you, (and so in the rest). As the Father in the
Gospel once said to his Son, Luke 15.31.
Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine; so says Christ to
the believing Soul, thou art ever in me, all that I am or have is thine. Being
in Christ, you share with him in all his Offices; hence you are Kings and Omnes
Christiani sant Sacerdotes, quia membra unius Sacerdotis. August. de Civ. De^.
lib. 20. cap* 10.
Priests as he is (in a spiritual and mystical notion): Rev. 1.6. And has made
us Kings and Priests unto God. etc. 1 Pet. 2.5. Saints are styled an holy
Priesthood, and ( v. 9.) a royal Priesthood. Being in Christ, you bear his name
(as has been shown), and you partake with him in his high Relations and
Dignities: he is a Son of God, so are you; Joh. 20.17. I ascend to my Father,
and your Father; he is heir of all things Heb. 1.2. you joint heirs with him,
Romans 8.17. Being in Christ, all his Merit is yours: his sufferings, Caput and
membra sunt quasi una persona mystica, and ideo satisfactio Christi ad omnes
fideles pertinet sicut ad su^ membra. Aquin. 3. p. Q^. 49. Art 1.
satisfaction are as much to your advantage, as if you had suffered and
satisfied in your own persons. You being in Christ, all the Unio haec est
spiritualis illa relatio hominum ad Personam Christi, qua jus acquirunt ad
omnes illas benedictiones quae ad ipso praeparantur. Ames. medul, lib 1. cap.
26. fect. 2. Fides pure docenda est, quod per eum sic conglutineris, ut ex te
and Christo fiat quasi una Persona, quae non possit segregari; ut cum fiducia
dicere possis ego sum Christus, (h. e.) Christi justitia, victoria, vita, est
mea; and vicissim Christus dicat, Ego sum ille peccator, (h. e.) ejus peccata
and mors mea sunt, quia adhaeret mihi and ego illi, conjuncti enim sumus per
fidem in unam carnem and os. Luther. Homo cum fiducia possit gloriari in
Christo, and dicere, meum est quod Christus vixit, egit, dixit, passus est,
mortuns est, non secus quam si ego illa vixissem, egissem, dixissem, passus
essem, mortuus essem; sicut sponsus habet omnia quae sunt sponsae, and sponsa
habet omnia quae sunt sponsi, etc. Idem.
blessings, privileges, which he has purchased are yours; as justification,
atonement, adoption, access to God, etc. You being in Christ, that very glory
which he has, is yours: (see Rev. 3.2^. Joh. 17.24. Luke 22.29). You being in
Christ, all the promises in him are Yea, and Amen to you, 2 Cor. 1.20. Gal.
3.29. You being in Christ, all his victories and triumphs over enemies are
yours: Rev 2.26, 27. Upon Union with Christ, you have Union too with the Sea
Sedgw. on the Covenant. p. 208.
Father and the Holy Ghost. In a word, you being Christ's, all is yours, 1 Cor.
3.21. and what can be said further? Is not all this enough for your comfort?
Here Is blessed communion flowing from a blessed union; here is partaking indeed
of the fatness of the Olive, upon your being ingrafted into it, (as it is Romans
11.17.)

Union secures from Condemnation.
11. Are you in Christ? then it is no condemnation: (so the Text expressly tells
you). O what a ground of rejoicing is exemption from condemnation! what can be
sweet to him who is obnoxious to it? what can be bitter to him who is secured
against it? this is the happiness of all in Christ. Poor Christless Souls are
condemned over and over; Law, and Gospel, and Conscience, and (which is worst
of all) the great God condemns them; but it is not so with you who are in
Christ; to you it is no condemnation. You are justified here, and shall be
solemnly, publicly, declared to be so at the great day. You are in Christ^,
not only as the members in the head (which is your Mystical Union), but as the
Debtor in the Surety (which is your Legal Union). Christ's payment and
satisfaction is yours, and God will not fall upon him and you too for payment.
The Wife under covert is not liable to an arrest or action at Law, but all must
fall upon her Husband: You being married to Christ, this supersedes the process
of the Law against you; if it be not fully satisfied, it must seek its
reparation at the hands of your spiritual Husband, Christ himself: as to any
condemnatory charge it cannot fall upon you. Amongst all the damned in Hell
there is not one in Christ to be found; that is no place for such as are limbs of
him. And (to shut up all) upon this Union it is not only No condemnation, but
it is also certain salvation; 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has life. Joh.
14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also Christ the Head is in Heaven, and
where he is, there he will have his Members also; this is his great request to
his Father Joh. 17.24. Where it is Union it shall be Vision; in Christ here and
with Christ hereafter, are inseparable; a Christ in you is a sufficient ground
for the hope of glory; Col. 1.27. Christ in you, the hope of glory. You
therefore who are in Christ, should highly comfort your selves with these
things.

I would desire such not to put from them these Cordials; as if they were not
proper for them, because of the weakness of their graces, the imperfections of
their duties, the meaness of their persons, (or upon any other discouragement
of this nature). Art thou a Believer? be thou never so weak, yet thou art in
Christ: thou art low in grace, in gifts, in thy outward condition; yet thou art
in Christ. The meanest member in the body is united to the head, as well as
that which is the highest; and so it is here. Though the eye was weak which
looked upon the brazen Serpent, yet it looking thereupon there was healing for
all that: The weakest faith is healing faith; and it is so, not only because it
takes a view of Christ, but also because it knits to Christ. O Christian!
Faiths uniting virtue does not depend upon its strength, but upon its
sincerity: the very minimum quod sic is enough to put thee into Christ;
therefore be not discouraged because thy faith is so weak and low. And for thy
outward condition, that is nothing at all to the state or privilege; the poor
are in Christ as well as the rich, the ignoble as well as the noble: He does
not choose his members by any external considerations. If Grace be in thy
heart, though thou art very mean in thy outward state, have scarce bread to put
into thy belly or rags upon thy body, Christ is not Heb. 2.11.
ashamed to own thee as one of his Members and Brethren.

Let this suffice for the opening of the Subjects of the Privilege, (so far
forth as they are described by their Union); There is no Condemnation [to them
which are in Christ Jesus].

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, [who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit].


CHAP. III. Of the Holy and Spiritual Life, in opposition to the Sinful and
Carnal Life.
The Subjects of the Privilege are further uncharacterized by their Course. The
words repeated Verse 4. with some little variation. They are descriptive both
with respest to the Non-condemnation, and also to the Being in Christ Jesus.
Why the Apostle singles out this Character. What Walking imports. The
Observation raised. Eight things taken notice of from the Words: 1. The Apostle
does not say, There Is no Condemnation to them in whom there is no Flesh, but to
them who walk not after the Flesh: 2. He does not lay his Evidence upon
particular acts, but upon the general Course: 3. Here is not redditio Causae,
but only descriptio Personae: 4. The description is not laid down in the
Negative only, but also in the Affirmative: 5. The two Walkings are supposed to
be contrary: 6. First it is being in Christ Jesus, and then it is walking not
after the Flesh. etc. 7. There always was and always will be different walkers:
8. The Apostle lays it down in the general; and the reason givenw by he so
does. The Parts of the Description opened. What is meant by Flesh, and by
walking or not walking after the Flesh. Flesh considered 1. More Generally:
what it is to walk after it in that respect: why the Corrupt Nature is set
forth by Flesh: a fivefold account given of that. 2. More Particularly; what it
is to walk after it in that respect. Of Lust (or Lusting) the most natural act
of the Flesh. What is here meant by the Spirit. What it is to walk after the
Spirit. That opened in Five Particulars. The Doctrine confirmed. Applied: 1. by
way of Information, in three things: 1. That Scripture Marks or Signs grounded
upon Sanctification and Holiness, are not under the Gospel to be rejected by
Believers. 2. That the Popish Calumnies against Protestants and the Protestant
Doctrine, are causeless and groundless. 3. That there are but few who are in
Christ Jesus. Use 2. To examine the walking, whether it be after the Flesh, or
after the Spirit. Use 3. 1. To dehort from walking after the Flesh: Several
Motives to enforce that Dehortation: What is to be done for the avoiding of it.
2. To exhort to walking after the Spirit: Three Motives to that. Use 4. Such as
do walk after the Spirit are exhorted 1. To be very thankful. 2. To walk yet
less and less after the Flesh, and yet more and more after the Spirit. 3. To
take the Comfort of this walking: The great discouragement of troubled
Christians about it, removed.

THere is in the whole Verse (as you have heard), the Privilege and the
Description of the persons who have a share in that Privilege: They are
described 1. By their Union with Christ: There is no Condemnation [to them
which are in Christ Jesus]; this has been spoken to. 2. By their holy course:
they are such, who [walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit]; this I
proceed now to speak to.


In the (...).
Greek the Words run thus, There is no condemnation to them in Christ Jesus,
not walking after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Our Translators put in, --
to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after etc. And they part the [
being in Christ, and the not walking, etc.] and read them as distinct: but
Others put them together and make all but one sentence. Thus the Syriack
Version (cited before); thus Nulia condemnatio iis qui per Jesum Christum (sive
per Evangelium) eousque perducti sunt, ut non eant quo carnis affectus rapiunt
sine discrimine, sed Spiritum Sanctu^^ adepti ejus motibus constanter
obsequuntur. Grot.
Grotius: There is (says he) no condemnation to them, who by Jesus Christ (or
by the Gospel) are brought to this, not to go whether carnal affections do
carry them, but having obtained the Spirit they constantly obey his motions.
Some difference there is in this double reading; but I Will not enquire whether
Unica est in textu Pauli oration, sed Interpres distinxit in duas, etc. quam vis
ad sensum non intersit. Cajet.
material or not.

The Apostle recites these words ( v. 4.) with a double variation: 1. There he
brings in the Relative and joins it with the Participle, which here he does
not: for there it is (...), whereas the Relative here is joined with (...). 2.
Here it is expressed in the Third person, there in the First person; that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled [in us], who walk not after the
Flesh but after the Spirit.


The Words are descriptive and characteristical of Persons, both with respect
to the Non-condemnation, and also to the Being in Christ.
This Clause is descriptive of the persons, who have an interest or share in
that which goes before: and so it is an evidence or description either with
respect to the No-condemnation, or to the being in Christ. There is therefore
now no condemnation, to whom? why, to them who walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit. Wherever there is an holy conversation in this life, there
shall be no condemnation in the life to come; (and so vice versa). Or it refers
to the other branch immediately foregoing; [to them that are in Christ Jesus],
who are they? or how may they be known? the Apostle thus characterizeth them,
they are such who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. An holy,
spiritual course is an infallible evidence and inseparable concomitant of Union
with Christ: These two may reciprocally be predicated each of the other: thus,
they who are in Christ, walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, and They
who thus walk, are in Christ. You may take the Words in which of these two
references you please; but their immediate conjunction seems to carry it for
the latter, (they being linked and coupled with the (...), them that are in
Christ Jesus): but both may very well be taken in. Which way soever we take it,
certainly there is (as to both) a restriction and limitation in the Words: the
Non-condemnation and the Union belong only to those who walk not after the
Flesh, etc. Yea, they are conditional (as to the privilege) even to them who
are in Christ Jesus: there is no condemnation to such, provided or upon this
condition that they walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit: (and so the
Non est igitur ulla damnatio eis qui sunt in fide Jesu Christi, dummodo se
exerceant, non in his quae propria sunt carnis, sed in his quae propria sunt
Spiritus. Verse. Arab.
Arabic Version paraphraseth upon them).

Why the Apostle singles out this Character.
The Apostle designing to describe such who are freed from condemnation, or such
who are in Christ, he pitches upon that evidence and character which is plain
and obvious, and not upon that which might have been more dark, obscure, and
hard to be understood. He grounds it upon the course of a man's life and
conversation; and what may better be known than that? He does not lay it upon
Election or the secret Decree of God; and say, there is no condemnation to them
whom God has Ephesians. 1.4.
chosen before the foundation of the world, to them whom God has Act. 13.48.
ordained to eternal life, whose names are Rev. 13.8.
written in the book of life, (though that be a very great truth): but because
persons possibly herein might not be so well able to judge of themselves,
therefore he says there is no condemnation to them who walk not after the
Flesh but after the Spirit. This walking is a thing that is manifest and easy
to be known: I cannot so easily find out my Election (for that lies deep and
hid), as I can my Conversation; which (in a great measure) is exposed to the
view of others, much more to my own. And whereas the Apostle had been speaking
of Union with Christ, that being a great mystery, and men might not so well
know how to judge of themselves concerning it; therefore he comes to that which
would fully and plainly open it to them. He says, whoever they be who are in
Christ this is the course they take, they walk not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit. They that can find (which upon faithful searching may easily be
found), that they do not live the carnal and sensual life, but the holy and
spiritual life, though this being in Christ be a great mystery in it self, yet
this walking will clear it up to them (so far as their interest in it is
concerned), that they are indeed in Christ.

What Walking imports.
[Who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit]. It Is a very usual
Metaphor in Scripture, to set forth the course of life by walking: Genesis 5.24.
Enoch walked with God, etc. ( i. e. the course of his life was holy): Genesis
17.1.
I am God Allfufficient, walk before me and be perfect: Luke 1.6.
Zachary and Elizabeth were righteous, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of God blameless: (with very many such places). That which in this
Verse is called walking after the flesh, in the 12 and 13 Verses it is called
living after the flesh. I might in several particulars show you the aptness of
this Metaphor, how proper it is to set forth the course of life: but I will not
stay upon that.

This branch of the Text leads me to that Second Observation, which I raised
from the whole Verse at my entrance upon it: namely That such who are in Christ
(and thereby freed from Condemnation), 2 Observe.
this is their property or course, they walk not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit.

In the discussing of which, my main work will be to open the twofold Walking
here mentioned: Yet before I fall upon that, let me take notice of Seven or
Eight things which lie very plainly before us in the Words.

Eight things premis^d for the clearing up of the Words, and of the Observation.
1. The Apostle does not say, There is therefore now no condemnation to them in
whom there is no Flesh, or to them who have no Flesh in them; but he says, --
to them who walk not after the Flesh. Alas! if the Former should be the
description and character of justified persons, and of such who are in Christ,
then none would be justified, or in Christ: there would not be so much as any
one person in the world exempted from condemnation, or united to Christ: for
there is not a man upon the earth, I except not Romans 3.10.
one, in whom there is not more or less of this Flesh. The very best of Saints
in their lower state are not wholly freed from it: the most spiritual whilst
here below, are but mixed, imperfect creatures; made up partly of Flesh, and
partly of Spirit; so it is in the natural, and so it is in the moral notion also.
Paul himself lay under a sad sense of this, (as you see Romans 7.14, 25). It Is
most truly said by Elton upon the Text.
One upon the words, Perfect sanctification is the rule that is to be laid to
the Saints in heaven, not to those that are upon the face of the earth: And
it is a saying of Bernard, Velis, nolis, intra fines tuos habitabit Jebusaeus;
the poor burdened Christian whether he will or no, shall have the Jebusite, the
Flesh, dwelling in him. Men before conversion are entirely Flesh, but they are
not after conversion entirely Spirit. The Apostle here says, There is now no
condemnation; but he does not say, there is now no corrupion, no flesh, no Et
ne putares hoc poste^ futurum, ideo additum est Nunc; postea expecta illud ut
nec concupiscentia sit in te contra quam contendas, quia nec ipsa erit. Anselm.
concupiscence in the Children of God: It shall be so hereafter but it is not so
at present; no, that perfect freedom from all mixtures of Flesh is reserved
for heaven. And therefore Nihil absurdius, nequo magis falsum dici potest,
Origenis in hunc locum expositione, qui haec de iis dici vult, qui sunt
(inquit) ita emendati, ut in seipsis nihil vitiosi operis inveniatur; (i. e.)
de iis, qui (uno excepto Christo) nusquam unquam fuerunt, neque sunt futuri.
Beza.
Origen's Gloss upon the Words, is much too high: There Is no condemnation to
them, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; (that is, says he) to
them who are so reformed and rectified, that there is nothing of sin, of any
vicious act, or of Flesh to be found in them. But who ( Christ only excepted)
did ever arrive at this pitch and measure of holiness and spiritualness here on
earth? There is not only Flesh in the best, but that is very stirring, active,
and powerful even in them: It has not only a bare being or existence in them,
but a great activity and strength; the Flesh lusts against the Spirit Gal.
5.17. These two opposite principles (like Rebecca's twins in the womb) are
daily contending in the gracious Soul, each against the other; and this combat
will continue till the Saint be in heaven It Is well therefore, that the Apostle
grounds his description, not upon the Secundum Spiritum ambulare dicit, non qui
penitus exucrint omnes Carnis sensus, ut tota eorum vita praeter coelesten
perfectionem nihil redoleat, sed qui in domanda and mortificanda Ca^ne sedulo
laborant. Calvin. Omnes Carnem habent, and violentiam Peccati in se sentiunt,
tamen modo ei non obediant, sed Spiritu actiones carnis mortificent, nulla est
eis condemnatio Pareus. Attendendum est, non dicere Apostolum sublatum in nobis
esse peccatum, utpote regeneratis; sed nullam condemnationem in nobis
superesse, quia summa and per^ectissima Naturae nostrae in Filio Dei
integritas, nostra facta per nostram cum ipso per sidem spiritualiter
apprehenso unitionem, nos jam nunc licet vix ab illa nativa corruptione
liberari coeptos, sistit in sese apud Patris tribunal prorsus integros and
securos. Beza. Non dicit, Qui non peccant, etc. Vide Muscul. in loc. p. 120.
not having of flesh, but upon the not walking after the flesh, (which are two
very different things).

2. He does not lay his Evidence upon particular Acts, but upon the general
Course: not upon particular Steps but upon Walking, which notes the continued,
uniform course of life. In the trial of our selves, about our Union with
Christ, or freedom from condemnation, or the truth of grace, we are not to
judge so much by single acts, as by the general course. The reason is, because
the State (whether present or future) may infallibly be known by the latter,
but it cannot be so by the former: for as to some single acts, the bad may be
very good, and the good may be very bad. The best sometimes tread awry, and
take some steps (too many God knows) in the way of the Flesh; of which, Noah's
drunkenness, Lot's incest, David's adultery, etc. are too sad proofs: but yet
they do not walk, after the Flesh, because this is not their general course.
And on the other hand, the worst may seem to take a step or two now and then in
the way of duty, to come up to some particular good acts; Cain sacrificed, Ahab
humbled himself, Judas preached Christ, etc. but yet they do not walk after the
Spirit; both because they are not thorough and sincere in the good they do, and
also because it is not their course to do good. The coursest web here and there
may have some finer threads in it, but they are nothing to the whole piece:
Even the blackest Moors have their white teeth; yet the whole body being black,
from that they receive their denomination: the application is obvious. That
which constitutes this walking after the Flesh, or after the Spirit, is a
constant, continued, uniform course of life; and therefore this is that which
we must judge by. A godly man indeed is (and ought to be) careful as to his
particular steps; David prayed, Psalm. 119.133.
Order my steps in thy word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over me:
but that which does denominate him to be godly, it is that course of godliness
which he drives on in his whole life; and this is that which must evidence his
being in Christ. Every Aliud est peccare etiam actu, aliud in peccato ambulare;
(h. e.) eo delect^ri, and illi operam dare, eique maxim servire. Gomar. Qui
Spiritum sequitur ducem, quamvis interdum a Carne quasi pertractus extra viam
vestigium ponat, secundum tamen Carnem vivere non dicitur. Beza. Non protenus
secundum Carnem ambulat, qui imprudens aut affectu aliquo abreptus delinquit:
Lapsus hic est vel cespitatio quaedam, non ambulatio, etc. Slichting. Fidelis
seipsum and omnes suas naturales facultates subdidit Magisterio Spiritus, and
secundum i^lum ambulat: Sed dum ambulat in Obedientia Spiritus, violentis
motibus inhabitants Carnis per externa objecta and externas occasiones
excitatis, ita obruitur, ut labatur and vincatur, atque ita dictamen Carnis
aliquando sequatur. Sic fuit cum Noah, etc. Streso.
fleshly act does not constitute fleshly walking, (though even they must be
avoided as much as may be, and greatly repented of when they do prevail): but
when the conversation is filled up with them, and the heart too delights in
them, O that is to walk after the Flesh. And so it is e contra, as to walking
after the Spirit.

3. This Spiritual walking is not redditio causae, but only descriptio
personae: or the Words are not the assignation of the cause of the privilege,
but only the description of the person to whom it belongs. Here is walking not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, how does this come in? I answer, the
Apostle does not assign this as the cause of the Non-condemnation (as the Causa
haec est cur non sic eis damnationis, etc. Tolets Ut haec posteriora causam
contineant, cur nihil condemnationis, etc. Justin. Vide Stapl. Antidor. p. 624,
625. Contzen. in V. 2. Cap. 8. ad Romans Quaest. 2.
Popish Doctors teach), or of the union with Christ; only he brings it in as a
description of the person, who is freed from condemnation, and who is in Christ
Jesus. He does not say, There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, Non dicit quia non secundum carnem ambulamus, sed qui non secundum, etc.
ne faciat in hac justificationis causa primum esse, quod secundarium est, etc.
Muscul. in Romans Cap. 8. V. 4. p. 124.
because they walk not after the Flesh, etc. but to them who walk not after the
Flesh, etc. so that this is merely descriptive of the person. The heavenly and
spiritual life is not the Non propter novam aliquam qualitatem quam in nobis
operata est gratia Spiritus Sancti, extra condemnationem sumus; sed propter
solam gratiam Dei quam fide Christi apprehendimus. Muscul. Non causa
justificationis, sed conditio and nota justificatorum. Pareus. See more Dub. 2.
p. 773.
Cause of Justification, only it is the note or evidence of justified persons.
And as to the union with Christ; the fruits of the Spirit and the effects of
grace and sanctification begun in us, these do not unite us unto Christ, only
they Fructus Spiritus sive sanctificationis in nobis inchoatae effecta, nos non
inserunt Christo, sed nos ei insitos esse declarant. Beza.
declare us to be so united: they are Evidences not Causes. Wherever there is
justification and the mystical union, there is sanctification and holiness; yet
the latter is not the ground of the former; (as wherever life is there is sense
and motion; yet these are not the cause, but only the sign, evidence, and
consequent of life). There Is a vast Sunt cohaerentes quidem, sed diversae
questiones, qua re eximamur omni condemnationi, etc. and quinam in Christo
eximuntur condemnationi: ii videlicet qui se in Christo esse ex regenerationis
fructibus ostendunt. Beza.
difference betwixt who is justified, and why or upon what grounds he is
justified: The holy walker is the justified person, but he is not justified
because of the holiness of his walking. No, this causal influence upon
justification is wholly founded upon the merits of Christ applied by Faith.
This is the Protestant-Doctrine; to which, I shall have occasion from these two
first Verses to speak more than once.

4. The description is laid down not in the Negative only, but in the
Affirmative also: it is not only [who walk not after the Flesh], but it is also
[who walk after the Spirit]. In order to the participation and evidence of the
grace of the Gospel, it is not enough Non sat est non ambulare secundum Carnem,
abstinere a malis, non peccare; sed oportet secundum Spiritum ambulare, been
^agere: Qui enim non been agit, hoc saltem malum committit quod bonum omittit.
Corn. Mussus. -- Ut intelligamus non sufficere ad evitandam omnem damnationem
abstinere a Carnalibus, sed oportere proficere in Spiritualibus. Cajet.
not to be evil or not to do evil; but there must be being good and doing good.
Mere Negatives will never justify or save: for a man may go so far upon bare
restraing grace; and besides, God requires a great deal more. As when the
repentance is right, there is not only a ceasing to do evil, but there is also
a learning to do well, Isa. 1.16. Psalm. 34.14. Depart from evil, and do good:
So when the walking is right and evidential of Gospel-mercy, there is in it
both the absence of Sin and also the presence of Virtue and Grace. A Religion
made up of Nots is but an half-religion: To be magis extra vitia quam cum
virtutibus (as the Tacit. Hist. Lib. 1. p. 323. ex Edit Lips.
Historian describes Galba), rather free from vice than virtuous, in the
positive fruits and effects of virtue, this is not sufficient: it is to be as a
cake that is baked but on one side, (as the Metaphor is Hos. 7.8.) The first is
well but the last is (...). Arist. Eth. l. 4. c. 1.
better (as the Philosopher tells us.). The Gospel does not only teach us, to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, but also to live soberly, righteously,
godly in this present world: Tit 2.12. And it threatens not only those who
bring forth evil fruit, but also those who do not bring forth good fruit;
Matthew. 3.10. It Is an expression of Theophylact upon the Words, (...). Theop.
Mere abstinence from Vice does not crown, but there must be also the
participation of Virtue, and of that which is Spiritual: And (...). Chrysostom.
in Verse. 4. hujus Capitis.
Chrysostom upon the fourth Verse speaks to the same purpose. You have in the
description of the Text therefore the negative and the positive part of
holiness; and these two must go together, for holiness is made up of both: 1
Pet. 1.14, 15. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to
the former lusts, in your ignorance (there is the negative part): But as he
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation
(there is the positive part). As some read the Words this head cannot be
grounded upon them; for they only put in the Negative [not walking after the
Flesh], leaving out the Affirmative [but after the Spirit]: So the Syriack, so
the Vulgar, and the Expositors who follow it. But generally the Greek Copies
have it; and the Syriack too brings it in v. 4; and why not here as well as
there? It Is not put in only as a Non est dubium, rectissime tanquam
interpretationem addi [secundum Spiritum]: Qui enim non ambulat secundum
Carnem, necesse est ut ambulet secundum Spiritum; medium enim in vita humana
nullum est. Contz. in cap. 8. ad Romans Qu^^.
true interpretation, but it is a part of the Text it self.

5. The Apostle here brings in two Walkings, and he supposes them to be
contrary; for he sets them in opposition one to the other: [who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit], implying a contrariety betwixt these two
walkings. And so indeed there is: the Flesh and Spirit are two contrary
principles, and therefore the Walkings which proceed from these contrary
principles, must needs be contrary too. They are so contrary that they are
incompatible and inconsistent in the same subject; there may be Flesh and
Spirit in the same person, but there cannot be walking after both in the same
person. Therefore says the Apostle Gal. 5.16. Walk in the spirit, and ye shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; as if he had said, he that does the one
cannot do the other too: He goes on v. 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these two are contrary: Contrary
as to their Natures, their Originals, and (which suits best with the scope of
the Apostle in these words) contrary as to their propensions, tendencies,
workings, lustings in the Subject. Oh they put men upon different courses; so
different, as that (in their proper acceptance) they cannot consist: insomuch
that he who walks after the flesh cannot walk after the spirit; neither can he
who walks after the spirit, walk after the flesh. A man cannot move to two
contrary points (as East and West, North and South) at the same time; no more
can a man walk heavenward and hell-ward at the same time: now the Flesh draws
hell-ward and the Spirit draws heavenward; so that it is impossible in sensu
composito to follow both. These are the two opposite Masters which none can
serve together, Matthew 6.24. Friendship with the Flesh is enmity to the Spirit;
whoever therefore will be a friend of the Flesh he must be an enemy to the
Spirit: (I allude to James 4.4).

6. The Order of the things here spoken of, is to be observed First it is being
in Christ Jesus, and then it is walking not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit; (this I may briefly take notice of though it be not the thing here
directly intended) There must be union with Christ before there can be
spiritual walking: for walking is an act or operation of life, dead things do
not move; there can be no motion where there is no life: Especially spiritual
and holy walking depends upon life: but now there is no such life in the soul,
till being united to Christ it be quickened by him. He who is out of Christ
cannot live the holy life, for it is union with him that lays the foundation of
all holiness in us. The branch must first be ingrafted into the stock, and then
it bears fruit; so here. Therefore says Christ Joh 15.4, 5. Abide in me, and I
in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the
branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. Holiness is the evidence of Union (so
it comes in in the Text); and Union is the ground of Holiness (so it comes in
in this Head). Holy walking is an infallible consequent upon being in Christ;
and that is a necessary antecedent to holy walking.

7. It Is implied, That there were in the Apostles time, and so will be to the
end of the world, different Walkers; some will walk after the Spirit, and some
after the Flesh. As 'twas said with respect to persecution, Gal. 4.27.
As then he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after
the Spirit, even so it is now: So it may be said with respect to the different
conversations of men; as then in Paul's days some walked after the Spirit and
some after the Flesh, even so it is now. So long as the world stands some will
be carnal as well as some spiritual: the distinction of Saints and Sinners, of
godly and ungodly, of good and bad, will abide whilst this world shall abide.
There is the broad way of the flesh, there is the strait way of the spirit; in
both of which some or other will always be walking: And the misery is, Mat.
7.13, 14.
many walk in the broad way of the Flesh, when but few walk in the strait way
of the Spirit; this may have its thousands, but that has its ten thousands

8. The Apostle expresses it in the general only, [by not walking after the
Flesh but after the Spirit]: He does not instance in those particulars which
are proper either to the one or to the other, (as he does Gal. 5.17. etc.)
only he speaks in the gross. But all the several Particulars are included in
the General, and run into that as all waters do into the Sea. Be it pride,
coveteousness, uncleanness, etc. all center in the Flesh; so be it humility,
heavenly-mindedness, holy love, etc. all center in the Spirit, and derive their
being, operation, efficacy from the Spirit. Therefore the Apostle sets it down
thus generally, under the Flesh comprehending all Evil and under the Spirit all
Good; he sums up all the several Sins under the former, and all the several
Graces under the latter.

These things being premised, I come now to the main Point: Such as are in
Christ Jesus, this is their property or course, they walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit.

This I will 1. explain: 2. prove: 3. apply.


For Explication, The Observe. opened.
I must speak to the parts of the Description severally; and show 1. What is
meant by Flesh, and by walking or not walking after it. 2. What is meant by
Spirit, and by walking after it. And as I go along I will take in the Doctrine,
and particularly bring down to it the several explications of the Description,
Negative and Affirmative.


What is meant by Flesh, and by not walking after the Flesh.
I begin with the First. Which that I may the better clear up, observe that
there is a being in the Flesh, and a walking in or after the Flesh; which two
though they be never parted yet they are distinct: the First refers to a man's
State, the Second to his Course. There is a being in the Flesh, of which you
read Romans 7.5. For when we [were in the Flesh], the motions of sin which were
by the Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death: Romans 8.8,
9. So then, they that [are in the Flesh] cannot please God: but ye are not [in
the Flesh] but in the Spirit, etc. Then there is a walking after the Flesh:
this inevitably follows upon and suits with the former. They who are in the
Flesh will certainly walk after the Flesh, for the Conversation always agrees
with the State. Now it is this walking which the Text speaks of: You have the
same expression 2 Pet. 2.10. But chiefly them that walk after the Flesh, etc.
it is also set forth by living after the Flesh, v. 12, 13. of this Chapter.

If you turn to one Scripture, you will find the phrase there used in a quite
other sense than that in which it is here used. 2 Cor. 10.3. explained.
It Is 2 Cor. 10.3. Though we walk in the Flesh, we do not war after the Flesh:
what may be the meaning of [walking in the Flesh] in this place? I conceive, it
notes the Apostles living the Porro hoc loco Paulus aliter dicit ambulare
secundum carnem, quam alibi cum dixit. In carne ambulantes non secundum carnem
militamus; ibi enim in Carne ambulare, est mortalem adhuc vi^am ducere; hic
autem secundum Carnem ambulare, idem est quod militare secundum Carnem, (h. e)
Genio ac voluptatibus indulgere, and pravis cupiditatibus morem g^r^re. Justin.
same natural life with other men, and also the meanness of his external
appearance in the eye of the world. We walk in the Flesh, it is as if he had
said, we are poor, frail, mortal men as well as others, made with them of the
same flesh, living in the same flesh, and encompassed with the same infirmities
of flesh: and there is nothing from our outward condition and appearance to
gain us any honor, esteem, or success amongst men; thus (says the Apostle) we
walk in the Flesh. But then he adds, we do not war after the Flesh, (h. e.) we
do not carry on our work and business (as we are the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ) by the flesh; it is not humane power or any fleshly advantage which we
go upon; it is only a divine power that helps, assists, and prospers us; by
virtue of which, God's work in our hands does and shall go on in spite of all
opposition from Men and Devils. This clearly seems to be the Apostles meaning,
for it immediately follows v. 4. The weapons of our warfare are not fleshly and
carnal, but spiritual and mighty through God. Well! but now walking in the
Flesh (or after the Flesh) here in the Text, carries a quite other sense along
with it.

For the finding out of which, we must first enquire what is meant by Flesh?

Now as to this Enquiry, to give you the several acceptations of the word
[Flesh] would be both tedious and unnecessary: Expositors generally agree about
its sense in this place; only I find some few a little varying in their
Explications of it They by Flesh here understanding (at least wise taking in
that sense as well as that which is usual and common) the Jewish Fortasse per
Carnem Ceremonias Legis intelligit; vultque dicere, Christianos illos a
condemnatione exemptos and liberos ^ffe, qui Christo Jesu serviunt, non carnali
illa ceremoniarum observatione, sed spirituali. Mussus.
Ceremonial Law, with the several rites, ceremonies, appurtenances thereof: and
so they make the Words to run thus, Such are exempted from condemnation, who
serve the Lord Jesus Christ not according to the fleshly observation of the
Ceremonies of the Law, but in a spiritual and evangelical manner. Now it is
true, those may come under this title of Flesh, for they are called carnal
ordinances Heb. 9.10. and Paul ( in part speaking of them) calls them- Flesh
over and over, Phil. 3.3, 4. Yet I conceive, they do not fall within the great
intendment of our Apostle in these words. Our There is therefore now no
obligation lying on a Christian, to observe these Ceremonies of Moses's Law,
Circumcision, etc. nor consequently danger of damnation to him for that
neglect; supposing that he forsake those carnal sins that the circumcised Jews
yet indulged themselves in, and perform the evangelical obedience (in doing
what the mind illuminated by Christ directs us to), that inward true purity
(which that circumcision of the flesh was set to signify), that is now
required by Christ under the Gospel. Dr. Hammond.
learned Annotator (in his Paraphrase upon the Text and also upon the following
Verses), though for the main he opens it as Others do, yet he makes it more
specially to refer to the Jews as under the Law, and to Christians as under the
Gospel. What there may be of that notion in the Words, I shall not meddle with:
but rather come to the general and unquestionable interpretation of the word
Flesh as it is here used.

Where I will consider it, 1. more generally: 2. more particularly.


Of Flesh in its more general Notion.
1. More generally. So Flesh in Scripture commonly notes that corrupt, sinful,
depraved, vitiated nature that is in man as he comes into the world. This
Nature is variously set forth: Sometimes, by the old man; so Ephesians. 4.22. That ye
put off concerning the former conversation the Old man, etc. Sometimes, by the
Law in the members warring against the Law of the mind; so Romans 7.23.
Sometimes, by Sin in the general; so Romans 7.8. Sin ( i e. the corrupt Nature)
taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence.
Sometimes, by indwelling sin; so Romans 7.17. Sometimes, by the sin which does so
easily beset us; so Heb. 12.1. And sometimes, by Flesh; so here, and so in
several other places. Joh. 3.6. That which is begotten of the flesh, is flesh:
Joh. 1.13. Born again not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God: Romans 7.18. I know that in me, (that is, in my flesh), dwells no good
thing: and v. 25. So then, with the mind (he means the renewed and sanctified
Nature) I serve the Law of God; but with the Flesh (he means the corrupt
Nature) the Law of Sin: Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc.
Once indeed in Scripture this corrupt Nature is set forth by Spirit: Jam. 4.5.
The Spirit that is in us lusts to Envy: but usually it is set forth by Flesh.
And several Reasons might be given of that appellation: I Will name some few but
will not in the least enlarge upon them. The sinful Nature in man is styled
Flesh, Why the corrupt Nature is set forth by Flesh.
1. Because it is convayed and propagated as the Flesh is. 2. Because it is
propagated by the Flesh, or by fleshly generation. 3. Because it is very much
acted in the Flesh, or fleshly part. 4. Because it is nourished, strengthened,
and drawn forth by the Flesh, or by fleshly Objects. 5. Because of its
baseness, sordidness, and degeneracy.


And by the most of these things, the corrupt Nature in Man is distinguished
from the corrupt Nature of the Apostate Angels. Their's is set forth by Ephesians.
6.12.
spiritual wickedness, because it vents it self in spiritual not in carnal
acts; such as are envy, hatred, pride, blasphemy, fretting at God himself and
at his dispensations, etc But Ours is set forth by the Flesh, because it is
conveyed through the Flesh, and acted in the Flesh, and drawn forth by the
Flesh.

What it is to walk after the Flesh in the general notion of it.
Now if you take Flesh in this general notion, then to walk after it it is this,
To have the corrupt, sinful Nature to be a man's principle and guide: and Not to
walk after the Flesh, it is not to have that Nature to be ones principle and
guide. For the Text brings in these two ( Flesh and Spirit), as different and
opposite principles and guides: and therefore they who make Flesh their
principle and guide, they walk after the Flesh; as they who make the Spirit
their principle and guide, they walk after the Spirit. Take men our of Christ
and such as are unregenerate they walk after the Flesh, how? why Flesh is their
principle and Flesh is their guide; the Flesh is that which they act from
(there is their principle), and it is that which they act by (there is their
guide). That which is the spring of action, that is the principle; that which
puts upon and orders in action, that is the guide: Now take Christless men (the
persons of whom I am speaking), Flesh is the spring and Flesh is the guide of
their actings: if they think, it is from the corrupt Nature; if they speak, it is
from the corrupt Nature; if they love, it is from the corrupt Nature, etc. and
so all along, this is that spring in them which makes all the wheels to move.
And this is that guide too by which they steer, order, direct their whole
course. And it being so, their conversation must needs be a fleshly
conversation, or a walking after the Flesh: for that is always denominated from
and answerable to its principle and guide; if it be a fleshly principle and a
fleshly guide, it must needs be a fleshly walking. And thus it is with persons
out of Christ: they act from the flesh and by the flesh, and so they are said
to walk after the flesh. But such who are in Christ they do not thus walk;
corrupt Nature is neither their principle nor their guide; there is another
Nature in them by which they are acted and guided (viz.) the Spirit, (as I
shall show you by and by, when I come to the Affirmative part). Expositors
(whom to cite would be endless) do variously open and illustrate this walking
or not walking after the Flesh; but the Most do pitch upon that illustration of
it which I have given. This concerning Flesh in the general consideration of
it. But then

The Flesh more particularly considered. Of Lust the most natural and vital act
of the Flesh.
Secondly, It may be considered more particularly, with respect to its proper,
radical, most natural and vital act; and that is Lust or lusting: This Lust is
the great act, the most genuine issue of the Flesh; the stream which does most
immediately and directly flow from that fountain: the most proper notion of the
Flesh is to conceive of it as a lusting thing. The Apostle therefore when he
was speaking of it, presently he puts down this as its most proper and
essential act; Gal. 5.17.
The Flesh [lusteth] against the Spirit: and Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the [Lusts] thereof: ( Sin here
is the Flesh and you see how it works). You read of the Lust of the Flesh Gal.
5.16. and of the Lusts of the Flesh Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.24. These
Lusts (I say) are the most proper issue and the most genuine effects of the
corrupt Nature in man: Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion by the commandment,
wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence (or Lust). Ephesians. 4.22. That ye put off
concerning your former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful Lusts Observe how the Flesh, the old man, the corrupt Nature, and
Lust or Lusts are usually linked and coupled together.

To apply this now to the walking which I am upon. To walk after the Flesh,
it is to live and act as under the full power and strength of unmortified Lust:
it is to indulge, gratify, obey, and comply with the Flesh as a lusting thing,
or as it puts forth it self in sinful lustings. The Apostle 2 Pet. 2.10. having
spoken of walking after the Flesh, immediately he instances in the gratifying
of a particular Lust, thereby showing what that walking after the Flesh is: But
chiefly them that walk after the Flesh [in the Lust of uncleanness] etc. On the
other hand, Not to walk after the Flesh, it is to keep Lust under, to beat it
down, to resist it, not to give way to it (in whatever form or shape it may
assault the Soul), to live in the daily mortification of it, not to suffer such
hellish fire to smother and burn in the Soul, to let it have no harbor or
entertainment in the heart, but to thrust it out with abhorrency and
detestation, etc. this is not to walk after the Flesh.

But this Lust being so near to the Flesh, so connatural with it, that which
issues from it even as heat and burning does from the fire; and the walking or
not walking after the Flesh being so much to be measured by it; I will
therefore give you some further explication of it.

Lust in Scripture (as it is taken in a bad sense, for the Spirit has its
lustings as well as the Flesh), sometimes notes the habit, the root it self
(viz.) the depraved Nature; sometimes the Act, that cursed fruit which grows
upon the forenamed cursed root. The Apostle James speaks of it as the Mother
sin (if I may so express it); Jam. 1.4. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own Lust, and enticed: then when Lust has conceived, it brings
forth sin, etc. Paul speaks of it as the Daughter-sin; Romans 7.8. Sin taking
occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence (or
Lust): the One considers it as the fountain, the Other as the stream. In this
latter Notion I am to open it: and so it is the bent and propension, the eager,
sierce, vehement desire of the Soul after fleshly Objects or sensual things.
For Lust (in its strict and primary sense) mainly lies in the [(...)] the
desiring or concupiscible faculty: therefore (...) is the word by which it is
set forth. The Soul of man is a desiring, craving, thirsting thing, it is a very
mass of desires: and there is no faculty more natural to it or wherein it puts
forth it self more vigorously, than the desiring faculty. Now here is the
principal seat of Lust, and that which gives it its very being: when the Soul
is earnestly, vehemently, impetuously carried out after some sensual good,
something that will please the fleshly part (if it will but do that let it be
what it will); this is Lust. I say, it refers principally to the desires as
inordinately set upon and drawn out after fleshly things. Therefore the Apostle
couples them together, the Lusts of the Flesh and the desires of the Flesh,
Ephesians. 2.3. And the other Apostle speaking of the inordinate desire of worldly
pleasure and profit, he expresses it by the Lust of the flesh, and the Lust of
the eyes; 1 John 2.16. I know, if you consider Lust habitually and radically,
there is more in it than this: for so it is the bent and propension of the Soul
to whatever is evil, and its aversation from whatever is good. But if you
consider it actually and particularly, so fleshly and sensual desires are the
main and most proper acts of it.

Here further, you must distinguish of Lust or Lusts: Some are more rank and
gross, such as lie in the sensitive and fleshly part; Others are more resin'd
and secret, such as lie in the upper part of the Soul, the Reason, Mind, and
Will. You read 2 Cor. 7.1. of the filthiness of the Flesh, and of the Spirit:
where the Apostle describes the Lusts of the lower faculties under the
filthiness of the Flesh; and the Lusts of the higher faculties under the
filthiness of the Spirit. So Ephesians ^.3. Among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past, in the Lusts of our Flesh, how? why, in fulfilling
the desires of the flesh, and of the Non Corpo^s tantum, h^e. partis ratione
carentis, sed etiam (...) opera esse vult omnes esmedi cupiditates, quas ex
sola animae part, quae censetur rationis expers, produci Platonici prohibent.
Salmas. in Epictet. p. 117.
mind: So that all Lusts do not he in the desires of the flesh, but there are
some which lie in the mind and in the highest faculties of the Soul.

Therefore the Apostle in this Chapter v. 6. speaks of the wisdom of the flesh:
where (God willing) we shall show against the Papists, that the Flesh and the
Lusts thereof are not to be confined to the lower and sensitive part in man,
but that they do also extend to the nobler and higher part in him. And (to
instance but in one place more) you read Col. 2.18. of a fleshly mind. These
are the Lusts that are situated in the upper region of the Soul: but then there
are Others which reside in that region which is lower. They are called fleshly
Lusts 1 Pet. 2.11. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly
Lusts, etc. They are also called worldly Lusts; Tit. 2.12. The grace of God
which has brought salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly
Lusts: They are styled fleshly Lusts, because they are altogether for the
satisfaction of the fleshly and sensual part; or because they reach no further
than the fleshly part: and they are styled wordly Lusts, because they are drawn
forth by wordly Objects, or because they draw out a man in eager propensions
after worldly things.

What it is to walk after the Flesh in this particular consideration of it.
Now to bring this down to the business in hand! The Flesh being thus
particularly considered, so to walk after it it is this: For a person to be
under the regency and dominion of Lust, in whatever part or faculty it may
reside or exert it self; so that he acts in a ready, willing, full subjection
to it and compliance with it: It Is to be under the unbroken strength of sensual
propensions, and to follow them in the course of life. More closely, it is to be
carried out with vehemence of desire after some fleshly good, so as wholly to
be swallowed up in pursuits after it and delights in it, even to the slighting,
undervaluing, total neglect of what is truly and spiritually good: this is
Lust, by which whoever is thus acted he is a walker after the Flesh. For
wherever Lust commands and is obeyed (in one respect or another), there it is
walking after the Flesh. Oh does it bear sway in any of you, that you obey and
act by it in heart and life? the dark side of the Character is toward you; you
walk after the Flesh, and not after the Spirit.

Saints in Christ Jesus do not thus walk: the Flesh may sometimes be stirring
and lusting in them, but they dare not hearken or give way to it; they repel
its evil motions and propensions, do not follow or steer their course by the
commands and counsels thereof; and they are not inordinately desirous of
sensual things. In general, they do not, they dare not Romans 6.12.
obey sin in the lusts thereof, or fall in with the cursed suggestions and
follicitations of the Flesh to that which is evil: They that are Christ's have
crucified [the Flesh], with the affections and lusts thereof; Gal. 5.24. But
let this suffice for the opening of the Negative [who walk not after the
Flesh]; much more might be added, but that which follows will give more light
about it.

Before I enter upon the applying of this, let me proceed to the opening of the
positive or affirmative part: Such as are in Christ Jesus do not walk after the
Flesh, what then do they walk after? why, after the Spirit.

The Question here to be answered is, Quest.
what is it to walk after the Spirit? or when and how may persons be said to
walk after the Spirit?

Ans. What is meant by Spirit.
For the better answering of which Question, we must first enquire, what we are
to understand by the Spirit? for that being cleared, the walking after it will
be the more evident.

Here also not to insist upon the several significations and senses of the word
Spirit, in this place it must be taken either Personally, for the Spirit of
God, the third Person in the Sacred Trinity; or Habitually, for Grace in us,
the Divine Nature implanted in the Soul in the work of regeneration; or it must
be understood of both. You find Grace in Scripture set forth by Spirit; Joh.
3.6, What is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and what is born of the Spirit, is
Spirit: (where the latter Spirit must be understood of the heavenly and renewed
Nature). Jude 19. the Apostle speaks of some who were sensual, having not the
Spirit; which though it be chiefly to be understood of the Spirit of Grace (of
which these persons were destitute), yet it takes in the Grace of the Spirit
too. So Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the Flesh; (i. e.) the corrupt Nature and the renewed and sanctified Nature, do
reciprocally oppose and contend each against the other. So some interpret that
of our Savior Mat. 26.41. The Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak: (but I
cannot lay so great a stress upon this place for this import of the word). And
as the sinful Nature may very well be set forth by Flesh, so Grace or the
sanctified Nature may as well be set forth by this appellation of Spirit: Why
Grace is set forth by the Spirit.
And that for these reasons; 1. because it is of the Spirit of God; it being
immediately infused and created by him. 2. Because it is principally seated in
the Spirit, the Soul of man. 3. Because it is a spiritual thing and vents it
self most in spiritual acts. 4. Because of the nobleness and excellency of it.


Now you will ask, in which of these senses is Spirit here to be taken? I answer,
it is best to take in both; namely both the Spirit of Grace, and also the Grace
of the Spirit or the renewed Spirit in the Creature: the thing here spoken of
is applicable to both, and therefore why should we limit it to one?

The word [Spirit] throughout in this Chapter is generally taken in the
personal notion, for the Holy Ghost himself; and no sooner had the Apostle
mentioned [Spirit] in this verse, but presently in the second verse he speaks
of the Spirit as considered personally: the Law of the Spirit of Life, etc. (he
means the living and quickening Spirit of God): therefore to be sure this sense
must be taken in. And Grace habitually considered or the renewed Nature in the
Soul, that too may have its place here very properly; for Spirit being set in
opposition to the Flesh which is the depraved Nature, it must have some
reference to that other Nature which is opposite to this. And Spiritus sumitur
pro animo regenerato per Spiritum. Pareus. Per spiritum intelligit novitatem
Naturae, effectam per regenerationem Spiritus, vitiositate naturali emendata.
Piscat. Vocat Carnem universam hominis naturam, ut quae corrupta exciderit a
priftina dignitate, cui opponitur Spiritus, eadem viz. instaurata per Spiritum
Dei. Beza.
Interpreters generally so open it: it is best therefore (I say) to take in both
these notions of the word Spirit.

The natural and philosophical notion of Flesh and Spirit, is Body and Soul:
(though yet some Philosophers sometimes speak of them in a somewhat different
and more restrained sense). For Spirit they make to be, as the whole Soul in
general so sometimes only the highest part of the Soul, viz. the intellectual
and discursive Faculty: in compliance with whom (or rather with the Vide
Drussum in 1 These. 5.23.
Jewish. Writers in their Nephesh, Ruach, and Nesama) Paul seems so to use the
word, 1 These. 5.23.
I pray God your whole Spirit and Soul and Body be preserved blameless, etc.
And as to Flesh, that they make to be not only the Body it self but also the
sensitive Soul; that part which is void of and sets it self against Reason, and
refuses to be subject to the Laws and Dictates of the rational faculty. Thus
the For this see Salmas. in Epicl. and Simplic. p. 116. etc.
Platonists and Stoics do frequently make use of the word (...), Flesh; (only
they differ about the diversity of the Faculty where it is seated, from the
reasonable faculty). Now though Flesh and Spirit in the Text contain in them
something higher than what this philosophical notion of them reaches, yet it is
not altogether to be rejected; and therefore in this discourse it will
accordingly be made use of.

What it is to walk after the Spirit.
Now I come to answer the Question, What is it to walk after the Spirit?

In general, it is to walk in the way of Spirit: The Flesh has its way, and the
Spirit has its way; the way of the Flesh is sin, wickedness, rebellion against
God, etc. the way of the Spirit is holiness, obedience, righteousness etc. He
then that walks in the way of Sin, he walks after the Flesh; and he that walks
in the way of Holiness, he walks after the Spirit; (for the walking is
according to the way that men go in).

So again; To walk after the Spirit, it is to bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit: the Spirit has its fruits, such as Love, Joy, etc. Gal. 5.22. and the
Flesh has its fruits (several of which are recited Gal. 5.19); where the
fruits of the Spirit fill up the life there it is walking after the Spirit, and
so ( e contra) as to the Flesh. In short (as to the general opening of it), To
walk after the Spirit it is to live the holy and the spiritual life; it is to
have Gods Spirit and to act in compliance with and obedience to it; and it is
too to have the Divine Nature in the Soul, to follow the motions and dictates
of that Nature, and to live in the exercise of the several Graces which grow
upon that root. I could very much enlarge upon this General Description, but I
shall choose rather to explain the thing particularly, under these Five Heads:

To walk after the Spirit, it is 1. To have the Spirit to be the principle of
acting. 2. To have the Spirit to be the guide of life, and to follow its
guidance. 3. To have those affections which are proper to and suit with the
Spirit. 4. To live under and to close with holy inclinations and propensions to
what is good. 5. To act for spiritual Ends.


Here I instance in more particulars than I did in the opening of the Walking
after the flesh, but they are as applicable to that as to this; and they being
contraries the One will illustrate the Other.

I. To walk after the Spirit, it is for a person to be acted by the Spirit (or
to act from the Spirit) as his principle. That is the principle (as has been
said) which acts a man or from which he acts: when the Spirit is this to a
person, so that he lives and acts by its vital, quickening agency and working
in him, then he may be said to walk after (or according to) the Spirit. You
heard before, a man walks after the flesh when the flesh is his principle, and
so he walks after the spirit when the spirit is his principle.

This is applicable to the Spirit in both of the respects which have been
mentioned: As 1. take it personally; the Holy Spirit is in Believers as the
spring and principle of their obedience and holy actings. In a sober sense (all
others I dread and detest), that which acts and animates the Saints in their
course it is Gods own Spirit: he is not barely in them but he is in them as a
lively and active principle, to actuate their Graces, to quicken and excite
them to all holy and spiritual acts. This is a part of that walking in the
spirit which you read of Gal. 5.25. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk
in the spirit: as if the Apostle had said, if the Spirit has been a quickening
spirit to us and has wrought a supernatural life in us, then let us walk in
the Spirit; that is, let us all along live and act by this Spirit as our great
principle. Such as are in Christ they pray, mortify sin, are heavenly minded,
love God, deny themselves, etc. now in all these acti agunt, they act as they
are acted from above; the Spirit (on his part) stirs them up to what is good,
and gives out his influences to them in what is good, and they (on their part)
fall in with his exciting and assisting grace (in opposition to all the
interposures of the flesh): and so they walk after the Spirit.

Then 2. take the Spirit habitually, for Grace or the sanctified Nature in the
heart: this is a secondary or subordinate principle (the principium Quod as the
former is principium Quo), from which spiritual acts do proceed. You have the
Apostle speaking to this double principle Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ lives in me, (there is the
supreme and first principle); and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the Son of God, (there is the subordinate and secondary
principle). Faith and Love (those two great branches of that general root which
I am upon) make all the several wheels in a gracious heart to move; that which
is done in the life comes from these in the heart: the spiritual walker does
all from these two Graces as his abiding principles; he lives by the Faith of
the Son of God, and 2 Cor. 5.14.
the Love of Christ constrains him.

Now he who is acted by this twofold principle he is the walker after the
Spirit. 'Pray observe, as there are two public Heads to which all men in the
world do belong, the first and the second Adam; and as there are two Common
States under which all are and shall be comprehended; at present it is the
state of Nature or the state of Grace, and hereafter it is the state of
blessedness or the state of mystery: So there are also two Common Principles by
which all men in the world are acted, (viz) the Flesh and the Spirit. They that
have Flesh for their principle, they walk after the Flesh; they that have the
Spirit for their principle, they walk after the Spirit. So far forth as our
principle is divine and spiritual, so far forth is our walking divine and
spiritual; for that is always answerable to its principle. O are you acted in
your course by an inward principle? is that the Spirit of God and Grace in the
heart? is all done by and from this Spirit? this is to walk after the Spirit.

II. To walk after the Spirit, it is to have the Spirit for the guide of life
and to follow its guidance. Where there is a fleshly guide there it is fleshly
walking; where there is a spiritual guide there it is spiritual walking; for the
Course is denominated as from the principle so from the guide or rule. And
indeed the latter is (in part) included in the former, for whatever is the
principle that carries in it too the nature and use of a guide; inasmuch as the
action is always steered and ordered by and according to the principle: but yet
I consider them here as distinct. I say, when the Spirit is the guide and
followed as the guide, this is to walk after the Spirit. As I may be said to
walk after one when he goes before me, shows me my way, and I follow him step
by step; where he goes I go, as he bids me move so I move: So it is in reference
to this walking after the Spirit. Thus it is very commonly opened: Ambulare
secundum spiritum, quid? est sequi in omnibus nostris actionibus ductum
Spiritus Sancti: What is it to walk after the Spirit? it is for a man in all his
actions and motions to follow the Spirits conduct and guidance.

And here too 1. God's spirit is a guiding spirit: He leads, directs the Soul
to and in the way of holiness; (I say in the way of holiness, for this pure and
holy spirit always leads to that which is pure and holy, never to that which is
sinful; his excitations and guidance being evermore agreeable to his Nature).
Psa. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: how does God teach
or guide a man to this? it follows thy spirit is good* (good in it self and
good as a guide to us), lead me unto the land of uprightness. Now when this
Spirit is the dux viae, a persons leader and guide, and he follows its guidance
in his conversation, then his walking is right and good. It Is set forth Ver.
14. of this Chapt. by being led by the spirit; As many as are led by the Spirit
of God, are the sons of God. You read Ezekiel. 1.20. of the living Creatures,
whithersoever the Spirit was to go, they went, thither was their spirit to go:
And you read of the people of Israel Numb. 9.16. As the cloud moved, they
moved; as that stood; they stood, etc. Thus it is with the spiritual walker; he
is one who fetches his guidance from the unerring spirit, and who regulates all
his motions according to the spirits direction: what the Spirit bids him do
that he does, what the Spirit forbids him to do that he does not: he moves or
stands still as this great guide directs him Let not any mistake me, as though
I did in this assert or advance any Enthusiasms, immediate inspirations or
directions from the spirit, without or besides (much less against) the written
word: No, (God willing) I shall show the danger and vanity of such pretenses
when I come to the 14 v. I am for the Spirit and the Ambulare secundum spiritum
est omnes actiones qualescunque sunt, dirigere and instituere secundum dictamen
Spiritus Sancti in Verbo, and in conscientia nostra secundum Verbum loquentis.
S^r^so.
Word conjunctly; he guides, but it is by and in the Word, and the guidance of
the Word is the guidance of the Spirit. He that squares his Life by the
Counsels, Commands, Prohibitions of the Word, he truly walks after the Spirit.

Again 2. there is the sanctified Nature; which is a guide also (though
inferior to the former). Gal. 6.15, 16. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature: and as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of
God: The New Creature (or Grace) is a rule; it is not only regula regulata but
(in some sense) also regula regulans. For (in subordination to the Word) it
shows a man what is good, and directs him to and in the doing of it; what is
evil, and how he is to shun it: it leads him to those things which are suitable
to its self, as to love God, to hate sin, etc. He that lives in compliance with
this guide, he walks not after the flesh but after the spirit.

III. To walk after the spirit, it is to have spiritual and heavenly Affections;
such as are proper to and suit with the Divine Spirit. The Spirit himself
wherever he dwells, and the spiritual life wherever it is wrought in the Soul,
are always attended with spiritual affections: and indeed much of the influence
and efficacy of both is exerted in the spiritualizing of the affections. These
are always suited to the Nature; the fleshly nature has fleshly affections,
and the Divine nature has Divine and spiritual affections: so that the walking
after the spirit, or after the flesh, is very much to be judged of and measured
by them. Does the poor Creature love God? is his delight and joy in spiritual
things? have they his most strong and vehement desires? this is to walk after
the spirit. Our Apostle himself here opens the twofold walking by this; Ver. 5.
They that are after the flesh (or who walk after the flesh) mind the things of
the flesh; but they that are after the spirit (or who walk after the spirit)
mind the things of the spirit: This minding the things of the flesh or of the
spirit, is not to be limited either to the inward acts of the Mind in the
thoughts only, or to the outward endeavors; but it includes and takes in the
affections also. Here then is the difference; Such as are after the flesh, they
mind (i. e.) they savor and relish the things of the flesh; their affections
are wholly set upon and drawn out after fleshly Objects, their love, delight,
desires, run out altogether upon these things: But they that are after the
spirit, they mind the things of the spirit; their affections are fixed upon
spiritual Objects, they run in the right channel, are place upon God and
Christ; they are (in a word) pure and heavenly. The flesh has carnal
affections; and indeed it puts forth it self very much (if not most) in them:
therefore you have it coupled with them Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the [affections] and lusts. On the other hand the
spirit has its affections too, but they are as contrary to the former as
Heaven is to Hell. 'Pray observe what the Apostle subjoins ( v. 25), If we live
in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. This walking in the spirit (for it
will bear this sense as well as that which I mentioned before), is brought in
by way of opposition to the affections and lusts of the flesh; it is as if he
had said, if we live in the spirit then let us not give way to those sordid
affections which are of the flesh and suit with it; but let our affections be
such as may suit with the Holy Spirit, and with that Divine Life which he has
wrought in us. Where any thus walk in the spirit they walk after the spirit.

IV. To walk after the Spirit, it is to live under and to close with secret
inclinations and propensions in the Soul to what is holy and good: so that the
bent, byas, tendency, and workings of the heart are for what is good and
against what is evil. These two contrary principles have always contrary
propensions, they incline and draw contrary ways: the good Spirit and the
sanctified Nature are all for Obedience, close walking with God, the exercise
of the several Graces, etc. there is their tendency; The evil Spirit without and
the evil Nature within (I put them together, for they agree too well in that
which I am upon), they are altogether for sin; they perpetually incline and
urge to pride, passion, envy, coveteousness, uncleanness, etc. there is their
tendency. And these different propensions are so far in the Saints themselves,
that they are the ground of that civil war and conflict which they in this Life
feel so much of: They are set forth by the lustings of the flesh against the
spirit, and of the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. Now according to the
strength and prevalency of these two principles, and the closure of the heart
with them in their different propensions and inclinations, so is the Walking
either after the flesh, or after the spirit. Let me not be misunderstood, I do
not speak of the mere inexistence or inbeing of these contrary propensions; no,
nor of the prevalency of them in some particular acts, for both of these may be
in a Child of God and in one who walks after the Spirit, (as you see in Paul
himself Romans 7.23, 25). I only speak of evil propensions in their full
strength; when they are entire, unmixt, unbroken, do prevail as to the general
course; when persons upon all occasions side with and wholly give up themselves
to them; where it is so, doubtless there it is walking after the flesh. But now
when these are resisted, and the Soul does rather fall in with the good
inclinations of the good Spirit, so as to cherish, obey, comply with, and act
according to them; then it is walking after the spirit.

V. This walking after the Spirit consists in the spiritualness and
supernaturalness of the aims and ends: For the Spirit of God, where ever he is,
always raises and elevates a man in his ends; and the spiritual life too
wherever it is, always is attended with spiritual ends; namely, the glorifying
of God (as the supreme and ultimate End) and the saving of the Soul (as the
subordinate End). Wherever there is a supernatural principle there will also
be a supernatural end, for the end is always adequate and answerable to the
principle; as it cannot be higher so it will not be lower. Men that are nothing
but corrupt nature and flesh their aims are answerable to their state; all that
they drive at is the Flesh or Self under some fleshly consideration: as they
act altogether from Self (some base fleshly principle), so they act altogether
for Self (some base fleshly end); the great End the glory of God, is nothing to
them but Flesh is all in all: here is no halting in the case, this is downright
walking after the flesh. But they that are spirit and have the spirit O they
look higher: the mark which they aim at (with the greatest steadiness they
can), it is God's Glory. You see it in Paul: Phil. 1.21. To me to live is
Christ, and to dye is gain; Christ was the matter of his life and the end of
his life, (for these two Things make the living Christ): Paul was all for this
(as he Ver. 20.
there speaks), that Christ might be greatned or magnified by him. And he
speaking elsewhere of the Saints in general, he thus sets them forth Romans 14.7,
8.
None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself: for whether we
live, we live to the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye to the Lord; whether we
live, or dye, we are the Lords. Now so far forth as any in their course come up
to these high and spiritual ends, so far and no farther may they be said to to
walk after the Spirit. Flesh always centers in flesh; but grace causes a man to
aspire and aim at the glory of God: The spiritual Walker makes this his chief
end and looks upon all other things but as means to this; and herein lies the
very essence of Holiness or of holy Walking. Would any of you fully understand
your selves so as to be able to pass decisive judgment about this, let your
enquiry run out here what are our Ends? what is it that we mainly design and
intend in our Course? As every man's End hereafter ( happy or miserable) shall
be according to his walking here; so every man's walking here is (either
spiritual or carnal) according to his End Our Lord tells us Joh. 7.18. He that
speaks of himself, seeks his own glory; but he that seeks his glory that
sent me, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him: So here; he that
lives himself and of himself, he seeks himself; but he that seeks the
glory of God, the same is a true walker after the Spirit.

Thus have I shown in these five particulars what it is to walk after the
Spirit: Concerning which, it is not necessary that I should vouch an exact
difference betwixt them, I give them but as so many illustrations of the Thing
and so you must take them. From all that has been spoken it appears, that this
twofold walking is not to be limited to mere external and visible acts in the
life, but it lies very much in the inward, secret acts of the heart: there is
the Principle, the Affections, the Propensions, the Ends, and these are the
things which do constitute the walking either fleshly or spiritual: (but more
of this in the Use). I have done with the opening of the Description in both
its parts [not walking after the flesh, but after the spirit], (which was my
business in the Explicatory part).

The Doctrine proved by Scripture-Testimony.
I go on to the Second thing, the Confirmation of the Point: where it will be a
very easy thing to prove, That this is the property and deservedly the
Character of such who are in Christ Jesus, they walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. All Christ's mystical Members are spiritual walkers; this is
that very life which such do live, that very course which such do follow: 1 John 3.6. Whosoever abides in him, sins not; (that is, he does not live in
a course of sin, which is all one with not walking after the flesh): Gal. 5.24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts;
no sooner is a person brought into Christ but sin and the flesh are crucified
and dead in that person; so that there is no more walking after it. 1 Cor.
1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: here the Apostle sets down what
Christ is to Believers, but first he sets down the ground of all, namely the
mystical union; and then he adds, to such who are in him he is not only
righteousness, to free them from a guilty state; but he is also sanctification,
to free them from a carnal and to bring them over to an holy course: wherever
then there is this union, there is and must be also this spiritual, heavenly,
and holy conversation, as the inseparable fruit and consequent of
Sanctification.

By a double Argument.
I shall not need to spend much time in the proof of it; two Arguments (I
conceive) may suffice for that:

1. The being in Christ Jesus or the Union with him, is brought about (as has
been opened) by the Spirit, and by Faith: now both of these necessarily infer
this walking after the Spirit. The Holy Spirit being in a person as the bond of
his union with Christ, wherever he is he will be a spring and principle of
holiness: he will not lie hid in the Soul, but it shall be seen in the
heavenliness and spiritualness of the conversation that he is there; wherever
he comes, he comes as a commanding, overpow'ring guide and principle, working
with great efficacy upon the Sinner as to his walking: Ezekiel. 36.37. I will put
my spirit within you, (what then?) and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them; mark it, says God I Will cause you, etc.
the way of God in his working upon the Sinner, is not merely by moral suasion
(which leaves the Will undetermined and pendulous), but it is by effectual
inclination and overpowering. So that here is a complication of several things
in the Argument, which make it very strong: As 1. It Is the Spirit which unites
to Christ: 2. This uniting Spirit is always an active, working Spirit: 3. The
Matter of his working is Sanctification and universal Holiness: 4. The manner
of his working is effectual and irresistible.
Now put all these considerations together, and it will most undeniably follow,
that such who are in Christ they shall walk not after the Flesh but after the
Spirit.

Moreover, it is the very Spirit of Christ himself by which Believers are united
to him; so that the same Spirit which was in him is in them also (though in a
different measure); now hereupon where there is the same spirit there will be
the same course or walking: and therefore as Christ was holy so will they be
holy too, and as Christ walked not after the flesh but after the spirit, so
will they walk also. If he indeed should take a person and immediately make him
one with himself, possibly the certainty of this spiritual walking would not be
so evident: but the Union being carried on mediately by the Holy Spirit, that
Spirit will have an infallible and powerful influence upon the Way and Walk of
him who is united to Christ.

Besides this, there is the Other Bond (viz.) Faith: and that too, does
naturally operate and tend to the furtherance of that conversation which I am
proving. For it is of a purifying nature; it first Act. 15.9.
purifies the heart, and then consequently the several acts which issue and
flow from the heart. Faith is the justifying grace, but it is a Act. 26.18.
sanctifying grace too; it justifies before God but it also sanctifies before
men. It Is not only a bare instrument or condition of justification, but it is
likewise an operative and influential grace upon sanctification. It Is the
lively faith which knits to Christ; and being so it will show its liveliness by
its vigorous promoting of the holiness and spiritualness of the Believers
course: insomuch that Jam. 2.26.
as the body without the spirit is dead, so Faith without this spiritual
walking is dead also. It would be a very easy thing to descend to Particulars,
therein to show the special Methods in which the Spirit of God and Faith under
it, do work for the keeping down of the Walking after the flesh and the
promoting of the Walking after the spirit, in the distinct and several
considerations proper to each of them: but I fear I am already too prolix.

The second Argument is taken from Christ's tenderness of his Honor. He will
advance the creature, but he will do it in such a way as that he may secure and
advance his own glory. Now would this be for the Honor of Christ to take
persons into so near a conjunction with himself, and yet let them live the
carnal and sensual life? to walk just as others do who are Ephesians. 2.13.
afar off from him? To be in Christ and yet to live in sin, immersed in flesh
and sensuality, O what dishonor would this reflect upon the Head if his
Members should thus walk! Christ will have his followers to differ from others,
yea and from themselves too; therefore all that are in him shall be 2 Cor. 5.17.
new Creatures: and from the change in the heart there shall be a change in the
life and walking also. He can join the greatest Sinners to himself, but he will
first prepare and adapt them for such an Union, by making them other persons,
and so causing them to live at another rate than they did before. Where there
is nearness, nay oneness, there (as you have heard) shall be likeness in an
holy course: he that will not have us take 1 Cor. 6.15.
the members of Christ and make them the members of an Harlot, will not himself
take the members of Harlots (I mean great and gross Sinners, they so
continuing), and make them the members of himself. It shall be known by the
goodness of men's walking that they belong to a good head; for Christ's honor
is highly concerned therein. And hence it is that such who are in Christ shall
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Thus you have the Doctrine
explained and confirmed; I am now to fall upon the Application of it.

By way of Information First, three Things it informs us of:

USE 1. Of Information in Three Things.
1. That Believers even in the times and under the dispensation of the Gospel,
are not to lay aside or cast off Scripture-Marks, Signs or Evidences grounded
upon sanctification and holiness, in order to the finding out of their
spiritual State and Condition. 1. Scripture-Signs and Marks are not to be
rejected.
For wherefore does the Spirit of God here thus characterize persons in Christ
[which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit]? but for this end, that
by this Character or Mark men may know whether they be indeed in Christ or not:
(the like you find in very many Other places). The Antinomians do not approve
of this Doctrine; they will not hear of any Evidences or Signs of this or that
privilege, fetched from Sanctification or Holiness or any thing inherent in
our selves: An Opinion weak and false, yea, directly contrary to the tenor of
the Word! How great a part of the Bible might be blotted out (as altogether
useless) if what they affirm herein was true? Read but the First Epistle of
John, you will find it throughout to be Characteristical or Evidential of men's
State from the fruits and effects of sanctification: (the Places therein are so
many and so common, that I neither well can nor do I in the least need to make
any particular rehearsal of them). It Is strange that men cannot distinguish,
betwixt Grounds as to the Thing, and Evidences as to the Person: Far be it from
us to make Sanctification or Holy Walking the grounds of our union with Christ,
or of our justification; yet they are the evidences by which we come to know
that we are in Christ and justified by him. And the Question is not what the
Spirit of God can do, or possibly sometimes may do, (viz.) whether he does not
in an immediate manner without the making use of these Signs, reveal to a
Believer his Union with Christ and interest in Gospel-blessings; but the
Question is, What is the ordinary method of the Spirit in the witnessing and
clearing up of these things to a Soul? And surely that is first by the
witnessing of faith, sincerity, holiness of life, and then by witnessing to
them and upon them. And a Christian cannot ordinarily exspect assurance of his
Union with Christ (or of any other thing), but in this mediate way. Very much
might be spoken about this, but I think it is not now so necessary as sometimes
it has been; and See Rutherf. Survey of Antinom. par. 2. c. 55. p 81. etc.
Binning (who has some Sermons upon Rom 8. lately published) speaks something
to it, p. 23. etc.
diverse have largely wrote upon it therefore I will pass it over.

2. Popish Calumnies are injurious and groundless.
2. Secondly, it shows us how groundless and injurious those high calumnies and
sharp invectives are, which some ROMANISTS (in their Writings upon this Text)
are pleased to cast upon and let fly against PROTESTANTS and their Doctrine.
Because the Apostle here says, that such who are freed from condemnation and
in Jesus Christ, do not walk after the flesh but after the spirit, how do some
Popish Expositors from hence take occasion to oppose, traduce, revile, censure,
and strangely misrepresent the Protestant Doctrine and the worthy Assertors of
it! Amongst others, with what acrimony and virulency does Ubi ergo umbraculum
Calvinianum cum sola fide, and aliquo pietatis studio pene inefficaci? Stapl.
Antidot. p. 624. (Vide pluta p. 625, 626). Contzen in Quaest. 3. p. 308. An
Sectarii bona opera per suam expositionem condemnanda doceant? Et in V. 2.
Quaest. 2. p. 310. Si Phingez aliquis adulterum Calvinianum in ipsa libidine
configat, coelo eum continuo inserit, justus est enim, and est ei condemnatio,
quamvis secundum carnem cum occideretur ambularet. -- Justin. Magnopere falli
necesse est Haereticos, qui manner in Christo nihil aliud esse putant, quam
aliquem sibi certo polliceri, Christi merita sibi fuisse communicata, atque
adeo peccatis omnibus expiatis se esse justum.
Stapleton and Contzen (two who had (...), as Libanius speaks of some), here
fall upon Calvine, Beza, Pareus, etc. as if they did oppose nay quite nullify
the strict, holy and spiritual life; and instead thereof, by their Opinions did
encourage and promote the carnal and fleshly life! (I instance in these only,
because they are the persons who in their Expositions upon the Text in hand,
are pleased so freely to spit their venom upon this account; but it is that
reproach and scandal which occurrs very frequently in the body of their
Polemick Writers). Amongst whom what more common, than to tell the World that
Protestants make holiness, good works, etc. to be unnecessary? that they are
only for Faith and imputed Righteousness, that their principles tend to
looseness and profaneness, and what not? Now did we not too well know the
Spirit which acts these adversaries, it would make us to stand and wonder that
Opinions so sound, so agreeable to the word of Truth, as those are which in
these matters the Protestants hold in opposition to Rome, should yet be so
maliciously reflected upon; That scandals so undeserved, so often answered
should yet be continued; that men's passions and censures should be so high and
sharp, where their grounds and reasons are follow. How much has been spoken
and written over and over again for the vindicating of Opinions and Persons
from these imputations, for the due and right stating of things, and yet it is
all one! Dissenters calumniated before and so they will do still, Protestantism
was blackened and branded before and so it shall be still.

I will not insist upon the making any Apology or Defense for this or that
person, in what they have said by way of Exposition upon the Text; for they
need no such thing, and (as to that for which they are censured) they say
nothing but what the Body of Protestants hold: And for the forenamed Authors
Calvine, etc. do they not upon Tria simul conjungit (Apostolus), imperfectionem
qua semper laborant fideles, Dei indulgentiam in ea condonanda, regenerationem
Spiritus: atque hoc quidem postremum, ne quis vana opinione se lactet, ac si
liberatus esset a maledictione, carni suae interim secure indulgens. Ut ergo
frustra blanditur, etc. Calvin. Non satis est Christum ore profiteri, oportet
Fide per opera esfioaci Christo ahhaerere, quod fit non Carnis sed Spiritus
ductum sequendo in vita. -- Observa secundo quod connexam esse docet
Justificationis and Sanctificationis Gratiam, adeo ut divelli nequeant, ut
frustra de priore glorietur, qui posteriorem non habeat. Qui igitur hab^nas
laxant carni, testantur se in Christo non esse, etc. -- Hinc refutatur trita
Papistarum Calumnia, etc. Atqui docemus cum Apostolo, non esse in Christo nisi
qui secundum Spiritum ambulant: qui carni indulgent eos inanem Fidem profiteri,
etc. Pareus. Sunt cohaerentes quidem, etc. Beza.
this very place, say that which might be enough to all ingenuous men to
obviate these Calumnies? But let this pass! Give. me leave only in the General
to vindicate our Faith in this matter, and to show that what we believe herein
is not at all repugnant to this (or to any other) Scripture.

For do we hold that Believers are exempted from condemnation and shall most
certainly be saved, upon their being in Christ, though they live a sinful,
carnal, wicked life? how often have our Opposers been told that we detest and
abhor such an Opinion? We say indeed that sanctification, holiness,, or walking
after the Spirit are not the meritorious causes of Non-condemnation, (that
honor we give to the alone merits of our Savior): yet withal we say, that
whoever has an interest in such blessedness he is a sanctified person, and he
must and shall live an holy life. Is not this enough? as much as what the Word
will bear us out in? Can we not be for Walking after the Spirit unless we make
it to be a Cause of our justification? or can we not hold imputed righteousness
but we must deny inherent righteousness? are these two inconsistent? Our
Adversaries asperse us as if we denied the latter (which we do not); but what
may we say of them who do most certainly deny the former? To go on! Do not we
set inherent righteousness as high as they; bate but perfection and merit? (the
First of which would make it impossible in this life, as the Other would
derogate from the freeness of God's grace and the fullness of Christ's merit).
And we appeal to the world, do our Censurers with their principles live more
holily than Protestants with theirs? (we wish we could see it). Nay, take the
whole model and platform of their Doctrine and of ours, and let the would judge
which does most tend to the Sea Dr. Stillingslees of the Idolatry of the Church
of Rome, Chap. 3. p. 178.
promoting of a strict and holy conversation. Indeed if we give way to the
flesh and walk after the flesh we are to be blamed for our practices, but the
principles of our Religion are strict, holy and good. In short, we are for the
same things which They contend for, and that too in the highest measures and
degrees (so far as the infirmities of the present state will admit of); but not
upon the same grounds: We are for the spiritual life as the fruit and evidence
of the Union, and as always attending the person who is in Christ and shall not
be condemned; but we dare not make it to be the meritorious ground, or to have
any causal influence upon the one or the other. If this will not satisfy let
our revilers revile on!

3. There are but Jew who are in Christ.
3. If this be the way and course of such who are in Christ, that they walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit, it informs us then that there are but few
who are in Christ, or who have any interest in the Mystical Union. I would not
streighten or narrow the Grace of God or the happiness of the Creature, further
than the word it self does; but (on the other hand) I must not make them wider
than that does. The most (it is to be feared) are out of Christ, because the
most do walk after the flesh; it is but here and there some few who walk after
the spirit. Instead of walking not after the flesh but after the spirit, the
generality of men walk after the flesh and not after the spirit: they are in
the flesh (there is their state), and they walk after the flesh, (there is their
course). O that this was not as evident as the light of the noon day! This
Flesh (as you have heard) is either the corrupt Nature in the general, or more
particularly it is the corrupt Nature venting it self in and about fleshly and
sensual things: now in both respects how do fleshly Walkers abound! As to the
First, what an unholy, sinful life do the most live? how does the depraved
Nature break forth and show it self in their whole course? this is that which
acts them all along, by which they steer and order their conversation. And as
to the Second, look upon the greatest number of men how sensual are they? they
lie tumbling and wallowing in the mire of Lust, are even immersed and swallowed
up in fleshly things, minding nothing so much as the pleasing of the flesh! Go
to them at their Tables, there is gluttony, excess in eating and drinking; they
pamper the body whilst they starve the soul: Mind them in their pursuits, it is
some fleshly good they mainly drive at; some fleshly interest by which they
steer their course; what do they most consult but the Fleshes ease and
interest? O that is the thing which they make provision for, that they may
fulfill the lusts thereof (which the Apostle so expressly forbids Romans 13.14)!
their forecasts, projects, contrivances are for the Flesh, yea all their
thoughts are employed as so many caterers or purveyours for their sensual
lusts: is not this walking after the flesh? and is not this (more or less) the
Walk of the most? Alas! as to that walking after the spirit (which has been
opened) how few are there that know any thing of it? the generality are wholly
strangers to it, understanding the Angelical life in Heaven as well as the
spiritual, holy life of Saints here upon earth; you can scarce make them
believe that there is such a life, so far are they from the living of it. Thus
it is with the multitude; and is not this then too clear an evidence, too full a
demonstration of the paucity of such as are in Christ? O that we could bewail
and lament it! what more plain than that such who are in Christ do walk, not
after the Flesh but after the Spirit? and what more plain too, than that the
body of men do walk after the Flesh and not after the Spirit? Sirs! let us not
flatter and think too well of our selves; Ut eos omnes intelligamus esse
exclusos, qui Fidem and Evangelium jactitant, cum interim volutentur in
crassissimis vitiis, etc. P. Mart. Addo quod fortasse Paulus non tam spectasse
videtur vim Baptismi, qua omnis macula penitus abstergitur, sed ad mores ac
vitam eorum, qui Christi gratia percepta omnes vitae suae rations ad Christi
legem exigunt, atque it a pravae cupiditati nonobsequuntur. Justinian.
we talk of Faith, make our boast of the Gospel, glory in our Baptism, lay a
great stress upon our Church privileges, when yet notwithstanding all this we
are mere Flesh-pleasers, our Conversations are carnal and fleshly: does not
this proclaim us to be yet out of Christ?

USE 2. Of Examination about our walking, whither it be after the flesh, or
after the spirit.
Secondly, Let me desire you to examine what your walking is: whether it be
after the flesh or after the spirit. Is spiritual walking the property of all
who are in Christ? must this evidence your union with him? how then does it
concern you all to judge aright about it! Here are two Sorts of Walkers, and
every man in the world comes under the One or the Other; for these two divide
the world betwixt them. Now where are you? what is your course? which of these
walkings do you come under? what do you follow Flesh or Spirit? I told you at
the first this is a thing which may be known; the Apostle does not lay the
Evidence upon something that is abstruse and hard to be understood, but upon
that which is easy to be found out: surely with a little diligence every
person may know what his walking is. I entreat you therefore to urge this home
upon your selves; O let every one say how do I walk? what a kind of life do I
live? holy or sinful, spiritual or carnal? Brethren! your freedom from
Condemnation depends upon your Union with Christ, will you not find out that?
then your Union must be known by the holiness of your walking, and will you not
understand your selves about this also? O what a blessed thing is it when a man
is clear in this! so that he can frame a Syllogism upon it, (thus) He that
walks not after the flesh but after the spirit, he is in Christ; But I (through
grace) am one who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, therefore I am
in Christ. This is a good bottom to build assurance upon; these premises will
bear the weight of such a conclusion: be sure you take up with nothing short of
this. It Is only the spiritual life which must assure of the Mystical Union: 1 John 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we
lie and do not the truth. 1 John 2.4, 5, 6. He that says I know him and
keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whosoever
keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we
that we are in him. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk
even as he walked. Faith indeed is the bond of the union, but holiness (of heart
and life) is the mark or evidence of it: And it is the walking which makes the
Christian; it is not external profession, the being of such or such a party,
some good religious talking, but it is the course of life which is the
distinguishing character betwixt person and person. O that God would direct
every one of you to pass righteous judgment upon himself concerning this!

I need not add any thing to what has been laid down in order to the helping
of you in this Trial. The walking after the Flesh and after the Spirit have
been opened, and by the particulars which make up each of them you may be able
to judge of your selves. 'Pray go over them in your own thoughts again and
again, and say, is the Flesh or the Spirit our principle? our guide? what are
our affections? do we savor the things of the Flesh or of the Spirit? what are
our secret and strongest propensions? are our Ends fleshly or spiritual? I say
go over these things again and again, and there is no question of it, but that
serious and frequent examination in a little time will fully clear up the thing
to you.

Atwofold walking after the Flesh.
Only (to prevent mistakes) let me tell you, there is a twofold walking after
the Flesh: One more gross and manifest, the Other more close and more
indiscernable. The first, is when the Flesh breaks forth and openly vents it
self in external and bodily lusts, (such as adultery, uncleanness, drunkenness,
gluttony, etc.); this is 2 Cor. 7.1.
the filthiness of the flesh: The Second, is when the Flesh more secretly vents
it self in internal, heart-lusts, such as are kept in and lie smothering in the
Soul, (as pride, self-love, envy, coveteousness, etc.); this is the filthiness
of the Spirit: (the Apostle gives a Catalogue of the actings of the Flesh in
both of these respects Gal. 5.19, 20, etc.) Now here is the mistake of men, they
confine walking after the flesh to the first of these, the latter being little
regarded by them; so that if they do not live in whoredom, gross intemperance,
open profaneness, brutish sensuality, they think all is well: whereas they may
be free from these gross practices and yet be walkers after the flesh. The
corrupt Nature has other out-lets besides these, and there may be Sins ulcers
within when they do not externally show themselves. O be not deceived! you are
not possibly so and so vicious in the outward conversation, but if there be
within in the Heart malice, hatred, envy, uncharitableness, self exalting,
inordinate affections to the world, coveteousness, these are enough to bring
you within the compass of walking after the flesh. Invidentia vitium
Diabolicum, quo solus Diabolus reus est, etc. Non enim dicitur Diabolo ut
damnetur, adulterium commisisti, furtum fecisti, etc. sed homini stanti lapsus
invidisti. Aug. de Disc. Chri. cap. 1.
Devils you will grant are bad enough; it is because of their envy, pride, etc. for
the grosser sins of the Flesh they are not liable to them. De Civitate Dei, l.
14. c. 2.
Austine proves that the Stoics (that strict Sect of Philosophers) were as
guilty of this upon their inward unmortified corruptions, as the Epicureans
themselves a more debauched and sensual sort of men, (if they be not wronged,
for as to Epicurus himself Against who^, see Dr. Meric Casaubon of Incredulity,
par. 1. p. 202. etc.
Laertius, Gassendus, etc. give a quite other character of him). Do I see one
living a brutish life, wallowing in his filthy lusts, laying the reins upon
the neck of his corruptions? he is drunk, defiles his body, lives in open
wickedness, etc. I Am sure this man walks after the flesh; these are the works
of the flesh which are manifest Gal. 5.19. every eye sees and every tongue
cries shame upon these courses: Ah but there is another who is free from these
scandalous courses, yet he is worldly, revengeful, envious, proud, haughty,
under the power of carthly affections, full of evil desires; this man now is a
walker after the flesh as well as the former (though not in so gross a manner).
Therefore do not please yourselves upon your being kept from the notorious and
external eruptions of the corrupt Nature, if yet inward and more refined
corruptions have their full power and strength over you. O how many persons of
a civil, unblameable conversation, nay how many fair professing Hypocrites
(though no adulterers, no drunkards, etc.) will yet be judged at the Great Day
to be walkers after the flesh! 'Pray look inward, any one allowed, cherished,
unmortified Lust in the heart will spoil your walking before God though before
Men it may seem to be blameless, yea very spiritual.

Thirdly, the main Use will be for Counsel. USE 3.


1. To dehort from walking after the flesh. 2. To exhort to walk after the
spirit.
1. First, 1 Branch to dehort from walking after the Flesh.
do not walk after the flesh. Particularly, let not Flesh be your principle to
act you in your course; for what can be expected but evil practices from so
evil a principle? Mat. 7.16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? how impure must those
streams be which flow from so impure a fountain? how bitter must that fruit be
which grows upon so bitter a root? So also let not Flesh be your Guide; that
you should choose to be ordered and directed by it. Will you choose or follow a
blind guide? Mat. 15.14.
If the blind lead the blind both fall into the ditch: or will you follow a
Guide that will lead you to Hell? God forbid! when you have the good Spirit of
God and the good Word of God to lead you, will you rather live under the
leading and conduct of the flesh? O have as little to do with its guidance as
ever you can! it is not a thing that you must walk after, but rather fly from:
for if you follow it, 'twill certainly carry you to those rocks and precipices
which will endanger the dashing of you in pieces forever.

I know the best will not be wholly freed from this Flesh whilst they are here;
but let not any tamely give up themselves to it, so as to be subject and
obedient to it or to walk after it: Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that
you should obey it in the lusts thereof. Avoid it (I beseech you) in all the
parts and limbs of it, for it is all naught: there are the wills of the flesh
[(...)], Ephesians. 2.3. the affections (or passions) of the flesh [(...)], Gal.
5.24. Romans 7.5. the works of the flesh [(...)], Gal. 5.19. all these flow from
one and the same spring, only they are several channels in which it runs. Now
(I say) avoid it in all; as it works in the soul by its wills and affections,
as it works in the body by its grosser lusts, do not in any thing comply with
it or walk after it: we must be always mortifying, never (allowedly) gratifying
this cursed flesh.

The Dehortation enforced by several Motives.
To enforce the Dehortation one would think the Motive in the Text should be
strong enough: if you do not walk after the flesh then you are in Christ; and
if you be in Christ you will not walk after the flesh, for such do never so
walk. But besides this, there are some Other Motives which have a great force
and efficacy in them.

1. Let it be considered, that this walking after the flesh is directly
contrary to your Baptismal dedication and obligation. When you passed under
that blessed Ordinance did you not then dedicate your selves to the Lord? have
you not since owned and acknowledged that dedication? and shall persons so
dedicated to the Lord walk after the flesh? that would be like Dan. 5.2, 3, 4.
Belshazzar's making of himself drunk, even out of the golden vessels which
were dedicated to the service of God in the Temple. There is upon your
baptismal dedication a Sacredness upon your Souls and Bodies; and yet shall
they be made common and prostituted to the service of sin and lust? this is not
only to rescind, retract, null your dedication, but even to profane that which
was consecrated to holy uses and ends. When you were baptized did you not then
stipulate and covenant, to renounce the Flesh as well as the World and the
Devil? and notwithstanding this will you yet walk after it? what an high breach
of Covenant would that be? and shall any break Covenant with God and Ezekiel.
17.15.
prosper? If after Baptism you will be flesh-pleasers and flesh followers,
where will that answer of a good conscience be (which the Apostle speaks of 1
Pet. 3.21)? how will you be said Romans 6.3.
to be baptized into Christ's death, if the Flesh yet live in you and you in
it? And what a poor insignificative thing is the outward washing, if heart and
life continue under flesh pollutions? (...). Chrysostom. in V. 4. hujus Capitis.
Restringitur generalis Propositio, contra cos qui in Baptismo omnia
collocabant, satis esse Christo per Baptismum insitum esse, recte credere, in
Ecclesia versari, Sacramenta participare: vitam Christanam dignam etiam requir^
docet, vitam spiritualem non carnalem. Con^z.
what will the sprinkling of baptismal water profit him who lies wallowing in
fleshly lusts? O think much of your solemn engagement in Baptism, and surely
you will not be so obsequious and pliable to the motions of the flesh as
hitherto you have been! how ill does the Christian-mark and title agree with a
Pagan-life!

2. Secondly, I would desire you to consider what the Flesh is: He that knows
it and has right apprehensions of it certainly will not walk after it. In
general, let it promise or pretend what it will, it is an Enemy; and shall we
cherish an enemy in our bosom, nay, let him have the command and guidance of
us?

First it is God's enemy: yea, his inveterate, implacable, irreconcilable
enemy; the Sinner may be reconciled to God, but Sin it self (the Flesh, the
corrupt Nature) never can. It Is observable Ver. 7. The wisdom of the Flesh [
the carnal mind we read it], is enmity against God: the Apostle sets it forth
in the abstract to note the greatness of the enmity; it is more than if he had
said it is an enemy against God, for enemies may, but enmities cannot be
reconciled: and he speaks of the best of the Flesh too, the very [wisdome] of
the Flesh is enmity against God; and see what a full proof he gives of it, for
(says he) it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; O how
evil a thing is this Flesh! Now shall that be your principle and guide which is
God's Enemy? will you agree with that which is at such variance with God? and
be subject to that which neither is nor can be subject to the Law of God?

Then Secondly, Vide Najanz. t. 2. in Carm. p. 93. describing the mischievous
Effects of the Flesh.
it is your enemy too: I and the very worst enemy you have in all the world. For
was it not for this, all your other enemies could never hurt you; the Devil and
the World without, do all their mischief to Souls by the Flesh within: Christ
not having any of it was impenetrable against all the fiery darts of Satan;
Joh. 14, 30. The Prince of this world comes and has nothing in me. We cannot
say so, he has a corrupt Nature in us and that he works upon and endangers us
by. This Flesh is the womb where all is conceived and formed, the anvil upon
which all is wrought; it is the false Judas that betrays us, the close enemy
within that is ready upon all occasions to open the gates to the Besieger: was
it not for this morbus mentis the morsus dentis could never hurt us.

And besides this relative consideration of the Flesh (as it gives advantage to
our other grand adversaries), it is in it self a very dangerous Enemy. Partly in
respect of its malice: it carries on desperate aims and designs against the
Sinner, it is full of mischievous intentions, and those of an high nature too;
it aims at nothing below the ruin of the precious Soul. The Apostle speaking of
one part of its working ( viz. by fleshly lusts), tells you that those war
against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. how? why not only as they would take away the
Souls order, beauty, strength, peace, comfort, etc. but as they strike at the
very life and happiness of the Soul. And the same is designed by this malicious
Flesh in all its workings, for they all tend to the everlasting destruction of
the Soul; O what a pernicious enemy is the Flesh! Partly also in respect of its
subtilty: for (which makes it the more formidable) as it is a malicious and
desperate, so it is a cunning and subtle enemy. How craftily does it insinuate
it self into us in order to the carrying on of its mischievous designs! how
cunningly by its blandishments and allurements does it entice us unto evil!
Jam. 1.14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust (there is
the force and power of it), and enticed (there is the fraud and cunning of it).
How finely does it represent some taking good to men in order to the alluring
of them, whilst it slily conceals the evil which should deter them! It shows
the bait but hides the hook, holds forth the milk but keeps close the hammer
and the nail, presents the apple but conceals the death; here is the Fleshes
subtilty, and O how many poor Souls are undone by it! Their eye is upon the
good which the Flesh promises, they not at all regarding the evil which indeed
it designs, (as you read of Amasa 2 Samuel 20.8, 9. Joab took Amasa by the beard
with the right hand to kiss him, but Amasa took no heed to the sword that was
in Joab's hand). O what a cunning, deceiving enemy is the Flesh! Romans 7.11. Sin
taking occasion by the commandment deceived me. Ephesians. 4.22. That ye put off
concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts; (in the Greek it is lusts of deceit, (...).
they are made up of deceit, there is nothing but mere deceit in them). The
Apostle Tit. 3.3. says they were deceived (how?) serving diverse lusts and
pleasures: whoever serves Sin shall find at last he was sadly deceived by it.
Upon the whole then, is Flesh a thing to be walked after? will you trust your
selves, your souls, your everlasting concerns in the hands of an enemy? of such
an enemy?

3. Thirdly, Consider what this walking after the Flesh is:

1. It Is sordid walking. It carries in it a great abasement of the humane
nature, man is degraded by it and divested of that glory and excellency which
God and Nature has put upon him. To be under the power of the Flesh and the
lusts thereof (especially such as are gross and lie in the sensual part), how
does this turn the Man into a very Brute! what is the difference (I pray you)
between a brute and a man who lives a brutish life? (only this, that of the
two the Man is the worst, for he has Reason and Religion to direct him to a
better course which the Brute has not). (...). Arrian. Epict. lib. 4. cap. 5.
p. 391.
Is it the shape only which makes the man, without suitable actings to the
nature? To walk after the Flesh? how base and unworthy is this for such a
creature as Man! who was once made after Gods own Image, and who yet has a
noble, spiritual, and immortal Soul. O how is this Soul depressed in its native
excellencies by a carnal course! by this it is made an underling to the body,
and (to make use of that proverbial allusion) the Prince is forced to go on
foot while the Beggar rides on horseback: O that flesh-followers would often
think of this! This walking is not only below the Christian but the Man too;
he that was made by God like Nebuchadnezzar when upon the throne, he (by living
after the flesh) makes himself like Nebuchadnezzar when Dan. 4.32, 33.
grazing among the beasts. Pray (Sirs) know your selves, consider your
Original, whose (...), etc. Arrian. Epict. lib. 2. cap. 8. p. 188.
workmanship you are, (...)* Idem l. 1. c. 3. ^. 91.
that you are Soul as well as Body, how highly your Maker has advanced you;
and scorn to live below your selves. It Is happy Pride which makes men to
disdain a sordid Life.

2. It Is foolish walking: that which is the fruit of ignorance, and only suits
with the state of ignorance; 1 Pet. 1.14. Not fashioning your selves according
to the former lusts [in your ignorance]. It Is both the effect and the evidence
of ignorance: it men were not strangely blinded and besotted they would never
carry it toward the Flesh as they do. But here is the misery of it, first the
Flesh blinds and besots Sinners, puts out their eyes (as the Judge. 16.21.
Philistines did Sampson's), and then they are at its beck and dispose. Ah Sirs!
have ye no knowledge, no wisdom? are you under total darkness and gross
infatuation? are ye so foolish that you do not know what the Flesh is, and
whether it leads? and yet will you walk after it? when there is a spiritual,
heavenly, holy course revealed to you, will you yet choose that which is
opposite thereunto? will you prefer the conduct of the Flesh before the conduct
of the Spirit? O stupendous folly, most woeful infatuation! The Apostle
describing the natural state says For we our selves also were sometimes
foolish, ((...), without any understanding or intellective faculty, wherein)?
serving diverse lusts and pleasures; O that is to be foolish indeed! And he
elsewhere speaking of lusts themselves, calls them too (...) foolish and
hurtful; 1 Timothy 6.9. Flesh-followers are apt to admire their own wisdom, but
they fall under that sad character Romans 1.20. Professing themselves to be wise
they became fool^.

3. It Is groundless and unreasonable walking: Bate but the Sinners pleasing
himself (which is a pitiful reason), and what reason has he to serve or
gratify the Flesh? what can it plead for any subjection or obedience to it?
This our Apostle here takes notice of ( v. 12.) we are debtors not to the
flesh, to live after the flesh: We are debtors indeed to God every way, to him
we owe our Love, Obedience, etc. our All; but what do we owe the flesh? what
has it done or suffered for us? has it redeemed us? was it crucified for us?
surely no! Justice and gratitude call upon us to live to God and Christ, but
for the Flesh we are under no obligation at all to live to it; (rather the
quite contrary). Why should we pay where we owe nothing, and not pay where we
owe our-all? were we but so just and honest as to pay our debts, sure I am we
should walk after the Spirit and not after the Flesh.

4. It Is uncomfortable walking. Isa. 57.20, 21. The wicked are like the
troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt: There is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Isa. 59.8. They have made them crooked
paths, whosoever goes therein shall not have peace. Sin and Comfort cannot go
together; he loses the one who closes with the other. A wicked life (says
(...). Plat^ de Leg. lib. 2. p. 663.
Plato) is not only a sordid, but a more unpleasant life than that which is
virtuous; (the bare light of Nature led diverse of the ancient (...) etc.
Plutarch. 101. (...). Idem in Tract. Ne suaviter quidem, etc. p. 1087.
Moralists to assert this over and over). And Sinners may put the best face
upon it, but they find this to be true by their own sad experience; they feel
it, their Consciences plainly tell them of it every day, that there is little
true joy in a sinful, sensual course: O the sad gripes of Conscience which they
meet with in the way of sin! which though they endeavor to smother yet they
pursue and vex them from time to time. But suppose the way of the Flesh at
present be not uncomfortable, to be sure in the final issue it will be so: when
the Sensualist and ungodly wretch shall see death making its near approaches to
him, when Conscience shall force him to take a review of his ill-spent life,
when he shall be called to stand before the tribunal of his Judge; I say, how
will it be then? will it be joy and comfort? no, but instead thereof
inexpressible anguish and horror of spirit. O let not the Flesh deceive you!
its Heb. 11.25.
pleasures are but for a season, its Delectatio occidit and praeteriit,
volneravit and transivit, miserum fecit and abiit, infaelicem reddidit and
reliquit. August. de Temp. Sermon. 3.
delights are soon over and gone; and then that which was honey in the mouth
turns into gall and wormwood in the belly. Poor deluded creatures think to
take their fill of it, but in a little time God finds them out, sets home their
sin and folly, gives them the prospect of a dreadful eternity; and what
follows? first Hell is in their Souls and then in a little time their Souls are
in Hell. And therefore as you desire to be kept from this misery, and to have
peace and comfort in Life and Death, see that you abandon the Flesh so as not
to walk after it.

5. It Is walking which ends in eternal perdition. O that this might be believed
before it be felt! Sirs! whom will you believe? Sin and the Flesh (which are
made up of lies and do their business by lies), or the God of truth and the
Word of truth? He tells you therein Romans 8.6.
To be carnally minded is death; Romans 8.13.
If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye; Gal. 6.8.
He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; There is no
condemnation to them which walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; then
there is condemnation to them who walk after the Flesh, etc. Jam. 2.15.
Sin when it is finished it brings forth death; (with many such Scriptures).
Now shall not this deter you from a fleshly conversation? if this will not,
what will? Solomon speaking of the strange Woman tells us, Prove. ^.18.
her house inclines unto death and her paths to the dead; just so it is with
fleshly* Walking. Nothing more certain, than that every man's end shall be
according to his course; as he sowes so shall he reap, Gal. 6.7. now there are
two very different ends, and two very different courses; there is Heaven and
Hell (two very different ends), and there is walking after the flesh and after
the spirit (two very different courses): If you fall in with the Former, that
will most certainly lead you to Hell; if with the Latter, that will as
certainly lead you to Heaven; which of these Courses now will you choose?
Condemnation is as sure to them who walk after the Flesh, as No-Condemnation is
to them who walk after the Spirit. So much for the third Motive.

4. Fourthly let me add but one Disuasive more, and that is the Death of
Christ. What a consideration is this to take men off from a carnal life? O when
this flesh begins to stir and pirk up it self, you will do well (in order to
the suppressing of it) to fix your thoughts upon your dying Redeemer. Say, when
my Savior has died for Sin shall I live in Sin? when he was 1 John 3.8.
manifested on purpose to destroy the works of the Flesh and of the Devil,
shall I yet walk after them? was the sinless Flesh in Christ crucified and
shall the sinful Flesh in me be cherished? You read of the crucifiion of the
Flesh Gal. 5.24. we should be for nothing short of that, for no better usage
does it deserve from us. When Pilate asked the enraged Jews against our blessed
Lord, What shall I then do with Jesus which is called Christ? they all said
unto him Let him be crucified: and when he a little hung off from this cruelty,
What evil has he done? they cried out the more saying Let him be crucified:
Matthew. 27.22, 23. This was not so much their sin in being so cruel to the Lord
of Glory, but it is as much your duty to deal thus revengefully with the Flesh:
O let all cry out in the height of their hatred against it, Let it be
crucified! why but what evil has it done? nay rather ask what evil has it not
done? therefore cry out the more let it be crucified. And indeed the
crucifixion of our Natural Flesh in Christ without the crucifixion of moral and
sinful Flesh in our selves, will not profit us. Paul says he was crucified
with Christ Gal. 2.20. how? why in a spiritual and mystical sense, so as to be
dead to the Flesh, and so as to live the spiritual life. And the Apostle lays
it upon this, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2 Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in
the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind: For he that has
suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin; that he no longer should live the
rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.
It Is a Scripture somewhat dark but the strength of it lies thus, Christ has
suffered for us, and we (in an analogical sense) must be ready to suffer too,
(this is the same mind here spoken of); and Christ having suffered has ceased
from sin ( h. e. so as to dye for sin no more); so (says the Apostle) you too
in your own persons must so dye to sin as no longer to live in it. This is the
being planted into the likeness of Christ's death, Romans 6.5. and you find the
Apostle there in that Chapter from this very Topic (the Death of Christ),
earnestly disuading persons from walking after the flesh. I have done with the
Motives to enforce the Dehortation.

What men are to do that they may not walk after the Flesh.
Before I go off from this Head something must be hinted by way of Direction:
What is to be done (some may say) that we may no longer walk after the Flesh? I
answer,

1. Get out of the Flesh: For being in the flesh is always attended with
walking after the flesh; as the State is always according to the Course, so the
Course is always according to the State: if you be in the fleshly state your
conversation will be a fleshly conversation. Such as the man is such are the
principles, and such as the principles are such will the practices be also.
Therefore get out of the state of Nature (in which the Flesh rules and carries
a man whither it pleases) and get into Christ; persons out of Christ are all
Flesh, and thereupon will be wholly followers of the Flesh. Spiritual walking
discovers the Union, but first the Union is the ground of spiritual walking:
that will certainly follow upon being in Christ, but being in Christ must
necessarily antecede it. Till thou be ingrafted into Christ no good fruit
can grow upon thee: he that is flesh must needs live and act flesh.

2. Get the Spirit, and walk after the Spirit. It Is the divine Spirit and the
divine Nature from that Spirit, which must dethrone and break the power of
sinning and sinful Nature. Till the Holy Spirit and grace come into the heart,
the Flesh lords and domineers in the life (as you will hear more fully when I
come to the second Verse). The Apostle joins together Sensual and not having
the Spirit Jud. 19. (where the latter clause is not only a further description
of the persons spoken of, but it is also the assignation of the cause or reason
of their being sensual, (viz.) because they had not the Spirit). Till the
mighty Spirit of God comes into the Soul by saving illumination and
overpowering influences, to say efficaciously to a man Isa. 30.21.
This is the way walk therein; there may be convictions, purposes, resolutions
to the contrary, yet still there will be (one way or other) walking after the
Flesh. And so for Grace: no sooner does this take possession but the Walking is
altered; which it never is before to any purpose. Prove. 2.10. When wisdom
enters into the heart, etc. discretion shall preserve thee, etc. to deliver
thee from the way of the evil man, etc. who leave the paths of uprightness to
walk in the ways of darkness, who rejoice to do evil, etc. Your way to be rid
of the Flesh is to get the Spirit; set a thousand Arguments, the most effectual
Considerations imaginable before the Sinner, to draw him off from this fleshly
walking, till the regenerating, sanctifying Spirit take hold of him, they are
all weak and ineffective.

I add, Walk after the Spirit. Every man will be walking, there is no standing
still; all will be in motion so long as they are in via: and every man's Walking
will be in one of these two ways, either after the Flesh or after the Spirit,
(for non datur tertium). And these being contrary do mutually exclude each the
other; he that walks after the flesh cannot (in sensu composito) walk after the
spirit, and he that walks after the spirit cannot walk after the flesh;
therefore Gal. 5.16. Walk in the spirit; and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh: the Reason then upon which this Direction is grounded is strong and
evident. And let me tell you, Principles you will and must have (some or
other), which if they be not good they will be bad: and so as to Guides,
Affections, Propensions, Ends, these will be in every reasonable Soul from one
cause or another. So that if you be not spiritual you will be carnal; for one
of these two you must be, as both you cannot be: O let it be the Former that it
may not be the Latter.

3. Take heed of particular, allowed fleshly acts: for they make way for that
general course which you are to shun: Acts produce Habits as well as Habits do
produce Acts: particular acts of sin (especially if allowed and repeated) end
in a course of sin. If you gratify the flesh in some things, it will grow upon
you (as sad experience proves); the Gangrene or Leprosy at the first begins
with some particular member, but if it be let alone in a little time it
diffuses it self over the whole body; and so it is here as to sin: A little
leaven leavens the whole lump. It Is true (as has been observed) the Apostle
here fixes his Character upon the Course and not upon single acts; but he that
allows himself in them will not stay there, in time he will fall into a wicked
and fleshly Course.

4. Timely suppress the first risings of the flesh: it gains by delays. O as
soon as the corrupt Nature begins to stir and show it self, see that you fall
upon it presently, make speedy and vigorous resistance to it! if you give the
Enemy time he will grow stronger and the Conquest will be the more difficult. You
read Jam. 1.15. of the conceiving of Lust, (...) etc. Vide Stobaeum in Eclog.
Sermon. 3. p. 9.
[when Lust has conceived it brings forth Sin]: now Sin must be taken at the
first conception; as soon as the temptation offers it self and begins to allure
and tickle by something that it presents, so that the Heart inclines to a
closure with it, now fall on presently and parlie no longer. This brat of
Babylon must be dashed in pieces in its very infancy; it is good to kill the
Cockatrice in the very egg, to quench the fire at the first smotherings of it
within or else it will quickly flame forth in the life, even to the making the
conversation carnal. Be very watchful over the initial suggestions of the
Flesh, and fall upon the timely exercise of mortification; upon the first
motions of sin say Satan, Flesh, Mat. 16.23.
get thee behind me, thou art an offense to me. (But I must not further
expatiate upon these things)! So much for the disuasive part of this Use,
against walking after the flesh.

2 Branch of the Use to exhort to Walking after the Spirit.
I go on to the persuasive part, wherein I would most earnestly exhort you to
walk after the Spirit: (I will be but short upon this, because that which I
have already spoken has a great tendency to the promoting of it; for the truth
is, whilst I have been disuading you from walking after the Flesh, I have in
effect been persuading you to walk after the Spirit: in beating you off from
that I have been drawing you on to this). You have heard what it is so to walk,
what now remains but that you would all endeavor to put it in practice? and O
that this might be your way and course! Let others live as they please, let it
be your fixed resolution that you will live the holy, spiritual, heavenly life.
True, there are but few who do thus walk; the World is but a great Exchange,
wherein the Spirits Walk is very thin whilst the Fleshes Walk is full and
crowded: but it is better to be with the Few in the way of the Spirit than with
the Many in the way of the Flesh. And I desire you to lay it to heart, have not
you your selves too long walked after the flesh? is it not high time for you to
think of another Course? 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past of our life may suffice us,
to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in Lasciviousness,
Lusts, Excess of Wine, etc. When will ye walk in newness of life (as the
expression is Romans 6.4)? when shall the renewing and the renewed Spirit
command, govern, act, guide you in your whole conversation? when will you so
walk that you your selves (and others too) may know by the spiritualness of
your deportment, that you are indeed in Christ Jesus? The exhortation to
walking after the Spirit pressed by some Motives.


Here consider (in opposition to what was said of the former walking) but three
things:

1. This is excellent Walking: The spiritual life is the excellent life; (...).
Arist. Eth. lib. 10. cap. 7.
this speaks somewhat more than what is of man, there is something divine and
supernatural in it. To be acted by, to live under the conduct and guidance of
the blessed Spirit, to have affections, propensions, ends, all holy, this is
truly great. This is the Life which is most agreeable to the humane Nature,
(not only as considered in its primitive, unstained glory and excellency, but
as it is now under its sad ruins and decays): O how unbecoming, how ill does a
vicious Conversation comport even with that Reason, natural Light, and those
broken excellencies which are yet left in Man! Man is not so low but that by
complying with sensual Lusts he yet acts below himself: nay, so far as he puts
on the Sinner he puts off the Man; where he un-Saints himself he un-Mans
himself: Sensuality and wickedness carry in them a contradiction to his very
Being; nothing so well suits with that as a pious, religious, heavenly course.
Further, the fleshly life is a base, sordid life, but the spiritual life is a
raised, noble life: So much as the Spirit is above the Flesh, the Soul above
the Body, so much is the (...). Arist. ibid. p. 138.
spiritual life above the sensual or carnal life. The life (which I am urging
upon you) is the very life of God himself; for the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 4.18. of
some men's being alienated from the [life of God] through the ignorance that is
in them: (by which life of God, he means (in part) the holiness of God or that
holy life which God lives): the holy liver then (he not being alienated from
Gods holiness) lives the life of God; he acts in (...). Plato in Thaeaet.
conformity (though under a vast, disproportion) to the great God; must there
not then needs be unspeakable glory and excellency in Spiritual Walking? The
more one lives the fleshly life the more he resembles the Beast, the more one,
lives the spiritual life the more he resembles God: the Creature is not so much
debased and depressed by the One, but he-is as much advanced and dignified by
the Other. Saints may be censured and misjudged by the world, but in truth they
come the nearest and are most like to God: -- that they might be judged
according to men in the Flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet.
4.6. (I do but allude to these words, for I know in their first and proper
sense they point to another thing than that which I cite them for): Gods people
are judged as if they lived according to men, walking in (or after) the Flesh
as others do; but it is not so, they walk in (or after) the Spirit and so live
according to God: what a great thing is this for poor creatures to live
according to God! who would not so live?

And this too is the Life of the blessed ones in Heaven: take the glorified
Saints how do they walk? not after the Flesh I assure you (for they have no
such Flesh to walk after); they are wholly freed from the sinning and sinful
Nature, are perfectly renewed and sanctified, and accordingly they act. All in
them or from them is divine and spiritual; there is nothing that they do but
what flows from a gracious principle, all their thoughts and affections are
swallowed up in God, their love, joy, delight are unmixtly spiritual, the
pleasures of the Flesh are nothing to them, they have not the least inclination
to the least evil, the great thing they mind and rejoice in is the Glory of
God: O what an holy, spiritual life do the Saints live in heaven! Must not the
same life then needs be excellent in the Saints here (so far forth as they can
reach it in their imperfect state)? Surely none can undervalue or think low of
it, but only they who are altogether ignorant of and strangers to it. A Child
of God would not for a thousand worlds live any other life; nay, should God
leave him to his liberty to make his own choice, and fully assure him of his
future blessedness let his choice be what it would, yet he would choose to live
the spiritual rather than the carnal life: was there no Heaven nor no Hell yet
the sincere Christian would be for holy walking, because of that excellency and
intrinsic goodness which he sees in it.

2. Walking after the Spirit is pleasant, delightful, comfortable walking: that
which begets true peace, solid joy, unspeakable comfort in the Soul. The more
spiritual a man is in his walking the greater is his rejoicing; O Psalm. 119.165.
what peace have they who thus walk! The Flesh must not vye with the Spirit
about true comfort; men exceedingly mistake themselves when they look for
pleasure, delight, and satisfaction in a fleshly course, (alas!) it is not there
to be had. Its very sweet is bitter, there is gall and wormwood even in its
honey; Prove. 14.13.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. It promises indeed great things but it falls exceedingly short in
its performances, eminently it does so in its promises of joy and comfort. True
peace is only to be found in a holy course: Romans 8.6. To be spiritually minded
is life and peace; (life hereafter, peace here): 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing: 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimo^^ of our
Conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but
by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world. There Is no
comfort like to that which attends (...). Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 9.
holy walking; the true Christian would not for a world exchange that joy which
he has in his Soul, in and from Meditation, Prayer, the Word, Sacraments.
Promises, mortification of sin holiness, communion with God, the hope of glory,
for all that joy which the Sinner has in the way of sin and in his sensual
delights. Would you have the 1 P^t. 1, 8.
joy which is unspeakable, the Phil. 4.7.
peace which passes all understanding, the Job 15.11.
consolations of God which are not small? O walk after the Spirit. Men have
false notions of Religion (which experience must confute); the Devil belies and
misreports the ways of God, as if a godly life was a sad pensive, melancholy
life: pray try and then judge, be persuaded to fall upon this heavenly course,
and then tell me whether Prove. 3.17.
wisdoms ways be not ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace. Psalm.
119.14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as much as in all riches.
The Flesh is outdone by the Spirit; if it gives some outward, flashy joy, the
Spirit (with advantage) gives inward, solid, abiding joy; should not this
allure you to walk after it? We always love to walk where our walking may be
most pleasant and delightful: surely to walk with God, to live in communion
with Father, Son, and Spirit, to be taken up in the contemplation and fruition
of heavenly things, to be always sucking at the breasts of the Promises, to act
in the daily exercis^ of Grace; I say, surely this must needs be pleasant and
delightful Walking indeed. And the Spiritual Walker has not only this peace
and satisfaction whilst he lives; but in a dying hour too he is full of
comfort: O the Soul-chearing reflections which he then can make upon an holy
life! O that heart-exhilerating prospect which he has of the World to come!
whether he looks backward or forward all administers ground of rejoicing to
him. Is it thus with the Sinner? the Sensualist? alas, it is quite otherwise;
when Death comes and lays his cold hands upon him, what bitter pangs of
Conscience does he feel, what dreadful terrors do sill his Soul, how does the
sense of Judgment and Aeternity strike him with astonishment! All his sensual
Comforts do now fail him; and he did not live so full of joy but he dies as
full of sorrow: This shall ye have of mine hand ye shall lie down in s^rrow,
Isa. 50.11. but Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37.

3. This is blessed Walking, for it evermore ends in salvation. It do^^ not
only at present evidence Non-condemnation and Union with Christ, but it
assures of Heaven and certainly brings to Heaven at last. Holiness and
Happiness never were, never shall be parted. Every motion has its terminus or
end; the End of this motion (or walking) is eternal rest: Romans 8.13. If ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: Gal. 6.18.
He that sows to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting: Prove.
12.28. In the way of righteousness is life. and in the pathway thereof there
is no death: so that if you will be persuaded to enter into and to hold on in
the way of the spirit, it will infallibly lead you to eternal life; and what
can be spoken higher? The sum of all is this, I here set Jer. 21.8.
life and death before you, if the One will not allure you to an holy, heavenly
conversation, nor the Other deter you from a sinful, carnal conversation, I
have then no more to say: but surely such as have any sense of God, of the
worth of the Soul, and of the things of the world to come, they will resolve
for the spiritual life. (...), etc. Athenag. Leg, pro Christian. p. 35.
Athenagoras (in his Apology for the primitive Christians) states their
practice thus: If (says he) we did believe that we should only live the
present life, there might then be some room for suspicion that we might be as
wicked as others; indulging flesh and blood and drawn aside by covetuousness
and concupiscence: but we know, that God is privy not only to all our actions
but to all our thoughts and words, that he is all light, and sees what is most
hid in us; and we are fully persuaded, that after this life we shall live a
much better life with God in Heaven; and therefore we do not live as others do
whose life will end in Hell fire. O that we could as easily draw men to the
heavenly life, as we can apologize for those who live it, or set down the
grounds and reasons why they live it!

And now you who are Flesh-followers will nothing prevail with you? shall all
these Considerations be ineffectual? will you yet persist in your fleshly
course? though an Angel with a drawn sword stands before you to stop you in
your evil way, yet ( Numb. 22.22.
Balaam-like) will you go on? will you set your selves in a way that is not
good (as the wicked are described Psalm. 36.4.)? are you at that language Jer.
18.2.
We will every one walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart? or as it is Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the ways and
see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way (the way of the Spirit)
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls: but they said we will
not walk therein? Do you walk after the Flesh and resolve to do so still? then
it is sad indeed! but I would fain hope better of you. 'Pray be entreated to
read the Motives again which have been set before you, and in your most calm
thoughts to pause and dwell upon the things which have been spoken. Shall I
need to add any thing further? in telling you, that all your walkings, yea
every step you take is known to God, ( Job 21.4. Job 34.21. Psalm. 139.3. Psalm.
119.168): that God judges of every man here, and hereafter will judge every man
at the Great Day, according to his walking, ( Eccles. 11.9. 2 Cor. 5.10.
Eccles. 12.14): that Death will come with a dreadful aspect where the life has
been carual and sinful: that in the way of the Flesh you are in danger of
treading upon Serpents, Vipers, Adders, Scorpions, every ^^^p you take: that by
this Course you Psa. 16.11.
forsake the path of life, and (for a little flesh-pleasing) put your selves
into the broad way to everlasting damnation: how much might I yet say upon this
account? but enough and enough has been already said (if God will but set it
home upon the Conscience). The Lord hedge up your ways with thorns, and make a
wall that you may not find the paths of the Flesh, and thereupon may resolve to
get into the paths of the Spirit; for surely it will be better then than now it
is, (I allude to Hos. 2.6, 7).

USE 4. To those that do walk after the Spirit. Three things urged upon them.
There is one Use more, and that shall be directed to them who do walk after the
Spirit: Three things to such.

1. First I would (with the greatest earnestness) stir up such to be highly
thankful to God. Are any of you through grace made spiritual, and do you live
the spiritual life? have you received the Spirit, and do you also walk after
the Spirit? what cause have you to bless God! yea, what thankfulness can be
high enough to him who has brought you to this! Why do you not walk just as
others do? why is not the Flesh as powerful, as predominant in you as it is in
others? why does not the very worst of the Flesh prevail over you? why are not
you Atheists, Scoffers at Religion, Drunkards, Adulterers, open and notorious
Sinners? surely all must be resolved into the discriminating grace of God; that
(and that only) has made the difference. Time was when your walking was bad
enough, when you were as carnal as any, and very tamely lacquey'd it after
every base lust; is not God to be admired upon that blessed change which he
has wrought in you? Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. You has he quickened who were dead in
trespasses and sins: wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of
this world, etc. Among whom also, we all had our conversation in times past in
the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind;
and were by nature the children of wrath even as others: But God who is rich in
mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, when we were dead in Sins has
quickened us together with Christ. Tit. 3.3. For we our selves also were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures:
(See also Col. 3.7. 1 Pet. 4.3). O what a sad course do the best follow before
conversion! and (as to your selves) if God by his distinguishing and almighty
grace had not seized upon you, as you began with that course so you had
continued in it to this very day: O let the Lord be forever magnified, who has
delivered you from fleshly walking, and brought you over to that which is
spiritual and heavenly. And this must the rather be done, because you now have
so clear, so convincing an evidence of your being in Christ; is not that a
great thing? The blessedness of this Union with Christ has been fully set
before you; it is all yours (you not walking after the Flesh but after the
Spirit). Surely, though you cannot in your praises reach so great mercy, yet
you should go as far as ever you can.

2. Secondly, such are to be exhorted to walk yet less and less after the
Flesh, and yet more and more after the Spirit. For this walking admits of
degrees; there are none (in the present state) so freed from the Flesh and the
fleshly conversation, but that yet they may be more freed from it; and so too,
there are none who have so much of the Spirit and walk so much after the
Spirit, but that yet they may be more spiritual in their walking. It Is mercy
that it is so well (as to the main), but surely it may yet be better. Saints!
are you so universally acted by the Spirit of God and the sanctified Nature, as
you might be? O do you so constantly live under the guidance and conduct of the
Spirit, as you might and should? is he your guide no sooner to show you the
right way, but presently and (...). Arrian. Epict. lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 186.
readily you engage therein? are all your affections so pure and heavenly as
God requires? are there not many strong inclinations to evil yet remaining in
you? are your Ends in all things so sublime and spiritual, as the Gospel
commands? Ah! something is yet wanting, there is yet room for growth, you have
not yet arrived at perfection (as the Apostle speaks of himself Not as though I
had already attained, etc Phil. 3.11). O that every day you might rise higher
and higher in heavenly walking! that the Flesh might decrease and the Spirit
increase, the carnal part (like the house of Saul) might still be going down,
and the spiritual part like the house of David) might still be getting up, that
Heart and Life might be refined and spiritualized yet more and more! I beseech
you, do not stay where you are but still be Phil. 3.14.
pressing forward. Walking it is motus progressivus; so it should be in your
walking after the Spirit: as there is a going from strength to strength Psalm.
84.7. from faith to faith Romans 1.17. so there should be also from spiritualness
to spiritualness. And Walking it is motus uniformis; are you so steady, so eaven
and uniform in your walkings as you ought? In a (...). Socrat.
statue or piece of Art all the several parts are uniform and proportionable,
or else it loses in its exactness and curiosity; and should it not be so too in
the Spiritual Life? (but I Will only keep to the Metaphor of the cavenness of
the Christians Walking). O the many crooked, wandering, extravagant stops which
you take! Sometimes you are in the way of the Spirit, then presently in the way
of the Flesh; you do not make straight-paths (as the Apostle advises Heb.
12.13): how do your partial closures and compliances with the carnal part too
often intercept the light of God's countenance, interrupt your communion with
him, and cause a damp in all your inward peace, (as you know by reason of this
it sometimes was with David himself)! when will you walk in the path of
Holiness so as not to turn to the right hand or to the left, (as the Word
enjoins, see Prove. 4.27. Deuteronomy. 5.32)? Again, is your Spiritual walking so
visible as it should be? so as to convince the world that there is such a life,
such a course as has been described? Truly men question whether there be such
a thing because you who pretend to it come so short of it; when you speak, act
just as others, are as wordly, vain, passionate, selfish, revengeful as others,
who will believe that there is in reality any such walking after the Spirit? or
that there is more in it than mere fancy and pretense? How did Paul's Spirit
rise in him, upon the surmises and censures of some who 2 Cor. 10.2.
thought of him as though he walked according to the Flesh? and can you (as to
your selves) no^ only bear such censures but (which is much worse) give too
just occasion for them? Further let me ask you, does this Holy walking
intermingle it self with your whole conversation? even in your natural and
civil actions do you walk after the Spirit? when you 1 Cor. 10.31.
eat and drink is your eye upon the glory of God? in common actions have you
special and peculiar aims and principles? the very animal life which you live
in the Flesh do you live by the Faith of the Son of God (as Paul did Gal.
2.20)? It Is a great mistake to limit this walking after the Spirit to actions
materially spiritual, or to the positive duties of Religion; No, at all times,
in all actions you are so to walk, doing all from a spiritual Principle, by a
spiritual Rule, to a spiritual End. It Is one thing to be employed in some acts
that are spiritual, and another thing to be spiritual in all acts; the fleshly
Walker may do the First, but Saints must endeavor after the Last. At your
Tables, in your Shops, in your civil Converses, you may (and ought) to live the
heavenly life as well as in hearing the Word, Prayer, and such religious
Duties. A carnal man sometimes engages in spiritual things, and yet even then
he does not walk after the Spirit; and a Child of God sometimes is engaged in
common things ( Civil and Natural), and yet even then he walks after the
Spirit; (viz.) as he intermingles grace with all he does. Now is it thus with
you? are you holy, spiritual in all manner of conversation, in every winding
and turn of the life (as the Apostle exhorts 1 Pet. 1.15)? And once more let me
ask you (and 'pray call your own Souls to account about it), is there not some
one or other secret by-path of the Flesh which you walk in? this holy David
prayed against, Psalm. 139.24. See if there be [any wicked way] in me, and lead
me in the way everlasting. Upon the whole, I fear there is need to press this
upon you to walk yet more and more after the Spirit: and we beseech and exhort
you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how you ought to walk and
to please God, so ye would abound more and more; 1 These. 4.1. --

3. Thirdly, are you such who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit? O
rejoice in this and take the comfort of it! Here Is sufficient ground of
assurance that there is no condemnation to you, that you are in Christ Jesus;
and is not that matter of rejoicing? You are within the Character here given of
such who are in Christ, therefore you are in him, and being in him must it not
needs be well with you? And if you look into the following Verses there is yet
more comfort for you: they tell you that God sent his Son to condemn Sin, to
fulfill the Law, and all for such spiritual Walkers as you are, (for upon them
the Character is repeated again).

Ah (you will say) if it was thus with us we would desire no higher comfort in the
world, but we fear it is otherwise; we cannot find that we come up to this
description, and therefore cannot apply the happiness annexed to it. And why
so? why because there is so much of Flesh in us, O there is a very sinful,
carnal, and sensual part in us! yea, this often prevails and breaks forth in
our conversation; upon which we cannot but judge that we walk after the Flesh
rather than after the Spirit.

Now to this I answer: Nothing more certain than that Flesh is in you, and will
be so whilst you are in the Flesh; you must carry it with you to your very
grave, the Body of sin and the other Body must both be buried together; you will
never be wholly rid of a sinning Nature and a carnal part till you be in
heaven. And it is true too, this Flesh does and will sometimes prevail over you
(though the seldomer the better): yet this does not amount to walking after the
Flesh, or to the nullifying of the walking after the Spirit. Paul himself
complained of the Flesh, yea of the strength and power of it, yet for all that
he says here ( v. 4.) we walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; though
it was so with him, yet his state was good and his course good too: (we must
thus speak for the comfort of burd'ned Souls, though Enemies (without) take
occasion from hence to revile, and Sinners (amongst our selves) to presume). It
would be Desiderium tuum tale debet esse ad Deum, ut omnino non fit ipsa
concupiscentia cui resist^^e oporteat; Resistis enim, and non consentiendo
vincis, sed m^lius est hostem non habere quam vincere. Aug. Sermon. de Tem. 45.
happy if you might wholly be freed from a corrupt Nature, but that is rather
to be desired than hoped for in this life: Yet here is this to support you,
though that may carry the day as to some particular acts, yet the bent of the
heart is for God, and as to the general course the renewed part is uppermost.
The Flesh sometimes is too hard for you, but you do not Nulla condemnatio iis
qui sunt in* Chisto Je^u, nonenim damnatur nisi qui concupiscentia^ carnis
consentit ad malum. Aug. contra, duas, Ep. Pelag. l^b. 1. c. 10. (Vide plura in
Aug. in Psalm. ^ 18. co^c. 3.)
consent to it, it has not the full allowance and approbation of the Will, you
do not give up your selves in a willing subjection to it, what it does it is
from mere force and strength, you cry our to God daily for help against it:
well! God will not lay particular failings (thus circumstantiated) to your
charge. The Damsel under the Law that was ravished, if she cried out for help
and did not consent to the fact, was to be acquitted, Deuteronomy. 22.25. so you do to
God under the assaults of the Flesh, and so God will do to you. True sin is sin
though it has not full and deliberate consent, but God is so gracious that
where that is not, he will not impute it. I have also told you, that you must
distinguish betwixt Non dicitur vivere sec^ndum Carnem qui Spiritum ducem
sequitur, etiamsi aliquando extra viam vestigium ponat, Justin.
lapses into sin and walking in sin; thou sometimes fallest by the Flesh but
yet thou do not walk after the Flesh: where the fleshly act (especially if
it be gross) is not repeated, where the Soul resists it, where there is a
rising again by repentance, deep humiliation for for what is past, and all
diligent circumspection and steadfast resolation (in God's strength) for the
time to come; there it is but a lapse and not a walking. This I hope is your
case; and if so, then what you allege against your selves will not amount to
make you walkers after the Flesh.

And as to the positive part, the walking after the Spirit, though you come
short as to degrees and are not so raised in the spiritual life as you ought,
yet in such a measure (which God accepts) you do live it. The Spirit is your
Principle, your Guide, spiritual objects have your affections, the Heart
inclines and bends chiefly to that which is good, your great end is to enjoy
and glorify God; O be of good comfort, this is walking after the Spirit. You
are imperfect in it yet sincere, you aim at more than, what you can as yet
arrive at; God accepts of you and will deal, with you as persons really
ingrafted into Christ: your holy walking discovers your Union, and your Union
secures your Non-condemnation. What have you to do, but to beg of God that he
will yet guide you, and more and more fix and stablish you in this your
spiritual walking? He that knows the goodness of your Way, knows also the
weakness of your Graces. O pray much for strengthening Grace, that you may
steadfastly continue, in your holy course to the end. Psalm. 17.5. Hold up my
goings in thy paths that my footsteps slip not: Psalm. 119.117. Hold thou me up
and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually. So
much for the Application of this Point: Two things should therein have been
further spoken to (but now must be omitted); namely

1. To vindicate the true Notion of the Spiritual Life, against all the false
MONASTIC glosses and interpretations which Some do put upon it. 2. To answer
those usual and common Objections which too many do raise against it. But the
due handling of these two Heads would take me up some considerable time, and
they will in the following Verses again offer themselves; and I fear I have
already been too long upon this Verse, therefore at present I shall not meddle
with them. I have done with the First Verse; There is therefore now no
Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit.
ROMANS 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of sin and death.


CHAP. IV. Of the Sinners being made free by the power of the Spirit from the
power of Sin and Death.
Of the Connection of this Verse with the Former. Some bring in the Words by way
of Prolepsis. The proper import of the Particle [For] cleared, and made good
against the Papists. In the Words something implied, something expressed. All
reduced to three Heads; A gracious Deliverance, the Subject, the Author of that
deliverance. What Sin is here mainly intended? How far the being made free from
it does reach? Whether it points to the Guilt or Power of Sin? What is meant by
the Law of Sin? Of deliverance from the Law of Sin and Death. Paul instances in
himself as the Subject of it: How that is to be taken? Why he speaks in the
Singular Number? The Law of the Spirit, etc. opened. A Fourfold Exposition of
the Words. What that is which is in Christ Jesus? is it the Life, or the
Spirit, or the Law of the Spirit? In the close one Truth briefly handled, That
the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Life. How or in what respects he is so? Some
short Application made thereof.

The Connection of this Verse with the Former.
THe Apostle having in the former Verse more succinctly laid down that great
Truth upon which he designed to build his following discourse, he here in this
Verse falls upon the amplifying and enlarging of himself about it: and all that
he says from this Verse to the Seventeenth is but by way of amplification upon
what he had more concisely said in the First.

It Is obvious at the first view, that this Verse does not only immediately
follow but that in its Matter it is linked and imbodied with the Former; the
particle [For] plainly shows that it is brought in to prove or to explain
something there asserred, For the Law of the Spirit, etc. Now the Apostle
having there 1. propounded the happy state of persons in Christ; and 2. having
described and uncharacterized those persons; a Question here does arise Which of
these Two does he in this Verse design to prove or open? (I say to prove or
open, for the Words may come in by way of illustration as well as by way of
proof or argumentation)


For answer to which, I see nothing of reason why Hinc utrumque depender, quod
Versu praecedenti statuit. Prius etc. Lud. de Die^.
both may not be taken in; the Words will bear a fair reference both to the One
and to the Other too.

1. First, as to the Privilege. He had said [there is no condemnation to them
who are in Christ Jesus]; now this being the great prop or pillar of the
Believers faith and hope, he will therefore fasten it sure: he is not satisfied
barely to affirm it, but he will confirm and make it good, and also show how it is
brought about.

For the Proof of it, he first brings this Argument, They who are freed from
the Law of Sin and Death, to them there is no condemnation; But such who are in
Christ are thus freed from the Law of Sin and Death, Ergo etc. All the
difficulty lying in the Minor Proposition he shows how this freedom from the
Law of Sin and Death is effected: and as to that, he says it is [by the Law of
the Spirit of Life]. Which being done (in this method) in and for Believers,
they are in no danger of condemnation.

For the explication of it (if you take the Words in that notion), the Apostle
sets down the Way and Manner how this Non condemnation is carried on. That is
done two ways, partly by the Spirit of Christ, partly by the Merit of Christ:
In order to the Sinners Justification and Salvation two things are necessary,
1. he must be freed from the tyranny, usurpation, and dominion of sin: 2. he
must be freed too from the guilt of Sin, and the Justice of God must be
satisfied.
Now (says the Apostle) Both of these are accordingly done; the Former, by the
Spirit of Christ, (which is spoken to in this Second Verse), the Latter, by the
Merit or Satisfactory Obedience of Christ in his own Person (which is spoken to
in the Third and Fourth Verses). Thus the Apostle clears up the way and method
of God in the bringing about of the Non-condemnation of Believers; and this in
the double reference which the Words will bear with respect to the Privilege.

2. Then Secondly they way refer too to the Character or Description [who walk
not after, etc.] It might be asked, How does the truth of this appear (viz.)
that persons in Christ do thus walk? or rather, How comes it about that Such do
arrive at this spiritual course? The Apostle answers, The Law of the Spirit of
Life has freed Such from the Law of Sin: (q. d.) I have spoken of the holy and
heavenly course of Believers, and do not wonder at it, you may believe me in
what I have asserted, for the mighty power of the Spirit of God having subdued
Sin and broke its strength and dominion in these persons, upon this they are
brought to holy walking, or therefore they do so walk. In this reference
several Lex spiritus vitae quae pertinet ad gratiam, and liberat a lege peccati
and mortis, facit ut non concupiscamus, and impleamus jussa legis, etc. August.
Octoginr. Quaest. p. 575. t. 4. Verius and certius est, quod hoc versiculo
rationem reddere Apostolus voluerit, non illorum verborum [nihil nunc
damnationis], sed cur hanc quasi conditionem illis verbis adjecerit, [iis qui
non secundum carnem ambulant]. Stapl. Antidot. p. 625. The Apostle proves the
Spiritual walking a causa procreante, quae est Spiritus Sanctus. Piscat. He
gives a reason why the true members of Christ do walk according to the Spirit.
Deod.
Expositers carry the Words; (but this for their Connection).

Some Divines make them to be (in part) Proleptical; as if the Apostle,
foreseeing some Objections which might be made against what he had laid down,
did here design to prevent and anticipate those Objections. For as to both the
forementioned Things, doubts and discouragements might arise in some who were
in Christ: They might object thus, Blessed Paul! thou say there is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ, but how can this be? what? so much Sin
and Guilt, and yet no Condemnation? can we (who are nothing but a very mass of
Sin) be thus safe and secure as to our eternal state? O this we scarce know how
to believe! And (again) thou speak of Walking not after the Flesh but after
the Spirit, alas! who do thus walk? when we have so much of Flesh in us, and
that does so often draw us to carnal acts, etc. how is this qualification
practicable?

To obviate this double Objection or Discouragement the Apostle brings in these
Words; in which he renders both the Privilege and the Property (of persons
interested in it) real and credible, (viz) by their being freed from the Law of
Sin and Death through the Law of the Spirit. It Is as if he had said, it is too
true that even such who are in Christ will have Sin in them, and sin will (too
often) be committed by them; yet for all this I say that such shall not be
condemned, why? because they are freed from the Law of Sin, and so consequently
from the Law of Death: Sin (I grant) is in them but it is not a Law in them or
to them; it still keeps its residence in them but its reign, its commanding
power is gone; now where it is not commanding it shall not be condemning: So
then (this notwithstanding) the foundation of a Believers Safety and Comfort
stands firm and unshaken.

And for the Other discouragement, here is a kind of tacit and implicit
Concession that the people of God are Flesh as well as Spirit, and that as to
some particular acts through infirmity they may follow the guidance and motions
of the Flesh; but yet they are not under the Law and command of the Flesh, why?
because they are freed from the Law of Sin; there is another Law which has
thrust out that Law of Sin (viz.) the Law of the Spirit. Indeed time was when
they were at the beck and command of the Flesh, when they walked after it; but
the Law of the Spirit having taken hold of them, now (for the main) they do
not, they cannot walk after the Flesh.

The force of the is Particle [FOR] opened.
I come more strictly and narrowly to look into the Words; [For the Law of the
Spirit of Life, etc.] It Is a Scripture that either is dark in it self, or else
it is made so by the various and different interpretations put upon it. Which
before I can well speak to, the first word [For] must be a little considered;
and the rather, because it is made use of and insisted upon in some matters of
Controversy. That which unites Verse and Verse, divides party and party; this
little Word is made to bear its part in some sharp Contests, and though to us
at the first view it may seem but inconsiderable, yet it is not so to the
ROMANISTS who (in their arguings against PROTESTANTS) make no small use of it.
They tell us that it is here to be taken Subscribit causam praedictae
liberationis. Soto. Apostolus hanc libertatem a lege peccati per Spiritum Dei,
ponit ut causam ejus quod prius dixerat. Stapl. Antid. p. 625. (With many
Others.)
causally, as containing in it the Ground of Justification; that it points to
inherent Righteousness as the Cause of the Non-condemnation before spoken of;
and by this they attempt to prove, that the Believer is not justified by the
imputed righteousness of Christ, but by his own personal inherent
righteousness. For (say they) the Apostle having said that there is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ, he proves it from inherent
righteousness as the proper and formal cause of it; there is no Condemnation
For the Law of the Spirit, etc. And (that the Argument may be the more pressing
and concluding to us PROTESTANTS) they urge, that Calvin and Beza themselves do
make this Law of the Spirit of Life to point to grace, regeneration, inherent
righteousness.

To whom I reply, 1. That it is not safe (either for Them or Us), in matters of
great moment to lay too great a stress upon little Words (which only join
Verse and Verse together), unless that which we build upon them or infer from
them, do agree with other Scriptures where the Thing is fully and professedly
handled. I dare not undervalue the least, the meanest particle in God's Word;
yet I would be loath to bottom a fundamental Article of Faith upon such a
particle, (especially when it admits of various senses, as this here does), if
it has not the current of the Word to back it. For our Opinion of
Justification by the alone righteousness of Christ imputed to the Sinner and
laid hold on by Faith, we ground it upon several full and entire Discourses
where our Apostle does professedly handle that Argument, proving Justification
to be according to what we hold: But our Adversaries to prove their
justification by inherent righteousness, very often (I do not say always) catch
at some little single word, and that they make the foundation which they build
this Opinion upon. In short, against this [For] in the Text (I mean too only
as they pervert it, for in truth they have not so much as even this little Word
to favor them), we set the whole third, fourth, fifth Chapter of this Epistle
to the Romans, where the Apostle in a full discourse upon it does plainly lay
Justification upon imputed, not upon inherent righteousness: and which of us
now do build upon the surest and safest bottom?

2. What if this particle (supposing it to be Causal) does point to the
description of the persons, and not to the privilege? (some of their own
Stapl. ut prius. Tolet. Causam exponit cur qui sunt in Christo non secundum
carnem ambulant.
Authors do carry it so), where then is the strength of their Argument from it
to prove the fonmal Cause of No Condemnation? All that then can be deduced from
the Words is this, that Grace in the heart is the Cause of an holy life; that
men upon regeneration are delivered from the Law of Sin, and therefore they
walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; what is this against us? And
(with respect to their Glosses) who questions or denies inherent righteousness?
or that that does free from sin? provided you take it with a double limitation,
(1.) that the freeing from Sin upon regeneration be understood of the taking
away its power: (2.) that it be not carried so far as quite to justle out
imputed righteousness, or set so high as to have that attributed to it which is
only proper to Christ's righteousness.
Our Si Spiritus vitae vivificans, Sanctificans, etc. Ergo liberati sumus a
Lege peccati and mortis, Regeneratione, Sanctificatione, non sola Justitiae
imputatione; Gratia ergo inhaerens est quae liberat a peccato. Contz. Quaest.
1. in Verse. 2. cap. 8. ad Romans Torsit hic locus tam Calvinum quam Bezam, quia
inhaerentem Justitiam per veram peccati victoriam luculenter probat, and
imputativam subvertit. Stapl. Antidot. p. 625.
Adversaries misrepresent our Opinions, and trouble themselves (in a great
measure) to prove that which we never deny, and then asperse us as though we
did deny it.

3. It Is one thing to be the Proof of a thing, another thing to be the Cause of
that thing. Regeneration indeed proves Justification (for every regenerate
person is a justified person), but it is not the cause of justification; for the
person is not therefore justified because he is regenerated, but because
Christ's righteousness by Faith is made over to him. It Is one thing to say,
therefore a man lives because he has sense and moves, and another thing to
say, therefore a man lives because he has a living Soul in him; the Sense and
motion prove the life, but it is the living Soul which is the cause of life: So
here, the Believer shall not be condemned because the Law of the Spirit of
Life, etc. this evinces the certainty of the thing but it is not the proper
Cause of it. So that the [For] in the Text is only Nota probationis, but not
causalitatis, (and so it is used up and down in the Gospel in very many places).

4. It Is very true that Legem Spiritus improprie vocat Dei Spiritum, qui animas
nostras Christi sanguine aspergit, non tantum ut a peccati labe emundet quoad
reatum, sed ut in veram pietatem sanctificet. Calvin.
Calvin (in part) does interpret the Words of regeneration and inherent
righteousness; but then (foreseeing the Objection that would be made upon it)
he explains himself about it, and says Siquis excipiat veniam ergo qua
sepeliuntur nostra delicta pendete a regeneratione, facilis est solutio: Non
assignari causam a Paulo, sed modum tradi duntaxae, quo solvimur a reatu.
Calvin.
If any shall reply that then pardon or justification does depend upon
regeneration; the Answer (says he) is obvious, Paul does not set down the Cause
wherefore we are absolved from Guilt, only the Manner wherein this is done. He
adds further, Perinde valet haec sententia, ac si dixisset Paulus
Regenerationis Gratiam ab imputatione Justitiae nunquam disjungi.
It Is as much as if the Apostle had said, that regeneration is never separated
or parted from the imputation of Christ's righteousness: So that he does, not
argue for Non-condemnation or Justification from inherent righteousness as the
proper Cause of it, but only as these two always go together, and as this is
the order and method of God wherein he justifies. And it is true too that Legem
Spiritus Vitae, nec pro lege fidei, etc. sed pro ejus efficacia, per quam
peccatum (i. e.) corruption ipsaque adeo mors sensim aboletur, ut docet infra V.
10. and 11. denique pro Regenerationis gratia accipio, cui opponitur carnis (i.
e.) Naturae nostrae corruption. Beza.
Beza does take in here (under the Law of the Spirit) Regeneration and
Sanctification; but then it is very well known what he makes to be the Law of
the Spirit of Life principally, (viz.) the Sanctity and Holiness of Christ's
humane Nature, which (he says) being imputed to the Believer he is thereupon
justified. In his verbis Calvinum Orthodoxae and Augustinianae expositioni
conformite dicere, quis dubitaverit? sed audiantur reliqua, and impostoris
technae ac frauds apparebunt. Stapl. ubi supra. Quam Legem Spiritus cum probe
intellexissent recentiores Haeretici, perperam transferunt, non ad Gratiam
justis inhaer^ntem, sed ad externam Christi justitiam, quam robis quodaminodo
affingi volunt and imputari. Justin
And now Calvin and Beza have lost all their credit: So long as they expounded
the Words of inherent righteousness they were very sound and orthodox, but now
they thus explain themselves no Censures are severe enough for them; now (if
Stapleton may be believed) they are not adulteratores sed carnifices Verbi Dei.
I know Pareus (to avoid the Popish Objection) closes with another
interpretation of the Words; but there is no necessity for that (as I conceive).
In short (as was said in the handling of the foregoing Verse) we are for
inherent righteousness as well as our Opposers, (though they are pleased very
freely to Becanus Opuse de Justif. Calvinist. c. 2. Costeri Enchir. c. 6. p.
220. Campian. Rat. 8. -- Against which Calumny vide Chamier. tom. 3. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
calumniate us, as if we denied the Thing because we deny it to be the Cause or
Ground of Justification). We are for infallibilis nexus an inseparable
connection betwixt Justification and Sanctification, where there is the blood
there is the water also, (for Christ came by both 1 John 5.6). We further hold,
that Regeneration, Habitual and Actual Righteousness, are the indispensible
Conditions of eternal life and absolutely necessary thereunto: Nay, some worthy
Pareus in Respons. ad Dub. 2. page 773. With some eminent Divines of our own.
Divines go so far as to make them Causa sine qua non even with respect to
Justification. But all this is nothing unless we make them the proper, formal
cause of Justification; which we cannot do, that being a thing so diametrically
opposite to Gospel-revelation. This block being removed out of my way, now I
proceed.

[The Law of the Spirit of Life, etc.] In the Former Verse you had contrary
Principles ( Flesh and Spirit), in this you have contrary Laws: here is Law in
opposition to Law, the Law of the Spirit set against the Law of Sin, the Law of
the Spirit of Life against the Law of Death; the Law of Sin inslaving us
against the Law of the Spirit freeing us from that slavery.

In the Words something is implied, and something is expressed:

That which is implied is this, That all Men (the very best of them) for a time
(viz.) till they be converted, are under the Law of Sin and Death.

That which is expressed is this, that Believers by the Law of the Spirit of
Life are made free from the Law of Sin and Death. The Opening of these things
will be my present business, for I cannot well pitch upon the Doctrinal
Observations till I have cleared up the Sense of the Words and the Apostles
main Scope and design in them.

The Words summed up under three General Heads. First General Opened, (viz.)
the Gracious Deliverance.
In order to which, I will reduce the whole Matter contained in them to these
Three Heads, A Gracious Deliverance, the Subject, the Author or Efficient of
that Deliverance.

1. Here Is a gracious Deliverance, [ -- has made me free from the Law of Sin,
and Death]. As to the First of these (if you consider them as distinct) the
being made free from the Law of Sin, for the better understanding thereof I
desire you to take notice of the following Particulars

1. That by [Sin] the Apostle chiefly aims at the Root Sin, the Sin of Nature,
or the sinful depraved Nature which is in falt'n Man. It Is the same with the
[Flesh] spoken of before, as also with the indwelling Sin, the Law in the
members, etc. (in the foregoing Chapter). This is that Sin which has the
greatest power in and over the Soul. Particular and Actual Sins do but derive
their power from this; all that dominion and strength which they have is but
delegated, the Supreme, Sovereign, Original dominion of Sin is seated in the
corrupt Nature: there chiefly is that Law of Sin which Believers are freed
from; (yet in subordination to this, the power of particular sins and
deliverance from that is here also to be taken in). 2. The Apostle does not
say, that Believers are simply and absolutely made free from Sin, only that
they are made free from the [Law of Sin]. There Is a Non sunt idem Peccatum, and
Lex peccati; Peccatum est vitium inhabitans in Carne, Lex Peccati dominium
peccati, quod in Carne non regenitorum plene exercet. Ab hoc peccati
inhabitantis dominio, efficacia Spiritus regenerantis liberat fideles,
fraenando illud non vero penit us tollendo. Pareus. Attendendum, quod non dicit
and: Non enim Gratia hominem impeccabilem reddit, sed fomitis vim minuit etc.
Corn. Muss. Nos it a a morte and peccato liberati fumus, ut tamen horum malorum
non parum adhuc supersit. Pet. Mart.
great difference betwixt Sin and the Law of Sin: a total freedom from the
Former none have in this life, (no, not they who are most under the Law of the
Spirit). The dearest of Gods Children must wait for that till they come to
Heaven (the only place and State of Perfection); there they shall be
perfectly, completely freed from sin, yea, from the very Being of it, but here
the utmost that they can arrive at is to be freed from its power (in
Regeneration), and from its guilt (in Justification). The Text therefore does
not speak of absolute freedom from Sin, for that being unattainable here below
is yet to come, (and so it falls under the glorious liberty of the Sons of God
mentioned Verse 21): but the being made free in the Text is spoken of as a
thing that is past, [hath made me free, etc.]; and therefore it must be limited
to freedom from the Law of Sin only. 3. There is in this life a Twofold
Freedom from Sin, the One respects its Guilt, the Other its Power. It Is a Law
in both respects: in reference to Guilt, as it binds the Creature over to
answer at Gods Bar for what he has done, and makes him obnoxious to
punnishment: in reference to Power, as it rules, commands, and exercises a
strange kind of Tyranny and Dominion over the Sinner. Now Believers are freed
from Sin in both of these respects, namely (as was said but just now) in
Justification from the guilt, in Regeneration from the power of it.
But here a Question must be resolved, (viz.) Which does the Apostle here speak
of? which of these two parts of the Saints Freedom from Sin is here primarily
and principally intended?

For Answer to which, Divines do somewhat differ about it. Non damnatur nisi
qui Concupiscentiae Carnis consentit ad malum; Lex enim Spiritus vitae in
Christo Jesu liberavit te a Lege peccati and mortis, ne scil. consensionem tuam
concupiscentia Carnis sibi vindicet. August. contra duas Pelag. Ep. lib. 1.
cap. 10. Liberavit, quomodo? nisi quia ejus reatum peccatorum omnium remissione
dissolvit (Lex Spiritus vitae in Chrislo), ut quamvis adhuc maneret -- in
peccatum tamen non imputetur. Idem de Nup. and Concup. lib. 1. cap. 32.
Austine took in Both, and therefore he sometimes opens it by the One,
sometimes by the Other. Amongst Modern Expositors A jure peceati (i. e.) a
reatn etc. Pet. Martyr. Liberatio haec non est Regeneratio, qua liberamur ex
part a peccato inhaerente, sed est peccatorum remissio, qua liberamur non ex
part, sed plene, perfecteque a peccatorum quorumcunque remissione. Rolloc.
Paulo post satis patebit de absolutione gratuita loqui, etc. Calvin.
Some interpret the Words of Freedom from the guilt of sin, they making them
chiefly to point to that grace which is given out in Justification: Liberavit
regenerando ad novam vitam. Baza. -- Ut intelligamus Legem Spiritus non solum
hoc in nobis agere, quod non condemnemur propter imputationem justitiae, sed
and vim peccati in nobis extinguere, ut jam non regnet in nobis peccatum, sed
Gratia and virtus Christi. Muscul.
Others interpret them of Freedom from the power of sin, they referring them
to that grace which is proper to Regeneration. The Opinion of the Latter I
prefer, and shall follow in the ensuing Discourse: I conceive, the Law of Sin
mainly refers to the power of Sin, and therefore the freedom from the Law of
Sin must also mainly refer to the being freed from the power of Sin. As to the
taking away of its Guilt, that the Apostle speaks to in the following Verse,
(for that is the condemning of it there mentioned); in this Verse the taking
away of its dominion was chiefly in his eye. You have him (Chap. 7.) sadly
complaining of the Law in his Members, of the Law of Sin; now nothing more
evident than that he thereby designs to set forth, not Sins guilt, but that
great (though not full) power and strength which Sin had in him, and if that be
the proper notion of the Law of Sin there; then why not here? And besides, the
Word here used [(...)] has made free, both in Scripture and also in Common
Authors usually notes the freeing of One who is under bondage and slavery: it
does not so properly note the freeing of a Malefactor from his Guilt, and from
that condemnatory sentence which he deserves; as the freeing of a Slave or
Captive who is under the Tyranny and Dominion of another; and so it falls in
exactly with that notion of freedom which I am upon. Therefore the Arabic
Translator well renders it by Emancipavit me a lege peccati, and mortis; and
Tertull. de Resur. Carn. cap. 46. legit, manumisit me. Fuimus enim quasi
mancipia peccati and mortis, sed a Christo manumissi and liberate donati
sumus. A-Lapide.
Tertullian by Manumisit me, (in allusion to the Manumission of the Romans when
they set their Servants or Slaves at liberty): O when a man is once regenerated
he has a blessed manumission, he being made free from that cursed servitude
wherein he lived before under this cruel Master, Sin. I say, this is the strict
and proper notion of the word; which though ('it is true) it be here applied to
Death as well as to Sin, yet that is either in a more large and improper Sense,
(for the Apostle having first spoken of freedom from sin, and set it forth by
that term which was proper to it, he was not sollicitous to be so accurate as
to vary his expression for the Other, but would make the same to serve for
both); or else because there is a bondage in Death as well as in Sin, and
therefore [(...)] will agree with it as well as with sin. And I desire that
this may be considered (which I lay a great stress upon), the Apostle in this
Verse speaks of the Spirit personally considered, as in the next Verse of the
Son personally considered also: it being so, we must then interpret their
several [making free from sin] according to that which is proper to them in
their personal consideration. Now it is the Spirits personal act to free (by
regeneration) from Sins power, as it is the Sons personal act (by satisfaction)
to free from Sins guilt; therefore the First is meant in this Verse (where the
Spirit is mentioned), as the Second is meant it the next Verse (where the Son
is mentioned).

4. [The Law of Sin]: It Is a Metaphor which our Apostle often uses and in which
he seems much to delight; you have it often Romans 7. (V. 21.) I find a Law, that
when I would do good, evil is present with me: (V. 23.) But I see another Law
warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law
of sin, which is in my members: (V. 25.) With my mind I my self serve the Law
of God, but with the flesh the Law of sin. What this Law of sin is, and in what
respects it passes under this Appellation, hereafter shall be opened: at
present only in General observe, that this metaphorical expression notes the
Ex adverso, Legem peccati and mortis appellat Carnis imperium, and (quae inde
consequitur) mortis tyrannidem: Calv. A peccato inhabitante, quod instar Legis
mihi imperabat malas actiones, and ad eas me impellebat. Piscat. Est Lex
peccati, quia ad peccatum movet incitatque velut Lex quaedam. Estius. A Lege
peccati (i. e.) a Lege fomitis, quae inclinat ad peccandum, vel a Lege peccati
(i. e.) a consensu and operatione peccati, quod hominem tenet ligatum per modum
Legis. Aquin. -- Dum absolvuntur a Dominio peccati super ipsos, ab obligatione
conformandi voluntarias suas operationes Legi pecca^i, a quo vinculo non
absolvebat Lex. Cajetan. A Lege peccati, h. e. a dictamine, jure, dominatu,
reatu concupiscentiae. A-Lap.
Power, Dominion, Tyranny of sin. Some make the Law of sin to be no more than
barely: sin it self; but (I think) it carries a special reference to and super
adds the Adjunct of Sin. the power of it. And Elegantius vertisset a jure
peccati. Erasin.
Some would have us read it the Right of sin rather than the Law of sin; (the
matter comes much to one).

So much for the being, made free from the Law of Sin: In the opening of which,
as yet I have not taken any notice of the O pinion of Some who make the Law of
Sin to be the Old Mosaical Law; but by and by I will. It follows [and Death]:
Now this is either one and the same with sin as being only an Epethite, for
it, (so -- (...). Oecum. -- Apostolus conjunctionem interposuit, codem tamen
sensu, ac si peccatum mortiferum, (...) dixisset. Piscat.
Several expound it); [Sin and Death] that is deadly Sin or Sin which is of a
deadly nature. As the Spirit of life is the living spirit, so Sin and Death is
no more than deadly sin; it is an expression like that of the Poet, -- Pateris
libavit, and auro; (i. e. aureis pateris). Or else you may take it as distinct
from sin: and so there is a double Deliverance held forth in the Words, One
from the Law of Sin, an Other from the Law of Death: (thus the most of (...).
Theodoret. Confer supra cap. 7.23 and 24. ubi utriusque Legis, neinpe Legis
Peccati and Mortis mentio facta est: Quare non videtur hic esse Figura (...).
Vorstius in Schol.
Interpreters open it). The Law of Sin is always attended with the Law of
Death, and freedom from the Law of Sin is always attended with freedom from
the Law of Death: the power and dominion of Death stands or falls by the power
and dominion of Sin.

But what is this Law of Death?

August. contra Fortunat. Disput. 2.
Austine answers, the Law of sin is Whoever sins shall dye, the Law of Death is
Dust thou art and to dust shall thou return. Lex mortis est mortuum perseverare
mortuum; est de morte non esse reditum ad vitam. Cajes.
Cajetan makes it to be permanentia in morte the abiding or continuance in the
state of Death: So Believers are freed from it; for though they may for a time
be subjected under it yet it shad not always have power over them, so as to
hold them forever (as the Word is used concerning Christ Acts 2.24); they shall
arise and live again: they are not under the Law (i. e.) the everlasting,
evercontinuing, full power and strength of Death. You have Ver. 10, 11. the
matter of this Explication; If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of
sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness: But if the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in
you. But to pass these by! as the Law of Sin is the power of sin, so the Law of
Death is that power and right which it has over Men by reason of sin; for it
has its empire and dominion as well as sin. Therefore as you read of the
reigning of sin, so also you read of the reigning of Death; Romans 5.14. But
death reigned from Adam to Moses; [(...)] it reigned as a King (as the word
imports). Death is either Temporal or Eternal, both of which carry that in them
which may give them the Title or Denomination of a Law; but regenerate persons
upon the Law of the Spirit of Life are freed from both: From the first, not
simply and absolutely but only in a restrained sense (viz.) as it is (strictly)
a Curse, or the fruit and product of that primitive Curse Genesis 2.17. From the
second, as it notes eternal condemnation (for these two are all Ut sibi
respondeant Mors and damnatio. Estius.
one) they are absolutely freed. This Death, they being in Christ and by the
sanctifying Spirit delivered from the Law of sin, has no power or authority
over them; (I say) no authority, for it is (...) Rev. 20.6. -- on such the
second death has no power. This is the First General in the Words, that
Gracious Deliverance from the Law of Sin and Death which they hold forth.

Second General.
The Second is the Subject of this deliverance. This the Apostle puts down in
his own Person, The Law of the Spirit etc. has made [me] free from the Law of
sin and death. Here is Enallage Personae the change of the Person, 'twas [them]
in the foregoing Verse, it is [me] in this. I have already observed (and I would
now more fully open it), that our apostle throughout this whole Chapter
(wherein he mainly treats of the Saints Privileges), speaks altogether in the
Plural Number, excepting only this one Verse. It Is true, where he is speaking
of some high act of Grace (as performed by himself), there he purs it in the
Singular Number: as ( Ver. 18.) [I reckon] that the sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory, which shall be revealed in
us: And so too, where he is speaking of some high Assurance (a thing not so
common), there also he expresses it in the Singular Number; as ( Ver. 38.) For
[I am persunded] that neither, etc. But wherever the great and fundamental
privileges of Believers are before him, there he always expresses himself in
the Plural Number, then it is [us] altogether. And it is observable, that oven
where he speaks of himself (as to some special act, or enjoyment), yet even
there (as to the main Privilege) he takes in all the people of God: You may
see this made good in the two forementioned places; it is [ I reckon] but it is
the glory that shall be revealed [in us]; and it is [I am persuaded] but it is
shall separate [us] from the love of God. Well! here he puts in himself as the
Subject of the Privilege: but it is not to exclade or shut out Others, only he
propounds himself as one great Instance of freedom: from the Law of sin by the
Law of the Spirit; here is application and appropriation (as to himself), but
no impropriation or exclusion (with respect to Others). He that had so much of
Faith and Experience as to be able to apply this to himself, had withal so
much of Knowledge and Wisdom as to know, that it was with Others (yea, with all
regenerate persons) just as it was with himself. And therefore it is in the
Observandum est, in causa Gratiae nullum esse inter Apostolum, and quemvis
Christianum (duntaxat verum) discrimen: Non est quod dicamus Paulus suit
Apostolus, nos non item; ex eo quod sibi contigit per gratiam Christi, probat
hoc quod tribuit omnibus Christianis. Muscul. Continet Argumentum a Testimonio,
viz. experientia Apostoli, and ita fimul Argumentum a Pari, quod enim Apostolus
in se expertus fuerat, id pari ratione omnes credentes in se experiuntur, nempe
operationem illam Spiritus Sancti regenerantis. Piseas. Non ego solus sed omnes
quotquot in Jesu Christo sunt, etc. Zuingl. Me, and fidelem quemvis. Gomar. i.
e. quemvis vere Chriftianum. Grot. Pronomen (me) demonstrat ipsum in Christo
ambulantem, etc. personam fiquidem talium induit. Cajes. In little persona de se
Apostolus loquitur haec verba. Estius. Soto will be sure to extend it far
though, for be glosses upon it Me, i. e. Gonus humanum.
persons of all these that he here thus speaks, and this [me] is inclusive not
exclusive; every Child of God in the world may say as here Paul does, the Law
of the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin
and Death: and (indeed) every Believer should be so well acquainted with the
workings of the Spirit of God upon his own heart, as to be able to apply this
to himself.

But why does Paul here particularize himself, and speak thus in the Singular
Number in this place rather than in Others? I ansiver.

1. Because he looked upon himself as a pattern. And indeed God all along dealt
with him as so; in reference to pardoning grace he was a pattern; 1 Timothy 1.16.
-- that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long suffering, for a
pattern, etc. So in reference to renewing grace he shall be a pattern too. God
would (and did) so effectually work upon him in the miraculous changing of him,
in the mighty rescuing of him from the power of ignorance, carnal confidence,
prejudices against Christ, enmity to the Gospel and the Professors thereof,
that he should be (...) for a pattern to all that should be converted of the
freeness and efficacy of converting Grace. And therefore if He was thus freed
from the Law of sin it should then be so with Others also, for what was done to
him was not done to him as a mere single or private person, but as to One that
was to be an instance or pattern of the Grace of God toward many.

2. Because he was the Complainer therefore he shall be the Triumpher; because
he was the Combater therefore he shall be the Conqueror. And as you have him in
the Ponit se pro Exemplo, ut prius infirmitatum and Luctae, ita nunc fiduciae:
Imo verbis quasi praeit, quibus singuli hanc consolationem nobis applicemus.
Pareus.
foregoing Chapter (in the person of Believers), complaining of the Law of sin;
so here you shall have him (in the person of Believers too) triumphing over the
Law of sin, he being made free from it by another and an higher Law. But to
close this Head! be thou who thou will, if thou be a gracious person and one
upon whom the Spirit has put forth his efficacious power, thou as well as Paul
art made free from the Law of sin. Therefore to make this the more indefinite
and universal, the Syriac (not without an Emphasis says Et quidem non sine
Emphasi quasi admonente Paulo, ut singuli credentes hoc sibi beneficium
applicent. Beza.
Beza) reads it not [me] but [thee]; the Law of the Spirit of Life has made
[thee] free from the Law, etc.

The Third General in the Words is the Author or Efficient of this freedom
from the Law of Sin and Death, and the way or manner how it is effected; it is by
the Spirit of Life, and it is by the Law of the Spirit etc. Now here lies the
greatest difficulty, and that wherein Expositors do most differ: I find no less
than Four several Interpretations put upon these Words.

1. First Some would have them to refer to the sanctity and perfect holiness of
Christ's Humane Nature. This (say they) is the [Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus], and the [Law] of the Spirit of Life is the power and virtue of Christ's
unspotted holiness and purity, to acquit and make free the Believer from the
Law of Sin and Death, (h. e.) from the guilt of sin and Condemnation: So that
they bring the matter to this, the Habitual righteousness of Christ (as Man)
being imputed and made over to the Believer, upon this he is discharged from
all guilt and looked upon by God in Christ as perfectly righteous. This
Interpretation is that which Cum adeo imbecilla sit vis Spiritus in nobis,
quomodo inde possumus colligere, nullam esse condemnationem, etc. quoniam
(inquit) vis ista Spiritus vivificantis, quae tam imbecilla est in nobis,
perfectissima and potentissima est in Christo, and nobis credentibus imputata,
facit ut perinde censeamur, ac si nullae prorsus reliquiae corruptionis and
mortis in nobis inhaererent. -- Nunc autem de perfecta sanctitatis humanae
naturae Christi imputatione disterit, etc. Beza in Paraphr. Distinguit Legem
Spiritus vitae quae est in ipso Christo Jesu, ab ea quae in nobis est ab co
effecta, (i* e.) perfectam naturae nostrae in Christo sanctificationem, ab ea
quae in nobis est duntaxat inchoata: Nam illa quidem nobis imputata cum
perfecta sit nos liberavit, etc. Explicandum est igitur istud, de tertia
Justificationis nostrae gratuitae part, quae consistit in Sanctificatione ipsa
Jesu Christi nobis communicata. Idem in Notis. (Et porro), Vis illa Spiritus
vivifici cujus fons est in Christi carne, facit ut peccatum seu vitiositas
illa, cu us reliquiae adhuc in me supersunt, and quae me alioqui condemnationi
adjudicarent, efficere nequeat ut conde ^ner, quoniaru quod est in me duntaxat
inchoatum, in Christo perfectissimum est, cui sum insitus. This way goes
Hemingius, Elton, Parr, Streso, etc. Th^s Downham interprets it, Of Justific.
Book 1. Chap. 3.
Several Expositors (some of Whom are of great Eminency) do pitch upon: Yet
(with submission) I shall crave leave to prefer another before it.

For it is very well known (though I shall not in the least concern my self
therein), that some very worthy Persons do question the truth of the Thing,
(viz.) the formal imputation of Christ's Habitual and Original righteousness;
they making the sanctity of his Humane Nature to belong to his Justitia,
Personae, rather than to his Justitia Meriti or Justitia Fidejussoria; and they
looking upon it only as the necessary qualification of his Person to fit him
to be a Mediator, and also as that which was necessary in order to the
meritoriousness of his Obedience; but denying that it is directly and formally
made over by imputation to the Believer. But as to this (which is the Veritas
Rei), as I said before I will not at all concern my self about that; I am only
to enquire whether this Interpretation be proper to the Text and rightly
grounded upon it, (which is the Veritas Loci). And truly that I question very
much, and must say with the learned De Dicu, Nescio an id spectaverit
Apostolus, etc. I know not whether that was the thing which the Apostle here
had in his eye. I humbly conceive, the Words without great straining cannot be
brought to this Sense, their main scope and intendment looking to a quite Other
thing. And that branch of them [in Christ Jesus], upon which they who close
with the Exposition before us lay so great a stress, will bear another
explication much more easy and genuine, (as you will hear by and by).

2. Secondly, Others understand by [ the Law of the Spirit of Life and the Law
of Sin and Death], the Law of Faith and the Law of Works, or the Evangelical
and the Masaical Law. You read Romans 3.27. of the Law of Faith and of Works,
(two very opposite and contrary Laws); now by that twofold Law Some open the
Law of the Spirit, and the Law of Sin and Death. Thus I ex ergo Spiritur vitae
est Lex Fidei: Nam and Moysi Lex est Spiritualis, quia prohibet peccare, non
tamen vi^ae, etc. ('It Is too large to be written out).
Ambrose expounds it; The Law (says he) of the Spirit of Life, it is the very
Law of Faith: Chrysostom distinguishes much to the same purpose, (...).
Chrysostom, in loc.
"The Law of Moses was a Spiritual Law, because it forbad Sin, but it was not
the Law of the Spirit of Life, because it could not remit Sin, and so quicken
the dead. But this (Law of Faith) is the Law of the Spirit of Life, because it
does not only restrain Sin, but it also restores from death, etc. This Law in
Christ Jesus (that is) by Faith, does free the Believer from the Law of Sin,
and Death. The Law of Sin is that which dwells in the members, which persuades
to that which is contrary to the Will of God; the Law of Death is the Law of
Moses, because it kills Sinners: And no wonder that this Law should be the Law
of Death, when the Gospel is to some the savor of death unto death: (and so he
goes on in the further explication of it). Amongst modern Interpreters Pareus
follows this Exposition, making the Law of the Spirit of life to be the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Law of sin and death to be the Law of Moses:
The Gospel says he) is the Law of the Spirit because it is attended with the
conveyance of the Spirit; the Law of Moses was spiritual but not the Law of the
Spirit because it did not convey the Spirit: And that was the Law of Sin
because it discovered sin, irritated sin, made sin to be sin; and of Death too,
because it had a killing virtue in it; 2 Cor. 3.6. The letter kills but the
spirit gives life. Thus Pareus; who after he had laid down and opened his
Opinion, thus concludes, With submission to other men's judgments, I judge this
to be the most plain and genuine meaning of this place. This way very many Lex
Spiritu^, etc. est doctrina Evangehi fide apprehensa. Osiand. Fortasse and
legem Mose intelligit per legem peccati and mortis, a qua etiam lege liberati
sumus, in vulgato Jesu Christi Evangelio. Massus. Utraque est Spiritus Sancti
ut actoris, utraqne est Spiritus nostri directiva^, sed haec est Spiritus
Sancti, quatenus est vivificator noster in Jesu Christo, etc. Cajetan. Legem
peccati vocat literam Legis, quae peccatum excitare solet, and damnationem
revelare. Vatabl. Opponitur haec Lex Spiritus Legi Mosaicae. Crell. Posset
etiam per Legem peccati and mortis intelligi Lex Mosis, etc. Perer. Vide Lud.
de Dieu in loc. Baldwin. Dr. Hammond in Paraphr.
Others go (either as to the whole, or as to the most considerable part of it).

But neither shall I close with this Interpretation; and that for two Reasons:
I. Because though the Gospel may very well be styled the Law of the Spirit of
life, yet it sounds somewhat harsh to call the Mosaical Law (God's own Law) the
Law of sin and death. There is (I grant) something of truth in it, and it may
admit of a very fair and sound explication; but then there must be a great deal
of stating and limitation and cautioning before you can come at it. And
therefore many -- (...), etc. Chrysostom. Legem peccati and mortis non ausim cum
quibusdam accipere pro Lege Dei, etc. Quamvis enim peccatum augendo mortem
generet, Paulus tamen ab hac invidia consulto supra deflexit. Calvin. His
verbis non significatur Lex Mosaica, etc. Pet. Mart.
Expositors do not approve of the application of this title to the Mosaical
Law. Nay, our Apostle himself warns us against it; (whose way and custom it
was, whenever he had touched upon any thing which might seem to reflect any
disparagement upon the Law, presently to subjoin something for the vindication
of its honor): Romans 7.7. What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid!
when the commandment came, sin revived and I died: and the commandment which
was ordained to life, I found to be unto death, etc. yet (says he) the law is
holy and the commandment holy, and just, and good: was then that which was good
made death to me? God forbid! but sin that it might appear sin, working death
in me by that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding
sinful: No man did ever depress the Law more than Paul did (in the matter of
Justification), yet in other respects none did ever more vindicate and exalt
it. Well! this is one Reason why I shall not fall in with this Sense.

A Second is this, because the Apostle here is not treating of the Law-state or
Gospel-state, or of the Covenant-aaministration proper to either; but he is
(more closely) treating of the State of Nature and of Grace, of freedom from
Condemnation by the taking away of sins power and guilt; in pursuance of which,
he pitches upon Sanctification by the Spirit and Satisfaction by the Son. And
therefore though the Former Notion may be taken in, yet certainly that which
directly falls in with the Latter (as that Sense will which I shall presently
give), must be most agreeable to the Apostles Scope in this place.

3. Thirdly by [the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus] Some understand
nothing but the very Spirit of Christ Jesus: They make the Law of the Spirit to
be the very Spirit it self, and nothing more; (thus (...). Chrysostom. (Theophyl.
O^cumen. Theodor. say the same). Lex Spiritus, i. e. Lex quae est Spiritus.
Aquin.
Chrysostom and his Followers). This is a very good foundation to build upon,
but yet without some further addition it will not so fully reach that special
matter in the Words which has a great weight and emphasis in it.

4. Fourthly therefore, Others do interpret them not only as pointing to Gods
Spirit, but (to make it the more express) they consider the Spirit of God as
renewing, as regenerating, as working the new and heavenly life in the Soul
with great power and efficacy. The Spirit is styled the Spirit of life both as
he is a living Spirit himself, and also as he is a quickening Spirit to the
Creature; as he makes Sinners who were Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in trespasses and sins to live, by working Grace and Regeneration in them
and so life thereby. But what is the Law of the Spirit of Life? why, it is the
mighty power of the regenerating Spirit put forth upon men in order to the
freeing of them from the power and dominion of sin. There are (I know) sundry
other explications given of it: Lex-Spiritus vitae una eademque est quae and
Lex Dei, sicut una eademque est Lex peccati and mortis; Nihil damnationis erit
his, qui Lege peccati quae est Lex mortis liberantur, and Legi Dei quae est Lex
Spiritus serviunt. Orig.
Origin makes it to be the Law of God in general which (says he) is also the
Law of the Spirit; Lex Spiritus perinde sonat, q. d. Legem Spiritualem, juxa
proprietatem sermonis Hebraici. Erasm.
Erasmus opens it by the Spiritual Law; Est periphrasis Legis Gratiae, quam
Spiritus Sanctus renovator and vivificator mentis humanae scribit in cordibus
quae inhabitat. Perer. Legem Spiritus vocat Gratiam Christi, qua Lex Dei per
Spiritum Sanctum scribitur in cordibus nostris. Estius.
Pererius and Estius, by that grace of Christ or of the Spirit by which he
writes the Law in the Heart; Lex Spiritus vitae, i.e. certa and indubitata in
Christum fides, etc. Per Antithesin Legi peceati, fidem in Deum per Christum
Legem appellat, abutens vocabulo Legis. Zuinglius.
Zuinglius by the grace of Faith; (several such Glosses are put upon it which I
shall not further make recital of.) That explication which I have laid down is
most Cum Puulus utitur Voce Legis, loquitur Metaphorice, nam per Legem
intelligit Vim and efficaciam. Pet. Martyr. Lex Spiritus Metaphorioe vis quasi
imperans and dominans. Gomor.
usual and common; and so (to be brief) all comes to this; The Spirit of Life
is the Holy Spirit of God, which is a living Spirit in himself, and which also
as a regenerating Spirit works the divine and spiritual Life in the Soul; and
The Law of the Spirit of life is the power and commanding efficacy of the
Sanctifying Spirit in his gracious operations upon the Hearts of such and such
persons, by which they are made free from the Law of Sin and Death, that is,
from the absolute domination, tyranny, and full power of Sin and Death. Before
I go off from this One thing must be added, (viz.) that though Law be here
joined with the Spirit of life yet it is to be taken not as ultimately referring
to the life, but rather to that which follows has made me free from the Law of
sin, etc. I mean this; Great is that power which the Spirit puts forth in
renewing and (thereby) quickening the Soul, yet his power as terminating in
that effect is not here mainly intended; but it is the power of the Spirit
terminating in the deliverance of the Sinner from Sins dominion which is here
intended: that (I say) is the proper terminus of the Spirits power in this
place, and whatever power the Spirit puts forth in the life (or Regeneration),
that is here mentioned but as the way or medium of the Spirit in his making
free from the Law of Sin and Death.

This Interpretation of the Words I judge most agreeable to the Apostles Scope
in them, and therefore I shall handle them according to it: and then the
Connection will lie thus, There is no condemnation to them who are in Christ
Jesus, etc. because by the mighty power of the regenerating and enlivening
Spirit Such are freed from the command and rule of Sin, so that it does not
reign over them as formerly it did; and they being thus freed from the power of
Sin, consequently they are also freed from the power of Death, especially of
eternal Death; so that most certainly there is no Condemnation to them.

But now against the truth of what is here asserted a Question or Objection may
be raised; How does Paul here say that he was made free from the Law of sin,
when in the preceding Chapter he had so much complained of it? you have him
there bewailing it over and over, therefore how is that consistent with what he
here lays down? I will not at present stay to answer this Objection, but in the
handling of one of the Observations it shall be answered. What is it which is
in Christ Jesus?


Upon the review of the Words I find one thing in them which as yet has scarce
been touched upon, that therefore must be a little opened and then I shall have
done with the Explication of them. It Is here said the Law of the Spirit of life
[in Christ Jesus], now it may be asked what does this [in Christ Jesus] refer
to? or what is that in special which is in Christ Jesus? is it the Life? or the
Spirit? or the Law of the Spirit? (for all of these go before): I answer, Each
and all of them in different respects may be said to be in Christ Jesus, but I
conceive it is spoken chiefly with respect to the Spirit it self.

1. The Life (wrought in the Soul at and by regeneration) that is in Christ
Jesus: partly as he by the Spirit does work that Life, and partly as he
preserves and keeps up that Life when it is wrought. The spiritual life here as
well as the eternal life hereafter is in Christ; that of the Apostle (though it
be spoken of the latter, yet) is applicable to both, 1 John 5.11. And this life
is in his Son. Beza (with Lex Spiritus Vitae, est vis Spiritus quae vitam eam
inspirat quae est in Christo, quaeque vivitur ejus Spiritu. Bucer. -- Illius
(inquam) Spiritus, qui ad vitam aeternam ducit quam Christus daturus est. Grot.
Others, some of whom do a little differ in their notion of the life it self)
carries it in this reference, (according to his explication of the Spirit of
life); and to make the thing more express he would have an Article inserted and
added to the Words, thus, (...).

2. The Spirit is in Christ Jesus: And it may be said to be so upon a fourfold
account; (1.) As it was at first poured out upon him in his Humane Nature and
does yet reside in him in a very high and eminent manner: For God gave not the
Spirit by measure to him (as he does to us) Joh. 3.34. he was full of the Holy
Ghost Luke 4.1. anointed with the Holy Ghost Acts 10.38. 'twas prophesied of
him that the Spirit of the Lord should rest upon him Isa. 11.2. Christ as man
has the special residence of the Spirit in him and the special communication
of the Spirit to him; it is in all the Saints but eminently it is in Christ
Jesus. (2.) It Is the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, not only in respect of
the great acts and operations of this Spirit in and upon Christ himself, but
also in respect of the Order of the Spirit in its operations: for it See of
this Dr. Sibbs in The Spiritual Jubille, p. 36, etc.
first wrought in and upon Christ, in the sanctifying of his Humane Nature, in
the fitting of him for his Sufferings, in the supporting of him under his
Sufferings, etc. and then subsequently it works in and upon Believers according
to their capacity. (3.) The Spirit may be said to be in Christ Jesus, as he
does convey and give this Spirit where he pleases. Then the in Christ Jesus is
as much as (...). Occumenius. Lex Spiritus vitae, i. e. gubernatio Spiritus
vitalis, quem suppeditat Christus, non solum admonens nos exemplo mortis suae
ad charitatis opera perficienda, sed etiam operans illam in cordibus nostris.
Oecolamp.
by Christ Jesus; the Spirit is given and does work as a regenerating Spirit
(or the Spirit of life) according to the will and good pleasure of Christ. (4.)
In Christo Jesu, quia non datur nisi his qui sunt in Christo Jesu. Aquin.
As this Spirit is given only to those who are in Christ.
Men out of Christ have nothing to do with it, his Members are only its
Temples; without the Spirit there is no Union, and without the Union there is no
Spirit. As the Member does not participate of the Animal Spirit but as it is
united to the Head; so a man does not participate of the blessed quickening
Spirit of God but as he is united to Christ: (but these things will be more
largely insisted upon when I come to the ninth and tenth Verses). Now the Words
(which I am opening) mainly point to this; what is it which is in Christ Jesus?
why, it is the Spirit it self: therefore Placet supplementum (qui) ut referatur
ad Spiritum, and in Graeco subaudiatur (...), quasi scriptum sit (...). Piscat.
So Erasm.
Some also would have an Article inserted here to make the reference to the
Spirit more clear, thus, (...).

3. Then as to the Third and Last thing, the Law of the Spirit that too is in
Christ Jesus. Thus, that mighty power which the Spirit at any time does exert
in the work of Regeneration, it is conveyed to a person and does take hold of
him in Christ Jesus, that is, in and through Christ; viz. as this effectual
Operation of the Spirit is grounded upon Christ's purchase, and is put forth in
pursuance of Christ's redeeming love. (This is a truth which might be largely
opened, but I fear I have been too long already upon the clearing up of this
Branch of the Text).

And yet I cannot omit to tell you, that there is One reference more (which
Quamquam nihil vetat, quin illa verba, (...), construantur cum verba sequente
(...) etc. Piscat. in Schol..
Some do mention); as this [in Christ Jesus] may refer to and be joined with
the Word [(...)] has made free: Then the Sense would be this, it is by Christ
that Saints are made free from Sin and Death;; whatever spiritual freedom
Believers have they owe it all to Christ, he has the great hand in it as the
Efficient and meritorious Cause thereof. But this I Will pass by, because though
it be a thing unquestionably true, yet the generally received pointing of the
Words will not admit it to be here intended.

I have now finished the Explicatory part; the difficulty of the Words and the
different Expositions put upon them (all of which may be useful though all are
not so pertinent and proper) must be my Excuse for my being so redious and
prolix upon it.

Having given you their proper sense and monning, I should next draw out those
Doctrinal Truths which are contained in them; but that I shall not do at
present: Only there is One of them which I shall mention and briefly close
with; How the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Life.
it is this, The Holy and Blessed Spirit is the Spirit of Life: so he is here
expressly styled, the Law of the [Spirit of Life]. Which Words are applied to
the Witnesses Rev. 11.11. where it is said of them that the Spirit of Life from
God entered upon them; but yet know, though it is the same words yet it is not the
same sense. For by the Spirit of Life as applied to the Witnesses, nothing is
meant but their civil living again in their restunration to their former Power,
Office, Liberties of Service, etc. but when it is applied to the Great Spirit of
God it carries a quite other and much higher sense in it. What Is that? why, it
notes his living in, himself, and also his being the Cause of Life to the
Creature: He Is the Spirit of Life

1. Formally. 2. Effectively or Causally.
(A few words to each!)

1. First as to the Formal Notion. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of Life as
he is a living Spirit, as he lives in himself or has life in himself: For as
the Father has life in himself, and has given to the Son to have life in
himself ( Joh 5.26), so the Spirit has life in himself also. And it is not an
ordinary or common life which the Spirit lives, but it is the self same life
which the Father and the Son do live: he being truly God lives the same
increated, infinite, independent, blessed life which the two Other Persons do.
Genitivus Hebraico more pro Epitheto ponitur. Calvin. Est Genitivus Epitheti
loco. Estius.
Expositors generally observe, that Life when it is here joined with the Spirit
is not to be taken Substantive but Adjective; it is according to the Hebrew I
diome, where when two Substantives are put together the Latter of which is in
the Genitive Case, that is to be rendered as an Adjective or as an Epithete of
the Former: as the Bread of life is living bread, the Water of life is living
water, the Glory of Grace is glorious Grace, etc. so here the Spirit of life is
the living Spirit. Theophylact (joining this Life with the Law going before)
says this is spoken (...), as if the Law of Life was set in opposition to the
Law of Sin and Death: but Life is not to be joined with the Law but with the
Spirit himself.

2. Secondly the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of life Effectively or Causally. He
is a quickening, a life-bestowing or life-working Spirit in the Creature; he
makes Sinners to live, and is the spring of that heavenly and supernatural life
which is in the gracious Soul. As he has life in Himself so he communicates it
to Others, he is not only a living Spirit but he is also (...) a quickening
Spirit. And this is One of his great acts, namely to quicken: he is the Spirit
of 2 Cor. 3.17.
liberty and he is also the Spirit of life, he is a teaching, inlightning,
convincing, strengthening, comforting, purifying Spirit, and he is also an
enlivening and quickening Spirit. And as the Father and the Son live in
themselves and quicken Joh. 5.21.
whom they will, so the Holy Ghost too has life in himself and quickens whom
he will, (as he is said to divide gifts to every one severally even as he will,
1 Cor. 12.11). The Spirit is Oecumen.
(...) the guide and the giver of the spiritual life; as the Soul gives life to
the Body so the Spirit of God gives life to the Soul; in which respect he is
called Dicitur Spiritus vitae, quod animam vegetet and vivificet divina gratia.
Contzen. Sicut Spiritus naturalis facit vitam naturae, sic Spiritus Divinus
facit vitam Gratiae. Aquin.
the Spirit of life.

And this Life or Quickening by the Spirit is either that which is at the first
Conversion, or that which is subsequent and follows after Conversion.

1. First there is that Life which is proper to the first Conversion. When the
Sinner is converted he is quickened or made alive, for indeed till that great
work was done in him, in a spiritual sense he was no better than a dead man;
before renewing grace there is no life, It Is the regenerating Spirit which
inspires this into the Soul; I say into the Soul, for that is the receptive
subject of this Life: There is another Life or quickening (to be wrought also
by the Spirit) which is proper to the Body, of which the Apostle speaks here
Verse 11: -- shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells
in you; (in reference to which Christ too is called a quickening Spirit 1 Cor.
15.45): but the proper subject of the present and spiritual enlivening by the
Spirit, is the Soul. Now take a man before Conversion he has a Soul
spiritually dead, he lives the life of Nature, the common animal life and
that is all; but when the Spirit comes and renews him it breaths a divine and
excellent life into him. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened who were dead in
trespasses and sins: Luke 15.32. -- for this thy brother was dead, and is alive
again. The Spirit of life is the Spirit of regeneration, and he working as a
regenerating Spirit is the Spirit of life.

2. There is the Spirits quickening after Conversion: For this (in such a sense)
is a continued, abiding, repeated act; we are but once regenerated and
therefore but once habitually quickened, but the actual and subsequent quickening
is renewed and reiterated from time to time. This lies in the exciting and
actuating of the several Graces, the taking off the deadness of the heart in
holy Duties, the drawing out of vigoxous and lively desires after God and
Christ, the raising and stirring up of the Affections, etc. And all this is
done by the Spirit of life also; the life and liveliness too of a Christian is
from the vital, quickening influences of the Spirit; without which there can be
no spiritual vivacity in him. Therefore the Spouse prayed Cant. 4.16.
Awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices
thereof may flow out: she directed her prayer to the Spirit, and what did she
pray for? for that which I am upon (viz.) the enlivening and exciting of her
Graces; she expresses it metaphorically but this was the thing which her Soul
breathed after. To apply this in a word (for it is not a point which I intend to
stay upon).

Sirs! V. S. R.
You see whether you are go for life. Here Is the Spirit of life, to him
therefore you must apply your selves for life, it is the living Spirit which
must make you live. Are you not spiritually dead? is not this the sad condition
of all who lie in the Natural State? what are such but as so many walking
Ghosts? they are no better than dead even whilst they live, (as the Apostle
speaks of the Widow that lives in pleasure 1 Timothy 5.6); is not Grace the Life
of the Soul? what is Life it self but a kind of Death without Christ and Grace?
(...), (says Ignatius): Alas! you may move, walk, breath, eat, drink, sleep,
put forth all the several acts of the animal Life, and yet for all this (in
reference to any spiritual Life) be but dead persons. And is it so with any of
you? O why do you not fly to the Spirit of Life that you may be quickened? God
convince you of the misery of spiritual Death that you may endeavor to get out
of it! and God convince you of the glory, excellency, necessity of the
spiritual Life, that you with the most earnest desires pursue after it! what is
is to have the Life of Nature and to want the Life of Grace* to have living
Bodies without and dead Souls within? to be able to do whatever is proper to
Nature, and not to be able to put forth one vital act of Grace? Is not the
spiritual death a certain forerunner of the eternal death? can he that is dead
here (being without God) hope to live with God hereafter? O that you would be
persuaded to make out after the spiritual Life! I would in hearty desires say
that for every dead Soul which they once wrote upon the Tomb of dead Brutus,
utinam viveres, would to God that thou might live! But how shall that be
accomplished? why thus, here is the Spirit of Life, whose Office it is to
quicken the dead; whoever thou art therefore if thou will but betake thy self
to this Spirit, he can and he will give thee Life: Life thou must have, (for
it is better to have no Life than not to have this Life); Life thou may have,
nay Life thou shall have if thou will but implore, improve, wait, depend upon
this Spirit of Life.

Further, you that are Saints in whom the quickening Spirit has effectually
wrought, yet do not you find your selves too often under great deadness?
(certainly you are great strangers to your selves if you do not find it to be
so); you are not dead yet often under deadness: O now whenever it is so with you
(and you groan under it as your burden), do you also apply your selves to this
Spirit of Life. You go to Duty, attend upon Ordinances, pray, hear the Word,
receive the Sacrament, and you would fain be lively in all; would you be so
indeed? look upwards then, as knowing it is the Spirit of Life that must make
you so. Quickening Grace is very precious to the Soul that is sincere; a Child
of God cannot be without it; he cannot be satisfied in the bare having of grace
unless it be lively* nor with the bare performance of Duty unless he be lively
in it. How earnest was David in his prayers to God for it! Psalm. 119.25, 37,
40, 88. Quicken thou me according to thy word: Quicken thou me in thy way:
Quicken me in thy righteousness: Quicken me after thy loving kindness, (the
earnestness of his desires after it made him go over it again and again). And
no wonder it is so, for how sweet are Ordinances to a gracious person when he
has life in them? when therein he can get his Graces up, his Affections up and
lively, when he prays and has life in prayer, hears and has life in hearing,
receives and has life in receiving, O then great is his joy! Deadness very
much hinders Comfort in Duty, as the Soul is quickened so proportionably it is
comforted. In order therefore to this how does it concern you to improve the
Spirit of God as the Spirit of Life? who can thus animate and enliven you but
he? he who freed you from the Law of Sin and Death must also free you from all
that dullness and deadness of Spirit which sometimes possesses you: therefore
when David was desiring this mercy he puts the Spirit before it, Thy Spirit is
good, etc. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake: Psalm. 143.10, 11. Indeed as
none can cleanse the filthy heart but the purifying Spirit, nor soften the hard
heart but the mollifying Spirit, so none can enliven the dead heart but the
quicking Spirit. When the Child was dead the Prophet sent his staff but that
would not do the work, the Child did not revive till the Prophet came himself;
so you may have quickening Means, and quickening Ordinances, and quickening
Providence, but if this quickening Spirit does not come himself you will be
dead still. O therefore whenever you find the Heart under inward deadness,
presently carry it to this quickening Spirit for quickening Grace! I would not
have any here mistake me, to put a wrong interpretation or make bad inferences
from what has been spoken, so as to slight, neglect, cast off External Means,
Ordinances, Duties, because they are but dead things of themselves and it is the
Spirit only which gives life; (Some infer such a practice from the premises
but they do it very unwarrantably). For it is true that the Spirit of Life only
quickens, but then he does this for men when they are in the use of and in
attendance upon the Means; he first quickens to duty and then in duty and by
duty: his way and method is to give out his enlivening influences when the Soul
is waiting in holy Ordinances. And therefore these must be highly valued and
duly attended upon, though it be the Spirit only which works in them
effectually upon the heart. 'Twas the the Angel moving the Waters that did the
Cure, yet the poor Cripples were to lie by the Pool side; so it is here. It Is a
good Caveat therefore that of Musculus upon the Words, Ista Spiritus Dei
efficacia, etc. that efficacy of the Spirit (says he) is always to be prayed
for, yet we must take heed that we have a due respect for those outward Means
which the Spirit will have us to make use of. (But no more of this).

ROMANS 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of sin and death.


CHAP. V. Of the Law or Power of Sin, under which all Men are by Nature.
The whole Matter in the Words drawn into several Observations. The main
Observation broken into Three. The First of which is spoken to, (viz.) That
every unregenerate person is under the Law of Sin. That Law of Sin is opened in
the twofold notion of it. Two Questions stated: (1.) How does Sin act as a Law
in the Unregenerate? -- (2.) How it may be known when it is the Law of Sin?
or wherein does the difference lie betwixt the Power of Sin in the Regenerate
and in the Unregenerate? The Point applied by way of Information: to inform us
(1.) of the bondage of the Natural State. The Evil and Misery of that set forth
in some Particulars. (2.) To inform us of the necessity, power and efficacy of
restraining and renewing Grace. Both spoken to.


HHaving opened the Words and fixed upon that Interpretation of them which I
judge most proper and genuine, The Observations raised from the Words.
(which was my work the last time); I come now to fall upon those Observations
which are grounded upon and do best therewith.

It has been already observed, First that the Holy Spirit of God is the Spirit
of Life: (this I have given some short account of and will add nothing further
upon it).

I might Secondly observe, That this Spirit of Life is in Christ Jesus: the
regenerating Spirit is in Christ: (though not as the regenerating Spirit,
according to our common notion of Regeneration). This was also cleared up in
some Particulars when I was upon the Explication of the Words; and in the
following Verses I shall have occasion to handle it fully; therefore here I Will
pass it over.

There Is a Third Observation (which takes in the principal matter in the Text,
that therefore I shall only insist upon), namely That all regenerate persons
by the Law of the Spirit of Life are made free from the Law of Sin and Death:
For this is that which Paul here affirms concerning himself; and he speaking
here not as an Apostle but as One regenerate, quatenus regenerate, that which
he says of himself is applicable to all such, they all are made free from, etc.

The General Observation broken into Three.
This being more generally laid down just as it lies in the Words of the Text,
and it being very comprehensive, I will therefore more particularly branch it
out into three Observations:

1. That every man in the world as he is in the natural and unconverted state,
1. Obs.
before the Spirit of Life (or the regenerating Spirit) takes hold of him, is
under the Law of Sin and Death. 2. That such who are truly regenerate are made
free from the Law of Sin and Death. 2. Obs.
3. That it is by the Law of the Spirit of Life that these are made free from
the Law of Sin and Death. 3. Obs.
Each of these Points are of great weight and importance, therefore I shall
distinctly and largely speak to them.
First Observe. handled.
I begin with the First; which you may shorten thus Every unregenerate man is
under the Law of Sin and Death. In the handling both of this (and also of the
two other) I shall mainly direct my Discourse to the Law of Sin; as to the Law
of Death that I shall only speak to in the close of all.

This first Doctrinal Proposition is not so express in the letter of the Words
as the two following, but it is strongly implied and very naturally deducible
from them. Paul himself (that Acts 9.15.
chosen vessel, who was so eminent in the Love of God, the Graces of the
Spirit, the work and privileges of the Gospel) till it pleased the Lord
savingly to work upon him, was under the Law of Sin; for he says here he was
made free from it, implying there was a time when he was enslaved under it. As
to the civil freedom of a Roman he tells us he was born to that Acts 22.28. but
as to Evangelical freedom from the command and bondage of Sin he does not say
he was born free but made free; this was not the result of, Nature, Birth (or
any such thing) but the mere effect of divine grace. Further (he says) the Law
of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free; whence it follows that
till this Law of the Spirit had taken hold of him he was under the Law of Sin;
before the mighty power of the regenerating Spirit did effectually work in him
to convert and sanctify him, Sin had its full power and dominion over him. He
gives a sad account of this Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh, etc. And Tit. 3.3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, etc. It Is true, even after Conversion you have him complaining of
the Law of Sin; Romans 7.21. I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me, etc. but there was a great difference between that Law of Sin
which he was under before conversion, and that which he was under after
conversion (as you shall hereafter understand).

And thus it is with all men in the world before regenerating Grace; in the
natural and unconverted state all are under the Law of Sin, Every man is born a
subject and vassal to Sin, and is (as he comes into the world) under the power,
tyranny and domination of a cursed Nature. Sin is that (truly) Universal
Monarch which has all men (before they be converted) under its Empire and
Sovereignty: let them be High or Low, Bond or Free (in other respects), till
they be renewed and rescued by the Law of the Spirit of Life, they are all
under Sin's command and regency. For the proof of this (in the General) I shall
only refer you to Romans 6. (from the 12. to the end); where you have the Law of
Sin and the Sinners bondage under its dominion set forth in great variety of
Expressions; (I will not recite any of them, it is best to take them together as
they lie in the whole discourse of the Apostle).

For the better handling of the Truth before us, I will 1. Open this Law of
Sin, and show what is included in it and why that is set forth by this
Metaphor: Then 2. prove that Men (whilst unregenerate) are under this Law of
Sin.


How Sin is a Law, what this imports.
Yet since without any prejudice or disadvantage to the Matter contained in each
of these Heads, they may be spoken to conjunctly as well as apart; and because
too the putting of them together will somewhat shorten the work, therefore that
shall be my Method.

The word Law (as a Dr. O of the Power, etc. of Indwelling Sin, chapter 1. and 2.
Worthy Person has observed to my hand) is taken either properly or
improperly: Properly, so it is the Edict or Sanction of a person (or persons)
in Authority, wherein he or they do order and enjoin something to be done,
backing his or their Commands with promises of rewards, as also their
Prohibitions with threatenings of punnishment: this is the nature of a Law in
the strict and proper notion of it. Now if you insist upon this its exact
consideration and take in all in this Description, so Sin cannot be said to be
a Law or to impose a Law upon the Creature; the reason is obvious because it
has no Right of Dominion or rightful Authority, which is essentially requisite
to the Lawmakers and to the validity and obligation of the Law. The power of
Sin is but usurped, it has dominion de facto but not de jure; God never gave
the corrupt Nature in Man any Authority to be or to make a Law which should
bind his Creatures. He himself has made excellent Laws which are
unquestionably and universally obligatory; and he has set up Magistrates (his
Vicegerents), to whom he has delegated a power of making Laws which shall (in
a lower degree) be obligatory also: but now for Sin what has that to do with
this Law-making or Law-obliging Authority? So that this Consideration of a Law
does not at all suit with it; yet there is something in the Description that
will suit with it well enough, insomuch that it may be truly called the Law of
Sin.

Sin is a Law as it commands the Sinner.
For 1. A Law is a commanding thing: It lays its imperative injunctions upon men
and expects their Obedience; it does not barely notify or represent to Men
what they are to do or not to do, nor only advise and persuade them to do so
and so, but it commands Authoritatively. It carries dominion in it, Romans 7.1.
Know ye not the law has dominion over a man as long as he lives? this is
wrapped up in the very nature of it and is inseparable from it. Now in this
respect Sin is a Law; it commands the Sinner to act so and so, lays its
precepts upon him in a very imperious manner, assumes a strange kind of
Authority over him (though justly it has none); therefore you read of the
reigning of Sin, of obeying Sin, of the dominion of Sin, Romans 6.12, 14. this is
the nature of a Law in general, in reference to which Sin has this appellation
of a Law. In this respect such as are in the Natural State may too justly be
said to be under the Law of Sin, for it has the Command over them and does
from time to time lay its Commands upon them: the Subject is not more under the
Law of his Sovereign, nor the Servant of his Master, than the Sinner is under
the Laws of Sin; it commands very proudly and he as tamely obeys, O there is the
Law of Sin!

There are indeed two things in a Law, it is a commanding and it is a condemning
thing: it first commands men to order their actings according to what it
prescribes, and if they do not so do, in case of disobedience then they are by
it tried and condemned. Unregenerate persons are in both of these respects
under the Law of Sin: (1.) Sin has a commanding power in them; O that is upon
the throne in their Hearts, it rules them and with a strange kind of
Sovereignty orders them to do what it pleases; it (...)
Kings and (...)
Lords it over them (as the words are Romans 6.12, 14). And as there is this
domination on Sins part so there is subjection on the Sinners part; no sooner
does it command but it is presently obeyed, it does but speak the word and it is
done; if it will have such a Lust gratified the Sinner readily yields to it. As
the Centurion speaks of his Soldiers Matthew. 8.9, I am a man under authority,
having Soldiers under me, and I say to this man go, and he goes, come, and he
comes, do this, and he does it; just such a power or sovereignty has Sin in
and over graceless persons: they are at its beck, according to its commanding
propensions they order and steer their Course, may they not therefore be said
to be under the Law of Sin? -- Then (2.) for the Other property of a Law as
it is a condemning thing, that belongs to Sin too: o it is not only of a
commanding but also of a condemning nature. And (which is not usual) where it
commands and is obeyed there it condemus; which shows the difference betwixt
the Law of sin and all other Laws; they do not condemn where they are obeyed,
it is only the breach or nonperformance of them which makes a person liable to
Condemnation; but herein lies the cursedness of the Law of Sin, upon the
obeying of it it becomes a condemning Law and it only condemns where it is
obeyed. But observe how this comes about, for there is a difference in this
double Act of the Law of Sin: to command, that is Sins proper and natural act;
to condemn, that is Sins act only eventually or meritoriously; it rules of it
self directly, and propenly, but it condemns only as it lays the foundation of
Condemnation by another, (for there is another Law which formally is the
condemning Law, (viz.) the Law of God upon the violation of it). And this
speaks the inexpressible misery of the Unregenerate, they are under that Law
which tyrannically commands them here, and which (upon their obeying of it)
will most certainly condemn them hereafter. Sin a Law as it backs its Commands
with Promises and Threatenings.



2. Secondly, that I may further clear up this Expression of the Law of Sin,
let me compare it with other Laws, Divine and Humane. Take the Law of God or
Men they are usually backed with Some therefore defins a Law Ordo rectam
gubernandi rationem includens, ex prudentia prodien^, transgredientibus prenam,
obtemperantibus praemium decernens. (See Wendel. Polie. l. 2. c. 11).
Rewards and Punnishments; and it is convenient it should be so, if not for the
strengthening of the Laws in themselves yet however for the furtherance of men's
Obedience to them: for men (generally) do not obey them upon the Authority of
the Legislators, or the intrinsic goodness of the Matter of the Law, but as
they are thereunto either allured by Rewards or deterred by Punnishments; these
are the things that do most prevail with them to yield their Obedience to the
Laws both of God and Men. Answerably now to this, Sin (Indwelling in, the
Corrupt Nature) will be backing its Commands with Promises and Threatenings, it
will be pretending to Rewards and Punnishments; which though in themselves they
are but sorry things yet they have a great power and efficacy upon besotted
Sinners. For instance, Sinner! (says Sin) I enjoin thee to fall in with me and
my ways, to do as I bid thee do, I will that thou do go and swear, and steal,
and be filthy, and profane Sabbaths, and please the flesh, etc. (here is the
Laws or Commands of Sin): well! how does it strengthen and back them? why thus,
Sinner! do but obey me, and here are such Profits, Pleasures, Delights,
Honors, Preserments, all of which upon thy compliance with me shall be thine;
if thou will but be my loyal Subject and do what I would have thee, thou shall
live at ease, flourish in the world, pass thy days in mirth, be respected by
all, (with a great many more Promises of this nature); therefore why do thou
demur? why do not thou presently submit and obey? Particularly you read of
the pleasures of sin Heb. 11.25; now it represents and heightens these to
Sinners and by them urges and (almost) enforces Obedience to its Commands: O
(says Sin) do but hearken to me and do thus and thus, then what a delightful,
pleasant Life will you live; how will all Comforts then flow in upon you! then
your good days will begin when you once resolve to comply with my Laws, but
'twill never be well till then. And are all these promises and solicitations
of Sin in vain? no! the poor deluded Sinner believes, hearkens, yields, closes
with them, and knows not how to resist its Commands backed with such promises
and rewards.

But if these soft and mild insinuations, these enticing and alluring Arguments
will not do, Sin then appears in the Lionsshape and begins to menace and
threaten: it alters its language and says, Sinner! will thou cast off my Laws
and choose to be subject to some Other? then look to thy self and take what
follows: will thou engage in a course of Duty and fall in with a strict and
godly life? then know what will be the fruit of this (much better than thine O
thou cursed Liar!) thou must expect the loss of all that is good, the
undergoing of all that is evil; thou must look for nothing but prisons,
reproaches, derision, contempt, poverty, persecution, and what not? thou must
bid adieu to all thy Comforts, prepare for the carrying of an heavy Cross, live
a pensive, afflicted Life; this will cost thee deer, expose thee to the loss of
Liberty, Estate, Relations, Credit, nay of Life it self. O how does Sin (to
draw and hold the Sinner in vassalage to it self, and to keep him off from the
way of holiness) bestir it self and summon in all its Threats and Menaces. And
may not unrenewed Souls too truly be said to be under the Law of sin in these
respects? with what efficacy does it entice them to what is evil by what it
promises, and deter them from what is good by what it threatens? Do not these
promises and threatenings of Sin carry it with men in their natural state (the
former for Sins of Commission, the latter for Sins of Omission), that they know
not how to withstand them? O that what we do see every day was not too full a
demonstration of their being under the power of Sin, as promising and as
threatening!

By this you understand what there is in a Law (in the strict notion of it)
that is applicable to Sin, upon which the Apostle might ground his Metaphor of
the Law of Sin; it is a commanding thing, and it urges and seconds its Commands
with promises and threatenings, (both of which are proper to a Law).

One thing further I desire you to take notice of, and it is this; that Sin
considered as simply commanding so it is not a Law, but it then becomes formally
and completely a Law when it commands and the Sinner obeys; so that he owns the
power of it and willingly subjects himself to its dominion, o now it is a Law
indeed! As it is in the Laws of Usurpers, they (merely as imposed by them) are
no Laws, because not made by persons in lawful Authority; but if a people
freely own these Usurpers and willingly put themselves under subjection to
them, them (to them) their Laws become valid and obligatory; so here as to Sin,
it has not the least right to any dominion over the Soul, it has no power but
what is by usurpation, and therefore its Laws are mere nullities; but yet if
men (which is the Case of the Unconverted) will voluntarily put themselves
under its Government and consent that it shall rule them, to them de facto it
becomes a Law, and has the force and authority of a Law, though de jure it can
challenge no such thing. This for a Law in its proper sense.

Sin is a Law according to the improper acceptance of a Law.
2. Secondly the word [Law] is taken improperly, for any thing that has an
impelling (or impulsive) virtue in it, which though it be not strictly and
properly a Law, yet it may pass under that appellation because it has the
virtue and force of a Law, and does that which a true and proper Law uses to
do. And so an inward, operative, lively Principle, that which efficaciously
moves and acts a man or impells and urges him so and so to act, may be styled a
Law because of its powerful and authoritative influence in and upon the man in
his acting: a Principle is a Virtual Law, or that which is equivalent to a Law,
inasmuch as it inclines, urges, impells with power and efficacy to such and
such operations which are suitable to it. And therefore when Sin is the
Principle which acts a person in his general course, and which does
efficaciously excite and impell him to those things which are suitable to its
own nature; I say when it is thus, there Sin may be called a Law and there it is
the Law of Sin. So that when Paul here supposes himself before his Conversion
to be under the Law of Sin, he means that then Sin was his principle, the sole
and active principle in him, that which with a strange kind of power and
efficacy did urge, excite, impell him to wicked and sinful acts all along in
that state. The Law of Sin notes the power of Sin (as has been shown); now
that is twofold Moral or Physical, (I will not upon several accounts undertake
to justify this distinction in the rigid acceptance of things, I only make
use of it to help your conceptions in that which I am upon): Sins moral power
lies in its being a Law (for that is the power of a Law), its physical power
lies in its being a Principle (for that is the power of a principle). As to its
Moral power, it directs and regulates prescribing to the Sinner what it would
have him to do and (in a sense) commanding him to do accordingly: as to its
Physical power, it does so and so excite and act by its inward, effectual,
powerful inclinations and impulsions. I distinguish here between a Law and a
Principle, because I now consider the Latter strictly in it self and not
according to the improper application of the word Law to it: And I make use of
this distinction of Sins twofold power, not as designing to assert any
specifical difference betwixt them, (possibly something might be objected
against that); I only design thereby to set forth the several ways and modes
wherein Sin does exert its power: for though it is very true that Moral and
Physical power as considered in themselves and when applied to such and such
things, are distinct kinds of power; yet when they are applied to sin they are
but different modes (the Nature of the thing admitting nothing more).

Now to bring this to the Point in hand! Unregenerate persons are under the Law
of Sin, inasmuch as in that state Sin (the depraved Nature) is the principle
which acts them, and which strongly, effectually, nay impetuously inclines and
excites them to what is sinful. Every Agent has its principle which acts it
strongly and irresistibly; as Natural Agents in natural acts have their
principle working with great efficacy in them, the Fire burns and cannot do
otherwise because it is determined and influenced by that natural principle
which is in it: so Moral Agents in Moral acts have their efficacious principles
too which work as strongly and powerfully in them, (the difference being always
preserved 'twixt Natural and Free Agents). But now these principles are very
different according to men's different state; where it is the Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus there the Spirit is the principle, and the New Nature
too in the Soul as the principle does with a great deal of power and efficacy
excite and quicken to what is good; 2 Cor. 5.14. The Love of Christ
constrains us: But where it is the Law of Sin there Sin is the principle
which does also strongly excite to what is evil. The Natural man has no other
principle than this, and it is very active in him it ever workng with great
power and strength to draw out his corruption: and so he is under the Law of
sin.

I conceive this Law of Sin (as to its most proper import) notes the activeness
and efficacy of a principle, rather than the authority or Sovereignty of a Law
(though that be the word here used). But however it is best to take in both
notions, and in both the Doctrine holds true; so long as any man is unrenewed
Sin is both a Law to him to command, rule, and govern him, and also a principle
powerfully and efficaciously to act him in his whole course: in both respects
before regeneration it is nothing but the Law of Sin. By which expression the
Apostle seems to superadd something to what he had said Ver. 1. he had there
spoke of walking after the Flesh, thereby intimating the Flesh to be the
principle by which men out of Christ do act; but now here in calling it the Law
of Sin (or of the Flesh), he intimates the power and strength of that principle
in those persons, it is a commanding principle in them (which takes in the sum
of both the significations which I have been enlarging upon), it rules and acts
them as it pleases, it has over them the authority of a Law and in them the
energy or efficacy of a principle, both of which do center and are comprehended
in one word, the power of Sin. So much for the First Thing to show what the
Apostle means by the Law of Sin, and in what respects it is so styled.

1 Quest. Wherein does Sin act as a Law in the Unregenerate?
Two Questions here arise (the answering of which will give further light into
the Doctrine); the First is this, How or wherein does Sin (as a Law) exert and
put forth its power and dominion in and over unregenerate persons?

In the answering of this should I fall upon particulars, Answ.
to set forth the various workings of Sin in the matter or kind of them, or the
various arts and methods of Sin in the manner of its working, it would occasion
a discourse too large for my present design: I will therefore limit my self to
two General Heads under which the several particulars will fall.

The Law of Sin shows it self, partly with respect to what is Evil and partly
with respect to what is Good: You may understand its workings in the
Unregenerate by its workings in the Regenerate, (for it is the same in both,
only in different degrees). Now how does it work in these? that you shall see
in our great instance in the Text; Paul complaining of this Law (as in himself)
shows how it did put forth its power and strength in him, namely thus: (1.) it
did strongly excite, impell, and draw him to what was evil; so Romans 7.15. That
which I do, I allow not, what I hate, that do I; ( V. 17.) It is no more I that
do it, but sin that dwells in me: ( V. 19.) -- the evil which I would not,
that I do: ( V. 23.) I see another law in my members, etc. -- (2.) it did
strongly oppose, resist, hinder him as to what was good: ( V. 15.) what I
would, that do I not: ( V. 18.) To will is present with me, but how to perform
that which is good I find not; for the good that I would I do not: ( V. 21.) I
find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.
Thus Sin acted in Paul in whom its power and strength was much broken, and
thus it does (in a much higher degree) act in the Unregenerate in whom it is in
its full strength and vigor.

1. Sin in such exerts its power in its vehement urging and impelling of them
to what is evil. I say to what is evil for indeed all its impulsions are to
that, Sin is for nothing but Sin, Sin in the Habit is altogether for Sin in the
Act, Indwelling Sin is wholly for dwelling in Sin; it bends and works entirely
that way, urget ad Peccata Peccatum. And no wonder that it so does, since the
principle always moves and excites to those acts which are consentaneous to it
self; therefore Sin agreeing with Sin, the sinful Nature solely stirs up a
person to that which is sinful. And how entire, restless, unwearied, impetuous
is it in this! the truth is, though there was no Devil to tempt the graceless
Sinner, yet that Law of Sin which is in himself would be enough to make him sin
(in a great measure) as he does: as to many Men and many Sins of those men it is
but the Devils over-eagerness which puts him upon tempting of them, for without
that the thing would be done to his hand (as dry wood would burn without
blowing). Corrupt Nature is continually egging, soliciting, exciting the
unsanctified man to what is evil, 'twill not let him alone day or night unless
he gratify it; and its motions are so urgent and violent that he poor creature
either cannot or will not make any considerable resistance. What an instance
was Amnon of this! he was under the Law of Sin, it had such a power and
Sovereignty over him and was so impetuous in its workings in him, that he
walked sadly, pined away, fell downright sick, and all because he knew not how
to satisfy that Lust which wrought so strongly in him toward his own Sister;
(read 2 Samuel 13.2, etc.) So Ahab, Sin put him upon the coveting of Naboths
Vineyard, and this it did with such violence that he would eat no bread because
he could not have his will; 1 Kings 21.5. Solomon tells us of some who sleep
not except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they
cause some to fall; Prove. 4.16. O the Law of Sin! it sollicits to this and that
evil, and its solicitations thereunto are so pressing and earnest that it will
receive no repulse; yea, the Sinner is so overpowered that he is even carried
away with it like an empty Vessel in a fierce and rapid stream. In whatever
point the Wind stands it blows so fiercely, so strongly that there is no
standing against it; I mean, whatever the Lust be in which the Sin of Nature
vents it self (whether Uncleanness, or Ambition, or Coveteousness, or what you
will), that comes with such a force and violence upon the natural man that he
falls before it and yields to it. We speak much (in another sense) of the Law
of Nature, truly the grand Law of Nature as depraved is to command and incline
men to sin against God; and this it must needs do with a mighty power and
efficacy in those in whom it is wholly depraved.

2. Secondly this Law of Sin shows it self in its opposing and hindering of what
is good. It Is a Law which always runs counter to Gods Law, it will be sure to
further what that forbids and to hinder what that commands, for it always sets
it self in a direct opposition thereunto. Does that call for such and such
Duties? are there some Convictions upon the Sinners Conscience about them? does
he begin a little to incline to what is good? how does Sin now bestir it self
to make head in the Soul against these convictions and good inclinations! how
does it endeavor to nip the blossoms, to stifle and smother the initial
propensions to what is good, to kill the Infant in the Cradle (as Herod would
have done with Christ), to make all Conceptions (in order to Obedience and
Holiness) to prove abortive! There is in Sin a fixed, rooted aversation to
whatever is holy and spiritual, which it puts forth to its utmost wherever it is
upon the throne: it does not only work a loathness to duty but a loathing of
duty, it countermands (where it is in its full power) all the motions and
excitations of the blessed Spirit thereunto. O sometimes the Spirit comes to a
man and says, thou have neglected prayer hitherto it is high time now to set
upon it, thus long thou have lived and all this time thou have not minded the
reading of the Scriptures, the hearing of the Word preached, etc. come now let
them be minded, all thy days thou have been a stranger to holiness now be holy,
thou have been a despiser of Christ hitherto now love, fear, receive, honor
him: thus the good Spirit would draw on the Sinner to what is good. Well! is
indwelling Sin quiet now? O no! it puts forth it self with its greatest vigor
and strength in opposition to the breathings of the good Spirit; it says,
Sinner! let Word and Spirit say what they will do thou hold on thy course, keep
on thy way, God is merciful fear it not, Duty is burdensome meddle not with it,
what need is there of all this praying, hearing, believing, repenting, holy
walking? etc. These are the bold oppositions and subtle insinuations of Sin
against what is good, (set forth by the lustings of the Flesh against the
Spirit Gal. 5.17), these are its cursed renitencies and reluctancies against
duty. Now till the regenerating Spirit comes with his victorious grace to
conquer them, the Sinner is wholly under their power, so that they do most
effectually and prevailingly keep him off from what is good: You have it
exemplified in the Young Man Matthew. 19.22. in Felix Acts 24.25. (and in several
others). This is the very Case of men before Conversion: whether you consider
the Law of Sin as it puts forth it self with respect to Evil or with respect to
Good, the Unconverted are under it; it hurries them on to what is wicked and as
powerfully holds them off from what is holy; in both respects they are entirely
under the command of it as a Law and entirely acted by it as a principle; it is
no better than thus (and worser it cannot be) with unregenerate persons. Let
this general Answer to the First Question be sufficient.

2 Quest. Of the difference betwixt the Law of Sin as it is in the Regenerate
and as it is in the Unregenerate.
A Second is this, How may it be known when persons are under the Law of Sin? or
How may we distinguish betwixt the Law of Sin as it is in the Unregenerate and
as it is in the Regenerate? For even the Latter find too much of this Law in
them; Paul here says he was freed from it, and yet in the foregoing Chap. he
sadly laments it (as you have often heard): renewed and sanctified Souls do by
sad experience feel the corrupt Nature strongly urging and pressing them to
what is evil, and as strongly opposing and hindering them in what is good, yea,
in both often prevailing: may not they therefore as well as Others be said to
be under the Law of sin? if not, where lies the difference? or what is it that
does indeed denominate a man to be under that Law?

This being a Question of great importance I shall be larger in the answering
of it than I was of the Former; Answ.
yet not so large as the Nature of the Subject would admit of, nor as Some of
our own Divines are who write upon it: I shall reduce all to Three Heads.

1. First where the whole bent and tendency of the heart is toward sin, that
the propensions of the Soul thereto are entire and unmixt, there it is the Law
of sin, and that Law of sin which is proper to the Unregenerate: this speaks
Sin to be upon the throne indeed, that its power and dominion is habitual,
plenary and absolute. A Child of God may have very strong corruptions in him,
and they sometimes too may break forth into external acts, the sinful Nature
may vehemently incline him to what is evil and sometimes prevail too; yet the
bent of his heart is for God against Sin, and the stream does not run wholly
one way, he has propensions unto good as well as unto evil; whereupon he is
not under the Law of sin. But take an unsanctified person it is otherwise with
him, his heart is in sin and set for sin, that is the thing to which it
altogether bends, inclines and works; there is not a stronger bent in heavy
bodies to descend or in light things to ascend than there is in such an one to
sin against God: and further he is not divided in what is evil, he is all of a
piece, the sinful Nature in him is entire and does all: now where it is thus
certainly there it is the Law of sin. Paul in his saddest complaints of this Law
(as in himself) yet says, It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me, ('it was not he that did it because the bent of his heart was against it):
and he says With the mind I my self serve the law of God, (the habitual
tendency and inclination of his Soul was toward Good, and as he was himself it
was thus with him, for he puts [I my self] only to the serving of the law of
God not to that of the law of sin): So that though the Law of sin was in him
yet he was not under it (strictly) as the Law of sin; Sin had too great a
strength in him but it had not the sole and full command of him.

2. Secondly when all the several Faculties of the Soul are altogether on Sin's
side and wholly take its part, then it is the Law of sin, and that which is
proper to the Unregenerate: (if this Head be not distinct from the Former yet
it may be useful as a more particular explication of it). In such persons
Understanding, Will, Affections, all are engaged on Sins side, and therein lies
its power and dominion over them; the Understanding assents, the Will consents,
the Affections answerably are drawn out, o here is the Law of Sin or Sin
regnant. The Understanding gives in its final and positive dictate that Sin is
good, represents it as eligible to the Will, the Will (upon this) closes with
it, embraces it, cleaves to it, the Affections (desire, joy, delight, etc.) run
out upon it; where it is thus, the case is determined. But this must be taken
with a threefold Proviso: (1.) That the assent of the Understanding be
deliberate; for even a Child of God upon a sudden surprisal pro hic and nunc
may judge better of sin than it deserves. (2.) That the consent of the Will be
plenary and full; for there may be in gracious persons sometimes a broken
half-consent to what is evil. (3.) That both Assent and Consent be understood
of a Course in Sin; for as to particular Acts no question but one who is
regenerate (under the power of a temptation) may do both of these.
This threefold Proviso being taken in the thing is clear, whosoever shall be
so far besotted as upon deliberation to judge a sinful course to be the best
course, and thereupon shall choose, embrace; fall in with and continue in it,
yea shall delight and please himself in it, unquestionably in this man it is the
Law of Sin; Sin never gets thus high where Grace is. For the proof of which we
must recur to our great instance; Paul after his Conversion found Sin to be too
powerful in him (which was his great burden), yet notwithstanding the fixed
acts of the several Faculties of his Soul were for God against Sin: As for
example, in his Understanding he assented to the goodness of the Law of God but
not to the goodness of the Law of Sin; Romans 7.12. wherefore the Law is holy,
etc. in his Will he also consented to this, ( V. 16.) If then I do that which I
would not, I consent unto the Law that it is good: and for his Affections (he
says) I delight in the Law of God after the inward man: now these being (as I
said) the fixed acts of the several Faculties in Paul, in him it was not the
Law of Sin. And thus for the main it is with every gracious Soul; but for
Others in whom Sin has all, all the Faculties (Understanding, Will,
Affections) in their proper acts being entirely for it, it is evident that they
are under the Law of Sin.

Of all the Faculties the Will does most discover the power of Sin, for there
its Dominion and Sovereignty is chiefly seated and acted; o when it once gains
that then it ascends the throne indeed, that is the time (as it were) of its
inauguration when it is invested in all its Regalities. It comes to the Sinner
and says art thou willing that I should rule thee? yes (says he) with all my
heart, I like thy Commands and Government, I am thine, I submit to thee to be
at thy dispose, I here swear Fealty and Allegiance to thee, etc. (Dreadful
language! o that ever it should be uttered by the heart of man! Sinner! do
thou know what thou say? pray thee make a little pause, be persuaded to
consider what thou do; is this spoken in good (or rather in bad) earnest?
do thou resolve upon it? will thou stick to it? o then thou art a mere
vassal, thou putt'st thy self under the reign of the worst Tyrant in all the
world, from this day forward thou must carry chains and fetters about thee,
from this act of thine Sins reign commences: therefore if it be not yet done
let it never be done, if it be done let it be rescinded speedily; (but I forget
my self).

The lowest act of the Will (in order to the constituting of this Law of Sin,)
is Election or Choice; there is Good and Evil, Holiness and Sin set before the
Soul and it chooses the evil before the good, this is a sad evidence of Sins
power: Isa. 65.12. -- but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that
wherein I delighted not: Isa. 66.3, 4, etc. they have chosen their own ways,
and their Soul delights in their abominations, etc. But though I say that
this is the lowest act of the Will in Sins being a Law, yet even this is enough
to put a person under that Law. The godly man chooses the way of Holiness,
Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the way of truth; the Sinner chooses the way of
Sin, this he prefers before the Other: Now should there be nothing more than
this choice (supposing it to be deliberate, full and peremptory), that would be
enough to evince Sins dominion, for wherever it has the preference it has the
power. But there are higher acts of the Will than this, which do more highly
constitute and more fully demonstrate the Law of Sin, and which are to be found
only in the Unregenerate: As namely when the Will does not merely choose,
embrace, prefer Sin before Holiness but it is pertinaciously set for Sin, its
full purpose and resolution is for Sin against Holiness; the Sinner says he
has sinned and so he will do still, he is fixed and obstinate in his
wickedness, instead of cleaving to the Lord with full purpose of heart (as
Barnabas exhorted the Christians at Antioch to do, Acts 11.23.) he cleaves to
Sin with full purpose of heart. Jer. 2.25. I have loved strangers, and after
them I will go: Jer. 8.5. They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return: Jer.
44.16. As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we
will not hearken to thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever goes out of our
own mouth, etc. Now wherever it comes to this that Sin is thus enthroned in the
Will, there most certainly it is the Law of Sin. But I must yet go one step
further, there is one act of the Will higher than this too, (viz) when the
heart is wholly set for Sin and is not only resolvedly but also impetuously
carried out after it. Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil. Jer. 50* 38. They are mad upon their idols: Ephesians. 4.19. Who
being past feeling have given themselves ever unto lasciviousness to work all
uncleanness with greediness Jer. 8.6. Every one turned to his course as the
horse rusheth into the battle. Here the power of Sin rises high indeed! when
the Will does not barely consent to it but it is eager and fierce for it, o this
speaks not only its own great wickedness and most woeful depravation, but also
the Sinners full subjection to Sin; this is the Law of Sin with a witness,
where it is thus it may easily be known who bears Rule in the Soul. Sin never
arrives at this height of power in the Regenerate, this is altogether
inconsistent with Grace: upon Conversion the Will is sanctified and the
sanctified Will can never carry it thus toward Sin.

You see what that is in the interior faculties of the Soul which does
constitute and evidence the Law of Sin in unregenerate persons: I might
instance also in the exterior parts of the Body, for though Sins power does
mainly reside and put forth it self in the Former, yet it reaches to these
also; therefore the Apostle brings them in upon this account, Romans 6.12. Let
not sin reign in your mortal bodies, etc. (13.) neither yield you your members
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, etc. (19.) As ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness, etc. When the Body is prostituted to Sins
drudgery, the several parts thereof employed in its service (as the Eyes to let
in external Objects for the exciting and feeding of Lust within, the Feet to
run on Sins errands, the Tongue to utter vanity and frothiness, etc) this is a
great demonstration of a man's being under the Law of Sin. It Is true, it chiefly
reigns in the Heart, there is its imperial Seat or the Palace where it has its
imperial residence, that is the inward Citadel where its main strength does lie;
but yet from thence it issues out its Laws and Edicts to the Body also, and
that is its out ward Fort or Territory where it has a great strength and
command also. Indeed the Law of Sin is best discerned (as to Others) by its
venting of it self in and through the Body; for so long as Sin keeps in its
power within the interior Faculties of the Soul, it is known only to the
Sinner himself; but when that once breaks out in Sins committed in and by the
body (as intemperance, drunkenness, uncleanness, etc.) then it becomes
discernible to all to whom such Sins shall be known. And though it is certain,
that Sin may have its full dominion in the heart without the external eruptions
of it in the Life, in gross and corporeal acts, yet where they are added they
infallibly discover that Sin lords and domineers. O therefore how evident is it
that all who abuse and defile their bodies, who use them as instruments for Sin
and wear them out in its service, are most perfectly under the Law of Sin! But
it is not thus with any who are truly sanctified, Sin has not the command of
their Bodies, they Romans 6.19.
yield up their members servants to righteousness unto holiness, they look upon
their Bodies as the 1 Cor. 6.19.
Temples of the Holy Ghost and accordingly they keep them holy, they know they
are themselves 1 Cor. 6.20.
bought with a price and that their Souls and Bodies are both Gods, and
therefore both to be employed in the glorifying of God; they scorn to let their
Bodies be drudges to Sin and Satan; and in this respect they are not under the
Law of Sin.

3. Thirdly the Law of Sin and its different workings in the people of God and
Others, may be opened by the modification of the act of Sin. As

1. Where Sin is committed industriously and designedly there it is the Law of
Sin and that which is peculiar to the graceless. Some there are who set
themselves to sin, it is the thing they aim at, which they deliberate, contrive,
muse how to bring about, their serious thoughts from time to time are at work
in order to it; like to that person whom David describes Psalm. 36.4. He
devises mischief on his bed, he sets himself in a way that is not good:
like to the wickedness of men before the Deluge, Genesis 6.5. etc. Every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually: ('it is
meant not only of imaginations which had Sin in them materially and
subjectively, but also of those which were for Sin and in order to Sin
intentionally and finally): The Apostle sets it forth by making provision for
the flesh Romans 13.14. when the Sinner has his forecasts and projects for Sin.
Now When the Flesh has the (...) providen^ial projecting and forecasting
ability at command and at her service, it is certain her supremacy is in the
full. Mr. Rich. Bifeild The Gospels glory, etc. p. 235.
where it is thus, unquestionably it is the Law of Sin, this does most certainly
discover the absolute, unbroken, full power and dominion of Sin. Joh. 8.34.
Whoever commits Sin ((...) who makes it or frames it as an Artist does a thing
which is proper to his trade or art, who sins de industria, data opera, what of
him? why, he) is the servant of sin (that is, he is fully under its Command and
is a perfect slave and vassal to it). It Is never thus with regenerate persons,
this Deuteronomy. 32.5.
spot is not the spot of Gods Children: 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God
does not commit Sin; he does not frame sin or contrive how to sin (in the sense
named but now). It cannot be denied but that even a Child of God may sin after
deliberation, nay as to some particular sinful act he may deliberate in order
to the doing of it; there was a great deal of deliberation in David's killing
Vriah, 'twas a plotted, contrived sin, that which was brought about by many
deliberate thoughts: o but in such an One this is very rare and seldom, it is
but in this or that particular act, it is not a thing that he holds on in (God
forbid it should be so!) And therefore though this be a great aggravation of
sin when it is committed deliberately, and a sad evidence that it has too much
power and strength in the heart, yet every deliberate sin is not enough to
prove a man to be under the Law of sin: when the designing and contriving is
customary and that too as to a Course in sin, o then it is the Law of sin. 2.
When the Temptation easily prevails and there is little or no resistance and
opposition made to sin, then it is the Law of sin and that which is proper to
the unregenerate. If the Town be surrendered and yields upon the first Summons
it is a sign the Assailers are very strong and the Defendants very weak: if the
tinder takes fire upon the first little spark that falls into it, surely it is
very dry; so here, when Satan does no sooner lay the temptation before the
Sinner, but he immediately closes with it and falls before it and yields to it,
this argues that Sin and Satan have a full power in and over him. But I lay the
main stress of this Head upon little or no resistance to the motions,
suggestions, commands of sin. Possibly it no sooner commands but the Sinner
readily obeys; if he chance to make some some opposition it is as bad as none at
all, it is not lively, vigorous, resolute, but cold, dull, faint and languid, o
this is a sad demonstration of Sins height and regency in the Soul. The bare
Commands of Sin (as has been said) do not make it to be a Law, but when there
is a ready, willing subjection to those Commands then it is a Law. Romans 6.16.
Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves to obey, his servants ye are to
whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?
It Is a brand upon Ephraim that he was Hos. 5.11.
willingly walked after the Commandment: may not this be charged upon men
before renovation with respect to the Commands of Sin? We read of Satan that he
takes some captive at his will, 2 Timothy 6.26. and truly so it is with the sinful
Nature too, it does with the unregenerate what it will, it commands, governs,
orders them even as it will; it meets with little or no resistance, upon all
occasions it does but speak the word and the thing is done. The true Convert
stands upon his guard, fights it out to the last, he will dye rather than yield;
Sin does not so easily do his work in him: he may sometimes ^e a Captive to it
(as being overborn with its strength), but he will not be a Subject to it (so
as to give willing obedience to it); which shows that he is not under the Law
of Sin. When it is willingness in the way of duty then it is the day of Psalm.
110.3.
God's power, when it is willingness in the way of sin then it is the day of Sins
power. There may be some resistance made to Sin and yet its dominion may be
high, but when it is no resistance then its dominion is high indeed. A Sinner
sometimes from the stirrings of Conscience may make a little opposition, but
Sin having his Will in its entire consent that opposition soon goes off, and so
Sins Sover aignty is as absolute as ever it was. 3. When Sin carries it in
spite of all opposition, then it is the Law of Sin and that power of Sin which
only suits with the unregenerate state: when it is committed with little
opposition ab intra and in spite of all opposition ab extra, I assure you then
it has a great power. Many there are who are so much under the strength and
dominion of the hellish Nature, that nothing shall hinder them from what is
evil: As the sincere Christian, set never so many hindrances and
discouragements before him yet (being under the Law of the Spirit) he will be
and do good, so e contra the man that is destitute of Grace, set what
hindrances or discouragements you will before him yet (being under the Law of
Sin) he will be and do evil. Let the threatenings of the Law of God stand in his
way (like the Angel with a drawn sword in his hand) yet he will sin, let the
Scepter of the Gospel be held out to him yet he will sin, set the Love, Grace,
Mercy of God before him yet he will sin, set the Wrath, Justice, Severity of God
before him yet he will sin, set the Death, Sufferings, Agonies, Wounds, Blood of
the Lord Jesus before him yet he will sin, let Conscience smite him, let Word,
Ministers, Christians, reprove him yet he will sin, let him resolve, purpose,
vow, promise, covenant yet he will sin; tell him of Heaven or Hell, that he will
waste his Estate, impair his Health, undo his Family, ruin his Body, nay his
precious Soul it is all one yet he will sin, come Plague, Pestilence, War, Fire
yet he will sin; set the Law of Scripture before him yet he will sin, nay, (as to
some acts) set the very Law of Nature before him yet he will sin: here is the Law
of Sin to some purpose, the power and strength of Sin in their (...), and yet
all graceless and Christless Souls are under this (though not all in the same
way or in the same degree). But Sin never rises thus high in Gods people, they
are more easily stopped and kept off from sinning against God: you know the
stream in a Flood runs very fiercely and will not be stopped by any opposition,
it tears and breaks the banks which would give a check to it; but let the
Flood be but over and then it comes to it self again and its motion is not so
boisterous and impetuous; so it is with the true Christian, possibly in some
single act, under some strong temptation, upon some fit of passion, he may
break thorough all that lies in his way (as a let or hinderance to him in sin);
but when the sudden gush of Corruption and the power of the temptation are a
little over, he comes to himself again and then the Word and Spirit do easily
stop him in what is evil. 4. When it is sinning and no sense of sin, no
after-repentance for it, then it is the Law of Sin and that power of it which is
only in the unconverted. Sin always rules most where it is least felt, but it
never arrives at the highest pitch of dominion where the Soul groans under it
as its burden. As it was with Paul, the corrupt Nature was too powerful in him
but he was very sensible of it, he cried out O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death! Thus too it is with all gracious
Souls; they may have much of sin in them, yea it may be so strong in them as
that in some particular acts they may be overcome by it; yet it is but peccatum
vincens non regnans, Sin conquering not commanding, because they are greatly
humbled in the sense of this, and because they ever recover themselves again by
true repentance: o how do they mourn and grieve over Corruption, especially
when it has been too hard for them! if you read of David's sins you shall also
read of David's tears. Now when it is thus it is never the Law of Sin, Sin
bewailed is never Sin reigning; but when a man sins insensibly and
impenitently, there is no after-shame or after-grief in him for sin, no rising
again after falling, verily in this man it is the Law of Sin. (But so much for
the answering of this Question, and also for the Explication of the Point in
hand).
USE. For Information.
In the applying of it there is but one Use which I shall insist upon, and that
shall be for Information: Is it thus? that every person before regeneration is
under the Law of Sin? it informs us of two things:

1. Of the bondage of the Natural state. 2. Of the power, efficacy, necessity
of restraining and renewing Grace.
1. Branch of Information concerning the bondage of the Unregenerate.
1. Here Is a sad demonstration of that bondage which attends the Natural State
and those who are in it. Such being under the Law of Sin, and that importing
what you have heard it does, hence it follows that they are under bondage, the
very worst bondage and thraldom that is imaginable: This Sinners will not
believe nor lay it to heart but so it is, they being Sins Subjects and governed
by its Laws they are no better than Slaves and Vassals (for so all its Subjects
are). We pity those who live under Tyrants, Usurpers, hard Masters, etc. and
judge their bondage to be very great; but (alas!) what is that if compared with
this of graceless Souls living under the tyranny, usurpation, dominion of Sin?
O poor Creature! art thou out of Christ, unsanctified and unregenerate, and
consequently acted, ruled, governed by Sin? know thy self, thou art (in a
spiritual sense) no better than a slave, yea there is no servitude or vassalage
in the world comparable to thine: the poor Christians who are Captives and
Bondmen under the barbarous Turks or such who are condemned to Mines and
Galleys, are in a better condition than thou who art under the power of thy
base Lusts. The state of Nature is a quite other thing than what men imagine it
to be, they think there is nothing but freedom and liberty in it, such who are
in it fancy none live so free and happy a Life as themselves; but God knows
it is quite otherwise: while they promise themselves liberty they are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought into bondage, (as the Apostle speaks 2 Pet. 2.19). There are very many
sad attendants upon Unregeneracy (as blindness, darkness, death, enmity,
distance and alienation from God, etc.) but none worse than the spiritual
bondage which accompanies it: I add too, there is none of all these which
Sinners are with more difficulty convinced of and more hardly brought to
believe, than that which I am upon. We see it in the Jews, Joh. 8.33. We be
Abraham 's seed, and never were in bondage to any man, how say thou we shall
be made free? (never in bondage to any man? that was false; were they not once
in bondage in Egypt (which therefore was called the house of bondage Exodus
20.2. where they were under hard bondage Exodus 1.14)? were they not again in
bondage in Babylon? yea, were they not now in bondage under the Romans? but
this not being the bondage which Christ aimed at, he passed by this their
vaunting of their exemption from it and fell upon their spiritual bondage,
whith respect to which he told them) whasoever commits sin is the servant of
sin: So go to many now and tell them they are under servitude they will not
believe it, what they in such a condition? no, they are so and so descended,
such and such is their birth and parentage, they have such noble blood running
in their veins, they live in the enjoyment of such privileges, have so many
under them at their beck whilst they themselves are commanded by none, they can
go and come and do as they (...). Plutarch. Mor. p. 35.
list (being free from that (...), wherein the Stoics placed bondage), and yet
are they Slaves? Yes, notwithstanding all this they may be so and are so if Sin
has the rule and regency over them; they have all liberty but that which is
the best and are exempted from all bondage but that which is the worst. The
(...). Plato Alcib. 1.
Moralists by the Light of Nature had true notions about this, for they could
say that Virtue and Goodness only did entitle to Liberty, that Vice and
Wickedness were always attended with Servitude: The Persius Sat. 5. An quisquam
est alius liber nisi ducere vitam
Cui licet ut voluit? licet ut volo vivere, non sum
Liberior Bruto? --
Liber ego? unde datum hoc sumis tot subdite rebus?
An Dominum ignoras nifi quem vindicta relaxat?
-- Servitium acre
Te nihil impellit, nec quicquam extrinsecus intrat
Quod nervos agitet; sed si intus and in jecore aegro
Nascantur Domini, qui tu impunitior exis? --

Satyrist falls severely upon some high pretenders to Liberty, because they
were their own Masters, at their own dispose, did what they pleased, were not
they free? he answers them sharply showing there might be external and Civil
Liberty and yet they might be under bondage, if Vice had the mastery and
command of them; nay, if any one Vice or Lust did prevail over them (whether
Covetuousness or Intemperance, etc.) that would be enough to prove them no
better than Vassals and Slaves (let their outward condition be never so high
and good). Now surely we may be more clear and positive in this than they, who
by Scripture Light know more of the Law of Sin than they could do by the bare
light of Nature. Every regenerate, Vide Philon. Jud. in Tract. cui titulus.
Quod omnis probus liber. p. 670.
good man is free; but every unregenerate, wicked man is a very slave and under
most dreadful thraldom.

Now it being thus, that I may the better convince your of the evil and misery
of this bondage, and also excite you to the most vigorous endeavors to get out
of it, let me lay a few particulars before you: As

The Evil and Misery of spiritual Bondage resulting from the Law of Sin, set
forth.
1. Consider that bondage to Sin is always accompanied with bondage to Satan.
Whoever is under the Law of Sin he is thereupon also under the Law of Satan,
for Sins and Satan's power always go together: the truth is, these two are (as
it were) Allies and Confederates; nay they are copartners in dominion, they
ever share in the government of the Soul and rule jointly; so that he who is
under the power of the one is under the power of the other also. There is an
oneness of interest and dominion betwixt them; as Satan gets up Sin gets up,
and as Sin gets up Satan gets up too. The Devil's Reign depends upon the Reign
of Sin, where it is not the Law of Sin his power is very low; it is said of him
that Ephesians. 2.2.
he rules (where or in whom? why) in the Children of disobedience; where it is
disobedience to the Laws of God and obedience to the Laws of Sin there Satan's
Kingdom is very high; there he rules and does what he will (as he is said to
take some men captives at his will, 2 Timothy 2.11.) Now is not this a dreadful
thing? the most deplorable bondage that a Creature can lie under? what? to be
the Devils Subject? a Slave to him who is in chains himself? ruled by him who
is the grand Rebel and the Head of all the lower Rebels against God? what more
woeful! Sinner when will thou consider it, shall a damned Creature be thy Lord
and Sovereign? shall he be thy Ruler here who will be thy tormentor hereafter?
will thou live in jubjection under him who is but a Jailer and Executioner of
Gods displeasure? what bondage can be so great, so much to be detested as this!

2. Secondly let be considered what sin is, both as it is in it self and also
as it manages its power, command and regency in and over the Sinner.

1. Look upon Sin in it self. It Is the basest, the vilest thing that is, the
whole world has nothing in it of so vile a nature as it: It Is that only thing
which God never made; other things may seem to be vile (and comparatively they
may really be so), yet they being Gods Creatures there is something of
excellency in them, but as for Sin God has nothing to do with it (only as he
does dispose and overruled it to his own glory). It Is the only thing that God
cannot do, there are many things which he will not do but Sin is the only
thing which he cannot do; God can make a world, uphold a world, destroy a
world, he can do all, only he cannot sin. Now (whoever thou art) let this be
thought of, shall a thing so vile and base, so contrary to God's Nature, shall
that have the Rule and Command of thee? how can the Spirit of a Man bear a
thing so indecent, so unworthy of him? but if he will stoop to what is so much
below him, what slavery and bondage must needs result from it? It Is sometimes
matter of affliction to us to see vile and base men exalted to places of high
power and dignity; Psalm. 12.8. The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest
men are exalted: yet this must be submitted to because the all-disposing God in
the methods of his wise providence has a hand in it, (as we read Dan. 4.17. --
that the most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it whomsoever he
will, and sets up over it the basest of men): But that a man by his own Act
and Choice should set so base a thing as Sin upon the throne and put himself
under the dominion of it, this is most strange (and indeed would be incredible
did we not see it done every day). To be subject to a Prince of high
extraction, that has Greatness and Majesty in him who refuses that? but to be
subject to a fellow taken off from the Dunghill, that was born for the Kitchen
not the Throne, to hold the Plow rather than the Scepter who can bear that? the
application is obvious as to that which I am upon, Sin is of so vile a nature
that every heart should rise against its power. All subjection does not infer
bondage, but when it is to a Person or Thing that is below ones self then it is
bondage; now that is the case as to Sin. It Is sad that that which is so much
below us (in worth and excellency) should be above us (in power and dominion):
'twas Noah's Curse upon Cham to be a Servant of Servants Genesis 9.25. what a
servant or slave is he who is a servant to Sin and the several Lusts thereof?

2. Look upon Sin in the management of its power (and by that you will the
better see into the evil and misery of that bondage which arises from
subjection to it). What are the Laws of Sin? always evil: Usurpers amongst men
often make good Laws; our own Histories (as to matter of Fact) tell us that
some of our Kings who had the worst Titles made the best Laws, (and indeed they
had need use their power well who get it ill): But now Sin does not only usurp
that power which of right belongs not to it but it also manages its power very
wickedly, particularly with respect to the Laws which it makes and imposes upon
its Subjects; o it is sad living under its government! The Philosopher tells us
that the intention of the Legislator is to make his Subjects good, (certainly
it is either so or it should be so); but when Sin gets upon the throne and
assumes a legislative Authority to it self its intention is only to make its
Subjects bad, for the worse they are the better they suit with it. It Is a
blessed thing to live under the Rule of Christ because of the holiness, purity,
goodness of his Laws, but it is a woeful thing to live under the Rule of Sin
because its Laws are quite contrary, hellish and wicked; for here it holds true
like Lord like Law. Nay, the Laws of Men (I do not say all) have real goodness
in them, so far as they are founded upon Lex est nihil aliud nisi recta and a
Numine Deorum Ratio, imperans honesta, prohi^ ens contraria. -- profecto ita se
res habet, ut quoniain vitiorum emendatricem Legem esse oportet
commendatricemque virtutum, ab ea vivendi doctrina petatur. Cicero de Legib. l.
1.
Reason and designed for good Ends, (viz.) to excite persons to what is good
and to restrain them from what is evil; and so far it is the happiness of any to
live under them and their duty readily and cheerfully to comply with them: But
it is not thus with the Laws of Sin, inasmuch as they are always contrary to
right and sound Reason and always tend to what is evil; which therefore so far
as any man is subject to he must needs be miserable. It Is commonly said Ex
malis moribus bonae Leges; bad manners sometimes produce good Laws, but bad
Laws, especially when they are written in the heart and are the principle of
action (as the Laws of Sin are), can never produce good manners; if Sin make
the Law I know what will be the Life.

Further, this Sin is not only out of measure sinful in the exercise of its
power where it is uppermost, but it is also out of measure tyrannical. There
have been too many Tyrants in the World but never was there such an one as Sin,
all the Nero's, Caligula's, Domitians, etc. that ever lived were nothing to it;
this first acted the part of a Tyrant in them before they acted the part of
Tyrants over others. The tyranny of Sin appears in many things, I Will instance
in a Few: (1.) Its Commands are innumerable; there is no end of its Laws (and In
corruptissima Republica plurimae Leges. Tacit.
multiplicity of Laws always speaks either a bad people or a bad Prince). (2.)
Its Commands are contrary; one Law thwarts another, the poor Sinner (under its
dominion) is haled contrary ways that he scarce knows whether to go or what to
do, Lust clashes with Lust, one draws one way and another another, so that the
poor inslaved Soul is at a loss and knows not how to please all: Tit. 3.3.
serving diverse Lusts, ((...), diverse for their Number and diverse for their
Nature and Kind also). O quam multos habet Dominos qui unum non habet! how many
Lords and Masters has he who has not Christ only for his Lord! (3.) It Is
very rigorous in its demands; it must have full Obedience or none at all, Ephesians.
2.3. -- fulfilling the Lusts of the flesh: partial and half-Obedience will
neither satisfy an holy God nor an unholy Nature; and as God (for whom the All
is too little) so Sin too (for which the least is too much) is for the doing of
all it requires. (4.) Its Commands are never at an end. Let the poor bondsman
sin to day he must sin again to morrow, and so on in infinitum; yea, the more
he does in obedience to it the more it grows upon him in its Commands (just. as
Tyrants and hard Masters use to do). (5.) When Sin once gets upon the throne
it is so imperious and cruel that its Vassals must stick at nothing.
Be the thing never so base, the costs and hazards never so great, yet if Sin
calls for the doing of it it must be done: Sinners! you must waste you Estates,
blast your Credit, impair your Health, destroy your Bodies, damn your Souls;
you must part with God, peace of Conscience, Heaven it self; you must quit all
that is good and venture all that is bad in its service and in compliance with
its Edicts; o what an imperious, insolent, insatiable thing is Sin! here is the
Tyrant indeed both in Titulo and also in Exercitio. And now is not the poor
unregenerate Sinner very miserable who lives under such a Tyrant? is not his
bondage exceeding great? who (that is not highly besotted) would be willing to
continue under Sins power that may be brought under the holy, gracious,
excellent government of the Lord Jesus?

3. Thirdly the Evil of this bondage (arising from the Law of sin) appears from
its principal Subject, it is a Soul-bondage. Of all Evils Soul evils are the
worst; Soul-famin is the worst famine, Soul-death the worst death, Soul-plagues
the worst plagues; and so here, Soul-bondage is the worst bondage. The bondage
of Israel in Egypt was very evil yet not comparable to this which I am upon,
because that was but corporal and external but this is spiritual and internal:
when the best part is enslaved that must needs be the worst slavery. There may
be a servile condition without and yet a free and generous Soul within (as
Errat siquis existimat servitutem in totum hominem descendere; pars melior ejus
excepta est; corpora obnoxia sunt, and adscripta Dominis, men's sui juris est,
etc. Sen. de Benef. l. 3. c. 20.
Seneca observes of Servants); but if the Soul it self be under servitude then
the whole man, the very top of man, all is in servitude. Sin is of so proud and
aspiring a nature that no place will serve it for its palace or principal
Seat, but the very Soul; o there it delights to have its residence and to
exercise its dominion! And this is its subtilty as well as its pride, for it
knows if it can but rule the Soul that then the Soul will easily rule the Body,
(as the main Fort within the Town being gained that will with ease command all
the outward Forts). And it is the whole Soul too that Sin must have; God (who
made it) will have the whole Heart, and Sin (which designs to enslave it) will
have the whole Heart too: it is not satisfied with this or that Faculty but all
must be subject to it; it must reign in the Understanding (by Darkness,
Ignorance, false Conceits of God, prejudices against the good ways of God,
etc.) it must reign in the Will (by Perverseness, Obstinacy, and Rebellion
against God), it must reign in the Affections (by disorder, earthiness and
sensuality), it must reign in the Conscience (by insensibleness and
searedness); o how great is Sins ambition! nothing will serve it but an
Universal Empire, so as that all Men and all in Men may be under its dominion.
Now what a dreadful thing is this! that the Soul the whole Soul should be thus
under the Law of Sin? who can express the greatness, the sadness of this
bondage? that the best in man should serve the worst in man (for the Soul is
the best and Sin is the worst in him); that that which was immediately created
by God and for God, which did at first participate of the image of God and was
designed for the fruition of God here and hereafter, that so glorious, so
excellent a Being should be subjugated, enslaved, to such a cursed thing as
Sin, o the misery and evil of this is inexpressible! and yet thus it is with
all who are unregenerate.

4. Fourthly, Of all bondage this is the most unprofitable. As to other bondage
there may be some profit in that, but there is none in this; the Master may be
cruel enough to his poor Servant and hold him to very hard and slavish work,
but then he makes him some amends by giving him good wages; but here is the
Sinners unhappiness he serves that Master which pays him no wages at all (
death excepted): what does he get by all his service, drudging and toyling for
sin? even nothing but what he may put into his eye (I mean to mourn and weep
over); what fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?
Romans 6.21. O this Sin is the basest Master that any can serve! God is the best
(there is enough to be gained under him), but Sin the worst for there is nothing
to be got in its service but broken bones, terrors of Conscience, the loss of
Gods favor, and Hell at last: You must drudge for it from morning to night, be
at its Call and beck upon all occasions, grind in its mill, run upon its
errands, carry its burdens, etc. and what recompense shall you have for all
this? I Will tell you, the loss of all that is truly good and the bearing of all
that is truly evil; you shall have shame before men, trouble in your own Souls,
and the eternal wrath of the great God; these are the rewards and recompenses
of Sin. Now are not they miserable who serve such a Master? and yet so it is
with all men before Conversion.

5. Fifthly, Sins bondage is the worse because they who lie under it are
altogether insensible of it. Where it is external and civil bondage men are
sensible enough of that; o they groan under it, would fain be rid of it, all
their thoughts are employed to contrive how they may get out of it! The people
of Israel sighed, and groaned, and cried to God because of their bondage, Exodus
2.23. and you read in this Chapter how the poor irrational Creatures (being
under the bondage of corruption) do groan after deliverance, ( Ver. 21, 22);
the poor Christians in slavery under Infidels what a sense have they of their
thraldom, how would they rejoice might they be but set free! But here is the
evil of spiritual bondage men do not feel it; nay they will not believe it,
they have other thoughts of themselves than that they are under any such thing;
who thinks himself so free as he that is a vassal to Sin? The poor deluded
Sinner (like some distracted persons) plays with his chains, sports himself
with his fetters, and looks upon them as if they were his crown: o how does Sin
(where it is in its full command and power) besot its Subjects, and make them
carry it as though they were in a plain frenzy! Have you not sometimes been in
Bedlam ('it is mercy you have been there only as spectators of the misery of
others), where you saw poor creatures in a very dismal and deplorable
condition, chained, beaten, almost starved, lodged in straw, sadly used; and
yet how do these carry it? why they laugh, sing, are merry, behave themselves
as if they were the happiest persons in the world, who so jovial as they? is
not this a dreadful sight? Ah (my Brethren) the World in a spiritual sense is
little better than a large Bedlam, where Sin has men in its chains and
fetters, does with them what it pleases, keeps them under cruel bondage; and
yet they eat, drink, feast, game, live a merry life, and feel nothing; o how
insensible, how stupid are Sinners in the Natural state! Nay, they are so far
from lamenting and groaning under this bondage (as their infelicity), that they
affect it and make it the matter of their choice, they love to have it so and
refuse to have it otherwise: they refuse the Olive, the Vine, and choose rather
the Bramble to reign over them (I allude to that parable, Judge. 9.7, etc.) they
had rather swear Allegiance and Fealty to sin than to God; Christ's government
and dominion is rejected and sin's is preferred, they rather hold their bondage
than their bondage them, (according to that of the Senec. Ep. 22.
Moralist, Paucos servitus, plures servitutem tenent). In a word, they are
slaves and it pleases them exceedingly to be so. Now here is a twofold
aggravation of the evil of this bondage, partly that it is voluntary (for of
all servitude that is the worst which is voluntary, Senec. Ep. 47.
Nulla servitus turpior quam voluntaria), and partly that it is not laid to
heart: I know God has a judicial hand in this, as also in the power it self
which Sin has over the Sinner; but yet the Sinners own Will is as free, full,
and entire in his closing with it and submitting to it, as though God was not
at all concerned in it.

6. Lastly, this bondage is the most hurtful and most dangerous bondage: for it
is deadly, yea, it makes way for and most certainly ends in Eternal Death.
Death puts an end to other bondage, the slave when he is dead is a slave no
more; There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
oppressor: the small and great are there, and the servant is free from his
Master; Job 3.18, 19. but the worst of spiritual bondage follows after death,
this ends in death but it does not end with death. And other bondage does not
make any liable to eternal death, for that (simply considered) is nothing
either to Heaven or to Hell; God may love and save the true penitent though in
chains, and condemn the impenitent though never so free und flourishing in the
world; the everlasting Concerns of the Soul do not at all depend upon civil
liberty or civil servitude: but where this spiritual servitude is there God
has no love, there the Sinner must dye eternally. You have in the Text the Law
of sin and the Law of death coupled together; o what a dangerous thing is the
Law of sin! where Sin has its full power over the creature to make him wicked,
Death upon this will have its full power also to make him miserable. So Romans
6.16. Know you not, that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants you are to whom you obey, whether of sin [unto death], or of obedience
unto righreousness? (V. 21.) For the end of these things is death: (V. 23.) the
wages of sin is death. And is it so? who then would be Sins servant? who would
serve that master who pays no better wages than death? you that are Servants
would you enter into the service of One that would pay you such wages? such a
master sin is and such wages it does pay; o therefore quit its service, be wise
for your Souls, be sensible of the danger of continuing under the Law of sin,
otherwise this Law of sin will soon be turned into the Law of death. And indeed
it is this which ends in death, it is not barely sin which condemns but it is the
Law of sin which condemns; when it has the Supreme and Sovereign commanding
power in the Soul and reigns there as Lord paramount, then it is killing and
damning.

And now (Sirs!) may not that which has been spoken, be sufficient to convince
you of the evil of that bondage (that miserable hereditary bondage) which you
all lie under so long as you are in the natural and unregenerate state? and
will you not be prevailed with to endeavor speedily to get out of it? by the
Law of the Spirit to be made free from the Law of Sin? You may be freed from
this bondage if you will; Christ is come as for other ends so for this, to give
liberty to the captives and to open the prison to them who are bound Isa. 61.1.
to knock off Sinners bolts and chains and to make them free indeed, Joh. 8.36.
in his name I do this day tender freedom to you and deliverance from Sins
vassalage, will you not accept of it? And here is the Law of the Spirit too to
make you free from the Law of Sin, why then shall not this be done? Will you
still like Sins yoke? (I assure you, Christ's is not so easy but Sins is as
uneafie); will you have its dominion yet kept up in you? are you loath to part
with your old Master? then your ears must be boared for Sin and Satan ( Exodus
21.5, 6.
as the Servant under the Law was to be served, who might have been set at
liberty from his Master but he had no mind to it). If it be thus I can say
nothing more, only pray that the Lord will convince you what the reign and
power of Sin is, what a miserable bondage attends it, that you may with the
greatest earnestness press after Conversion and the Law of the Spirit of Life
(in order to freedom from it). So much for the First Branch of this Use of
Information!

2. Branch of Information concerning the Necessity, etc. of restraining and
renewing Grace.
Secondly it informs us further of the Necessity, Power, and Efficacy of
restraining and renewing Grace; I Will speak to them apart:

1. For restraining Grace. By which I mean that grace whereby God keeps in men's
corruptions and sets bounds and limits to them in Sin, so as not to suffer them
to be as vile and wicked as otherwise they would be. That such a thing is done
by God, all grant; he that bounds the Sea that it does not break forth and
overflow all, ('it is most elegantly set out Job 38.8, 10, 11. Who shut up the
Sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb? And
brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars, and doors; And said, hitherto
shalt-thou come, but no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed: as
also Jer. 5.22. -- which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea by a
perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it; and though the waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass
over it): I say, he that thus bounds the Sea (that unruly body) does also bound
the wickedness of man's heart, (a far more unruly thing than the Sea it self);
this God keeps in or lets out as seems good unto him. You see it in the case of
Abimilech; whose Lust did strongly work in him toward Sarah but says God Genesis
20.6. I withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore I suffered thee not to
touch her; (the like you have in several other instances). Now this Law of Sin
proves both the necessity and also the mighty power and efficacy of this
restraining Grace; for the making out of which be pleased to take notice of the
following Particulars: 1. That the most of men are under the Law of Sin. All
are born under it and the most continue under it, for the most are in the state
of Nature and in that state the Law of Sin carries it. Here and there you have
a Soul brought in to God, converted, savingly wrought upon, Jer. 3.14.
one of a city, and two of a family; but the generality of men are strangers to
this work, and therefore they are under the full power and dominion of a cursed
nature. It being so, how necessary is restraining grace? for the less there is
of regenerating grace the more need there is of restraining grace. 2. Men
naturally being under this Law it does vehemently and impetuously put them upon
sin; for herein lies its being a Law and a Principle (as you have heard). The
depraved Nature does not barely dispose men to sin or faintly persuade them to
sin, but it does powerfully and efficaciously incline, urge, impell, nay
necessitate them to sin: they cannot cease from sin 2 Pet. 2.14. 3. It is not
this or that sin which this Law urges men to, but (if it be left to it self) it
urges to every sin, yea, to the very worst of sins. This indwelling sin
contains all sin in it, the corrupt Nature is the (...) the Seminary or
Seed-plot of all wickedness, in that one sinful habit all sinful acts do lie (
seminally and radically); and Sin where it is a Law is for all Sin, it will
excite, instigate, provoke not only to lesser evils (such as the world puts a
fairer interpretation upon), but also to those which are most enormous, hideous
and horrid, (as Atheism, Blasphemy, Murder, Theft, Adultery, etc.) 4. This Law
of Sin has great advantages in and over men: for it is a Law that is in them,
an innate, ingenit, inbred Law, it is written and engraven in their very nature;
Sin is now connatural to them, yea it is as natural (in some respects) for
apostatized man to sin as it is for the fire to burn or the stone to descend. I
have told you (and there is too much of truth in it) that the great Law of
Nature (it being considered as depraved) is to sin against God: This Law of sin
is written in the heart, and that gives a mighty power and efficacy to it and
must needs strongly incline a person to comply with it; as God (when he would
have men readily and effectually to close with his Will) Jer. 31.33.
he writes his Law in their heart, and that being done they cannot but do what
that Law enjoins; just so it is with Sinners in reference to the Law of Sin
upon the writing of it in their hearts.


These things being considered and put together, what is the reason that there
is no more sin in the world? God knows there is too much of it, the Law of Sin
is too prevalent in the hearts and lives of the most; but yet (I say) what is
the reason that there is no more of it? for certainly this Law of Sin leads the
Unregenerate to do more evil than what many, yea any of them do. Doubtless
there are diverse who are fully under Sins power who yet are kept from many
external gross acts of it, and are not altogether so bad as it and Satan would
have them to be. Sometimes it breaks forth in this or that unconverted person
but why does it not do the same in every such person? and sometimes too it
breaks forth in this or that act but why does it not so do in every act, yea in
the grossest acts? whence is it that every unconverted man is not a Cain, a
Judas, a Nero, etc. (the Law of Sin inclining him to all this wickedness?) I
answer, the reason why it is not so, is wholly grounded upon the restraining
grace of God. It pleases God (for the Good of the World, of humane Society,
especially for the good of his own people), to keep in and bound that wicked
nature which is in wicked men, that it shall not in all such, at all times, in
all acts (proper to it) vent it self as it pleases: And was it not for this
mighty restraint which God in his Providence lays upon Sin and Sinners there
would be no living in the world, there would be nothing but killing, and
slaying, and stealing, etc. and (in a word) the perpetration of all villainies
imaginable Was it not for this, whither would not the Law of Sin carry men?
they being under the full dominion of it what would they stick at? o but God
restrains them; he lets out so much of their corruptions as may be to his own
glory and the residuum or overplus he keeps in, (according to that of the
Psalmist Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainer
of wrath shall thou restrain. How necessary therefore is restraining grace!
it is necessary in respect of the good much more in respect of the bad; even
they do need it for themselves but these much more for others. Ravenous and
fierce Creatures must be kept in chains, or else they would worry and tear all
that should come within their reach; if God had not Devils and Men in chains
they would be so exorbitant that the world could not long subsist: blessed be
God for restraining mercy! And how does this also hold forth the mighty power
of this mercy! when Sin lords it at such a rate in the hearts of men, has such
an absolute power over them, does so impetuously urge them to all kinds and
degrees of evil, that yet they should be so bounded and limited that some Order
and Decorum should be kept up in the world, o the power of restraining
providence! It Is like the Fires not burning into which the Three Children were
cast, or like the Lions not tearing of Daniel when he was in the very midst of
them; which certainly proceeded from the mighty restraint which God laid upon
the One and upon the Other, in the suspending and hindering of them in their
natural operations: it is no less power that which God puts forth in the
restraining of men's sinful Natures that they do not so fiercely break forth in
all wicked acts as otherwise they would. And if this be so admirable in the
restraining of Men, how much more admirable is it in the restraining of Devils*
their power, rage, malice, wickedness is greater by much than that in men; o
therefore why do not they do all the mischief they could and would? why do not
they destroy and worry all before them? especially as to the Saints (whom they
most hate) why do they not tear them in pieces every day? why? no thank to
themselves, they cannot do it because God restrains them, binds and bounds them
as he pleases; here is the great demonstration of the power of restraining Grace.

2. Secondly it shows us also the necessity, power, and efficacy of Renewing
Grace. There Is more in this Grace than in the former; in restraining grace Sin
is a little curbed and kept in, but yet it retains its inward strength and
power (as 'twas with Sampson when he was only bound, or as it is with fierce
Creatures when they are in cages or chains): but in renewing grace Sin is
subdued, conquered, much weakened in its strength, divested of its former
absolute power, not only kept in but brought under, and the Soul brought over
to the will and command of God. Now this being effected in and by renewing
grace it is evident that there is a mighty power and efficacy in that Grace; for
that which frees from so great a power (as that of Sin before Conversion) must
needs have a great power it it. If renewing grace was a weak thing or did act
in a weak manner, it could never do what it does; was there not the Law of the
Spirit in it the Law of Sin would be too hard for it. It Is not to be imagined
that Sin will ever be persuaded to resign or tamely to quit its power and
dominion (which it so dearly loves and so fiercely contends for); no, it must
be forced to this and plainly overpowered or else 'twill keep what it has;
therefore in regeneration God comes with that effectual, almighty grace which
shall infallibly pull Sin off from the throne (let it do its worst), with that
power which all the power of Sin cannot withstand and so the work is done. As
you see in the case of Peter (that I may open it by an allusion); you read Acts
12.5, etc. how he was kept in prison, bound with two chains, the Keepers before
the door kept the prison, besides he had Soldiers by him and he sleeping
betwixt them: one would think that now Herod had him fast enough; and yet Peter
is brought out, how? why the Angel of the Lord comes (in the strength of God)
awakens him, bids him arise, makes his chains fall off from him, breaks open
the prison doors, and so sets him free: The like you read of Paul and Silas
Acts 16.23. they were thrown into prison, the Jailer charged to keep them
safely, he throws them into the inner prison, made their feet fast in the
stocks, yet for all this they were delivered; how? Suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken, and immediately
all the doors were opened, and every ones bonds were loosed: what could have
brought these persons (under these circumstances) out of prison, but the
miraculous interposures of the mighty power of God? and that did it
effectually. Thus it is with men in their Natural State, Sin and Satan have them
fast bound, secured in chains and fetters, they cannot stir hand or foot to
help themselves, are fully under the power of their enemies; how are these now
released? why, God comes and the Spirit comes by renewing grace, and therein he
opens the doors of their hearts (though shut up very fast), knocks off their
fetters, conquers the Guard that is set upon them, breaks all the power and
force of Sin, and so rescues them from that thraldom and bondage which they
were under; o the power of renewing grace! well might Paul say Ephesians. 3, 20.
according to the power that works in us. The truth is, in the freeing of a
Soul from the Law of Sin, no less power is put forth than that very power of
God put forth in the raising up of the Lord Jesus from the dead, so the Apostle
makes the parallel Ephesians. 1.19, 20. (and that was much above that power which was
exerted in the rescuing of the forementioned persons out of their confinement).
It had been morally impossible that ever the Children of Israel should have
been freed from the power of Pharaoh and that woeful bondage they were under, if
God himself had not made bare his arm and brought them out with a strong and
mighty hand, (as it is Deuteronomy. 6.21. Psalm. 136.12.) but it is a much harder thing
to free the Sinner from his spiritual bondage, he being under a sadder
captivity and held therein by a far greater strength than what Pharaoh had; o
surely no deliverance could be expected from Sins dominion, unless infinite
power was engaged in the bringing of it about: therefore how necessary as well
as efficacious is renewing Grace! (but more of this when I come to the third
Observation). --

One Use I have finished; several Others should have been made of the Point in
hand, as to show you yet further how you may find out your particular Cases,
whether you be under the Law of Sin or not; how you may be freed from this Law
if as yet you be not so; why you should labor after this freedom, etc. But
these things will as well fall in under the next Observation and therefore I
will there insist upon them.

ROMANS 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of sin and death.


CHAP. VI. Of Regenerate Persons being made free from the Law of Sin.
The Second Observation spoken to, (viz.) That persons truly regenerate are
made free from the Law of Sin. This is (1.) cleared and stated: where it is
shown, that the freedom is not to be carried further than the Law of Sin. How
Sin is in the best, yea and has a great power in them, and yet they are not
under the Law of Sin: when persons may be said to be so? or what that is which
constitutes the Law of Sin? That not to be found in those who belong to God.
The Observation (2.) confirmed by Scriptures and Reasons. It Is (3.) applied:
First by way of Examination.
Mistakes about things which look like freedom from the Law of Sin and yet are
not so: Five Particulars instanced in. Secondly, all are exhorted to make out
after this freedom. One Direction in order to it. Thirdly, suth as are made
free, etc. are exhorted (1.) To be humble. (2.) To stand fast in their Liberty,
and also to walk suitably thereunto. (3.) To bless God.
Fourthly, Gracious persons are comforted from hence.

THe Sum of these Words (after the giving their proper sense and meaning) has
been drawn into three Observations: The 2. Observe. spoken to.
the First of which has been spoken to; the Second now follows; and it is this,
That persons truly regenerate are made free from the Law of Sin; this is the
privilege of all such, and that which always accompanies the State of Grace or
Regeneration (viz.) freedom from the Law of Sin. Paul being such a person here
says he was [made free from the Law of Sin].

For the better opening and stating of this Truth (the first thing to be done),
The opening and stating of it.
I must necessarily inmind you of some things which in the explication of the
Words (and elsewhere too) I have had occasion to insist upon: As

1. Though the Apostle here speaks in his own person, the Law of the Spirit of
Life has made [me] free, etc. yet the thing spoken of is not to be limited to
him ( individually considered), but to be extended to all who are regenerated
and sanctified: his knowledge of it might be somewhat special, but the thing it
self is common and general in all Saints. 2. That the freedom (mentioned in the
Text) refers to the being made free from the commanding, reigning power of Sin,
rather than to the being made free from the condemning power of Sin. 3. The
Apostle speaks of it as an act that is past [hath made me free, etc.] therefore
that freedom from Sin which the Saints shall have hereafter in their glorified
estate is not here primarily intended; but rather that which they have already
upon their sanctification. 4. This especially must be observed (which I must
more enlarge upon) that the thing which the Saints are freed from is but the
Law of Sin: So the Apostle here states it, Saints freed from Sin only in the
Notion of its being a Law.
and therefore the Words are to be carried no further than to deliverance from
that in Sin which does properly denominate it to be a Law, or which does belong
to it in the notion and appellation of a Law; so far the Saints in this Life
are made free from it, but no farther.
For the preventing of mistakes and the due bounding of the Point, two things
must be laid down and made good:

As 1. That this freedom is not to be taken simply and absolutely for perfect
deliverance from the very being, and inhesion of Sin, but only for deliverance
from Sin in the notion of a Law. The highest Saints (God knows, and they
themselves know too well,) in their present state are far from being wholly,
completely, perfectly made free from Sin in this respect; yet the very lowest
Saints are truly and really made free from the Law of Sin. There Is a great
difference 'twixt the inbeing and the Law of sin, 'twixt the residence and the
reign of sin, betwixt Sins mansion and Sins dominion: Sin will have a being in
Gods people though it be not a Law to them, a residence in them though it does
not reign over them, a mansion though it be cast out of dominion. There are
none on this side of Heaven so pure but that there is some mixture in them;
they have corruption as well as grace, (as the best grain has its chaff and
the brightest marble its spots and flaws): the Regenerate themselves whilst
here on earth are but like gold in the ore which has much of baser matter
mingled with it. O this Sin cleaves fast to us, it will live as long as we live
and will not dye till we dye, 'twill be in the Soul so long as the Soul is in
the Body, upon Conversion it is cast down but not wholly cast out: and therefore
all that we can safely ground upon from the Text or that is designed in the
present Truth, is deliverance only from the Law of sin. It Is here according to
what you read of Dan. 7.12.
Daniel's Beasts, they had their dominion taken away, yet their lives were
prolonged for a season and time; Sins dominion at the the first moment of the
Sinners Conversion is taken away, yet for some time it lives and has a being
in the Soul: Or as you read of the Canaanites, they were to be be divested of
all their power, yet God (for some reasons) would have them to Exodus 23.28, etc.
continue in the Holy Land and not cut them off all at once; just so he orders
it with his people in reference to Sin. You have in the Words (according to
some) a double freedom, one from Sin, and another from Death; now we are not
absolutely freed from Death but only from the Law of it, (that is) from the
tyranny and curse of it; so neither are we absolutely freed from Sin but only
from the Law of it, (that is) the power and tyranny of it.

Nay 2. Even the deliverance of regenerate persons from the power of Sin, must
be taken but in a limited and qualified sense. Not as if they were wholly freed
even from that so as that Sin should have no power in them, for as to that too
in this life they come short: Alas! it is the affliction of true Converts not
only to have Sin ( Habitual and Actual), but (which is much worse) that Sin
has a great power and strength in them and over them. True indeed, it has not
such a power in them as it has in the Unregenerate, for its power is very much
broken and is not so entire and absolute in them as it is in the other; yet it
has too much of power even in them also. By which I do not mean only Sins Of
these things and of Sins Dominion (as to the whole) read Sedgwick's Anatomy of
Sin; chapter 4.
molesting power, (as it can and does here greatly mobest, disturb, disquiet,
trouble, vex the dearest of Gods Children); nor only Sins assaulting power,
(as it can and does often invade and set upon the Saints, wherever they are
or'whatever they are about in order to the overcoming of them); nor only Sins
tempting and provoking power (as it does strongly excite, urge, provoke,
solicit them to what is evil): we may go higher than so, it has a worser
power than all these namely a prevailing power; now at some times and in some
cases Gods own people may be brought even under that. O Sin may carry the day
and be victorious over them! it may with great efficacy and success prevail
even in them both in the keeping of them from what is good and also in the
drawing of them to what is evil. Is this a thing to be questioned (though the
truth of it is much to be lamented)? do we not see it by sad experience made
good in our selves and others? did not Paul himself who here says he was made
free from the Law of Sin, yet (which has often come in my way) a little
before, when he was in the same state in which here he was, make sad complaints
about it? I find (says he) a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me; as if he had said, others may dream of perfection and please
themselves with the thoughts of their high seize but (as to my self) I
cannot pretend to any such thing, for my part I find a Law, etc. there is such
a Law, such a corrupt, cursed nature in me which has too much strength and
power over me; and (says he) this Law I find, I plainly perceive it and cannot
but take notice of it, I do not only hear of it but I find and feel it in my
self in the sad fruits and effects of it: yea (says he) this is no weak or
languid thing but that which has a great power in me; for it wars against the
law of my mind and leads me captive, etc. thus this great Saint did groan under
Sins power. And if a Paul thus complains how may others complain? if Sin had
such a power in him what has it in poor Christians of a far lower size and
s^^^^re? We have too many Instances not only of the having and bare inbeing of
Sin, but of the prevailing power of Sin even in truly, yea eminently gracious
persons; David commits adultery, plots the death of Vriah, numbers the people,
etc. Noah is drunk, Lot incestuous, Hezekiah proud, Job impatient, Peter denies
Christ, etc. o the strength and efficncy of Sin even in the Regenerate
themselves! It may and it does sometimes prevail in the strongest (though it
never rules in the weakest); yet you must know that these partial successes of
Sin do not amount to the Law of Sin: it may conquer and yet not command, its
prevalency does not evince its regency; the Invader may win the field in some
barrels and yet for all that not be upon the throne. But (I say) Sin pro his
and nunc may have a prevailing power even over the best, notwithstanding their
being made free from the Law of Sin.

All then that we can warrantably and truly fix upon in this matter is this,
that such who are in the state of grace, in whom the Spirit has wrought as the
Spirit of Life, they are made free from the Law of Sin, (that Law being taken
in its strict and proper notion according to the explication which has been
given of it, and as noting something more than the bare power of Sin with
respect to some particular acts). In some sense Sin may be said to be a Law in
the regenerate (namely in regard of that power and strength which it has in
them), but yet it is not a Law to the regenerate because they do not own it or
submit to it, as to that which has the authority or dominion over them. You
have heard there are two things which make Sin to be a Law; One is
authoritative commanding on its part, the Other is full and free resignation on
the Sinners part to its Commands and impulsions: now the Unsanctified in both
of these ways are under the Law of Sin, but with the Sanctified it is not so,
(especially in the latter respect). Indeed Sin (on its part) will often be
laying its Commands upon them magisterially and imperiously enough, but they do
not (on their part) yield obedience or subjection to those commands; possibly
now and then through infirmity they may hearken to something that Sin enjoins,
but as to their general course and to the bent and purpose of their hearts they
say Sin shall not reign ever us. Sin is only then a Law when it has habitual,
universal, entire, absolute dominion, and when the Sinner gives up himself in
willing, ready total subjection to it; now its never thus bad with the
Regenerate, Sins power never rises so high where grace is, in this respect
every Child of God is made free from the Law of Sin. And in this notion the
Apostle here takes the Law of Sin: in the At inquies quomodo Paulus se
liberatum jactat a lege Peccati, qui cap. praecedente quaestus sit-se adhuc
mancipari Legi Peccati, and adhuc servire Legi Peccati? Dixit se carne ei
servire, at mente Legi Dei: Si carne tantum, non mente, ergo vere liberatus; a
mente enim, non a carne fidelis aestimandus est, etc. Add quod lex peccati non
eodem prorsus modo hic sumitur atque praeced. capite. -- Hic significat plenum
illud peccati Dominium, cui totus homo naturalis extra Christum constitutus,
subjectus est, etc. Illic autem per legem peccati intelligebantur reliquiae
quaedam istius Dominii, quod peccatum non in totum hominem fidelem, sed in
membra, sive in carnem ejus tantum, i. e. in corruptam naturam adhuc exercet,
etc. Lud. de Dieu.
former Chapter he speaks to it as it notes the power and strength of the
relics. of Sin and as its power is but somewhat broken, and so he (...) too
much of it; but here in the Text, he speaks to it as it is in its full power and
strength and so he was freed from it.

Several of these things have occurred in what goes before, but they being most
necessary and proper in this place, I could not but again mention them. Having
thus stated the Doctrine and given you the explication of it, I am now Secondly
to make out the truth of it and to prove, that persons truly regenerate are
made free from the Law of Sin. And surely so it is! The Obs. proved by
Scripture and Reason.
as certain as the unrenewed are under this Law, so certain are the renewed
freed from it: Paul here attests it as to himself, the Law of the Spirit, etc.
and elsewhere he asserts the same in a more general manner. That Text is not
impertinent to my present purpose, in the 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the
Lord is (as the Spirit of Life, as renewing and regenerating), there is liberty
(or freedom from the Law of Sin): for I conceive the Apostle does not only
speak of liberty of Spirit (in opposition to bondage of Spirit or the Spirit of
bondage), but also of the liberty of the State, in opposition to the State of
bondage; and that too, is not to be limited only to the liberty of the Gospel
state, in opposition to the bondage of the Law, (though I grant the Words are
brought in more immediately upon that account); but it is applicable to persons
with respect to their inward and spiritual state, as by the sanctifying Spirit
they are freed from the power of Sin, and from that bondage which they were
under to it in their natural condition: So that the liberty here spoken of is
(in a great measure) one and the same with the being made free from the Law of
Sin in my Text; and if so, then you see how positively it is asserted where the
Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. So again, the Apostle Romans 6. speaks
much of the Law or reign and dominion of Sin; which he having dehorted from (
V. 12.) let not Sin reign in you, etc. he then backs his dehortation with a
promise) V. 14. For Sin shall not have dominion over you, because you are not
under the law, but under Homo consideratur ante Legem, sub Lege, sub Gratia, in
Pace: Ante Legem non pugnamus, sub Lege pugnamus sed vincimur, sub Gratia
pugnamus and vincimus, in Pace non pugnamus quidem. Aug. Lib. Octog. Quaest.
66. and in Expos. quarund Propos. Ep. ad Romans
grace: the grace here mainly intended is that assisting, helping,
strengthening grace which always accompanies the Gospel or new Covenant state;
the Law commanded much but gave no strength for the doing what it commanded,
but the Gospel where it requires duty it always enables a person to perform it.
Now upon this grace Paul assures Believers that, they endeavoring on their
part and making vigorous resistance to sin, it should not have dominion over
them, because they should certainly have such strength and assistance given
them from God, as that their endeavors should be successful against all Sins
assaults: This (I say) is the Grace primarily intended in this place, yet you
may take in too Converting and renewing Grace: and then the words will run
thus, Sin neither has nor ever shall have dominion over you (who are
Believers), because you are not under the Law ( i e. that Law which only
discovers Sin but does not help to conquer it, which leaves the person as it
finds him without any charging of his heart or state), but you are under grace
( i.e. regenerating grace), which always delivers from and secures against the
dominion of Sin.

And besides these Scripture-proofs in point of Reason it must needs be so,
because upon regeneration there is another active, operative, commanding
principle infused into the Soul (viz) Grace; now Grace and the Law of Sin are
inconsistent. It may consist with sin, for otherwise there would be no Grace in
this lower world, but it cannot consist with the Law of Sin or with Sin in its
full and absolute dominion power: Two contrary principles cannot be together in
the same Subject in their full vigor and strength, (the like caeteris paribus
may be said of contrary Powers); if Sin be the principle in its full efficacy
(so as to make it a Law) then there is no grace, because if this was in the
Soul it would certainly break the full strength of the opposite principle. True
grace is a commanding thing as well as Sin; there is such an holy pride in it
that it disdains and scorns to be subject to Corruption or to let Sin be above
it; it can (though not without reluctance) bear the inbeing of Sin, but it
cannot bear Sin as a corrival or competitor with it in point of rule and
dominion. Here the elder must serve the younger (to allude to that of Jacob and
Esau Genesis 25.23.) I mean, the corrupt nature must be an underling to that which
is sanctified: if Hagar will be content to live in the house in a state of
inferiority well and good, that for a time must be submitted to; but if she
will be presuming to vie with her Mistress for authority and rule and nothing
will serve her below that, she must then be made to know her self: the
application is obvious.

To make the thing unquestionable, pray consider what that in special is which
is done by God at the converting of a Soul; it is this very thing, the
dethroning of Sin and Satan and the inthroning of Christ and Grace: where God
converts he does (in effect) say, Sin thou must now come down, and Christ and
Grace shall now ascend the throne. When ever the Sinner is regenerated in the
first moment of that state Sin is divested of its usurped power and regency,
and the Kingdom of Christ (in and by Grace) is set up in him: now Christ's
kingdom and Sins kingdom are incompatible, where he reigns it shall not for he
is impatiens consortis; but especially he will not have such a base thing as
Sin to share with him in the government of the Soul. Where Christ comes and
takes possession, he always abolishes the Law of Sin and instead of that sets
up another Law; for new Lords will have new Laws, and different Lords different
Laws. Therefore in the work of Conversion God promises to write his Law in the
heart; Jer. 31.33. But this shall be the Covenant, that I will make with the
house of Israel, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts: now upon the doing of that the Law of Sin is defaced, antiquated and
canoell'd, for since contrary Laws cannot be together in their full force, the
former must be abolished upon the introduction of the latter.

Once more: in the Text you have the Law of the Spirit of Life brought in in
opposition to and in order to the abolition of the Law of Sin; which being
considered, it affords a very weighty argument for the proof of the Truth in
hand. The Law of the Spirit is the mighty power of the Spirit put forth in the
regenerate Soul, for the rescuing of it from the power of Sin and the bringing
of it under the Rule and Scepter of the Lord Christ: now shall this Spirit put
forth such a mighty power for this very end, and yet Sin continue as high in
its Sovereignty as before? what advantage then would the Believer have by the
Law of the Spirit if the Law of Sin should yet be kept up in him? Certainly
when this great Spirit shall vouchsafe to exert his great power there must be
some great effect produced by it; and what can that be but the delivering of
the poor Captive-Sinner from Sins bondage? the destroying of Satan's kingdom?
and the setting up of Christ's sweet and gracious Government in the Soul? (but I
spend time in the proving of that which indeed needs not much proof.)

In the application of the Doctrine (which I judge will be more useful and
necessary), I might here take occasion to confute those who misunderstanding
this passage [being made free from the Law of Sin], do from thence infer and
argue for the Saints perfection in this Life. But having given you all that
this freedom contains in it (which comes exceeding short of perfection), I
think I need not (I Am sure I will not) speak any thing further for the
obviating and refuting of that proud Opinion. He that here says he was made
free from the Law of Sin, elsewhere says also Phil. 3.12.
he had not already attained nor was already perfect, etc. and surely he went
as far (nay, much further) than any of our modern Perfectionists. God make us
sensible of imperfection in this State, and ever to be pressing after and
waiting for that perfection which only belongs to the future state!

I might also from hence infer the happiness of such who are truly regenerate,
and the preciousness, excellency, advantage of regenerating grace: o how happy
are they who are delivered from Sins yoke! and how precious is that grace which
instates the Soul in such liberty!

USE 1. How we may know whether we be made free from the Law of Sin?
But passing by these things, I will in the first place desire you to make
diligent search whether you be thus freed from the Law of Sin. O Sirs! how is
it with you? what can you say of your selves about this? You heard in the
former Point that all in the Natural State are under this Law; Adam has
entailed this bondage upon all his posterity, had he not flan we had come into
the world with the Law of God written in our hearts, but now we are born with
the Law of Sin written in them: are we therefore brought out of the state of
Nature? In this Point you have heard that they who are Regenerate are made free
from it; so that if you be not such, you are concluded to be yet under the Law
of Sin; these two do mutually prove each the other, if it be the state of
unregeneracy it is the Law of Sin, and if it be the Law of Sin it is the state of
unregeneracy. Well! it highly concerns you to be most seriously inquisitive
about this, 'pray therefore bring it down to your selves one by one and ask,
how is it with me? am I under the Law of Sin? or am I made free from it? some
Law or other I must be under (for every man in the world is so), therefore what
is the Law which has the authority over me? is it the Law of Christ, the Law
of Grace, or is it the Law of Sin? has not the sinful Nature in me the
dominion of a Law, and the efficacy of a Principle? is not all that which makes
up the Law of Sin to be found in me?

To help you in this Enquiry I need not say much more than what I have already
said: do but look back to the explication of Sins being a Law, as also to the
Answer of that Question How this may be known? and there is enough to direct you
in examination and passing judgment upon your selves. Yet however a little
further to help you herein, and also to quicken you to the more serious
searching into it, let me tell you there are very great and dangerous mistakes
in this matter; o how far may Sinners go and how well may they think of
themselves, and yet for all that be under the Law of Sin! men catch at false
evidences and lay that stress upon them which they will not bear: Let me
instance in a few particulars to show how far persons may go and yet not be
made free from the Law of Sin, or to set forth the weakness of some grounds
which men build upon for this.

How far men may go and yet be under the Law of Sin?
1. They make some resistance to Sin and therefore they conclude they are not
under its power. But (alas!) this will not prove it, for (1.) this resistance
may be but a faint, weak, half resistance: (2.) it may be bus to this or that
Sin, nor to every Sin: (3.) it may be to Sin but not as Sin; (that is) Sin may
be resisted, because of the Effects and Consequents of it, as it kindles God's
wrath, brings punnishment, ends in Hell, exposes to shame before men, etc. and
yet as considered in its own nature, as it is an offense to God, a breach of the
holy Commandment, an aberration from the straight Rule, so no resistance may be
made to it but the Sinner readily closes with it and likes it well enough: now
such a resistance as this will not amount to a proof or evidence of not being
under the Law of Sin.
There is a resistance indeed which will undeniably prove it, as when it is
hearty, thorough, vigorous, universal; when it is such that the utmost strength
of the Soul goes out in it against Sin, when it is made to every sin and to sin
as sin; where it is thus it is no Law of Sin, he that thus opposes and resists it
it is most certain he is none of Sins slaves and subjects: if therefore it be
thus with any of you it is well, but you must not bottom too much upon mere
resistance (if it be not thus qualified and stated). Indeed no resistance is a
good affirmative Argument to prove Sins dominion, but every kind of resistance
is not a good negative Argument to prove no dominion thereof: Sincere
Christians may fetch much comfort from their resistings of sin, but as to those
which are common and ordinary in Others little comfort can be fetched from them.

2. Persons may be free from very many Sins, may not have such violent
inclinations to some particular Sins, and yet for all this be under the Law of
Sin. The reason is this, because there may be some Other sins in which (though
not in these) it may exercise full authority over them: possibly they are not
proud but they are covetuous, they are not openly vicious but they are worldly,
they are not unclean but they are spightful and malicious; now reigning Sin
never limits it self to any one Sin, though it be not obeyed in this or that if
its Commands be observed in any other sin, it is enough: willing and full
subjection to it in any one sin (I speak not of particular acts but of the
kinds of Sin) evinces its dominion. Thou please thy self because such
Corruptions and Lusts do not prevail over thee, I but if any other single Lust
rules thee so that it has thy heart and thou yieldest free and entire
Obedience to it, this sufficiently determins thy Case thou art under the Law of
Sin. As Jam. 2.10.
whoever keeps the whole Law of God and yet offends in one point, is guilty of
all, so whoever opposes the whole Law of Sin and yet in some one point resigns
up himself to it, he is as truly under the power of it as if he obeyed it in
all its Commands. There needs not thirty Tyrants at once to enslave a people,
one is enough.

3. Sin may seem to lie still and quiet in the heart, to let Sinners alone,
that they shall not feel its urgings and impulsions to what is evil (especially
in such a violent and impetuous manner), and yet they may be under its full
strength and empire. For this stillness and quietness of sin may proceed merely
from the entireness of its reign, or because it meets with no opposition; the
Soul does whatever it will have it do, no wonder then that it is still: Pharaoh
himself was so till the people of Israel would cast off his yoke, but then he
bestirred himself and marched in all his rage and fury against them. O when the
Sinner begins to think of changing his master, when Christ and Grace are
competitors with Sin who shall rule, how does it then (though it was quiet
before) show it self, and put forth all its strength for the securing of its
dominion! We say Natura vexata seipsam prodit, when Sin is vexed and crossed a
little then you shall see and feel what it is; but so long as it is pleased all
is still and calm. And do any say they feel not the impetuous risings,
stirrings, motions of Sin? does not this proceed from their insensibleness? if
so, then Sins power is very high, for the less is the Sinners sense the greater
always is Sins power; if all be in peace it is a sign the strong man keeps the
house Luke 11.21. Sin evermore has the fullest dominion where it gives the
least disturbance, where it troubles least it rules most: if there be little or
no sense, no conflict, no trouble, it is a very bad sign that Sin is entire upon
the throne.

4. There may be some trouble upon the Conscience after the commission of sin,
and yet it be the Law of Sin. 'Twas so in Cain, in Ahab, in Judas, etc. where
there is no after-grief Sin indeed reigns, there may be some after-grief and
yet for all that Sin may reign too. Upon the commission of some known Sin
natural and enlightened Conscience may fall upon a man and vex him sorely; Sin
usually has not that power in the Conscience which it has in the other
Faculties, it may entirely have the Will and Affections whilst yet Conscience
stands off and is not so fully on its side: no, that (unless it be a cauteriz'd
Conscience) will give in its dictates against Sin, and (if it be not hearkened
to) it will smite and vex and gaul the Sinner to some purpose. And because
sometimes it is fast asleep and neglects to do its office, therefore God himself
interposes to awaken and set it on the Sinner; Conscience (says God) go and do
thine office, make such a man know what he has done, tell him of his Sin and
spare him not, pursue him from place to place with the sense of his guilt, etc.
Well! now all this may be but in order to his smarting and not in order to his
healing, this trouble may be only penal and not medicinal or penitential; and
therefore does not amount to any proof of freedom from the Law of Sin. I would
not discourage any true penitent, know therefore Sin never reigns where the
Soul grieves for it, provided (1.) that the ground of this belief be right:
(viz.) because God is offended, the good Spirit grieved, the holy Law violated,
etc. (2.) that the effect of this grief be Poenitentia est mala praeterita
plangere, and plangenda iterum non committere. Ambr de Poen. Inanis est
Poenitentia quam sequens inquinat Cu'pa, and nihil prosunt lamenta si iterantur
peccata. Aug.
reformation and the leaving that Sin which the Soul seems to mourn over: if
there be not these two things accompanying the trouble upon the Conscience, it
speaks nothing against the dominion of sin.

5. Men may do that which materially is very good and may hold on in so doing
for some time, and yet be under the Law of Sin. O there are many who pray, hear
the Word, attend upon Ordinances, give alms, etc. and yet Sin is still regent
in them: because (1.) though they do all this, yet the heart is not at all
changed in them; now Sins power never goes off till the heart be made new: (2.)
because (which is more demonstrative) the heart is rotten in all this; Christ
has the external duty but Sin has the heart; some outward respect is shown to
God but yet the heart is set for some Lust against God; as you read of those
Ezekiel. 33.31. And they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before
thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetuousness. It Is a thing too common for men even in their external serving
of God to serve Sin more than God; and Gods work is done by them (for the
matter of it), but Sin so far interposes its authority and strength as that it
carries it in the Sinner as to his Ends in what he does, (and if it can but
sway and order him in them; God may have the external act but still it has the
soveraiguty and power within). The same holds true too as to a plausible,
outwardly good Conversation; external piety is too well consistent with the
internal reign of Sin: it rules in the fair professing-Hypocrite as well as in
the gross and scandalous Sinner.

By this you see, you may run your selves upon great mistakes in taking up with
such Evidences as will not prove your being made free from the Law of Sin: O
that the consideration thereof might make you the more careful lest you (as
many thousands are to their eternal undoing) should herein be deceived, as also
quicken you to the trial of your selves by those things which will infallibly
prove the thing in hand. What are they? why, no allowed subjection to Sin, no
tame; quiet submission to its commands, inward renouncing, nay abjuring of its
authority, a rooted, vigorous opposition to it in all its cursed suggestions,
an utter dislike and hatred of it, the bent and impetus of the heart set
against it, universal resignation of a man's self to the Law and Will of God, an
hearty willingness, nay desire to come under the rule and government of the
Lord Jesus, etc. these are the things you are to enquire after and to judge by,
for these are sure Evidences which you may rely upon. Happy is that man who
finds these in himself! he may with confidence build upon them that he is
indeed made free from the Law of Sin; but he that is confident upon any thing
short of these, will sooner or later find he was too credulous. (So much for
this Use).

USE 2. To exhort Sinners to make out after this freedom.
The next shall be to exhort you and others (yea all men in the whole world, if
I could reach them), to labor after and make sure of a share and interest in
this blessed freedom from Sins power and dominion. Regenerate persons you hear
have it, shall the Unregenerate sit still and be quiet and contented under the
want of it? God forbid! To be made free from the Law of Sin? what a mercy or
privilege is this! o how much is there in it to excite, draw, allure Sinners
to desire, love, and value it, and to be industrious after it! He that can upon
good grounds say over the words of the Text, needs no higher happiness: 'twas
more for Paul to say the Law of the Spirit of Life, etc. than if he could have
said that God had given him all the Kingdoms, Crowns, Diadems, Riches, Honors,
Pleasures of this world. You see he applies it to himself (and surely he had
comfort enough in that application); now (Sinners!) when will you be able to
say the same of your selves? that you also by the power of the Spirit are made
free from the Law of Sin? o (as Eliphaz once said to Job, hear it and know it
for thy self, Job. 5.27. so) I would say to you hear this and know it for your
selves; so as to get it for and to be able to appropriate it unto your own
selves, so as to take the [me] here (as coming out of Paul's mouth concerning
himself) into your mouths one by one concerning your selves. Sirs! this is a
thing of such importance that we Ministers cannot speak too much or be too
earnest about it: it is the great end of our Lord and Master in his employing us
in the work of the Ministry, to open your eyes, to turn you from darkness to
light, and from the [power of Satan unto God], Acts 26.18. and therefore though
I have said so much already to press the thing upon you, yet I must further
plead with you in order to the more effectual pressing of it.

Therefore consider has not this Sin tyrannized long enough over you? are you
willing still to continue under its thraldom and vassalage? must this cursed
Usurper forever sit upon the throne? shall it yet command and give Law to you?
What woeful and miserable bondage attends its empire and government, has been
described largely, shall all that be nothing to you? to be slaves, the very
worst of slaves, shall that be but a little thing in your eye? Other bondage
(not half so bad) you cannot bear, you detest and dread it; shall the worst
bondage only be tolerable, nay eligible? 'pray look Page 189, etc.
back to the description of Sins bondage and methinks your hearts should rise
at it. It Is an astonishing thing to consider, that so excellent a Creature as
Man, who has such an excellent Being in him as a reasonable and immortal Soul,
should so tamely submit to so base a^thing as Sin and make no more of servitude
to it. Does God in the Gospel so graciously tender Liberty ( privative and
positive) to you, and will you not accept of it? may you be made free and will
you not? o stupendous folly! is this after the manner of men (with respect to
external liberty or bondage)? When God sent Moses to deliver Israel out of
their bondage, what madness would it have been in them not to have accepted it?
let there be a ransom sent to the poor Captives under Turkish cruelty, would
they not readily embrace it? ah Sinner! the Lord Jesus came from Heaven on
purpose to redeem thy poor captive Soul out of the hands of Sin and Satan, he
has (on his part), effected what he came about, he now offers his Merit and
Spirit to make thee free, nay, he invites, entreats, sollicits, beseeches thee
that thou will accept of the liberty purchased for thee; and yet will thou hug
thy chains, play with thy fetters, love thy dungeon, be fond of thy bondage,
and prefer it before liberty? what is this but madness not to be paralleled!
what ingratitude is this to thy Savior, what cruelty to thy self! as to thee I
may well alter Tiberius's o gentem, etc. into o animam ad servitutem natam!
Further I pray you think of this, if Sin rule you will Christ save you? you
cannot but know the contrary; you know that he rules wherever he saves, that he
will be the Governor Where he is the Savior, that Sins yoke must be taken off
and Matthew. 11.29.
his yoke taken up, or no salvation; and yet shall Sin be obeyed and be thy
Lord and Sovereign rather than Christ? The business comes to a narrow issue,
let Christ rule thee and he will save the, but let Sin command thee and 'twill
condemn thee; the Law of Christ and of the Spirit is the Law of Life, but the
Law of Sin is the Law of Death; (but these things have been insisted upon). O
that this Spirit which frees from the Law of Sin, would show you what there is
in the Law of Sin! men do not endeavor to get out of it because they are not
convinced of the evil that is in it; did they but know what it is, they would
choose to dye rather than to live under it. And as for you, let me ask you how
you carry it in other respects; you hate the Tyrant without, will you love the
Tyrant within? you groan under the Laws of men (when they are a little heavy),
shall there be no groanings under the far heavier Laws of Sin? you will not be
called slaves to any, will you be content to be indeed slaves to Sin? is a
barbarous Turk cried out of, when a Devil and a cursed Nature are never
regarded? -- But one Consideration more! as God made you at the first you had
nothing to do with this Law of Sin: no, he made you for his own government, to
be subject to himself, his Law was written within you to command and act you in
your whole course; how then came Sin by this power? how did it get up thus into
the throne? why, only by the first Apostasy from God; Adams Fall was Sins
Rise, its reign commenced from man's rebellion; it is a mere upstart and
intruder, God never designed this power to it; will you now by your liking of
it and continuance under it give an after-ratification or approbation of its
power? It has deprived you of your primitive liberty and will you not
endeavor to regain it? when Sardis was taken by the Grecians, Xerxes commanded
that every day when he was at dinner one should cry aloud, Sardis is lost,
Sardis is lost, that hereby he might be inminded of what he had lost and
stirred up to endeavor the regaining of it: o Sirs! your Original Liberty is
lost, Sin has got it out of your hands, this we proclaim in your ears from
time to time that you may never be quiet till you have recovered it, and yet
will you do nothing in order thereunto? will you e'ne sit still under this
inexpressible loss? o that is sad!

All this has been spoken to set you against Sins dominion, to excite you to
the most earnest endeavors to be rid of its sovereignty, to cause you to fly
to the Spirit of Life that you may be made free from the Law of Sin, to work
holy purposes in you that Sin shall no longer reign over you, that you may say
with the Church Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had
dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy name: O that I
might prevail with some Soul to say with respect to Sin, Ah Lord! other Lords
have had dominion over me, lust, pride, passion, covetuousness, sensuality have
ruled me just as they pleased, but I desire it may be so no longer; I am
resolved now only to be subject to thy self, o do thou dethrone Sin and
inthrone thy self in me, let me be brought under universal, hearty, ready
subjection to thy Laws, and let not the Law of Sin carry it in me any longer,
etc.

One Direction given for the Sinners being freed from Sins power.
In what ways and by what means a poor enslaved Sinner may be made free from the
Law of Sin, is a very weighty enquiry; and I would hope that some Sinners
(being convinced by what has been spoken) have it in their thoughts. For
answer to it there is one Direction only which I shall at present give, it is
this Get into the regenerate state: regenerate persons are the adequate
Subjects of this freedom, they (and none but they) are freed from Sin as a Law.
Paul so long as he was unconverted was as much under this Law as any person
whatsoever, but as soon as it pleased God to convert him he was made free from
it. This deliverance depends upon the state, it must be the state of
regeneracy; till which, Sin will keep up its regency and sovereignty in the
Soul: o (as you have heard) when Grace once comes into the heart, the kingdom
of Sin goes down and the kingdom of Christ goes up therein; but never before.
All your strivings; endeavors, convictions, purposes, promises, will never
make Sins throne to shake and fall, till you be renewed and sanctified.
Therefore pray much for the regenerating Spirit, and attend much upon the
regenerating Word in order to this great work: Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born
of water and of [the Spirit], he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Jam.
1.18. Of his own will begat he us by the [Word of truth], etc. 1 Cor. 4.15. In
Christ Jesus I have begotten you [through the Gospel]; it is this Spirit and
this Word which must renew and bring about the new birth in you, and so deliver
you from the power of darkness and translate you into the kingdom of Gods dear
Son (as the Apostle speaks Col. 1.13). But this will be more properly enlarged
upon when I shall come to the third Observation, therefore here I Will say no
more about it.

USE 3. To such who are made free from the Law of Sin first by way of Counsel.
3. I will direct my self to those who by the Spirit of Life are made free from
the Law of Sin: something to them (1.) by way of Counsel; (2.) by way of
Comfort.


By way of Counsel I Will urge three duties upon them:

1. The first is hearty and deep humiliation: and this is incumbent upon such,
partly upon what is past and partly upon what is present.

Regenerate persons to be deeply humbled though they be made free from the Law
of Sin.
First, has the Lord been so gracious to any of you as to bring you out of the
Natural bondage? to dethrone and bring down this Sin which did at such a rate
domineer over you? o you must be deeply humbled upon your taking a view of what
is past. You are now (God be blessed for it!) made free, but how long was it
before this was done? how many years did you pass over in the unregenerate
state, in which you were as much under the command and at the beck of Sin as
any? how great a part of your life has been spent in its drudgery and
vassalage? for how long a time did you tamely submit to its yoke when you would
by no means be brought to submit to the yoke of Christ? do you not remember how
it was with you a few days or years ago, when the Scepter was in Sins hands and
it ruled and acted you even as it pleased? should not this now be thought of
with the greatest grief and sorrow? o the bondage, rebellion, enmity of the
natural state should (even by converted ones) often be remembered and bitterly
bewailed! That Is a Soul-humbling, Heart-melting word, Ephesians. 2.3.
Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts, etc.
who can read that sad description of a Sinner before Conversion Ezekiel. 16.3, 4,
5, etc. and not be affected!

Secondly you must be humbled upon the consideration of what is present. It Is
better than it has been yet not so well as it might and should be; Sin has
lost its absolute, full, entire power but yet it lives, nay yet it has a great
strength and power in and over you, I and against you too, so as that it is
still able to do you much hurt notwithstanding its being weakened, (as Sampson
though he was much debilitated when his locks were cut yet he had strength
enough left to do mischief to the Philistines). Do not you to this very day find
the corrupt Nature very strong and powerful? Sin rising and stirring in you
with great vigor? many very evil inclinations assaulting you with such
vehemence that you scarce know how to resist? does not Corruption, this and
that Lust too often foil you and triumph over you as its Captives? Now though
these things are not enough to evince Sins dominion yet surely they call for
deep humiliation: it does not rule you here, it shall not damn. you hereafter,
but it defiles you, often separates 'twixt you and your God, draws you off from
him, prevailingly hinders you from what is good and prevailingly also excites
you to what is evil: is not this sad? is there nothing to afflict a gracious
heart but only the unbroken power of Sin? o why are you not more in crying out
o wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! He that
gloried here in his deliverance from the Law of Sin (in one sense), was as much
abased before because of the Law of Sin (of which he felt so much in another
sense). The wise God orders it thus that Sin shall not only have a being in his
people, but also a considerable power over them in this life; amongst other
ends for this that he may keep them humble and draw out and heighten their
godly sorrow: and indeed there is more in the relics of Sin to humble the true
Christian than in all the outward Evils. that either do or can befall him. O
never think how it has been, how yet it is, without great self-abasement and
humiliation! when you begin to be 2 Cor. 12.7.
exalted above measure remember what you were, consider what you are.

To stand fast in their liberty.
2. Are you made free from the Law of Sin? let me say to you what Paul once said
to the Galatians (in reference to their being made free from the Ceremonial
Law), Galat. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not
entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Is Sin brought down? be sure you keep
it down; it is pity it should get up again or ever recover its pristine power.
When a people have once got the Usurper off from the throne, it concerns them
to look to it that he does not regain it, for should he so do their condition
then would be much worse than before: Saints! just so should you carry it
toward Sin. That Is brought under at present I but it watches all opportunities
for the regaining of that power which it has lost, (for it is of a proud nature
and cannot bear the loss of superiority); you must therefore always be upon
your guard with your weapons in your hands, ready to make resistance against it
in all its attempts, or else it will soon rally its forces and make head again
upon you, and endanger all. I know all its attempts are in vain as to the
recovery of its former dominion, God will not suffer it again to lord it over
you as before it did; yet if you be careless (especially if you in the least
side with it) 'twill strangely get ground and grow upon you. Therefore as
Christ once charged the healed man Joh. 5.14. Thou art made whole, sin no more,
so would I charge you, you are made free, o sin no more that you may never come
under its bondage again. Though God had so miraculously brought Israel out of
Egypt and out of that miserable servitude that there they were in, yet upon all
occasions how desirous were they to be in Egypt again! shall it be thus with
you? shall your gracious deliverance be so undervalued? have you such low
thoughts of Sins servitude as that you can be willing to come under it again?
'Pray learn how to put a due value upon your liberty, prize it at an high rate,
and so prize it as to continue in it and to maintain it to your utmost. Amongst
other Conditions which were anciently imposed upon those who were set at
liberty this was one, that they should not servitutis jugum iterum sponte
suscipere, willingly submit to the yoke of bondage again; and is not this
obligation laid upon Souls in their being made free by Christ and the Spirit?
The Libertatem nemo bonus nisi cum anima simul amittit. Salust in Conjur. Cat.
Historian tells us a good man will lose his life as soon as his liberty; o how
should you defend that spiritual liberty which you have by Christ and by Grace!
I beseech you take heed lest by your carelessness and little compliances with
Sin, you provoke God to permit its former power and tyranny in a great measure
to return upon you, that he may thereby let you see the difference 'twixt His
and Sins government; (read and apply Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.) 'Twould be sad it God
should deal with any of you as once that Master in Athens did with his Servant,
whom he had formerly made free but upon some unworthy carriage he reversed and
retracted that freedom, saying to him, Superse deo te, habere civem tanti
muneris impium aestimatorem, etc. Abi igitur and esto servus, quoniam liber
esse nescisti. Val. Max. l. 2. cap. 6.
The City shall never have one as a free Denizon of it, who does so little know
how to value such a privilege: Go thy way therefore and be a slave again since
thou know not how to carry it as becomes one that is free: Now (I say) if
God should deal thus with any of you would it not be sad? true, he will never
wholly reverse what he has done in you and for you; but thus far he may go, he
may let corruption at some times and in some acts prevail over you, and he may
wholly deprive you of the sense and comfort of your spiritual liberty, and
would not these be bad enough?

To walk suitably to it.
Let me under this Head press another thing upon you (viz.) to walk suitably to
this your freedom: wherein does that consist? why in this in being holy and
very holy. If you so be, this will suit with the deliverance from the Law of
Sin which you have upon regeneration; and which you must therefore be because
it is one great end of God in doing that for you: Luke 1.74, 75. That we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. It Is observable
how God ushers in the Ten Commandments with his delivering the people of
Israel out of the Egyptian bondage, (thereby to lay the greater obligation upon
them to obey and keep those Commandments); Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God,
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage;
then the several Commandments follow: And as to that particular Command of
keeping the Sabbath, you find God enforcing of it with this Argument only,
Deuteronomy. 5.15. Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, etc. O how
holy, how obedient should they be whom God has brought out of the state of
spiritual bondage (the obligation rising higher from this deliverance than from
the former)! Christians! you should be very holy, partly from a principle of
gratitude; partly because now the life of holiness is made more easy and
facil; if you be not so now the power of Sin is broken in you, it must be from
your sloth (or something worse). (...). Oec.
Some observe upon the latter-Clause of the preceding Verse [who walk not after
the flesh, etc.] that now under the Gospel it is much more easy to live the
heavenly life than it was formerly under the Law; so that (say they) if men do
not live that Life it must be charged merely upon their own negligence: so here
I say, persons being delivered from the Reign of Sin to them now it is much more
possible, nay easy to be holy in their walkings than sometimes it was; and
therefore if they do not so walk it is merely from their idleness and sinful
neglects. Sirs! now the holy Life is made practicable to you, what an
engagement does this lay upon you to live it! The Apostle here (according to
that Connection of the Words which some pitch upon) brings in freedom from the
Law of Sin as the ground of not walking, etc. therefore they who are in Christ
do not follow the sinful and carnal but the holy and spiritual course, because
they are freed from Sins power: I Am sure (as to the thing) it is the duty of
such so to walk upon this account. -- Let me add a third Consideration,
regenerate persons upon this must be very holy that there may be some
proportion 'twixt Nature as renewed in the way of Holiness, and Nature as
depraved in the way of Sin: 'pray observe it, so long as depraved Nature was
upon the throne you were very sinful, therefore now when renewed Nature is upon
the throne you should be very holy. I do not from hence plead for an equality
(that I very well know is not possible, and the reason is because corrupt
nature before Conversion was entire, not broken or weakened by any contrary
habit or principle; but it is not so with the renewed Nature after Conversion,
for that has Sin mingled with it, striving against it, making opposition to
it; therefore men cannot be so entirely good after grace as they were entirely
evil before grace); yet I may (and I do) plead from hence for some proportion,
whilst Sin ruled you you were very sinful therefore now Christ and Grace rule
you you should be very holy. So the Apostle argues Romans 6.19, 20. [As] you have
yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto iniquity,
[even so] now yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness: For
when ye were servants to sin, ye were free from righteousness; therefore (which
though it be not expressed yet it is implied) proportionably now when you are
the servants of righteousness, you should be free from sin. Upon this threefold
Consideration such as are made free from the Law of Sin should be holy.

Against Sins actual and partial dominion.
Now (that I may be somewhat more particular about this) Sin being that which is
opposite to Holiness, and much of the nature of holiness lying in refraining
from sin, and also the dominion of any particular sin very ill agreeing with
deliverance from the Law thereof, therefore in both of these respects I would
caution all regenerate persons against it; (but it is the latter only that I
shall speak a few words unto). Where I would be very earnest with you who have
passed under the regenerating work of the Spirit, to take heed even of the
actual and partial dominion of Sin; and there is great need of this admonition,
for though upon regeneration you are secured from its Habitual and Universal
dominion, yet as to some particular Sin and some particular evil acts it may
have that which looks too much like dominion (though strictly and properly it
be not so). Here therefore I desire you to be very careful that you do not
suffer any one sin to reign in you, for how would this consist with your being
made free from the Law of Sin? since (as has been said) the power of any one
sin and subjection thereunto (if it be full and free, plenary and voluntary)
does as certainly prove its dominion as the power of many, nay of all: o take
heed that this and that sin do not rule or be too high in you. 'Twas David's
prayer Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let
[them not have dominion] over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression: he goes further and takes in all Psalm.
119.133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not [any iniquity] have dominion
over me: Saints are not so freed from the Law of Sin by the Spirit, but that
there is need of daily prayer and that there be all endeavors and care on
their part against it; and their care must reach even to this that not any
(single) iniquity may have dominion over them.

The particular prevailing Sin to be most watched against and resisted.
And here especially you must be careful and vigilant about that particular sin
to which you are most strongly inclined, or which has the greatest strength in
you; about the Diotrephes-sin, the Herodias or darling-Sin, that which is as
the right eye or the right hand, I say your eye must be chiefly upon this that
it do not prevail and domineer over you. Every man in the world has some one
Sin which is uppermost in him, which carries it before all the rest, to which
all do vail and stoop: it is pride in one, fleshly lust in another, greediness
after the world in a third (and so on): Nay, a Child of God too usually has
some particular sin which is predominant in him, which though it does not
absolutely reign in him (for then he would be under the Law of Sin), yet
comparatively it does (i. e.) it has a greater power over him than any other
sin has. David calls it his iniquity Psalm. 18.23. Look as the Saints though
they have every Grace in them all being planted together in the new Nature, yet
there is some particular grace which shows it self more eminently in one than
in another, (as faith in Abraham, meekness in Moses, patience in Job, zeal in
Hezekiah, etc.) So e contra though they (and others) have every sin in them
radically and seminally in the corrupt Nature, yet there is some particular sin
which ordinarily vents it self with more strength than the rest, which having
the advantage of the Constitution, Education, Calling, Condition, etc. is
stronger than others: (how that may be known See Burg. Resin. Part 2. p. 232.
(With many Others).
Divines show in several things, but I must not stay upon it). Now you that are
regenerate look to your selves here, act your greatest vigilance and make your
strongest opposition with respect to your particular sin; here is your weakest
part and therefore here you must set your strongest guard (as Keepers of
Garrisons use to do): as he said 1 Kings 22.31.
Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel, so I
would say to you, fight against neither small nor great but only against the
King sin or Master sin in you. This is to kill Goliath himself which being done
all the Philistines fly, to stab Sin at the very heart upon which wound it must
needs dye: and here is the great evidence of sincerity, I was also upright
before him and I kept my self from my iniquity, Psalm. 18.23. and herein
deliverance from the Law of Sin mainly shows it self.

Regenerate persons to be very thankeful for their being made free from the Law
of Sin.
3. Thirdly you that are upon regeneration thus freed from Sins power I am to
bespeak your thankfulness, your highest and most hearty thankfulness for so
great a mercy. In the doing of this what has God done for you! o whilst you
pity Others who are under Sins bondage, bless God for your selves who are
delivered out of it. The remainders of Sin call for your deepest humiliation
but withal the not reigning of Sin calls for your highest thankefulness. Are
you made partakers of such liberty and will you not be thankful? is there any
deliverance from any servitude whatsoever like to this? Sin is the worst of
Evils, the power of Sin the worst of Sin, are you delivered from that? o
admirable mercy! Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt and Babylon, the rescuing of
Subjects from the dominion of Tyrants, the fetching poor Captives out of chains
and bonds are good things; yet all but very nothings in comparison of the
freeing a Soul from the power and vassalage of Sin: and this is done for you
shall not the Lord be greatly blessed for it? Here Is a great part of that
benefit which you have by Christ as a Redeemer; for what does Redemption point
to but to the Sinners release from his spiritual captivity and bondage by Sin?
what did Christ come for but to Isa. 61.1.
proclaim liberty to the captives, etc. Now as you were Captives in Gods hands
by reason of guilt so Christ redeemed you by paying down a price or ransom for
you; as you are Captives in Sins and Satan's hands so he redeems you by power
(for they are no other way to be dealt withal,) by rescuing you out of their
dominion and slavery in spite of all the resistance they can make; and Christ
redeeming both these ways so he becomes a full and complete Redeemer. So that
your being made free from the Law of Sin is a a part of Christ's redeeming love;
and what the Spirit of Life does therein it is but in conjunction with Christ
in the carrying on of that love: and if so, have not you great reason to be
very thankful? 'Pray look into that precious promise (the matter of which is
that God will not only pardon your iniquities but also subdue them, he being
every way as gracious in the latter as in the former); Micah 7.18, 19. Who is a
God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression
of the remnant of his heritage, etc. He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us, [he will subdue our iniquities]: it is as great a mercy to
have Sin subdued in its power as pardoned in its guilt; you magnify God for
the one, o do the same for the other also! If God himself had not brought about
this freedom you had been without it forever: Alas! you your selves in the time
of the natural thraldom never thought of or desired it, you were altogether
unable to accomplish it, nay, you were set against it and opposed it to your
utmost; the Law of Sin was in the heart and had the heart, you liked and loved
its government above any other, all your strength was engaged for it; insomuch
that God was fain to conquer not only Satan and it but your own selves too, and
by a mighty power to make you willing to accept of deliverance out of its
servitude: what ground of thankfulness is here! Once more, why should you be
made free when others are let alone? what was there in you to move God to
vouchsafe this distinguishing mercy? you had indeed been eternally undone
without it but was he under any necessity or motive (but what was from his own
grace) to do it for you? o you that are renewed shall not the Lord be admired
by you? 'pray be much in blessing of him for all Mercies, but amongst the rest
be sure you never forget to bless him for Sin-subduing, Sin-dethroning mercy.
See how Paul upon this account blesses God for others; Romans 6.17. But God be
thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart
the form of doctrine, which was delivered you: He that was so thankful for
others surely would be so much more for himself; and so he was Romans 7.24, 25. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Titus 3.3, 4, 5. For we our selves
also were sometimes foolish, etc. but after that the kindness and love of God
our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration
and renewing of the Holy Ghost: he lays it upon the kindness and love of God,
which indeed are admirable in the freeing of a Soul from the Law of Sin by the
regenerating Spirit; this kindness of God should draw out the thankefulness of
every gracious heart. (So much for this Use of Counsel.

USE 4. Comfort to regenerate persons upon their being made free from the Law
of Sin.
A word in the fourth place for Comfort! I would have every truly gracious
person upon this Truth to be even filled with joy, what glad tidings does it
bring to thee (whoever thou art) upon whom regenerating Grace has taken hold!
it tells thee thou art made free from the Law of Sin. Sin may (and does)
trouble thee but it does not rule thee, it lorded it over thee too long but now
its dominion is gone, from the very first moment of thy Conversion thou have
been made free; believe it and take the comfort of it. What think you? had not
Paul great joy in himself when he uttered these words the Law of the Spirit,
etc. thou may say the same concerning thy self the new birth having passed
upon thee, why therefore should not thou be brimful of joy also? This is so
great a thing that the sense and comfort of it should revive and cheer thy
Spirit under all outward evils; the Laws of Men possibly may be somewhat heavy
upon thee, thou may groan under such and such external pressures, there may
be much of bondage in thy outward condition; but the Law of Sin is abolished,
thy Soul is made free, the spiritual bondage is taken off; is not this well?
very well? Under the Law how were the poor Servants overjoyed when the year of
Jubilee came which gave them a release from all their servitude? o Christian
thou have lived to see a glorious Jubilee wilt not thou rejoice? So also when
oppressed Subjects are freed from cruel Usurpers it is a time of great
rejoicing, men's joy then runs over and will be kept in no bounds or limits;
what a full tide of joy should be in their Souls whom God has graciously
delivered from Sins tyranny and usurpation? 'True, Sin never had any right to
rule yet de facto rule it did, therefore triumph over it as though its
authority had been just (as the Hoc illi in malis suis indulgente fortuna, ut
de eo populus Romanus quasi de vero Rege triumpharet. Florus lib. 2. cap. 14.
people of Rome once did with a mean person). That Sin which once had you under
is now brought under it self, and it is subdued therefore cannot much hurt you:
Adonibezek himself when in chains, Bajazet when in an Iron Cage, the fiercest
Enemies when broken in their power cannot do much mischief; God be blessed so
it is with Sin and therefore (as to the main state) fear it not. I know you lie
under many discouragements, you feel such cursed inclinations to evil, Sin does
so often prevail over you, repeated backslidings afflict you greatly, your
corruptions daily pursue you, etc. Well! I would have you to be very sensible
of these things and mourn over them, but yet know the reigning, commanding
power of Sin is gone, notwithstanding all these yet it is not the Law of Sin.
How much good may an unregenerate person do and yet Sin reign in him, and how
much evil may a regenerate person do and yet Sin not reign in him! Under the
Law every scab did not make one a Leper, neither does every prevalency of Sin
make one a slave to it. The Spirit of Life has freed you from its dominion
(that being duly stated), and that too in such a manner as that you shall
never again be brought under it; Sin shall not have dominion over you, etc.
Romans 6.14. Is all this nothing or but little in your thoughts? is not here
sufficient matter of great joy? o know what God has done for you and make the
best of it! Being freed from the Law of Sin you are freed from Guilt, Wrath,
Hell, eternal condemnation; for the Apostle having said there is no
condemnation, etc. he proves his assertion by this for the Law of the Spirit of
Life, etc. And where it is not the Law of Sin there it is not the Law of Death;
these two Laws are linked and fast'ned each to the other, therefore he that is
delivered from the one is delivered from the other also. Believers there is but
one thing remaining to be done for you (which in due time shall most certainly
be done too), and that is to free you from the very being of Sin and from all
those remainders of power which yet it has in you; do but wait and a little
time will put an end to these also: be of good comfort Sin is dying and
weakening and wearing out every day, shortly 'twill dye indeed so as never to
molest you more. As you are justified its guilt is gone, as you are sanctified
its power is gone, it will not be long before you will be glorified and then
its very being shall be gone too: here in Grace Pharaoh's yoke is broken, but
above in Glory Sin shall be like Pharaoh drowned in the bottom of the Sea; o
let every regenerate Soul greatly rejoice in these things! (So much for the
Second Observation).

ROMANS 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of sin and death.


CHAP. VII. Of the power of the Holy Spirit in the making of persons free from
the Law of Sin.
The Third Observation, (viz.) that it is the Law of the Spirit of Life which
frees the Regenerate from the Law of Sin. How this is brought about by the
Spirit, by the Spirit of Life, by the Law of the Spirit, etc. what this
imports. Of the necessity, sufficiency, efficacy of the Spirits power for and
in the production of this Effect. The particular ways and methods of the Spirit
in it opened. Of its workings at the first Conversion: Of its subsequent
regency in the renewed Soul. Use 1. Of the greatness and glory of the Spirit:
his Godhead inferred from hence. Use 2. To show the true and proper Cause of
freedom from the Law of Sin: where men are exhorted (1.) To apply themselves
to the Spirit for this freedom: (2.) In case it be wrought in them, to ascribe
and attribute the glory of it only to the Spirit.
Saints exhorted (1.) To love and honor the Spirit: (2.) To live continually
under the Law of it: (3.) To set Law against Law.


The third Observation handled.
TWo Observations I have gone through, I come now to the third and last, It Is
the Law of the Spirit of Life which frees the Regenerate from the Law of Sin;
or thus, it is by the mighty power of the living and regenerating Spirit that
any are delivered from the power and dominion of Sin. This is the great effect
here spoken of, and the Apostle shows who is the Author and Efficient of it or
how it is brought about, the Law of the Spirit of Life has made me free from
the Law of Sin. I shall (as much as conveniently I may) contract in what I have
to say upon this Point that I may draw toward the close of this Verse (which I
fear I have staid too long upon).

The Spirit frees. from the Law of Sin.
Now here observe 1. The Spirit frees from the Law of Sin: he is the true and
proper Agent in the production of this Effect. In reference to which you may
consider him either essentially as he is God, or personally as he is the third
Person distinct from the Father and the Son: in both of which considerations he
makes free from the Law of Sin. As to the first, so there can be no question
made of the thing, Factum* Spiritus S. factum filii Dei est and propter Natun^
and Voluntatis unitatem. Sive enim Pater faciat, sive Filius, sive Spiritus
Sanct. Trinitas est quae operatur, and quicquid tres fecerint Dei unius est
operatio. Aug. in Qu. N. T. Quaest. 51.
because the Spirit (so considered) acts in common with the two other Persons
and (a) they with him; what the Father does and the Son (as God) that the
Spirit does also, and so vice versa, (I speak of August. in Enchirid. c. 38.
actiones ad extra which only are indivisae). As to the second, so the thing
is also clear because it is the Spirits personal and proper act to weaken and
dethrone Sin in the heart, for as it is the Sons proper act to free from the
guilt so it is the Spirits proper act to free from the power of Sin; that being
a thing done within the Creature this person is the proper author of it, it
belonging to the Son to do all without and to the Spirit to do all within: The
Father and the Son are by no means to be excluded, yet it is the Spirit which
does immediately bring about in the Soul that blessed freedom which I am upon.
If you cast your eye a little upon what lies very near the Text, you will find all
the Persons mentioned (as all concurring to the advancement and promoting of
the good of Believers): it is (...), etc. Chrysostom. (...). Oecumen.
Chrysostomes observation upon the Words, That (says he) which the Apostle
always does going from the Son to the Spirit, from the Spirit to the Son and
Father, ascribing all to the Trinity, that here he does also: For when he said
[who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord], heshews that the Father does this by the Son; then he shows
that the Spirit also does this by the Son, when he says that [the Law of the
Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, etc.] then he brings in again the
Father and the Son ( v. 3, 4.) But (I say) this freedom from the Law of Sin
it is the proper and immediate effect of the Spirit; therefore it is said 2 Cor.
3.17.
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, (the meaning of which
Scripture I had occasion to touch upon before): That which God once said to
Zerubbabel in reference to the building of the Temple Zech. 4.6.
Not by might, not by power, but by my Spirit, is applicable to deliverance
from Sins dominion, which is not brought about by any external and visible
force and strength but only by the internal, effectual operations of the Holy
Spirit.

How the Spirit of Life comes in.
2. Secondly observe this is done by the Spirit of Life: he does not say only
the Spirit had made him free from the Law of Sin, but he joins this with it the
Spirit of Life. What is contained in this as it is considered abstractly and in
it self, I showed at my first entrance upon this Verse; but I conceive it here
has some special reference to the effect spoken of: it being either a
description of the Spirit who frees from the Law of Sin, he is a living Spirit;
or it pointing to the special time when the Spirit does this (viz.) when he
quickens and regenerates a man; or it noting the way and method of the Spirit
wherein or whereby he frees from the Law of Sin, that is by working the
spiritual Life or regeneration. The Spirit who renews, when he renews, by
renewing, brings Sin under; these are distinct things and yet are all couched
in this Spirit of Life; I might enlarge upon each but I will not because that
which I have in my eye does not much depend upon them.

The Law of the Spirit frees from the Law of Sin.
3. Then observe thirdly, it is the Law of the Spirit by which this is done. It Is
a Metaphorical expression (as was shown in the opening of the Words), the Law
of the Spirit is the power of the Spirit (as the Law of Sin is the power of
Sin). Here is Law against Law, power against power, the power and efficacy of
the Spirit against the power and efficacy of Sin. The Apostle elsewhere speaks
of (...) an inworking power, Ephesians. 3.20. -- according to the power that works
in us: that is the same with the Law of the Spirit in the Text; so that when he
says the Law of the Spirit, etc. he means this that through the mighty power
of the Holy Ghost, authoritatively and effectually working in him, Sins power
was abolished, its dominion brought down, its kingdom in him destroyed; and not
only so but likewise Christ's kingdom was erected in him (for this Law of the
Spirit does both conjunctly, wherever it dethrones Sin it also at the same time
inthrones Christ and Grace in the heart). When I was upon the Law of Sin I told
you it has a twofold power, a moral and a physical power in reference to both
of which it is called a Law; so it is with the Spirit, he has his Moral power as
he does persuade, command, etc. and he has his Physical power as he does
strongly, efficaciously incline, urge, impell the Sinner to such and such
gracious acts; yea (which is highest of all) as he does effectually nay
irresistibly change his heart, make him a new Creature, dispossess Sin of its
regency and bring him under the Scepter and Government of Christ. The
difference betwixt the Law of the Spirit and the Law of Sin.
And herein the Law of the Spirit is above the Law of Sin, for though that puts
forth a great efficacy in the manner of its working, yet it does not rise to
such a pitch or degree of efficacy in what is evil as the Spirit of God does in
what is good: Set corrupt Nature never so high yet it is but a finite thing and
so has but a finite power, but the Spirit is an infinite being and in his
saving and special workings he puts forth an infinite power, and therefore He
must work more efficaciously than Sin can do; the Law of the Spirit must carry
it against and notwithstanding the Law of Sin, for though both pass under the
same appellation of Laws yet they are Laws of a different kind and nature with
respect to their power and efficacy.

This Law or power of the Spirit is that which I will speak to* and for the
better opening of the Truth in hand (which mainly points thereunto) I Will do two
things,

Two things propounded for the opening of the Observation.
1. I Will speak to the necessity, sufficiency, efficacy of the power of the
Spirit in order to the freeing of men from the power of Sin. 2. I Will show in
what Way or Method the Spirit does work and exert his power in his rescuing of
Souls from Sins power.
In the First of these Heads three things are put together, which must be
spoken unto apart:

The Necessity of the Spirits power to free from Sins power.
1. First of the necessity of the power of the Spirit. Concerning which I may
confidently affirm that it is indispensably, absolutely necessary for the
divesting Sin of its long possessed sovereignty, no less a power than the
mighty power of this Spirit can bring down Sins power: o its no easy thing to
rescue the poor enslaved captive-soul out of its bonds, Omnipotency it self is
requisite thereunto; that is the Luke 11.21, 22.
strong man which keeps the palace till Christ through the Spirit (which is
stronger than it) comes upon it and overcomes it. Israel had never got out of
their bondage under Pharaoh, if God himself had not brought them out of it
through a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm (as you read Deuteronomy. 5.15); and
so it is here. Let Us bring it to a particular case! take a Sinner who is under
the Law of Unbelief (as there are too many such, God knows), nothing shall ever
free this Sinner from the power of his unbelief unless a divine and an almighty
power from above be put forth upon him; 'till this be done all the Calls,
Commands, Invitations, Promises of the Gospel are all weak and ineffectual:
therefore it is said to be the faith of the operation of God Col. 2.12. and the
Apostle prayed that God would fulfill the work of faith with power 2 These. 1.11.
and says the Prophet who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? Isa. 53.1. (without the revealing of Gods mighty arm there is
no believing); and you read that God in sanctification and the working of Faith
does put forth the exceeding greatness of his power, according to the working
of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. what can be spoken higher than this! You see the Law of
the Spirit is necessary to the freeing of a person from the Law of Unbelief,
and is it not so in all other things wherein Sins power shows it self? The
power of Nature (which some do so much magnify) can never conquer the power of
Sin, (alas!) it is impar congressus, there is no eaven match betwixt them: and
besides, Natures greatest strength is on Sins side; its relics only (where
it is good) are for God against Sin, but its full and entire strength (as it is
bad) are for Sin against God; God has but its shattered sorces (as it were)
but Sin has its full Body; what can enfeebled Nature, what will depraved
Nature do against Sin? Let it be considered, if the power of Grace in the
Regenerate be so small that by that alone (without the concurrence of divine
and special assistance from above) they can do nothing, (which Christ affirms
Joh. 15.5.) no, not so much as think a good thought (as the Apostle affirms 2
Cor. 3.5); what then can be expected from mere Nature in the Unregenerate (in
whom Sin is in its full strength) as to the weakening or subduing of it? In
things of a spiritual nature the Scripture does not only deny the act but the
power too; Joh. 6.44. No man [can] come to me except the Father draw him: 1
Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, etc.
neither [can] the know them, because they are spiritually discerned: Jer.
13.23. [Can] the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may
ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. So in that which I am upon,
it is not only the Sinner does not free himself from the Law of Sin, but of
himself without the mighty power of the divine Spirit he cannot so do; he that
is not strong enough to subdue some one particular Lust, how shall he be able
to subdue the whole body of Sin in all its united and combined force? (as he
that cannot conquer one single Soldier can much less conquer the whole Army).
If God leave a man to grapple with Sin merely by his own strength, woe be to
him!

The necessity of the Spirits power to free from Sins power made out in some
Particulars.
That the power of the Spirit is absolutely necessary to free from the power of
Sin will be very evident, if you consider those several advantages which it
has for the securing and holding up of its power in the Sinner: As (1.) it is
in possession: (2.) It has been so a long time; may be twenty, forty,
theescore years, to be sure from the time of the Sinners coming into the world,
for its power and his birth are of the same date: now Usurpers in possession
and who have long been so are not so easily conquered. (3.) Its dominion is
entire, it has all on its side; the whole Soul is for Sin, insomuch that when
the Spirit of God comes to grapple with it, he finds nothing there to side with
him or to take his part (which argues the necessity of his infinite power):
When there is a party within a Kingdom ready to fall in with the foreign force
that comes to depose the Tyrant, he may with more facility be vanquished; but
if all the people unanimously stick to him, then the conquest is the more
difficult. As Christ once said Joh. 14.30.
the prince of this world comes and has nothing in me, so the poor Sinner may
say, the Sin-subduing Spirit comes but he finds nothing in me to close with
him. (4.) The natural man likes the power of Sin; it has his heart (which is
worst of all for the securing of its empire), he is fond of his vassalage and
loves Sins government better than Christ's, o the Commands of it suit better
with him than the Commands of an holy God; so that upon the whole matter he is
peremptorily resolved to adhere to it against whatever shall oppose it. (5.)
Sins strength is not only very great in it self but it has also those
additional advantages which render it (as to any finite power) invincible:
therefore it is set forth by the strong man and by the strong man armed too Luke
11.21. it is ingarrison'd in the heart (which of all places is the most
inaccessible), it has its [(...)] strong holds in which it is fortified 2 Cor.
10.4. (6.) Sin is very resolute for and in the maintaining of what it has: it
has a power and 'twill keep it, 'twill fight it out to the last and dye rather
than yield, all the persuasives in the world signify nothing to it; if the
Spirit of God will gain the Soul he must gain it as Soldiers do strong Towns
which refuse to surrender, unciatim (to borrow the Comedians word) inch by inch
(7.) Sin and the Sinner are under a Isa. 28.15.
Covenant; they have engaged (as it were) to live and dye together; now to
dissolve and break this engagement is no easy matter. (8.) Satan sets in with
it, and upon all occasions gives it all the help he can (as Allies and
Confederates use to do); he says to Sin what Joab once did to Abisha 2 Samuel
10.11. If the Syrians be too strong for me then thou shall help me, but if the
Children of Ammon be too strong for thee then I will come and help thee: if he
can hinder it, Sins kingdom shall never be demolished no not in any one Soul.
Now put all these things together and it will appear, that the power of the
Spirit is highly necessary to deliver from the power of Sin, yea that nothing
below the Almighty strength of this Almighty Spirit can free a Soul from its
dominion: who but he who is God could subdue and conquer such an enemy as this
is!


Of the sufficiency of the Spirits power to make free from the Law of Sin.
2. Secondly, there is the sufficiency of the Spirits power as he is every way
able to produce the effect we are speaking of. It Is indeed a great thing to
break the yoke of Sin, to pull the Crown off from its head, to conquer it
notwithstanding all the things which have been alleged; yet as great a thing
as it is this great Spirit is able to do it, if he once engage in the work it is
enough, the power of an Almighty God must needs be above the power of what is
but finite and limited (as was said but now). As Christ is able to save Heb.
7.25.
to the utmost from Sins guilt, so the Spirit also is able to save to the
utmost from Sins power; let it be never so high and lofty if this Spirit take
it in hand I Will warrant you it shall be brought down. God once said to Paul My
grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. ('it is meant chiefly of strengthening
and supporting grace); now as that grace is sufficient to bear up under the
heaviest afflictions, so this sanctifying, sin-subduing, sin-mortifying grace
is sufficient to bring down the strongest corruptions. All things considered,
we may stand and wonder at the rescuing of a Soul out of Sins thraldom, o the
bringing of Sin under (that but just now was so high) is a strange and
wonderful thing! but if we consider the strength of that person who is employed
about it, the wonder is at an end; (as 'twas said upon another account Zech.
8.6. If it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these
days, should it also be mavelous in mine eyes? says the Lord of Hosts). Jer.
32.27. Behold I am the Lord, the God of all flesh, is there any thing too hard
for me? (this is applicable to the Spirit in the personal consideration of
God). We (alas!) must cry out (as David once of the Sons of Zeruiah) Sin is too
hard for us we cannot get it down, but it is not too hard for God and his
Spirit. Though it has its strong holds he takes them or batters them all down
with ease; it captivates the Sinner but the Spirit captivates it: 2 Cor 10.4,
5. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds; Casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ: o the boundless, infinite power of
the Spirit! nothing no not Sin it self, even when it is at the highest, can
stand before him; that which all the Creatures in heaven and in earth cannot
do, that he can do omnipotentissima facilitate (as Epist. 107. ad Vitalem.
Austine phrases it). Who is sufficient for these things? why, he (and none but
he) who has illimited and infinite power.

Of the efficacious workings of the Spirit in this Effect.
3. Thirdly, There Is the efficacy of the Spirits power or the effectual working
of the Spirit, in the freeing of a person from the Law of Sin. When this great
Agent comes to bring about this freedom how does he act? Answ. efficaciously
and irresistibly; I mean, he puts forth such a power as that the work is
certainly done. He does not only in a Moral way advise, counsel, Vid. Twiss.
Vind. Great. l. 1. par. 2. sect. 16. p. 160. etc. and Digress. 6. p. 163, etc.
(With many others who every where write upon this Argument.)
persuade the Sinner to cast off Sins bondage, but he in order thereunto puts
forth an insuperable and irresistible strength upon him, and so goes thorough
with the work; he conquers all opposition both from without and from within (so
as that it shall not be victorious), and in spite of all makes the Soul free;
he works herein omnipotenter indeclinabiliter, insuperabiliter, (as that great
Champion of Effectual Grace expresses it). Further, when he comes about this or
any other saving act, he does not leave the Sinners Will in suspense,
pendulous, in aequilibrio, hanging like a pair of Scales even and not going
down on either side; but (in a way congruous to its liberty) he overcomes and
determins it for God against Sin, so as that it shall neither hesitate nor make
any successful Deo volenti salvum facere, null um humanum resistit arbitrium.
Aug. de Corrept. and Great. c. 14. Vide Jansen. August. t. 3. l. 2 c. 2^.
Habertus de Great. l. 2. c. 16. Vid. etiam celeberrimum Doct. Ward de Great
disct. p. 24, etc.
resistance to his Grace. I am (be ore I was well aware of it) fallen upon a
nice and much controverted Point, viz. the efficacy of Divine Grace in its
special operations; a thing strongly defended of old by Austine against the
Pelagians, and of late by the Dominicans and Jansenists against the Jesuits,
(and I could wish the Controversy had lodged there, but there are other
persons and parties concerned in it). Well! I am thus fallen upon it but I Will
presently get off from it, for it being a point only incidental in my passage I
am not bound to stay upon it. In short therefore this I assert that Gratia
liberatrix est Gratia efficax, Soul-freeing Grace is effectual Grace; wherever
and whenever the Spirit undertakes to deliver any man out of Sins power he does
it effectually; he then puts forth such a mighty power as that he infallibly
does effect what he designed, (which is all that Non aliam irresistibilitatem
propugnant nostri, quam realem and efficacem operationem, cujus vi effectum
certo vel infallibiliter existit. Ames. Coron. Art. 4. c. 3. Dicimus Gratiam
efficacem, quae operatur velle and perficere, adeo potenter in opere
conversionis and quovis opere salutari voluntatem movere, ut certo causaliter
tollat non resistibilitatem aut connatam aut adnatam, aut etiam omnem actualem
resistentiam, sed actualem resistentiam vincentem; adeo ut gratia semper
eliciat consensum and acceptationem: ac proinde eo momento impossible sit quod
voluntas non annuat, aut de facto resistat. D. Ward. Conc. de Great. discrim. p.
31, 32.
Divines mean by that so much disliked word irresistibly). As the power of
Nature, take it at its best, cannot much further this freedom, so the power of
Nature, take it at its worst (as to the final issue) shall not be able to
hinder it. The Scriptures which hold forth the efficacy of saving grace in
general, are applicable to that particular branch of it which I am upon: Cant.
1.4. Draw thou me, we will run after thee. Joh. 6.45. Every man that has heard
and learned of the Father, comes to me. Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me, and I shall
be turned. Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk
in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them: (there is much in
each of these Texts to prove what is before me might I but stay upon them).
It Is in the acts of Grace as it is in the acts of Providence, in which sometimes
the stream runs with such a mighty force that there is no resisting of it; Isa.
43.13 I will work and who shall let it? and so (I say) it is in the acts of
Grace, it works with such a power that none can let it. Our Apostle himself
here before Conversion was as much under the Law of Sin as ordinarily any are,
and yet as soon as the renewing acts of this Spirit took hold of him, he
yielded presently and made no (prevailing) opposition; Acts 9.5, 6.
indeed at first he was at his Who art thou Lord? but 'twas not long before he
threw himself down at the feet of Christ saying, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? So much for the threefold consideration of the power of the Spirit with
respect to the effect here mentioned, making free from the Law of Sin.

The Ways and Methods of the Spirit in making free from the Law of Sin.
The Second thing propounded was to show, In what Ways or Methods the Holy
Spirit does exert his power in the making a person free from the Law of Sin.

For the explaining of which we must distinguish of his Workings; they are
either those which are at the first Conversion by which Sins habitual dominion
is destroyed, or those which follow after Conversion and continue the whole
life by which Sins actual dominion is prevented and kept down; by the first he
makes free, by the second he keeps free from the Law of Sin. With respect to
each of these workings the Spirit has his different Ways and Methods, which
therefore must be distinctly spoken unto.

1. As to the first in the general he puts forth his power in and by the doing
of the main work, viz. the Converting of the Soul: He comes and Acts 26.18.
turns it from Sin to God, brings about the 2 Cor. 5.17.
new Creature in it, Gal. 4 19.
forms Christ therein, Col. 1.13.
translates it out of one state into another; and herein you have the Law or
mighty power of the Spirit exerted. I say the mighty power of the Spirit, for
this is a work which calls for such power, without which it would never be
done: o it is no easy thing to convert a Sinner! indeed there is nothing more
difficult than that is. Though all things are alike easy to an Almighty Agent
(as God and his Spirit are), yet as things are considered in themselves and as
we conceive of them, so some are more easy or hard than others are: as here,
it is easier to create a World than to convert a Soul, the new Creation is more
difficult than the old; for in the latter there was nothing to oppose or make
resistance, but in the former there is Sin, Satan, a wicked heart within, a
cursed World without, all uniting and combining in all their strength to oppose
to their utmost the work of Conversion: there the matter was indisposed and
unfit to be cast into such a form and that was all, but here it is not only
unfitness but renitency, reluctance, the highest opposition that is imaginable;
it being so, it follows that that must be a mighty power by which the work is
done notwithstanding all this resistance. The Spirit therefore puts forth such
a power, whereby he makes Zech. 4.9.
mountains to become plains, cuts his way through the very rock, conquers all
that vast host which is mustered up against him, in spite of all opposition
converts the Sinner; here is the Law of the Spirit. Now upon and by this he
frees from the Law of Sin, for upon Conversion Sin is as much deposed and
pulled off from the throne as 2 Kings 11.
Athaliah once was, then its Reign expires, from that time forward it must not
any more lord it as before it did; (but this has been already spoken to).
Observe it, it is the Law of the Spirit of Life which frees from the Law of Sin,
it is not absolute or mere power that does it but it is power as regenerating, as
changing the heart, as implanting the divine Nature by which Sin is brought
under.

How he exerts his power upon the Understanding.
But more particularly in freeing from the Law of Sin this is the way of the
Spirit; 1. He effectually works upon the Understanding; that being the leading
faculty, and there being in it several things by which in special Sins dominion
is kept up, and he working upon reasonable Creatures in that way which best
agrees with them as such, therefore there the Spirit of God begins and first
exerts his power upon that faculty. And whereas he finds it under darkness,
blindness, woeful ignorance he is pleased to act as a Spirit of Illumination,
irradiating the mind with beams of divine light, dispelling the opposite
darkness, filling the Soul with heavenly and saving knowledge. This is the
Spirits proper act, and that which carries a mavelous power in it; it is no
easy thing to open a blind eye, this is just such a thing as that; when the
World lay in the abyss of darkness it required Omnipotency to say Genesis 1.3.
Let there be light, no less a power is requisite to the saving enlight'ning of
the Sinner (who is not in darkness but darkness it self, Ephesians. 5.8.) But this
being done Sin is exceedingly broken in its power by it; for ignorance is one
of the great supporters of its throne, one of its royal Forts wherein its main
strength lies; where that is in the head, Sin domineers in the heart and life.
You read Ephesians. 4.19. of some who being past feeling, have given themselves over
unto lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness; (here was the Law
of Sin to purpose, Sin at the very height and top of its dominion, how did
things come to this pass?) why ver. 18. their Understanding was darkened, and
they were alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that was in
them, because of the blindness of their heart: what a friend to Sin is
ignorance, how by this is the Sinner at its beck even to do whatever it would
have him! No wonder then that the Spirit when he comes to take Sin down, first
removes this ignorance: Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, etc. here is the order
or method in which the Spirit acts, he first opens men's eyes and turns them
from darkness to light, and so he frees them from the power of Sin and Satan.
Again, whereas the Understanding lies under sad mistakes, misapprehensions,
misjudgings, having false notions of things, and accordingly passing false
judgment upon them (by which Sins power is highly strengthened and kept up);
therefore the Spirit does rectify it, delivers it from these mistakes, etc.
makes it to judge aright of things and things, brings it to pass true dictates
(that Sin is evil, Christ good, holiness excellent, etc.) gives that sound mind
which the Apostle speaks of 2 Timothy 1.7. This too being done, Sin as commanding
exceedingly falls and sinks, upon this there is a great abatement and diminution
of its power, for that never continues absolute and entire in a rectified
judgment; the convincing Spirit (working as such) always destroys commanding
Sin. Its kingdom stands by lies and falsehoods, let but the Soul be enabled to
see into them and thorough them so as no longer to be deluded by them, and down
goes that kingdom; to be made free from a Isa. 44.20.
deceived and a deceiving judgment is the way to the being made free from the
Law of Sin; therefore the Spirit will be sure to have that done. Once more, the
Understanding is full of high and proud thoughts, of strange imaginations and
reasonings which lift up themselves against God and subjection to his Will: o
(says the Spirit) these I must take a course with, these must be thrown out of
the heart or else Christ's kingdom will never go up in it; till something be
done to bring these down, Sins regency will continue as high as ever; wherefore
I Will do it effectually. 2 Cor. 10.5. Casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: I assure you this is an act
of great power, but the Spirit goes thorough with it when he comes as a Sin
dethroning Spirit: thus he exerts his power in the Understanding.

Upon the Will.
2. He then proceeds to the Will: where you have heard Sin chiefly exercises its
dominion and which of all the faculties is most enslaved to it and by it. The
liberty of the Will is very much cried up by many (and in such a sense none can
deny it), but (out of that sense) there is nothing in man more under bondage
than his Will; it is not now liberum but servum arbitrium (as See him de Servo
Arbitr.
Luther used to phrase it, and Vide Jansen. August. l. 1. p. 3. c. 3. and 5.
Austine long before him): In natural and (purely) moral acts there is no
question but it yet retains its freedom, but in things of a spiritual and
supernatural nature that upon Adams fall it has wholly lost; since which it is
only libera quatenus liberata, free no further than as it is made free. Well!
the Spirit undertakes this faculty, lays forth his power upon it that he may
rescue it out of the hands of Sin and bring it over to God; and surely it is
most necessary he should so do, for till the Will be effectually wrought upon
and subbued how can it be imagined that ever the Law of Sin should be
abolished? Of all the faculties Sin contends most for the Will, which when it
has once gained it will not easily part with, whatever it loses that it will
not lose, it puts forth its utmost strength to defend and make good its
Conquests over that: And so too of all the faculties the blessed Spirit
contends most for the Will (that being the determining faculty with respect to
Sins Reign), he puts forth the greatest efficacy of his Grace for the setting
of that right and straight for God, that it may choose, close with, cleave to
his good and holy Commands in opposition to what it was wont to do to the Laws
and Commands of Sin.

But 'twill be asked How far or wherein does he exert his power upon the
Sinners Will in order to the freeing of him from Sin as a Law? I have already
answered this in what I said but now, when I affirmed that the Spirit does not
work upon it only in a persuasive way, barely presenting some alluring
Considerations or Motives for the inclining of it to this or that, but still
leaving it under a perfect indifferency (so as that the Sinner may after all
yet choose whether he will believe or not, repent or not, cast of Sins yoke or
not); but he does efficaciously incline, bow, overpon^er, determine it, so as
that it shall most certainly (yet most freely) consent to what is good and
close with it. And if God by his Spirit did not thus determine the Will, either
the Sinner would never be converted, or if he should be converted, the
completing of his Conversion would be brought about by the determination of
his Will as his own act (God doing no more than only leaving it to its own
indifferency), and so he would Domine, gratias ago tibi, quod supernaturale
auxilium mihi contuleris misericcrditer, nempe posse velle convertere: At vero
simile aequaleque auxilium condiscipulo Judae contulisti, sed ego superaddidi
quod tu mihi supernaturaliter non dedisti, (viz) velle convertere; cumque non
amplius receperim quam ille, tamen ego amplius fcci quam ille, cum jam
justificatus evadam, and ille in peccato permaneat; itaque non amplius tibi
tuaeque gratiae d^beo, quam iste Judas, qui non est conversus. Hoc autem
Christianae aures audire exhorrescunt. Bannez in D. Ward de Great. discrim. p.
40.
have whereof to glory, he himself having done that which was the highest and
the hardest thing in Conversion. And herein lies the mysterious operation of
the Spirit, in that though he acts thus efficaciously and victorio^sly upon the
Will, yet he does not at all violate, infringe, or entrench upon its Ne
arbitreris istam asperam molestamque violentiam, dul^is est, suavis est, ipsa
suavitas te trahit. Aug. Gratia Dei humanum arbitrium non aufertur, sed
sanatur, etc. Fulgent. l. 2. de verit Praed. Divina haec actio non laedit
voluntatis liberatem, sed roborat; neque tamen extirpat radicitus vitiosam
resistendi possibilitatem, sed efficaciter and suaviter dat homm: firmam
obediendi voluntatem. Theol Mag. Brit. in Acta Syn. part. 1. p. 679 Deus ita
utitur voluntate, vt ipsa voluntas sese elective, vitaliter, and ex practico
rationis judicio agat. Rhaetorf. de Gr^t. Exerc. 3. cap. 3. Vide Norton's
Orthod. Evangel. p 114.
Natural liberty; which is yet secured because the Spirit exerts all this power
in such a way as does very well agree with that liberty, for he carries on the
work suaviter as well as fortiter, with efficacy but without any coaction or
violence; all being done by him in an accommodation and congruous attemperature
of things to the Wills native and ingenit liberty, and he working per certam
scientiam and victricem delectationem (as De Peccat. Mer. and Romans lib. 2. cap.
19. tom. 7.
Austine speaks). Therefore it is said Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing
in the day of thy power; (mark what a sweet harmony and consistency there is
betwixt the efficacy of Grace and the Wills liberty)! Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we
will run after thee: draw me there is efficacious grace, we'll run there is free
and voluntary obedience, and see how well they agree draw me and we will run;
what more forceable than the former, what more free than the latter! Let us but
fix upon the right notion of Liberty ( viz spontaneity not indifferency), and
that which I have said will be clear enough. But to come to what is easy! the
converting Spirit so puts forth his power upon the Will that he makes it
willing to close with what is good; he removes that averseness, obstinateness,
reluctance, that is in it against what is holy and spiritual, whereupon it most
readily complies therewith: And in reference to the casting off the yoke of Sin
and the taking up of the yoke of Christ, he never gives the Will off till he
has brought the Sinner to say, Sin! from this day forward I break of all my
allegiance to thee, I Will be ruled by thee no longer, I resolve now to change my
Master; Lord Jesus! I am thine, I have been a traitor and rebel against thee
too long, but now I fully surrender up my self to thy Government, thy Laws only
I Will be subject unto, do thou rule, command, order, dispose me as thou
please, put thy yoke upon me I willingly stoop to it: thus his Will is
subdued and now he is made free from the Law of Sin. So much of the power of the
Spirit and of its way of working upon the Will in order to this effect.

3. I might go on the show the way of the Spirits agency upon the affections,
as he does disengage and disentangle them from Sin, nay set them directly
against it; and so freeing the Sinner from the Law of Sin. But this being
necessarily consequential upon the two former I will not at all stay upon it:
So much for the Spirits workings at the first Conversion.

Of the Spirits subsequent workings after Conversion for the keeping down of
the power of Sin.
2. Secondly I am to consider the exertings of his power in his subsequent
workings after Conversion, during the whole life, by which he keeps free from
the Law of Sin and secures from its actual dominion: (this being not so proper
to the Text I Will dispatch it very briefly). The good Spirit does not put forth
his power only in his first regenerating, Sin-subduing acts, but he continues
so to do to the end of the Believers life; having brought Sin under, he will keep
it so; it will be endeavoring to regain what it has lost but this gracious
Spirit will not suffer it. Having made the conquest he will (parta tueri) make
good the conquest, having gained the throne in the heart for God and Christ
he will order it so that that shall be secured for them, that Sin shall never
ascend it any more. And truly there is much power in this as well as in that
which went before: o this corrupt nature will be stirring, making head upon all
occasions to get up again! it must be a mighty strength which must suppress and
break it in all its attempts; therefore here too it is the Law of the Spirit.

But how is this done by him? Answ. by his constant and continued agency in and
regency over the renewed Soul. The Law of the Spirit may have reference to
these also; that look as Sin is a standing Law in the Unregenerate (it having
in their whole course the command of them, and it being the constant, active
principle in them efficaciously urging and exciting them to what is evil), so
the Spirit is standing Law in the Regenerate, it too in their whole course
having the command of them, and it being the constant, abiding, lively
principle in them efficaciously urging and exciting them to what is good: by
which continued actings he keeps Sin under forever. For if it shall offer at
any time by its solicitations, promises, threatenings, to recover its former
dominion, the Spirit is ready at hand to set in with other commands, promises,
threatenings, thereby to obviate and countermine Sin in its interposures: he
watches Sin in all its motions and assaults, and accordingly applies himself in
his guiding, governing, strengthening grace; so that Sin can make but little
on it in all its endeavors. You read here in this Chapter Ver. 14. of the
leading of this Spirit, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God: and 'twas David's prayer Psalm. 51.12 that God would uphold him with
his free Spirit, (so we read it, but De Sp. Sanct. l. 6. p. 213.
Chysostome renders it by (...) the leading, governing, commanding Spirit;
which (he says) is so called because it does (...), etc. bridle and command
the affections and put forth its power over sensual pleasures): This is
certain, the Spirit of God does authoritatively lead and govern the Children of
God in their course; and by virtue of that constant regency which it keeps up
in and over them, Sins power is kept down: here also is the Law of the Spirit
freeing from the Law of Sin.

USE 1. It informs as of the greatness and glory of the Spirit.
I have done with the Doctrinal part, let me make some short Application. Where
first we see what a great and glorious person the Spirit of God is: he is the
Spirit of Life, by a mighty power he delivers from the Law of Sin, the corrupt
nature with all its strength and advantages cannot stand before him, that which
to the Creature is invincible he overcomes with ease; o he that does such great
things must needs be a great Spirit! the excellency of the effect proves the
excellency of the agent. Some from this very passage fetch an Argument to prove
the Godhead of the Holy Ghost; -- (...), etc. Cyril. Alexandr. in Thesaur.
Assert. 34. p. 235. t. 5.
Cyril from his being the Spirit of Life, (...), etc. (...). Chrysostom. de Spir.
Sanct. p. 206.
Chrysostom from his making free from the Law of Sin: Have thou not (says he)
heard Paul saying the Law of the Spirit, etc. does the Spirit make slaves free
it not having liberty in its own nature? if it be created and in subjection it
self, it cannot make others free. The Argument may be thus drawn up, He that in
the way of primary efficiency is the Spirit of Life to quicken the dead Soul,
and the Spirit of Liberty to free the enslaved Soul, he is God; but the Holy
Spirit of God in this way is and does all this, ergo: (I put in these words in
the way of primary efficiency, because other things as means or instruments by
a derived and subordinate power may have some influence upon these things, and
yet not be God, but whoever does produce them by an immediate, primary,
underived power (as the Spirit does), certainly he is more than a bare
Creature, he is truly God). To make free from the Law of Sin is work for a God,
and for a God only: for to this, infinite knowledge is requisite (in order to
the finding out of all the secret recesses and close workings of Sin); and also
infinite power, for none below that is fit to grapple with so great a power as
that of Sin: so long as it is finite against finite the match is but equal, and
so there would be no victory; if therefore the Spirit carries through such a
work as this, it speaks him to be infinite in his knowledge and in his power,
and consequently to be God. (But this I do but touch upon here, hereafter (if
the Lord give leave) I shall have occasion to speak more fully to it).

USE 2. The true Cause of the Sinners being made free from the Law of Sin.
2. Secondly we have here the assignation of the true and only Cause of freedom
from Sins bondage. Mistakes about this are very dangerous; and yet nothing more
common than for men to run themselves upon such mistakes. The Apostle here
speaking of his being made free from the Law of Sin, what does he fix upon as
the proper Cause thereof? does he resolve it into the power of Nature? alas!
that is a thing so feeble and weak that corrupt Nature despises it, not fearing
that that will ever do any great thing against it. Does he resolve it into his
own Neque liberum arbitrium quicquam nisi ad peccandum valet, si careat
veritatis via. August. de Sp. and Lit. c. 3. liberum arbitrium captivatum non
nisi ad peccatum valet. Aug. adversus du^s Pelag Ep. l. 3. c. 3.
Free Will? no, that he understood little of. I challenge the whole world to
give me one instance of a Sinner that was ever (by the power, election, and
determination of his own Will) made free from the reign of Sin. The Will (as
now constituted) is so corrupted that it is rather for the continuance than for
the shaking off of Sins dominion; o it is loath to be delivered even by a
foreign power (it likes its bondage so well)! One of the greatest things that
the converting Spirit (when it so works) has to do, is to bow and incline the
Sinners Will so as to make it willing to accept of deliverance from Sins yoke;
and he is never brought to this till the day of Gods power dawn upon him, Psalm.
110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. The Evangelist
setting down the proper Causes of Regeneration, first removes the false ones
(among which man's Will is one), and then assigns the true one; Joh. 1.13. Which
we born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God: the same holds true of that which is a Consequent upon regeneration,
viz. being made free from the Law of Sin. How can he that is a captive himself
deliver others out of their captivity? how can that bring down Sins power which
is it self most under that power? This was not the thing in Paul's eye when he
was giving an account of his happy state; 'twas De corpore mortis hujus non
liberum hominis arbitrium, neque Legis Sanctum jusiumque mandatum, sed sola nos
liberat gratia Dei per Jesum Christum. Lex euim Spiritus vitae, etc. Fulg. de
Incarn. and Great. c. 16.
Free Grace and not Free Will that he magnified. Again, does he resolve it into
any thing out of himself, as the Word, Ordinances, the means of Grace, etc. no!
it is very true that these, God having set his divine stamp upon them, he also
being pleased to accompany them with his own presence and blessing, may be
productive of high and great things; yet as considered in themselves they are
but means or instruments, and therefore do not operate from any natural or
instruments, and therefore do not operate from any natural or inherent virtue,
but only as they are used by the first Cause and as the Spirit of Life puts
energy and power into them. 2 Cor. 10.4.
Our weapons (says the Apostle) are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty
[through God] to the pulling down of strong holds, etc. the same may be said of
all Gospel-institutions. O how many live under the most effectual means, the
Ordinances of God in the most lively and powerful administration thereof, and
yet Sin stands its ground and keeps up its full power in and over them! It Is
not Goliah's Sword that makes execution upon the Enemy unless it be wielded
with Goliah's arm; the Word is the Ephesians. 6.17.
sword of the Spirit, which when he manages himself with his Isa. 53.1.
own arm then Sin falls and dies before it, but in any other hand it does but
little execution. I would fain convince you of the insufficiency, inability of
all Causes or things, within or without, and consequently of the absolute
necessity of the Spirits efficiency, in order to the divesting Sin of its
dominion; and thence it is that I stay so long upon this Argument: but I Will
close it with this one Consideration, viz. Take the Saints themselves, such as
have true Grace wrought in them, who consequently are made free from the Law of
Sin; and put even these upon particular and gradual Mortification (the
mortifying of some one Lust be it what it will, or the mortifying of it in an
higher degree than before); I say take these very persons and let things too be
brought thus low, yet they of themselves without the mighty assistance of Gods
Spirit can do nothing about them: special grace from above is requisite to
every act and degree of mortification by the Saints themselves, Romans 8.13. If
ye [through the Spirit] do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: 'twas
spoken to renewed persons therefore it must be understood of gradual and
progressive mortification; now says Paul if ye through the Spirit, etc.
implying that even such persons, in such mortification (which of all is most
easy), must be enabled thereunto by strength from the holy Spirit conveyed to
them. Whence I infer an utter inability in the unregenerate to free themselves
from the Law of Sin; they having no principle in them to further such a thing
(as the Saints have for their mortification), Sin having its full, unbroken
strength in them (which it has not in the other), their work not being gradual
mortification but habitual and the first mortification of the whole body of Sin
(which therefore is much harder than the former); I say, upon this stating of
things how unable must these be to throw off Sins power! If the Saint be so
weak, how weak is the Sinner? if the Saint must have the Spirits help or else
Sin will be too hard for him in its relics, how much more must the Sinner have
it in whom Sin is in its full strength? he being under the Law of Sin what can
he do (further than attend upon the means) to free himself from it? Blessed be
God that this Spirit is engaged in this work, otherwise there would be no such
thing in the world as freedom from the Law of Sin!

Two things inser'd by way of advice. 1. That Sinners would betake themselves
to the Spirit for freedom from the Law of Sin.
It being so, two things I would infer by way of advice:

1. Let such who desire this mercy betake themselves to the Spirit for it. Such
who desire it did I say? methinks (upon what has been said) all should
passionately desire it; will any be willing still to continue under Sins
Command? I will suppose all that hear me to be heartily desirous to cast off
its yoke, no longer to live in subjection to it, etc. the only thing that
troubles them is the difficulty of the thing, and all their enquiry is how they
may be rid of this Tyrant (who has so long domineered over them)? If so, then
I would give them this direction, Fly to the Spirit of Life; let them cast
themselves down at the feet of this Spirit, expecting only deliverance by and
from him. It Is a great while before Sinners will be brought to desire such a
thing, when they are brought to that then they mistake themselves about the way
of obtaining it: fain they would be made free but they do not betake themselves
to that Spirit which alone can make them so. Sirs! your case is desperate if
this Spirit of Life do not undertake it, no power in heaven or in earth can
relieve you but his: As that evil Spirit once said to him that would undertake
to cast it out, Acts 19.15.
Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? so here, Sin despises and
defies all that will meddle with it, it only knows and cannot stand before
this omnipotent Spirit. Christ's infinite merit alone frees from its damnation,
the Spirits infinite power alone frees from its dominion; therefore to that you
must fly for this freedom. You may possibly think this and that may do the
work, but you will be deceived: suppose you are brought under some convictions,
Sin will do well enough for all them; suppose you resolve thus and thus for the
future, Sins throne may stand fast enough for all that; suppose you sit under
such a Ministry, Sin can let you hear the Word powerfully preached and yet rule
you as much as ever: O do not deceive your selves! I tell you, nothing will or
can effectually pull the Scepter out of this Usurpers hand, and disengage the
Heart from obedience and bondage under Sin, but this one thing the Law of the
Spirit of Life. With the most humble, hearty, fervent prayer therefore go to
him and say, O blessed Spirit pity and help me! deliver a poor Captive that is
held in Sins chains and fetters, break its yoke for me, rid me out of the
thraldom I have so long lived in, put forth thy power in me to free me from
Sins power over me, I Am undone forever if thou do not help me; I know not
what to do against Sins mighty Host only 2 Chr. 20.12,
mine eyes are unto thee: I have heard that it is thy office to rescue and set
free poor inslaved Souls, such a one am I, o do this for me thou blessed
Spirit! I must not let thee alone 'till this be done, take thine own course and
method, convince, humble, terrify, etc. do any thing with me, only let not
lust, pride, ignorance, passion, covetuousness, sensuality, any sin whatsoever
any longer reign over me. Could I but bring you thus to pray, the thing was
done; if it be the Spirit of supplication it will be the Law of the Spirit,
etc. never did any sincerely desire to be freed from Sins dominion but 'twas
done for them, (at the Spirits time, in the Spirits method, and according to
that measure which the Spirit sees best).

In your betaking of your selves to him in prayer,

1. See that you pray in Faith, believing the sufficiency of his power. Let Sin
be never so high he is able to bring it down, do you believe this? all other
things are weak and can contribute but little to your help, but the mighty
Spirit can do it easily and effectually: Sin cannot stand before him no more
than you can before it; when he undertakes it, he will subdue it to purpose
(notwithstanding all its strength). You cannot be too diffident as to your
selves, nor too confident as to the Spirit.

2. Let all other Means be joined with Prayer. They are but means and therefore
not to be relied upon, yet they are means and therefore not to be neglected. In
things of this nature men are very prone to run themselves upon one of these
two rocks, either they rest upon the means not looking up to the Spirit, or
they cast off the means casting all upon the Spirit; Quosdam nimia voluntatis
suae fiducia extulit in superbiam, and quosdam nimia voluntatis suae
diffidentia dejecit in negligentiam: Illi dicunt quid rogamus Deum ne vincamur
tentatione, quod in nostra est potestate? isti quid conamur been vivere, quod
in Dei est potestate? o Domine, o Pater, qui es in Coelis, ne nos inferas in
quamlibet istarum tentationum, sed libera nos a malo. August. Agendae gratiae
sunt, quia data est potestas, and orandum ne succumbat infirmitas. Bradw. l. 2.
c. 4. p. 473.
either they are proud and can do all without God, or dejected and slothful so
as that God must and shall do all without them: both of which are most
dangerous mistakes! You have heard that it is the Spirits sole Act to free from
Sins power, that you your selves and all Causes and Means whatsoever are
utterly unable to produce this effect; what now will you draw from hence? what,
that you have nothing to do? that it is a vain thing for you to use any
endeavor on your part, or to attend upon any means? for it is God and his
Spirit that must do all? o pray do not so argue! you will err most perniciously
if you do. The Spirits sole efficiency (as to the formal production of the act)
is very well consistent with the Creatures endeavors; he indeed does the
thing, yet he will have the Creature do what he can in order to it; he does all in
us and for us yet he will do nothing without us; therefore the confidence must be
on him, but yet diligence is required of us: It Is the warmth and influences of
the Sun which make the fruits of the earth to grow, yet the Husbandman must
plow the ground and sow his seed; 'twas the Angel stirring the waters that
wrought the cure, yet the poor Cripples were to lie by the pool side, (which
allusion was before made use of upon this account); and thus it is here. So then
as to that which I am upon, unquestionably it is the power of the Spirit which
alone frees from the power of Sin, but yet you in your sphere are to be active
and to do what in you lies in order to this very thing: as namely, you are to
attend upon the Word, the several Ordinances (in and by which the Spirit
works), to read the Scriptures, to be much in consideration (of the evil of Sin
and the sad effects of its dominion), not to do any thing that may tend to the
strengthening of its power, by abstinence, fasting, etc. to keep it under
(where it vents it self in some bodily lusts), etc. And in the doing of these
things, with all faithfulness and diligence, you may with the greater
confidence expect that the Spirit will exert his power for the real and
thorough delivering of you from the Law of Sin.

2. Such a^ are freed, etc. are to ascribe all to the Spirit.
2. The Second word of advice is this, Let such who are made free from this Law
of Sin, own the Spirit of Life as the author of their freedom and ascribe the
glory of it to him. Is this done for any of you? you are infinitely engaged to
God and to his Spirit. How high should you be in the admiring of him, how
humble in the ascribing of all to him! how should you evermore be crying out
Not unto us (o Lord and Spirit), not unto us, (nor unto any thing in all the
World besides) but unto thy name be all the glory. Assuredly if this Spirit had
not effected this liberty for you, you had been to this day as much under Sins
bondage as you your selves ever were or as any others yet are; you may take the
comfort but God must have the sole glory of it. The Apostle praid for the
Romans that God would fill them with all joy and peace in believing, that they
might abound in hope [through the power of the holy Ghost], Romans 15.13. it is
this power of the holy Ghost that has done your work, keep your eye there.
Acts 3.12. Why look ye so earnestly on us (says Peter), as though by our own
power we had made this man to walk? possibly God was pleased to make use of
such instruments in order to your spiritual rescue, but why is your eye so much
upon them as though they had done it by any power of their own? no, 'twas not
so, all was done in the power of God. We poor Ministers must say We have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. and all other things whatsoever must say the same.
But is nothing to be ascribed to a man's self? to the actings and determination
of his own will? to the improvement of his natural abilities? is it not enough
to ascribe part (yea, the better part) to the Spirit, but some part to the
Creature? o this we like dearly, to divide 'twixt God and our selves, to share
with him in part of the glory due upon his special grace! Aqnin. 1.2 Quaest.
109. A. 6 and 7 Syn. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 2. Can. 3. Bellar. de Lib: Arb. l. 6. c.
15. Remonst. in Acta Syn. p. 1. p. 64. Armin. Declar. Sent. p. 98. and in Ep,
ad Hip. Addo illum doctorem mihi maxim placere, qui Gratiae quam plurimum
tribuit, etc.
Some seem highly to cry up the grace of God, and very much to assert the
impotency of Nature; and yet in after-positions and distinctions the Creature
must come in for a part; may be God shall have the J. G. Red. red. in Praef.
nine hundred ninety ninth proportion, but the thousandth part man himself must
have: which if it be granted to him, in a little time he will put in for more,
till at last it come to this man did all and God did nothing. It Is safest and
best to ascribe all to God; 'twas a good speech of Non est devotionis dedisse
prope totum, sod fraudis retinuisle vel minimum. Contra Collat. c. ult. Saints
further exhorted
Prosper, It Is not devotion to give almost all to God, but it is dishonesty to
keep the very least part from him; the all is not too much to be attributed to
him, the least is too much to be attributed to the Creature.

1. I cannot confine my advice to Gods people to this only Head, three things
further I would say to them and I have done.

To love and honor the Spirit.
You are greatly to love and honor the Spirit. This you do (or ought to do) to
the Father, to the Son, pray do the same to the Spirit: He Is the great agent in
your Regeneration, deliverance from Sins Sovereignty, illumination, conviction,
turning to God, believing, mortification, etc. from him your light, life,
strength, liberty joy, peace, do all proceed; why do you not more love and
honor the Spirit? O love the Son for what has been done without, but love the
Spirit also for what he has done within; the whole management of Soul-work
within in order to salvation now lies upon the hands of the Spirit; let him be
adored and honored by all Saints.

To live under the Law of the Spirit.
As you have found the Law of the Spirit in your first Conversion, so you
should live under the Law of the Spirit in your whole Conversation. There is
the power of the Spirit at the first saving work (that is here spoken of), and
there is (in what sense you have heard) the continuation of it in the whole
life; now this you are to labor after: I mean two things, (1.) you are to live
under the constant influences, (2.) under the constant government and rule of
the Spirit. Blessed is the man that has it always working in him and ruling of
him! what a life does he live who ever lives under the Spirits authoritative
guidance! Col. 3.15. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, etc. I and let
the Spirit of peace rule in your hearts.
It Is a great motive to men to come under the rule of Christ, to consider that
where he rules there he saves; and it is also a great motive to sanctified
persons to live under the rule of the Spirit, to consider where he rules there
he comforts; his governing and his comforting go together: he that is acted by
the Spirits command and yields up himself to the Spirits guidance, shall
neither want peace here nor come short of Heaven hereafter.

To set Law against Law.
Set Law against Law: the Law of the Spirit against the Law of Sin. You yet
find too much of this latter Law, and it goes to the heart of you that Sin
should yet have so great a power over you: well! what have you to do in this
case? why, set Law against Law, power against power the power of the Spirit
against the power of Sin: this should humble you that should support you. That
power which could baffle Sin when in its full strength, can it not subdue it in
the remainders thereof? that power which could bring you in to God (in spite of
all opposition), is it not sufficient to keep you now you are brought in to
God? 1 Pet. 1.5. We are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation:
that very power is put forth for your establishment now, which was put forth
for your Conversion at the first: o fear not the Law of Sin against you so long
as the Law of the Spirit is for you! When you are beset and enemies press hard
upon you, see that you improve (both for duty and comfort) this power of Gods
own Spirit. Thus I have finished the three Observations which take in the sum
of this Verse.

Romans 8.2. Reader, the Contents of this Chapter were insisted upon only in the
close of a Sermon; I having under the former Head (the Law of Sin) exceeded the
bounds allowed by the Press, cannot upon this Head (the Law of Death) make any
considerable enlargement.
-- From the Law of Sin and [Death].


CHAP. VIII.
Of the Law of Death. The connection 'twixt Sin and Death. Where it is the Law of
Sin there it is the Law of Death. Regenerate persons are made free from this
Law: that opened with respect to Death temporal and Death eternal. Use 1. Men
persuaded to believe that Sin and Death go together; dehorted from thence not
to sin. Use 2. Of the happiness of Gods people.

Of the Law of Death.
THe Apostle here sets a twofold Law before us, the Law of Sin and the Law of
Death; the former I have been large upon, the latter I must dispatch in a few
words.

-- [And Death]: The word Law is not repeated, but (according to that
interpretation which some put upon the Words) it is to be Ut Lex ad utrumque ex
aequo referatur. Erasm. Of the twofold Sense of the Words.
repeated; it is the Law of Sin, and it is the Law of Death too: as if the
Apostle had said The Law, etc. has made me free both from the Law of Sin, and
also from the Law of Death.

In the Sea page 152.
opening of them I told you there is a twofold Sense given of them: (1.) Some
tell us there is in them the Figure (...), wherein one thing is set forth by
two words: therefore they render this [and Death] as being only an Adjective
or Epethite of Sin; thus, the Law etc. from the Law of Sin and Death, that is,
from deadly Sin, or from the Law of Sin which is of a deadly nature. (2.)
Others take the word substantive, making the Law of Death to be a Law by it
self as well as the Law of Sin; as if this Death was not to be melted into Sin,
and the deliverance from it into the deliverance from Sin, but that they are
distinct things and point to distinct deliverances.

Now both of these Senses are very true and good, and indeed I know not which
to prefer. From the First, The Matter contained in them.
one single point offers it self to us, viz. That Sin is a deadly thing: From
the Second, these three (which mutatis mutandis perfectly answer to the three
former under the Law of Sin);

1. That men by Nature, and before Regeneration, are under the Law of Death. 2.
That upon Regeneration (or such as are Regenerate) are made free from the Law
of Death. 3. That it is the Law of the Spirit of Life which frees from the Law
of Death.
The due handling of these Heads would take up a great deal of time; but I
having already staid too long upon this Verse, and upon some other
Considerations, I am necessitated to contract; and therefore (for the better
shortning of the work) I must pitch upon another method, wherein I may draw all
into a narrow compass.

Three things abserv'd in the Words. That Sin and Death go together.
Three things only shall be observed:

1. That Sin and Death go hand in hand together. There Is an inseparable
connection or conjunction betwixt them; they come here in the Text very near
each to the other, there is but an [and] betwixt them, and that too is
copulative, the Law of Sin and Death. And well might the Apostle put them
together, when God himself in the methods of his Justice, and in the threatening
of his Law has so put them together, (and surely what he has so joined no man
can put asunder). When Sin came into the world Death came along with it, the
one trod upon the heels of the other; if man will sin, he shall dye. Romans 5.12.
Wherefore as by one man Sin entered into the world, and [Death by Sin], even so
Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: -- Ver. 17. For if by one
man's offense, Death reigned by one, etc. (here is Death and the Law of Death
too; by Sin it has got a power over men so as to reign over them). Had there
been no Sin there had been no Death: if man had continued in his sinless and
innocent state, he might have been Vide Grot. de Sat. c. 1. p. 18.
mortal (i. e.) under a posse mori, (he being but a Creature and made up of
contrary principles); but he had not actually dyed, much less had he been under
a necessity of dying if he had not sinned. Death did not come into the world
upon Gods mere dominion and Sovereignty, or merely upon the frailty of the
humane Nature (as Pelagians of old and Mors non erat poena vel effectus
transgressionis Adami; sed conditionis naturalis consequens. Socin, de Statu
primi hominis. Vide Praelect. Cap. 1. and contra Paccium Cap. 5.
Socinians of late assert); but as the Calov. Soc. Prost. p. 250. Hoorn. Soc.
conf. vol. 1 l. 3. c. 4. p. 583, etc. Franz. Scho Sacr. Disp. 1. p. 7.
fruit and punnishment of Sin. Immortality was a part of Molin. Enod. Grav. Qu.
de statu Innoc. Tract. 3. p. 62. Gerhard: Loc. Com. de Imag etc. t. 1. c. 4. p.
199. Z^^em. de Imag. etc. c. 8. Art. 2. Moret^n's threefold state of man, p. 1.
c. 2. p. 35.
Gods Image at first imprinted upon man; that image being defaced, mortality
took place. You know in Gods dealing with our first Parents, how he backed his
Command (or Prohibition) with the threatening of death; Genesis 2.17. Of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye: they disobeyed this most equitable
Commandment, and thereby brought death both upon themselves ( Genesis 3.19), and
also upon all their posterity. Besides the guilt of this Sin (made over to all
mankind by imputation), there is men's personal sin ( habitual and actual) which
renders them yet more obnoxious unto death; and that too not only to temporal
but also to eternal death: Romans 6.21. the end of those things is death; ( v.
23.) the wages of sin is death: The Apostle in James 1.14.15. treats of the
first and last of Sin, shows where it begins and where it ends, sets down its
rise, progress, and final issue; But every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed; Then when lust has conceived it brings
forth sin, and sin when it is finished [it brings forth death]: ( Sin is the
issue of Lust, and Death is the issue of Sin). So that our Apostle here in the
Text might upon very good grounds link and couple Sin and Death.

Where it is the Law of Sin there it is the Law of Death.
2. Observe, that it is the Law of Sin and the Law of Death which is here coupled
together: so that where it is the Law of Sin there (and there only) it is the Law
of Death. When Sin is reigning and commanding then it is ruining and condemning;
it is the power of Sin that exposes to the power of death. Romans 6.16. Know ye
not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to
whom ye obey, whether [of sin unto death], or of obedience unto righteousness?
It Is true every sin in its own nature deserves death, the Scripture knows no
such thing as venial sin, it being judge all and every sin is mortal: indeed as
to event the Apostle says there is a Sin not unto death 1 John 5.17. but as to
merit every Sin (be it what it will) deserves death: Yet God is so gracious as
that Sin shall not condemn and end in death where it does not command. 'Pray
mark it, how in the words the Law of the Spirit is joined with Life, and the
Law of Sin with Death; as where the power of the Spirit is there is Life, so
where the power of Sin is there is Death. I know the Death in the latter Clause
does not carry a direct opposition to the Life in the former; for the Life
there referring to Grace and Regeneration and not to Glory hereafter, the
Death, which refers to eternal Condemnation and the misery of the future state,
cannot be looked upon as directly opposite to that Life; yet there is a truth
in the Parallel: As upon the Law of the Spirit there is Life ( spiritual and
eternal), so upon the Law of Sin there is 'Death ( spiritual and eternal too).
Further I know there is a great disparity betwixt the Spirits working Life, and
Sins working Death; the Law of the Spirit works Life in the way of proper
Efficiency and Causality, the Law of Sin works Death only in a final,
consequential, meritorious way; yet here also we may speak by way of Parallel:
as the power of the Spirit works Life in its way, so the power of Sin works
Death too in its way. (That which I drive at is very plain if I be so happy as
to express my self clearly about it).

Regenerate persons are made free from the Law of Death.
3. Observe, that such who are brought under the power of the regenerating
Spirit, they are made free from the Law of Death. This was Paul's happiness
here laid down, and it is the same to all that are regenerate; the proof of
which I need not insist upon: for this deliverance undeniably follows from the
former; they who are made free from the Law of Sin, by that Grace are also made
free from the Law of Death, it being the Law of Sin which subjects the Creature
to the Law of Death. The power (or right) of Death stands or falls by the power
of Sin; so that if the person be freed from the latter (as you have heard every
regenerate person is), it certainly follows in the course and methods of Gods
Grace, that every such person shall be freed from the former too: for the Law
of Death is penal, or the effect of the Law of Sin, now take away the Cause and
the Effect ceases.

Quest. How is this to be understood?
But a little explication will be necessary. How may Regenerate Persons be said
to be made free from the Law of Death?

For answer to this, Answ.
you know Death is either temporal or eternal; (I do not instance in spiritual
Death, because though it is very true that the Saints upon the Law of the Spirit
are made free from this Death, yet I conceive that is not so much intended
here): the former lies in the separation of the Soul from the Body for a time,
the latter in the everlasting separation of both Soul and Body from the love
and favor and presence of God. This separation from God is the death of this
Death (or that wherein it mainly consists); hence though it does not carry in
it any annihilation, yea though it be attended with a kind of Life (both Soul
and Body retaining their physical being, existence, and union); yet it is called
Death, because there is in it a separation from the fountain of true Life and
of all blessedness: upon which account it is not only Death but the worst Death;
and this too is the worst part of this worst Death, for though there be more
included in it than the loss of Gods presence, ( viz. the punnishment of sense,
eternal torment in Hellfire), yet it might easily be proved that herein lies
its greatest evil; the Mat. 25.41.
departing from God is worse than the going into everlasting fire. But to apply
this distinction to the business in hand!

How Believers are made free from the Law of temporal death.
1. The Law of the Spirit of Life frees the Regenerate from death temporal. Not
simply and absolutely, from death considered abstractly and in itself, for so
all must dye; Believers themselves are within the compass of the general
Statute Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to dye; Psalm. 89.48. What man
is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave? but it frees from death as so qualified and so
circumstantiated; in the language of the Text it frees from the Law of Death:
How Is that? why, take a gracious man Death has not a full right or an absolute
power over him, so as to keep him under its dominion forever, (for so I showed
you some open this Law of Death). Such an one may dye but he shall live again,
the grave shall not always hold him, he may be thrown into prison for a time
but Christ will fetch him out; and then death shall never again exercise its
power over him, after he has died once he shall dye no more (as it is said of
Christ Romans 6.9.) Again, Grace frees from the Law of this Death, (that is) from
the hurtfulness, sting, and curse of it: Death carries much of a curse in it,
it is the result and fruit of the primitive Genesis 2.17.
curse: now in this notion sanctified persons are freed from it. The nature and
property of death is altered to a godly man; to him it is now but the paying of
that debt or tribute which is due to Nature, but a 1. These. 4.14.
sleep, but a Job 14.14.
change, but a Luke 2.29.
departure or going out of prison, but a If. 57.2.
going to bed, but an 2 Cor. 5.4.
uncloathing, but a passage into an endless and everlasting life, an inlet into
the immediate fruition of God. O (set but sense aside) what an harmless,
innocent thing is this death to such a person! the Lion being slain (by Christ)
there is honey now in the belly of it, (I allude to that of Sampson Judge. 14.8.)
1 Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy sting? o grave, where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to
God, which give thus the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ by death
has overcome death, unstung it and taken off its hurtful quality; by dying
himself he has expiated Sin, vanquished Satan, atoned God, satisfied the Law,
secured from Hell, purchased eternal life; and (these things being done) where
is now the Law of Death? Heb 2.14, 15 Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is
the Devil: And deliver them, who through fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage.

How from the Law of eternal death.
2. There is that death which is much worse than this, (viz.) eternal death;
that which indeed is the death incomparably surpassing any other: as no life
like to eternal life so no death like to eternal death. To have the Body
separated for a while from the Soul is a thing to Nature very dreadful, but
what is that to the separation both of Body and Soul from God forever? This is
sometimes set forth by Death without the addition of any Epethite, as Joh.
8.51. If a man keep my sayings he shall never see death; Romans 6.23. -- 8.6.
(and passim): Sometimes by the second death; and it is so styled because it
succeeds upon and does not commence till after the first death: Rev. 2.11. He
that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death: Rev, 20.6. -- 21.4. This
is that death which the Sicut is qui liberatur a Lege Spiritus vitae, permanet
in Christo qui est vita; ita qui servit Lege peccati permanet in morte, quae
venit ex damnatione peccati. Orig.
unconverted and impenitent are obnoxious unto, but such as turn to God by true
repentance and live and holy life they are freed from it: And this deliverance
is absolute; the former was but in such a qualified sense, but this (I say) is
absolute. Even such may (and shall) dye the first death, but they shall never
dye this second death; Romans 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first resurrection, on such the second death has no power: You read of the
abolishing of this death by Christ 2 Timothy 1.10. eternal death is quite
abolished to all regenerate persons. But this very much falls in with the
No-condemnation in the foregoing Verse; of which having there said enough I Will
add nothing more.

USE 1. Men exhorted to live in the belief of this, that it is Sin and Death.
By way of Use, 1. I would exhort you all to live in the steady belief of this,
and often to revive it upon your thoughts that it is Sin and Death. Especially
when at any time Satan and your own hearts solicit and tempt you to sin, be
sure then you think of this, so as to retort it upon the temptation speedily;
what? shall I sin and dye? shall I for the pleasures, delights, satisfaction of
sin which are but Heb. 11.25.
for a season expose my self to death? yea, to eternal death? no, that I dare
not, that I must not do. It Is good to break the force of a temptation by such
reasonings as these; for though ('it is true) the great restraints from sin
should be taken from the love of God, the fear of offending God, etc. yet it is
good (and God allows it) to take in the advantage of self-love too, and the
fear of self-destroying. Surely if men did indeed believe or did nor strangely
smother and suppress all serious convictions about this, that it is sin and
death, they durst not sin as they do. Where Is the man, let him be never so
thirsty or let the draught be never so alluring, that would venture upon it
should he be told there is poison in it, and that if he drinks it he is a dead
man? o the stupendous folly, nay madness of men! we tell them from Gods own
mouth there is death at the bottom of sinful practices, and yet (because these
suit with and please their sensual part) they will venture upon them. The fear
of temporal death to be inflicted by the Magistrate, keeps off many from those
enormous acts which otherwise they would commit; they dare not thus and thus
transgress the Law (by stealing, killing, etc.) though they have a good mind to
it, why? because they know if they so do, they must dye: Ah Sinner! God backs
his Laws with the penalty of eternal death, to which thou make thy self
liable by the violation of them, and yet will thou dare to do it? shall the
fear of this not at all restrain thee from what is evil? Here Is the Devils
cunning in his temptations, he presents the bait but hides the hook, he tempts
from and by the pleasure, delight, contentment that is in sin, but conceals the
death that will follow upon it; nay, he does not only conceal the evil
threatened but (either in thesi or in hypothesi) he flatly denies it: This lying
Spirit will tell the Sinner he may sin without danger, what? dye for it? no,
there is no such thing, thou shall not dye: Thus he began in his first assault
upon our first Parents, Genesis 3.4. And the serpent said to the woman, ye shall
not surely dye; and thus he does with Sinners to this very day: He always
sharpens his temptations by blunting the edge of the Laws threatening, assuring
the poor besotted Creature that he may sin and yet not dye. Now I beseech you
do not hearken to him or believe him, for he is what he always was a liar, and
so a murderer, Joh. 8.44. Let the temptation be never so inviting and alluring,
yet 'pray consider 2 Kings 4.40.
death is in the pot, and therefore there is no meddling with it; let the
enticements of Sin be never so specious and plausible, yet know nothing less
than eternal death will inevitably follow upon it; and does not the evil of
that infinitely weigh down all the good which Sin promises? Sin is the falsest
thing in all the world, its promises are very fair but its performances are
quite contrary; it pretends to this and that (which takes with the Sinner
exceedingly), but the very upshot and end of all is everlasting destruction:
Suppose it be as good as its word (as to some temporal concerns), yet (alas)
its good is soon over and gone, but its bad abides forever; the pleasant taste
of its honey in the mouth is but short, but its gall lies fretting in the bowels
to all eternity: now what madness is it, for a man for a few minutes delight to
run himself into everlasting and endless torments! It Is one of the saddest
things that is imaginable, that men do (and cannot but) know that it is Sin and
Death; and yet in a st^^nge defiance of God, and in a bold contemning of all
that he threatens, yea even of eternal death it self, they will venture upon
Sin: Romans 1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God, (that they which commit such
things are worthy of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them
that do them. But surely did they but know and consider what this death is,
they would not carry it thus; I cannot now enter upon any particular
description of it, only let me tell them what there is in it, the absence of
all good, the presence of all evil; is not this enough? that (in short) it is
the summary and abridgment of all that misery which the Humane Nature is
capable of; and should not such a thing make a poor Creature tremble? As to
this death the Sinner would fain dye, but cannot; he must live (though he be
dead even whilst he lives): at the Mors prima pellit animam nolentem de
corpore, mors secunda detinet animam nolentem in corpore. Aug. de Civit. Dei,
l. 21. c. 3.
first death the Body and Soul are loath to part, but in the second death they
would fain part if they might; but the just God will keep them together, that
as they sinned together so they shall suffer together. What a sad meeting will
there be 'twixt these two at the general Resurrection? when they shall be
reunited only in order to their being eternally miserable? Now do not Sinners
tremble at this? do they not dread that which will bring all this upon them? if
not, what can we further say or do!

As to you (dearly Beloved) I hope you are not given up to a reprobate mind, to
this desperate hardness of heart to make nothing of dying eternally; 'pray
therefore Psalm. 4.4.
stand in awe and sin not, do not dare to live in that for which you must dye
and perish forever; let Sin dye that you may never dye, for it must be either
its death or yours. If you live sin you love death, and is death a thing to be
loved? Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me wrongeth his own Soul; all they
that hate me love death. Methinks that is a very sad description of the carriage
of the poor amorous Wanton under the enchantments of the whorish Woman; Prove.
7.21, 22, 23. With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him. He goes after her straightway, as an
ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; Till
a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not
that it is for his life. Sirs! will you carry it thus under Sins enchantments?
not considering that it aims at your life and exposes you to eternal death? A
fool sees but a little way, but a wise man looks to the issues and consequences
of things; you know what I mean. Simply to dye is not so much, but to dye
eternally o that's a formidable thing! as you would shun that, shun sin for it^
house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers of death, Proverbs 7.27.

USE 2. Comfort to all Regenerate Persons.
2. Let the people of God see their happiness, and take the comfort of it. You
that by the power of the regenerating. Spirit are made free from the Law of
Sin, know that upon this you are also made free from the Law of death; o
precious and admirable mercy! what a cordial is this to revive you under all
your faintings! As to temporal death you are not wholly exempted from it,
that is common to you as well as to others; yet it is a quite other thing to you
than what it is to others; o whenever it shall come bid it welcome and do not
Non est formidandum quod liberat nos ab omni formidando. Tertull. Ejus est
mortem timere, qui ad Christum nollet ire. Cypr.
fear it. For to you 'twill come without a sting, and you know the Serpent that
has lost its sting may hiss but cannot hurt; it is in it self an enemy and the
1 Cor. 15.26.
last enemy, but to you it is an harmless because a conquered enemy; it may seem
to threaten the greatest evil but (in truth) it shall do you the greatest good.
But here lies your main happiness you are wholly exempted from eternal death,
the second death; you shall dye but once and then live with God forever. It Is
this second death that makes the first to be so formidable; for a man to dye
that he may live that is not at all dreadful; but to dye here in order to a
worser death hereafter there is the thing which is only dreadful. When death is
but an inlet to eternal life, a departure to be Phill. 1.23.
with Christ, when there is no condemnation to follow after it, you may and you
should meet it with joy and holy triumph. And know, that to you it shall not be
bare freedom from eternal death, but it shall also be the possession of
eternal life; there is very much in the privative part of the mercy, but when
the positive part too is joined with it how high does it rise! o admire and
adore the Grace of God! The least of your sins deserves death, the best of your
duties does not deserve life; and yet you are freed from that which you so much
deserve, and shall be put into the possession of that which you so little
deserve, here is the riches of the grace of God toward you. Sin and Death are
the two Peccatum and mors sunt duae parts adaequatae humanae miseriae; nam in
culpa and poena tota miseria hominis consistit. Streso.
comprehensive evils, all evil is summed up in and under them, but you are
freed from both; what reason have you to rejoice and to admire the Lords
boundless goodness! o the damned in hell (who are under this death and feel
it,) what would they give to be freed from it? You through the merit of Christ
and the power of the Spirit are made free from it, therefore you should first
be very thankeful and then very cheerful. What great things has the gracious
God done for you! he has delivered you from the Rule of sin whilst you live,
from the hurt of death when you dye, have not you abundant cause of blessing
and rejoicing? 'Twill not be long before this Death will look you in the face
and lay its cold hands upon you; it is every minute making its nearer approaches
to you, by every breath you draw it gets ground upon you: well! be not troubled
at this you know the worst on it; it is death but not damnation, it is the parting
of the Soul from the Body but no parting of the Soul from God; it is but dying
temporally that you may live eternally: how great is your happiness!
proportionable to which how great should your thankefulness and holy joy be!
(So much for this Verse).

ROMANS 8.3, 4. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh:

That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit.


CHAP. IX. Of the Laws inability to justify and save.
High and glorious Matter contained in these two Verses. Of their Coherence
with what went before. The difference amongst Expositors about that. The
General sense and meaning of the Words. The various Readings and Explications
of them. They are divided into Five Parts. There Is a Complication in them of
the several Causes of the Sinners Justification and Salvation. The First Branch
of the Text insisted upon, What the Law. etc. Four things observed in it. Of
its Literal Exposition. What is here meant by Law? What that was which the Law
could not do? How it is said to be weak? What the Flesh is by which it is
weakened? The whole matter drawn into one Observation. Of the Special matter of
the Laws impotency, as it refers to Justification and Salvation. Three Grounds
or Demonstrations of its impotency: 1. It requires more than what the fallen
Creature can perform. 2. It does not give what the fallen Creature needs. 3. It
cannot make reparation for what the fallen Creature bath done.
Use 1. To humble us, because we have a Nature in us by which Gods own Law is
thus weakened: where some thing is said against the Power of Nature. Use 2.
First, To vindicate the Honor of the Law, notwithstanding the Weakness charged
upon it. Secondly, The Laws Obligation not to be cast off because of this.
Thirdly, Nor yet is it to be looked upon as altogether weak or useless. Use 3.
To take men off from expecting Righteousness and Life from and by the Law. Use
4. To stir up Believers to adore the Love and Mercy of God, in sending his Son,
when the Law was under an utter inability to justify and save.

High and glorious things contained in these Verses.
OUr Apostle here (Eagle-like) soar's aloft and rises up in his discourse to the
most sublime truths of the Gospel. These two Verses set things before us so
high and glorious, as may fill Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men with amazement
and astonishment. Here Is the whole Gospel sum'd up in a few words, contracted
and brought into a narrow compass: here is in one view Man undone and Man
recovered; the depths of the Creatures misery and the heights of Gods Mercy, in
a short abridgement. Here Is Gods sending his Son: which surely was the greatest
thing that ever he did (it being the highest contrivance of his infinite
Wisdom, and the highest product of his infinite Love). Here Is this Son sent in
our flesh; the first and the great Mystery of the Gospel (for it comes in the
front of the Gospel-Mysteries 1 Timothy 3.16.). Here Is sin condemned and the
Sinner acquitted; the Law represented as impossible for us to keep, yet
fulfilled for us in a most strange and wonderful manner, as Christ has done
and suffered that for us which we were utterly unable to do and suffer our
selves. O the Ephesians. 3.18.
bredths, lengths, depths, heights of the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness of
God! for all these several Attributes in what is here set forth, do concur and
shine forth in their greatest luster. Who can hear or read these two Verses
(with due consideration), and not be in a divine transport and ecstasy? for the
truth is, whatever is short of the most raised workings in the Soul, is too low
for the glorious things here spoken of.

The Coherence of them with what goes before.
We must first enquire into their Coherence or Connection with what goes before.
They are a further proof or confirmation of the main Proposition laid down in
the first Verse, [there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus].
That which might endanger as to Condemnation, was Sin: and there are two things
in Sin to endanger about it, its Power and Guilt: therefore the Apostle shows,
how such who are in Christ are freed from both of these. As to the taking away
its Power, that is spoken to in the second Verse: The Law of the Spirit of
Life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin, etc. As to the
taking away its Guilt, that he speaks to in these two Verses; [What the Law
could not do, etc.] As if the Apostle had said, If any thing could condemn
God's people, it would be Sin; but that cannot, for it is condemned it self:
Christ (or God by him) has condemned Sin, and so the Sinner himself shall not
be condemned by it, or for it. The guilt of Sin being expiated, and the Sinner
made righteous upon the imputation of Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction,
(which are the two things here asserted); surely there is, there can be no
condemnation to those who have an interest in this Grace. And this I judge to
be the chief scope and proper reference of the Words; which I will endeavor to
clear up a little further.

The Coherence further cleared
The Believers Non-condemnation (as you have heard) is brought about, partly by
Sanctification (in which the strength and dominion of Sin is broken), and
partly by Justification (in which the guilt of Sin is done away and not
imputed). The First of these, is done by the Spirit in the heart within, in the
putting forth of his mighty power in the work of Regeneration; [the Law of the
Spirit of Life, etc.] The Second, is done by the Son for the person without, in
that Propitiatory Sacrifice which he offered up to God; upon which God is
atoned, reconciled, satisfied, and so does acquit the Sinner. Now the Apostle
having spoken to that act which is proper to the Spirit ( Verse. 2.), he here
expressly speaks to that which was proper to, and to be effected by the Son;
[God sending his Son in the, etc.] And he speaks of condemning sin for sin,
(that is) for Christ's being a Sacrifice for Sin; and therefore this must
properly and strictly refer to Justification, rather than to Sanctification.
Yet I would not be too nice, for as (in a large sense) the Law of sin in the
foregoing Verse, may point to the guilt as well as to the power of sin; so here
(in a large sense too), the condemning of sin may point to the abolishing of
the power, as well as to the expiating of the guilt of sin. Expositors take in
both, and I would not straighten the Words more than needs, (though yet I
conceive, in their main and primary intendment they refer to what is done in
Justification). The Apostles Argument then stands thus, To them for whom God
sent his Son (all other ways being impossible), for sin to condemn sin, and in
their stead to fulfill the righteousness of the Law, to them there is no
Condemnation: But for Believers and such who are in Christ, God upon these
terms sent his Son; therefore to them there is no Condemnation. I shall follow
those Nunc sequitur expolitio vel illustratio probationis, quod scilicet
Dominus gratuita sua misericordia nos in Christo justificavit, id quod Legi
erat impossible. Calvin. Duobus argumentis consolationem de indemnitate piis
confirmavit; quorum prius fuit, quod Lex Spiritus, etc. Alterum, quod Deus
misso filio suo, etc. Pareus. Jam accedit ad probationem sententiae prioris,
quae fuit de justificatione; nempe credentes in Christum esse justificatos seu
nullam esse eis condemnationem. Piscat. in Paraphr. Observandum sententiam hanc
non cohaerere cum proxime praecedente, sed cum priore membro versiculi primi.
Id. in Schol: (Vide Cajet. in locum). Quorum causa Deus Pater misit Filium suum
coaeternum in carne conspicuum fieri, iis nulla est condemnatio; at qui nostra
causa etc. Gryn: (See Dutch Annot.)
Interpreters who make the main Scope and drift of the words to lie in this.

I know there are Firmamentum est in hoc versu superioris conclusionis, etc.
Beza. Pertinent ista declarationis vice ad id quod dixit, se per legem
Spiritus, etc. et transfert totius hujus negotii causam and meritum in gratiam
Dei. Muscul. He proves the foresaid making free, because that God being
reconciled by Christ's death, he has taken away from sin that power, which he
had granted it over man for a punishment of his first transgression. Deod. Hic
affertur ratio, qua ostenditur istum Dei Spiritum liberatorem nobis donatum
esse etc. Pet Mart. Ratio superioris sententiae, qua explicat Apostolus quomodo
Lex Spiritus, etc. Justin. Hic Versus continet aetiologiam itemque exegesin
eorum quae versu secundo dicta fuerunt. Vorst. So Staplet. Streso, R^lloc: etc.
Several who go another way; they making the Words to be rather the further
explication or continuation of that Matter which is laid down in the Second
Verse. The Saints are made free from the law of sin and death, how is that
brought about? why thus, God sent his Son into the World, by whom he is
reconciled to them; being reconciled, upon this he has taken away from Sin
that commanding power that it had before, abolished its strength, divested it
of its former dominion and regency; and this they make to be the condemning of
sin in the Text. Well! I will not now object any thing against this
Interpetation; (hereafter I shall speak more to it, when I come to the more
particular opening of the Clause, And for sin condemned sin); only at present
give me leave to prefer the former.

The words considered in themselves. Their general sense and meaning.
Let us now consider the Words in themselves. As to their general Sense and
Meaning, it is plainly this (though somewhat more darkly expressed), Quod
impossible erat logi, Deus in Christo fecit. Anselm. Men's Apostoli hoc loco
est (etsi verbis obscurioribus expressa), id nobis praestitum per gratiam quod
Lex praestare non potuit. Estius. (...). Theophyl.
What the Law (it standing in such circumstances) could not do, for the guilty,
undone Sinner, that God through Christ has fully done for him: this is that
plain Truth which they resolve themselves into.

The various Readings of them.
I find some considerable difference amongst Expositors in the Reading of them.
Mihi locum hunc pro virili mea perpendenti, videtur aliquid verborum deesse ad
explendam sententiam, veluti si sic legamus; Nam quod Lex Mosaica non potuit
juxta partem carnalem; secundum quam imbecillis erat and inefficax, hoc Deus
[praestitit] misso Filio suo, qui Spiritualem Legis partem absolvit. Erasm.
Subaudiendum verbum praestitit, aut aliquid simile. Estius. Omnino videtur
(...) verbum (...) aut simile. Piscat. Ut huic malo fuccurreretur (tale quid
enim necessario intelligendum est) Staplet. Antid p. 626. Sane conjunctio (Et)
postulare videtur, ut aliquid subaudiatur, ut sensus sit, perfecit id Deus quod
Lex efficere non poterat. Justin: Subaudiendum videtur [praestitit], aut
aliquid hujusmodi. Bucer. To the same purpose Salmer. tom. 13. p. 531. Catharin
Vorst. Muscul. Heming. etc.
Some, would have a Word inserted, as (...), fecit, praestitit; thus, What the
Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God [did], he sending
his own Son etc. They conceive, with the addition of this one Word the sense
would be more clear, and the words would run much more smooth: but Hoc
supplementum non est necessarium. Tolet. etc. Sed non est opus, et Socinus
Haereticus illud ad suam blasphemiam trahit. Pareus. Mihi videtur aliter
contextus optime fluere. Calv.
Others will not admit of this addition.

Una tantum Conjunctione expuncta, nullo praeterea opus est supplemento. Soto
(with diverse others).
Some again would have the Conjunctive particle [(...), and] and for sin, etc.
to be expunged; apprehending that it makes the Words to be more obscure. They
would have us read them thus, [ what the Law, etc. God sending his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, for sin condemned sin in the flesh]. But this too
is not approved of, for Copula (...) Erasmum decepit, ut insereret verbum
praestitit, ego vero amplificandi causa positam suisse sentio. Calv.
Calvin lays a great stress upon that particle, as heightning the matter spoken
of: [and for sin] it is as much as Yea or Even for sin condemned sin, etc. It Is
not a Pleonasm or superfluous word, but it is particula intensiva, to show the
greatness and strangeness of the thing spoken of. It Is not omitted by any of
the Greek Scholiasts; and I see no reason why we should put it out.

Tolet would solve all 1st. by adding some illative word, as ideo, igitur, etc.
2dly. by turning the Participle [sending] into the Verb [sent];
(of which hereafter).

Take the Words in the gross (as I am now considering of them), I think our
Translators render them very well; and there will be no necessity either to add
to them, or to take from them. Only it is necessary that you make this Variation
or Addition; whereas it is said [and for sin condemned sin], read [and by a
Sin-offering or Sacrifice for Sin, condemned Sin]. And so they will run thus,
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending (or sent) his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and [by a
Sacrifice] for Sin condemned Sin in the flesh: That the righteousness, etc.

There are great difficulties in their several branches and parts; but they
shall be opened as I go over them in their order.

The Words divided into Five Parts.
If you take them in pieces, you have these Five things in them;

1. It Is here implied, That something was to be done in order to the Recovery,
Justification, Salvation of the lost Sinner 2. Here Is an express assertion of
the weakness, inability of the Law, to do what was to be done; with the true
cause of that inability of the Law: [What the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh]. 3. The Way and Method which the wise and gracious God
took upon this, that He might effectually do that which the Law could not de:
[He sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh]. 4. The double Effect
produced by this, or the double End and design of God in this sending of his
Son: [for sin he condemned sin in the flesh; That the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled]. 5. The description of the persons who have an interest in
all this Grace: [who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit].
We have in the whole, a Complication of the several Causes of the Sinner's
Justification and Redemption. Here Is a Complication of the Causes of the
Sinners Justification and Salvation.
Here Is the Deficient Cause [the Law]; Here Is the Principal Efficient Cause
[God the Father]; here is the Subordinate Agent (I mean with respect to the
Father) or the Meritorious Cause, [Christ the Son]; the Formal and also the
Material Cause, [for sin condemning sin in the flesh]; the Final Cause, the
Finis (...) [that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled], and the
Finis (...) [in us, who walk not after the flesh, but etc.] Here I bring in the
Words [for sin condemned sin] under another Head of Causes than that laid down
but now in the division of the words; but that I may do well enough, because
they will bear diverse causal respects.

I begin with the Causa deficiens; which comes in also as the Procatartick or
impulsive Cause, as that which moved God to send his Son, (viz.) the weakness
and impotency of the Law to help the lost Sinner.

The first Branch of the Words pitched upon. Four things observed in it.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh]. Here
observe,

1. The thing spoken of, [the Law]. 2. That which is asserted concerning this
Law, [it could not do]. 3. The ground or reason of this its inability to do,
[in that it was weak]. 4. The assignation of the true Cause of its weakness,
(viz.) the flesh; [in that it was weak through the flesh]: it could not do
because it was weak, and it was weak because of the Flesh.
I will a little insist upon the Literal Explication of this Branch, and then
come to the matter contained in it.

The literal explication of the Words.
[For what the Law could not do]: In the Greek it is (...); which, if you render
word for word, runs thus, For the impossible of the Law, or the invalid of the
Law, (so Quod invalidum erat Legis. De Resur. carnis Cap. 46.
Tertullian renders it). The Sense and meaning of the expression is plain
enough; our Translation gives us that very well, What the Law could not do: but
the form and manner of it in the Original (especially when it is turned into our
language), is somewhat harsh and unusual.

Interpreters, for the opening of the Phrase and the clearing up of the
connection of the matter, do several ways Comment upon the Words. Some bring in
this first Paragraph under a Parenthesis; but that signifies but little one way
or another. (...) impotentia Legis existente. Beza. Mihi placet, ut (...)
Nominativus positus sit absolute loco Genitivi, ut sensus sit, cum enim effet
impossible, etc. Erasm. Fateri necesse est Panli orationem mutilam esse and
imperfectam, nifi dicamus, (...) positum esse absolute loco secundi Casus, quo
Graeci eo firm modo utuntur quo Latini Casu auferendi etc. Justin.
Some, would read it absolutely, and change the Nominative Case into the
Genitive, (the Greeks using that Case as the Latins do the Ablative in that
form of expression); thus, for (...), they turn it (...) or (...), the Law
being unable, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent, etc. Some, take
it in the Accusative Case, and put in the word (...); the impossible part of
the Law God performed or made good by the sending of Christ. Some, change the
(...) into (...), putting in (...)((...)); what was the impossible of the Law
(or to the Law) that God supplied by the sending of his Son: (this comes
nearest to our Translation). Impossible legis: i. e. impossibilitas implendae
legis ex eo procedebat, quoniam Lex infirma erat per Carnem. Tolet.
Some, make the impossible Legis to be taken Substantive, for impossibilitas
implendae Legis; which impossibility of fulfilling the Law proceeded from
hence, because the Law was weak through the flesh. So Camerarius. (...) Artica
constructione usitata accipi commode potest, pro (...). Beza. Propter
impotentiam Legis, eo quod per camem erat infirmata Pare.
Some tell us, the Words are an Atticism, and they make a double Atticism in
them; it is first (...) for (...), and then it is (...) for (...). Then the sense
of them runs thus; For the impotency and inability (or because of the impotency
and inability of the Law), therefore God sent his Son. The Quum impotens esset
Lex propter infirmitatem carnis etc. V. Sir. Ob defectum virium legis, quo
laborabat in carne etc V. Arab. Et cum impotentes cramus ad praestandum mandata
legis etc. V. Ethiop.
Ancient Versions bring it in with a Since or Because; Since there was an utter
impossibility or inability in the Law to justify or recover lost man,
therefore God pitched upon another way, (viz.) the Incarnation, Obedience,
Satisfaction of his own Son. I thought it not amiss, to put down these several
Explications and Readings of the Words, for the satisfaction of more
inquisitive persons concerning the Expression it self, and the Coherence of the
Matter: but as to the plain Sense, that our Translators (as I said before) give
us very well; For what the Law could not do, (or because of the Laws inability
to do), in that it was weak through the flesh, therefore God sent his Son, etc.

The Sum of the Words in Two Proposi ions.
I pass from the Letter of the Words to the Matter contained in them; and that
may be sum'd up in these Two Propositions:

1. There was something to be done by and for the Sinner, 1. Prop.
which the Law could not do: it was under an impossibility of doing it. 2.
Therefore the Law could not thus do, 2. Prop:
because it was weak through the flesh.
For the better understanding of which Propositions, 4 Questions answered.
it will be necessary to resolve these Four Questions:

1. Of what Law does the Apostle here speak? 2. What was the [(...)], that
which the Law could not do? 3. How is the Law said to be weak? 4. What is meant
by the [Flesh] from which the Laws weakness proceeds?
First, Of what Law does the Apostle here speak, 1. Quest. What Law is here
meant?
when he says What the Law could not do?

I answer, Of Gods own Law, and that too in its strict and proper acceptance.
Answ.
For the Word [Law] is taken sometimes in an improper, allusive, Metaphorical
notion; as in the Verse foregoing, where you read of the Law of the Spirit and
of the Law of Sin, (which is nothing but the power and commanding efficacy of
the Spirit and of Sin). But here in this Verse it is to be taken in the strict
and proper notion of a Law; (viz.) as it notes that declaration or revelation
which God (the great Lawgiver) has made of his Will, therein binding and
obliging the reasonable creature to duty. I know Some understand the Law here
of that Lex mentis quae impleri non poterat propter carnem peccati. Tolet.
Crediderim ego, non hic legem Mosis, sed legem illam mentis accipiendam esse.
Justin. Potest and de lege mentis intelligi, quam supra dixit velle facere
bonum, sed per infirmitatem and fragilitatem carnis implere non posse. Orig.
Law of the Mind spoken of Chap. 7.23; which lies in strong propensions,
efficacious and commanding impulsions to what is holy and good, springing from
the Sanctified nature in regenerate persons: But I conceive this interpretation
is not so genuine, nor so well suiting with the Apostles Scope in the words;
where he is treating not of the Law which is in some persons, but of the Law
which is imposed upon all; of that Law the righteousness of which was to be
fulfilled (as it follows Verse. 4.): and therefore it must be understood of Gods
own Law, that being it which Christ was to fulfill and satisfy, and not any
other Law.

Since then the Words point to the Law of God, we must bring the Question into
a narrower compass; and enquire What Law of God is here spoken of? For answer
to which (that I may as much as I can avoid unnecessary excursions), I shall
only say this; That it is either that Primitive Law which God imposed upon Adam
(and in him upon all mankind), upon the keeping of which he promised Life, upon
the breaking of which he threatened death, (it being the Summary of the Covenant
of Works): Or else, it is that Law which God gave the people of Israel from
Mount Sinai, namely the Decalogue or Moral Law. Which Law was but a new draught
of the Law first made with Adam; for that being by his Fall much defaced, nay
almost quite obliterated (as it was written in his heart), it pleased the Lord
to copy it out again and to write it afresh (in Tables of Stone) in fair and
legible Characters. And this too was a Scheme or Transcript and Summary of the
Covenant of Works, first made with Adam, (though it was not given to the people
of Israel purely and absolutely as the Covenant of Works, for in reference to
its end and design there was much in it of the Covenant of Grace). For Matter
and Substance they were both but one and the same Law; the Terms and Conditions
of both were the same, Romans 10.5.
Do and Live: but there were certain appendixes of Grace to the Moral Law,
which were not in that made with Adam in the state of innocence (as is fully
made out by several Camero de tripl. Foedere. Coceius de Foedere. Bulkely on
the Covenant. p. 57.
Writers upon the Covenant); so that it was a mixed thing, there being something
in it of the Covenant of Works, and something also of the Covenant of Grace.
Now the Law considered as first given to Adam, and then as renewed to the
people of Israel, so far as in both it was the Covenant of Works, is the Law
here spoken of; as being concluded under an impossibility of doing what was
requisite to be done. 'Twas not the Ceremonial Law which the Apostle here had
in his eye, but the Legem dicit, non praecepta Sacrificicrum, et caetera quae
erant umbra usque ad tempus Christi data, sed illam quam etc. Hieron. Quare
nihil est quod quisquam cavilletur, illud quod Paulus ait, Impossible fuisse
Legi, non ad Moralem sed ad Ceremonias referri. P. Martyr.
Moral Law it self: which (if it was necessary) might be evinced by several
Considerations; but this one is enough, he speaks of that Law the righteousness
of which was to be fulfilled in Believers, (For Law in the 3 verse must be
expounded by Law in the 4 verse); now it is the righteousness of the Moral Law
which is fulfilled in us; Ergo. It Is very true, Paul insisting upon the Laws
weakness does sometimes direct his discourse to the Ceremonial, and sometimes
to the Moral Law; and it would be of great use to us to understand his
Epistles, if we could exactly hit upon the true notion of that Law of which he
occasionally speaks: but undoubtedly here 'twas the Moral Law (as the Covenant
of Works), of which he affirms that it could not do etc. Let this suffice for
answer to the First Question.

The Second is, 2d. Quest. What is the thing which the Law could not do?
What does this impossible of the Law refer to? or what is the thing in Special
which the Law could not do?

To this it is answered several ways: You read ( verse. 1.) of exemption from
condemnation, now this the Law could not do: the Law (in separation from Christ
and especially in opposition to Christ) can condemn millions, but it cannot
save one person from condemnation; (thus etc. nempe condemnationem ab homine
auferre. Piscat.
Some do open it). You read ( verse. 2.) of being made free from the Law of sin
and death; herein too was the Law impotent, it might lay some restraints upon
sin but it could never bring down the power of Sin: ( Aptissimus mihi sensus
videtur, ut illa verba non modo sequentia, sed multo magis praecedentia
respiciant etc. ut in carnis contumaciam domandam vires non haberet. Contz.
Some apply it to this). There is the blessed empire or regency of the Spirit
over the Flesh, as also the full and perfect obeying of the Laws commands:
neither of these could the Law effect; (so Duo quantum ad propositum spectar
subordinata sunt, quae Lex nequit efficere; Alterum est Dominium Spiritus super
carnem, alterum hinc consequens est, perfecta praeceptorum Legis executio.
Cajet.
Cajetaine opens it). There is the amendment and reformation of the life and
manners: this the Law could not do; (this explication Dr. Hammond.
Some six upon). The Text speaks of the condemning of sin: this the Law could
not do, it can condemn the Sinner but it cannot (in a way of expiation) condemn
sin it self; (So Quae erat impossibilitas Legis? nempe id facere, quod Deus
deinde fecit in Carne Filii sui, condemnare peccatum. Lud. De Dieu.
De Dieu paraphraseth upon it). Quid est illud, quod legi erat praestitu
impossible? Abolere peccatum, and reddere justos, liberare a jure peccati and
mortis, dare ut justitia, quam docebat and exigebat, in nobis impleretur.
Muscul.
Musculus puts many things together; What is it (says he) that was impossible
to the Law? he answers, to abolish sin, to make righteous, to free from the Law
of Sin and Death, to give that the righteousness which it taught and exacted,
should be fulfilled in us.

All these several explications are very true; but further, there is the
reconciling of God and the Sinner, the atoning and propitiating of an incensed
God, the satisfying of infinite justice, the paying of vast debts contracted,
the justifying of the guilty, the giving of a right and title to Heaven, (with
many other suchlike great things). Now the Law was under an impossibility of
doing or effecting any of these; insomuch that God must send his Son, or no
(...). Athan. Significat Legem fuisse imbecillem and invalidam ad justificandom
hominem. Peter. Disp. 3. in c. 8. ad Romans
justification, no reconciliation, no atonement, no satisfaction, no payment,
no pardon, no righteousness, no salvation: (which will be by and by
particularly made out, in the two most eminent branches of the Laws impotency.)

I must mind you, that I am in all this speaking of the Moral Law: The
inability of the Ceremonial Law (abstracted from Christ, who was the pith and
marrow, and who put energy and efficacy into all the types, rites, shadows of
that Law), I say, its inability to do any thing (further than to point or
direct and lead to Christ), is easily granted. It Is the very thing which the
Apostle largely insists upon the proof of, in his excellent Epistle to the
Hebrews: Chap. 7.18, 19. For there is verily a disannulling of the Commandment
going before, for [the weakness] and unprofitableness thereof; for the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by the which we draw
nigh unto God. Heb. 9.9. Which was a figure for the time then present, in which
were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that [could not] make him that did the
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience. So Heb. 10.1. For the Law
having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things,
[can never] with those Sacrifices which they offered year by year continualy,
make the comers thereunto perfect: ((...), here is a total negation of the
power of the Ceremonial Law). And that Law had its (...) also, for the Apostle
adds ( verse. 4.), it is not possible [(...)] that the blood of Bulls and Goats
should take away sins: thus it was with that Law (of which it is very clear Paul
speaks in these places). And it was but little better with the Moral Law it
self (though that was a far higher and better Law); even this was and is as
weak as the former. This very Law which is so much for doing, which requires
and commands the creature to be so much in doing, it self can do little or
nothing. The lost Sinner has great things to be done by him and for him; but
in all these, the Moral Law (though God's own Law and an excellent Law) cannot
(without Christ) give the least help or assistance to him.

The Third Enquiry is, 3d Quest. How the Law is said to be weak?
What is the weakness of the Law here spoken of?

The word is (...), Answ.
which is used to set forth any debility or weakness whether it be natural or
praeternatural, (as being occasioned by some bodily disease or distemper, (in
which Sense it is often used in the New Testament). It Is applied here to the
Law; and it is brought in as the ground of its (...) before mentioned. Else
where the Apostle uses it, he speaks of the [(...)] the weakness of the
Commandment, Heb. 7.18. And speaking of the ordinances, rites, injunctions of
the Ceremonial Law, he calls them [(...)] weak and beggarly elements, Gal. 4.9.
Here in the Text an higher Law was in his eye, and yet he attributes weakness
to it also: it could not do because it was weak, and it was weak because it
could not do, (for these two do reciprocally open and prove each the other).

And let me add, that this weakness of the Law is not (...) ex qua (...)
nascitur, virium non imbecillitatem, sed omnem destitutionem declarat. Beza.
Non dicit, quod Legi erat grave and difficile, sed quod etc. quibus sane verbis
adimit Legi in universum justificandi vim etc. Muscul. Infirmitatem Legis
accipe, quomodo solet usurpare Apostolus vocabulum (...), non tantum pro modica
imbecillitate verum pro impotentia; ut significet Legem nihil prorsus momenti
habere ad conferendam justitiam. Calv. Quamquam per verbum infirmari (...) ab
Interpret versum sit, vis tamen illius verbi Graece potius significat vires
nullas quam imbecillas. Salmer. tom. 13. p. 532.
gradual or partial but total: it is not the having of a lesser strength but
it is the negation of all strength; it is so weak, that it has no power at all
to accomplish what is here intended. The Apostle carries it up to an
impossibility: he does not say, it was somewhat hard or difficult for the Law
to do thus and thus, or that it could do something though but imperfectly; but
he says this was impossible to it as being utterly above its power and ability.
A man that is weak may do something, though he cannot do it vigorously,
exactly, and thoroughly: but now (as to Justification and Salvation) the Law
(considered in its self) is so weak, that it can do nothing; it cannot have the
least influence into these effects (further than as God is pleased to make use
of it in a preparatory or directive manner). Its weakness as to the great
things of the Gospel, is like the weakness of the body when it is dead; 1
Cor.15.43. It is sown in weakness [(...), it is the same word with that in the
Text concerning the Law], it is raised in power: a dead body is so weak that it
cannot put forth one vital act; it may be weak in part whilst it lives, but
when it is dead it lies under a total weakness: Such is the weakness or
impotency of the Law, in reference to the taking away of guilt and the making
of a person righteous before God.

Fourthly, 4th Quest. What are we to understand by Flesh?
It will be query'd What the Flesh is here by which the Law is made thus weak?

The word [Flesh] occurs thrice in this Verse, etc. Answ.
in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sent his Son in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the Flesh: As it is used in the first
place, it carries in it a very different sense from what it does in the two
following places; (and it is not unusual in holy Writ, for one and the same Word
in one and the same Verse to be taken in different senses; as you may see
Matthew. 26.29. Matthew. 8.22.) When it is said the Law was weak through the Flesh,
here Flesh is taken Morally for the corrupt nature in man: but when it is said,
God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh (and so on), there Flesh is
taken Physically for the humane nature of Christ. But to come to the business
in hand! The Law was weak [through the Flesh]: By this Flesh the Manichees of
old understood the very being and substance of Flesh; that which constitutes
the body in man: but this interpretation is rejected by all. Origin (with some
others) expounds it of the Puto quod stance of Flesh; that which Legem M^sis in
duas parts Apostolus dividat, and aliud in ea carnem, aliud Spiritum nominat;
et illam quidem observantiam quae secundum literam geritur, sensum caruis
appellat, illam vero quae accipitur spiritualiter, Spiritum nominat --
Impossible Legis co quod etc. Intellectus qui secundum literam est accipi
potest, ipse enim impossibilis erat etc. Orig. Vel per carnem infumabatur Lex,
i. e. per carnalem intellectum, et per carnalem observantiam erat imbecilla,
non per seipsam. Anselm. Per Carnem, h. e. Per carnalem Legis intelligentiam,
sive carnis infirmitatem, cui deerat Evangelica Gratia. Erasm. Origenes Per
Carnem intelligit crassam, literalem, et carnalem Legis intelligentiam; atque
etiam Legis infirmitatem in eo collocat, quod impossible fuer it Legis
Ceremonias omnes secundum Carnem (i.e.) secundum Literam observare. A. Lapide.
Ceremonial Law, with respect to the gross and literal sense and meaning of
that Law: Now it is true (as has been already observed), that that Law may be
styled Flesh because it lay very much in fleshly things; it is called the Law of
a carnal commandment, Heb. 7.16; it stood only in meats, and drinks, and diverse
washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed till the time of reformation, Heb.
9.10. And it is also most true, that they who looked no further than the fleshly
part the letter of that Law, who did haerere in cortice and only rodere
literarum ossa (as the Jews did); to them it must needs be weak, and unable to
bring about any Evangelical and saving good. But this is not the Law (as you
have heard) which the Apostle here does mainly intend: Distinguit hoc loco
impurissimus ille scriptor Legem in Carnem et Spiritum etc. Beza in loc.
Beza is very sharp against Origin for this his exposition of the flesh.
Cajetaine interprets it of the Carnal state of the Jews under the Law; they
being in that state by means thereof to them the Law was weak: But (as to this
explication) our learned Dr. Hammond in Annot. (a)
Annotator well observes, that Flesh here is not so properly the State of men
under the Law, as that which is the means by which occasionally the Law became
weak and unable to restrain men, (viz.) the carnal or fleshly appetite which is
so contrary to the proposals of the Law; therefore he expounds it by that: (and
Caro (i.e.) carnales Judaeorum affectus vires ejus retuderant. Act. 13.38. Heb
9.15. Grot.
Grotius before him went the same way). The fullest and best interpretation of
this Flesh and that which is most Per Carnem: i. e. vitiatam hominis naturam
Piscat. etc. i.e. Per camis desideria, et per fomitem vitiorum qui est in came.
Anselm. Ideo lex infirma est, quia in vitiatam naturam incurrit. P. Mart. Quum
vel Legem infirmatam fuisse etc. nemo sibi finget damnari hic substantiam
carnis aut naturam corporis, nam haec a Deo creata sunt bona; sed per Carnem
intelligit pravitatem and corruptionem, quae per lapsum Adami transivit in
nostrum genus. Idem.
generally followed, is this; it is the corrupt, sinful depraved nature that is
in fallen man: O this is that which puts such a weakness and inability upon the
Law, to help and recover the undone Sinner! it is by this that the Law is so
infeebled and debilitated as to its production of any spiritual or saving
effects. The Apostle lays it upon this, the Law could not do [in that] it was
weak through the flesh, (that is) because it was weak through the Flesh: For
the [(...)] is (...) valet hic Ruia more Hebraico. Grot.
Causal; therefore it is usually rendered here by quia, quoniam, quandoquidem, eo
quod etc. And so it is in other places, as Heb. 2.18. For [in that] he himself
has suffered [(...), because he has suffered], being tempted he is able to
succor them that are tempted: it is as much as the (...) Romans 5.12. Sometimes
indeed it is only expressive of such a time or state or condition; as Mar. 2.19.
Can the children of the Bride-chamber fast while the Bridegroom is with them?
((...)): Sometimes again it is rendered by [whereas], as 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Pet.
3.16; but here in the Text it is taken causally.

Let it then be observed, that the Impotentia legis etc. non fuit ex ipsa Lege,
quasi justificare homines eam praestantes nequiret, sed ex carne (h. e.) ex
corruptione naturae humanae, quae hominem reddit impotentem ad praestandam
legem. Pare us. Non infirmitatem illi impingit quasi intrinsecus inhaerentem,
sed quasi extrinsecus ratione carnis ei adjacentem. Soto.
weakness. of the Law is not properly inherent or from the Law it self, only
it is adventitious, accidental, and from the state and condition of the Subject
with whom it has to do. It Is the wickedness. of man's Nature which is the sole
cause of the Law's weakness. If Man was the same now that at first he was, the
Law would be the same too now that at first it was; and have the same power and
ability that then it had; but he being fallen now the Law is weak'ned. It Is not
(I say) from any intrinsic defect or weakness in the Law, but only because it
meets with a Subject in which there is Flesh, a depraved nature; and so it
cannot do that which before it did when the Nature was holy and good. When Man
was in the state of innocence, the Law ( Sampson like) was in its full strength
and could do whatever was proper to it; yea, (as to it self) it is able yet to
do the same; but the case with us is altered: we cannot now fulfill this Law nor
come up to what it requires of us, and therefore it is weak. True, the Apostle
lays it upon the weakness of the Law, he says it was weak; but then he tells
you what was the ground of that weakness, namely our Fesh. The Law is only weak
to us because we are weak to it: the strongest Sword in a weak hand can do but
little execution; the brightest Sun cannot give light to a blind eye, (not from
any impotency in it self; but merely from the incapacity of the Subject): and
that is the case in the Law's (...) with respect to the Sinner. Pray observe,
the Law strengthens Sin and Sin weakens the Law: 1 Cor. 15.56. The strength of
Sin is the Law; (viz.) as the Law gives it a killing and condemning power, and
as (through man's corruption) it makes Sin to be more active, impetuous and
boystrous; thus Sin is strengthened by the Law: But then the weakness of the Law
is Sin, for because of that it cannot now do what formerly it could.

Thus I have answered the Four Questions propounded; under which I have cleared
up the Words, and also (in part) the Matter contained in them. Which being
done, I might from the whole The whole matter in the Words drawn into one
Observation.
raise this Observation, That the Law, yea the Moral Law it self, though it was
an excellent Law, the Law of Gods own making, and designed by him for high and
excellent ends; yet it having now to do with fallen man, with Sinners that have
Flesh (a corrupt nature) in them, it is become weak and altogether unable to
justify and save.

I must not enter upon any large prosecution of this Point; yet let me speak
something to it, both to fill up what I have hitherto but just touched upon,
and also to supply what as yet I have said nothing to. There are but Two Things
which I would further open:

1. The Special Matter of the Laws weakness. 2. The Grounds or Demonstrations
of the Laws weakness.
The Laws inability to justify and save.
For the First the Special Matter of the Laws weakness, that will be cleared up

1. With respect to Justification.

2. With respect to Salvation and Eternal Life. What the Law could not do in
that it was weak: what was the thing particularly which the Law could not do?
what did its weakness especially refer to? Answ. The Scripture mainly fixes it
upon these Two things, it could not justify, it could not eternally save.
There are indeed many other things (some of which have been already hinted)
which the Law could not do; but these two are most usually instanced in in the
Word when it speaks of or would set forth the Laws weakness.

1. The Law (upon its terms of doing and working) ever since man's Fall always
was, and yet is, unable to justify: it may possibly attempt such a thing (or
rather the Sinner may look for such a thing from it), but it cannot carry it on
to any good issue. This (I conceive) Paul's thoughts were in special upon, when
he says what the Law could not do: For it is the Sinners justification which he
in this place is discoursing of; and he first begins with the Law as being
impotent and insufficient to accomplish this justification. God by Christ
condemned sin (i. e. he abolished and cut off Sins Guilt), and by him he
brought about a righteousness for the Sinner; but the doing of this by the Law
was a thing altogether impossible: that could not make the Creature to cease to
be guilty or to become righteous. The proving of this truth was elsewhere his
main business: as namely in the 3d, 4th, 5th Chapters of this Epistle, where he
does professedly and largely insist upon it. That one place is a sufficient
proof of it, Chapt. 3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of Sin. He
pursues the same Argument in his Epistle to the Galatians, where he goes over
it again and again. Gal. 2.16, 21. Knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the Law: for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. I do
not frustrate the Grace of God: for if righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain. Gal. 3.11, 21, 22. But that no man is justified by the
Law in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith. --
Is the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid.! for if there had been
a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been
by the Law. But the Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the promise by
faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe. So also in his
Sermon at Antioch, Acts 13.39. By him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. How full and
positive are the Scriptures in the denial of any power to the Law to justify!
It can discover Sin, accuse and judge for Sin, but it cannot expiate Sin or
make a man righteous before God. There is indeed the righteousness of the Law,
and (upon that) righteousness by the Law; but that now is altogether
unattainable further than as it is brought about and accomplished in the hands
of Christ; the Law in Christ's hands can do great things, but in ours it can do
nothing.

So also the Law is weak in reference to Eternal life. It could not do (i. e.)
it could not save; it never yet (as separated from Christ) carried one Sinner
to Heaven: it is above the ability of the Law to save one. Soul. Consider it as
the Covenant of works so its language is Do and Live, Romans 10.5. For Moses
describes the righteousness of the Law, that the man which does these things
shall live by them: Now man in his lapsed state cannot do according to the Laws
demands, therefore by it there is no Life for him. Had he continued in the state
of innocence: he had been able to have done all which the Law required, and so
would have attained Life by it in the way of doing; but now the case is
altered. If Salvation depended upon the Creatures perfect and personal
obedience not a man would be saved. There must indeed be Obedience to the Law
or no Salvation; but should it be that very Obedience which the Law calls for,
and as the Law calls for it (viz.) as the condition of the first Covenant, this
would make salvation absolutely impossible. You know, Moses brought Israel to
the borders of the Holy Land but Joshua must lead them into it: so the Law (as
God uses it in subserviency to the Gospel), may do something toward the saving
of a poor creature; but it is the alone Merit and Obedience of the Lord Jesus
(applied by Faith), which must put the Sinner into the possession of the
Heavenly Rest. That which now saves, is Christ not Moses, the Gospel not the
Law, believing not doing, (I mean only in the old Covenant sense). So much for
the Matter of the Laws impotency.

The Grounds or Demonstrations of the Laws inability to justify and save.
Secondly: Let me give you the Grounds, or (if you will) the Demonstrations of
the Laws impotency and weakness to justify and save: He instance in Three.

1. It requires that which the Creature cannot perform. Before the Law do any
great thing for a person it must first be exactly fulfilled; for that is its
way, the terms and condition which it stands upon: and it is as high in these
terms now as ever it was, for though man has lost his power, the Law has not
lost its rigor; it does not sink or fall in its demands because of man's
inability to answer them. Though the Sinner be as the poor broken debtor,
utterly undone, yet the Law will not compound with him or abate him any thing,
but 'twill have full payment of the whole debt. Now this in statu lapso (as I
shall show when I come to the 4th verse) is Unde sequitur plus in lege
praecipi, quam praestando simus, quia si pares essemus implendae Legi, frustra
aliunde effet quaesitum remedium. Calvin. Hic locus efficacissime convincit
justificationem non esse ex opcribus, etc. P. Martyr. Non implet Legem
infirmitas mea, sed landat Legem voluntas mea. August.
impossible: None (but such an one as Christ) could thus answer the Laws
demands. For nothing will serve it below perfection: inherent righteousness,
actual obedience, all must be perfect or else the Law despises them. The Gospel
accepts of Sincerity but the Law will 'bate nothing of perfection; if there be
but the least failure, all is spoiled. Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the
works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one
that continues not [in all things] which are written in the book of the Law to
do them. Jam. 2.1^. For who, soever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
[in one point] he is guilty of all. -- And is it thus? are these the terms and
demands of the Law? what then can it do? (or rather what can we do)? it must
needs be weak to us Because (in these rigors) we are so weak to it; it cannot
do much for us because we can do but little to it; it cannot do what we desire
because we cannot do what it demands. O how exceeding short do the best come of
the high measures of the Law! Prove. 20.9.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Jam. 3.2.
In many things we offend all. Eccles. 7.20
There is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not: Isa. 64.6.
Our very righteousness is as a polluted ragge: Job. 9.2, 3.
How should man be just with God? If he will contend with him, he cannot answer
him one of a thousand: If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me,
if I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. (See Job 15.14, 15, 16.
Job 25.4, 5, 6.) Psalm. 130.3.
If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 143.2.
Quis melior Propheta dequo dixit Deus, Inveni virum secundum cor meum, et tamen
ipse necesse habuit dicere Deo, Ne imres in judicium cum servo tuo. Bernard. in
Annunt. Mariae. Sine peccato qui se vivere existimet, non id agit ut peccatum
non habeat, sed ut veniam non accipiat. August. Enchirid. In pessimis aliquid
boni, et in optimis non nihil pessimi, solus homo sine peccato Christus. Tertul.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified.

2. The Law does not give what the Creature Lex Moysi quamvis spiritualis
esset, quia tamen non adjuvabat intus per gratiam, lex ^rat infirma et
imbecillis ob statum carnalem hominum, in quo relinquebat illos. Cajet. Non
quod ipsa infirma sit, sed quod infirmos faciat, minando poenam, nec adjuvando
per gratiam. Anselm. Lex Praeterquam quod peccati rationem aperiebat, nihil
praeterea auxilii praestabat spiritui adversus carnem, et ideo neque
sufficiebat ad justificandum, neque ad perficienda Legis opera. Soto.
needs: it asks above his strength and gives below his want. He must have
Grace, Sanctification, Holiness, etc. but will the Law help him to these? no!
it is high in the commanding of them but that is all, it does not work them in
the soul; it asks very high but gives very low. It Is holy it self but it cannot
make others holy; it can discover sin but it cannot mortify sin (as the glass
discovers the spots and blemishes in the face; but does not remove them). The
Law is a 2 Cor. 3.6.
killing thing, but it is of the Sinner not of the Sin: it has by accident, by
reason of the Flesh here spoken of a quite other effect; for it does rather Non
de legis praestatione hic agitur, sed de ipsius vi in nostris immutandis
animis, and ad illud Legis praescriptum efformandis, utpote quae corruptionem
illam in qua nascinsur non modo non sanet, sed augeat potius. Beza.
enliven, increase, and irritate sin, (as Water meeting with opposition grows
the more fierce and violent; and the Disease the more it is checked by the
medicine the more it rages). Paul found in himself this sad effect of the Law,
Romans 7.8. But sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner
of concupiscence: for without the Law sin was dead. Moreover, the Law calls for
duty but it gives no Per-Legem non adjutorium sed nostri mali indicium and
monitorium habemus. Lu^her.
strength for the performance of it, ( Pharaoh-like who exacted brick but
allowed no straw). The Gospel helps where it commands, the Law commands but
helps not: Lex jubet, Evangelium juvat; (remember I still speak of the Law as
it stands in opposition to the Gospel, and as it is the matter and transcript of
the first Covenant). It neither pardons what it forbids, for does it enable to
do what it injoyns; and much of the (...) impotency of the Law lies in these
Necessarius fuit adventus Christi, qui Legi suppetias ferret etc. Nam illa
quidem recte docuerat etc. Verum adhuc duo erant necessaria quae Lex confer
non potuit, 1. ut condonentur ea quae contra ejus precepta admissa fuerint: 2.
ut vires hominis corroborentur, quibus possit Legis jussa perficere. P. Martyr.
two things. Take a particular instance, great is the Sinners need of Faith;
for without this, no justification, no peace with God, no heaven; it is the
Gospel-condition on which all depends. Now the Law knows nothing of this Faith;
nay, it is diametrically opposite to it, it is so far from working it that it
hinders it to its utmost. It Is all for working, for doing; Gal. 3.12. And the
Law is not of Faith: but the man that does them shall live in them. Believing
belongs only to the Gospel; therefore that is styled the Law of Works, and this
the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. If Faith come under the Law, it is only that Faith
which is a General Faith, or as it is a part of Obedience, not as the Condition
of Gospel Grace. The Law therefore not helping as to these things (so
indispensably necessary for Grace here and hereafter), what can it do for the
lost Sinner?

3dly. The Law could not do, because it could not heal that breach which Sin
had made betwixt God and the Sinner. It still looks forwards, and is always
calling for perfect Obedience; but what if Sin has been committed for the time
past? O there the Law is weak! It can make no reparation for what is past; as
to that, all it says to the guilty person is (as they to Judas) what is that
to me? see Matthew. 27.4.
thou to that. Suppose the Sinner could for the future come up to a full
conformity to the Law and in every thing answer its highest commands, Suppose
him now to arrive at such a pitch of perfection that he should do nothing which
this Law forbids, and do every thing which this Law commands: yet (supposing
the Fall from God and the Guilt thereby contracted, or any one sin committed),
the Law would be weak and the creature could not thereby be justified; the
reason is, because here is now reparation and satisfaction to be made for what
is past, which to make is impossible to the Law. This perfect Obedience
(present and future) might do the work was it not for what is past; but guilt
has been contracted, God has been offended, his first Covenant violated;
therefore there must be reparation made to him for this. Now this the Law
cannot do nor the Creature upon the terms of the Law; for all that he can
arrive at is but perfect obedience and that is his duty; he is under an
obligation to it and therefore by it he can make no satisfaction for what is
past: this is but the paying of the present debt which can quit nothing of the
former score. This is very well if we look forward but what becomes of us when
we look backward? So that the Apostle did very deservedly thus speak of the
Law, what the Law could not do, etc. So much for the opening of the matter held
forth in these Words; let me close this Head with some Application.

Use 1. To humble us in the sense of our Flesh, by which the Law is weakened.
First, Here Is matter of deep humiliation to us. How should we lament that
sinful Nature, that Flesh which is in all of us! we all come into the world
under a sad and woeful depravation of nature: Well! suppose we do, what of this?
O this should bitterly be bewailed by us because by reason of this the Law is
weak; that it cannot do that for us which otherwise it could and would have
done. As we were created at the first before our Nature was corrupted, we were
strong to the Law and the Law strong to us; we could fulfill its highest demands
and it could fulfill our highest desires; we were able to keep it and it was
able to save us; its perfect righteousness was not above us and we had been
righteous in that righteousness. But now it is far otherwise; Sin has got into
us, our Natures are now depraved and vitiated, insomuch that even from this Law
it self we can look for nothing: it is upon our degeneracy weak'ned to us to all
intents and purposes; and is not this sad? O that there should be such Natures
in us as even to debilitate and weaken Gods own blessed Law! And would to God
the sad effects of the Flesh in us staid here! but it goes further: it does not
only bring a weakness upon the Law but upon the Gospel too. The Gospel it self
(the new and remedial Law) though it be the Romans 1.16.
power of God, yet it would be altogether ineffectual to our justification and
salvation, if God did not accompany it with a mighty power. It tenders and
holds forth that in Christ which is every way sufficient for these great
things; yet we should be never the better for it, this too could not do, if God
(in spite of all opposition from our cursed Natures) did not over-powre us to
believe, to close with Christ, to accept of restoring Grace in the way of the
Gospel. Truly if God should leave us to our selves, and should not rescue us
from the power of Natural corruption, neither Law nor Gospel could do our work;
notwithstanding both we should perish for ever. Should not this be greatly
bewailed and lamented by us? that Sin should be sor rooted in our Nature and
have such a strength in us, as that it should be too hard both for Law and
Gospel, and bring both under an inability to do us good?

And is it so? I might then from hence infer, that certainly in the fallen
Creature the power of Nature is very low, nay, that (with respect to the
keeping and fulfilling of the Law) it is quite lost. Pelagius of old (with whom
Some in latter ages do almost concur, only they put a better varnish upon their
Opinions) held, that though Nature by the Fall is somewhat weakened and
impaired in its strength, yet still it can do great things; yea, (especially
with some ordinary assistance) it may enable a man to fulfill the Law of God.
Now against this the Quid hic dicent Naturalium virium praedicatores ac
doctores? Reddant rationem quare per camem infirma fuerit Lex Dei; ita ut
necessuas humanae salutis opus habuerit missione Christi etc. Si virtus and
judicium rationis tam potens est, ut quae bona praecipiuntur, agnoscat,
approbet, and praestare valeat, quomodo in illis non potuit qui sub paedagogio
Legis fuerunt? etc. Muscul. Paulus ait Legem sine Christo infirmam esse, isti
aiunt, nos priusquam sunus participes Christi posse been operari, and
obtemperare Legi Dei. P. Marty^.
Argument in the Text is considerable: is the Law weak and yet is the Sinner
strong? is that under an impossibility and yet is (this and that) possible to
the creature? The Flesh is but extraneous to the Law and yet by reason of that
it cannot do; but it is inherent in the Sinner and yet he can do, what more
absurd! Especially it being considered, that the Laws weakness is not
attributed to it in respect of it self, but only in respect of us; so that if
we now could perfectly obey, perform, keep the Law, its (...) would then cease;
and if so, why was Christ sent? (but no more of this).

Secondly, Use 2. To vindicate the honor of the Law, and to obviate bad
Inferences, etc.
It Is necessary that I should vindicate the honor of the Law, and obviate
those mistakes and bad inferences which some possibly may run upon from what
has been spoken. Three things therefore let me say to you:

1: Notwithstanding this weakness of the Law, yet keep up high thoughts of it
and give it that honor and reverence which is due to it.

It Is weak indeed, but yet remember whose Law it is; as also what an excellent
Law it is in it self: it is a perfect draught or model and delineation of
Original righteousness, it is the measure, standard, test of that purity and
perfection which man would have had in the state of innocence; yea, it is the
copy, transcript, exemplar of Gods own holiness, (for God framed and modelled
this Law according to his own purity and sanctity). And let us be what we will,
still the Law (in it self) is all this and the same that ever it was (though we
be not so). And therefore we should adore and reverence and magnify it, though
now to us accidentally it be thus weak.

But does not this weakness reflect disparagement and dishonor upon the Law?
Answ. No, not in the least. Two things will sufficiently vindicate it as to any
such reflections: 1. The Apostle only says of it that 'twas weak: he charge
nothing upon it but only weakness. He does not say that 'twas any way impure or
unholy or unrighteous, (he affirms the contrary Romans 7.12.
The Law is holy, and just and good); only he says 'twas weak. This the (...)
etc. (...). Chrysostom.(...) etc. Oecum. Theophyl. to the same purpose (...).
Theodor.
Greek Expositors take notice of and from it apologize for the Law.

2. It Is weak, but how comes it to be so? why, Ne legem incusare videatur
culpam rejicit in carnem. i. e. concupiscentiam, quae fomes est peccati.
Estius. Vide quanta art Legem simul extollit, deprimit, and excusat: deprimit,
cum dicit quod non potuit peccatum damnare; excusat, cum dicit hoc non
accidisse ejus vitio sed camis potius; extollit quam maxim, cum co^cludit
Christum advenisse ut Legi contra carnem subsidium ferret. Mussus. Transfert
legis impotentiam alio ut Legem absolvat a culpa, quam dat carni (viz.)
nostrae, i. e. corruptae nostrae naturae. Muscul. Ne quis parum honorifice
Legem impotentiae argui putaret, vel hoc restringeret ad Ceremonias, expressit
nominatim Paulus defectum illum non a Legis esse vitio, sed Carnis nostrae
corruptela, Calvin.
through our Flesh: it is not so in and from it self but only through our
depraved nature; it is merely by accident et aliunde that it lies under this
impotency. The Law is not to be blamed but we: had not we finn'd, the Law would
have been still as able and mighty in its operations as ever it was; did it but
meet with the same subject, it would soon appear that it has the same power
which it had before Adam fell: So that (I say) the Law is not at all in the
fault, but only we because of the Flesh. Observe here the wisdom and care of
our Apostle, wherever he seems to tax the Law there he will be sure to
vindicate it: As where he speaks of its irritating of corruption, he there
lays the blame upon his own wicked nature, not at all upon the holy Law: Romans
7.8, 9, 10, 11. Sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence: for without the Law sin was dead. For I was alive
without the Law once, but when the commandment came Sin revived, and I died.
And the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. For
Sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me, and by it slew me. Yet
verse. 12, 13, 14. The Law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and
good: Was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid! But Sin that
it might appear Sin, working death in me by that which is good, that Sin by the
commandment might become exceeding sinful. For we know that the Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin. And thus we should carry it with
respect to the Laws weakness: O in it self it is mighty and powerful, but there
is sin in us by which only the Law is made weak, there therefore the blame must
lie. Could we but get rid of this Sin we should soon find what a mighty thing
the Law is; so mighty that nothing would be too high or too hard for it.

2: Secondly, Take heed that you do not cast off the Law upon this pretense.
It Is indeed weak (as to such ends), but yet it is a Law and that which is
obligatory to all (even to Believers themselves under the Gospel State and
Covenant). Shall we because of this weakness (especially it being occasioned by
our selves) cast off the Law? and pretend that we are not under the obligation
of it? we must not so argue. Observe it in the Apostle, even when he was
proving the weakness of the Law as to Justification and showing that God had
found out another way for that (viz.) the way of Faith, yet foreseeing that
some might run themselves upon this rock, and infer from hence that they had
nothing to do with the Law; he therefore adds, Romans 3.31.
Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid! yea we establish the
Law (in its proper place and Sphere). The Creature as a creature is under a
natural (and therefore indispensable) obligation to this Law; so as that
nothing can exempt him from that obligation. It commands to love, fear, serve,
honor, obey God; wherein it obliges so strongly, that God himself (with
reverence be it spoken) cannot free the creature from its obligation to these
duties. True indeed, Believers are not under the curse, rigor, or bondage of
this Law, or under it as it is the condition of life: but they are (and it
cannot be otherwise) under the obligation of its commands as to an holy life.
There may be (and blessed be God there is) a great change as to circumstances,
a great relaxation as to the Laws rigors, severitys and penaltys; but for the
main duties of Obedience and Holiness, it is eternally obligatory and never to
be abrogated. O therefore do not look upon your selves as made free from this
Law, though it be weak and unable to justify and save you! it can damn (upon
the breaking of it) though it cannot save (by the keeping of it).

3: Thirdly, Neither must you upon this look upon the Law as altogether weak,
or useless. I say, not as altogether weak; for though as to some things it be
under a total impotency, yet as to other things it still retains its pristine
power. It cannot take away sin, or make righteous, or give life (which it
promised at first and for which it was appointed, for the commandment was
ordained to life Romans 7.10); here is the weak side of the Law, as to these it is
(...): But as to the commanding of duty, the directing and regulating of the
life, the threatening of punishment upon the violation of it; here it can do
whatever it did before. The Laws preceptive and punitive part (where it is not
taken off by Christ) are yet in their full strength; only as to the promissory
part of it (viz. its promising life upon the condition of perfect Obedience),
there it is at a loss. In a word, its authority to oblige to duty or punishment
is the same that ever it was, but its ability to give righteousness or life (in
which respects only the Apostle here speaks of it) is not the same. If God open
this Law to you and set it home upon your Consciences, you will find it has
yet a very great strength and efficacy in it: let it not therefore be
altogether weak in your eye.

Nor altogether useless. For Some will be ready to say, if the Law be thus weak
then what use is there of it? to what end does it serve? what is to be looked
for from that which can do so little for us? But do not you thus reason! For
though the Law be not of use to you as to Justification, I mean in a way of
immediate influence upon the Act or State, (a remoter influence it may have);
yet in other respects it is of great and admirable use: (viz.) as a Monitor to
excite to duty, as a Rule to direct and guide you in your course, as a Glass to
discover sin, as a Bridle to restrain sin, as an Hatchet to break the hard
heart, as a Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmasters to whip you to Christ. The Lord Jesus indeed has taken
Sin-pardoning, God-atoning, Justice-satisfying, Soul-saving work into his own
hands, (he would not trust this in the hands of the Law any longer, because he
knew the weakness of it); but for other work, the awakening and convincing of a
Sinner, the terrifying of the secure, the humbling of the proud, the preparing
of the Soul to close with Christ, (though this last act be only eventual and
accidental as to the Law), all this work (I say) yet lies upon the Law. Be you
who you will, Believers or unbelievers, regenerate or unregenerate, the Law is
of mavelous use to you. It Is a rule to all whether they be good or bad, and
(as so) none are exempted from it, (as is by several Divines sufficiently
proved against the Antinomists); and it has too, very good and useful effects
upon all, whether called or uncalled, Saints or Sinners. Our Apostle who here
does so much depress the Law in respect of Justification, does elsewhere in
other respects speak much of its usefulness: Romans 3.19. Now we know that what
things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law, that every
mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. Romans 7.7.
What shall we say then? is the Law sin? God forbid! Nay, I had not known sin,
but by the Law: for I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall
not covet. Gal. 3.19, 24. Wherefore then serves the Law? it was added because
of transgressions, till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was made, and
it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator: Wherefore the Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. I
must not launch out into this vast Ocean; you have variety of Taytor's Reg.
Vitae. Burg. Vind. Legis. Boltons Bounds etc. Baxter (in several Treat.) with
diverse Others. Facessat long ex animis nostris profana ista Opinio, Legem non
este regulam; Est enim inflexibilis vivendi regula. Calvin.
Treatises upon this Argument, (namely) to prove that the Law is still a Rule,
and still very useful in those great effects which have been mentioned: (I
refer you to them for further satisfaction). This I only touch upon as it lies
in my way, both that I may prevent dangerous mistakes, and also show you how
you are to carry it toward the Law. O let it be highly esteemed, reverenced,
honored by you! yea, bless God for it, for though indeed it is weak and
unprofitable (as the Covenant of Works), yet as it is a Rule, and as it produces
such effects upon the Conscience, so it is of great use and highly beneficial.
(So much for the 2d Use).

Thirdly, Use 3.
Was the Law thus unable to do for the Sinner what was necessary to be done?
then never look for Righteousness and Life from and by the Law. For as to
these, it cannot do your work unless you could do its work, it cannot justify
or save you unless you could perfectly obey and fulfill it. O pray expect little
from it (nay, nothing at all in this way)! you cannot answer its expectations
and it cannot answer yours. It highly concerns every man in the world to make
sure of righteousness and life; but where are these to be had? only in Christ
in the way of believing, not in the Law in the way of doing. We would fain make
the Law stronger than indeed it is; and it is natural to us to look for a
righteousness from it because there was our righteousness at first, and that
suits best with the pride of our hearts. Man is not so averse to the Law in
point of obedience, but he is as apt to rest upon the Law for Heaven and
Happiness; if he can but do something which the Law requires, O this he looks
upon as a sufficient Righteousness and as a good Plea for Heaven. Especially
when Conscience is a little awakened then the poor Creature betakes himself to
his doing, to his obedience to the Law; and this he thinks will do his work
(till God lets him see his great mistake). As it is Hos. 5.13.
said When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judab saw his wound, then went Ephraim
to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, yet could he not heal you, nor cure
you of your wound: just so it is with the convinced Sinner in reference to the
Law, both as to his practice and also as to his success.

I would not be mistaken (in what I have said or shall further say), as if I
did design to take off any from Obedience to the Law, God forbid! all that I
aim at, is only to take men off from trusting in that obedience, and from
leaning upon that as their Righteousness. We should be doers of the Law (for,
Romans 2.13.
not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall
be justified); yea, we should go as far as ever we can in our endeavors after
a Law-righteousness; for though that be not sufficient to justify us before
God, yet that must make us righteous in his eye Vide Burg. of Justif. 2d. p.
Sermon. 22. p. 215.
as to qualitative and inherent righteousness: and so we are to understand that
Text (with many others of the same import), Deuteronomy. 6.25.
It shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments
before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us. But yet when we have gone the
furthest, the Righteousness which we are to rely upon is only the Gospel
Righteousness or the imputed Righteousness of the Lord Jesus; if we take up
with any thing short of that, we are O nos miseros, si vel tantillum nostra
salus basi tam infirma nitatur! Beza in 1 John 1.8.
miserable and lost for ever. As to the Law, is it thus weak (or rather are you
thus weak) and yet will you bottom your expectation and confidence there? can
you fulfill or satisfy it in its demands of perfect, personal, universal,
constant Obedience? If you cannot (then which nothing more certain), it can
never then do your business; nay, upon the least failure it will be your enemy,
to plead against you for the nonperformance of its Conditions: and so, though
it cannot as a Friend do you much good yet as an Enemy it can and will do you
much hurt. What a sad case is the legalist in? the Law condemns him because he
does no more obey, and the Gospel condemns him because he does no more believe;
he is lost on every hand, O this is woeful! And yet how many precious Souls split
themselves upon this rock! millions of men look no higher than the Law, that is
the foundation upon which they build their confidence for Life and Salvation.
Could we but get into them and be privy to the Grounds of their Hope, we should
find that it is not Christ and Faith in him but the Law and some imperfect
Obedience thereunto upon which they bottom: they deal honestly, wrong no body,
live unblameably, make some external Profession, perform such duties, are thus
and thus charitable to the poor, etc. and hereupon they are confident of their
Salvation. Now I deny not but that these are very good things (I wish there was
more of them); yet when any rest in them or upon them for Righteousness and
Life, they set them much too high; as good as they are, in reference to these
great concerns they are no better than so many figg-leaves, which will not
cover a Sinners nakedness when God shall come to reckon with him; whosoever
bottoms his trust and confidence upon these, he builds upon the sand and sooner
or later there will be a sad downfall of all his Hopes: Sordet in districtione
Judicis quod fulget in conspectu operantis. Gregor.
these are things which glitter in our eye but they are but course and mean
things (without Christ) in Gods eye.

Sirs! I am upon a Point of as great importance as any that can be spoken to;
and therefore give me leave to stay upon it a little, and to deal plainly and
faithfully with you about it. I would feign leave every one of you upon a good
bottom, built upon the Rock, that Isa. 28.16.
sure Foundation which will stand firm and steady in all winds and weather,
having that anchor-hold which will abide under all storms. And therefore let me
prevail with you, to cast off all Legal Confidence, and to rely, trust, rest
upon nothing short of Christ and his Righteousness. Duties, Graces, Holiness,
Obedience, Good Works, all (in their proper places) are excellent things; but
it is the alone Merit, Righteousness, Satisfaction of Christ that must justify
and save you. Would you have that righteousness which will bear the test at the
great day? that righteousness in which you may be able to stand before the
disquisition of the righteous God? O then fly to Christ, to his imputed
righteousness, and there let all your trust and relyance be placed! What is
that One thing which the New-Testament-revelation mainly drives at? it is this,
to carry Sinners from Moses to Christ, from the way of the Law to the way of
the Gospel, from doing (as the Old-Covenant Condition and Ground of Life) to
believing. The not understanding, receiving, embracing of this grand Truth, was
the sin and ruin of the Jews; all that Christ and the Apostles could say or
do, would not prevail with them to shake off their depending upon the Law; but
still they Romans 2.17.
rested in the Law, Romans 9.31, 32.
followed after the Law of Righteousness, and sought righteousness not by Faith
but as it were by the works of the Law; Romans 10.3.
they being ignorant of Gods righteousness and going about to establish their
own righteousness, would not submit to the Righteousness of God. O therefore
how full, how earnest was Paul in his dealings with them (and with others too),
to undeceive and convince them about this! He says, the whole matter of
Righteousness was now taken out of the Laws hands and put into the hands of
Christ; Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes:
Romans 3.21, 22.
Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his
sight, etc. But now the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested,
being witnessed by the Law and Prophets: Even the Righteousness of God which is
by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe. He sets down
the miserable state of those who would be resting upon the Law, such as were
(...) (as he describes them); Gal. 3.10.
For as many as are of the works of the Law are under the Curse, for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law to do them. He tells them, by this they made the
sending, dying of Christ to be to no purpose; Gal. 2.21.
I do not frustrate the Grace of God, for if Righteousness come by the Law,
then Christ is dead in vain: (see too Gal. 5.3, 4.) He tells them further, that
God had such a respect for his own Law that if righteousness and Life had been
possible by it, he would have taken no other way; Gal. 3.21.
If there had been a Law given which could have given Life, verily
righteousness should have been by the Law: (But why do I give you a few
gleanings when you your selves may go into the full field?) Now was all this
spoken only to the Jews and Gentiles who lived at that time? does it not
concern us also? have not these several Considerations their strength to us as
well as to them?

To come nearer home! the Text tells us the Law could not do: will you not be
convinced of the Laws inability to help you? so as to betake your selves to
that better and effectual way of Justification and Salvation which God has so
graciously provided for you? The Law is weak (as weak now as ever.), but Christ
is strong (as strong now as ever;) the Law can do nothing but Christ can do
all. 'Till it pleases God to convince you of the Laws impossibility to make you
righteous and happy, you will never seek out after help in Christ or close with
him: for as Christ had never come to you, had it not been because it was
impossible for the Law to save you; so you will never come to him, till you see
that it is impossible for the Law to save you: this is that which moved God to
send Christ, and this is that which moves the Sinner to embrace Christ, and his
way of Salvation. If this work of Conviction was but once passed upon you, O
you would soon quit the Law and all your Confidence would be bottomed upon
Christ. Well! shall I bring it to an head? here are two ways set before you
for Righteousness and Life, the way of the Law and the way of the Gospel, the
way of Doing and the way of Believing; now which of these two will you choose?
if the former, so as to venture your Souls upon what you can do, your case is
desperate; by this you plainly put your selves under the Covenant of Works, and
there is nothing but perishing (as things now stand with us) under that
Covenant: if the latter, there is hope, nay certainty (supposing you close with
the Gospel-way in a right Gospel-manner) that it shall be well with you. Who
would not now say with David Psalm. 71.16.
I will make mention of thy righteousness even of thine only? who would not
with Phil. 3.8, 9.
Paul count all but dross and dung, that he may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having his own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

4. Fourthly, Use. 4.
See here the admirable love of God, and be greatly affected with it. The Law
was weak, utterly unable to relieve us in our forlorn condition; as to that
conclamatum est the case is desperate: and now the merciful God finds out
another way, pitches upon another course, he will see what that will do (the
former failing); what is that? he sent his own Son in the likeness, etc. O the
infinite Love, Mercy, Compassion of God! The weaker was Gods Law, the stronger
and higher was Gods love. O that he should not let us all perish under the Laws
impotency! that he should employ One for our recovery who was every way able to
do what the Law could not! how should we adore his mercy in this? But this
leads me to the following words in the Text, God sent etc. where I shall have
occasion more fully to press this duty upon you. So much therefore for this
First Branch of the Words, What the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the Flesh.

ROMANS 8.3. God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, etc.


CHAP. X. Of Christ's Mission and of God's sending him.
Man being utterly lost upon the terms of the Law, it pleased God to find out
and to pitch upon another Way, which he knew would be effectual. That was the
sending of his own Son, etc. Four things observed in the Words. All reduced to
three Observations. Of Christ's Mission: How be was sent, and sent by God. It
notes his Praeexistence (before his Mission and Incarnation); his Personality;
his being distinct from the Father. It Is opened First Negatively: 1. 'Twas not
Christ's ineffable and eternal Generation. 2. 'Twas not any local Secession
from his Father.
Secondly Affirmatively: 'Twas 1. Gods preordaining of him to the Office and
Work of a Mediator. 2. His qualifying and fitting of him for that Office and
Work. 3. His authorizing and commissionating of him to engage therein. 4. His
authoritative willing of him to assume man's Nature, and therein so to do and so
to suffer. 5. His trusting of him with his great designs.
How was this Sending of Christ consistent with his equality with the Father?
this answered Two ways. Why was Christ sent? answered first more Generally,
then more Particularly in Four things. Use 1. To stir up persons 1. To admire
God. 2. To admire (in special) the Love of the Father. 3. To love Christ. 4. To
imitate Christ (with respect to his Sending). 5. Not to rest in the external
Sending of Christ. 6. To believe on him whom God has sent.
Use 2. This is improved for the Comfort of Believers.

The Law being weak God pitched upon another Course: He Sent his Son.
THe Laws impotency and weakness, nay, utter inability to recover, justify, and
save the lost Sinner, has been spoken to: I go on to that which thereupon the
Wise and Gracious God was pleased to do. And what was that? why (to the praise
of his glorious grace) he sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh. The
Great God is never at a loss; if one Means fails he has another, if all Means
fail which fall within the view of the Creature, yet God has his secret
reserves and that under the deck which shall no the work. Upon Adams Sin all
Mankind was lost, plunged into a woeful abyss of misery, obnoxious to eternal
wrath; and accordingly God might have dealt with them in the utmost severity of
his Justice. What is there now to prevent this? to give any relief to man in
this deplorable State? Alas! the Sinner cannot help himself, the Law stands
with a withered arm and can do nothing, there is no Creature in heaven or earth
to interpose; as to all of these the case was desperate. Therefore God Deus
Solus in hac intricata causa poterat prospicere remedium. Streso.
himself engages to let the world see what He could do; Isa. 63.3.
He looked and there was none to help, therefore his own arm brought Salvation.
Here indeed was (...), a God helping at a dead lift, in the greatest streights
and in the most admirable manner. If ever (with reverence be it spoken)
infinite Wisdom was put to it, now was the time; yet (even in this intricate
and perplexed State of things) That found out a Way which would do the
business: a Way, which none could have thought of but God alone, [ he sent his
own Son etc]: None could cry (...) to this but God himself, this was his alone
invention and contrivance. The restoring of fallen man was impossible to the
Law, yet it shall be done; God will take Noluit propterea quod Lex imbecillis
erat per praritatem humanae naturae, opus salutis humanae abjicere; quasi non
posset per aliam, quod ista Legis via non succedebat, efficere. Musc.
another (strange and wonderful) Course, which shall do it effectually: what
his own Law cannot do his own Son can, therefore him he will send. A very high
and costly Way! yet rather than all mankind shall perish, God will make use of
it: here is the very mirror of the Wisdom, Love, Grace, Pity of the blessed God.

[God sending his own Son] etc. Of the Reading of the words.
To make the Sense run more smoothly, Some turn the Participle [(...)] into the
Verb [(...)], reading the Words thus [ God sent his etc]: if the following
Conjunctive particle [And] be kept in, this Reading is not much amiss. Some
render it in the Dictio interpretata Mittens Participium est etc. et propterea
ad servandum and Participium and Tempus, aliqui Interpretes verterunt (and
recte) Activum in Passivum, legendo sic, Deus filio suo misso in Carne. Cajet.
Passive form, Deus misso Filio suo etc. Duplex est Hebraismus, unus est;
oportet supplere Latin Ideo; Alter, quia Participium Mittens ponitur loco
Verbi Misit. Tolet.
Some would put in the word [Ideo, therefore]; Since the Law was weak through
the flesh, [therefore] God sent his own Son, and for sin, etc. (but as to these
things there is no great difficulty).

In the whole Paragraph you have, Their Division into Four Parts.
1. The Act or the Thing done: namely the [Sending] of Christ. 2. The Person
whose Act this was, or the Person sending: (viz.) God the Father; [God] sent
etc.
It Is a known Rule, when the Name or Title of God is set in contradistinction
to the Son, it is then taken not Essentially but Personally, for the First
Person God the Father, (instances of which are very common). It Is here said God
sent his own Son, therefore it must be understood of God the Father, Christ
being his Son and upon that consideration he being styled the Father. And Mr.
Perkins. on Galat. 4.4. p. 271.
this Person is called God, not because he partakes more of the Godhead than
the Other Persons ( Son and holy Ghost) do, but because he is the first in the
Order of the Three Divine Persons; and because he is the beginning of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost, but has no beginning of his own Person; for he does not
receive the Godhead (in the Personal consideration of it) by communication from
any other: in which respect he is in Scripture more frequently styled God than
either the Son or the Holy Ghost.

3. You have the Person sent, our Lord Jesus Christ: And he is set forth 1. by
his near Relation to God; God sending [his Son]. In order to the Sinners
Redemption God did not employ an ordinary Person, a mere Servant, a Creature
that stood at a great distance from him; but (so great was his Love) he
employed a Son. 2. by the speciality and peculiarity of this Relation, God
sending [his own Son]. In the Greek it is [(...)] the Son of himself; In Verse.
32. it is [(...)] his proper Son, or his own Son. There is that in this
expression which very much heightens Christ's Sonship; he was not barely a Son
but God's own Son, a Son in a special, extraordinary, incommunicable manner.

4. Here Is the further explication of this Sending with respect to the way and
manner of it; how did God send his Son? why [in the likeness of sinful flesh].
If you go further into the Words than that Branch of them which I have now
read, there are two Generals more to be observed in them; but they will be
taken notice of in their proper place.

Three Observations raised.
There are three great Doctrinal Truths here to be handled: 1. That Christ was
sent, 1. Obs.
and sent by God the Father. 2. That Christ (thus sent) was God's own Son. 2.
Obs.
3. That Christ (God's own Son) was sent in the likeness of sinful flesh. 3.
Obs.



The First handled.
I begin with the first, That Christ was sent, and sent by God the Father. Here
are two things to be spoken to, Christ's being sent, and his being sent by the
Father; but they may very well be put together.

Before I fall upon the close handling of this Sending of Christ, there are
three things which it presents to our Consideration; his Pra^xistence, his
Personality, his Personal Distinction from the Father; let me therefore a
little touch upon each of these.

of Christ's Praeecistence before his Innation.
1. This Sending of Christ strongly imply's his Praeecistence before his
Incarnation. For if he had not had a Being before, how could the Father send
him? that which is not cannot be sent. It Is not said here Non de novo creans
vel faciens, sed quasi praeexistentem misit. Aquin. Misit, non creavit aut
condidit, sed qui secum erat ceaeternus, eundem ad nos (...) ^egavit; non ut
e^^et ubi non fuer at etc. Sed up appareret ubi in visibili modo erat. Soro.
The whole body of the Socinian Authors agree in this, except Erasmus Johannis
who fell in with the Arrian^. See Socinus his Disp. with him. De Filii Dei
existe^^^.
that God now created him or made him (as if he did not exist before), but he
sent him; which must (as I said) strongly imply that he did exist before this
Sending. This the Socinians fiercely oppose: and therefore in this matter they
are worse than the Arrians. For these though they denied that Christ was from
all Eternity, and made him to be only first created by God, (upon the
misunderstanding and perverting of his being called the first born of every
Creature Col. 1.13. the beginning of the creation of God Rev. 3.14); yet they
asserted Christ's existence long before his Incarnation. But the Socinians
(following Photinus) deny that he had any Being or Existence before he was
con^^^ed and brought forth by the Virgin Mary: So that their Opinion about the
Person of Christ is somewhat worse than that of the Old Arrians, (for which
they are admonished and dealt with a little sharply by a late Sandius in
Nucleus Histor. Eccles. who p. 229. L. 1 concerning the Praeexistence of Christ
thus expresses himself: Licet dogma de Praeexistentia Christi antesaecula^i, in
Symbolo dicto non contineatur etc. nihilo minus praestat tutiorem viam sequi,
Christi praeexistentiam non denegando. Nam si Christus praeextitit, quanti res
plena periculi Christo id nolle concedere quod ei jure comperit, and quam mitem
judicem habituri sunt qui ita sentiunt? H^si Christus non fuit ante Mariam,
periculo tamen vacat confessio praeexistentiae; Nam Christus non succensebit
illis qui ei nimium honoris attribuerint. Nec est quod timeant se eo ipso
detrabere Majestati Patris: Nam, ut taceam non esse contrarationem vel
impossible, Fillum fuisse primogenitum ante omnes creaturas; certe Majestati
Patris magis convenit, quod ^alem Filium anto saecula genuerit. De^^de nec
habent, quod vereantur s^ per praeexistentiam tollere very Christ hamanitatem,
potest enim virtute Divina quilibet Angelus incarnari and uniri cum came in
unitatem Personae, sic ut ille unitus simul dici possit and Homo and Angelus:
and Plato non negavit animas praeexistentes post incarnationem fieri homines.
Arrian Writer himself). The Orthodox fully prove the Eternity of Christ
against the One, and consequently the Praexistence of Christ before his
Incarnation against the Other.

And One would think the Scriptures are so clear in this, that there should not
be the least Controversy about it: For they tell us, that Christ was in Jacobs
time, Genesis 48.16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil etc. (it might
easily be proved that this Vide Franzii Disput. Theolog. Disp. 14. The. 40. p.
436.
Angel was Christ): That he was in Job's time, for he said Job 19.25. I know
that my Redeemer lives (meaning Christ): That he was in the Prophets time
under the Old Testament, for the Spirit of Christ was in them 1 Pet. 1.11. That
he was in Abraham's time, yea, long before it; Joh. 8.56. etc. Your Father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and was glad: Then said the Jews unto him, thou
art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. That he was in the
Israelites time, for 1 Cor. 10.9. it is said, Neither let us tempt Christ as
some of them also tempted; (him is added in some Translations, however the
Sense will so carry it): That he was in the Prophet Isaih's time, for Joh.
12.41. you read, These things said Isaias when he saw his glory and spoke of
him, (that is, of Christ). Now were not these Periods of time before (long
before) Christ's being born of the Virgin? therefore he had an existence before
that. How fully and plainly is this asserted in the Gospel! Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 10.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God:
The same was in the beginning with God: All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made: He was in the world, and the
world was made by him, and the world knew him not. Ephesians. 3.9. etc. Who created
all things by Jesus Christ; (by him, not as an instrument but as a social or
coordinate cause). Col. 1.16, 17, By him were all things created, that are in
heaven and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: All things were created by him, and
for him: And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. Heb. 1.2.
By whom also he made the worlds. Now could Christ have thus cooperated with the
Father in the Creation, and yet not have a being before his incarnation which
was so long after the Creation? Joh. 1.15. John bare witness of him and cried,
saying, This was he of whom I spoke, He that comes after me is preferred
before me, for he was before me: how was Christ before John Baptist if he did
then only exist when he was born? for in reference to that John Baptist was
before Christ, he being born before him. Joh. 17.5. And now, O Father, glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was: mark the latter words [with the glory which I had with thee before
the world was]. Phil. 2.6. Who being [(...), subsisting, existing] in the form
of God etc. Joh. 16.28. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. Joh. 6.62. What and if
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before, (in respect of his
Divine Nature or as he was the Son of God)? Do not these Scriptures
sufficiently evince that Christ had a Being before he was Incarnate? the
drawing forth of their full strength, and the answering of the several Cavils
and Evasions of the Adversaries about them, would fill up a Volume, the Learned
know where and by See Arnold. Catech. Racov. Major de Persona Christi p. 187.
etc. Hoorneb Socin. Conf. Tom. 2. de Christo cap. 1. Calovius Socin. Proflig.
de Filio Dei controv. 1. But especially Placei Disput. de Argum. quibus
efficitur Christum prius fuisse, quam in utero Beatae Virginis secundum carnem
conciperetur. This is fully and learnedly discoursed of by Dr. Pearson on the
Creed. Art. 2. p. 213. to p. 237.
Whom both of these are fully done.

This Sending of Christ therefore speaks his existence before he assumed flesh;
he must have an antecedent Being, otherwise he would not have been capable of
being Necesse est ut qui mittitur existat priusquam mittatur, fatente Enjedino.
Calov. Socin. Proflig. p. 183.
sent. And he was first sent and then incarnate, his Mission being antecedent
to his incarnation (though this be dony'd by the Misit a se per virtutem
Spiritus Sancti genitum, and ex matte sua natum, and ad virilem aetatem
perductum, non adhuc generandum and oriturum, quod dictu ipso absonum est and
Scripturae plane dissonum. Slichting.
Enemies with whom we have to do); for God sent him, that is, appointed that he
should assume the bumane nature, and this is his being sent in the likeness of
sinful flesh, (as a judicious Expositor descants upon the words).

Of Christ's Personality.
2. Secondly, this Sending of Christ speaks his Personality. He did not only
exist before he took flesh, but he existed as a Person; he had his (...)
(wherein the notion of a Divine Person consists), his manner of subsistence
distinct from the subsistence of the Father and of the Holy Ghost: (but this
explication of Christ's being a Person more properly belongs to the next head).
Here I say Christ was a Person; by which I mean, he was not a thing, quality,
dispensation, or manifestation (as some fondly and dangerously speak), but he
was (and is) a Person, having a proper, personal subsistence: And he must be
so, or else he could not be the Subject of this Sending. It Is very true, God
may be said to send or give that which is but manifestative; as he sends his
Gospel, which yet is not a person but only a manifestation of his Will, Grace,
Love, Wisdom, etc. But now in Christ there is something more than bare sending,
even that which will amount to the proving of him to be nothing less than a
Person. For he is sent to be incarnate, to take the likeness of sinful flesh
upon him: now a bare Quality or Manifestation are under an utter incapacity of
being thus or doing thus: who will be so absurd as to assert such a thing? If
Christ be sent by God the Father, and upon that does assume flesh, then
certainly he was a Person, for none but a Person could do this: had the Apostle
only said that God sent Christ, the Truth in hand had not been so evident (at
leastwise from this Text); but when he adds he sent him in the likeness of
sinful flesh, this undeniably proves his personality.

3. Thirdly, it notes the distinction that is betwixt the Father and Christ.
Which appears not only as One is the Father and the Other is the Son, (though
that evidently infers a distinction, for the same Person in the same respects
cannot be Father and Son too, cannot beget and be begotten too); but also as
the (...) Epiphan. adv. Haeres. p. 740. See Gerhard. Loc. Com. tom. 1. cap. 6.
p. 263. de personali Filii a Patre and S. S. distinctione.
One sends and the Other is sent. The Father and the Son are One in Nature and
Essence (with respect to which he says Joh. 10.30.
I and my Father are One); yet they are Una est Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus
Sancti Essentia, in qua non est aliud Pater, aliud Filius, aliud Spiritus
Sanctus; quamvis Personaliter sit alius Pater, alius Filius, alius Spiritus
Sanctus. Fulgent. lib. 1. de Fid. Ecce dico alium esse Patrem, and alium
Filium, and alium Spiritum Sanctum. Male accepit idiotes quisque aut perversus
hoc dictum quasi diversitatem sonet, and ex diversitate separationem pretendat
Patris and Filii and Spiritus. Ter tul. adv. Pra^eam. Of the distinction of the
three Divine Persons See Dr. Cheynel of the Trin-unity c. 7. p. 181 etc. et
227. to 248.
distinct Persons. The number and distinction of the Persons in the Trinity, is
usually taken notice of by Divi^^s from this Scripture. The Apostle (faith
Theophylact) had spoken of the Spirit in the former Verse, in this he speaks of
the Father and of the Son, (...) tenching the Trinity: And says Ex his verbis
apparet Divinarum Personarum in Sancta Triade Numerus and Distinctio.
Pet. Martyr, from these words the number and distinction of the Persons in the
holy Trinity does appear. Which great Truth is also frequently held forth in
Other places: Isa. 48.16. Come ye near unto me (Christ is the Person here
speaking) hear ye this, I have not spoken in secret from the beginning, from
the time that it was there am I, and now the Lord God, and his Spirit has sent
me: (a full Old Testament proof of the distinction of the Persons). But it is
most plainly held forth in the New Testament: At the Baptism of Christ there
was a Pater auditur in Voce, Filius manifestatur in homine, Spiritus
dignoscitur in Columb^. August.
manifestation of God in the Father, Son, and Spirit; the Spirit descended in
the form of a Dove, the Father gave the Testimony This is my beloved Son etc.
Christ was the object of it. Christ directed his Apostles to baptize in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (which surely he would not have done
had there not been a personal distinction betwixt them). Joh. 14.16. I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter etc. (here is all the
Persons as distinct). Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Joh.
12.44. He that believes on me, believes not on me (i. e. on me only), but on
him that sent me. Joh. 5.32. There is [another] that bears witness of me, and
I know that the witness which he witnesses of me is true: (many such places
might be cited but these may suffice). Here Is enough in the Text; the same
Person (considered in the same respects) cannot both send and be sent too,
therefore the Father and the Son are distinct Persons. True (as Lib. 2. de
Trin. c. 5. Vide Lombard lib. 1. Did. 15.
Austine observes) in some sense Christ might be said to send himself; that is,
consider him Essentially, so he did what the Father did, so he sent himself;
but if you consider him Personally, so he did not send but was sent: upon which
He and his Father are distinct. So much for these three things which are but
implied in Christ's Mission.

I come more closely to the Thing it self, and to the Point which lies before
us; namely That Christ was sent; and sent by God the Father. The Redemption of
lost Man was a blessed work, a most glorious-undertaking, never was there any
like to it or to be paralleled with it; yet our Lord Jesus would not of his
own head engage in it or thrust himself upon it, no, he must first be sent,
then (and not till then) did he undertake it. And who sent him? surely He who
only had Authority to employ and commissionate him about such a work, (viz.)
God the Father; God sent his own Son* etc. where (as has been already hinted)
God is to be taken in the Personaliter sumpto vocabulo, quia opponitur Persona
mittens Person^e misfae. Grynaus. Ubi ait quod Deus misit Filium, nominatione
Dei Patrem intelligit, ad quem Filius refertur. Soto.
Personal Notion, and as relating to the first Person.

This sending of Christ, and that by the Father, are two Points of such
unquestionable verity to all who pass under the denomination os Christians,
that as to them (and with Jews and Heathens I will not meddle) it is not
necessary to spend the least time in the proving of them: Yet (even as to them)
it is needful that these Truths should be a little opened and explained.

In order to which, I will endeavor 1. To clear up the nature of the Act. 2.
To remove a difficulty or answer an Objection about it. 3. To give the Grounds
and Reasons of it.


As to the first, the Question is What was the Fathers sending of Christ? in
what respects is he said to be sent, and sent by the Father (for I shall open
both together)? The Sending of Christ opened.


To which I answer 1. Negatively, in Two things:

1. This Sending of Christ was not his ineffable and eternal Generation, or
Sonship grounded upon that. He was sent who was the Son of God, but he was not
the Son of God as he was sent, nor said to be Non eo ips^ quod de Patre natus
est, missus dicitur Filius, sed eo quod apparuit huic mundo, verbum Caro factum
est. Aug. de Trin. l. 4. c. 10. Duobus modis dicitur mitti Filius, praeter
illam aeternam genituram quae ineffabilis est; secundum quam etiam missus
posset dici (ut videtur quibuldam), sed mclius ac verius secundum eam dicitur
genitus. Lomb. Lib. 1. Did. 15.
sent as he was the Son of God: his Sonship was the result of his Generation,
not of his Mission. These two are very different things, for Christ was
begotten of the Father from everlasting, but he was sent by the Father (the
sending being taken in its strict and most proper notion) in time; Gal. 4.^.
When the fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son etc. He was a Son
long before he was sent; and he was not a Son because he was sent, but he was
sent because he was a Son. 2. Christ's Sending was not any local Secession from
his Father, Non missus est mutando locum quia in m^ndo ^rat. Quapropter Pater
invisibilis una cum Filio secum invisibili, eundem Filium visi^ilem faciendo,
misisfe eum ^ictus est etc. August. de Trinit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
or any local motion from the place where he was, to some other place where he
was not. You must not so conceive of it, nor fetch your measures concerning it
from your own sending of Persons; for there when you send one upon your errand
or business, he leaves the place where he was and goes to the place where he
was not; but so it was not with Christ. The Father sent him to this lower world
yet here he was before; the Father sent him from heaven yet (as to his Godhead)
he remained in heaven still. He says indeed Joh. 16.28.
I came forth from the Father (yet not so but that he was still with the
Father), and am come into the world (yet not so but that he was there before,
for he was in the world and the world was made by him Joh. 1.10.); again I
leave the world and go to the Father (he speaks in respect of his bodily
presence). Look as when Christ ascended, he went from earth and yet he was on
earth still (as to his Spiritual presence, for he says Mat. 28. ult.
Lo I am with you unto the end of the world; A quibus Homo abscedebat, Deus non
recedebat. Aug. Tract. 78. in Joh. Et abiit and hic est, and rediit and nos non
deseruit. Idem Tract. 50. in Joh.
as Man he went from us, but as God he is as much with us as ever); so when
Christ descended, he came from heaven and yet he was in heaven still, for he
tells us Joh. 3.13.
No man has ascended up into heaven but he that came down from heaven, even
the Son of Man which is in heaven. So that in Christ's Sending there was no
Missio Divinae Personae convenire potest, secundum quod importat ex una part
processionem originis a mittente, and secundum quod importat ex alia part
novum modum existendi in alio. Sicut Filius dicitur esse missus a Patre in
mundum, secundum quod incepit in mundo esse per carnem assumptam, and tamen
ante in mundo erat, ut dicitur Joh. 1. Aquin. 1. part. Qu. 43. Art. 1. in corp.
Art. Et in Resp. ad 2. Illud quod sic mittitur ut incipiat esse ubi prius nullo
modo erat, sua missione localiter movetur. Sed hoc non accidit in missione
Divinae Personae, quia Persona divina missa, sicut non incipit esse ubi prius
non suerat, ita nec desinit esse ubi suerat.
mutation of place, only upon that he assumed the humane nature and so became
visible, whereas before (as God) he was invisible: He was but where he was,
only he was more than what he was for he was now God-man; and he was here in a
different manner for now he was visible. You see what the sending of Christ was
not.
2. Secondly to open it Affirmatively, this Sending of Christ lies in Five
things:

1. In God's choosing, appointing, ordaining of Christ from everlasting to the
Office and Work of the Mediator: (this I confess is somewhat remote from that
strict notion of his sending, in which the Scripture usually speaks of it;
however I take it in, it being the foundation of his being sent in time). God
the Father from all Eternity did choose, decree, ordain that his Son should
take flesh, and in that flesh redeem man; therefore he calls him his Elect Isa.
42.1. Mine Elect in whom my Soul delights: And Romans 3.25. it is said, Whom God
has [set forth] to be a propitiation through faith in his blood etc. (...), it
relates to God's (...) or purpose; and it notes not only God's setting forth
and revealing of Christ in the Gospel which was done in time, but also (and
chiefly) his decreeing, fore-ordaining of Christ in his secret purpose from all
eternity to the work and office of a Redeemer; (so the Word is used Ephesians. 1.9):
and therefore the marginal rendering of it [whom God fore-ordained] is better
than that in the text it self [whom God has set forth]. The Apostle Peter
speaks expressly of it, 1 Pet. 1.20.
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times for you. You read of a decree concerning Christ
Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the decree etc. (but that which I am upon, was not
the matter of the decree there spoken of). 2dly. Christ's Sending (I take it
passively) lies in God's qualifying and fitting of him for his great Work:
(this also is more remote from the close intendment of the sending, yet it also
may be taken in). The wise God first fits and then sends; he never puts a
person upon any special service but first he qualifies and fits him for that
service; (you have it exemplified in Moses, and in several Others): Now the
restoration of Man to God's image and favor, the redeeming and reconciling of
the Sinner to God, was the greatest work that ever was undertaken; and
therefore if God will employ Christ about such a work, his Wisdom engaged him
first to fit him for it. Which accordingly he did, for in order thereunto
whereas Christ must have a Body (to fit him for dying and suffering), that God
provided for him; Heb. 10.5.
Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and Offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared (or fitted) me. And whereas he must
also have the Spirit, in a large proportion and plentiful effusion thereof,
that too the Father does furnish him with: Isa. 42.1. I have put my Spirit upon
him: Joh. 3.34. God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. Our blessed
Savior could need nothing (more than a Body and the Spirit) to qualify and
fit him for his work, and both you see were given to him. Joh. 10.36. Say ye of
him, whom the Father has [Sanctified] and sent into the world, Thou
blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? what was the Father's
Sanctifying of Christ? I answer, 'twas partly his setting of Christ apart to,
and partly his gifting and qualifying of Christ for, his Office and
undertaking; the latter of which the Father did for him as well as the former;
and so he sanctified him: And observe, 'twas first Sanctifying and then
Sending, whom the Father has sanctified and sent, etc. 3. Thirdly, It lies in
God's authorizing and commissionating of Christ to what he was to be, and to
do. The Father sent him (that is) gave him authority to engage as the Redeemer
of the world: Christ had a Commission from God under hand and seal (as it
were), before he meddled in his great negotiation; Joh. 6.27. Him has God the
Father sealed (or authorized by special commission); for though that be not all
which is intended in the sealing, yet that is a great part of it. As Princes
when they send abroad their Ambassadors or appoint their Officers at home,
they give them their Commissions sealed to be their warrant for what they shall
do; so God the Father did with Christ. He did not intrude or thrust himself
upon what he undertook; no, but though he had in himself a strong inclination
thereunto, yet first his Father must call him to it: he did not run before he
was sent (as those Prophets did Jer. 23.21.). So the Apostle tells us Heb. 5.4,
5. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that was called of God as was
Aaron: So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he
that said unto him, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee. Joh. 8.42. I
proceeded forth and came from God, neither came I of my self, but he sent me.
You see how his Sending is opened by this; the due consideration of which does
administer matter of great support and encouragement to Faith, (as you will
hear in the applying of the Truth in hand). 4. Fourthly, This Sending of Christ
consists in the Fathers authoritative willing of him to take man's nature upon
him, and in that nature so to do, and so to suffer. This is higher than the
former; God did not only authorize Christ to engage, so as that he might if he
so pleased undertake to redeem Sinners, without any intrusion or usurpation;
but he made this known to him as his Will, and (to speak according to our
conceptions) he laid his command upon him to act accordingly. So as that Christ
was under an obligation (which yet did not in the least destroy or lessen his
Liberty, or his Merit, or his Love) to come and to do as he did. Sending is an
authoritative act amongst men; 'twas so in God toward Christ: the Father did
not proceed with him in a way of mere offer or bare proposal or entreaty, but
in a way of authority; he laid his injunction upon him to assume flesh, and in
that flesh to make satisfaction. Therefore when Christ entered upon this work,
speaking to his Father he says Heb. 10.7.
Lo I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will O
God; And when he was discoursing of laying down his Life, he adds Joh. 10.18.
This commandment have I received of my Father; the Apostle also tells us that
Phil. 2.8.
he became [obedient] unto death even the death of the cross, (which obedience
necessarily supposes a command). And Christ was under a command in reference to
his incarnation as well as to his death and passion, for indeed without that
there could have been none of this; therefore the Text says God sent him in
the likeness, etc. that is, God ordered him to take our flesh. This Sending
then of Christ was the Father's authoritative calling of him to the Office and
Work of a Redeemer, which Call was also backed with positive and peremptory
commands as to the management of both; in respect of which God is said to send
him, for mittere Deus dicitur ubi mandata dat (as Grotius glosses upon it). And
the truth is, Christ in the management of the whole work of our Redemption was
under, acted by, and according to his Fathers comuand: whereupon God calls him
his Servant Isa. 42.1. Isa. 53.11. and Christ himself speaking to his Father
says, Joh. 17.4. I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do; mark that [which thou gave me to do] intimating
that all his Work was cut out for him by the will of his Father. So Joh. 4.34.
Jesus says unto them, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me and to
finish his work: Joh. 6.38. I came down from heaven not to do mine own will but
the will of him that sent me: upon this account therefore Christ may well be
said to be sent by the Father. In Scripture it is sometimes God gave him, and
sometimes God sent him; Christ was given, in respect of the freeness of the
Grace of God toward us, and he was sent, in respect of the Father's authority
over himself. 5. Fifthly, take one thing more, God's Sending of Christ imports
his trusting of him with his great designs: (this comes in too, if not
directly, yet at leastwise collaterally or concomitantly). In all sending there
is trust; when we send a person about our affairs we repose a trust in him,
that he will be faithful in the management of our concerns; God sent Christ
(that is) he put a great trust into his hands. It Is as if the Father had said,
My Son! here is a great work to be done, a work upon which my glory does
infinitely depend, all now lies at the stake, as this is managed it will be
well or ill with Souls: Well, I Will send thee, I Will put all into thy hands,
venture all with thee; I know thou will be faithful to secure my Glory and to
promote the good of Souls; I Will trust thee (and none but thee) with such great
things as these are: this (I say) is implied in God's sending of Christ.
And now by all put together you see how or in what respects. Christ was sent,
and sent by God the Father: you may (both to strengthen what has been said,
and also further to clear it up) take his own parallel; Joh. 20.21. As my
Father has sent me, even so I send you: So that look what Christ's sending of
the Apostles was in reference to their Office, the same was God's sending of
Christ in reference to his Office. How then did he send them? why 1. he
designed, chose, selected them to and for the work of the Ministry: 2. He
qualified and fitted them for that work: 3. He authorized them by his special
Commissian to undertake it: 4. He sent them out authoritatively to preach the
Gospel, and laid his commands upon them so to do: 5. He reposed a special Trust
in them that they would be faithful.
Just thus (allowing for the pre-eminence of the Person and of his Office) did
God send Christ, (which fully agrees with the particulars that have been
insisted upon). And as to the Apostles, Christ had said the same before to his
Father, Joh. 17.18. As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I also
sent them into the world: (not that there was a Vocula (...) non omnimodam
paritatem, sed aliquam convenientiam indicat. Nam and ab alio, and alio modo,
and alio fine Christus missus est quam Apostoli^. Bisterf. contra Crellium Lib.
1. Sec. 2; cap. 31.
parity or perfect equality betwixt the one and the other, only an harmony and
great agreement). So much for the first thing, the opening the nature of the
Act.

How is Christ's being sent consistent with his equality to his Father.
I proceed to the Second; to answer an Objection, or to remove a difficulty
which here lies before us. That which has been spoken seems to derogate from
the greatness and glory of Christ's Person: For did God thus send him? surely
then (as some argue) he is a Person inferior to the Father, this sending seems
to be inconsistent with his equality to his Father; if he was sent and thus
sent does not that speak his inferiority to that God who sent him? and by
consequence that he is not God? (thus the Socinians argue from it; and this is
One of those Heads from which they fetch their Arguments against Christ's
Deity).

For the explaining of the Thing, and the answering of the Adversary, Divines
commonly lay down two things about it:

1. That Sending does not always imply inferiority or inequality: See Mr.
Perkins on Call 4.4. p. 271.
For Persons who are equal upon mutual consent may send each the other, and if
the Person sent does freely concur and consent with the Person sending, there is
no impeachment or intrenchment then upon the equality betwixt them. And thus it
was between God the Father and Christ: had he been sent merely from the Will of
the Father (whether he Himself would or no), then indeed the Case had differed
and the Objection would have carried strength in it; but it was quite
otherwise. For Christ readily consented to and perfectly concurred with the
Father, and he was as willing to be sent as the Father was to send him; Lo, I
come to do thy Will, O God. When the Master sends the Servant he goes because
he must, but when the Father sends the Son he goes readily, because his Will
falls in with his Father's Will; he obeys not upon necessity but upon choice
and consent: So it was with Christ in reference to his Father's sending of him;
the Will of the Son was as much for the Work as the Will of the Father himself.
You must not look upon Christ as merely passive in the Sending, for (in some
respects) he sent himself; and his coming upon that great errand of man's
Redemption was his own act as well as the Fathers. As the Father is said to
Joh. 10.36.
Sanctify him, and yet he also is said to Joh. 17.19.
sanctify himself, and as the Father is said Romans 8.32.
to give him, and yet he also is said Gal. 2.20.
to give himself; So here the Father is said to send him, yet he also (as he
was One in Nature and in Will with the Father) may be said to send himself;
(thus Forte aliquis rogat, ut dicamus etiam a seipso missum esse Filium, quia
and Mariae conceptus and partus operatio Trinitatis est. Sed inquit aliquis,
quomodo Pater eum misit, si ipse se misit? Cui respondeo quaerens ut dicat,
quomodo eum Pater Sanctificavit, si ipse se Sanctificavit? utrumque enim
Dominus dicit etc. Item quaeio quomodo Pater eum tradidit, si ipse se tradidit?
utrumque enim legitur. Credo respondebit, si probe sapit, quia una v^luntas est
Patris and Filii, and inseparabilis operatio. Aug. de Trin. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Austine opens it). The expression in the Text [God sent his Son] does not
exclude the Son or the Spirit from the sending, or wholly appropriate it to the
Father; it only notes the Order of the Persons in their working. The Father
being the first in working therefore the sending of Christ is ascribed to him;
but there being nothing more in it than so, that will not prove any inequality
in the Persons, or any superiority that One has over the Other. The Schoolmen
give some nice and curious distinctions about Christ's being sent by himself,
and by the Holy Ghost, as well as by the first Person; but it is not convenient
to perplex the Reader with them: this is one Answer for the clearing up of the
difficulty and the weakening of the Objection which we have to do with. 2. The
Learned further distinguish of a twofold inferiority, One in respect of Nature,
and One in respect of Office, Condition, or Dispensation. As to the First,
Christ neither was nor is in the least inferior to the Father (both having the
same Nature and Essence, in respect of which he Phil. 2.6.
thought it not robbery to be [equal] with God). As to the Second, Christ being
considered as Mediator, as having assumed flesh, put himself into the Sinners
stead, and undertaken to make Satisfaction to God; so (without any derogation)
it may be said of him that he was inferior to the Father: In reference to
which it follows in the Verse. 7, 8.
forementioned place, He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross. And upon this he says Joh. 14.28. See this Text fully
opened in Estwicke against Biddle. p. 121. etc. vid. etiam Epiph adver. Haeres.
Lib. 2. Tom. 2. p. 775 etc. Loquatur Filius Hominis, Pater major me est;
loquatur Filius Dei, Ego and Pater unum sumus. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 6.
My Father is greater than I; He was in Nature every way as great as the
Father, but he having submitted to be made Man, to be a Surety, having
condescended to the Office and Work of a Redeemer in our Flesh, so in respect
of economy and dispensation the Father was greater than he. And by virtue of
his superiority over Christ (as considered in this his voluntary exinanition)
so he sent him, and laid his commands upon him and dealt with him as you have
heard: but Non ideo arbitrandum est, minorem esse Filium quia missus est a
Patre, nec ideo minorem Spiritum Sanctum quia and Pater eum misit, and Filius.
Sive enim propter visibilem Creaturam, sive potius propter principii
authoritatem vel commendationem, non propter inequalitatem vel imparilitatem
and dissimilitudinem substantiae, in Scripturis haec posita intelliguntur. Non
ergo ideo dicitur Pater misisse Filium, vel Spiritum Sanctum, quia ille esset
major, and illi minores; sed maxim propter authoritatem principii
commendandam, and quia in visibili creatura non sicut ille apparuit. Aug. de
Trin. Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Missio importet minorationem in eo qui mittitur,
secundum quod importat processionem a principio mittente, aut secundum imperium
aut secundum consilium, quia imperans est major, and consilians est sapientior:
Sed in divinis non importat nisi processionem originis, quae est secundum
equalitatem. Aquin. 1. p. Quaest. 43. Art. 1. resp. ad Primum. (...). Naz.
Orat. 2. de Filio p. 582.
yet his natural and essential greatness or equality with the Father was not at
all by this impaired or lessened, (which was the great Truth to be secured
against the Adversary).
Reasons why God sent Christ.
The Third thing which I am to speak to is, to enquire (so far as the Word will
warrant) into the Grounds and Reasons of Christ's mission; wherefore did God
send him? He who is so Wise that he does nothing (be it never so little or
mean) but he has his Reasons for it, surely in so great a thing as the sending
of his own Son he had very high and weighty reasons upon which he acted. And
though it is most certain, that he neither had (nor could have) any Motives ab
extra (in a way of Merit) to move him to this, yet it is as certain that he had
great and urgent Grounds for it, even such as might become a God in doing such
a thing. He that in Other things is a Isa. 30.18.
God of judgment, undoubtedly in this (which was his Masterpiece) he would
show himself to be a God of judgment. It will therefore be worthy of a modest
enquiry, to find out the Reasons which the wise and gracious God went upon in
the sending of his Son.

In the General, Some must be sent. When I say [must] I do not mean any simple
or absolute necessity, as though it was simply and absolutely necessary that
God should take some course, or employ some person from heaven for the
redeeming and saving the world; (God forbid that I should assert a thing so
utterly false, and so highly derogatory from the freeness of the grace of God
in what he did!) I only mean therefore that which we call hypothetical or
conditional necessity: and so the business stood thus. God designed to glorify
and advance his mercy to Sinners, he had gracious purposes in himself toward
Man; and whereas all mankind lay before him in an undone and ruined condition,
he would not leave them to perish eternally in that condition: Then supposing
this (which cannot be denied) God must send, something must be done; or else
these gracious purposes of God will be lost, and all men must inevitably perish
for ever. For as to all Other Ways the Sinners Case was desperate, with
respect to them there was no hope or help; some new and strange course must be
taken, or else (as things stand on the Creatures part) there is nothing to be
looked for but hell and damnation. Now things being brought to this pass,
therefore God will send, yea, he will send his own Son; for he will be sure to
pitch upon a Way which shall infallibly and effectually do the work. Observe it
in the Text, when (or because) it was impossible for the Law to do, then (or
therefore) God sent his Son: since neither the Law (nor any thing else) could
operate to any purpose toward the advancing of God's Honor, and the promoting
of the Sinners good, it was necessary (in order to these great Ends) that God
himself should interpose in some extraordinary way; which thereupon he
accordingly did in the sending of Christ.

But more particularly; let us take it for granted that there was a necessity
of Sending, yet why did God pitch upon his Son and send him? might not some
Other Person have been sent as well as he? or might not some Other Way have
been found out as good as this?

I answer, No: Christ the Son must be the very Person whom God will send. And
him he pitched upon (so far as we poor shallow mortals are able to judge of his
deep and unsearchable actings, or to assign the reasons of them), for these
Reasons:

1. First, because he was the Person with whom the Father had covenanted about
this very thing. There was a Covenant (commonly called the Covenant of
Redemption) which had passed betwixt these two Persons; in which the Father
engaged so and so to Christ, and Christ reciprocally engaged so and so to the
Father, (a considerable part of the terms and matter of which Covenant is set
down Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin, he shall
see his seed, etc.). The Father Covenants to do thus and thus for Fallen Man;
but first (in order thereunto) the Son must Covenant to take man's Nature,
therein to satisfy offended Justice, to repair and vindicate his Father's
Honor etc: well, he submits, assents to these demands, indents and covenants
to make all good; and this was the Covenant of Redemption. Now upon this
Covenant God sends his Son, (that being done in pursuance of, and agreeable to
that admirable compact or stipulation that had passed betwixt them both). So
that this Sending was not founded merely upon the Father's absolute Will or
Sovereignty over Christ, but upon the foederal agreement made betwixt them as
to this very matter. (Of which I Will say no more here, having formerly had an
opportunity to publish some thoughts about it). 2. Secondly, God sent Christ
because he saw that was the very best way which could be taken; and therefore
in wisdom he pitched upon it. O there was no Way like to that! The Father had
great desigus now to carry on, (as for example) to let the world see what an
evil thing Sin was, what a dreadful breach it had made betwixt himself and the
Creature, how terrible and impartial his Justice was, what an Ocean of Love he
had in his heart, to promote the Sinners happiness (yet so as in the first
place to secure and advance his own glory in the magnifying of all his
Attributes), to indear himself, his Son, and all his mercies to his people, to
lay a sure foundation for the Righteousness and Salvation of believers; were
not these great and glorious designs? Now there was no Way (for the
accomplishing and effecting of these) comparable to this of God's sending his
Son. What God might have done some other way by his absolute Power and Will (
abstracting from his decree), I dare not enquire into, much less determine any
thing about it; or wherther this was the Only Way I leave to others to
discuss: but certainly this was the best, the fittest Way, and therefore the
Wise God pitched upon it. ( Eos itaque qui dicunt, itane defuit Deo modus alius
quo liberaret homines a miseria mortalitatis hujus, ut unigenitum Filium etc.
parum est sic refellere, ut istum modum, quo nos per Mediatorem Dei and Hominum
hominem Jesum Christum Deus liberare dignatur, asseramus bonum and divinae
congruum dignitati: verum etiam ut oftendamus non alium modum possibilem Deo
defuisse, cujus potestati aequaliter cuncta subjacent, sed sanandae nostrae
miseriae convenientiorem alium non fuisse. Aug. de Trin. lib. 13. cap. 10.
Austine went no higher than thus). 3. Christ was sent, because as this was the
best and the fittest Way, so he was the best and the fittest Person to be
employed in such an Embassy. God always sends the fittest messengers upon his
errands; 'twas a great errand for Christ to come from heaven to earth about
man's Redemption, but God saw that He was the fittest messenger to be employed
therein, and therefore he sent him. For as he imploys none in his work
(especially when it is high and of great importance) whom he does not either
find or make fit for it, so the more fit any are for his work the rather he
does employ them; and therefore this was that which induced him to send Christ,
none being so fit for the managing and transacting the Work of Redemption as he
was: (which I shall endeavor to make out in a few Particulars).
Christ's superlative fitness for it appears from, and was grounded upon,

Christ's Fitness for the Work of Redemption set forth.
1. His two Natures, the Hypostatical union of Both in his Person. He was God;
Joh. 1.1. Phil. 2.6. 1 John 5.20. Romans 9.5. Isa. 9.6. Tit. 2.13. He was also
Man; 1 Timothy 2.5. then too he ^as God-man in one Person; Col. 2.19. Now who
could be so fit to bring God and Man together, as he who was himself both God
and Man? who so fit to negotiate with both, as he who was a middle Person
betwixt both? who so fit to treat with an offended God, as he who was God? who
so fit to suffer as he who was Man, and to merit by suffering as he who was
God-man? Had he been only God he could not have suffered, had he been only Man
he could not have merited: but being both he was eminently fit for both, (viz.)
for suffering and meriting, for obeying and satisfying. Thus his not to be
paralleled Fitness was grounded upon his Personal consideration.

2. 'Twas grounded upon his glorious Attributes; his Power, Wisdom, Mercy,
Goodness, Faithfulness, Holiness etc. He that will undertake to redeem Sinners
must have all these, for they all were indispensably requisite to such an
undertaking: the Lord Jesus had them all, and that too in an eminent and
extraordinary measure (as I might easily show at large); never did any mere
Creature arrive at that pitch of Wisdom, Power, Holiness etc. which he did:
therefore none so fit to be sent as he.

3. 'Twas grounded upon his Sonship and near relation to God. Who so fit to
make others the adopted sons of God, as he who was himself the Natural Son of
God?

4. Upon the glory and dignity of his Person. He was the image of the invisible
God Col. 1.15. the express image of his Fathers Person Heb. 1.3. Now who so fit
to restore Man to God's image, as that Man who was the essential image of God?

5. Christ's admirable and transcendent fitness was grounded upon his threefold
Office, as he was King, Priest, and Prophet. For hereupon he was (and is) fit
to deal both with God and Man; he is a Friest to deal with God, a King and
Prophet to deal with Man. Does God stand upon Satisfaction? Christ is a Priest
to die, and to offer up himself an expiatory Sacrifice: or will God keep his
distance from the Creature and be known in his greatness? Christ is a Priest to
mediate and intercede. Then is the Sinner under ignorance and darkness? Christ
is a Prophet to inlighten and teach or is he under the tyranny of sin and a
rebel against God? Christ is King to rescue, subdue and conquer him to himself,
to bring and keep him under his own dominion and government. To sum up all!
there are but two things to be done for the Sinner in order to his happiness
(viz.) impetration and application; now both of these are done by Christ's
threefold Office. By the first part of his Priestly Office (his Oblation),
there was the impetration, for by that he procured, purchased, merited all
good; by the second part of his Priestly Office (his intercession,), there is
the application. And because both God and the Creature are to be dealt withal
in order to this application, therefore Christ does accordingly deal with both
of them: with God he deals in the way of prayer or intercession (for God
because of his Majesty and Sovereignty will be treated in this manner); with
the Creature, he deals in the way of power; partly by dispelling the darkness
of the mind (which he does as Prophet), and partly by taking off the rebellion
of the Will and bringing the stubborn Sinner under a ready subjection to God
(which he does as King). Which things being done, all that Christ has
purchased is now made over and actually applied to the Creature. Upon the Whole
then it follows, that Christ being invested with these Offices (which are every
way so full, of so great virtue, so suited to the Nature and demands of God,
and the condition of the Sinner), he must needs be by many degrees the
fittest-Person to be sent by God.

Before I go off from this Head I desire One thing may be taken notice of; It
must be granted, that the sending of Christ was praevious and antecedent to
several of the Things which have been mentioned, (as the demonstrations of his
superlative fitness to be sent, and the grounds of his being sent): Yet
nevertheless they may be alleged and made use of in that notion, because
though in our apprehension (if not also in the Nature of the Thing) they were
after the sending, yet in the eye and estimation of God they were before it.
For instance, Christ just at his sending had not then assumed the Humane
Nature, (we suppose that to antecede his incarnation); yet God judged him a
person fit to be sent because of that Nature. And so he might very well; for
though the incarnation as considered in it self was future, yet as to the
knowledge, consideration, estimation of God, it was present and done already.
(I thought it necessary to put in this, for the preventing of an Objection
which might arise in the thoughts of Some upon the reading of what has been
laid down).

4. Fourthly, God therefore sent Christ, not only because he was the fittest
Person to be sent, but because indeed he was the only Person that could be
sent; for none but he could effect or accomplish Man's Redemption. If God will
be so gracious as to send, 'twas not only convenient but necessary that he
should send this very person his own Son; for there was none Other in heaven or
earth that could go through an undertaking of this nature. There were Evils to
be endured, which were above the strength of any mere Creature to endure; there
were Evils to be removed (the Wrath of God, the Guilt of Sin, the Curse of the
Law), which no mere Creature was able to remove; there were also Blessings to
be procured (as Reconciliation with God, Justification, Adoption, eternal
Salvation), which no such Creature possibly could procure: O no! therefore
Christ himself must come or nothing can be done. Why did not God send an Angel
rather than his Son? why? because he knew Redemption-work was no work for an
Angel; no, not for the whole body of Angels. If the whole Order of them had
come from heaven and combined all their strength together, they could not have
redeemed so much as One Soul. I dispute not how far God by his mighty power
might have enabled an Angel to have bore up under the greatest sufferings:
Suppose he might have had such a strength as to have been able to undergo all
that Christ did, yet under the highest communications of the grace of God to
him, he (being still a mere Creature) could never satisfy for what was past,
not merit for what was to come; he could neither expiate sin nor procure
eternal Life. No, these are things which could only be accomplished by Him who
was more than a mere finite or created being, even by the Lord Jesus who was
Man but God too; wherefore he is the Person whom the Father will send. And he
very well understood himself in what he did; if the work had been possible to
have been effected by any Creature, God would have employed that Creature and
spared his own Son; nothing but absolute necessity made him to fix upon this
course.

So much for the Reasons why God sent his Son; which we poor dim-sighted
creatures do but (in a manner) guess at, but he himself understands them fully.
As Acts 15.18.
all his works are known to him, so also the special reasons of all his works
are known to him; and eminently those which he went upon in this his highest
and greatest work. When we come to heaven we shall more fully know why Christ
was sent; but here our knowledge is very dark and imperfect about it.

I have done with the three Things which I propounded to open, and so have
dispatched the Doctrinal part; I am now to make some practical improvement of
it.

Was Christ sent? and did God thus send him? what does this great act of God
call for from us? I Will tell you in a few things:

1. It calls upon us greatly to admire God. Use 1. God to be admired for his
sending of Christ.
O how should all our souls be drawn forth and elevated in the adoring of God,
for his sending of Christ! What rich Mines of Grace have we in these few words,
God sent his own Son! Here Is the greatest thing that ever God did, or ever will
do: 'twas much that he should make a World, but what is the making of a World to
the sending of a Son? The Apostle (in the Text) seems to ascend step by step,
and to crowd together variety of great and glorious things, that he might the
more heighten God's Love and draw up the hearts of Believers to the admiration
of it. For 1. here is Sending: 2. God sending: 3. God sending a Son: 4. His own
Son: 5. The sending of this Son in our flesh: Yea 6. in the likeness of sinful
flesh: Yea 7. in that Flesh to offer up himself as a Sacrifice for sin: 8.
Doing this for this End that sin might be condemned, and that the righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us: 9. Doing this too when the Sinners Case
was desperate as to the Law; is not here maguum in parvo? and does not the
Apostle thrust
things together, heaping one thing upon another, that he might the better set
off and aggrandize the Love of God? There Is enough in any One of them to make
you stand and wonder; but when you have them conjunct, and all set before you
in their proper emphasis and import, how should you be affected and wrought
upon to admire the Grace of God! The truth is, take all together and you have
here a representation of that Low, Mercy, Goodness, which was too great and
bigg for any but a God. If you read no further than [the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the Flesh], there man is utterly lost; but if you go
on to [God's sending of his Son etc.], there the day of Salvation begins to
dawn, there is an effectual remedy for a desperate malady, now the case is
altered; O let the blessed God be therefore for ever magnified and adored!

2. More particularly, The Love of God the Father to be admired.
this calls upon you to admire the Love of God the Father, and always to
entertain good thoughts of him; (they are distinct Heads, however let me put
them together). I would not too curiously divide or distinguish betwixt the
Sacred Persons in their several Acts; much less would I set them in competition
or prefer one before another, (as if we were more beholden to the One than to
the Other): As they center in the same common Essence, it is the same Love and
the same gracious actings in all; but yet they being personally distinct, and
they having those acts which are proper to them as so distinguished, so they
have their special and peculiar Love. And it is very good for us to understand
what is immediately done by the Father, what by the Son, what by the Spirit;
which we must the rather endeavor after, because the Scripture usually (I do
not say always) apply's this effect to the First, that to the Second, and
another to the Third Person. I am at present only to speak to the acts of the
Father, wherein he has displayed that Love which is proper to him; which if
you please to look into (as the Scripture sets them forth), you will find your
selves under a strong obligation to admire him (as personally so considered).
For 'pray observe, who did from all eternity predestinate, elect, choose you?
was it not God the Father? Predestinating Love is the Father's Love: Ephesians. 1.3,
4, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: According as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world etc. Having
predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will. After this came Redeeming Love, and
had the Father no hand in that Love? nay, had not He the first and the chief
hand therein? For did not he find out the ransom? Job 33.24. I have found a
ransom: did not he contrive and lay the whole model and platform of Redemption
in his eternal purpose and ordination? (therefore it is said Isa. 53.10. The
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; that great Work resolves it
self into the Will and pleasure of the Father, as the first and principal Cause
of it; Christ (as Mediator) is brought in but as subordinate to him, as being
but the ministerial and executive agent in redemption, for it is but in his
hands that the pleasure of the Lord should prosper). Who chose, sent, called
Christ to that Work and fitted him for it, but the Father (as you have heard)?
So also who assisted and strengthened him in it, but the Father? Isa. 42.1.
Behold my servant whom I uphold; of which upholding and strengthening Grace by
the Father Christ assured himself beforehand (as you read Isa. 50. 7, 9.) and
it was accordingly made good to him (as you read Matthew. 4.11. Luke 22.43.) Then
again, who rewarded Christ when he had finished his Work, but the Father?
therefore to him Christ prayed for this, Joh. 17.4, 5. I have glorified thee on
the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: And now, O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was. And now Christ has made the purchase, who does
authoritatively collate upon persons the blessings purchased, but the Father?
Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies: 2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ etc. Luke 12.32. Fear not little
flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Who is it
that works in Sinners their meetness for heaven, but the Father? Col. 1.12.
Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Who is it that reveals the great mysteries
of the Gospel, but the Father? Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes. Who bestows and gives the Spirit, but the
Father? Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth. And
(to shut up this) who secures and keeps in a state of grace, but the Father?
Joh. 10.29. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all, and no man is
able to pluck them out of my Father's band. Now (Christians) may you not be
fully convinced by all this, that the Father's Love to you is very great? and
if so, will you not admire him for it? You must Joh. 5.23.
honor the Son even as you honor the Father, and you must adore, bless, love
the Father even as you do the Son. God forbid that I should go about to lessen
your most thankful sense of what the Son and Spirit have done for you! but yet
know, that these the Father (as the first Cause) does work by, it is He who by
them does do so great things for you: 'pray, think high of their love, but then
think high of his love too.

Further, I would persuade you to entertain good thoughts of the Father. It Is a
temptation (though not so usual) which some gracious Persons lie under, they
can with more comfort think of the Son than of the Father, they do not so much
question the Love of the Son as of the Father: they cannot deny but that the
Son is indeed a very gracious Person, for he came from heaven Luke 19.10.
to seek and to save what was lost, to 1 Timothy 1.15.
save Sinners, yea the chiefest of them etc. hereupon they can (in some
comfortable manner) encourage themselves to hope in him. But as to the Father
they are not so confident, they are more jealous and suspicious and have a
greater dread of him, than they have either of the Son or of the Spirit. Does
Satan assault any of you in this manner? or do such thoughts as these prevail
over you? O be convinced of your mistake! You have as great encouragement for
faith and hope from the Father, as you have from the Son; for you hear 'twas He
who sent Christ, and whatever Christ was or did, all was but in pursuance of
his good pleasure; therefore have you any reason to think otherwise than well
of him? Surely. 1 John 4.16.
God is Love: this very thing (his sending of his Son) represents him as full
of Mercy, Goodness, and Grace; the Sinner has not the least cause to be
jealous or afraid of him. O when unbelief and hard thoughts of God the Father
begin to rise, beat them down by arguing thus, was not He the first spring from
which redeeming Grace did flow? the great contriver and willer of man's
recovery? who set Christ on work but he? who sent him into the world to be a
Savior but he? who employed his own Son for the good of Sinners but he? O that
you would labor to get your Faith encouraged and strengthened as to the first
Person! and that it might rise up to the first Cause of all, and there fix and
terminate, that your faith and hope may be in God (as the Apostle expresses it
1 Pet. 1.21.) Christ says Joh. 14.1. Let not your heart be troubled, ye
believe in God, believe in me also: and let me say, he believe in Christ,
believe in God also, (as the fountain and original of all your happiness).

Christ to be loved for his ready submission to his Father in sending him.
3. It calls upon us to love Christ greatly: O how should the consideration of
this endear Christ to every gracious heart! God sent him, but not against his
will; how willing was he to be sent upon the errand of your Salvation! he
freely consented to whatever the Father was pleased to put him upon for your
good. He very well knew before hand what would follow upon this sending, what
he was to undergo, how he was to be abased (if he do engage to redeem and save
you); yet notwithstanding this, no sooner did the Father call him to it, but he
most readily and cheerfully obeyed, O the infinite Love of Christ! He came down
from heaven that he might carry you up to heaven; he that was a Son for your
sake stooped to be a Servant, that you of slaves might be made sons: What had
become of you if Christ had refused to come when the Father sent him? O love
the Lord Jesus! let his Person be very dear and precious to you, admit him into
your hearts who was willing to take the whole business of your Salvation into
his hands: what Love can be enough for a Father sending, and a Son coming! It Is
true God sent him, but his obedience to his Father was no diminution of his
Love to you; and it is true, in this Embassy he acted in a way of inferiority to
his Father, but 'twas his pity to you which made him willing to put himself
into such a state of subjection and inferiority: for that did not proceed from
his Nature (before he had assumed yours), but merely from his dignation and
gracious condescension; and now after all this will you not love him? how can
you do otherwise than love him? Suppose you had heard him (as soon as ever God
had signified his pleasure to him, and said, Son! the fullness of time is come,
I must send thee down to earth to redeem man), saying, Father I am ready, here
I am, send me whithersoever and about whatsoever thou please; to promote thy
Glory and the good of Souls I am willing to go wherever thou wilt have me; yea,
Ple stick at nothing which thou shall judge necessary for the preventing of the
Sinners everlasting ruin: Send me to be made Flesh, I submit; to lie in a
Manger, I submit; to die upon a Cross, I submit; lay what Commands upon me thou
please, to further the Salvation of Souls, they shall all be obeyed: Suppose
(I say) you had heard Christ uttering such Words to his Father, doubtless it
would have wrought very much upon you, your Hearts would have been all in
flames of Love to him. O wretched Creatures! we know all this was spoken and
done too by our Lord Jesus, and yet how cold, how weak is our Love to him!

Christ a Pattern herein for imitation.
4. It calls upon you to imitate Christ in his carriage with respect o his being
sent. Thus, never go till you be sent, then go readily: both of these were
admirably done by our Lord Jesus. He went not till he was sent, before he would
move one step he would have his Father's Mission and Commission; a great Mind
he had to be at Redeeming Work, his Heart was exceedingly set upon it, yet he
would stay till he was sent, called, authorized thereunto by his Father. But as
soon as he was so called, how readily and cheerfully did he engage! Heb. 10.7.
Lo T come to do thy Will, O God. Now in this his deportment he has set us an
excellent copy to write after; teaching us, always humbly to wait for a Call
from God, and when it comes (let it be what it will) faithfully to comply with
it. Whatever rank or station God has set you in, see that you therein 1 Cor.
7.17.20, 24.
abide; and that you meddle with no Work, Employment, Office, Undertaking,
further than as you are called thereunto. This is a Duty in special incumbent
upon Public Officers, Magistrates and Ministers; as also, upon Christians in a
private capacity with respect to public Offices: none must presume to invade
an Office or to intrude themselves into it where they are not sent by God; O
that is an act of high presumption, and usually attended with sad and fatal
Consequences (as several Instances show). Concerning the Office and Work of the
Ministry the Apostle is very smart, Romans 10.13.
How shall they preach except they be sent? the Interrogation carries a
vehement negation it it, (viz.) without a Call and Mission from God none ought,
none can (that is, lawfully, warrantably, you may put in too Deus non fortunat
labores little qui non simt vocati, and quamvis Salutaria quaedam afferant,
tamen non aedificant. Luther.
successfully) preach the Gospel. But now though in things of this Nature a
Divine Call be eminently requisite, yet it is not to be limited to them; whoever
you be, whatever work or service you engage in, you must look to your Call and
Commission from God. For you can no further expect assistance, acceptance,
success in any thing you do then as you are thereunto called: when it is so, you
may rely upon it God will assist, accept, succeed, prosper; but when it is
otherwise, nothing can be hoped for. Our Lord being sent 'twas prophesied that
the work should Isa. 53.10.
prosper in his hands; and we find that from the consideration of his sending
all along he fetched encouragement, that his Father would be with him and would
not leave him alone, (as you see Joh. 8.29. and passim). Hence therefore I
would give you this advice, in every undertaking (especially when it is very
weighty and momentous) make sure of a Call and Commission from above; to run
upon any thing without this, you will find to be not only uncomfortable but
very dangerous. And in order to the finding out of this Call pro hic and nunc,
there must first be the serious studying of the Word, and then the prudent
weighing and considering of Providence (so far as they comply with the Word);
for Providence. (so bounded) may sometimes in such and such particular Cases
give much light concerning the Will and Call of God: (but I must not engage in
this Point).

But then I add (which is the Second Branch of this Exhortation), When once you
are clear in your Call, stick at nothing; if God bids you go, be sure you go
(let the errand be what it will). Suppose the Work be difficult, dangerous,
contrary to the interest of the Flesh, etc. it is no matter for that, if God
commands you must obey, if God sends you must run: no dangers, difficulties,
discouragements, sufferings, fleshly concerns are then to be regarded. Paul's
example herein was excellent and most worthy of our imitation; Gal. 1.15, 16.
When it pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by
his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen;
immediately I conferred not with Flesh and Blood: No question but Flesh and
Blood were very apt to suggest many things, to make this blessed Man to balk
the Call and Work of God; I but (says he) I would not confer with them, so as
to hearken to their suggestions, so as to fetch my guidance and direction from
them; no, these he laid aside that he might wholly steer his course by God's
Will: O let the Service be what it will, be it the preaching of the Gospel
amongst Heathens, there must be no consulting with Carnal Reason or Carnal
Interest against a Divine Call and Command. But I am upon a far higher Example,
the example of Christ himself: never was any sent upon such Work as His was,
that was hard work indeed, abasing work indeed, painful work indeed, never was
any to be compared with it; and yet upon his Father's Call with what readiness
did he set upon it! And this is that very thing wherein the Apostle would have
us to conform to Christ, Phil, 2.5. Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus; what mind does he mean? why this, upon all occasions in ready
compliance with the Will and Call of God, to be willing to be emptied and
abased, to be, to do, to suffer any thing. It Is a great Evil for any (upon
carnal and selfish Grounds) to shift-off and withstand a Call from God;
therefore the Lord took it very ill from Moses, that he was so backward to go
upon his sending and would so fain have put it off: Exodus 4.13. Send I pray
thee by the hand of him whom thou will send: but it follows ( verse. 14.) The
anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses. Jonah's disobedience in this cost
him dear; God sent him to Niviveh but thither he would not go, wherefore God
sent him to the bottom of the Sea and thither he shall go; O let all dread the
like disobedience! Pray be always willing to observe and obey God's Call, balk
not any service which he puts you upon: stir not a step till he sends, be sure
you run when he sends; it is the wisdom of a Christian not to stir a foot till
he be sent, it is the zeal of a Christian to run when he is sent. It Is a blessed
thing when we can so carry it, as neither to be over forward in running before
we are sent (for which, though possibly in a Sense somewhat different from that
which I am upon, God so much complained of the false Prophets, Jerem. 14.14.
Chap. 23.21.) nor over backward in demurring and hanging off after we are sent.
When God asked the Prophet, Isa. 6.8.
Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? see how presently he answered, Here
am I, send me: O that there was such a readiness in all of us to comply with
God's Call! believe it, no errand is (or can be) bad which he sends about.

The bure External sending of Christ not to be rested in.
5. A word of Cautionary advice will here be very necessary, it is this, Take
heed that you do not rest or take up with the external sending of Christ. When
the everlasting concerns of your Souls are upon your thoughts, and you are
casting with your selves what may be necessary to bring you to Heaven, take
heed of looking no farther than merely a Christ sent. True, this is the great
thing which Faith builds upon, the proper and sole foundation of all its
relyance and confidence; for that which it does ultimately eye in the hope of
pardon, justification, eternal life, is merely a Christ sent by God; but yet as
to the qualification and actual intitling of the Person to the things believed
and hoped for, so there must be something more than the bare external sending
of Christ. Every one knows there is a Ecce distincti sunt duo modi missionis
Filii, and secundum alterum semel tantum missus est Dei Filius, secundum
alterum saepe missus est, and mittitur quotidie. Nam secundum alterum missus
est ut sit Homo, and semel tantum factum est; secundum alterum vero mittitur ut
sit cum Homine, quomodo quotidie mittitur ad Sanctos, and missus est etiam ante
incarnationem, and ad omnes Sanctos qui ante fuerunt, and etiam ad Angelos.
Unde Aug. de Filio etc. Lomb. L. 1. D. 13.
twofold sending of him, the one External and Visible, the other Internal and
Invisible: the First was Christ's sending to be Man, (that is past and over, and
was to be but once); the Second is Christ's sending into Man, (that yet
continues and is reiterated from time to time). Now these two though they are
of a different nature must not be parted; he that would regularly hope for
Salvation by Christ must have the latter as well as the former sending; for
it is most certain that a Christ without if it be not also a Christ within, will
never save. A Christ in our Flesh must be accompanied with a Christ in our
Hearts, there must be not only a Christ sent to us but also a Christ sent into
us, or else he will not profit us. The whole business of Merit lies upon the
Christ without (as he took our Nature and therein fulfilled the Law); but the
fitting or qualifying of persons to have a share in the blessings merited, that
lies in the Christ within as he is received into the heart: In a word, the
impetration is by Christ without, but the application is by Christ within. Now
therefore (I say) you must nor rest in the One unless you find the Other too:
there are very dangerous mistakes abroad in the world about this. Some are all
for a Christ within making nothing of a Christ without, (a most pernicious
Opinion and destructive of all Christianity): Others again are all for a Christ
without, contenting themselves with this that he was sent into the world to
save Sinners, and this to them is enough for future happiness, they look no
farther. But now whoever would be wise to Salvation must take in both; so as to
adore, believe in, rest upon a Christ as externally sent, and yet so as to make
sure of a Christ in Col. 1.27.
himself (through the gracious operations of the Spirit). Paul here in this
Verse speaks of the External Sending, in the 10 Verse he speaks of the Internal
Sending [ And if Christ be in you etc]; all that live under the Gospel know the
former, but few know the latter. O how is it with you? Christ was sent to you
but is he in you? he was formed in the Virgins womh but is he formed in your
hearts (as the expression is Gal. 4.19.)? he came from heaven in a corporeal
manner for you, but did he ever in a spiritual manner come into you? you have
the external mission but have you also the mystical Union? has the Father who
sent his own Son in your Flesh, sent also his own Spirit into your hearts?
(which is the great Promise of the New Testament as the former was the great
Promise of the Old; see Joh. 14.26. Joh. 15.26. Joh. 16.7.). 'Pray search
diligently into these things, for be assured that a Christ as only sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh, if He and his Spirit be not also received within, I
say a Christ (so stated) will never make you happy.

Men exhorted to believe in him whom God sent.
6. Did God thus send Christ? it calls aloud to you all to believe in him. Has
the Father chosen him, set him apart, every way fitted him to be a Redeemer,
sent him into the world for that end? and after all this, will you not receive,
embrace, fly to, and venture your selves, your All upon him? O what an Argument
is this to draw Sinners to an hearty closure with Christ! what will engage
Souls to believe on him if this will not! Christ (as sent) is the Object, the
Ground, and also the great Encouragement of Faith: Sinners! you may very safely
believe on him, for he is no Impostor or Deceiver but that very person whom God
sent to be the Savior of the world. And it is not only so (that you may safely
believe on him), but it is your great duty to believe on him; for he (who sent
him) lays this as his grand Command upon you so to do: 1 John 3.23. And this
is [his Commandment] that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus
Christ. Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God (that great Work which he injoyns)
that ye believe on him whom he has sent. It Is observable how high Christ
speaks of the knowledge of himself under this notion (as he was sent of God);
Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ [whom thou have sent]: As also how desirous he was that the
World might know and believe that he was thus sent of God; Joh. 17.21, 23. That
they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they all may
be one in us, [that the world may believe that thou have sent me]: I in them,
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and [that the world may
know that thou have sent me]. Now what was it that Christ propounded to himself
in all this? certainly he had more in his eye than the bare notional knowledge
of, or naked assent to this great Truth, that he was the Person sent of God.
Yes, his desire reached to a practical and fiducial knowledge of it, to such a
knowledge as might be attended with true and saving Faith. So that it is not
enough for you to know and believe (in a common and general way) that Christ
was indeed sent of God, (which will only make you differ from Jews and
Heathens); but you must so know and so believe it as to receive, accept, close
with, rest upon him in a saving manner, (which will make you differ from all
outside and formal Christians).

Further let it be considered, what was God's great design in the sending of
Christ? 'twas this, that Sinners believing in him might live: So the Gospel
tells you over and over; Joh. 3.16, 17*
God so loved the world, that he gave (or sent) his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: For
God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved: is not here a strong engagement as well as an high
encouragement to believe? And it being God's act to send his Son, he looks upon
Himself as highly concerned according as men carry it toward him; therefore
says Christ Math. 10.40.
He that receives me, receives him that sent me: Luke 10.16.
He that despises me, despises him that sent me. And especially this holds
true in the matter of believing or not believing: O do you close with Christ
and receive him upon the Gospel-offer? not only He himself, but his Father also
is highly pleased herewith and takes it very kindly at your hands: I (says
God) here are Souls that do not throw away or tread upon that costly remedy
which I provided for them, who give me the glory of my Wisdom and Mercy, who
would not have my great designs (in the sending of my Son) to be frustrated,
who duly entertain the Messenger whom I sent to transact the great affairs of
my Glory and their Good, who answer my expectations in my highest Love etc. I
say, this pleases God exceedingly. But (on the other hand) do you reject
Christ, make little of him, stand it out against him, refuse to believe? how
heinously does God resent such carriage! this he looks upon as an high
despising and undervaluing of his Mercy, a desperate striking at his Glory
(which is very dear to him), a very unworthy requital of his Love, a dangerous
attempt to make all his Grace to be to no purpose; and must not all this highly
provoke him? Suppose some Great Person, hearing of the sad condition of some
poor Captives, should out of mere compassion to them send from a far Country
his own and only Son to redeem them; and this Son should in Person come to
them, and treat with them about their redemption, he offering to pay down their
ransom, to free them from all their misery; provided, they will but trust on
him and be subject to him: If now these Captives should slight all this and
choose still to continue in their chains, rather than upon these terms to
accept of deliverance; would not this folly and obstinacy greatly incense both
Father and Son? Or suppose again, some offended Prince (against whom the
Treason had been committed) should send his Son to the Traitor with a Pardon in
his hand; and he should take no notice of this Son or Pardon (brought by him),
but reject and slight both; what could be expected to follow upon this but the
greatest indignation? Now is not this the very case of Unbelievers? nay, is not
theirs much worse in respect of the Person sending, the Person sent, the
Benefits offered, the Conditions required? and therefore must not they incur an
higher displeasure and make themselves obnoxious to a worser severity? Sinners!
shall not these things be thought of? will nothing prevail upon you to believe?
Was Christ sent and did he come to you and will not you come to him? will you
not yet understand that it is He only who must save you? (to allude to that
Act. 7.25. He supposed his brethren would have understood, how that God by his
hand would deliver them, but they understood not); do you look for another Son
or another Savior to be sent? indeed has God such another Son to send? or was
not the once sending of this Son enough? has not God in Christ given you his
last Way and Method for Salvation, so that there is no Other to be expected
after that? And was he only sent? did he not do all for which he was sent, and
so returned back again to his Father? is there any thing further to be done but
only that you will repent and believe? Methinks these Considerations should
work upon you, and yet I Am sure they will not, unless the Lord persuade your
hearts to believe and he himself be pleased to work Faith in you. We may speak
much to convince you of your Duty, but when we have said all it is God who must
both incline and enable you to believe, who must over-powre against
unwillingness and strengthen against weakness. Faith is his Gift (Ephesians. 2.8.),
he who gives the Christ to be believed on, must give the Grace to believe with;
he who sent Christ to you must draw you to Christ; Joh. 6.44.
No man can (or will) come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw
him. So much for the Duties proper to be urged upon God's sending of Christ,
(in which you have the First Use).

Use 2. Comfort to Believers from God's sending Christ.
Secondly, It affords abundant matter of Comfort to all sincere Christians. The
Truth which I have been upon (Christ sent by God), may be useful not only as a
powerful incentive to Duty but also as a firm foundation of inward Comfort. O
believers! set your Faith, Hope, Joy as high as ever you can, this Sending of
Christ will bear you out in it: you cannot (God having done this) overbelieve
or over-rejoyce. I Will show you what there is wrapped up in a Christ sent; and
for the better raising of your Comfort. I Will instance in Particulars, (for it is
with Gospel Truths as it is with your perfumed things, which so long as they are
wrapped up do but weakly affect the Sense; but when they are taken out, opened
and parted, then they do more strongly send forth their fragrant odours).

1. Did God send Christ? surely then great was his good Will toward you. For
had it not been so, would he ever have done such a great thing for you as this?
therefore that heavenly Quire of Angels singing in consort upon the Birth of
Christ made this a part of their Spiritual Song, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth peace, [good will] toward men; (I
follow our reading of the latter Clause, though I know it might be (and is)
otherwise rendered): why did they say good will toward men? O because now in
the Sending and Incarnation of Christ God had given out the highest
demonstration that was possible of his good Will toward them. Had there been
any thing but that in his Heart, and had there not been an abundance of that in
his Heart, he would never have sent and so sent his own Son.

2. Did God send Christ? surely then he is in good earnest, real, hearty in the
matters of Salvation. After such a thing as this Saints have not the least
reason to be jealous of God, or to question the reality of his Call, offers,
invitations, intentions, promises, declarations concerning their happiness.
What higher assurance could God give of his heartiness and reality in these,
than this? if he once send his Son there is no room left for suspicion or
doubting. This assures us that God is real in his Promises and will be faithful
to his Promises, for by it they are all at once ratified and confirmed. If God
make good the grand Promise of Sending his Son, what other promise will he not
make good? a Christ sent is the Seal of all the Promises; (See Isa. 7.14.)

3. Did God send Christ? then you need not fear but that the work of Redemption
is completed. When such a Person sends, and such a Person is sent, the Thing
shall be done effectually and thoroughly; be it never so high, so hard, if
Christ undertake it he will accomplish it. Had a Creature indeed been sent, there
might have been some ground of fear that he would not have been able to have
gone throught such a work; but when Christ is pitched upon, all ground of fear
is removed; to be sure he can and will finish what he engages in. And it is
evident that he perfected what he came about, from the Father's re-admitting
him into Heaven; had there been any thing left undone by him would the Father
have given him such a reception as he did? Believers! do not fear, all is Joh.
17.4.
finished, Christ gave not over till he brought it Joh. 19.30.
to that. You do your work by halfes, very weakly and imperfectly, but Christ
did his completely; yea, though the Law it self (through your flesh) was weak,
yet Christ (in your flesh) was strong; he did that thoroughly which the Law was
altogether unable to do.

4. Did God send Christ? know to your Comfort he has not yet done. As to his
own Satisfaction he has no more to do, but as to Your Glory and Happiness he
will yet do more. He sent Christ once into the Flesh and he will send him again
in the Flesh, (not to suffer and die again, no, Christ Romans 6.9.
being dead dies no more, there is now no further need of any suffering and
dying; but) to appear etc. (...) etc. Athan. de Incar. Verbi. p. 110.
like Himself in Glory and then to take you up into Glory. Once already he came
down from Heaven to Earth, from thence he will come again, for what end? why, to
carry you up from Earth to Heaven. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many (that is past), and unto them that look for him, shall he
appear the second time without sin unto Salvation, (this is yet to come; O long
for it, and rejoice in it!) His First-Sending was to make the Purchase, his
Second shall be to put you into Possession; which shall be done as certainly as
the former is done, and then there will be nothing further to be done.

5. Wherefore did God send Christ? for most gracious ends and purposes: 1 Timothy
1.15. -- Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners etc. 1 John 4.9, 10.
In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him: herein is
Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins: Joh. 3.17. For God sent not his Son into the world
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Now were
these God's Ends and shall they not be accomplished? may not Faith fetch strong
encouragement from these? for in order to the strengthening of Faith we are to
look to God's Works and their great Ends, as well as to his Word and Promise.

6. Did God send Christ? set this against All. Against the weakness of the Law:
that which the Law could not do, Christ did; that which was too hard for it,
was not too hard for him; the Text tells you he was sent on purpose to make up
what was defective in the Law. Set it also against the guilt of Sin: upon
Christ's Sending presently you read of the condemning of sin; God sent his own
Son etc. and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. Sin was to be destroyed and
the Wise God took a fit course, employed a fit messenger for that end, (as the
Scapegoat with the Sin of the people was to be sent away by the hand of a fit
man into the Wilderness, Lev. 16.21.) Several Other things might be instanced
in; whatever it is which troubles the dejected Christian let him therein study
a God sending, a Son sent, and there he may find very proper and considerable
satisfaction in every Case.

7. God sent Christ, for whom? for you who see your lost and undone condition.
Matthew. 15.24. I am not sent but unto the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, (so
his Commission was straightened at first, but afterward it was enlarged to the
lost sheep of the Gentiles also): Luke 19.10. The Son of man is come to seek
and to save that which was lost: Matt. 9.13. I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
Sinners, of whom I am chief.

8. He that sent Christ was also pleased to lay a special Trust and Charge upon
him, to secure all the Elect and to look to it that not One of those should
perish. Here Is a Truth which is like the full Honeycomb, you cannot touch it
but Honey and sweetness drops from it: And I the rather here take notice of it,
because I find our Savior himself when he is speaking of his Sending to make
mention of it, or when he mentions it to take in also his sending: as Joh.
6.39, 40. This is [the Father's Will [which has sent me], that of all which he
has given me I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again at the last
day: And this is [the Will of him [that sent me], that every one which sees
the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up at the last day. O when the Father sent Christ he made this known to him as
his Will and Pleasure, that he should take special care of all his Elect, and
see that not one of them should be lost: And this Christ submitted to (as a
part of his Surety-ship), and ever since he has with all faithfulness observed
this his Father's Will, and made good his Trust in the securing of every
sincere Christian. And (for your Comfort) know, that this Trust does as much
lie upon Christ's hands now as ever it did; that even as to your individual
Persons (if you be true Believers) it is the Father's Will to Christ, that he
should not lose one of you or let one of you perish. A child of God perish? O
by no means! that neither Father nor Son will permit: Rather than that should
befall any of the Elect, God would send his Son again to do and suffer all over
again (if such a thing was to be imagined). Here then (Believers) is matter of
strong Consolation for you, (viz.) as to your Spiritual and Eternal State you
are safe; Christ is under a special obligation to secure you: For the Father
did not only send him in order to the bringing of you into a good estate, but
he did also then entrust him with the keeping of you in that estate when he
should have brought you into it; and what can be spoken higher for your support
and comfort? But I must leave these things with you! O that you would often
think of them (especially in Soul-distresses), and be ever drawing from them
till your Hearts be even brim-full of Heavenly Consolation.

A Third Use offers it self, which might be as useful in order to Information
as the two Former were in order to Exhortation and Consolation. Something has
been spoke for the opening of the Nature and Grounds of Christ's being sent,
but as to the determination or close application of that to his Person (wherein
we have to do with Jews and Infidels), little has been spoken (I mean in that
way and method which is proper to those Opposers of Christ and Christianity).
Here therefore I should lay down and make good these two Propositions:

1. That that Jesus in whom we Christians believe, even He who was born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried,
and rose again, etc. I say, this Jesus was the very Person whom God sent; and
consequently that he was the Shiloh or Messiah prophesied of. 2. That this
Jesus was so sent by God (to be the true and only Messiah), as that besides and
after him no other Person is to be expected in that nature or quality to be
sent by God.
Now though these be two as weighty and as Fundamental Truths to us Christians
(as Christians) as any whatsoever; and though I could not hope to reach the
great Enemies of the Gospel so as to fasten any conviction upon them, yet
probably I might (in the pursuing of this Argument) reach some weak Christians,
so as to confirm and stablish them in the belief of these great Truths; yet I
shall not at present engage in the discussing of these two Propositions. First
because in so great Points it is better to say nothing then not to speak fully
and thoroughly to them; which if I could (other Discouragements being removed)
hope to do, yet here in this place, without making the Work in hand too vast
and big, to be sure I could not. Secondly because (however pertinent this
Undertaking might be to some other Texts) to that which I am upon it would not
be so pertinent: where the Apostles drift and design is not so much (in
opposition to Jews and Infidels) to assert that Christ was the very Person sent
of God, as to assign (for the Comfort of Believers) the Way and Course which
God took to bring about their Salvation, when upon the terms of the Law it was
impossible, (namely he sent his own Son etc). The Text therefore not tying me
to it, I may wave it; I shall have work enough to go over what the proper and
immediate Sense of the Contents of this Chapter will lead me to, and therefore
I may well cut off what is of a more remote and foreign Consideration. So that
this shall suffice for the First Observation, Christ was sent, and sent by God
the Father.

ROMANS 8.3. God sending [his own Son] in the likeness of sinful flesh, etc.


CHAP. XI. Of Christ's being the Natural and Eternal Son of God.
The Second Observation spoken to. Of Christ's being God's Son. How his Sonship
is attested in Scripture. Of his being God's own Son. That opened as he is
considered both relatively and absolutely. That He is the Natural Son of God,
coaequal, coessential, coaeternal with the Father, is asserted and proved by
sundry Scriptures. The true Notion and Ground of Christ's Sonship vindicated
against the Socinians. Where it is made good against them, that He is not the
Son of God 1. in respect of his miraculous Conception: Nor 2. of his
extraordinary Sanctification: Nor 3. of his Resurrection: Nor 4. of the Dignity
and Advancement of his Person: Nor 5. of the Father's Special Love to him: Nor
6. of Adoption: Nor 7. of his Likeness to God.
But he is the Son of God in respect of his participation of his Father's
Essence, and of his eternal Generation. Some Others ( besides Socinians)
somewhat concerned in this Controversy. Of the different communication of the
Divine Essence from the Father to the Son and to the Holy Ghost. Use 1. In
which by way of Inferenee it is shown, 1. That Christ is God. 2. That he is a
very great and glorious Person. 3. That the work of Redemption was an high and
costly Work.
Use 2. Christians from hence are exhorted 1. To study Christ in this Relation,
as God's own Son. Some Directions given about that. 2. To believe him and on
him as Such. 3. To honor and adore Christ. 4. To admire the greatness of God's
Love.
Use 3. To draw forth the Comfort wrapped up in this Relation of Christ.

I Proceed to the Third General observed in the Words, 2. Observe. Christ God's
Son and his own Son.
the Description of the Person sent: he is described by his near and special
Relation to God as being God's own Son. From whence the Second Observation will
be this, That the Lord Jesus the Person sent by God (as you have heard) was his
Son, yea his own Son. 1 John 4.14. We have seen and do testify, that the
Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.

Here Two things are to be spoken to; 1. Christ was God's Son: 2. He was God's
own Son.


1. First Christ was God's Son. He was truly the Son of man but not only the
Son of man, for he was also the Son of God; and he was as truly the latter as
the former. In reference to his Humane Nature he is styled the Genesis 3.15.
Seed of the Woman, the Gal. 3.16.
Seed of Abraham, the Matthew. 1.1.
Son of David, the Isa. 11.1. Jer. 23.5, 6. Zech. 6.12.
branch of the root of Jesse, the Son of man: in reference to his Divine Nature
he is styled the Son of God. This Relative Appellation or Title is so
frequently applied to Christ, that if I should cite the several Texts where it
occurs, I must transcribe a great part of the New Testament.

Several attestations of Christ's Sonship.
Yet it will not be amiss to take notice of the several attestations there upon
record to this great Truth. As that of John Baptist, Joh. 1.34. I saw, and bare
record, that this is the Son of God: That of Nathanael, Joh. 1.49. Rabbi, thou
art the Son of God: That of Peter, Matthew. 16.16. Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God: That of the Centurion, Matthew. 27.54. Truly this was the Son of God:
That of the Eunuch, Acts 8.37. I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God:
That of Martha, Joh. 11.27. Yea Lord, I believe, that thou art the Christ, the
Son of God, which should come into the world: The Devils themselves witnessed
to it, Matthew. 8.29. -- they cried out saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus thou Son of God? Mark 3.11. Unclean Spirits when they saw him fell down
before him, and cried, saying Thou art the Son of God. Christ himself (even
when he was speaking to God the Father) often asserted and pleaded his Sonship:
And the Father himself in a most solemn and open manner attested it; First at
Christ's Baptism, Matt. 3.17. Lo, a voice from heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and then at his Transfiguration, Matthew.
17.5. Behold a voice out of the cloud which said, This is my beloved Son. The
Apostle 1 John 5.7, 8. speaks of the Witness of Heaven and of Earth; There are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these three are one: And there are three that bear witness in earth, the
Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one: Now what is
the thing which they bear witness to? it is Christ's Sonship; for that is
instanced in as to the First and Supreme Witness (Verse. 9.), If we receive the
witness of men, the witness of God is greater: For this is the witness of God,
which he has testified af his Son. You see how fully this Truth is attested,
and how abundantly God was pleased to clear it up in the first promulgation of
the Gospel, (it being the great thing necessary to be known and believed).
Indeed the Jews (as to the Body of them) had a vail before their eyes, so that
they could not) discern this near relation of Christ to God; they saw the Son
of man but they did not see the Son of God: they went no higher than Matthew.
13.55, 56.
Is not this the Carpenters Son? is not his mother called Mary? and his
brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? and his sisters, are they not
all with us? Joh. 6.42.
Is not this Jesus the Son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know? how is
it then, that he says, I came down from heaven? Nay, when Christ plainly and
boldly told them that he was the Son of God, they could not bear it: Joh.
10.33. For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because that
thou being a man make thy self God: (you may know what they meant by this by
Christ's reply (Verse. 36.) Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and
sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?)
Nay, they were so offended at it that for this very thing they took away his
life: Joh. 19.7. The Jews answered him, we have a Law and by our Law he ought
to die, because he made himself the Son of God. You have a full account of it,
Mark 14.61, to 65. Again, the High Priest asked him, and said unto him, Art
thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? And Jesus said I am: etc. Then the
High Priest rent his clothes, and said, What need we any further witnesses? Ye
have heard the blasphemy, what think ye? and they all condemned him to be
guilty of death. Thus the eyes of that people were then (and O that they were
not so still!) so blinded, that they could not perceive Christ to be the Son of
God; but the Lord has given sufficient evidence thereof to all who do not
wilfully shut their eyes upon the light. It Is a Truth out of all question to
us who are called Christians; (yet about the Nature and Manner of Christ's
Sonship there are some unhappy Controversies raised amongst us).

2. Secondly Christ was God's own Son: so it is here signanter, God sending his
own Son. I have told you in the Original it is (...).
the Son of himself, or his (...).
proper Son (as it is Verse. 32.); God is Christ's proper Father [(...)] Joh.
5.18, and Christ here is God's proper Son [(...)]. He is not barely a Son but a
Son in a special and peculiar manner, God's own Son. This being a Truth of very
high import, a most Fundamental Point, I will endeavor first to explain and
prove it, and then to vindicate and make good its true and genuine Notion
against Opposers.

Our Lord Jesus Christ is God's own Son, whether you consider him comparatively
and relatively (I mean, How Christ is God's own Son.
in reference to other Sons), or absolutely as he is in Himself, abstractly
considered from all Other Sons:

God has three sorts of Sons, By Creation, by Grace, by Nature.
1. Consider him Comparatively: And so he is thus styled to difference or
distinguish him from all Other Sons. For God has three sorts of Sons, (1.)
Some are so by Creation (or in respect of their immediate Creation by God), so
the Angels are the Sons of God; of whom Divines commonly interpret those
passages in Job, Chap. 1.6. There was a day when the Sons of God came to
present themselves before the Lord: Chap. 38.7. When the morning Stars sang
together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy. So Adam upon this account,
he being immediately made by God, is called the Son of God Luke 3.38. (2.) Some
are the Sons of God by Grace, (viz.) the Grace of Regeneration and Adoption:
thus Believers are the Sons of God, as they are spiritually begotten of him and
adopted by him. Joh. 1.12, 13. As many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the Sons of God etc. which were born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat
he us with the word of truth etc. Gal. 4.3. To redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons: Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined
us unto the adoption of Chrildren by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the
good pleasure of his will: Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God: Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus: 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God; and every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him. Then (3.) in contradistinction to these there is God's own Son
or his Son by Nature; one that is a Son of another rank and Order than the
former: in this respect God has but One Son namely Christ: True Believers are
his Sons (which speaks the exuberancy of Divine Love toward them, 1 John 3.1.^^
Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God!) therefore Christ owns them for his Brethren; Heb.
2.11. Both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one,
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren: and ( Verse. 17.) In
all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren.
But yet they are not Sons as Christ is, his Sonship and theirs are of a very
different nature, differing no less than specifically. Upon which account he
sometimes appropriates the paternal relation in God unto himself; Luke 10.22.
All things are delivered to me of [ my Father etc.] Joh. 14.2. In [my Fathers]
house are many mansions: And elsewhere he distinguishes 'twixt God as being his
Father and as being the Father of Believers; Joh. 20.17. Go to my brethren, and
say unto them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God:
where he plainly makes a difference, for he does not say I ascend to our Father
as though He and They had one and the same common interest in this near
relation to God, (as he teaches us to say Our Father, because we all stand upon
the same foot and bottom of Filiation); but he says I ascend to my Father, and
your Father, thereby intimating that there was a difference betwixt God's being
a Father to him, and a Father to them. And so indeed there is a vast one, for
he is the Father of Christ by (...). Cyrill. Hieros.
Nature and by eternal generation; but he is the Father of Saints only by
Grace, by Adoption and Regeneration, which also are not eternal but
accomplished in time. Thus in this comparative notion Christ may be called
God's own Son.

2. Consider him absolutely, and abstractly from all Other Sons, so he is God's
own proper Son. It will be asked, how or wherein?

That I may a little insist upon the explication of this sublime Mystery, I
answer, Christ is God's own Son not only as God has a special interest or
propriety in him, (as Believers are said to be [(...)] Christ's own Joh.
13.1.); nor only as Christ is the Son of no other Father but of God (as the
Proprius Dei Filius jure optimo dicitur, propterea quod non sit alienus, nec
cujuspiam alterius etc. Slichting.
Socinians would turn off the word (...)); for so the Saints themselves may be
called God's own Sons, they being Sons as to their spiritual Sonship by and
from God the Father only: there must be therefore something higher than this
intended in this glorious Title of God's own Son. What may that be? Answ. that
Christ was (and is) God's Natural and Essential Son, that he was in a peculiar
manner begotten of him and from him in his eternal Generation, that he did
participate of the Fathers own Nature and Essence, that he was a Son coequal,
co-essential, coeternal with God the Father.

To draw all into as narrow a compass as may be! Our Lord Jesus is God's own
Son, as God the Father did from all eternity, in an ineffable manner, beget him
in his own Divine Essence: So that it points to two things, to his being
eternally begotten, to his being begotten in the Divine Essence. As to the
latter, I choose to express it so because it is more safe (if not more true) to
say that the Son was begotten in that Essence, rather than out of it. And Some
(who endeavor to open these profound Mysteries) tell us, that here we are not
to consider Christ essentially as he is God, but Personally as the Divine
Essence subsists in him as the Second Person: In the First consideration as he
was God he had the Divine Essence in and of himself, and so he could not be
begotten to it; for he was (...) God from himself, (though Amongst Others see
Armin. Declarat. Sent. p. 100 etc. and Resp. ad Artic. p. 131.
Some who yet were no Arrians, do not agree to this): In the Second notion as
he was God personally considered or as he was the Second Person and the Son, so
he was of the Father and not of himself; for though he was (...) God of himself
yet he was not (...) Son of himself. The usual language of the Ancients was God
of God, very God of very God etc. and this was very true; but then you must
take it as spoken of God Christus non est Filius Essentiae sed Personae; non
Dei Essentiae sed Dei Patris: Genitus enim est non essentiatus, ergo non suae
Essentiae, vel sui Filius. Est Filius unius very Dei, vid. Patris, non Divinae
in Patre Essentiae etc. Hoorneb. Socin. Conf. Lib. 1. ca. 1. p. 36). Cum
dicitur quod Filius est a Patre, novimus ex ipsis Fidei principiis hoc ita esse
explicandum, ut Filius sit a Patre quoad Personalitatem, nimirum secundum quod
est Filius, non quoad Deitatem and secundum quod est Deus. Siquidem cum Deitas
Filii sit una illa simplex and ipsissima Patris Deitas, ab alio esse non
possit; nam and Filius just (...) dicitur. Cum idco in Symbolo Nicaeno de
Christo occurrit, quod sit (...), hoc sensu Catholico intelligendum est, ut sit
Deus de Deo, non quoad Deitatem and Essentiam, sed potius quoad Personalitatem
and subsistentiam etc. Barlow. Exercit. 5. p. 107. etc. The Son in respect of
his Person is of the Father, but in respect of his Godhead he is of none. The
Son of God considered as he is a Son, is of the Father, God of very God; But
considered as he is God, he is God of himself, because the Godhead of the Son
is not begotten more than the Godhead of the Father. Perkins on Gal. p. 271.
See Cheyn. Trin-unity. p. 134.
Personally considered, with respect both to the Person begotting and the
Person begotten; for in the Sacred Persons Essence does not beget Essence, but
Person begets Person (as it is Alting. Theol. Probl. Loc. 30. Probl. 32. and 34.
usually expressed). I fear these things may be too high for our weak
capacities, that they do but darken rather than illustrate the Sonship of
Christ: yet Divines know not how to speak more plainly concerning these
Mysteries. Well! I (for my part) will not venture too far into these great
depths: that Christ is the Son of God, yea thus the Son of God (as has been
laid down), is evident enough; but he that will engage in a curious inquisition
into all Particulars resulting from or referring to Christ's Natural and
Eternal Sonship, will find at last he attempted that which was infinitely too
high for him.

Christ's Natural and Eternal Sonship proved by Scripture.
Contenting our selves therefore with this more General Explication of it and
not launching out too far into Particulars, that we may be the more firmly
rooted in the belief of this great Article of the Christian Faith, (viz.) that
Christ is the natural and eternally begotten Son of God (and therefore called
his own Son), it will be necessary for us to look into the Word of Truth to see
what Foundation we have there for this our belief: For it would be equally
dangerous for us to believe it if the Word does not affirm it, as not to
believe it if the Word does affirm it because we cannot fathom several things
in it by the plummet of Reason. I shall desire you therefore to weigh the
following Scriptures.

Joh. 7.29. I know him, for I am [from him], and he has sent me. They are the
words of Christ uttered with reference to God the Father, concerning whom he
says that he was [(...)] from him. How was Christ from the Father? I answer,
not only in respect of his Mission by and from the Father, (that indeed follows
immediately upon it [and has sent me], but not as the sole or main thing in
respect of which Christ is said to be from his Father; I conceive, his being
sent is brought in as a quite Other thing and distinct from that): But Christ
says he was from the Father in respect of his eternal Generation by the
Father; that was the Thing principally intended by him in this Expression. As
the Holy Ghost is said to be [from the Father] because of his procession from
him, (that is the reason I go upon); Joh. 15.26. [(...)] he proceeds from the
Father: so the Son the Second Person is said to be from the Father because of
his Generation by him; (and I find the Ab ipso (inquit) sum, quia Filius de
Patre, and quicquid est Filius de illo est cujus est Filius. Ideo Dominum.
Jesum dicimus Deum de Deo; Patrem non dicimus Deum de Deo, sed tantum Deum.
August.
Ancients thus opening the place).

Another Text for the proof of this eternal Sonship of Christ, is Psalm. 2.7.
The Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. To
me, this is a very considerable Scripture for the confirming the Truth in hand,
(though our Adversaries (I know) make a contrary use of it, and Some As the
learned Dr. Jackson who says he dares not insist upon this Text to prove
Christ's eternal Generation. On the Creed 7. B. Sect. 3. Chapter 25. p. 257.
Others who are Friends speaks somewhat diminutively about it). It Is beyond all
dispute that Christ was the Person here spoken of; 'twas not said to David
(further than as he was a type) but to Christ himself, Thou art my Son etc.
thus Some of the One of which has this notable passage about this 2d Psalm:
Magistri nostri quicquid hoc Psalmo canitur, de Rege Messia interpretati sunt;
sed secundum verborum sonum, and ob refutationem Haereticorum (be means us
Christians) convenit, ut eum interpretemur de ipso Davide. Rabbi Solomon Jarchi.
Jewish Writers themselves do carry it; and the matter of the Psalm with the
several expressions in it, are only applicable to Christ; (See Verse. 8, 9, etc.
to the end): and as to that Verse which I have to do with, you have it thrice
cited in the New Testament and it is always applied to Christ; (so Acts 13.33.
Heb. 1.5. Heb. 5.5.) Well then! what does God here say concerning Christ? why,
Thou art my Son: but how did Christ come to be his Son? why, as he had begotten
him (for that comes in as the fundamentum relationis), Thou art my Son, I have
begotten thee: but when did God thus beget him? why, from all eternity, [to
day] have I begotten thee. Various are the apprehensions of men about the
import and reference of this word [to day], and what that matter or period of
Time is to which it refers: Some make it to point to the time of the rage and
opposition of Enemies against Christ (spoken of Verse 1. etc.); Some to the
time of the New-Testament-administration: Some to the time of Christ's
resurrection and advancement (as we shall see hereafter). But I concur with
Hodie non tempus certum, sed aeternitatem designat: Est descriptio Naturae
aeternitatis optime come niens, omne praeteritum a Deo removers, omne futurum a
Deo praescindens, omnem successionem excludens, aeternitatem his omnibus
carentem optime explicans. Arnold. Catch. Racov. Major. p. 208.
Those who do not understand it of this or that particular, determinate day or
time, but make it to point to and to be expressive of eternity. This Eternity
is but one day or but one continued Now, in which there being no succession
whatever God does from eternity he may be said to do it now or to day: So here,
this day have I begotten thee, that is from everlasting. True indeed, Non
volunt Nostri Vocem Hodie aeternitatem significare, sed pro subjecta materia
exponi debare; and quando Deo tribuitur, non infringere ejus aeternitatem, sed
ei propter nos and (...) duntaxat adjungi. Hoornb. de Christo. cap. 1. p. 17.
the Word it self (in its first and strictect sense) does not signify or
import eternity; yet because in this place it must be interpreted according to
the matter spoken of, therefore here it must have that signification the Nature
of the Thing so determining it. For God's begetting of his Son being an
immanent act, it must (as all acts of that nature are) be from everlasting: and
it being spoken after the manner of men, it must be so understood as may best
suit with the Nature of God and with the Nature of the Thing which it speaks
of. When therefore you read [thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee],
it is as if God had said, O my Son I own thee to be so before the world, and I
here attest that from all Eternity I have begotten thee, and that thou art my
Son by eternal Generation. And thus the great Lights of the Ancient Church in
their Contests with the Arrians did make use of and expound it.

That Text in Prove. 8. is exceeding full and clear: Verse. 22, 23, 24, etc. The
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was
set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was: When there
were no depths, I was brought forth: when there were no fountains abounding
with water. Before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills, was I brought
forth. (this is further with great elegancy set forth Verse. 26, 27, 28.) He
concludes ( Verse. 29, 30.), When he gave to the Sea his decree, that the waters
should not pass his Commandment, when he appointed the foundations of the
earth: Then I was by him, as one brought up with him, and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him. Vide Synopsis Critic. V. 2. in Cap. 8.
Prove. in initio.
Of whom can all this be understood but of Christ? to whom is it applicable but
to him who is the Personal Wisdom of God the Father? and if so, does it not
then plainly hold forth his eternal Existence and also his eternal Generation?
So Micah 5.2. Thou Bethleem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands
of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in
Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting; (in the
Hebr. it is from the days of eternity).

If we look into the New Testament this will yet be more clear. There Christ is
styled the only begotten of the Father, which Title the Evangelist John often
repeats; the Other Evangelists speak much of Christ's Manhood and of his Birth
as Man, but (...). Epiphan. adv. Her. lib. 2. tom. 2. p. 747.
John is altogether taken up with the Godhead of Christ and with his eternal
Generation as the Son of God; (whence Nyssene says of him that he did indeed
(...); and Some think he was from hence called John the Divine). In reference
to which he calls him over and over God's only begotten Son, (as you see Joh.
1.14.18. Joh. 3.16.18. 1 John 4.9.) Now how is Christ the only begotten Son of
God? surely it must be in respect of some extraordinary way and manner of his
Sonship peculiar to himself; and what can that be but that which I am upon?
Never was any person (...). Damasc. Naianz. Orat. 2. de Filio and Sp. Sancto.
Page 590. puts in another word, (...).
so begotten of the Father as he was; God has other Sons begotten of him (as
some prealledged Scriptures testify), but yet Christ is styled his only
begotten Son because of his special and incommunicable Generation, because he
is the Son of God by Nature and has that very Nature and Essence which God the
Father has. Take away this speciality of his Sonship and how shall we
interpret this exclusive title of Christ, the only begotten of God? He is not
only called God's own Son but also his only Son; and nothing can make him to be
so (as will appear by and by), but his being the Natural Son of God and by
eternal Generation. It Is observable, after the Evangelist had been speaking of
the Sonship of Christ (Verse. 14.); and he speaks of this as being of a
different kind and order from the former, upon which he calls him the only
begotten of the Father. The old Arrian Heretics had a pretty evasion for this;
Christ says Eunomius (whom Basil and his Brother Nyssen have so profoundly
confuted,) was the only begotten of the Father in as much as he was begotten
only of the Father; (which evasion exactly falls in with that modern Gloss
which some Socinians give upon the Text, Christ was God's own Son (i.e.) he was
the Son of no other but of God): But to this it is answered, there is a great
difference betwixt being begotten only. of the Father and being the only
begotten of the Father; the first makes God to be the only begetter but not
Christ to be the only begotten: without which this Title of his would signify
nothing. For it is true as to the Saints they are begotten only of the Father,
but yet it is not true that they are the only begotten of the Father, (indeed
this belongs not to them at all, but only to Christ); their Sonship by
regeneration and Christ's Sonship by eternal Generation are things of a quite
different Nature and Species, and it must be so or else he could not truly be
styled the only begotten of the Father.

The Apostle in this Chapter ( Verse. 32.) calls Christ God's own Son, He that
spared not his own Son etc. now the word [(...)] imports as much as God's
proper or natural Son. That Is the fignification of it in other references; Luke
6.44. Every tree is known by his own fruit: it is (...) that fruit which is
proper and natural to it; so that (...) is to be taken 1 Cor. 15.38. God gives
it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own body: And so Christ
is (...) God's own Son (that is) his Son who has the same Nature and Essence
with himself.

There are three Properties (if the two First be not one and the same,)
belonging to Christ in his Sonship which are incommunicable to any other: As

1. He is a Son Coequal with his Father: Joh. 5.18. The Jews sought the more
to kill him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but said also that God
was his Father, making himself equal with God: The Jews were in the right as to
the thing only they erred as to the Person, because they would not see that
Christ was this Son of God and therefore equal to the Father; their Argument
was good and their Inference proper and genuine, if Christ do claim to be the
proper Son of God then he must be equal with God; nothing could be more true.
And he had and must have such a Sonship as will rise up to this, therefore his
whole discourse (in which he is very large Joh. 5. and 10 Chapt.) tends to the
proving of nothing lower than his Natural Sonship, and consequently his
equality with his Father. And if he had been only the Son of God in a lower way
why did he not so explain himself? why did he suffer the charge of blasphemy
upon it? nay, why did he lose his life upon it? Had he been the Son of God only
as others are, the very telling of that had quieted the people, acquitted him
from blasphemy, and saved his life; but he lets them alone to go on in their
malice against him, because that was the very truth which they pitched upon and
which he would have to be known, namely, that he was so the Son of God as to be
equal with God. For a further proof of this take that of the Apostle where he
speaks it out expressly, Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God: surely there is more in this [being equal with
God] than what Some (particularly (...) est spectari tanquam Deum. Grotius. As
though there were no more in (...), than in (...) Dr. Pearson on the Creed. p.
246.
Grotius) are pleased to make it to be; it notes equality of Nature and
Essence, not only some external show or appearance, or estimation by others.
The latter Clause must be expounded as it is joined with the former, and then
its sense and emphasis will be clear enough; Christ being in the form of God
(existing in the Divine Nature and really participating of that Nature) thought
it no robbery (no bold encroachment upon the honor of God) to be equal with
God, (to assume and apply that Nature to himself which he had in truth). And
(which will much strengthen this exposition of the words,) as that which
follows Verse. 7, 8. speaks Christ's Natural equality with us (as he was Man)
and must be so interpreted, so this here speaks Christ's Natural equality with
the Father (as he was God) and must be so interpreted also.

2. Christ is a Son Co-essential with the Father. He is not only like him but
of the same Nature and Essence with him, not only under some resemblance of God
((...)), but under a perfect identity and oneness of Essence with God ((...)):
Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one. Hence he is styled the image (the
essential and substantial image) of God, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. This was that
great Truth which the Nicene Fathers asserted and maintained with such renowned
courage and zeal. (But I will but touch upon this Head because it is the same
with the former; that is more comprehensive but in its main import it perfectly
agrees with this).

3. Christ is the Coeternal Son of God the Father. They were both of the same
standing (if I may with reverence so express it), both from everlasting. Christ
was eternally a Son, there never was any time when he was otherwise or when he
began so to be, (...) (as the Ancients used to express it). If the (...).
Najanz. Orat. 35. tom. 1. page 563. (...) etc. (...); etc. Epiph. adv. Haeres.
lib. 2. tom. 2. p. 796. (...). Id. p. 794.
Father was eternal and always a Father then the Son was eternal and always a
Son, for Relatives must be simultaneous. This was that which greatly troubled
and vexed Arius so often to hear the Orthodox speaking of, semper Pater semper
Filius, simul Pater simul Filius, (I say) this offended him very much, (as
appears by what he himself wrote in his Letter to Eusebius): but the thing is
never the less true because he was offended at it. The Scriptures are very
plain concerning Christ's eternity and eternal generation, (some of which have
been already cited, take a few more) Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty. Rev. 2.8. These things says the First and the Last,
which was dead and is alive. As soon as the Apostle had spoken of Christ's
Sonship Heb. 1.5. presently he falls upon his eternity Verse. 8. Unto the Son he
says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Thus I have shown in what
respects Christ is styled God's own Son, and how far those are grounded upon
the He that would see the Texts (which have been cited, and diverse Others)
opened and improved in reference to Christ's Sonship (as it has been stated),
let him read Zanch. de Tribus Elohim Lib. 4. Cap. 6. etc. p. 125. etc.
Word of truth.

But all this being vehemently denied and opposed by Some, and it highly
concerning us truly to apprehend and firmly to believe a Thing of so high a
Nature, upon these considerations I judge that it will not be enough barely to
assert the Truth, but it will be necessary also to hear what Opposers say
against it and how they endeavor to undermine it; give me leave therefore to
spend some time about that.

Christ's Natural and Eternal Sonship vindicated against the Opposers of it.
I think I may confidently and warrantably affirm that amongst all the Articles
of Faith which make up the Christian Religion, not any One of them ever met
with so much Opposition and was the ground of so many and so fierce Disputes,
as this great Article which refers to the Godhead of Christ and to his being
the Natural and Essential Son of God. They who know any thing of what has
passed in former Times in the matters of Religion, know what Contests there
were about it in the first Ages of the Church: In the very infancy of the
Gospel Satan stirred up Some (as Of whom Ignatius is conceived to speak when he
says (...); they made the Son to be of another and different Essence from the
Father, and so the Father from the Son; (so the expression is usually opened).
Ep. ad Trallian. p. 69. Edit. Vsser.
Ebion, Cerinthus etc.) to oppose it, for it being the great fort and bulwark
of Christianity he would be sure first to make his batteries against it. But
things never came to their full height till about 300 years after Christ, when
Vide Hist. Trip. Lib. 1. Cap. 12 and 13.
Arius and his Party with great zeal (such as it was) set themselves against
it, boldly denying Christ to be God or the eternal Son of God. After a long
flux of time, these Controversies were pretty well composed, yea the Church had
(in a great measure) after its sharp Conflicts gained the belief of this
fundamental Truth and was in the quiet possession of it: till in these latter
Ages that unhappy SOCINVS came upon the stage, and he muddy'd the waters again,
revived the old Arrian Heresies which seemed to be dead and rotten, and did
(with no less boldness and more subtilty) veterem serram reciprocare. With
Socinus contra Wiekum. Lib. Suasor: Animadv. in Assert. Posnan. Smalcius de
vera Divinit. Jesu Christi. Refut. Franz. Contra Smiglet. Crellius de uno Deo
Patre. Slichting: contra Meisner. Ostorod. contra Tradel. Enjedinus. Catech.
Racov. de Pers. Christi. cap. 1.
Him and his Followers (all of which do unanimously agree in their denial of
Christ's Sonship in that sense wherein it has been opened) we now have to do:
and the difference 'twixt them and us stands thus; they agree with us that
Christ is the Son of God, but as to the nature, quality, manner, foundation of
his Sonship, there they differ from us. We say he is the proper, natural Son of
God, they make him (in effect) no better than an improper, allusive,
Metaphorical Son of God; we say he is the eternal Son of God, they say he is
only so in time; The Socinian false Grounds of Christ's Sonship refuted: and
the true Ground thereof established.
We say he is the Son of God by eternal Generation and thereupon called God's
own Son, they say he is God's own Son upon other Grounds and Causes; which what
they are we are now to enquire after and whether they be true and consonant to
the Word. This is a work which has been done over and over by many, (by Some
in our own language), yet the Subject in hand necessarily leads me also to
speak something to it.

The First false Ground propounded.
1. First they affirm that Christ is God's own Son in respect of his miraculous
Conception and production in the womb of the Virgin by the holy Ghost. For the
proof of which they allege Luke 1.35. The Angel answered and said unto her,
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee: [Therefore also that Holy thing which shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God].

That refuted, and it is proved that Christ is not God's own Son in respect of
his miraculous Conception.
Here the Defenders of the Truth take notice of the Adversaries fallacious and
fraudulent dealing, which indeed is very gross; for the greatest of them
sometimes seem to grant that Christ is the Natural and Essential Son of God,
('it is the very Title which they prefix before some of their Treatises); in
which One would think that they did concur with us, holding the same thing
which we do and giving the same honor and respect to Christ which we do: when
in truth there is no such thing, they do but speak fraudulently (according to
the custom of their (...) etc. See much of the fraud of the Arrians in this, in
Epiphan. adv. Haeres. lib. 2. tom. 2. p. 738 Of them Hilarious speaks to the
same purpose: Tribuunt Christo Dei nomen, quia hoc and hominibus sit tributum.
Fatentur Dei vere Filium, quia Sacramento Baptismi vere Dei Filius unusquisque
perficitur. Ante tempora and saecula confitentur, quod de Angelis and Diabolis
non est negandum. Ita Domino Christo sola illa tribuuntur, quae sunt vel
Angelorum propria vel nostra. Caeterum quod Deo Christo legitimum and verum
est, Christus Deus verus, i.e. eadem esse Filii quae Patris Divinitas
denegatur. Contra Auxent. Mediolan.
old Predecessors): for here is the Fallacy, they me an by all this nothing more
than that Christ was the Son of God in regard of his wonderful Conception and
Nativity by the Virgin Mary. (But to pass by their frauds let us come to the
thing!) We say Christ's filiation or Sonship was grounded upon something of a
far higher nature than this, that he was the Son of God antecedently to it,
even from all eternity; they ground his Sonship upon it only, making it but
then to commence when he was begotten by the holy Ghost, conceived and born by
the Virgin.

Against which dangerous Opinion we argue thus;

1. If Christ's Sonship did result from this as the true and proper ground of
it, then the Vide Stegm. Photin. Dip. 16. p. 180. Arnold. Catech. Racov. major.
p. 176.
Holy Ghost (the third Person) should rather be entitled the Father of Christ
than the First Person; because that effect which was the foundation of Christ's
Sonship was more immediately produced by him than by the First Person. But this
is notoriously false, for all along in the whole current of the Word Christ is
brought in as the Son of the Father and as standing in this relation to the
Father, and not to the Spirit.

2. Christ himself never resolves his Sonship into his miraculous Conception or
Birth. You find him sometimes professedly treating upon it and giving the
world' an account about it, and what does he then ground it upon? why, he
carry's it up to his doing what the Father did Joh. 5.19. to his quickening whom
he will, even as the Father does Joh. 5.21. to his having life in himself, as
the Father has life in himself Joh. 5.26. to his being one with the Father
Joh. 10.30. to his being in the Father and his Father in him Joh. 10.38. He
does not at all mention his miraculous Conception (which in all probability he
would have done if that had been the proper Ground of his Sonship), but he
insists altogether upon things tending to the proof of his participating of his
Fathers Nature and Essence, and by them he designs to make out his Sonship,
yea, and that it was such a Sonship as did render him equal with his Father;
but this he could not have done either with truth or evidence had he been only
the Son of God upon what is here pretended.

3. Though Christ's Conception and temporal Generation was very wonderful, yet
that did but reach to his Flesh or Humane Nature and there terminate. Now the
Scripture does not place his great Sonship in his Humane but in his Divine
Nature; therefore as to that it speaks him to be the Qui factus est ex semine
David secundum carnem, hic erit Homo and Filius Hominis, qui declarandus est
Filius Dei secundum Spiritum Sanctificationis, hic erit Deus, and sermo Dei
Filius. Tertul. adv. Praxean. Torquetur frustra locus Luc. 1.35, etc. A nuda
enim conceptione and nativitate Carnis ex Virgin, manavit non Filii Dei, sed
Filii hominis appellatio. Quod vero Angelus porro affirmat, illud est, hac
Filiatione non obstante, etiam vocandum Filium Dei; adhibita exact particula
(...), ad conciliandam utramque Filii Hominis and Filii Dei uni Christo
tribuendam appellationem, per communicationem idiomatum etc. Cloppenb. Ant.
Smalc. p. 71.
Son and Seed of David or the Son of Man, in contradistinction to his being the
Son of God. And his Sonship to God cannot be grounded upon that which was the
ground of his Sonship to Man, for where the Sonships are so different they must
needs have different Grounds and foundations. Pray let these two Texts be well
weighed and they will sufficiently prove what I say; Romans 1.3.4. Concerning his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the resurrection from the Dead. Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers
and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed
for ever. The sum of all, Christ has two Natures, according to which two
Natures he has two distinct Sonships (he is the Son of God and he is the Son
of Man), these different Sonships must have different causes and grounds;
therefore his Conception upon which he was the Son of Man cannot make him also
to be the Son of God.

4. As to the Text alleged by our Adversaries to prove their Opinion, there is
a double Answer commonly given to it.

1. The particle [therefore] in it is not causal but illative. It Is not brought
in as signifying the Ground of Christ's Sonship, but as a note of inference
wherein something is inferred from what went before. The Angel had told Mary
that the Holy Ghost should come upon her, and the power of the Highest should
overshadow her; (and then adds) therefore also the Holy thing which shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God: therefore? what may be the force
of this word in this place? it is a mere deduction drawn from the premises, to
this effect, Since such a thing shall be done by the Holy Ghost, therefore
(according to what was prophesied) Christ shall be called the Son of God. The
words plainly refer to the prophecy Isa. 7 14. Therefore the Lord himself
shall give you a sign, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and
shall call his name Immanuel: The Evangelist brings them in expressly in that
reference, Matthew. 1.21, 22, 23. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall
call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. (Now all
this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken of the Lord by the
Prophet, saying, Behold a Virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring forth a
Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is God with
us). And their sense and tendency is the same here, Therefore also that Holy
thing etc. as if the Angel had said, this being the thing which was foretold
(which must be accomplished and is now near to be accomplished) therefore it
shall so be, that which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.
So that this [Therefore] is only a note of Consequence as to the Event or the
fulfilling of the Prophecy, not a note of causality as to the thing it self
(viz.) Christ's Sonship to God.

2. It Is therefore he shall be [called] the Son of the most High: it is not
therefore he shall be the Son etc. but therefore he shall be called. etc. And
so it points not to that which was constitutive of Christ's Filiation, but only
to that which was Angelus non dixit quare sit Filius Dei, sed quod sit Filius
Dei, and quare fideles ipsum pro Filio Dei sint agnituri. Christum autem ab
aeterno a Patre esse genitum, humanamque Naturam in Unitatem Filii esse
assumendam, satis indicavit, dum dixit, quod nascetur ex te Sanctum, Filius Dei
vocabitur etc. Nec tamen hoc vult, quod Mariae Filius, qua Mariae Filius est,
etiam sit Filius Dei; sed quod inter alia signa ex quibus Christum Dei Filium
esse agnoscatur, etiam hoc sit. Bisterf. contra Crellium lib. 1. sect. 2. cap.
31. p. 305.
manifestative and declarative of it. Christ was God before he assumed Flesh,
but he was God manifested in the Flesh (1 Timothy 3.16.) so Christ was the Son of
God before he was thus conceived but this was a great manifestation or
declaration that he was the Son of God. It Is true, as to us our being 1 John
3.1.
called the Sons of God notes our being made the Sons of God; but here as to
Christ it only notes that he should be declared, evidenced; acknowledged to be
the Son of God: he was not now made the Son of God (that was done by his
eternal Generation), only it was now made to appear that he was the Son of God.
In short, the Lord Jesus who was thus miraculously conceived was the very Son
of God, but as he was thus conceived or because he was thus conceived, so he
was not the Son of God; for of this there was an antecedent foundation, that
which was of a far more ancient date, namely his being begotten of the Father
from everlasting.

The Second False Ground of Christ's Sonship.
2. Secondly it is said, that Christ was the Son of God in respect of his
Sanctification and Mission. Joh. 10.36. Say ye of him, whom the Father has
sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the
Son of God? Christ being sanctified by the Father (that is) the Spirit of Grace
and Holiness being in so eminent a degree poured out upon him, and he being
designed and set apart and fitted by God to and for a most high and eminent
Office, as also he being sent upon a great work for an extraordinary end to
redeem and save lost Sinners; therefore upon these Grounds (and not upon his
being eternally begotten of the Father) he was God's Son.

Christ not God's own Son in respect of his Sanctification or Mission.
Answ. More is inferred from this Text than what it will bear; we may thus far
very well argue from it He who was sanctified and sent was undoubtedly the Son
of God; but if we go further and infer, He who was sanctified and sent was
therefore the Son of God (as if the sanctification and mission were the ground
of his being so), Ex loco Joh. 10.36. negamus hoc effici posse, Jesum Christum
Deum, ac Filium Dei unigenitum dici aut esse etc. Sanctificatio and Missio qua
Pater Filium Sanctificavit and misit in mundum, nec Deita^en^ Filii nec
Filiationem fundat, sed fundatur in illa, atque illam demonstrat a posteriori:
Quia ad munus mediatorium sanctificari and mitti in mundum non poterat, qui non
esset co-aeternus and co-essentialis Patri mi^tenti Filius. Cloppenb. Compend.
Socin. p. 38.
we stretch the words too far and endeavor to fetch that out of them which is
not at all in them. There Is a great difference betwixt the applying of such a
relation to such a Person, and the assigning of the proper cause and foundation
of that relation: Christ being sanctified and sent is the Son of God, upon
these that relation may truly be attributed to him; but yet they do not amount
to the being the Cause of that relation. Christus qui fuit sanctificatus and
missus est Filius Dei is a Proposition very true, but Christus qua fuit
sanctificatus and missus est Filius Dei (as pointing to the fundamentum
Filiationis), is a Proposition very false; (and there lies the Controversy
betwixt us and our Opponents). The words cited have reference to the preceding
Verses, where Christ is vindicating himself from that blasphemy which the Jews
charged him with because he made himself God, ( Verse. 33.): now this he does
first in a lower way, by an Argument drawn from the Title usually given to Men
in places of Office and Authority; they are called Gods, and if so then (says
Christ) do I blaspheme because I call my self God and the Son of God whom God
has sanctified and sent and invested with such high Offices? Do not mistake
here, Christ is not God only in a titular way because of his Office, he is so
truly, properly, in respect of his Nature and Essence, (this he speaks to Verse.
30, 37, 38.) but he instances only in his Office in this place and from thence
fetches that Argument which was very proper to his present design, (viz.) the
vindicating of himself as to the charge of blasphemy. Verses 34, 35, 36. Jesus
answered them, is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods? If he called
them Gods, unto whom the Word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken:
Say ye of him, whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou
blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? Now what is there in this to
undermine Christ's eternal Sonship? or to make his sanctification and mission
the Hoc non dicit causam suae Filiationis, sed praestantiae supra alios, unde
potius queat nuncupari Dei Filius quam illi Dii. Hoornb. Socin. confut. de
Christo c. 1. p. 39.
ground of his filial relation to God? One word further (as to the latter of
these), if Christ was the Son of God before he was sent then his sending did
not make him to become the Son of God; but so he was, for it is said here in the
Text God sent his Son implying he was a Son before he was sent; had it not been
so, it must have been said God sent him to be his Son and not God sent his Son
(which supposes him before the sending to be actually a Son).

The Third False Ground of Christ's Sonship.
3. Another Cause assigned of Christ's Sonship and of the apellation here given
him, God's own Son, is his Resurrection. That begetting which the Psalmist
speaks of Psalm. 2.7. is not (say they) to be interpreted of Christ's being
eternally begotten of the Father, but only of what the Father did when he
raised him up from the dead: for so the Apostle brings it in Acts 13.32, 33. We
declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the
Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us* their children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again: as it is also written in the Second Psalm, Thou art my
Son this day have I begotten thee.

Christ not God's Son in respect of his Resu^rection.
For answer to this, 1. How many Causes and Grounds shall we have of Christ's
Sonship? we have had two already here is a third, we shall have by and by a
fourth and a fifth and I know not how many more, where shall we stop? Christ's
Sonship is but one (I mean as he is the Son of God), and therefore admits not
of the multiplication of Causes. In all relations there is some single act
which is the foundation of them, upon which in their relative notion they are
complete: and why should it not be so here in the relation betwixt God and
Christ? Our Opponents tell us that Christ upon his miraculous Coneeption was
the Son of God? I then ask, was he so, truly, fully, perfectly, completely? if
so (which they by their Principles cannot deny) then what need is there of any
thing further? or how does the nature of the thing admit of any thing further?
for he that is a Son already perfect and complete cannot by any addition or new
emergency be made more a Son; because the Essence of things (whether absolute
or relative) cannot be intended or remitted. We are enquiring what is it which
makes Christ the Son of God? we ground it (as we should and must) upon one
thing, namely upon the Father's begetting of Christ from all eternity and
communicating his own Nature and Essence to him; they (who oppose) lay it upon
several things (as you have already heard in part and will yet further hear in
what follows): now we say this cannot be, for there can be but one foundation
of one and the same relation, therefore they must pitch upon some such one
foundation and wave all the rest. I know what they say, Christ upon his
Conception etc. was the Son of God in a way of inchoation, but upon his
Resurrection and Exaltation he was the Son of God in a way of consummation: I
reply, (1.) Then the Texts urged before are out of doors and signify little or
nothing; for they only prove that Christ (upon his Conception and
Sanctification and Mission) began to be a Son of God, but he was not so indeed,
fully, and properly; for there must be yet something more which must follow
after to complete and consummate his Sonship. (2.) This is a very strange and
most ungrounded distinction, it arguing a growth and progress in Christ's
Sonship (for which there is not the least warrant from the Word of God): we
read of Christ's Luke 2.52.
increasing in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and Man, but we never
read of his increasing in his Sonship; that admitted of several manifestative
evidences (as to us) but not of several perfective degrees (as to it self).
Even the Sonship of Believers at the first moment of their Conversion is entire
and full; they may grow and be more perfect in their Gifts, Graces, Comforts,
but as to their Covenant-state and Relation to God that is complete at the first
and admits of no further addition. And shall the Sonship of the blessed Son of
God be a partial, imperfect, progressive thing? neither the glory of the Person
nor the nature of the Relation it self will bear such a thing.

2. Secondly, nothing more evident than that Christ was the Son of God before
his Resurrection: Matthew. 3.17. Lo, a voice from heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: was not this witness given of Christ
before his Resurrection? Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son but gave him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Christ
here is called God's own Son, which must be understood of him before his
Resurrection for the Father's not sparing of him was antecedent to that, and
yet then he was his own Son otherwise how could it be said that God spared not
his own Son? Matthew. 16.16. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God: was not
this Confession made by Peter before Christ's Resurrection? I might go much
higher in the dating of Christ's Sonship than merely before his Resurrection;
but that is high enough to show the falsity of what is asserted by the
Adversary.

3. We say Christ was Non quod tum Filins Dei esse caeperit, qui ab aeterno
fuerat, sed quia tunc res aliqua fieri dicitur, quando talis cognoscitur; seu
tum demum dicitur facta (...) cum fuit facta (...). Portus contra Ostorod. cap.
9. p. 67.
declared and manifested but not made or constituted the Son of God by his
Resurrection. So the Apostle himself states it Romans 1.4. Declared to be the Son
of God with power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the resurrection
from the dead: (that the word (...) is truly rendered by [declared], is
sufficiently proved by many). It Is one thing to be made God's Son, another
thing to be declared God's Son, the First Christ had from his eternal
Generation 'twas only the Second that he had from his Resurrection. You read
Verse. 19. of this Chapter of the manifestation of the Sons of God, Believers
are not made the Sons of God when they enter upon the glorified estate, but
they are then manifested both to be the Sons of God as also what their glory is
upon their being so. 1 John 3.2. Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him: mark it, the relation it self is present [now we are the Sons of
God], but the dignity and glory which is to follow upon this relation, that
does not yet appear but hereafter it shall: So here, Christ was the Son of God
long before his resurrection, but the manifestation thereof was when God raised
him from the dead; till then his Sonship and Glory had been very much veiled
and hid, but then it broke forth like the Sun after it has been shut up under
a dark and thick cloud: then God owned him as his own Son before all the world,
and made it to appear who and what he was. And this is that which the Apostle
aimed at in the place cited: his only design there being to prove that God had
given the World sufficient Evidence that Christ was his very Son; and amongst
other Evidences of it he instances in the miraculous raising of him out of the
Grave. So that the begetting in Psalm. 2. and in Acts 13. are of a quite
different nature, the one being proper as relating to the thing it self, the
other improper as relating only to the declaration or manifestation of the
thing: We argue from the proper and primary sense of the words [ Thou art my
Son etc.] the Adverse Party from their improper and secondary sense (as the
Apostle makes use of them in that place). In the Scripture dialect several
things are said to be done when they are declared and manifested to be done: so
Paul brings in Christ as begotten at the day of his Resurrection, because it
was then declared that he was the eternally begotten Son of God.

A Fourth False Ground of Christ's Sonship.
4. It Is said, Christ is God's Son (and so called) because of the pre-eminence
and dignity of his Person, or because of his great advancement and exaltation
to the Offices of King and Priest. Heb. 1.4, 5. Being made so much better than
the Angels, Deus misit suum Filium i. e. Christum illum suum, cui communis
alioqui Filii Dei Titulus, propter singularitatem and excellentiam, proprius
est factus. Slichting. in Loc.
as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they: For unto
which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son. Heb. 5.5. Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest: but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee: Here you see
Christ's Sonship comes in upon his exaltation with respect to his Person and
Office.

Christ not God's Son in respect of his dignity and advancement.
I answer, this proves as little as that which went before; for here also

1. It Is clear that Christ was the Son of God before he was thus exalted.

2. His Exaltation was not the ground but the result and consequent of his
Sonship: he was not a Son because he was exalted, but he was exalted because he
was a Son. First the Apostle describes him in what relates to the formality and
Essence of his Sonship, Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and
the express image of his Person: and then he sets down the Honor which the
Father put upon him, not to be a Son (for that he was already) but because he
was a Son, (for that is the ground of the more excellent name given to him, and
so the words in Verse. 4, 5. come in).

3. It Is strange that this day of Christ's begetting should be so multiplied:
there is the day of his Nativity, and then it was [ to day have I begotten thee;
there is the day of his Resurrection, and then too it was [ To day have etc.]
there is the day of his Exaltation, and then again it was [To day have] etc. Had
this Text been cited forty times in forty several Cases, we must have had so
many several grounds and Causes of Christ's Sonship.

But why then (Some may say) is this place so often repeated in the New
Testament?

I answer, not only because it is applied to the several declarations of
Christ's Sonship, but also to show that all which the Father did to and for
Christ was all to be resolved into his eternal Sonship as the ground thereof:
he was raised again because he was the Son of God, exalted to great Honor and
Dignity because he was the Son all was grounded upon this his Relation. And
therefore when ever such great things are brought in concerning Christ, this
Text is mentioned as pointing to that Sonship which was the ground of them, but
not to assert that they were the ground of it.

Christ not the Son of God because of his Kingly Dominion. Vide Jacob. ad
Portum contra Ostorod. Def. Fid. Orthod. c. 37. p. 512 ad 518. Not because of
his pre-eminence etc. Epiph. adv. Here Is. p. 740. (...) etc.
4. Though the glory which the Father has conferred upon Christ, (as King,
Prophet, and Priest) be very great, yet it will not reach that which is wrapped
up in his being the proper and only begotten Son of God. Sonship and Office are
different things, and the highest Office can never come up to what is in
Sonship by eternal Generation.

A Fifth False Ground of Christ's Sonship.
5. Fifthly it is said that Christ is the Son of God in respect of that special
love and affection which the Father bears to him. Matthew. 3. 17. Lo, a voice
from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: And
whereas Christ is called the only begotten Son of God, they (with whom I have
to do) say there is no more in it than only this that Christ is the most beloved
of God: As Isaac is stilled Abraham's only Son Genesis 22.2. his only begotten Son
Heb. 11.17. now how is this to be taken? had not Abraham an Ishmael as well as
an Isaac? how is Isaac then called his only begotten Son? why, only as he had a
greater share in his Fathers love than Ishmael had. For the same reason Solomon
calls himself an only Son Prove. 4.3. therefore the Septuagint render the word
there used [(...)] by (...), the beloved; and so our Translators fill it up
[and only beloved in the sight of my Mother]. So (say they) it is here as to
Christ's being the only begotten Son of God, God has a special love for him
and that is all.

Christ not the Son of God in respect of his Fathers special Love,
Answ. But we must not suffer this great Title of our Lord Jesus to be thus
wrested out of our hands: Without all question God has transcendent,
superlative love for Christ, (his dear Son he is called Col. 1.13.) but yet we
say,

1. (As before) this Love is not the Cause of his Sonship but his Sonship the
cause of it: He is not a Son because beloved, but he is beloved because a Son;
therefore it cannot be the Cause which is but the Effect.

2. If this was the proper foundation of Christ's Sonship, then there would be
only a (...). Epiph. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 2. p. 741.
gradual difference betwixt his Sonship and the Sonship of Believers. For they
being beloved of the Father as well as he and even as he is, (for the nature
and quality of the Love though not for the degree of it; Joh. 17.23. etc. --
and have loved them as thou have loved me); I say it being so, if the Love of
the Father to Christ was the proper ground of his Sonship, it would then
follow, that they are Sons just as Christ is (only in a lower degree). But
surely the Scripture holds forth more than a gradual difference betwixt his
Sonship and theirs; that [(...)] Heb. 1.4.
more excellent name (which the Apostle speaks of) carry's more in it than
barely an higher degree of Sonship, it points even to a different kind and
order thereof.

3. As to the Instances alleged for that use and signification of the word
which might undermine that which we put upon it, it is answered that Isaac is
called the only Son and the only begotten of Abraham, not only because of all
the Sons he had his greatest love, but there were other grounds and reasons of
it; he was the only Son by Sarah, the only Son by Promise, and the only Heir of
the Promise, upon which accounts (as well as upon the highest proportion of his
Fathers love to him), he is styled the only begotten Son: The same (under
different Circumstances) may be said concerning Solomon. But suppose that this
was the only thing held forth in the Vnigeniture of these Persons, will it
follow that therefore it is all in the unigeniture of Christ too? when there is
so great a disparity 'twixt Person and Person, Sonship and Sonship (as has
been already, and might yet further be demonstrated if it was needful)?

4. There is in Scripture another Title given to Christ, to which the Father's
greater love toward him than toward others does more properly belong; namely
his being the [(...)] the firstborn or the first-begotten. Heb. 1.6. -- When
he brings in the first begotten into the world etc. Col. 1.15. The image of
the invisible God, the firstborn of every Creature: And elsewhere (upon some
special and particular Considerations with respect to his Resurrection,) he is
called the firstborn from the dead. Col. 1.18. the first-begotten from the
dead, Rev. 1.5. (but as the Title in that reference is applied to Christ I am
not now to meddle with it).

What does his being the Firstborn or First-begotten hold forth?

Answ. Quomodo primogenitus esse potuit, nisi quia secundum Divinitatem ante
omnem creaturam ex Deo Patre sermo processit. Tertull.
Some expound it of his eternal Generation by the Father; Some, of the
pre-eminence and dignity of his Person, as also of the immunities and
privileges which belong to him above others: As the Firstborn under the Law
had an excellency put upon him from his Primogeniture, to him the dominion and
Genesis 27.29. and 49.8.
authority over the Family did belong, as also the Deuteronomy. 21.15, 16, 17.
double portion in the inheritance, and he was the most beloved: In reference
to which the people of Israel are styled Gods firstborn, Exodus 4.22. Israel is
my Son, even my firstborn; because of that great glory which God put upon that
people and that singular affection which he bore to them. In all these respects
Christ is God's Firstborn; if you understand it of his eternal Generation so
it is incommunicable to any Other, so he is primogenitus and unigenitus,
first-begotten and only begotten too; but if you understand it of the
excellency of his Person and of the Other particulars mentioned, so (in such a
degree) it is communicable to others. For Israel you see in a subordinate and
allusive sense was styled God's firstborn; and all Believers too may be so
styled in respect of the dignity of their Persons and of God's special love
toward them. As Christ is the Only begotten of the Father that is exclusive to
all, as he is the first-begotten of the Father that signifies praelation but
not exclusion. Saints are excellent though not so excellent as Christ, beloved
though not so beloved as Christ, heirs though not such heirs as Christ. And
therefore had Christ been called only the firstborn, and that too in its
second import and significancy, something then might have been inferred from it
for the nulling of that Sonship which we plead for, as only belonging to him:
but besides this he is also called the only begotten, wherefore he must be
alone in this relation. And though the Saints do in a lower degree share with
him in the Father's love as he is the firstborn, yet they do not at all share
with him in the glory of his eternal Generation as he is the only begotten.

A Sixth False Ground of Christ's Sonship.
6. Sixthly we are told that Christ is the Son of God in respect of Adoption:
that he is not the Natural or Essential, only the adopted Son of God.

This our Opposers are not afraid nor ashamed to assert; O how low will they
bring the Sonship of our blessed Lord and Savior! Christ not Gods Son in
respect of Adoption.
they will make him any thing rather than grant what indeed he is; but for Answer.
This is no novel Opinion or that which was never broached in the Church before;
'twas the old Heresy of those two Spanish Bishops See Forbesii Instruct.
Historico-Theolog. L. 6. C. 1.
Felix and Elipandus, (condemned in a Council. Tom. 20. p. 82. etc. secundum
Edit. Reg. Paris.
Council held at Frankford very near a thousand years ago); both (...). Cyrill.
Hierosol. Quod si etiam unigenitus Filius dicitur ex Gratia, non vere genitus
ex natura, proculdubio Nomen and veritatem unigeniti perdidit, postquam Fratres
habere jam caepit. Privatur enim hujus veritate nominis, si in unigenito non
est de Patre veritas naturalis. Fulgent. Si quaeritur, an Christus sit
adoptivus Filius secundum quod Homo, sive alio modo: Respondemus, Christum non
esse adoptivum Filium aliquo modo, sed tantum Naturalem, quia Natura Filius Dei
est non Adoptionis gratia. Lombard. Vide alios e Scholasticis in Hoorneb.
Socin. Confut. tom. 2. c. 1. de Christo. p. 30. and e Patribus in Zanch. de
Tribus Elohim. p. 249.
Fathers and Schoolmen (all but Durandus) argue much against it.

Take (in brief) these Four Arguments against it.

1. In all the Legi, and relegi Scripturas, Jesum Filium Dei Adoptione nusquam
inveni. Ambros.
Scriptures Christ is never styled the Adopted Son of God: nay, there is nothing
there to be found in the least to countenance the attributing of such a Sonship
to him; it is a mere forgery of man to evade and put off what the Word expressly
asserts. We read much of God's adopting of Saints but nothing at all of his
adopting of Christ. 2. Then Christ and Believers would have the same Sonship,
they being Sons by Adoption as well as he, and he having no higher foundation
for his Sonship than they. 3. Christ is the true and proper Son of God, but
should he be his Son by Adoption he would then cease to be In materia and
negotio Filiationis, proprius and adoptivus opponuntur; ut proprius non sit
adoptivus, and adoptivus non sit proprius; sed adoptivus opponitur naturali,
and proprio, and Naturalis non est adoptivus; Adoptivis Liberis opponuntur
naturales ac very, dicunt Jurisconsulti. Hoorneb.
his true and proper Son: for he that is adopted is only a Son in an improper
and allusive notion, and but in the esteem and repute of him who does adopt.
Socinus himself so describes such an one, Adoptivus Filius est, qui pro Filio
quidem habetur, sed tamen revera non est Filius.
An adopted Son is one who is accounted a Son but in truth and reality he is
not so: then according to his own explication of it, if Christ be an adopted
Son he is no true and proper Son, but only so as the Father does so repute him.
And is not Christ now greatly beholden to these persons? is he not highly
advanced by them? do they not show great respect and give great honor to him
(according to what they pretend), in making of him only a putative Son?
Adoption indeed is not so much too high for us but it is as much too low for
Christ. 4. If begotten then not adopted, for these two are incompatible or
inconsistent: the same Son cannot be begotten and adopted too, therefore
adoption comes in to supply the want of Generation. Christ must be the one or
the other, and if he be the one he cannot be the other; if begotten then not
adopted, and if adopted then not begotten. It Is true, in the Sonship of
Believers there is both, they are Sons by regeneration and adoption too; but
the reason of that is because they are Sons but in an improper and Metaphorical
respect, (I mean in contradistinction to Christ who is the very true and
natural Son of God).
A Seventh False Ground of Christ's Sonship.
7. Once more, they say Christ is God's own Son because of his resemblance and
likeness to him.

This comes exceeding short for it is not likeness but oneness, not resemblance
but equality upon which Christ is called God's Son; Christ not Gods Son in
respect of his likeness to God.
he himself draws it up to that (as you have already heard). No likeness here
will suffice but Essential likeness, (answerable to that Genesis 5.3. Adam lived
an hundred and thirty years and beg at a Son in his own likeness, after his
image. Amongst us you know likeness is not the foundation of Sonship; the Son
is a Son not because he is like his Father but because he is begotten by his
Father; and so it is with respect to Christ. There may be resemblance where yet
there no filial relation: in the glorified state we shall be Luke 20.36.
like the Angels, yet I never read of any paternal and filial relation 'twixt
them and us. In time I fear (according to the old Heresy of Some) it will come
to Christ's being the Son of Man too but in likeness. He is the Son of Man as
he has the very Nature and Essence of man, and why is he not the Son of God
also as he has the very Nature and Essence of God?

Thus I have both laid down the truth and also made it good against Opposers:
And now the false Grounds and Notions of Christ's Sonship being removed, the
true Ground and Notion of it is the more evident, (viz.) that he is God's own
Son as he partakes of his Essence and was from everlasting begotten by him. He
that would read full and large Discourses upon this great Subject, let him
peruse the Writings of those Bisterf. contra Crell. Lib. ^. Sect. 2. cap. 31.
Smiglet. de Vero and naturali Dei Filio contra Smalcium. Jacob. ad Portum adv.
Ostorod. Def. Fid. Orthod. cap. 9. Arnold. Catech. Racov. Maj. cap. 1. de
Person. Christi. Idem against Biddle, cap. 7. Calov. Socin. Proflig. De Filio
Dei Controv. 4. Hoorneb. Socin. confut. tom. 2. cap. 1. de Christo. Dr. Owen
against Biddle chapter 7. Estwick against Biddle p. 110 etc. and 375. Cheynal
Trin-unity. p. 190 etc. Alting. Theol. Elenctica. p. 149. ad 187.
Worthy Instruments whom God has raised up and enabled to assert and defend
it: If any think I have been too long or have unnecessarily troubled my self
and the Reader about it, I must (for several Reasons) crave leave to differ
from them. We cannot say too much, or too often go over those things in which
the Honor of God's own Son (our Lord and Master) and the good of Souls are so
highly concerned. Give the Socinians their due ('it is but a sad commendation)
all along they make their thrusts at the very heart of Religion, they fight
against neither great or small but only against the great King of all the
World, the very Son of God; whom they strike at in his Deity, eternal Sonship,
Incarnation, Satisfaction, in what not? Surely we cannot too much endeavor to
antidote men against their desperate Soul-destroying venom and poison,
especially in Times wherein men seem more than ordinarily to incline to close
with their pestilent Opinions; upon which Considerations I would encourage my
self to hope, that such who are Friends to Christ and Souls will put a candid
interpretation upon what has been done. Yet as to the Learned (if any such
shall cast their eye upon these Papers) I beg their pardon for the repeating of
things so well known and common to them, and which they have elsewhere with
great advantage: I have only this to say for my self, my eye has been upon
private Christians to make things plain to them, and to set that before them
here which (as written in other Languages) they could not reach.

Whether Christ may not be the Son of God by eternal Generation and by the
other ways too?
So much for these! But (though I have been too prolix already) I have not yet
done: there are some Others (of a different party and denomination) who do (in
part) concur and symbolize with the 'forenamed Dissenters. For though they hold
that Christ in a more special manner is the Son of God by eternal Generation,
yet they also hold that he is the Son of God too in respect of his Conception,
Office, Resurrection, and Exaltation. Vid. Disput, publ. These. 5.
Arminius himself pitches upon the first (as the only ground of the Sonship of
Christ), but his Successors take in the latter also; so the Confess. c. 3.
sect. 2. p. 14. and Apolog. contra Censur. c. 2. p. 48.
Remonstrants, so Instit. Theol. l. 4. sect. 2. c. 33.
Episcopius (a person of great eminence). These tell us that God is the proper
Father of Christ and he the proper Son of God, but how? why not only as he was
eternally begotten by him, but also as he was miraculously Conceived by the
Virgin Mary (that agreeing to none but only to him): And therefore in this
Point (upon their blending of these things together) they are judged by Some
See Peltius Harm. Remonstr. and Socin. Art. 4.
to Socinianize.

Now though this Opinion does come incomparably short of that which absolutely
deny's Christ's eternal Generation, (provided) that the abettors of it who seem
to grant this Generation do state it right, (that is) that they hold Christ to
be begotten in the very Nature and Essence of God and therein equal to him,
(...); (of which there is just matter of doubting as to the Instit: Theol. lib.
4. cap. 32.
Person named but now, he making the Son in the Deity it self not coordinate
but subordinate to the First Person): I say, though this Opinion (thus stated)
be nothing near so bad as the former, yet Censura Profess. Leid. in c. 3. p.
51. Trigland. in Exam. Ap^log. cap. 5. Alting. Theol. Elenc. p. 151. etc. et p.
181. etc.
Divines of another persuasion cannot close with it or let it pass without some
Confutation.

The Arguments against it do very much fall in with those which have been
insisted upon already:

1. First if Christ be the Son of God as eternally begotten with respect to his
Divine Nature, and also the Son of God as conceived in time etc. with respect
to his Humane Nature, then the Scripture does groundlesly and needlessly
distinguish betwixt his being the Son of God in reference to the one, and his
being the Son of Man in reference to the other Nature: Why does it make him to
be Romans 1.3, 4.
God's Son according to the Spirit of Holiness (i. e. his Divine Nature), and
the Son of David according to the Flesh (i. e. his Humane Nature), if with
respect to both he be the Son of God? this is to confound those things which
the Scripture makes distinct and places under several references. Christ's
Sonships, as the Son of God and as the Son of Man, are two very different
things, and therefore they cannot have the same foundation. It Is true, he who
is the Son of Man is also the Son of God, but as he is the Son of Man or in
what is proper to him as the Son of Man, so he is not the Son of God: And it is
true, these two in concreto may convertibly be predicated each of the other,
thus, the Son of God is the Son of Man and the Son of Man is the Son of God;
but this is founded not upon the oneness of the foundation of the Relation, nor
upon the oneness of the two Natures, but upon the Inficiamur Christum esse
(...) etc. quamvis propter Naturam Humanam personae divinae hypostatice unitam,
dicamus etiam in concreto, hunc hominem Jefum Deum ac Filium Dei unigenitum
esse, per communicationem idiomatum etc. Cloppenb. Comp. Socin. p. 38.
communication of properties and the union of the two Natures in one Person. It
comes to this, where the relations are distinct the grounds of these relations
must be distinct; and therefore Christ's Sonship (as the Son of God and as the
Son of Man) being distinct, there cannot be one and the same ground of them.

2. If this was so, that Christ was the Son of God conjunctly upon his eternal
Generation and also upon his conception and advancement in time, then he would
strangely differ in the same relation. I do not contradict my self in what I
said but now under the former head; for there I spoke of both the Sonships of
Christ which differ very much and must not be confounded, but here I speak only
of his single Sonship as he is the Son of God, which is but one and must not be
divided. Observe me, as the difference of the Sonships of Christ (as the Son of
God and as the Son of Mary) depends upon the difference of their Grounds, (
eternal Generation being the ground of the one, and temporal Generation being
the ground of the ooher); so the oneness of the same single Sonship of Christ
(as the Son of God) depends upon the oneness of the ground of it, viz. his
Generation by the Father: for if you add any other ground to this then Christ
ceases to be one Son, then he is the Son of God partly by Nature and partly by
Grace, partly begotten and partly made, partly from eternity and partly in
time: what a strange Son would Christ be upon these terms!

3. There can be but one true and proper Cause of one and the same Filiation;
(this has been already proved). Divines are so tender of multiplying this
relation of Christ, that several of them (though they grant the distinction of
his Natures and hold his twofold Generation, yet) they argue but for one
Sonship to belong to him; for (say they,) Sonship belonging to the Person and
being founded upon the Person, Christ being but one Person therefore he can
have but one Sonship; (so 3. p. Quest. 35. Art. 5. in corpore Art.
Aquinas argues). I concur with See Durandus, Rada etc. Junius, Martinius,
Amesius in Hoorneb. Socin. Conf. tom. 2. de Christo. c. 1. p. 30, 31, 32.
Others who attribute a twofold Sonship to Christ; but then I affirm that each
of them have but that one single Cause or foundation which is respectively
proper to them; it is only eternal Generation of the Father which makes Christ
to be the Son of God, and it is only temporal Generation of the Virgin which
makes him to be the Son of Man.

4. We say Oppositorum opposita ratio, if Christ be the Son of Man only because
he was conceived of the substance of his Mother, then he is the Son of God only
upon the account of his being begotten of the substance of his Father, (as a Dr
O. ag. B. p. 179.
Worthy Author argues).

5. Whatever is over and above eternal Generation is but manifestative and not
constitutive of Christ's Sonship: (this has been made out in the several
particulars alleged, therefore it will be needless to add any thing further
upon it).

I have shown wherein and how Christ is the Son of God, his own proper Son,
I Will but propound one Question and very briefly Answer it and then I shall have
finished the Explicatory part: It Is this, if Christ be God's Son because in his
ineffable Generation the Divine Essence was communicated to him, Quest. Of the
different Communication of the Divine Essence from the Father to the Son and to
the holy Ghost. Answ.
why may not the Holy Ghost the third Person also be styled the Son of God to
whom the same Essence was communicated as well as unto Christ?

I answer No, for two Reasons:

(1.) Because it is the same Essence in both yet not the same Person. When we
speak of the communicating of the Divine Essence from the First to the Second
and Third Persons, we must be understood (as was before hinted) to speak this
of them as Persons or as they are personally considered: for that Essence
simply and absolutely considered is not communicated to the Son and Spirit, but
only as it subsists in them as such Persons: the Godhead it self they have in
and from themselves, but their distinct Personalities (in which the Godhead
subsists) are of the Father. It being thus, from hence it follows that
according to the distinction of the Persons there must also be a distinct
communication of the divine Essence; not that there is one Essence in the Son
and another in the Spirit (for both are God); only that is distinguished
according to their Personal Consideration and the Personal Properties belonging
to them, (which notwithstanding their oneness in Nature do always remain).
Well then, Christ's Sonship being a Personal thing proceeding not simply from
the Divine Essence but as it subsists in the second Person, therefore it must
be proper and peculiar to him and not common to the Holy Ghost, he being
another Person and the Divine Nature subsisting in him accordingly (with
respect to his Personal Properties). (2.) Because though the same Divine
Essence be communicated to both yet not in the same way and manner. For though
both come from the Father yet it is in diverse respects, the Son coming from him
by Generation, the Spirit by Procession. And therefore though both are God and
both come from God yet both are not the Sons of God, because it is coming from
God in the way of Generation only which entitles to Sonship. Thus Quaeris a me
si de substantia Patris est Filius, de substantia Patris est etiam Spiritus
Sanctus, cur unus Filius sit, and alius non sit Filius? Ego respondeo, sive
capias sive non capias, De Patte est Filius, de Patre est Spiritus Sanctus, sed
ille genitus est, iste procedens. August. contra Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14:
Austine answers it, Thou ask of me (says he) if the Son be of the
substance of the Father, and the Holy Ghost be of the substance of the Father
also, why is one the Son and not the Other? I answer, whether you comprehend it
or not, the Son is of the Father, the Holy Ghost is of the Father, but the Son
is begotten, the Spirit proceeds. Thus this great Divine did solve this
difficulty stopping here and going no further: If any will be so curious as to
enquire further wherein the difference lies betwixt eternal Generation and
eternal Procession? I am not ashamed to give them this answer I cannot tell,
it is a mystery far above my reach; God has not revealed it and there is
nothing in Nature which will give us any light about it, therefore it becomes
us rather to adore than to be inquisitive. I know the Schoolmen (who are privy
to all secrets, and have a key to open every difficulty though it be locked up
never so close) attempt the opening of it, but they had better have let it
alone: here humble ignorance is better than sawey curiosity. I think (...)
hujus differentiae scire and credi ex divina revelatione: At (...) est nobis
incomprehensibile and ineffabile. Alting. Theolog. Prolem. loc. 3. Problem. 38.
p. 238.
they speak best who say, we know and believe there is a difference 'twixt
Generation and Procession, but what that is and wherein it lies, that is to us
incomprehensible. It Is time therefore for me to leave this Point and to come to
the Application of the main Truth.
Is Christ thus God's own Son? I infer then

Use 1. Three Things inferred from Christ's Sonship. 1. That he is God.
1. That he is God: Not a mere titular or nuncupative God, not a God by Office
only, not a made God (a contradiction in the adject); but he is God truly,
properly, essentially. Which great Truth is most strongly asserted and proved
by various convincing Arguments against Jews, Arrians, Socinians, all the
Opposers of it; I must not engage in so vast a Subject, I Will only argue from
this Relation wherein Christ stands to God as he is his own Son, which indeed
by its self is sufficient (if there was nothing more) to demonstrate his
Godhead. He who is the true Son of God and such a Son of God is truly God, but
Christ is the true Son of God and such a Son of God (his own Son), therefore he
is truly God etc. The Apostle joins the true Son and the true God together,
therefore the Argument is good: 1 John 5.20. We know that the Son of God is
come, and has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true; and
we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God,
and eternal Life. I do not say that every Son of God is God for the Saints are
Sons and yet not God; but I say he who is such a Son as God's own, proper,
natural, consubstantial, coessential, only begotten Son, he is God; wherever
this Sonship is there is the Deity or the Divine Essence: now Christ is thus
God's Son therefore he is God. What the Father is as to his Nature that the Son
must be also; now the first Person the Father of Christ is God whereupon he too
who is the Son must be God also. A Son always participates of his Fathers
Essence, there is betwixt them more an identity and oneness of Nature; if
therefore Christ be Gods Son (as has been fully proved) he must then needs
have Nisi esset Jesus Christus (...) Natura Deus, non esset (...) Natura seu
Naturalis Dei Filius. Cloppenb. Anti-Smalc. c. 3. p. 72. Vide Jacob ad Portum
contra Ostorod. c. 9. p. 59. Estwick against Bidale p. 442 etc.
that very Nature and Essence which God the Father has; in so much that if the
second Person be not really a God, the first Person is but equivocally a
Father. Therefore he himself tells us Job. 10.30.
I and my Father are one: where he is speaking of a far higher oneness than
that of Consent or Will only. Christ being both the natural Son of God and also
his Son by eternal Generation, that makes the thing unquestionable; for what is
that Generation but the Fathers communicating of his own Nature and Essence to
him? This is that which is done in all Generations, for Generation is always
the production of another in the same Nature; (...) etc. Epiph. Haeres. 69. p.
750. (...) Phot. Ep. p. 4. (...) etc. Najanz. Orat. 35. tom. 1. p. 568.
like ever begets like, (as it is said of Adam he begat a Son in his own
likeness after his image Genesis 5.3.) and must it not be so here in the Father's
begetting of Christ? If Man begets Man then God begets God, (this being taken
in that sense which I laid down in my first entrance upon this Subject); I know
this will not hold as to all modes and circumstances (with respect to which I
grant there is a great disparity), but as to the conveyance of the same Nature
and Essence, so far it will hold. The Jews therefore Joh. 5.18. argued very
well, if God was Christ's Father and he God's Son then he was equal with* God,
for such an equality must naturally and necessarily result from such a
Relation. Joh. 10.36. Say ye of him, whom the Father has sanctified, and sent
into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? why does
he say because I said I am the Son of God? he should have said because I said I
am God, for that was the blasphemy charged upon him ( Verse. 33.) because that
thou being a man make thy self God: but the answer is obvious, Christ knew
that these were equipollent terms, to be God and to be the Son of God are all
one, if Christ be the one he must be the other too. You find Nathaneel breaking
forth into this witness concerning him, Joh. 1.49.
Thou art the Son of God etc. his meaning was thou art God; for that which drew
this Confession from him was that which was proper to him as God, namely his
Omnisciency; (See Joh. 1.48.) God and the Son of God are so much one that he
who speaks Christ to be the Son of God speaks him to be God also. As soon as
the Apostle had set down Chri'sts Sunship Heb. 1.5. presently he falls upon
those testimonies which relate to his Godhead; Verse. 6, 8, 10, 11, 12. When he
brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels
of God worship him. Unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and
ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom: Thou Lord in
the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thy hands: They shall perish, but thou remainest: and they all shall
wax old as does a garment. And as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they
shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. You see
how Christ's Sonship is linked with the Godhead; therefore the Argument is good
to prove the latter by the former. And indeed as his being the Son of Man does
most evidently evince him to be truly Man, so his being the Son of God does as
evidently evince him to be truly God.

The Second Inference, that Christ is a great a glorious Person.
2. Is Christ God's own Son? I infer, surely then he is a very great and
glorious Person; such a relation cannot but be the foundation of great glory.
Though Christ's dignity and pre-eminence is not the ground of his Sonship, yet
his Sonship is the ground of his dignity and pre-eminence. He is styled a great
high Priest Heb. 4.14. not only because of the greatness of his Sacerdotal
Office, but also because of the greatness of his Person who does manage that
Office (he being God's own Son); therefore it follows, seeing we have a great
high Priest etc. Jesus the Son of God. It Is no small honor amongst us to be
the son of some great man, O what an honor is it to Christ to be the own and
only Son of the great God! It puts a marvailous- glory and greatness upon the
Saints that they are the adopted Sons of God, upon the Angels that they are the
created Sons of God; but what is this to Christ's being the natural, only
begotten Son of God? herein and hereby he has obtained Heb. 1.4.
a more excellent name than either Angels or Men, for Col. 1.18.
in all things (or amongst all persons) he must have the pre-eminence. The
higher and nearer the relation is to God the higher and greater is the glory
which accrews to a person standing in that relation; now what relation to God
can be higher and nearer than this of Christ (as he is his own Son)? therefore
his glory must needs be exceeding great; O let not any entertain low thoughts
of him who is thus the Son of God. The Lord Jesus is the Father's best Son (for
Gifts, Grace, Holiness etc.) and he is the Father's greatest Son (for Dignity,
Glory and Majesty): I say he is the Father's best Son, how short do all Sons
come of this Son! we read of Micipsa in Salust. Ne ego meliores Liberos
sumpsisse videar quam genuille.
One who feared he might seem to adopt better Sons than those whom he begat;
there is no such thing to be imagined with respect to God, to be sure his only
begotten Son shall infinitely exceed all his adopted Sons, for God has
anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. And he is
the greatest Son too, for God has set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come. Ephesians. 1.20, 21. True indeed this great Son for a time
Phil. 2.7.
emptied himself of his glory and for our sake submitted to great abasement,
but yet even then in himself he was very high and glorious: he who clothed
himself with our rags, put on our flesh, condescended to lie in the manger, to
die upon the cross, he even under all this was the proper Son of God and
therefore full of glory. And it is very notable to consider how in Christ even
when he was under his lowest abasement, when this Sun was hid under the
thickest cloud, I say how even Infantia parvuli ostenditur humilitate cunarum,
magnitudo altissimi declaratur vocibus Angelorum; similis est rudimentis
Hominum quem Herodes impius molitur occidere, sed Dominus est omnium quem Magi
gaudentes veniunt suppliciter adorare. Leo Magn. Ep. ad Flavian. Ep. Constable.
Najanzen Orat. 35. tom. 1. p. 375. instances in several particulars about this
and very clegantly enlarges upon them.
then there were some beamings out and breakings forth of his glory suitable to
this his relation: he is laid in the manger but there the Wise men come and
worship him, he is tempted by Satan but then the Angels minister unto him, he is
crucified but then the vail of the Temple was rent, the earth quaked, the rocks
were rent, the graves opened, the Sun stepped in and hid it self (as being
ashamed to be seen in its glory when the far brighter Sun was under such an
Eclipse); upon all which the Centurion might well cry out truly this was the
Son of God. But what a person is Christ now? when the time of his humiliation
is over, and when he appears in all things like himself as the Son of God in
his greatest glory!

The Third Inference: that the Work of Redemption was a very great Work.
3. Thirdly, was Christ God's own Son? I infer, certainly then the work of
Redemption was a very great work; for God sent his own Son about it and
therefore surely 'twas no ordinary or common thing. Always the greater the
Person is who is employed in the work the greater is that work; it is thus from
the wisdom of a Man, much more shall it be thus from the wisdom of a God: Kings
do not use to send their Sons upon mean and petty services but only upon such
as are high and weighty; and can it be imagined that ever God would have sent
his own Son into the world to redeem Sinners, if this had not been a work very
high and great in his eye? Indeed this makes Redemption to be the greatest work
that ever was done by God himself; the making of the World was a great thing
but God never sent his Son about that, that was dispatched by a word, he did
but speak the word and it was done: Works of Providence are very great but
there is no sending of a Son about them; but when Redemption-work was to come
upon the stage, in order to that Christ (God's own Son) must come from heaven,
and be incarnate, and do, and die, and all was necessary for the accomplishing
of that; O how great a work was this! (So much for the First Use by way of
Inference).

Use 2. For Exhortation. 1. Branch of the Exhortation, to study Christ as the
proper Son of God.
2. Secondly, was Christ God's own Son? let me from hence urge a few things upon
you.

1. Study Christ much in this relation, that you may know him as the proper,
natural, essential Son of God. The knowledge of Christ (in whatever notion you
consider him) is very precious, it was so to Paul who 1 Cor. 2.2.
determined not to know any thing save Jesus Christ etc. and Phil. 3.8.
who counted all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus: but to know him as he stands in this near relation to God, as God's own
Son, O this is precious knowledge indeed! Now (Sirs) you have heard much of
him, read much of him, but do you know him and know him as the eternal
only-begotten Son of God? This is that Truth upon which all Religion depends,
in which you have the very heart and spirit of the Gospel, upon which the whole
stress of your happiness is laid, it is one of the most fundamental Articles of
the Christian Faith; and yet will you be ignorant of it? You all have some
general knowledge of it, and you all profess to believe it ('it is a part of your
Creed), but do you distinctly and clearly know (always allowing for the
mysteriousness of the Object and the dimness of your Facultys,) how Christ is
the Son of God, how his Sonship was brought about and wherein it lies? that he
is God's natural Son begotten by him from all eternity in a most mysterious and
admirable manner, do you understand any thing about this? Cognoscere quando
Filius Dei primum extiterit, and utrum ex ipsius Patris essentia necne genitus
fuerit, non est necessarium creditu ad salutem. Socin. Solut. Scrupul. resp. ad
Scrup. 1. So Episcopius Just. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 34. per totum.
Some tell us, that the knowledge and belief of Christ's Sonship (according to
the particulars wherein it has been opened) not necessary to Salvation: I Will
not engage in this Controversy (wherein Some do as much affirm as Others
deny); but this I say, it being so momentous a Truth in it self, and the
Scriptures speaking so much of it and giving so much light about it, it is of
great Concern to all who live under Gospel-revelation to endeavor to know as
much of it as the height of the thing and the lowness of their capacities will
admit of.

Directions in the studying of Christ as the Son of God.
And because I would hope, that there are Some here whose thoughts are taken up
about it and who desire to arrive at a fuller knowledge of it, therefore to
such I would commend three things by way of Direction.

1. In all your enquiries and searchings into Christ's Sonship (especially into
the Ground and Mode of it (viz.) eternal Generation), be sure you keep within
the bounds of sobriety. I mean this, take heed that in this deep Mystery you 1
Cor. 4.6.
be not wise above what is written, that you do not therein consult your own
purblind and carnal reason but Scripture-revelation altogether. Pray study it,
but in so doing do not Quaero abs te quando vel quomodo Filium putas esse
generatum? mihi enim impossible est Generationis scire secretum, men's deficit,
vox silet, non mea tantum sed and Angelorum; supra potestates, and supra
Angelos, and supra Cherubin, and supra Seraphin, and supra omnem sensum est
etc. Tu ergo ori manum admove, scrutari non licet superna mysteria. Licet scire
quod natus sit, non licet discutere quomodo natus sit. Illud mihi negare, non
hoc quaerere metus est. Ineffabilis enim est illa Generatio. Ambros. de Fide
Cap. 5. Si Christus d^xit senescire de die illa and hora, sed solum Patrem,
quanto minus possumus nos scire quomodo genitus sit Filius ex Patre? Non debere
igitur nos crubescere fateri, neminem hunc modum nosse, sed solum illum qui
genuit, and eum qui genitus est. Iren. lib. 2. cap. 48. Quomodo Deus Pater
genuerit Filium, nolo discutias, nec te curiosius inseras in profundi hujus
arcanum. Cyprian. in Symbol. (...). Epiph. adv. Haeres. lib. 2. tom. 2. p. 739.
The Mystery of Mysteries, which corrupt and wanton Reason derides but prudent
Faith admires and adores. Cheyn. Trin-unity. p. 190.
pry too far into those secrets which God has locked up from you; content your
selves with what he has revealed in his Word and stay there.

It Is both sinful and also dangerous for poor shallow Creatures to venture too
far into these depths, where if they once lose their bottom (the written Word)
they drown themselves presently; there is no clue but that to guide us in this
labyrinth. That Christ is the Son of God is very clear, that he is the Son of
God by eternal Generation is very clear; but will you be inquisitive further to
know what this Generation is? what can your Reason (the Scripture being silent
about it) say of that? O go not too far there! Humane Reason (considered as
merely natural) is a very incompetent judge of this divine and sublime mystery,
a mystery to be adored by Faith not to be comprehended by Reason. Isa. 53.8.
Who shall declare his Generation? I may make use of this Text (though possibly
the Generation mentioned in it be not that which I am treating of): for I much
incline to think that it here notes that numerous issue and seed that Christ
should have upon the Preaching of the Gospel, rather than his being eternally
begotten by the Father; yet it is very well known that several of the FATHERS
take it in the latter sense, they making this to be the meaning of the words,
Who can be able to understand in himself or to declare to others the hidden,
ineffable, incomprehensible Generation of the Son of God? surely none can.
Without controversy this, as well as Christ's Incarnation, is a 1 Timothy 3.16.
great mystery. Nicodemus was a knowing man yet strangely puzzled at the
Regeneration of Believers; Joh. 3.4. How can a man be born when he is old? can
he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born? certainly the
eternal Generation of God's own Son is a thing much more abstruse and
unsearchable. And there are riddles in Natural generation which we cannot
resolve; Eccles. 11.5. As thou know not the way of the spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: Vide Najanz. Orat. 35. t.
1. p. 566, and 567.
now are we so much at a loss and nonplus there, how much more shall we be at
a loss when the far more unconceivable Generation of Christ is before us? O
therefore I advise you to be very humble and sober in all your disquisitions
about that. There are two things in Reason which you must always oppose and
beat down, viz. the curiosity of it (for it loves dearly to be prying into
God's Ark, into things which he sees good to lock up from the Creature), and
the pride of it (for it also loves to sit upon the bench as Judge of the
matters of Faith, to be giving out its decrees and edicts as to believing or
not believing): now do not you give way to it in either of these respects, in
your most earnest desires after knowledge still keep within the compass of what
the Word reveals, and let the Word alone command and order your Faith; and
especially in such profound mysteries (as that which I am upon) see that these
two things be done by you. When I consider the several nice and curious
Questions which Non dubito asserere, quando in Scholasticorum Quaestiones de
his rebus incido, quin in totidem salebras, labyrinthos, Syrtes, Charybdes,
ipsaque adeo (...) incidere mihi videar. Quanto satius tutiusque est intra
Scripturae limits se arcte continere, and sapere nolle (...). Episcop. Inst.
Theol. lib. 4. cap. 33. sect. 2.
Some have raised and discussed about the Generation of the Son of God, I
cannot but stand and wonder at the pride and sauciness of the Wit of man; (and
so far I do concur with that Learned person in his severe censure upon these
men). What is more than the thing it self, the Father's communicating of his
own Nature and Essence to Christ, we must humbly submit to be ignorant of; by
soaring too high we shall but scortch and hurt our selves.

2. In your eying of God the Father's active Generation of Christ take heed of
all gross Conceptions about it; so as not in the least to measure it by, or to
parallel it with, any Physical or Carnal Generation. Our apprehensions must be
rightly informed about this, otherwise what absurd and wretched notions shall
we run our selves upon? So far as there is that in common Generations which
speaks goodness and perfection, so far you make use of them to help you in your
conceiving of the Divine Generation of the Son of God: but there being much in
them which speaks defect and imperfection, all that you must praes^ind and cut
off and lay aside when you are thinking of that Generation which is the ground
of Christ's Sonship. As for instance! for like to beget like, for one thing to
conveigh its nature and substance to another this is good in Physical
Generations, and so far they may be improved to shadow out unto us the mystery
of God's eternal generation: But now there being sundry other respects which
carry imperfection in them, these you must be sure to keep out of your thoughts
and by no means to conceive by them of that which I am upon. As in our
knowledge and conceptions of God by the Creatures, we pick out of them what is
good and perfect and lay aside what is evil and imperfect, and so by them we
ascend to know and conceive of God; so we must do in Natural and Physical
Generations with respect to God the Father's supernatural and hyperphysical
Generation of Christ.

To show the Of this see Zanch. de tribus Elohim. lib. 5. cap. 8. p. 254.
Alting. Theol. Elenct. p. 170, 171. Estwick against Biddle. p. 443. Dr. Rearson
on the Creed. p. 275. etc.
difference betwixt these two let me particularize in a few things (without
much enlarging upon them). Natural Generation upon the failing of individuals
is necessary for the preservation of the species; in God the Father's begetting
of Christ it was quite otherwise: In natural Generation there is
multiplication, there though the thing begetting and the thing begotten have
the same nature and essence, yet numerically they are not the same; but in the
Father's begetting of Christ these (as the Learned prove) are perfectly one and
the same, they have not only the same specifical but the same numerical
Essence; here as the divine Essence was not divided so neither was it
multiplied (for it is as incapable of multiplication as of division): Natural
Generation in the Creature is a transient act, that in God was an immanent act:
In Natural Generation, the thing begetting precedes the thing begotten and
begets that which is after it in time; in God the Father's Generation of Christ
it was not so, both Father and Son being coeternal: In Natural Generation there
must be such a time before things arrive at their prolifick virtue; far be it
from us to entertain such a thought as to the Father's Generation of Christ. So
that you see there is a vast disparity betwixt these two, and therefore you
must in your apprehensions reverently distinguish betwixt them and not in
common judge of the one by the other, (God forbid that you should so sadly
mistake!) Though the Father's communicating of the Divine Essence to the Son
was a true and proper Generation (so far agreeing with Generations amongst us),
yet in other respects it was quite of another nature; and so you are to
conceive of it otherwise you will entertain very gross and unworthy thoughts of
God.

3. Join Study and Prayer together. Would you know Christ as the eternal Son of
God? especially would you go beyond a literal, speculative, notional knowledge
of him as such? so as to know both him and his Sonship practically and
savingly? O then be much in Prayer! Read and pray, hear and pray, meditate and
pray, study and pray: he studies this mystery (and all others) best who study's
it most upon his knees. This special and supernatural Sonship of Christ is not
savingly to be known without special and supernatural illumination from Christ
through the Spirit. It Is observable that in Matthew. 16.17. when Peter had made
that Matthew. 16.16.
good Confession [Thou art Christ the Son of the living God], see what Christ
resolved it into; 17.
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. You know that passage Matthew. 11.27. All
things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man knows the Son (or makes
others to know him) but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him: these two Persons do make
known each the other, the Father reveals the Son and the Son reveals the
Father; the Son is a fit Person to reveal the Father, for he is his only
begotten Son and lies in his bosom; therefore he says Joh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is the bosom of
the Father he has declared him: and the Father is also a fit Person to reveal
the Son, for he having begotten him and having had him with himself from
everlasting, he knows him exactly: O therefore go to him by Prayer and beseech
him to reveal his Son to you! It Is a great thing to know Christ in this
relation, so great that there must be an heavenly light, a spiritual
understanding given to a man before he can come up to it: mark that of the
Apostle 1 John 5.20. And has given us understanding that we may know him that
is true, (he speaks of the knowing of Christ as the true Son of God); it is as
if the Apostle had said, if God had not illuminated our understandings and
irradiated them with a divine light, we had never known Christ savingly in this
notion: He who begat the Son of himself from all eternity, to him it appertains
by his Spirit in time savingly to reveal this Son to the Creature; and
therefore your work lies with him in prayer to beg of him this revelation of
the Son. (So much for the first thing).

2. Branch of the Exhortation: To believe Christ to be the Son of God, and to
believe on him as the Son of God.
2. A second branch of the Exhortation shall be this; Is Christ God's own Son?
then do you believe him to be such, and believe on him as such. The first we
call dogmatical, the second justifying and saving Faith; the first is assent to
the proposition that Christ is God's own Son, the second is relyance upon the
person who is and as he is God's own Son. The first is more general and common,
for all who bear the name of Christians (in some sense or other) come up to it;
yet notwithstanding there is much worth and excellency in it (though not so
much as in the latter): and that is absolutely necessary in order to the
second, for how can he believe on Christ as the Son of God who does not first
dogmatically believe him to be the Son and such a Son of God? And this general
Faith too (as well as that which is more special) admits of degrees, for though
all Christians believe it yet some are more confirmed, rooted, stablished in
the belief of it than others are. Now therefore this is that which I would
press upon you, to labor after a more steady, unshaken, fixed believing of
this great Foundation-Truth: I hope you do believe it but do you believe it in
such a degree? does not your faith sometimes waver about it? is not your assent
weak and languid, attended with doubtings and questionings? are you rooted and
Col. 2.7.
stablished in the faith (as of other things) so in special of this great
Article of the Christian Religion)? are you come up unto all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father and of Christ (as the Apostle speaks Col. 2.2.)? I could most
heartily wish that it was thus with you, and with all who do profess that they
believe Christ to be the Son of God, but I fear it is not so. Now (my Brethren)
that I may the better excite you to labor after a full and firm assent
hereunto, consider that one special-reason or end why a great part of the New
Testament was written was this, that you might believe and be confirmed in your
belief of this very thing: Joh. 20.31. But these are written [that ye might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God], and that believing ye might
have life through his Name. You may observe concerning this Evangelist St.
John, as of all the other Evangelists he was most inspired in the revealing of
Christ's divine Sonship, so he was also most inspired in the pressing of men to
believe it and in the setting out of the weightiness of the belief of it: 1 John 2.23. Whosoever denies the Son the same has not the Father, but he that
acknowledges the Son, has the Father also: 1 John 4.15. Whosoever shall
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God: 1 John 5.5. Who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus
is the Son of God? What a mighty stress did this great Apostle lay upon it! O
how does it concern all upon the Considerations (laid down by him) to live
under a steady belief of Christ's being the Son of God! Indeed this is the
Foundation-Truth; Christ himself is the personal foundation and this Truth (not
exclusively but eminently) is the doctrinal foundation: to both of which that
famous and so much controverted Text is applicable, Matthew. 16.18. I say also
unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: upon this rock? what rock does
Christ mean? was it Peter personally considered? or was it Peter and his
Successors? (as Some would have it they meaning by these Successors the POPES
of ROME; whom I trust I shall never close with in this interpretation so long
as it is this rock and not this sand); undoubtedly (let but persons be unbiased
and not wedded to Party's and Opinions calculated for worldly designs and
Interests) nothing is more clear, than that by this rock we are to understand
either the Person of Christ or that Doctrinal proposition which Peter had laid
down concerning him, ( Verse. 16. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
after which it immediately follows Upon this rock I will build my Church), or
else we may put them together and take in both; upon this Person and this
Faith, the Church of God is built and therefore it shall stand fast for ever:
so that according to this Exposition (which is with great strength defended by
our PROTESTANT Divines), this Sonship of Christ is the foundation-truth. And
therefore no wonder that in all Ages the Zeal of the Church has been so much
engaged therein; for it is very well known that in its drawing up of Creeds and
Summaries of Faith, this one Article (viz. Christ's being the Coessential,
Coeternal, only begotten Son of God) has ever been put in, (witness the
Nicene, Constantinopolitan, Athanasian Creeds), because this was judged a thing
most necessary to be believed: And indeed there is not any one branch of the
Christian Faith which the Church has gained more out of the fire (after much
trouble and opposition) than this one. Nay, this was that very Truth for the
owning and asserting of which (above any other) our blessed Lord lost his life
(as you may plainly see by the Joh. 19.7. Mark 14.61. etc.
Evangelical History). And I desire that it may yet further be considered, that
as God himself began and ended with the witness and declaration of Christ's
Sonship, (for as soon as he entered upon his public Ministry the Father set him
out with this witness Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son etc. and when he had well nigh finished his work and
was going off the stage then the Father renewed his witness again Matthew. 17.5.
This is my beloved Son etc): So the Devil too he began and ended with the
Sonship of Christ; for presently after the Father's testimony thereof he took
him aside to tempt him, and when he had him alone and began the duel with him
how did he assault him? why, Matthew. 4.3.
[if thou be the Son of God] command that these stones be made bread; he comes
over it again Verse. 6.
[if thou be the Son of God] cast thy self down etc: If thou be the Son of God?
why did Satan harp so much upon this? what might his design be in laying his
temptation thus? I answer, it must be for one or for all of these Reasons;
either that he might by the observing of Christ's behavior in the contest more
fully inform himself whether Christ was indeed the Son of God, (which was the
thing he was deadly afraid of, knowing that such a person would be the ruin of
his kingdom); or that he might see whether he could make Christ to doubt of his
Sonship after and notwithstanding the plain testimony of his Father; or that he
might go as far as ever he could to draw him to the doing of what was evil, and
so (if such a thing had been possible) null this his near relation to God:
surely there was some special cause why Satan picked out this and so much
insisted upon it. Well! here he began, these were the very first words which
this cursed Spirit uttered when he dared to assault our Savior, wherein he
plainly struck at his Sonship it self (though cunningly he made his temptations
to point to some wicked inferences which he would have had drawn from Christ's
relation, rather than directly to the truth of the relation it self). And as he
began with this so he ended with this, for 'twas he (which speaks a prodigious
infatuation in him that he should be so forward in the promoting of that which
certainly would end in his ruin,) who stirred up Pilate, the High Priest the
Body of the Jews against Christ, and they through his instigation fell upon
Christ and took away his life, for what? for this very cause because he made
himself to be (as indeed he was) the Son of God. By all this you see of what
great moment and importance this Truth concerning Christ's Sonship is. And (to
add yet one thing further) pray look to that grand Seducer and Enemy of Christ
and of the Christian Faith, I mean Mahomet; of whom we read that he also set
himself to his utmost to oppose and decry the Sonship of Christ. He was willing
to grant Christ to be a great Prophet but by no means to be the very Son of
God; this particularly and expressly he principled his Followers against in his
ridiculous Alcoran, and Constanter dic illis, Deum unum esse, necessarium
omnibus, and incorporeum: Qui nec genuit, nec est generatus, nec habet,
quenquam sibi similem. Azoar. 122. Alcor. in Bibliandri. Edit. p. 188. Vide
Cribrat. Alcorani. per Nicol. de Cusa. lib. 1. c. 10, 11, 13, 14, etc. See Dr.
Pearson on the Creed. p. 272.
he gave them in special this Command (...), to worship one only God, and to
honor Christ as the Word of God but not as the Son of God.

From all these premises I infer, is this such a foundation-Truth and shall not
we firmly assent to it? has the Church with such zeal contended for it and
shall we yet doubt of it? do Heathens, Jews, Turks so much oppose it and shall
not we Christians (who have and own Scripture-revelation) steadily believe it?
has Christ sealed it with his blood and yet shall we stagger about it? have we
such attestations from God and Man and yet shall there be questionings and
reasonings in our Souls against it? 1 John 5.9, 10. If we receive the witness
of men the witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of God which he
has testified of his Son. He that believes on the Son of God, has the
witness in himself: he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he
believes not the record that God gave of his Son.

But Some will say to what purpose is all this? who questions whether Christ be
God's own Son?

I answer, O that there was not too much need of this advice! many poor Souls
think they do fully and firmly believe it and yet it is to be feared they do
not; and the truth is, that weakness which is in our Faith of adherence
proceeds (in part) from that weakness that is in our Faith of assent, much of
that dejectedness which is upon our Spirits under trouble and of those inward
sinkings under the sense of guilt comes from one of these two Causes, either we
do not revive upon our thoughts or else we do not fixedly believe in our hearts
that Christ is God's Son and his own Son: And (as to loose and common
Professors) if ever Arrianism ( Old or New) should get upon the throne (which
God forbid!) I fear the belief of Christ's Godhead and eternal Sonship would
soon be laid aside. O therefore I would be very earnest with you to get your
faith yet more and more strengthened and confirmed about it.

But though this be very good yet it is not enough: besides the believing of
Christ to be the Son of God there must be believing on Christ as the Son of
God. You find in Scripture that saving Faith is described by its special
reference to Christ as standing in this relation; so Gal. 2.20. The life which
I now live in the Flesh, I live [by the faith of the Son of God], who loved me,
and gave himself for me: why does the Apostle thus express it by the Faith of
the Son of God? I answer, partly because Christ the Son of God is the efficient
and Heb. 12.2.
author of faith, partly because this Son is the great Object of faith, and
partly because Faith in its essential act does very much eye Christ as thus
related to the Father, for it is a believing or relying upon him as the Son of
God. It Is very usual in the Gospel where it speaks of believing, to mention
Christ with it as standing in this relation; 1 John 3.23. This is his
commandment, that we should believe on the name of [his Son] Jesus Christ: 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
[the Son] of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life; and that ye may
believe on the name of [the Son] of God. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him (as the only
begotten Son) should not perish, but have everlasting life: O what a person is
Gods own Son for Sinners to believe on! what an all-sufficient Savior, how
able to Heb. 7.25.
save to the utmost must he needs be who is God and Man, the Son of God and the
Son of Man! And indeed it is not enough barely to believe on Christ but there
must be such a believing on him as may in some measure be answerable to this
his relation; is he God's own Son? at what a rate should we believe? what a
faith should we act upon him? what great things should we expect for him and
from him? can any thing be too high for our faith when we have the proper,
natural Son of God in our eye as its basis and foundation? Saints should have
their faith raised not only upon the encouragement of the Promises, but also
upon the consideration of Christ's Person as he is so near and dear to God. I
have formerly observed how our Apostle in the Text rises higher and higher in
the setting forth of the Love of God: he says God sent, there was Love; he
sent his own Son, there was more Love; this own Son he sent in the likeness of
sinful flesh, there was yet more Love; and this he did for this end that he
might for sin condemn sin in the Flesh etc. there was the very top and zenith
of Love. Now as there is a rise in these things in the setting off the Love of
God, so there is also a rise in them in their several engagements and
encouragements to us to believe in Christ, and to believe in him yet more and
more firmly and fiducially: he was sent, therefore we must believe; he was (and
is) God's own Son, therefore we must the rather and the more strongly believe;
he took our flesh, here is an higher argument for an higher faith; in that flesh
he condemned sin, performed all that the Law commanded, suffered all that the
Law threatened, what a faith does this call for? Now if notwithstanding all
this, it shall yet be either no believing or but faint-believing both will be
sad, (though in a great disparity, for the faint-believing is unanswerable to
what is revealed and uncomfortable to the Saint, but the no-believing is
damnable to the Sinner).

3. Branch of the Exhortation: To honor Christ.
3. Thirdly, is Christ God's own Son? how then should all honor and adore him!
certainly upon this Sonship the highest, yea, even divine adoration it self is
due to him. Is he a Son? such a Son? the Son of such a Father? the greatness of
his Person arising from that high and near relation wherein he stands to God,
calls for the highest respect, reverence, veneration which Angels or Men can
possibly give unto him. Besides this, it is the absolute Will of the Father that
all should Joh. 5.23.
honor his Son even as they honor himself, for he having the same Nature and
Essence with the Father, the Father will have him have the same honor which he
himself has: which whosoever deny's to him reflects dishonor upon the Father,
who will not bear any thing derogatory to the glory of his Son. It Is a known
Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 9. Sozom. l. 7. c. 6.
story that of the carriage of Amphilochius to the Emperor Theodosius; he had
petitioned the Emperor to be severe against the Arrians, to discountenance and
suppress them because in their Opinions they did so much disparage the Son of
God, but could not prevail: whereupon he made use of this device, coming one
day into the presence of the Emperor and of his Son Arcadius (who now ruled
jointly with his Father), he made his humble obeisance to the Emperor himself
and showed him all reverence, but as for his Son he passed him by, showed him
no respect at all, rather dealt derisorily with him, stroking him upon his head
and saying to him (in a way of contempt) Salve and tu Fili: The Emperor upon
this was much offended, sharply reproves Amphilochius for his affront to his
Son etc. whereupon the good man vindicates his carriage, plainly telling the
Emperor he had given reverence enough to his Son. And now the Emperor was
more incensed, commands him with great indignation to be thrust out of his
presence etc. which whilst some was doing, Amphilochius turned himself to the
Emperor and said thus, O Emperor! thou being but a man can not bear the
contempt or disparagement of thy Son; how do thou think the great God can
bear that contempt of his Son which the Arrians cast upon him? the Emperor was
much affected at this, begged the Bishop's pardon, commended his ingeny, and
did that now which he refused to do before. The inference is undeniable, if
great Men stand so much upon the giving of all honor and due observance to
their Sons, much more will the Great God stand upon the giving of all due
Honor and Reverence to his own and only Son: O therefore let Christ be highly
adored and honored by you! If you ask me, how? I answer, every honoring of
him is not sufficient but it must be such as may suit with his infinite Majesty
and Greatness; you must conceive of him as God, as the Natural and eternal Son
of God, and according to that honor which is due to him as such so you must
honor him. The Apostle speaks of some Romans 1.21.
who when they knew God they did not glorify him as God; so some pretend to
give some glory to Christ but they do not glorify him as God: O this is that
which you must come up to, to adore and reverence Christ in such a manner as
may be suitable to his Nature and Relation, as he is the infinite God and the
eternal only begotten Son of God; and what Honor can be high enough for such a
Person?

But more particularly there is a twofold Honor which you must all give to
Christ:

1. The Honor of Worship. Heb. 1.6. When he brings in the firstborn into
the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him: God will have
his only begotten Son to be worshipped (though he be very tender to whom that
honor is given). Divines do from hence strongly argue (yet I know Remonstr.
Apolog. Cap. 2. and 16. Episcop. Inst. Theolog. lib. 4. sect. 2. cap. 34. and
35.
Some make but little of this Argument) to prove the Godhead of Christ; thus,
if religious Worship be God's peculiar, if a God be the sole and adaequate
object of Divine Worship, if no Creature be to share with him therein (it being
that Glory which he will not give to another, Isa. 42.8. and Matthew. 4.10. Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve); and yet the
Father will have Christ to be the proper Object of divine Worship; hence it
follows, that then he is and must be more than mere Man, that he is true and
very God. And surely it would be no better than flat Idolatry in us Christians
to give proper and formal religious worship to Christ, was he not truly God as
well as truly Man. Therefore as to this Franciscus David and Christianus
Franken (both Socinians) were in the right against Socinus, if Christ was but
mere Man (the common Principle in which they all agreed), then he could not be
worshipped with religious Worship without Idolatry; whereupon they would not
give any such worship to him. And as this Worship proves Christ's Godhead so
his Godhead is the Of this see Zanch. de tribus Elohim. l. 3 c. 12. Junius Def.
Trinit. contra Samosat. Profess. Leid. Cens. cap. 16. Voetius de Adorat.
Christi. Cheynel Trin-unity (very largely). p. 334. etc. Dr. Stillingfleet of
the Idolatry of the etc. chap. 2. p. 112, 113, 114.
ground of it; for the adaequate, immediate, proper ground of Divine Worship
(as attributed to Christ) is his divine Nature, Essence and Sonship: true, he
as Man is to be worshipped but not because he is Man; the Humane Nature of
Christ is the Object of Worship but it is only as it is taken into Personal Union
with the Divine. As he is Mediator and set in such an Office he is to be
worshipped, but this is not the proper and fundamental reason thereof; for
though he never had been Mediator yet Worship would have been due to him, (as
the Father and Spirit are to be worshipped though the Office of Mediator
belongs not to them). Further, the Lord Jesus as he in our Nature has done
such great and excellent things for us is to be worshipped; yet this is only a
forcible motive and inducement thereunto, not the proper ground of it: it
remains then that the alone reason of Worship given or done to Christ is his
being God and the coequal, co-essential Son of God. And he being so, what an
obligation does this lay upon you to worship him? there is inward worship
(consisting in the trust, fear, reverence, adoration of the heart), there is
outward worship (consisting in attendance upon and due observance of
Gospel-institutions, as Prayer, Hearing the Word etc); in both of these
respects let Christ be worshipped by you, both are due to him as he is God's
own Son. Well may you tender your homage to him in this way when Angels
themselves bow before him and worship at his throne.

2. Secondly, there is the Honor of Obedience which you must also give to
Christ. This is annexed to the declaration of his Sonship, at the same time in
which the Father attested that Christ was his Son he enjoined obedience and
subjection to him; Matthew 17.5.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased (what follows?) hear ye him:
this hearing of Christ is the Creatures obeying of him in all his holy Laws,
Commands and Institutions; and so it is as if God had said, here is a Person whom
I own for my Son (in a special and peculiar way), whom therefore I have set as
Psalm. 2.6.
my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, into whose hands I have put Matthew. 28.18.
all power, upon whose shoulders I have laid the Isa. 9.7.
Government, therefore I charge you to hear him and to yield all Obedience and
Subjection to him. O Sirs! it is God himself (and not such a poor worm as I) who
requires this of you; it must be Reverence and it must be Obedience too, this
high relation of Christ calls for both; and believe it, without this Obedience
he that is God's Son will never be your Savior, for Heb. 5.9. Being made
perfect, he became the author of eternal Salvation unto all them (and to none
but them) that obey him. I have spoken much to press believing on this Son upon
you, but let me add there must be obeying of him as well as believing on him:
Obedience is not so of the very essence of Faith but that Faith may very well
be defined without it, yet it is an inseparable Adjunct or. Consequent or fruit
of Faith; and these two do always concur in the Subject, though they be
different in themselves, and have a different influence upon justification and
salvation. But that which I aim at is this, since Christ is the Son of God and
this is clearly revealed to you, since this Son has made known to you in the
holy Gospel what his Will and pleasure is, how he would have you to live, what
to do, what to shun; I beseech you now hearken to him, comply with him in all
his excellent Commands, give up your selves in an universal subjection to his
blessed Laws, let there be an obediential frame of heart to his whole Will:
this is indeed to honor him, and to honor him in such a way as best answers
his Sonship to God and his Lordship over you.

4. Branch of the Exhortation: To adore the Love of God.
4. Fourthly, is Christ no lower a Person than God's own Son? what cause have we
then to admire and wonder at the greatness of God's Love in his sending of him!
Here Is a glass indeed to transmit and represent unto us the Love of God, O how
shall we get our hearts affected with it! what thankfulness in us can bear any
proportion to the mercy before us! For God to send, to send a Son, such a Son,
in such a manner (as follows in the words) here is the Wonder of Wonders; God
never did the like before and he will never do the like again, (and blessed be
his name there is no need he should!) 'Twould have been admirable mercy if God
would have sent some other person upon this errand (to redeem and save undone
Sinners); if send he will why did he not send an Angel (or a body of Angels) to
try their skill and see what they could do? nay, why did he not send an Angel
(as he once did) with a Genesis 3.24.
flaming Sword in his hand to keep off Sinners from the tree of life? O this
did not comport with his gracious designs (though it did too well with the
Creatures merit), therefore he would not do it; no, his own Son shall be
pitched upon, he is the Person whom God will send. And his End in sending this
Son was as gracious as the Person whom he sent was glorious: surely here was
Love, great Love, great even to the degree of infiniteness! Millions of Angels
were nothing to one Son, to one such Son: the nearer the relation was 'twixt
God and Christ the greater was the affection shown to us; Christ God's own Son,
his first born, his only begotten Son, the Son of his Love who lay in his
bosom, had been his delight from everlasting? for him to be sent to recover
and save Man (vile, sinful, wicked, undone man)? the Son to be employed for the
Servant, the Slave, the Enemy? O astonishing mercy! O admirable goodness and
condescension! How may we here cry out, Lord! Psalm. 8.4. Psalm. 144.3.
what is man that thou art (thus) mindful of him? and the Joh. 3.16.
Son of man that thou make (this) account of him? Here was God's so loving of
the world, so as can never be expressed; he so loved the world as that he gave
his only begotten Son etc. So loved the world? what is there in this so? why so
inexpressibly, so unconceivably. Joh. 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the love
of God toward us; because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might live through him; Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that
he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. God owned it
as a great discovery of Abraham's Love to him, when upon his command he was
willing to offer up his only begotten Son; but (alas!) how infinitely short did
that come of his own Love in his sending and parting with his only begotten Son
for the good of Sinners? here he intended to give out the highest manifestation
of his Grace and he has done it to purpose. The Isa. 1.2.
heavens and the earth were once called upon to be filled with astonishment
because of the ingratitude of a sinful people; may not now Heaven and Earth,
Angels and Men, all Creatures whatsoever, be called upon to be filled with
astonishment because of the stupendous Love of God? O Christians! what
influence has this upon your dull and sluggish hearts? what are you made of
that you are no more (in the sense of it) drawn out in the blessing, loving,
admiring of God? Pray, (if there be any holy ingenuity in you) take some pains
with your selves that you may be much more affected with it, and give not over
till you have such thoughts and affections (upon God's sending his own Son)
raised in you, as may in some measure answer to those thoughts and affections
which you shall have about it when you shall be in Heaven.

Use 3. For Comfort from Christ's Sonship.
So much for Exhortation, the third and last Use shall be for Comfort: and
surely here is ground of strong Consolation to Believers, that which may highly
conduce to the furthering of their joy and the strengthening of their faith. You
who are such study this Sonship of Christ, dwell upon it often in your most
serious thoughts, make the best of it, and then tell me whether you do not find
that solid Support and Comfort from it which you desire and need.

Shall I broach this full Vessel and draw out a little of that heart-chearing
liquour which is in it? then know that

1. As Christ is the Son of God, so are you. When I say SO are you, you must
understand me of the Verity not of the Kind or Manner of the Sonship; you are
not Sons as Christ is (viz.) by eternal Generation, yet Sons you are in another
way (viz.) by regeneration and adoption; and though herein you come short of
Christ (you being but adopted Sons and he the natural Son), yet as you are but
such there is greater glory put upon you than if you were descended from or
adopted by the greatest Monarch of the World. May not this be matter of great
comfort to you, to consider that whatever Christ is that you are (according to
your capacity and necessary subordination to him)? that all that Grace which
fell upon him falls upon you likewise? and yet so it is; is he the anointed of
God? so are you; is he a Son? so are you; is he the beloved of God? so are you;
is he the Heir of God? so are you; in these respects also it is Joh. 1.16.
Grace for Grace. I am upon your Sonship in conformity to Christ's Sonship, the
truth of which you have no reason to question since the procuring of this for
you was one thing that God in special aimed at in the sending of his Great Son
into the world: Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth
his Son etc. that we might receive the adoption of Sons; and therefore in this
relation Christ takes you in with himself, Joh. 20.17. Go to my brethren and
say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father; and to my God and your
God.

2. You may now (upon this) confidently expect the bestowing of all good. For
Christ being God's own Son and he having given him to you, what can come after
that can be too great or too good for him to give to you? what will God now
deny after the gift of such a Son? He Romans 8.32.
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? Saints let this be thought of, as all
blessings come to you from God as he is the God and Father of Christ, (for it is
Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ,) so all blessings
are assured to you from this relative consideration of God, viz. as he is first
the God and Father of Christ and then in him your God and Father too.

3. You may he sure that there is an infinite value, worth, and efficacy in
Christ's Obedience, and that he was a person able to accomplish your
Redemption. Christ being such a Son this speaks him to be a Person of great
dignity, that dignity of his Person gives the highest assurance to Faith both
that he was every way able to go through what he undertook, and also that there
must be an infinite Virtue and Merit in what ever he did or suffered: What can
be so hard as that the power of the Son of God cannot effect it? and what can
be so high as that the Obedience of the Son of God cannot merit it? Had Christ
been only the Son of Man then indeed Faith could not have bore up with such
confidence; but he being the Son of God also and having the Nature, Essence,
Attributes of God, how may Faith triumph as to the efficacy and meritoriousness
of his obedience! 'Twas the blood of God which he shed Acts 20.28. O what a
greatness and Superest, ut poena illa Fidejussoris nostri pretio, dignitate,
atque merito foret infinita, id quod allter fieri non potuit, quam si Persona
patiens foret ipsa infinita. Nam ut Peccati etc. Vid. These. Salmur. de Christo
Mediat. part 1. th. 13. p. 246.
infiniteness of Merit must needs result from the greatness and infiniteness of
such a Person! Heb. 9.13, 14. If the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the
ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the
Flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works to
serve the Living God?

4. You may go boldly to the throne of Grace upon all occasions. For you have
God's own Son to lead you thither and to make way for you, and not only so but
this own Son improves all his interest in and with the Father for your good;
why are you afraid to go to God? Heb. 4.14, 16. Seeing then that we have a
great High Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus [the Son of God etc.]
let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy
and find grace to help in time of need.

5. You need not in the least question the prevalency of Christ's intercession:
Does Christ intercede and shall he not prevail? will not the Father hear such a
Son? Suppose he may deny you (which he will not) yet surely he will not deny
his own and only Son. Christ upon this relation may ask any thing and he shall
have it; mark the connection Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the decree, the Lord has
said unto me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: what follows now
upon this? why ( Verse. 8.) Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. God
thinks nothing too much for this Son when he asks it of him; and it is the same
when he asks for you as when he asks for himself: therefore fear not but that
your Prayers shall be graciously answered Christ himself interceding for you;
when the Kings own Son carrys the Petition doubtless it shall be granted.

6. This is the Person to whom you are mystically united; and therefore his
Glory and Greatness reflects a Glory and Greatness upon you. You are in Christ
not only as he is the Son of Man but as he is the Son of God also, for the
Union is terminated not in this or that Nature but in the whole Person: the
Apostle therefore takes special notice of this 1 John 5.20. We know that the
Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him
that is true: and we are in him that is true, [even in his Son Jesus Christ]; O
to be in this Son there is the glory and safety of a believer!

I have done with this high and most Evangelical Truth, The Lord Jesus is God's
own Son: upon which I have been somewhat large partly because of the excellency
of the Argument it self, and partly because of the great opposition made
against it. 2 John 3. Grace be with you, mercy, and peace from God the Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ [the Son of the Father], in truth and love.

ROMANS 8.3. -- etc. In the likeness of sinful Flesh.


CHAP. XII. Of Christ's Incarnation and abasement in Flesh.
A Fourth General in the Words handled. Why the Apostle is so express in the
further adding of these Words to the former? Five things laid down for the
explication of them. Flesh not taken here in the same sense with Flesh in what
went before. A double Synecdoche in the word Flesh. Christ did not bring Flesh
from Heaven with him but assumed it here on Earth. His sending in Flesh was not
his taking a mere humane shape etc. Likeness to be joined not with Flesh but
with sinful Flesh.

Two Propositions raised from the Words: Of the First, that Christ was sent in
Flesh. What his sending in Flesh imports: this opened more strictly and more
largely. Of Marcion (and Others) who denied the verity of Christ's Incarnation
and Body: That proved as to both: as also the verity of his whole Manhood. Of
his having a true Soul. Of his submitting to the common adjuncts and
infirmities of Flesh. How the Humane Nature in Christ and in us differ. His
Incarnation not impossible, not incredible. The Reasons of it: (1.) That the
Old Testament Prophecies, Promises, Types, might thereby receive their
accomplishment. (2.) That Christ might be qualified for his Office (as
Mediator) and the work of Redemption: (3.) Because it was the fittest and the
best way in order to the redeeming of man.
Seven Propositions laid down for the due stating and opening of Christ's
Incarnation: As (1.) That Christ (who before was the eternal Son of God and had
a praevious existence) was made Flesh: (this made good against the SOCINIANS).
(2.) That the Second Person only was incarnate. (3.) That this was not done
till the fullness of time. (4.) That 'twas not the divine Essence absolutely
considered which assumed Flesh, but that Essence considered as subsisting in
the Second Person. (5.) That the Nature assuming was the Divine Nature. (6.)
That the Humane Nature was so assumed as to subsist in the Divine, and that
both of these Natures make but one Person: ( where the Hypostatical Union is
opened and proved). (7.) It Is probable that if Adam had not fallen Christ had
not been sent in the Flesh.


Of the Second Proposition, That Christ was sent in the likeness, yet but in
the likeness of sinful Flesh. Of the Sanctity of Christ's Humane Nature: The
Grounds thereof. Use 1. To inform (1.) Of the excellency of the Gospel and of
the Christian Religion: As also (2.) Of the excellency of Christ's Flesh or
Manhood.
Use 2. Wherein several Duty's are urged upon Christians: as namely (1.) To
give a full and firm assent to the Truth of Christ's Incarnation, and also
firmly to adhere to Christ as having assumed our Flesh; ( where something is
spoken against those who make little of a Christ in Flesh but are all for a
Christ within). (2.) To be much in the study and contemplation of Christ
incarnate. (3.) To adore the Mystery it self and also the Father and the Son in
the Mystery. (4.) To endeavor after the powerful influence of it upon Heart
and Life: So as 1. To be humble. 2. Not to give way to Sin. 3. Especially not
to those sins which do more directly disparage and debase the Humane Nature. 4.
To love God and Christ. 5. To be willing to do, to suffer, to be abased for
Christ. 6. To labor after a participation of the Divine Nature. 7. To be
highly thankful, both for the Thing it self and also for the revelation of it.

Use 3. Of Comfort. As (1.) Christ in Flesh must needs be un effectual way for
promoting God's Glory and the Sinners Good. (2.) In this God has given out a
very high demonstration of his Love. (3.) By this all the Promises are sealed,
and all the great things of Faith and Hope made sure and credible: Particularly
1. The Mystical Union. 2. Communion with God, Christ's special presence, the
inhabitation of the Spirit. 3. The Communications of Grace from God. 4. Our
Sonship to God. 5. The Resurrection of our Bodies. 6. The Future Glory.
(4.) God is now knowable and accessible. (5.) The Humane Nature highly
dignified and advanced. (6.) Christ upon this is the more compassionate. (7.)
There are few troubles of Conscience wherein this may not afford matter of ease
and relief.


The Fourth General in the Words.
THis branch of the Words contains a Fourth Head in it (which comes next to be
opened): Our Apostle having spoken of God's sending his own Son, he goes on to
show in what manner he sent him; and (as to that) he says God sent him in the
likeness of sinful flesh. Here Is nothing in the Text but Wonders, but the (...)
the great things of God! the further we go the deeper the Waters are, and still
new matter offers it self to heighten our admiration: 'twas wonderful that God
should send such a Son, but that he should send such a Son in such a manner, in
Flesh, yea, in the likeness of sinful Flesh, this is yet more wonderful. O
Christian! stay alittle, pause upon these Words, get thy thoughts up, thy heart
elevated in the contemplation of what is here set before thee, and then read
one.

Why this Branch is added to what goes before?
In my entrance upon them it may be enquired, why the Apostle is so particular
and so express in this matter? Nonne satis erat dicere, mittens Filium suum?
Hoc ipso verbo declaratum non fuisset istud magnum mysterium scituque
dignissimum: quomodo videlicet peccatum peccati damnavit Omnipotens,
similitudine ^arnis peccati peccatores a peccato liberans etc. Corn. Mussus.
had it not been enough for him to have said God sent his own Son and so to
have broke off, but he must also add that God sent him in the likeness etc? To
which I answer, there was great reason for this amplification, for the Apostle
being here treating of such great mysteries, of such high and glorious
discoveries of the Wisdom, Grace, Love of God toward lost Sinners, he thought
in these he could not be too full or too express; and he being to set down in a
little room the whole model and platform of man's Salvation, the good Spirit of
God directed him to put in enough, both for the setting forth of God's
admirable Love, Mercy etc. and also for the encouragement of the Believers
Faith (with respect to the certainty, compleatness, and fullness of his
Salvation). Now Christ's incarnation and abasement in Man's Nature being so
pertinent and proper and so necessary as to both of these ends, therefore our
Apostle will not pass that over without a particular mentioning of it. And
elsewhere you find him when he had spoken of Christ's mission presently to
subjoyn Christ's incarnation also; as Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of time was
come, God sent his Son, made of a woman etc. 'Twas not only God's sending of
Christ but his so sending of him (viz.) in Flesh, yea, in the likeness of
sinful Flesh, which puts such an emphasis and accent upon his own Grace, and
which does give such full assurance to poor Creatures that they shall be
effectually redeemed and saved. Upon these Considerations therefore (besides
the admirableness of the thing in it self) Paul (when he is upon such an
Argument) might very well superadde this to what preceded; and he is not
satisfied with the once mentioning of it in the general, but he repeats it and
more particularly shows what use God made of Christ's Flesh, or what good did
by that redound to us, for sin he condemned sin in the Flesh (that is) in the
flesh of Christ.

The Explication of the Words.
For the clearing up the true meaning of the Words, and the vindicating of them
from those false interpretations which some of the old Heretics put upon them,
I will lay down a Few Particulars:

1. First, that Flesh (as here used concerning Christ) carry's a quite other
sense in it than what it did when it was spoken of before: You had it (Verse.
1.) -- Who walk not after the Flesh etc. in this Verse, what the Law could not
do in that it was weak through the Flesh; (in which sense as it is there used it
occurs in many following Verses). Now Flesh in these places is taken in a very
different notion from Flesh in this; for in them it is taken morally and
accidentally, but here (where Christ is concerned in it) it is taken Physically
and substantially; in them it notes Man's nature as corrupted, but here the
very being and substance of the Humane nature, or the verity of the Humane
nature it self abstracted from any such adjunct; (and so it is twice taken in
this Verse).

2. That Flesh (in this application) is not to be understood in its more narrow
and limited sense, but in its more general and comprehensive sense. Here Is a
double Synecdoche in the word, as it signifies (1.) the whole Body: (2.) the
whole Man or the whole nature of man:
Flesh in its strict acceptance is but a part of the body and the body but a
part of the Man, but so you are not here to take it; for Christ had a perfect,
entire, complete body, and every thing (as well as mere Flesh) which is proper
to a body; for instance, he had blood as well as Flesh (therefore both are
named Heb. 2.14. He also took part of the same (i.e. of Flesh and blood); and
he had bones as well as flesh, Luke 24.39. A Spirit has not flesh and bones as
ye see me have. Further, Christ was not only clothed with Flesh as that is
limited but to one part of Man, but he assumed the (...). Cyrill. Alexandr. in
Joh. p. 95.
whole Nature of Man; he had a Soul as well as a Body (which two are the
essential, constitutive parts of Man). What more common in Scripture than by
Flesh to set forth Man in his whole, entire, humane Nature? (See Genesis 6.12.
Psalm. 65.2. Isa. 40.5. Joel 2.28. Luke 3.6. Romans 3.20. Joh. 17.2. 1 Cor.
1.29.): and so the word is frequently used there to represent the whole manhood
of Christ, (so Joh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 10.20. 1 Pet. 3.18. and passim).
When therefore it is said God sent his Son in Flesh you are thus to conceive of
it, that Christ did not only take Flesh but that with it he took the whole
Nature of Man, that he was as truly so completely Man, consisting of Flesh and
Spirit, Body and Soul; yea, that he assumed the entire Humane Nature with
whatever is proper to it, ( two things only being excepted, of which by and
by). In this extent and latitude you are here to take the word Flesh, a part
being put for the whole.

3. Although it be said God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, yet
we must distinguish between the Mission and the Incarnation. They differ in
their Order, Christ being first sent and then incarnate; as also in the place
where each was done, for the mission was above but the incarnation was here
below. This I take notice of that I may the better clear up that ambiguity
which seems to be in the expression, (which some among the Ancients not
understanding aright, runn'd themselves upon very erroneous Opinions). For it
being said that God sent his own Son in the likenss of sinful Flesh, they from
hence inferred that Christ came from Heaven actually clothed with Flesh, that
his Body was immediately created there, and that from thence he brought it down
with him hither, and (to take in another of their The first broachers of which
were Apollinaris, Valentinus, etc. Of and against whom see Najanz. ad
Nectarium. Athan. de Incarn. Christi. tom. 1. p. 619. and 1083.
Haeresy's) that it was of such a nature as that it only passed through the
Virgins womb (...), as water through a pipe or as light through a glass. But
you are not to give way to these apprehensions the true meaning of the Words
being this; Christ was sent in the likeness of Flesh, not that he had it before
he was on earth but it was his Father's Will (for the fulfilling of which he
sent him) that he should descend and here below assume Flesh: so that though
the Apostle expresses it by being sent in the likeness etc. yet his meaning is
rather to or for or in order to the likeness of sinful flesh: this was not done
beforehand just at his sending but this was to be subsequent upon it in its
proper time and place. And Earth was that place where this stupendous mystery
of a Christ incarnate did commence, there was the attiring House where he put
on his mean and mourning dress; 'twas in the Virgin where his Body was so
curiously and so wonderfully wrought. When he ascended he carried up his Body
from Earth to Heaven, but when he descended he did not bring down his Body from
Heaven to Earth; the foundation of his being incarnate was laid above (in the
purpose and command of the Father, with respect to which he is said to be sent
in the likeness etc.) but his actual assumption of Flesh was done here below.
True he says Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven but he that came
down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven: and Joh. 6.62. What
if you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? but this you are
to understand as spoken only upon the (...) communication of Properties, that
being here attributed to Christ in one Nature (as the Son of man) which was
only proper to him in the other (as the Son of God). It Is also said of him that
the second man is the Lord from heaven 1 Cor. 15.47; but that you are to take
not as referring to the matter and substance of his body (as if he brought that
from heaven), but only as pointing to his descent from heaven and the
miraculous formation of his body here on earth. And whereas Some speak (as you
heard) of Christ's Body being immediately created, and but passing through the
Virgin as water through a pipe, the falsity of that Opinion is very notorious;
for the Scripture plainly tells us that it was produced in another way, that he
was conceived and born of the Virgin, that the production of his substance was
of Hers (though in an extraordinary manner); therefore it is said Mat. 1.18. she
was found with child of the holy Ghost; and (Verse. 20.) that which is conceived
in her is of the Holy Ghost; and Luke 1.35. that holy thing which shall be born
of thee shall be called the Son of God; and Elizabeth speaks of Christ as the
fruit of her womb Luke 1.42. and Paul says he was made of a woman Gal. 4.4.
(not made in a woman but of a woman). From all which Texts two things are
evident, Of these things read Tertull. in his excellent Treatise de Carne
Christi. p. 374.
(1.) that though the formation of Christ's Flesh was extraordinary and
miraculous, yet it was not immediately created (especially not in heaven): (2.)
that the Virgin Mary had a proper causality in the production of Christ's Body,
and therefore was not a mere pipe through which it did only pass.


4. This sending of Christ in the likeness etc. was not his assuming of a mere
humane shape or his apparition only in the shape and form of a man, but it was
the real assumption of the humane Nature consisting of Soul and Body. There Is a
vast difference betwixt Christ's incarnation and such apparitions as those
which we have instances of in the Old Testament; and that too, not only with
respect to the appanitions of Angels but also of Christ himself; for it might
easily be proved that 'twas he who appeared to Abraham Genesis 18.13, 14, 17. to
Jacob Genesis 32.24. to Moses Exodus 3.2. (compared with Acts 7.30. etc. 35.). But
now his incarnation was a quite other thing, for in that there was not the
taking of man's shape but of man's nature, not the taking of it so as to lay it
down again after a short time (as was in apparitions), but so as to keep it and
continue in it for ever. The Apostle cry's out 1 Timothy 3.16. Without
controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh
etc. but had there been in that nothing more than a mere apparition of Christ
in Flesh or in humane shape, the thing had not been so strange that he should
make such a mystery of it, for he knew this was very common: therefore there
must be more in it than so. To convince us of the truth and reality of Christ's
Flesh in opposition to all phantasms and mere apparitions, the Scripture speaks
of him not only as appearing (Mal. 3.2. Who shall stand when he appears? 2 Timothy 1.10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ etc. Heb. 9.26. Once in the end of the world has he appeared etc.); nor
only as manifested (1 John 1.2. 1 John 3.5, 8. 1 Timothy 3.16.); nor only as
taking Flesh (which expression to some might be more doubtful and general, as
Heb. 2.14, 16.): but to put this out of all question it says he was made flesh
Joh. 1.14. (which must be more than a bare appearance or manifestation in
imaginary and fantastic Flesh). 'Twas enough for Nullus unquam Angelus ideo
descendit ut crucisigeretur etc. Si nunquam ejusmodi fuit causa Angelorum
corporandorum, habes causam cur non acceperint carnem. Non venerant mori, ideo
nec nasci. At vero Christus mori missus, nasci quoque necessario habuit ut mori
posset. Tertull. de Carne Christi. p. 363.
Angels when God had only some particular and ordinary message to send them
upon, to assume an external shape and then lay it down again; but when Christ
is to be born, to converse in the world a considerable time, to die, to make
satisfaction in that Nature in which the offense had been committed, here must
be more than a Spectrum, an apparition, here must be real Flesh. And indeed the
former Old Testament apparitions were but as so many Vide Irenaum advers.
Haeres. lib. 4. c. 37.
praeludium's of Christ's real incarnation; in all these he did but praeludere
humanitati suae (as Tertullian phraseth it).

5. Therefore (as to the letter of the Words) when it is said Christ was sent in
the likeness of sinful Flesh, this likeness is to be linked not with Flesh but
with sinful Flesh. He had true, real, very Flesh but he had only in appearance
and likeness sinful Flesh; he had not a putative, imaginary body, but as to sin
though there was something like to that in his outward state and condition yet
'twas but like to it, there was no such thing in truth and reality inhering in
that Nature which he assumed. This is that plain, genuine interpretation of the
Words against the old Heretical pervertings of them which the Non in
similitudine Carnis quasi Caro non esset Caro, sed in similitudine Carnis quia
Caro erat sed peccati Caro non erat. Aug. Vide Sermon. 3. and 6. de verbis
Apostoli. In similitudine Carnis peccati fuisse Christum ait, non quod
similitudinem Carnis accepit, quasi imaginem Corporis and non veritatem, sed
similitudinem Carnis peccatricis vult intelligi, quod ipsa non peccatrix Caro
Christi ejus suit par cujus erat peccatum, genere non vitio Adae etc. Tertull.
de Carne Christi. p. 372. Similitudo ad peccati titulum pertinet non ad
substantiae mendacium etc. Idem adv. Marci. lib. 5. cap. 14. (...). Basil. Ep.
65. (...) etc. Chrysostom. in loc. (...) etc. (...). Theodoret. Misit Deus etc.
ut in vera carnis susceptione agnosceretur veritas non fuisse peccati; and
quantum ad corpus veritas intelligeretur, quantum ad peccatum similitudo
peccati, Cassian. de Incarn. Dom. lib. 4.
Orthodox ( Ancient and Modern) put upon them; the truth of which I shall
endeavor to make out in what will follow: at present I need say no more about
it.

Two Propositions raised from the Words.
These things being thus premised the whole matter will fall into these two
Propositions:

1. That Christ was sent in Flesh. 2. That he was sent in the likeness, yet but
in the likeness of sinful Flesh. Two very weighty and important Truths!
therefore I hope the opening and confirming of them will not be judged tedious
or unnecessary.
Of the First Proposition wherein the verity of Christ's Flesh is proved.
I begin with the First: where I shall consider the Flesh in which Christ was
sent (1.) in its more strict, (2.) in its more large notion.
More strictly, as it relates to the verity of Christ's incarnation and the
reality of his body; more largely, as it relates to the verity of his whole
manhood, which (as has been already said) is made up and constituted of
something more than Flesh.

But before I enter upon either of these Heads, I cannot but bewail (and O that
I could do it with the most inward and most intense sadness of Spirit!) that
unworthy, wretched usage which our blessed Lord JESUS has all along met withal
ever since he was revealed to the world. He has but two Natures and how has
he been impugned, opposed, struck at in both? first Some attempted to undermine
his Godhead, then Others succeeded who attempted to undermine his Manhood. It Is
very sad to consider, that he who is both God and Man (if several men might
have had their Will) should have been long before this neither God nor Man, but
a very nothing. Ebion first comes upon the Stage and he denies him to be God,
then come Marcion, Manes etc. and they deny him to be Man; the Arrian ungods
him, and the Manichee unmans him, what will they leave us of him who is our
All? How was the Primitive Church fain to dispute, argue, contend to their
utmost (and all little enough) for the defense of these Natures of Christ, (and
God be blessed for their excellent zeal in such fundamental Articles of the
Christian Faith! it is pity the Churches zeal should ever run in any other
Channel). But Christ must be opposed some way or other, (for he is set for a
sign which shall be spoken against Luke 2.34.); the present Contests of the
world are now against him chiefly with respect to his Offices, but the past
Contests were against him chiefly with respect to his Natures: I have
(according to my poor ability) vindicated his Natural and eternal Sonship (and
consequently his Godhead), I am now to vindicate the truth of his Incarnation
and Manhood.

This the forementioned Heretics peremptorily denied (as appears by the
Athanas. tom. 1. de Incarn. Christi. Tertull. de Praescrip. advers. Haeret. c.
46. Haer. 3. and de Carne Christi, and advers. Marcion. (against whom he writes
five Books). Epiphan. tom. 2. lib. 1. Haer. 24. and 80. and tom. 3. Haer. 42.
August. tom. 4. p. 925. etc. Cyrill Alexandr. tom. 5. p. 678. etc.
Ancients who wrote against them); they asserted that Christ had no -- (...).
Ignat. hence they were called (...). Valentinus carnem Christi putativam
introduxit. Tertull. de came Christi. They say Christ did but (...) as
Theophylact expresses it.
true Flesh, 'twas only the likeness of Flesh which he appeared in, that his
body was only a Fantastic, imaginary Body. And this pestilent Opinion they
did (in part) ground upon the Words which we have at present before us: but as
to them, by the giving of their true sense this weapon has been rescued out of
the Enemies hand. And some (...) est ipsa Caro, etiamsi non cum peccato etc.
Missus ergo Filius Dei (...). i. e. in carne non peccatrice, eadem tamen, quae
in nobis peccarat; five polluta non in ipso, sed in nobis. Naturam Peccati
(h.e.) Peocatorum Dei Filius suscepit, puram quidem sed ut nostram, quae
peccarat expiaret. Cum notissimo Hebraismo (...) res ipsa dicatur, ut cum (...)
ipse Homo dicitur, non video cur non and (...) vera sit ^aro: cum peccati non
ab eo dicatur, qui assumsit atque hoc ipso expiavit, sed ab eo qui peccando
corrupit. Heins.
Expositors (the more to weaken the Objection of the Adversaries as grounded
upon this Text) tell us, that the likeness here of sinful Flesh is the sameness
of sinful Flesh; that Christ took that very Flesh which was and is sinful, (not
that it was so in him but that it is so in us), that he assumed that very Flesh
which in man is defiled by sin, (yet not as defiled but as true Flesh). As when
it is said concerning him that he was in the Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
form of God, in the form of a Servant, in the likeness and fashion of man
((...), it is the same word with that in the Text), the meaning is that Christ
was truly God, truly a Servant, truly Man: and as it is said concerning Adam
Genesis 5.3.
he begat a Son in his own likeness, that is, he begat a Son who was as truly a
man and as truly a Sinner as himself; so Christ was sent in the likeness etc.
viz. in just such Flesh or in the very self same Flesh which man has made in
himself sinful, and therefore passible and mortal. Now though I cannot deny the
truth of this Exposition (as thus stated), nor that it may very well be
grounded upon parallel places; yet because to some at the first hearing it may
seem somewhat harsh, I rather incline to that which was laid down before in the
opening of the Words; 'twas the same flesh in Christ and in us in its Physical
consideration, but it being morally considered it was but the likeness of
sinful Flesh.

But to come to that which I propounded, let us consider Flesh in its strict
acceptance as it relates to the fleshly and bodily part, so I Will lay down two
things about it:

1. That Christ was indeed sent in flesh, was really incarnate, and did verily
take flesh upon him. And what one thing is there in the whole Gospel wherein
it is plain and positive, if it be not so in this? Joh. 1.14. And the Word was
made Flesh: 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in the flesh. Heb. 2.14, 16. Forasmuch then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil: For verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels
but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Romans 1.3. Concerning his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh: Romans
9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came,
who is over all God blessed for ever, Amen: Hence he is said to be made of a
woman Gal. 4.4. (many such See the strength of these (with other) Texts drawn
forth and vindicated against Objections by Mr. Tombs in a little Treatise
called Emmannel or God-man, Sect. 15, 16, etc. (to the end of the Book.)
places might be produced to prove that Christ really assumed Flesh, but these
may suffice).

Christ's Flesh was organized.
And this Flesh (wherein Christ was sent) was organized and formed into a
perfect body: the Apostle does not only call it his Flesh but the body of his
flesh: Col. 1.22. In the body of his flesh through death etc. Heb. 10.5.
Wherefore when he comes into the world he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a Body have thou prepared me. I Pet. 1 24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree etc. Our Savior did not assume a
confused indigested and unshapen mass or lump of flesh (that was not his
incarnation), but he assumed Flesh cast into the very mould and form of our
bodies, having the same several parts, members, lineaments, the same proportion
which they have.

2. I add (not as a distinct Head from the former, but only that I may more
distinctly speak to it then as yet I have done, Of the Verity of Christ's Body.
) that as Christ was indeed sent in Flesh, so the flesh in which he was sent
was Flesh indeed. He says. Joh. 6.55.
My flesh is meat indeed, and I say his Flesh was flesh indeed; as true, real,
proper, very flesh as that is which any of us carry about with us: 'twas (as
was said before) but the likeness of sinful flesh, but 'twas the reality of
physical or substantial Flesh. Vide Aquin. 3. p. Qu. 5. Art. 1.
Christ's body was no Spectrum or Phantasm, no putative body (as if it had no
being but what was in appearance and from imagination), but as real, as solid a
body as ever any was; therefore the Apostle (in the Col. 1.22.
forecited place) calls it a body of Flesh, a body to show the organization of
it, and a body of flesh to show the reality of it, in opposition to all aerial
and imaginary bodies. It had all the essential properties of a true body; such
as are organicalness, extension, local presence, confinement, circumscription,
penetrability, visibility, palpability, (and the like): Luke 24.39. Quomodo
hanc vocem interpretaris, Marcion etc. Ecce fallit and decipit etc. Ergo jam
Christum non de coelo defer debueras, sed de aliquo circulatorio caetu, nec
salutis Pontificem, sed spectaculi artificem etc. Tertull. de Carne Christi. p.
362.
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have: 1 John 1.1. That which was
from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life etc.
He had also those natural Esuriit sub Diabolo, sitiit sub Samaritide,
lacrymatus est supra Lazarum, trepidavit ad mortem, sanguinem fudit postremo
haec sunt opinor signa coelestia. Idem. ibid. p. 367.
affections, passions, infirmities which are proper to a body, as hunger Matthew.
4.2. When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered: thirst Joh. 4.7. Joh. 19.28. I thirst: Sleep Matthew. 8.24. Weariness
Joh. 4.6. Jesus being wearied with his journey etc. He was conceived, retained
so long in the Virgins womb, Marcion ut carnem Christi negaret, negavit etiam
nativitatem; aut ut nativitatem negaret, negavit et Carnem, scilicet ne invicem
sibi testimonium redderent, and responderent Nativitas and Caro, quia nec
nativitas sine carne, nec caro sine nativitate. Tertull. de Carne Christi. P.
358.
born, circumcised, lived about thirty years on earth, conversed all that time
with men, suffered, died, was crucified, buried, rose again, ascended, sat down
with his body at the right hand of God, with it will come again to judge the
world. Does not all this speak him to have a true body? could all this be done
in and upon and by an imaginary body? Had it been only such, then his
Conception, Nativity, Death, Resurrection, Ascension are all too but imaginary
things; his Sufferings, (...). Athan. de Incarn. p. 1083. Haec, quomodo in illo
vera erant si ipse non fuit verus? Si non vere habuit in se quod figeretur,
quod moreretur, quod sepeliretur, and resuscitaretur? Carnem scilicet sanguine
suffusam, ossibus structam, nervis, intextam, venis implexam, quae nasci and
mori novit? Tertull. de Carn. Christi. p. 361.
Crucifixion, but mere fancies, and what then would become of us? then all our
Falsa est and fides nostra, and phantasma crit totum quod speramus a Christo.
Tertull. Ibid.
Faith, Hope, yea all our Religion would vanish into a mere fancy also. When
Satan had him in the Wilderness and was tempting of him, he thus assaulted him
Matthew. 4.3. If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread:
and ( Verse. 6.) If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down: now what an
absurd ridiculous thing had it been for Satan thus to have tempted Christ,
supposing that he had only had a fantastic body? what need would there have
been of food for such a body? or what hurt could such a body have received by
falling from the highest pinnacle? Nay further (as Scelestissime hominum, qui
interemtores excusas Dei: Nihil enim ab eis passus est Christus, si nihil vere
est passus: Parce unicae spei totius orbis, quid destruis necessarium dedecus
fidei? Tertull.
Tertullian argues) what evil did his Murderers do in the crucifying of him if
he had not a true body? for without that he could not have truly suffered, they
then would have been excused (he suffering nothing at all by their means). The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a symbol and representation of his body, 1
Cor. 11.24. This is my body which is broken for you etc. now what a pitiful
thing would this Sacramental representation thereof be, if in it self it was
not a true body? (diverse such Considerations might be insisted upon if it was
necessary).

So much for Christ's Flesh in its stricter notion, Of the Verity of Christ's
Manhood.
I come now in the Second place to consider it in its more large and extensive
notion. So Christ was sent in Flesh (that is) in the verity of man's nature, he
verily took upon him the whole Humane nature, became true Man, of the same make
and substance with us, in all things like to us (some things excepted which do
not in the least abolish or destroy the truth of his manhood). He Is called the
Man Christ Jesus 1 Timothy 2.5. Since by man came death by man came also the
resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.21. He was made in the likeness of men:
Phil. 2.7. He Is styled the Son of man Dan. 7.13. Joh. 3.13. the seed of the
Woman Genesis 3.15. the seed of Abraham Genesis 22.18. the seed of David Romans 1.3.
the son of David Matthew. 1.1. the branch of David Jer. 23.5. he is said to be of
the fruit of his loins Acts 2.30.

The two essential or constitutive parts of Man are Soul and Body, Of his
having a true Soul.
where these two are there is the true man; Christ had both, therefore he was
such: That he had a real body has been already proved, I am only now to show
that he also had a real Vide Aquin Sum. 3. p. Quest. 5. Art. 3. Suscepit non
solum corpus humanum (ut quidam putant), sed and animam nostrarum animarum
similem per Naturam. August. de Incarn. Verbi Dei. tom. 4. lib. 2. p. 243.
Soul. And indeed the former proves the latter, for if Christ would assume the
body (which is but in a manner the bark, shell, or case of man, but the lowest
and meanest part of him, but as the -- (...). Nemes. de Not. Hom. c. 3. p. 94.
covering and garment of the Soul, (...) as the Jews call it), certainly he
would assume the Soul, the reasonable Soul, that being the highest and the
noblest part. This is that which principally makes the Man, and has the
greatest influence into his Being and Essence; if therefore our Lord had only
had an humane Body without an humane Soul, he had wanted that part which is
most essential to man, and so could not have been looked upon as true and
perfect man; but 'twas far otherwise. For indeed Christ H^c Deus in nobis
salvavit, quod pro nobis suscepit, and illam Naturam participem fecit salutis
quam sibi conjunxit. Fulgent. ad Trasimund. etc.
redeemed and saved nothing but what he assumed, the Redemption and Salvation
reach no farther than the assumption; our Soul then would have been never the
better for Christ had he not taken that as well as our body, for (...)(as
Najanzene expresses it): if he will save the whole man from sin he must Totum
hominem sine peccato suscepit, ut totum quo constabat homo a peccatorum pes^^
sanaret. August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 10. ca. 17. Si totum debuerat liberare
pietas, totum debuit suscipere divina Majestas. Totius ergo fuit hominis a Deo
suscipienda Natura, quoniam in toto fuit captivitas captivanda etc. Fulgent. ad
Trasimund. de Mysterio Mediat.
assume the whole man without sin. It Is said of him Luke 2.52. he increased in
wisdom and stature; here is stature for his Body and wisdom for his Soul, his
growth in that speaks the truth of the former, and his growth in this speaks
the truth of the latter; his body properly could not grow in wisdom nor his
soul in stature, therefore there must be both. There are three things in a
reasonable Soul, Understanding, Will, Affections; now it is evident all these
were in Christ: He had an humane Understanding (distinct from his Divine
Understanding); otherwise how could he have been said to increase in wisdom?
and how could he have been under the nescience of some things? (as it is plain
he was, for he knew not the Vide Najanz. Orat. 36. p. 588.
precise time of the day of judgment, Mark 13.32.); as he was God he knew all
things, so his Understanding was infinite, he must therefore have some other
Understanding which was but finite, in reference to which there might be
something which he did not know. He also had an humane Will (distinct from his
Divine Will); for what could that Will be which he did submit and subordinate
to the Will of his Father but this? Luke 22.42. -- Nevertheless not my Will but
thine be don. Then for those Affections which are proper to the Soul, it is
clear Christ had them; as namely Anger, Mar. 3.5. Mar. 10.14. Love, Mat. 10.21.
Sorrow, Mat. 26.38. Luke 19.41. Fear, Heb. 5.7. Joy, Luke 10, 21. Joh. 11.15.
Pity, Mat. 9.36. Mat. 13.32. Now where these three things are most certainly
there is a true and real Soul.

Yet here also our blessed Lord and Savior is assaulted: he has two Natures
which make up his Person (his Deity and his Humanity), but both of them by
several persons are taken away (as you heard but now); and there are two
Essential parts which make up one of his Natures, his Manhood, (viz. Soul and
Body), but both of these too by several persons are taken away also. Marcion
divests him of a Body and See Epiphan. vol. 1. p. 743, 771.
Apollinaris of a Soul, (the Arrians also are charged with this Heresy): these
held that Christ had no Soul, but that the (...). Theodor. lib. 5 contra
Haeres. cap. 11.
Deity was to him instead of a Soul and supplied the office thereof, that what
the Soul is to us and does in our bodies all that the Divine Nature was to
Christ and did in his Body: O what light can be clear enough for their
Conviction and guidance in the way of truth, whom God has given up to 2 These.
2.11.
strong delusions that they should believe lies! Are not the Scriptures clear
enough in this matter that Christ had a real Soul? what was the subject of his
inexpressible sorrow and agonies in the Garden, but his Soul? Matthew. 26.38. My
Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death etc. Joh. 12.27. Now is my Soul
troubled, and what shall I say? what did he in special recommend to God when he
was breathing out his last gasp, but his Soul? Luke 23.46. When Jesus had cried
with a loud voice he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and
having said thus he gave up the Ghost: what was the part affected in his sore
desertion when he cried out My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? surely
his Body could not be the immediate subject of a punishment purely spiritual,
no, that must terminate in his spiritual part, the Soul. By all this it appears
then that Christ was, as truly God, so also truly Man (he having a true Body
and a true Soul).

Yet a little further (that I may take in the whole truth, Of Christ's
submitting to the common Adjuncts etc. of the Humane Nature.
and leave out nothing which may tend to the heightning of Christ's
incomparable Love and condescension to Sinners), he was not barely sent in
Flesh (so far as the verity of the Humane Nature is concerned, in his assuming
the Essential parts thereof), but he also submitted to the common accidents,
adjuncts, infirmities, miseries, calamities which are incident to that Nature:
He lay so many Weeks and Months in the Virgins womb, received nourishment and
growth in the ordinary way, was brought forth and bred up just as common
Infants are ('bating some special respects shown to him to discover the
greatness of his Person), had his life sustained by common food as ours is, was
hungry, thirsty, weary, poor, reproached, tempted, deserted, etc. lived an
afflicted life, then died a miserable death; was a Isal. 53.3.
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, Phil. 2.7.
made himself of no reputation, took upon him the form of a Servant, was made
in the likeness of man (not only in the taking of their Nature, but also in
submitting to those abasements and miseries which now that Nature is liable
unto); his whole life was a life of sufferings, wherein as there was enough in
his Holiness, (...). Justin. Martyr. Expos. Fidei.
Miracles, to show him to be God, so there was also enough in his meanness,
poverty, sufferings to show him to be Man: In a word, he took all our
infirmities upon him; (take it with a double restriction), 1. To all our (...).
Damascen. de Orthod. Fid. l. 3. c. 20.
sinless infirmities: such as are culpable and carry sin in them they must be
excepted, for though he was made like to us in all things yet without sin, Heb.
4.15. 2. To all our Natural infirmities: as to personal infirmities, such as
are proper to this and that Person (as blindness, deafness, lameness etc.)
these Christ did not put himself under; for he did not assume this or that
Person but the Nature in common, and therefore was not liable to the particular
infirmities of Individuums, How the Humane Nature in Christ and in us differs?
but only to those which properly belonged to the common Nature.
I would carry this a little higher; though I have said so much concerning the
reality and sameness of Christ's Humane Nature with ours, yet you are not in
all respects to equalize that Nature as it is in him and as it is in us: for
Substance and Essence it is one and the same in both, yet in other
considerations there is a great disparity; for

1. The Humane Nature is solely and singly in us, in Christ it is conjunctly
with the Divine. 2. We have it in the way of common and ordinary generation,
Christ had it in a special and extraordinary way. 3. It Is tainted and defiled
in us, in Christ it is perfectly pure and holy. 4. In us it has its proper
subsistence, in Christ it subsists only in his Godhead.
Thus I have shown what this sending of Christ in the Flesh is and what it
imports, (viz.) the truth of his Incarnation, of his Body, and his assumption
of the whole, entire, and perfect Nature of Man; and also (as the several Heads
fell in my way) I have out of the Word given you the proof of them: I say out
of the Word, for these Mysteries are only to be known and believed upon the
light and authority thereof; if it asserts them, that certainly must be
sufficient to command the belief of Christians who profess in all things to
make the Scriptures to be the Rule of their Faith. And as to the credibility of
Christ's incarnation from rational Considerations (in subserviency to and
grounded upon Gospel-revelation), sundry Tertull. de Carne Christi: Deo nihil
impossible nisi quod non vult. -- Quodcunque Deo indignum est mihi expedit. --
Quid magis etubescendum nasci an mori? Carnem gestare an Crucem? circuncidi an
suffigi? educari an sepeliri? in praesepe deponi an in monumento recondi? --
Vide Athanas. de Incarn. Verbi Dei. tom. 1. p. 88. (more fully) p. 95. etc.
Isidor. Pelus. Ep. L. 1. Ep. 141. Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 12. p. 111. Cyprian de
Bapt. Christi. p. 492. Lactant. de Vera Sapient. cap. 22. Fulgent. ad Regem
Trasim. de Christo Mediat. Anselm. cur Deus Homo. l. 1. cap. 3. p. 92. -- Hoc
mysterium a recta ratione abhorrere ac tanquam impossible rejici, nunquam
probabit. Ratio quidem corrupta ac primae Philosophiae ignara, futilia quaedam
argumenta contra illud fingit: verum ratio quae infinitam divinae Essentiae
perfectionem agnoscit, ac Scripturam, ea qua par est modestia ac diligentia,
consulit ac confert, mysterium hoc divinae naturae omnibusque ejus Attributis
quam convenientissimum esse fatetur. -- Incarnatio illa non solum fuit
possibilis, sed ejufmodi, Patris consilio posito quale in hominum salute exequi
decrevit, simpliciter necessaria, tantumque abest ut a divina Majestate
abhorreat, ut nihil ejus Omnipotentiam, Omniscientiam, summam Misericordiam ac
Justitiam, uno verbo, infinitam ejus perfectionem magis patefaciat ac
illustret. Bisterfeld. contra Crellium Lib. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 32. p. 341, 342.
Authors ( Ancient and Modern) have written very much with great strength and
evidence, to prove that 'twas neither impossible nor incongruous, neither
absurd as to the thing nor unbecoming as to the Person, for Christ to be made
Flesh; but I will not engage in so vast an Argument, having to do with those
who are sufficiently satisfied with what the Word reveals.

The Grounds and Reasons of Christ's Incarnation.
Having thus explained and confirmed by Scripture-authority the Point in hand, I
now proceed to a Second thing to give some short account of the Grounds and
Reasons why Christ was thus sent in Flesh: Paul puts an (...) before it Heb.
2.17. Wherefore in all things it [behoved] him to be made like unto his
Brethren; which behoving he brings down to one particular, that he might be a
merciful and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God etc. but I must
take in more.

That the Old Testament Prophesies, Promises, Types might be accomplished.
1. Our Lord Jesus was incarnate that the Old Testament Promises, Prophesies,
Types might all be fulfilled and accomplished. The incarnation of Christ was no
new thing, or that which was never spoken of before it was done, 'twas that
very thing which the Spirit of God had testified beforehand (as the Apostle
speaks of his sufferings 1 Pet. 1.11.): it pleased God betimes, very early to
give out some (though darker) discoveries of it; you have it hinted in the
(...) the first-Gospel or first-Gospel-Promise that ever God made, Genesis 3.15. I
will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and her seed,
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel; here is a Christ
incarnate. Then 'twas more clearly intimated in the promise to Abraham, Genesis
22.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: in process of
time 'twas again held forth in the Promise made to David, 2 Samuel 7.12. (which
the Apostle makes to point to Christ Acts 2.30. Therefore being a Prophet, and
knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins
according to the Flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne):
Afterward this was most expressly promised and foretold, God would have it
veiled and clouded no longer but it shall shine forth more clearly; Isa. 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son and shall call his name
Immanuel: Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given: Yea Moses
(long before this) had given a plain prediction of it; Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord
thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy
Brethren, like unto me; unto him shall ye hearken: (18) I will raise them up a
Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee etc. now this Prophecy Peter
apply's to Christ Acts 3.22. and pray mark those words in it from the midst of
thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, (which clearly refer to his Manhood and
Incarnation): and that Prophecy of Balaam Numb. 24.17. had some reference to
this also. You perceive I only meddle with those Scriptural predictions of it
which are unquestionable and which God would have fulfilled: as to the
Sybilline predictions thereof, how far they are to be credited or valued I
concern not my self at all in that enquiry; but if any great stress could be
laid upon them one of those Sybilla Gumaea in Virgil. Eclog. 4. Ultima Cumaei
venit jam carminis aetas: Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo: Jam redit
and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna: Jam nova Progenies coelo dimittitur alto
etc. Of this see Athanas. tom. 2. p. 386. Dr. Jackson on the Creed. 7th. Book.
Sect. 2. Chap. 8. p. 40. etc.
Sybills went very far; (so far that some learned Persons do therefore doubt
whether its prediction was genuine, upon this very reason because 'twas so
express and clear): but I have not to do with them but with the sure Oracles of
God. Then as to Types (which were nothing but real Prophesies or Promises
wrapped up in visible representations,) these also pointed to a Christ in our
Flesh. The Old-Testament-dispensation lay much in Types, all of which pointed
to Christ as the sum and substance of them; he was the kernel in those shells,
all were but as so many fasciae or swadling-hands in which the Babe Jesus was
wrapped (as Luther used to say): Christ (says a * Reverend Author) was Abel's
Sacrifice, Noah's Dove, Bp. Brownrigge Sermon. p. 115.
Abraham's first Fruits, Isaac's Bam, Jacob's Ladder, Moses's Passover, Aaron's
Rod, the Israelites Rock, the Patriarchs Manna, David's Tabernacle, Solomon's
Temple; and all of these (says he) prefigur'd his Incarnation. But to wade
into the several Typical adumbrations of this would be a long work! In short,
under the Law when Persons or Lands were to be redeemed he that was next a-kinn
was to make the redemption, (see Levit. 25.25. Ruth. 3.13. etc.) Christ being
to redeem sinners he must take their Flesh that he may be a-kinn to them, their
Goel (as he is sometimes styled) and so be a fit person to be their Redeemer.
The Tabernacle seems to have a special reference to Christ's manhood, so the
Apostle brings it in Heb. 8.2. A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true
Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man: so again, Heb. 9.11. But Christ
being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say not of this building etc. by
this Tabernacle of the Lord's pitching and not made with hands, he means the
body or flesh of Christ which was the true Tabernacle and of which the common
Tabernacle was but a type: and indeed there was so great a resemblance betwixt
these two as that the one might very well prefigure and typify the other. For
(1.) the Outside of that Tabernacle was but mean; it was made without of very
ordinary and common things, within 'twas rich and glorious it being beautified
with Gold, Silver, Precious Stones etc. but without all was plain it being
covered only with Ram-skins and Goat Skins and such materials; Exodus 25.1. etc.
and 26.14. etc. So here, Christ's outside was (especially to some) but very
mean, Isa. 53.2. He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him there
is no beauty that we should desire him; but yet he was exceeding glorious
within (as it is said of the Church Psalm. 45.13.); such as had a discerning eye
they could see the inward glory of his Godhead shining through the cloud of his
Manhood; And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and
truth, Joh. 1.14. (2.) God's special presence was in the Tabernacle: there was
the Shechinah or habitation of God, wherein at first by an extraordinary Cloud
he signified his glorious presence to be (as afterward he did in the Temple
too): By which therefore Christ sets forth his Body, Joh. 2.19, 21. Jesus
answered and said unto them, Destroy this Temple and in three days I will
raise it up; but he spoke of the Temple of his Body. Both Tabernacle and Temple
were Dr. Cudworth true Notion of the Lord's Supper. p. 62.
types and apt resemblances of his Flesh or Manhood, in respect of the special
presence and inhabitation of the Divine Nature in it. Hence Dr. Jackson on the
Creed 7th Book. sect. 3. chapter 20.
Some make all those great Promises made to the people of Israel concerning
God's presence with them, in special in the Tabernacle and Temple, to point to
Christ's Incarnation and in that to receive their accomplishment; (you may read
them Exodus 25.8. Exodus 29.44, 45, 46. Levit. 26.11, 12, 13. Ezekiel. 37.26, 27,
28. (3.) The Tabernacle was a Josephus calls it (...), templum portatile:
Antiq. Jud. lib. 3. cap. 5. And Austine, Templum deambulatorium.
moveable thing; whilst Israel was in the Wilderness in an itinerary posture as
they moved the Tabernacle moved with them, it was not fixed all that time as
afterward it was: So it was with Christ, he was here on earth with his Body
for some time but neither he nor it were here long to abide; he ascended up to
heaven and thither he carried his Body with him, and there it is fixed: this the
Evangelist alludes unto Joh. 1.14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst
us etc. (...), he tented or tabernacled it for a time amongst us in respect of
his short abode here; (in reference to which our Bodies too are set forth by
Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. 2 Pet. 1.13, 14.).


I might also instance in Melchisedech as a personal Type of Christ; he was
without Father and Mother. etc. Heb. 7.3. which is very applicable to Christ;
for he as the (...). Najanz. P. 375. tom. 1.
Son of God was without Mother and as the Son of man without Father. Well then!
that all these Prophesies, Promises, Types might be fulfilled it was necessary
that Christ should assume Flesh; (there is the first Ground of it.)

The 2d Reason why Christ was incarnate and sent in Flesh, that he might be the
better qualified for his Office and Work.
2. This was necessary in regard of Christ's Office and Work.

1. As to his Office. He was to be the Mediator betwixt God and Man, and that
was to be his great and standing Office; now in order to his administration
thereof it was requisite that he should be Man and take our Nature, for he who
will be a Mediator 'twixt God and Man must himself be both: God and Man. He
must be God that he may be fit to transact, treat, negotiate with God, and he
must be Man that he may be fit to do the same with Man; God alone was too high
to deal with Man and Man alone was too low to deal with God; and therefore
Christ was a middle Person 'twixt both that he might deal with both. He could
not have been fit to be the Mediator in respect of Office if he had not first
been a middle Person in respect of his Natures; for (says the Apostle) Gal.
3.20. A Mediator is not of one, but God is one: Not of one that is (1.) not of
one Person; for mediation supposes more persons than one, was there none
besides God himself Christ's mediatory work would be at end (that necessarily
implying different parties betwixt whom he does mediate): (2.) Not of one
Nature; the Mediator must necessarily have more Natures than one: Observe it,
God (says the Text) is one (viz.) as he is essentially considered, and
therefore as so he cannot be the Mediator; but Christ as personally considered
he is not of one (that is) not of one Nature, for he is God and Man too;
whereupon he is the Person who is qualified to be the Mediator.
And therefore when he is spoken of as Mediator his Manhood is brought in (
that Nature being so necessary to that Office), 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one
God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

2. Christ's Incarnation and Manhood was necessary in respect of that Work
which he was willing to undertake, I mean the Work of Redemption. If he will
engage to redeem and save lost Sinners, he must be so qualified as that he may
first make Vide Anselm. cur Deus Homo Lib. 1. Cap. 11, 12, 19, 20.
satisfaction to an injured and offended God, for that God stood upon and would
not recede from: he had decreed (as appears by the event) to save man that way,
and what he decrees must accordingly be accomplished; he had threatened death to
the Sinner, which threatening therefore must be inflicted either upon the
Offender himself or his Surety; and God (as Rector mundi) will vindicate the
honor of his Government, and therefore will punish the transgression of his
Laws; upon such Considerations as these there must be Satisfaction. Now in
order to that there must be suffering, yea Christ himself must suffer partly
because he was pleased to substitute himself in the Sinners stead, and partly
because his sufferings only could be satisfactory: but unless he be Man how can
he suffer? So that the chain or link lies thus, without satisfaction no
redemption, without suffering no satisfaction, without flesh no suffering;
therefore Christ must be incarnate. Look as he must be Suscipitur a virtute
infirmitas, a majestate humilitas, ^ut quod nostris remediis congruebat, unus
atque idem Dei and hominum Mediator and mori ex uno and resurgere possit ex
altero: Nisi enim esset verus Deus non adferret remedium, nisi esset verus Homo
non praeberet exemplum. Leo de Nativ. Quum mortem nec solus Deus sentire, nec
solus Homo superareposset, Humanam Naturam cum Divina sociavit, ut alterius
imbecillitatem morti subjiceret, ad expianda peccata alterius virtute luctam
cum morte suscipiens, nobis victoriam acquireret. Calvin. Instit. l. 2. cap.
12. etc. (...) etc. vide Epiphan. adv. Haer. l. 2. t. 2. p. 748.
more than Man that he may be able so to suffer, that his Sufferings may be
meritorious, that he may go through with his Work and conquer all enemies,
difficulties, discouragements whatsoever (all which could not have been done by
a meet man); so he must be Man that he may be in a capacity to suffer, die, and
obey, for these are no work for one who is only God. A God only cannot suffer,
a Man only cannot merit; God cannot obey, Man is bound to obey (whereupon his
Obedience will be but matter of debt and therefore not meritorious); wherefore
Christ that he might obey and suffer he was Man, and that he might merit by his
Obedience and Suffering he was God-man; just such a Person did the work of
Redemption call for.

The 3d Reason why Christ was sent in Flesh, because this was the best and
fittest way in order to the carrying on of God's designs.
3. Christ must be made Flesh because (as was said before concerning his
sending) this was the best, the fittest, the most convenient way that God could
pitch upon, in order to the bringing about of his great designs. To make it the
De Necessitate si quaeritur, non simplex quidem and absoluta fuit, sed manavit
ex coelesti decreto unde pendebat hominum salus; caeterum quod nobis optimum
erat statuit clementissimus Pater. Calvin. Instit, lib. 2. cap. 12. Licet Deus
solo nutu voluntatis abolere potuisset peccatum, convenientius tamen ei visum
fuit, si hac justitiae via procederet ad destruendum regnum peccati, Estius in
loc. Poterat Deus suam incomprehensibitem misericordiae largitatem patefacere,
condonando noxam humano generi absque ullo actu perfectae satisfactionis etc.
Vide Soto in Romans 8.3. and Aquin. Sum. 3. P. Qu. 1. Art. 2.
necessary way (especially with respect to satisfaction), that to some possibly
may seem too high; but surely none will deny but that this was the fittest and
most convenient way; and had it not been so the wise God would have taken some
other way rather than it. But did he design to advance his own glory and the
Sinners good? to give out the highest manifestation and utmost advancement of
all his Attributes? to promote and ascertain Pardon, Justification, Salvation,
all Grace to Believers? what way could have been thought of so proper, so
effectual as this of Christ's coming in our Flesh! If God will punish sin was
it not meet that he should punish it in that Nature in which it had been
committed? what more congruous than since Man had been the sinner that Man
should be the sufferer? By man we fell God will therefore in wisdom so order it
that by man too we shall rise again, that in the same Nature wherein the (...)
the wound had been given the (...) the cure and remedy shall be provided also
(as Cyrill. Alexandr. Comment. in. Joh. P. 95.
one expresses it). 1 Cor. 15.21. For since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead. Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men for that all have
sinned. The Humane Nature was to be redeemed therefore 'twas fit that that
Nature should be assumed; that was Nascitur ut ipsam quam prius homo vitiaverat
Naturam melioraret. August. de temp. Sermon. 20. p. 613. etc. Et quia ea natura
pro nobis plecti debuit quae peccaverat, quaeque erat redimenda. These. Salmur.
de Christo Mediat. p. 244. Quoniam justitia and Lex Dei ita flagitabant, ut
Caro humana quae peccaverat, eadem pro peccato lueret, Pareus in loc. Homo qui
debuit, Homo qui solvit etc. Bern. Ep. ad Innocent.
corrupted and spoiled in us therefore it was expedient that Christ (to heal
this Nature) should take it upon himself pure, unstained and uncorrupted: in
short, Satan had foiled and baffled the first Adam in this Nature, wherefore in
it Christ the second Adam will foil and baffle him; to Man was the Law given,
by Man was the Law broken, therefore by Man also shall the Law be fulfilled. So
much for the Grounds and Reasons of Christ's Incarnation.

Hitherto I have insisted upon what is more plain and east, and have only in a
more general way spoken to some things that concern the Incarnation and Manhood
of Christ; Seven Propositions for the due stating and opening of Christ's
Incarnation.
I must now endeavor more particularly to open some other things about them
which are of a more mysterious and abstruse Nature: I Will reduce all to these
Seven Propositions.

1. Prop. Christ who did exist as the Son of God before, was incarnate.
1. That the Lord Jesus, who antecedently to his incarnation was the Son of God
and as such had a praevious existence, even he was incarnate and made Flesh.
Here the Socin. in Explic. cap. 1. Joh. and in Disput. de Not. Christi.
Smalcius Homil. in 1. Joh. Hom. 8. Refut. these. Grawer. and in refut. these.
Franzii. Crellius de uno Deo Patre. lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 5. p. 562. Ostorod.
Instit. cap. 17. Catech. Racov. p. 89.
SOCINIANS again make their opposition, for though they acknowledge Christ's
Flesh and Manhood (they had not need to deny him that it being all they grant
him), yet that he, as praeexisting in the Essence of God and in the relation of
God's Natural Son, did assume the Humane Nature and unite it to the Divine in
one Person, this they will by no means acknowledge, nay, this they fiercely and
vehemently oppose. With what vile reflections and opprobrious speeches do they
load this great Article of our Faith (as thus stated)! Disp. de Not. Christi.
p. 10. Humanationem merum humani ingenii suisse commentum. p. 3. stupenda Dei
metamorphosis.
Socinus is pleased to call it merum humani ingenii commentum, a mere fiction
of the wit of man; Smalcius refut. these. Franziu de Person. Christi. p. 67.
quod alicui persuaderi potuisse valde mirum esset, nisi homines vivi capti and
dementati essent a Sathana etc. Dogma tremendum Id. Hom. 8. in 1. cap. Joh. p.
87.
Smalcius a very Fable, yea Dogma in Christiana religione fere monstrosissimum,
(with many other such vile expressions which I either dread or disdain to
mention): only there is Credimus etiamsi non semel atque iterum, sed satis
crebro, and apertissime scriptum extaret, Deum esse hominem factum, multo
satius esse, quia haec res sit absurda and fanae rationi plane contraria, and
in Deum blasphema, modum aliquem dicendi comminisci, quo ista de Deo dici
possint, quam ista simpliciter. ita ut verba sonant intelligere etc. Smalcius
Homil 8. in Joh. p. 89.
one (from this last named Author) which out-strips all the rest, it is this, We
believe (says he) that though it should be written not once or twice, but very
often, and that too very plainly, that God was made man; yet it would be much
better (this being a thing very absurd, contrary to sound reason, blasphemous
against God), to find out some other sense of it which might suite with the
Nature of God, rather than to take it literally according to what such words do
hold forth, thereby to expose Religion to scorn: O the boldness and even
blasphemy of the man! it is a vain thing to argue with these persons (either in
this or any other Point) from the holy Scriptures, for let God say there what
he will if their Reason (as the Supreme Judge of what is to be believed or not
to be believed) does not like it, the Divine Revelation (let it be never so
plain) signifies nothing: Lord! whither will the pride of Reason and the
wickedness of the Heart carry men who are given up to themselves! But if
Scripture-revelation must be thus subjected to humane Reason, let us bid adieu
to all Religion (saving what is Natural): I thought this had been the highest
Reason in the world, that Creatures should believe what God reveals, because he
reveals it, though they with their poor dim and shallow reason cannot
comprehend what is so revealed by him: (but I am fallen upon another
Controversy).

I hope I speak to those who bear a greater reverence to the sacred Scriptures;
and surely if these may be believed what can be more clear than this, that
Christ is not only man but that he who was before the Son of God was afterward
in time made the Son of man? Mark the Text God sent his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh; where Christ is supposed antecedently to be God's Son, then as
such he was sent, and then incarnate: So Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law: Joh.
1.14. The Word was made Flesh: it is not only he (that is, Christ the Personal
Word) was Flesh but he was made Flesh, (so the word (...) is rendered Joh. 1.12.
1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 7.13. Gal. 3.13. Romans 1.3. Gal. 4.4.
elsewhere, and the subject matter determines it to be so rendered here also).
But how was Christ made Flesh? was this spoken of him only in respect of his
mean, afflicted, calamitous state and condition here? was that all that was
meant by it? surely no! that was so far from being all that the Evangelist had
it not at all in his eye when he uttered these words, for he adds and we saw
his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father; he joins his being
made flesh with the glory of his Person, not with the meanness of his
condition: and further, the Substance must antecede the Adjunct, the truth of
the humane Nature must go before the abasement and miseries of it: So that when
it is said the Word was made Flesh it can carry no other sense than that Christ
took the very Nature and Substance of man upon him; I say Christ, for it is very
evident (where men do not wilfully shut their eyes) that he is all along set
forth by the Word, he being the personal, essential, and substantial Word: now
observe he was the Word before he assumed Flesh, and he who was so praeexisting
he assumed Flesh for it is the Word was made Flesh; plainly implying the
antecedency of his being in that notion to this his incarnation. SOCINVS is
shrewdly pinched with this Text, insomuch that he is fain to fall upon every
word in it (with his usual Criticisms and forced senses) thereby to evade and
elude the strength of it; but all his attempts are in vain. So also (for the
Word is not sparing in the revealing of this Truth though our Socin. de Not.
Christi. p. 7. Smalc. Hom. 8. in 1. c. Joh. p. 88.
Adversaries are pleased to assert the contrary), Heb. 2.14, 16. Forasmuch then
as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil: For verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels,
but he took on him the seed of Abraham: here the Apostle lays it down over and
over by taking, he took part of the same, he took not on him the nature of
Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham; thereby to note Christ's
assuming of the humane Nature and joining of it to that other Nature which he
had before. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery of
Godliness: God was manifest in the flesh etc. a Person here must be spoken of
and the Lord Jesus must be that Person, for the following matter ( justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into Glory) is only applicable to a Person and to Christ as
that Person; (by the way Erasmus. Grotius. etc.
they who alter the reading of the Text putting out (...) and putting in, and
so carrying it from the Person of Christ to the Gospel, have done no good
service either to the truth in general or in special to that particular Truth
which I am upon); now it is not here said only that Christ was manifested in the
Flesh, but God was etc. to show that he who was incarnate (for that is the
manifestation in the flesh here intended,) was first God or God before and then
he was incarnate. It Is a mighty Scripture that in Phil. 2.6, 7. Who being in
the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: (here is Christ's
praeexisting in the Nature of the Godhead and then after this comes his
Manhood). But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of men.

'Twould be a long work to draw out the full strength of these (and several
other) Texts in order to the more undeniable proving of the Proposition before
us; as also to answer the various replies, evasions, misinterpretations about
them by such who dissent; and yet I could most willingly engage therein did I
think such an undertaking would be proper (in such a Discourse as this) or tend
to the advantage of any: but the truth is, I fear I should but perplex private
Christians with things that possibly would be too high for them, and I Am sure I
should do that which is needless for Others who know where this is Arnold.
Catech. Racov. major. p. 27^. Galov. Socin. proflig. p. 285. Cocceius against
Socin. in cap. 1. Joh. cap. 15. Bisterf. against Crellius. p. 564. Jacob. ad
Portum against Ostorod. p. 166. Owen against Biddle chapter 13. p. 289. etc.
done already. And indeed the whole matter in this Controversy is by Crellius
himself brought into a narrow compass (wherein we are very willing to join
issue with him), for he grants if Christ did praeexist before he was incarnate
that then his incarnation must needs be believed and owned according to our
stating of it; but I have See p. 284. etc.
already proved (and Others do it much more fully) that he did so praeexist,
therefore (upon that Concession) the thing is clear and I need say no more upon
it. Only let me leave this one word with our Opposers, their Homo Deus factus
is the greatest falsehood, but our Deus Homo factus is the greatest truth.

2. Prop. Christ the Second Person only was incarnate.
The second Proposition is this, that Christ the Son of God, the second Person
in the ineffable Trinity, he only was incarnate. It Is here said God sending his
own Son in the likeness etc. the taking then of flesh was that personal act
which was proper to the Son alone: and in that so often alleged Text it is said
Joh. 1.14.
the Word was made flesh; which Title (the Word) is never attributed to the
Father, or to the Spirit, but always to the Son, and you see he is the person
who was made flesh. It Is true, Incarnation was the act of the whole Trinity
approbative but 'twas only the Son's act terminative; all the Persons approved
of it and Sola persona Filii incarnata est, operante tamen eandem incarnationem
tota Sancta Trinitate, cujus opera sunt inseparabilia. August. Quest. de
Trinit. tom. 3. p. 1040. Vid. Anselm. de Incam. Verbi. cap. 3. and 4.
concurred to it, but it was terminated only in Christ the second Person. The
Schoolmen compare Christ's Flesh* to a garment made by three Virgin-sisters
which yet but One of them only wears. A See Lombard. lib. 3. Did. 1. Dr.
Jackson on the Creed 7th Book. p. 255.
Question is commonly here started, why the second Person rather than the first
or the third was thus incarnate? which Some do venture to answer by assigning
the Reasons of it: I humbly conceive, there is too much of curiosity in the
Question and too much of boldness in the Answer; why Christ was incarnate I can
give several Reasons, but why he rather than the other Persons, there I must be
silent. It Is also query'd, Of this see Zanchy de tribus Elohim. l. 5. c. 6. p.
546. etc. Tilen. de Incarn. Filii Dei Disp. 1. Sect. 20. Aug. Sermon. 3. de Temp.
there being such an oneness betwixt all the Persons how the Son can be said to
assume the Humane Nature and yet the Father and Spirit not assume it? to which
the Answer is obvious, this difference might very well be upon that personal
distinction which is betwixt them; for this assumption of flesh being not the
act of the Nature (which is common) but of the Person (which is limited), the
second Person might so assume and yet the other Persons not.

3. Prop. Christ not incarnate till the fullness of time.
Thirdly Christ's incarnation was in time, and not till the fullness of time. He
was always God (for he that is not always God is never God, the Divine
Essence admitting neither of beginning nor end,) but he was not Neque enim Caro
issa quae ex came Virginis nata est semper fuit, sea Deus qui semper fuit ex
carne Virginis in carne Hominis advenit. Cassian. de Incar. Dom. Lib. 6.
always man; there never was a time in which he was not God but there was a
time in which he was not Man: His Generation as the Son of God was eternal, but
his Generation as the Son of Man was but temporal. In the fullness of time God
sent his Son made of a woman etc. Gal. 4.4. The Evangelist sets him forth in
his two Natures Joh. 1. with respect to his Divine Nature he shows that he was
from everlasting: In the beginning was the Word etc. the same was in the
beginning with God etc. then he comes to his Humane Nature and that he shows
was in time, the Word was made Flesh; he was not so ab aeterno but he was made
so in time. In such a sense Christ may be said to be incarnate from all
eternity, viz. in regard of God's eternal parpose and decree, (as in reference
to that he is said to be the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world Rev.
13.8.); but as to the actuality of his Incarnation that was but 1600 and odd
years ago.

A double enquiry here will be made: As 1. if this was deferred so long what
then became of those who lib'd and died before Christ was inearnate? The
efficacy and benefit of Christ's Incarnation to those who lived before it.
if that was so necessary (as has been shown) what became of the Patriarchs,
of all who lived under the Law before that was in being? I answer, they had the
merit, virine, benefit of the thing though they had not the thing it self; for
God having decreed it, and Christ having covenanted and engaged to the Father
that in the fullness of time he would take flesh, the Father all-along looked
upon it as actually done, and accordingly dealt with Believers under the Law as
though it had been actually done; insomuch that they had the same benefit by a
Christ in Flesh which we now have: Therefore it is said Romans 3.25. Whom God set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins [that are past] through the forbearance
of God: Heb. 9.15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of the trrnsgressions [that were
under the first Testament], they which are called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance: Whatever our Lord is now since the actual exhibition of
him, he was the same before effectively and virtually, for it is Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever Heb. 13.8. We read Mark 11.9. They
that went before and they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna, blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord: Believers who lived before Christ's
incarnation and they who follow since both are equally obliged to magnify God
for him, both receiving the same benefit by him.

2. It may be enquired, Why Christ was incarnate just when he was?
why at this very Epoch or period of time rather than at any other was Christ
incarnate? why not either before or after but just then? Answ. why? because it
was that very time which God had set (therefore called the fullness of time Gal.
4.4.) He that is pleased to set the time for other things (as for the Churches
deliverances, Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion, for the time to favor
her, yea the set time is come, Psalm. 102.13. (and so in several Other cases),
surely he was pleased to set the time for so great a thing as the coming of his
own Son in Flesh: he in his eternal decree had determined the precise time for
this, which therefore when it was come then Christ came; now (I say) all must
be resolved into this. True, there were some more immediate Reasons why he came
just when he did; he was to come before the Scepter was (wholly) departed from
Judah, Genesis 49.10. whilst the Second Temple was standing, Hag. 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
during the Fourth Monarchy, Dan. 2.44. Daniel's 70 weeks were almost expired,
Dan. 9.24. there was a general expectation raised in the world of the coming of
the Messiah (as might easily be made out): Now with respect to these things the
Lord Jesus came at that very period of time whereat he did; but they all
falling out but in compliance with and subordination to the Decree of God,
therefore the determination of the time of Christ's Coming and Incarnation must
ultimately be resolved into that: O he came just when he did, neither sooner
nor later because the Father had appointed that very time.

Prop. 'Twas not the Divine Essence absolutely considered which assumed Flesh,
but that Essence considered as subsisting in the Second Person.
4. 'Twas not the Divine Nature or Essence simply and absolutely considered
which assumed Flesh, but it was that Tota igitur Natura Divina fuit incarnata,
sed non quatenus absolute and in se consideratur ut omnibus Personis communis,
sed quatenus personalibus proprietatibus seu (...) in Persona Filii determinata
co^sideratur. Davenant. in Col. 2.9. p. 240. Solus Filius suscepit humanitatem
in singularitatem Personae non in unitatem Naturae Divinae. Council. Tolet.
Neque enim Divina Natura si proprie and accurate loqui velimus, sed Persona
Divina assumsit Naturam Humanam: Divina quidem Natura unitur Humanae sed eam
non assumsit, assumere enim non est Naturae sed Suppositi. Bisterf. contra.
Crell. p. 565. Vide Alting. Theol. Problem. p. 562. and 577.
Nature considered as subsisting in the Second Person. If this restriction and
stating of the Point be not admitted, we cannot avoid our holding the
Incarnation was common to all the Persons (contrary to what the Church has
ever held, and to what was asserted but even now): therefore when it is said 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifested in the Flesh you are to understand God in the Personal not in
the Essential notion.

Prop. The Nature assuming was the Divine Nature.
5. The Nature assuming was the Divine Nature (that being considered as was laid
down in the forgoing Proposition): The Manhood did not assume the Godhead but
the Godhead it, (...). Damasc. de Orthod. Fide lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 167.
Man did not become God but God became Man; it is not said that (...). Athan. de
Inc. Christi. t. 1. p. 612.
the Flesh was made the Word but the Word was made Flesh: (this is a thing so
unquestionable that the very naming of it is enough).

Prop. That the Humane Nature was so assumed as to subsist in the Divine, and
that both Natures make but^ one Person.
6. The Lord Jesus (the eternal Son of God, God blessed for ever) did so assume
the Humane Nature, as in a most mysterious and unconceivable manner, to unite
it (upon the first framing or forming of it) to his Divine Nature, and to give
that a subsistence in this, so as that both do make but one Person, the
Essence, Properties, Operations of both Natures yet remaining the same, without
either conversion or confusion. Here the Hypostatical Union is both asserted
and and also described, for wherein does the nature of that Union consist but
in that which is here laid down? Of the Hypostatical Union.
Of it you read Col. 2.9. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, (i. e. Personally and Hypostatically): Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers,
and of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
for ever; (here is both the Natures of Christ, and both in him making but one
Person): upon the personal conjunction of which he is called Emmanuel, God with
us Matthew. 1.23.

But not to insist upon the Proof of this Union (which all but INFIDELS and
SOCINIANS do believe), The mysteriousness thereof.
I will endeavor (as well as I can) rather to explain and open it: an
undertaking which I enter upon (the Lord knows) with great fear and dread,
because of the loftiness and mysteriousness of the thing to be opened; O it is a
thing so sublime and mysterious as that it transcends the capacity of Angels
and Men! how then shall I be able to speak of it or to it? Take whom you will,
single out a Person of the sharpest wit, the profoundest judgment, the most
elevated reason, let all the most raised abilities concur in him, and then set
the Hypostatical Union before this person, alas poor man! how will he be
puzzled, nonplus'd, unable to fathom so great a depth as this is! And well he
may since it is the mystery of mysteries, one of the first magnitude, than which
by a narrow intellect none more hard to be conceived of or understood. It Is
indeed sure and certain to Faith (which believes it because God reveals it,
which readily answers all Objections and (...). Justin. Martyr.
solves all difficulties about it by resting on divine revelation;) but if
Reason (beyond its proper bounds) will be prying into and judging of a thing so
abstruse, its blindness as well as its boldness will soon appear: its bucket
will not go to the bottom of a Well so deep, its line is too short to measure
such heights, breadths, lengths, depths as are here to be found. I do not in
the least wonder that they, who make Reason to be the supreme Judge of matters
of Faith, do throw off the belief of this mystery, for though it be not at all
contrary to reason (that being supposed to be modest and rectified) yet it is
infinitely above it. There are several unions in Nature but all come short of
this, there is no resemblance in the whole compass of Nature that does exactly
reach it: Some I know speak of a See Mr. Perkins on Galat. p. 273.
plant which has no root of its own, only it grows and is sustained by a tree
of another kind; by which they would shadow out the subsistence of the Humane
Nature of Christ in the Divine: Others tell us the union of the Yet there is a
disparity in the union of these two in Man and of the two Natures in Christ. Of
which see Dr. Jackson on the Creed 7th B. p. 333.
Soul and Body in Man is of all resemblances the most fully expressive of this
Union: Now it is granted these (or some other suchlike) resemblances may hold
forth something of it, but (alas!) it is but something; they go but a little
way, their discoveries are as imperfect as those which some Travelers make of
the World, who when they have seen and said all they can do yet leave a vast
terra incognita undiscovered. Without controversy great is the mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in the flesh etc. Christ's incarnation has the
precedence before all the other mysteries which are there mentioned about him;
if that in it self be such a mystery, how must the mystery thereof be heightened
the Hypostatical Union being taken in and added to it? The Mystical Union is
very mysterious, the Hypostatical Union much more. Well therefore might I in
the Proposition thus lay it down, that the uniting of the Humane Nature in
Christ to the Divine is done in a most mysterious and unconceivable manner.
Well! upon the due weighing of that which has been said, it concerns me with
all tenderness and humility to treat of this Argument, and to fetch in all the
light and direction that ever I may (for I shall need it all) from the Word and
Spirit.

The Hypostatical Union opened in some Particulars. It Is not a common or
ordinary Union but special and extraordinary.
1. I desire that this in the General may be taken notice of, that the
Hypostatical Union is no common or ordinary Union but that which is special and
extraordinary: O it is an Union by it self, that which is of a very different
and peculiar nature from all other Unions. Of which there is great diversity:
for instance, there is an Union by apposition (as in the several parts of a
building); by mixtion (as in the several Elements in a compound body); by
alteration (as when water is turned into wine); there is a Natural Union (as in
the Soul and Body in man); a Moral Union (as betwixt Friend and Friend); a
Relative Union (as betwixt Husband and Wife); a Mystical Union (as betwixt
Christ and Believers); an Union in respect of special presence or inhabitation,
of special assistance, of special grace and favor, (which was all that
Nestorius would grant in the Union of Christ's Divine Nature with his Humane;
but most falsely, (...) etc. Athan. de Inc. Verbi Dei. p. 593.
for then there would be no more (for substance) in the Hypostatical Union then
what there is in that which belongs to all Believers, Christ being in these
respects united also to them though in a lower degree). Now some of these
Unions are not at all applicable to Christ; such as are so do yet come short of
that high and glorious Union that is betwixt his Godhead and his Manhood; alas!
take the highest of them what is it when compared with the Hypostatical Union!
You Will ask me, why? or what is there in that more than in them? let the
following head be observed and there will be the Solution of this Question. I
add therefore.

The two great things wherei^ it consists.
2. The two Natures are so united in Christ as that the Humane does subsist in
the Divine, and that both do make up but one Person: Herein lies the formal
nature of the Hypostatical Union, that wherein it differs from and transcends
all other Unions whatsoever; the explication of this therefore I must a little
insist upon.

Of the Subsistence of the Humane Nature in the Divine.
1. First, the conjunction of the two Natures in Christ is so near as that the
Godhead imparts subsistence to the Manhood: for the Manhood as it is in Christ
is (...), having no subsistence but what it has in the Personality of the
eternal Word; so it subsists and no otherwise. And here is one great difference
'twixt the Humane Nature as in us, and as in Christ; in us it has its proper
personality and subsistence, in Christ it has not so. But how comes this
about? take an answer to that from a Estwick against B. p. 113
Judicious Divine, It Is true (says he) the essential parts of a man's Body and
Soul being united, would have constituted a Person (as they do in all other
men) if they had been left to themselves; but it was prevented and stayed from
subsisting in it self, and was drawn into the Unity of the second Person by
Divine and supernatural operation; whereby it was highly advanced, and subsists
in a more eminent sort than it could have done if it had become a rational
humane Person. Incarnatio non est qualiscunque unio, sed est specialissima,
proxima, and immediatissuna unio, qua Persona divina humanam Naturam sua
Personalitate carentem it a terminat, ut eam personaliter sustentet, ipsique
illud complementum (attamen long eminentiori modo) communicet, quod a sua
connaturali Personalitate accepisset. Bisterf. contra Crell. p. 568. Vid.
Davenant. in Colos. p. 244.
And this may also prevent that Objection which from hence so readily offers it
self, (viz.) that if the Humane Nature in Christ has not a personal
subsistence belonging to it, then it wants that perfection which that Nature
commonly has in all Men, which seems to make it less perfect and excellent in
him than it is in them: This is easily answered, the Consequence is not good
because the want of this subsistence is compensated with advantage in that
subsistence which the Manhood has in the Godhead; in which the Humane Nature
subsisting it is so far from being depressed that it is highly advanced; as the
Sensitive Soul in man being joined with a nobler Soul and subsisting in it, is
thereupon more excellent than the sensitive Soul in a Beast, though there it
has a subsistence distinct from and independent upon the reasonable Soul.

The two Natures make but one Person.
2. Secondly, Such is the Union of the Humane with the Divine Nature in Christ,
that it is taken into his Deus in aeternam personam Deitatis temporalem accepit
substantiam Carnis. August. Duas substantias accipimus in uno Filio Dei, unam
Deitatis, aliam Humanitatis, non duas Personas. Idem. de Trinit. and Unit. Dei.
Vid. Anselm. de Incarn. Verbi. cap. 5. p. 87.
Person and both make but one * Person. Here Is the difference 'twixt the
essential union of the three Persons (where there is but one. Nature yet three
Persons); as also 'twixt the mystical Union of Believers (where there is the
Union of Persons yet not so as to make one Person); and the Hypostatick Union
of the two Natures in Christ: for against the former, here is distinction of
Natures yet but oneness of Person; and against the latter, here is the union of
Natures, and so as to make but one Person. And this follows upon the former
head, for if the Manhood has not personality in it self but only subsists in
the Godhead, then it cannot cause any personal multiplication in him. In short,
in Christ there is Nature and Nature but not Person and Person, aliud and aliud
but not In Deo non aliud and aliud quia una Natura, in Christo non alius and
alius quia una Persona.
alius and alius, for it is but one Christ: as Soul and Body make but one Man so
God and Man make (I say) but one Christ. We call it the Personal Union, but
how? not because it is made up of Persons but because it centers in one Person.
Christ took the Aquin. Sum. 3. part quaest. 4. Art. 2.
Nature of of man but not the Person of man; Nature did not assume Nature, nor
did Person assume Person, but Person assumed Nature. He was a Person before
incarnation, and his personality (or a distinct personality) did not result
from the unition of the two Natures, only they are said to make one Person as
the latter Nature makes no personal addition to Christ. And he was a Vid.
Daven. in Colos. 242.
perfect Person before the Union, only in ordine ad finem (the redeeming of
man) he was pleased to take the Manhood into communion with the Godhead. So
much for these two things wherein the nature of the Hypostatical Union mainly
lies.

In this Union no conversion or confusion of the two Natures.
3. Though this Union be thus close and intinious, yet notwithstanding, the
Essence, Properties, Operations of both Natures are preserved entire, without
any conversion or confusion. Nestorious multiplies the Person, Eutyches eris
upon another extreme (as it is usual when the staff is crooked and bends too
much one way, they that would make it strait do often make it to bend as much
the other way,) he confounds the Natures; to shun the plurality of Persons he
destroys the distinction of the Natures; asserting that after the Union the
Humane Nature was wholly smallowed up in the Divine, and so leaving but one
Nature to Christ: both of these Opinions were condemned by the Primitive Church
as equally false, heretical, and dangerous. Here Is the admirableness of this
Union, though the Godhead and the Manhood are brought into so near a
conjunction yet both retain that which is essential and proper to each; the One
is not converted into the Other nor yet both confounded in one. The Word was
made Fesh, but not so as to O (...). Najanz. Orat. 35, 375. Non potes dicere,
nisi natusfuisset and hominem vere induisset, Deus esse desi-'ssit, amittens
quod erat, dum fit quod non erat. Periculum enim status sui Deo nullum est etc.
Terrull. de Carn. Chr. p. 359. Quasi non valuerit Christus vere hominem indutus
Deus perseverare. Idem. p. 360. Verbum caro factum est etc. non in carnem
mutatum ut desisteret esse quod erat, sed caepit esse quod non erat. August. de
Trin. and Unit. tom. 4. p. 947. and Ep. 174. Non mutando quod erat, sed
assumendo quod non erat.
cease to be the Word still; when Christ was incarnate he did not part with
what he had, only he ^ook what he had not; there was assumption but no
abolition, Nemo credat Dei Filium coaeternum and coaequalem conversum esse in
hominis Filium, sed potius credamus, ut non consumpta Divina and perfect
assumpta humana substantia manentem Dei Filium factum hominis Filium. August.
de Temp. Sermon. 23. p. 616. etc. Neutra tamen ex duabus Naturis in aliam mutata
est substantiam, unita quippe est non confusa Verbi Dei hominisque substantia,
ut in Deum quod ex nobis fusceptum fuerat perveniret. O admirabile mysterium! O
innarrabile commercium! Aug. Medit. c. 16. -- (...) -- (...). Damasc. Orth.
Fid. lib. 3. cap. 2. (vide etiam ibid. c. 3.) (...). Najanz. Orat. 39 (...)
etc. Nyssen. contra Apollinar. l. 2. p. 69. -- (...). Isidor. Pelus. l. 1. Ep.
323. -- (...) Chrysostom. in Joh. 1.14. Vid. Athan. de Inc. Christi. p. 624. See
Leporius his recantation in Cassian. de sucarn. Dom. L. 1. Agit utraque for ma
cum alterius communione quod proprium est, Verbo scil. operante quod Verbi est,
and carne exequente quod carnis est. Leo in Ep. ad. Flav. Ep. Constantinop.
no conversion, no confusion. Indeed the two Natures stand at so great a
distance, that though they may admit of Union yet they are not capable of any
transmutation or commixtion; the Godhead can never be so depressed as to be
turned into the Manhood, nor the Manhood ever be so advanced as to be turned
into the Godhead. The Athanasian Creed thus sets it forth. Although Christ be
God and Man yet he is but one Christ: one, not by conversion of the Godhead
into Flesh, but by taking of the Manhood into God: one altogether, not by
confusion of substance, but by unity of Person. The Scriptures plainly hold
forth the two Natures of Christ to be distinct even after the Union; (turn to
Romans 1.3, 4. Romans 9.5. 1 Pet. 3.18. 2 Cor. 13.4.). To which Texts let me add a
few Considerations drawn out of some other Texts. Christ says Joh. 10.30.
I and my Father are one (there is his Godhead), but withal he says Joh. 14.28.
my Father is greater than I, (there is his Manhood too); he says Joh. 8.58.
Before Abraham was, I am (there is his being God), and yet he was born but the
other day (there is his being Man too); he had the Divine Nature for he was
Omniscient, but he had the Humane also at the same time, for he is said to Luke
2.52.
grow in wisdom and Mark 13.32.
not to know the time of the last Judgment (of which before); he was God and so
the Father's Will and his were all one, but he was also Man and so he prayed
Luke 22.42.
Nevertheless not my Will but thine be done; He was the Matthew. 22.45.
Lord of David and the Son of David, the branch of David and the root of David,
both Revel. 22.16.
root and offspring; how could such different things be affirmed of him but
upon the distinction of his two Natures? that therefore is not in the least
impeached by the Hypostatical Union. True, upon this Union there is the
communication of properties betwixt them, so as that that which is proper to
one Nature is applied to the other (as you see Joh. 3.13. 1 Cor. 2.8. Act.
20.48.), and so as that that which is predicated of the one may be also
predicated of the other, (I mean in the concrete for in the abstract this will
not hold, as I cannot say the Deity is the Humanity or the Humanity is the
Deity, yet I may truly say God is Man and Man is God): a communication of
properties (thus far or in this sense) we deny not (it follows upon the Union),
but that that which is essential to one Nature should really, Physically, be
conveyed and made over to the other Nature, as Omnipresence, Vbiquity,
Omniscience etc. from the Godhead to the Manhood (which is the Popish and
Lutheran Communication), this, as implying a Contradiction and carrying in it a
perfect repugnancy to the nature of the thing, we cannot assent unto.

The Humane Nature in the first moment of its formation was united to the
Divine.
4. No sooner was the Humane Nature framed or formed, but in that very instant
of time it was united to the Divine Nature; (this also I put down as another
branch of the main Proposition). 'Twas (...). Damasc. Orth. Fid. l. 3. cap. 2.
v. Luommbard. L. 3. Did. 2.
taken as soon as it was made, its first existence and its union were
contemporary. We distinguish betwixt the formation, sanctification, and
assumption of the Humane Nature, and we conceive of these as done successively
in such an order, first that Nature was formed, then sanctified, then assumed:
But this is merely founded upon our conception, not that it was so indeed and
really as to the things themselves; for in truth there was no priority of time
( priority of Nature I deny not) betwixt the one and the other; but at the very
same moment wherein by the Power of the Holy Ghost the Manhood of Christ was
formed, it was also sanctified and united to the Godhead. A Question here is
moved by Some whether Christ's Humane Nature was complete and perfect at the
first? (that is) whether as soon as ever his Flesh was formed, his Soul was
infused and united to it? or whether (as it is with us) there was not some
space of time intervening betwixt the formation of the Flesh and the infusion
of the Soul? in the discussing of which there is a difference among them, Some
being for the Sharp. Cursus Theol. p. 362.
Affirmative and Others for the Lud. Capellus in These. Salmur. part. 2. p. 12.
these. 15. Dr. Jackson on the Creed 7th Book. Sect. 3. chapter 29. p. 324.
Negative: But (which is to my purpose) all agree in this, that whether it was
only Flesh for sometime, or whether both Flesh and Soul were formed together,
yet still the Union began at the first instant of the Incarnation. There was a
time before Christ's Manhood did exist, but as soon as ever it did exist there
was no time wherein it was under disunion and disjunction from his Godhead.
Thus I have endeavored by these Four things to give you a little light
concerning the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in Christ's Person (which
this Sixth Proposition led me unto); a point of such high importance, and so
proper to the subject in hand that I could not wholly pass it over, and yet
withal so sublime and mysterious that I can neither speak nor conceive of it
according to what is in it.

7. Prop. It Is probable, if Adam had not fallen Christ had not been sent in Flesh.
7. Let me add but one thing further, It Is probable had there been no sin that
Christ had not been sent in Flesh; or had not. Adam fallen and thereby involved
his whole Posterity in a state of sin and guilt, it is probable that Christ had
not been incarnate: (I express it modestly going no higher than it is probable,
because though the Scriptures make it certain to me yet it is not so to others,
nay some are of a quite other opinion). The question is not de possibili, what
God by his absolute Power and Will might and could have done? but only de
facto, whither if man had not sinned Christ should actually have assumed our
Nature? about which the Schools (with other Divines) are divided, some Scotus
in 3. part. disput. 7. Quest. 3. Absque praejudicio concedi potest, etiamsi
humana natura non peccasset adhuc Christum carnem sumpturum fuisse. Alex.
Alons. 3. p. Qu. 2. memb. 13. Catharinus de praed. Christ. Pet. Galatinus de
Arc. Cathol. ver. l. 7 c. 2. -- Osiander etc.
affirming it, some Aquinas p. 3. qui. 1. art. 3. Vasquez. in 3. part. tom. 1.
disp. 10. art. 3. Becan. Theol. Schol. p. 3. c. 1. qu. 7. Calvin. Instit. l. 2.
c. 12. against Osiander. Hoorneb. Socin. Confut. tom. 2. l. ^. c. 2. p. 253.
Stegm. Photin. disp. 15. p. 176. Alting. Theol. Probl. Loc. 12. Probl. 5. p.
564.
denying it.

The former affirm though sin had not been yet Christ would have come in Flesh,
not to have died or suffered, but only to have let the world see the glory and
excellency of his Humane Nature, that so great a work as his Incarnation might
not have been lost or not done, that God thereby might give out a singular
demonstration of his Love to man: the latter cannot lay so great a stress upon
these things, and therefore assert if man had not sinned Christ had not been
incarnate. And indeed their Opinion seems to be more agreeable to the Word, for
that usually mentions saving from sin and the taking away of sin as the end and
ground of Christ's taking Flesh: My Text describes the state of the sinner to
be desperate (upon the terms of the Law), and then upon that God sent his Son
in Flesh; it adds further, he was thus sent to condemn sin in his Flesh, so
that had there been no sin to have been condemned; he had not been sent in
Fesh: So Matthew. 1.21. She shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins: 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners etc. Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away
the sin of the world: Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon the people,
and upon thy holy city to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins,
and to make reconciliation for iniquity. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity: Matthew. 18.11. For the Son of man is
come to save that which was lost: as soon as Man fell Christ was Genesis 3.15.
promised as incarnate, but not before. The truth is, had we not been Captives
what need would there have been of a Redeemer? Venit Filius hominis quaerere
and salvare quod perierat; si homo non periisset filius hominis non venisset.
Aug. Sermon. 8. de Verbis Apost. Nulla causa fuit veniendi Christo Domino, nisi
peccatores salvos facere: toll vul^era, toll morbos, and nulla est medicinae
causa: Idem Sermon. 9.
had we not been sick and wounded what need of a Physician? had there been no
breach 'twixt God and us what need of a Mediator in the way of reconciliation?
As to that which Smalcius disp. 12. contra Franzium. See Franzius's answer to
him de Sacrif. Disp. 15. Th. 75. etc.
Some allege that Christ might have come though there had been no sin, for
this end that he might have secured man (though in innocence) from death; that
is grounded upon a mere falsehood, for had there been no sinning there would
have been no danger of dying, and consequently no need of one to secure from
death in a sinless state.

I have done with the First thing observed in the Words, Christ was sent in
Flesh: in the opening of which I have been somewhat large, but if that be all I
hope none will blame me for it; for the Incarnation and Manhood of the Son of
God being the great foundation of our happiness, a thing wherein we have the
very pith and marrow of the Gospel, the highest demonstation of the love of
God, surely I could not stay too long upon it: it is an Argument which very As
Athanas^. de Incarn. Verbi Dei. tom. 1. p. 53. etc. and p 591 etc. and de Hum.
Not. susc. 595. etc. Cyril. Alex. tem. 5. p. 678. etc. Tertull. de Carne
Christi. and contra Marcion. Cassian. Petav. Theol. Dogm. tom. 4. Ragusa in 3
part. Aquin. with Vasquez etc. Zan^h. Oper. Theolog. tom. 8. Gerhard. Loc. Com.
tom. 1. de Pers. and Officio Christi p. 312. etc. et. in Uber. Exeg. Artic.
tom. ult. lib 4 ^p 424. etc. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 12. and 13. with
in^numerable others.
many have wrote upon, and Some very fully, but that which I have said as 'twas
necessary (because the Text led me to it) so it is sufficient with respect to my
design in this Work.

Of the Second Head.
Before I fall upon the application of this Head I must speak something to the
Second, namely that Christ was sent in the likeness of sinful flesh; the
Apostle does not say only God sent him in flesh, but he adds in the likeness of
sinful flesh.

In the handling of this I have two things to open,

1. Christ was sent in the likeness of sinful Flesh. 2. It was but in the
likeness of sinful Flesh.
How Christ was sent in the likeness of sinful Flesh.
Of the first: the Apostle again uses his former Hebraism, for in the Greek it is
in the likeness of the flesh of sin, which is as much as (according to our
rendering of it) in the likeness of sinful flesh. The meaning of it is this, as
Christ had true Flesh so he was under some appearance of having sinful flesh,
there was some outward show as if his Humane Nature had been tainted with sin;
he externally appeared like a sinner, yea as like a sinner as one could do who
yet indeed and in truth was none; such as looked upon him and saw how it was
with him in his external condition, might be apt to conceive of him as they
once did Joh. 9.24. We know this man is a sinner. There was something about
Christ that had some resemblance of sin, otherwise Paul would not have called
it the likeness of sinful flesh: he says Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the
second time [without sin] unto salvation, implying that Christ at his first
coming was not without some appearance of sin: when he shall come the second
time there shall not be the least show or appearance of it in him, nothing then
but Majesty and Sanctity, but Greatness and Goodness shall be seen in him, but
at his first coming it was otherwise.

But wherein was it the likeness of sinful flesh?

I answer, if you take it in the restrained notion of the flesh or body of
Christ, that was like to sinful flesh, how? why in as much as it was so far
like to our flesh (which is really sinful) as to be Camem peccatrici similem in
paena non in culpa. Habet tamen similitudinem carnis peccat^icis per
passibilitatem and mortalitatem. August. In carnem suam non pec^atum transtulit
tanquam venenum Serpentis, sed tamen trans^^lit mortem ut esset in similitudine
carnis Peccati paena sieve culpa; unde in carne peccati and culpa solveretur,
and paena. Idem. See him lib. 14. c. 5. contra Faustum Manich. Similem carni
peccatrici in hoc quod erat passibilis, nam caro hominis ante peccatum passioni
subjecta non erat. Aquin. Si peccatum cum carne accepisset, dictus esset missus
in Carnem peccati: si etiam Carnem immotalem and impassibilem sumpsisset
(qualem modo habet) non diceretui missus in similitudinem carnis peccati; at
qula carnem accepit sine peccato, passibilem tamen and mortalem, qualis est
peccatorum caro propter peccatum talis effecta, ideo dicitur missus in
similitudinem carnis peccati. Tolet.
passible and mortal; passibility and mortality, the suffering of pain, anguish
etc. and dying, are shr^wd signs and tokens of sin. Had man continued in his
innocent and sinless state, his body had not been liable to either of these,
but he sinning it became liable to both: and it being so too with Christ's own
body, here was the likeness of sinful flesh.

If you take it in the large notion, of the whole Humane Nature or Person of
Christ as Man, so 'twas the likeness of sinful flesh in several respects: He
was truly man and in appearance and likeness he was sinful man, for he was Ut
tractaretur quo modo nocentes tractari solent. Grot. in Loc.
dealt with, handled, used just as guilty and sinful persons are; and that both
by God, and by Men. By God; he charged upon Christ the sin of all the Elect,
Isa. 53.6.
the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all, 2 Cor. 5.21
he made him to be sin for us who knew no sin etc. He then let out his wrath
upon him, demanded satisfaction of him, would have him to suffer, did Romans 8.32.
not spare him in the least, yea, Isa. 53.10.
it pleased the Lord to bruise him, though he prayed that Matthew. 26.39
the Cup might pass from him yet his Father would have him drink of it; was not
here the likeness of sinful flesh in God's dealing thus with him? By Men: to
them 'twas more than likeness, they charged him to be really and actually
guilty of sin, that he was a Matthew. 11.19.
glutton, a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, an impostor, a
Matthew. 27.63.
deceiver, a Joh. 10.36.
blasphemer, a breaker of the Law, and what not! Toward the close of his life
they accused him of crimes of a very high and heinous nature, arraigned him as
a malefactor, condemned him to die, executed him, crucified him 'twixt two
thieves, Isa. 53.12. Mar. 15.28.
numbered him amongst transgressors; he that had sin upon him by imputation was
also a sinner by reputation: was not here the likeness of sinful flesh? Look
upon him in his sorrows, afflictions, sufferings, he was Isa. 35.3.
a man of sorrows, acquainted with gr^^, his whole life was but one continued
passion, never was any sorrow like to his sorrow, afflicted without, afflicted
within, he suffered from God, he suffered from Man, drunk such a Cup as never
any drank before him, was not here the likeness of sinful flesh? Did not the
blind and sadly mistaken world judge Christ's own personal sin to be the proper
Cause of all his suffering? Isa. 53.4. Surely he has born our griefs and
carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God and
afflicted: Are not suffering and sin so conjoined and linked together, that
where there is the one there is some appearance of the other also? I do not say
that really and in truth where there is suffering there is also sin, yet I say
apparently and in the opinion and judgment of men (who take their measures in
their judging of persons by their outward condition), wherever there is
suffering there is sin: so that in our most holy and innocent Savior it was
the likeness of sinful flesh, because it was the reality of suffering flesh.
Will you go on to his In morte ejus potissimam causam sitam arbitramur, cur ei
similitudo carnis peccati attributa sit ab Apostolo. De Dieu. Caro peccati
habet mortem and peccatum, similitudo autem carnis peccati habuit mortem sine
peccato. Si haberet peccatum caro esset peccati; si mortem non haberet, non
esset similitudo carnis peccati. Anselm.
Death (the worst and most exquisite part of his Sufferings)? did he die? did
he so die? undergo a death so ignominious, so painful? yea, and so penal too,
(the Tametsi nullis maculis inquinata fuit Christi caro peccatrix tamen in
specie visa est, quatenus debitam sceleribus nostris paenam sustinuit. Calvin.
punishment due for the sin of all believers being therein inflicted upon him)?
O surely here was a very great likeness of sinful flesh! There seemed to be
much of mere man in Christ's low condition whilst he continued in the world,
but there seemed to be much of sinful man in the manner. of his going out of
the World. What? so to suffer and so to die, and yet no sin? no, no sin for all
that; but so to suffer and so to die, and yet no show or appearance of sin? yes
that there was, (especially to them who could not look into things, and who
were altogether ignorant of Christ's Person and of the great designs which he
was carrying on.) There was such a likeness of sin in these things as that it
never yet Christus indeubat personam peccatum habentis etc. cum caro
passionibus mortique subjecta signum est communissimum hominis peccatum
habentis, nec in aliquo fefellit nisi in Christo. Cajeran.
failed and was but a likeness, but only in this one great and unparalled'd
Instance of our blessed Savior. As he submitted to the ordinary infirmities of
the Humane Nature, hunger, thirst, etc. in them there were some features and
lineaments of sinful flesh; but as he submitted to death, to such a death,
there was a more lively draught, a fuller resemblance of sinful flesh. As it
was with the Creatures which were offered in Sacrifice, they in themselves were
harmless and innocent, yet having the sins of the people laid upon them and
they dying for them, so they had the likeness of sinful flesh; and just so it
was with Christ, upon his being offered up upon the Cross as the Sacrifice for
our sins.

'Twas in Christ but the likeness of sinful Flesh: Of his Sanctity and Holiness.
2. Here was much likeness (you see) of sinful flesh, yet 'twas but likeness and
nothing more; some external appearance of sin there was but that was all, yet
no sin in truth and reality: 'twas the verity and sameness of natural flesh,
'twas but the likeness of sinful flesh. As 'twas with the brazen Serpent, that
was made in an exact resemblance of the fiery Serpents; having that very shape
and form which they had; yet 'twas but the likeness of them, for it had not
that poison and venom in it which was in them; so here as to Christ (of whom
the brazen Serpent even in this was an excellent type), he seemed to have that
very flesh which we have (and so he had in such a sense), but yet there was
this difference ours is envenomed, his not; it is truly sinful flesh in us,
'twas but like sinful flesh in him.

This (as before) may be understood either of Christ's fleshly part, or of his
whole Humane Nature: In the first respect so his flesh was sinless, he had a
true body but there was no sin in that body, 'twas pure, holy untainted (...).
Cyrill. Lib. 15. contra Julian. Peccatricem carnem non assumpsit qualis est
nostra, naturalem vero illam nostram assumpsit. Si Caro Adae erat vera Caro
antequam peccavit in Paradiso, utique and Christi caro vera est humana caro,
etiamsi peccati qualitatem non assumpserit. Muscul. Nostram induens suam fecit,
suam faciens non peccatricem eam fecit. Tertull. de Car. Christi, Hierom's
gloss upon the Words (if those Commentaries upon this Epistle be his) is liable
to exception; suscepta postea carne quae ad peccandum esset proclivior, ipse
tamen absque peccato came suscepit. See Perer. upon this Disp. 3. p. 850.
flesh; 'twas made (as to purity and sanctity) Athan. de Incarnat. Christi, p.
620.
(...) according to the primitive and archetype-formation of Adam's body in the
state of innocence; that was created holy and spotless, and just such a body
Christ did assume: it is true his body and Adam's differed in the manner of
their production, but as to their purity and undefiledness by sin so they did
agree. He says his Father had prepared him a body Heb. 10. 5. now if the holy
God, in such a wonderful and immediate manner, for such high and glorious ends
will prepare him a body, to be sure it shall be an holy body, and such an one
as shall be proper for the attaining of those ends (which only an holy body
was). 'Twas indeed upon our account and Christ's putting himself into our
stead, a passible and mortal body (and so far like to sinful flesh); but had it
not been for that, it had neither suffered nor died.

In the Second respect, so the whole Humane Nature in Christ was Habuit Natura
Humana quam Christus suscepit speciem peccati, non tamen ea revera peccato
contaminari potuit. P. Martyr.
sinless. He was true and very man but not in the least sinful man; he was made
man for the sin of man, but yet was man without the sin of man. That Nature
which is so sadly depraved, vitiated, corrupted in us, in him had its
primitive, original purity and holiness: Sin was not so essential or so
inseparably twisted into it, but that God knew how to separate 'twixt the
Nature it self and the deordination of it; Christ took the one but not the
other. The Humane Nature is made up of soul and body, both of these in Christ
were unstained, not having the least macula or spot of sin cleaving to them; as
'twas an unpolluted, undefiled body, so 'twas also a pure, holy, spotless Soul.
The Humane Nature too is attended with such (...) etc. vide Oecum. in loc. p.
301.
affections and such Particeps factus est infirmitatis non iniquitatis. Aug.
Trahens de homine mortalitatem non insquitatem. Id. tom. 3. (...). 1072.
infirmities, to all of which Christ submitted so far as they were sinless, but
no further: as to the former, he had Anger, Sorrow, Joy, Compassion, Love, but
without the least stain or tincture of sin; as to the latter, he underwent
hunger, thirst, pain etc. but yet under all he was without sin; he could suffer
but he did not, nay, he could not sin. Hence he is called God's holy one Psalm.
16.10. the holy Child Jesus Act. 4.27. the most holy Dan. 9.27. Jesus Christ
the righteous 1 John 2.1. God's righteous servant Isa. 53.11. He was a Lamb
without blemish and without spot 1 Pet. 1.19. holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners Heb. 7.26. it is said of him he did no sin 1 Pet. 2.22. he
knew no sin 2 Cor. 5.21. (he knew it in a way of imputation for he was made
sin, but as to any inhesion or commission so he knew it not). The Apostle says
he was tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin (that must always be
excepted) Heb. 4.15. he challenged all his enemies which of you convinces me
of sin? Joh. 8.46. He says of himself he always did the things which pleased
his Father Joh. 8.29. and now it is said of him in him is no sin 1 John 3.5. so
that upon all this it appears that 'twas but the likeness of sinful flesh.

A threefold Holiness in Christ.
Christ (as Man) had a threefold Holiness, Original, Habitual, Actual: 1. He was
Originally Holy. David bitterly lamented it that he was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did his mother conceive him Psalm. 51.5. and so it is with every man that
comes into the world (in the way of common generation); the very foundation of
our Being is laid in sin: But 'twas not so with out blessed Savior, in his
Conception, the first framing and forming of his Humane Nature there was
nothing of sin; for he was therefore Haec est similitudo carnis, quia cum eadem
sit caro quae and nostra, non tamen ita facta in utero est and nata ficut and
caro nostra. Est enim sanctificata in utero and nata sine peccato, and neque
ipse in illa peccavit. Ideo enim Virginalis uterus electus est ad pattum
dominicum, ut in sanctitate differret caro Dommi a carne nostra. Ambros.
conceived in the Virgins Womb in an extraordinary manner by the overshadowing
of the Holy Ghost, that he might be preserved pure from the common pollution:
so the Angel told Mary Luke 1.35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. 2. He was
Habitually Holy: there was in his Nature nothing but an universal rectitude and
conformity to the rule and pattern of holiness, he had therein grace, all
grace, nothing but grace, without the least mixture of habitual corruption. We
bring with us into the world Natures most woefully depraved, such as are a very
seed-plot and seminary of all evil; but our Lord Jesus had a quite other
Nature, one that was perfectly sanctified and not in the least tainted with
sin. This also was brought about by his miraculous and extraordinary formation,
for had he been begotten as we are, his Nature had be tainted as well as ours
is: that which is begotten (so I would read it rather than that which is born)
of the flesh, is flesh, Joh. 3.6. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one; Job 14.4. The liquor will taste of the cask into which it is
put; as water when it comes from the fountain may be very pure, yet if it runs
through a dirty pipe it will contract filth; so let the Soul as it comes out of
God's hands be never so pure, yet upon union with the body begotten and
propagated in the usual way, both it (and the nature of the person too) will be
defiled: therefore to avoid this Chirst was begotten in another way. By which
means he was also freed from the imputation of Adam's sin; for he not
descending naturally and seminally from Adam, his sin was not imputed nor
imputable unto him. The Apostle indeed says Heb. 2.11. Both he that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one (i.e.) of one Adam as
the common root; but they are not both of this one Adam in the same manner, for
they who are sanctified are of him; and from him in a way of seminal
propagation, but he who sanctifies was not so; whereupon though Adam's sin be
imputable and imputed to the former, it is not to the latter. As (according to
the Alting Theol. Problem. prob. 8. p. 571. Dr. Pearson. on the Creed. p. 365.
usual illustration) Levi being in the loins of Abraham paid Heb. 7.9, 10.
tithes in him, and yet Christ who was also in the loins of Abrabam did not; so
all men being in the loins of Adam and carnally descended from him, sinned in
him and became partakers of his guilt; but Christ (though in some sense he
might be said to be in Adam's loins too, for his genealogy is carried up to
Adam Luke 3.) yet he not descending from him in the ordinary fleshly way, his
Person was exempted from the guilt of his sin and his Nature from the general
depravation. 3. Christ was actually Holy; there was nothing but holiness in
whatever he did, all his actings ( inward and outward) did exactly correspond
with the Nature and Will of his Father, he never was guilty of the least sin in
thought, word, or deed, sin was neither contracted nor Eandem assumsit Naturam
Chri^tus, sed in ea non peccavi^. Ambros.
committed by him, Grace and Holiness were advanced in him to the highest
pitch, according to the utmost capacity of the Humane Nature, without the least
mixture of what is contrary thereunto: in a word, he lived in his whole course
a most holy, innocent, spotless, sinless life (as the Scriptures which have
been alleged do abundantly testify).


The Grounds of Christ's Holiness and Sanctity.
This sanctity and sinlessness of Christ's Humane Nature was necessary upon a
double account:

1. To fit it for the personal union with his Divine Nature. Can it be imagined
that ever the Lord Jesus would take a Nature tainted with sin, and so nearly
unite it to himself? when the Divine Nature stood at so great a distance from
sin, can we (without blasphemy) think that it would assume the Humane Nature
(had it been sinful), into so close an union as that both should make but one
person? O such a thing was not possible! God can take a sinning (if repenting)
Creature into his bosom, but he cannot take a sinning Nature into his Person.
Christ might condescend to take flesh and yet be God, but he could not have
taken sinful flesh and yet be God: the humane nature (simply considered) was
not inconsistent with his Godhead, but that Nature (if sinful) was.

2. This was necessary in respect of Christ's Office and undertaking for our
good: In order to which, as he must be man so he must be man perfectly holy and
righteous, for he that is a sinner himself cannot be a Savior to other
sinners: then 'twould be Physician heal thy self, or Savior save thy self; all
that such a one could do would be little enough for himself. Christ was both
Priest and Sacrifice, with respect to both he must be without sin: as Priest,
for if sin had been chargeable upon him he must then have offered for himself,
and so have been in the same condition with the Priests under the Law; which
the Apostle shows he was not Heb. 7.26, 27. As Sacrifice too, for whatever was
offered up to God it was to have no blemish in it. In allusion to which the
Apostle calls him a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19.
(answerably to the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12.5. and to the two Lambs in the
fire-offering Numb. 28.3.) and he is said to offer himself without spot to God
Heb. 9.14. How could Christ have taken off guilt from us had he had it lying
upon himself? or how could he have made us righteous had he not been righteous
himself? therefore 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: and Isa. 53.11. By
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, (mark it, Christ being
a righteous Person himself so he comes to justify and make others righteous):
so 1 John 3.5. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and in
him is no sin; the connection is observeable, Si esset in illo peccatum,
auferendum esset illi, non ipse auferret. August.
he that will take away sin from others must have no sin in himself; Christ
coming for that end therefore in him there was no sin. Three things (as one
observes from the words) were requisite to him that should be the Mediator, he
must be God, he must be Man, Piscat.
he he must be perfectly and unmixtly holy: all these three qualifications you
have in the Text, Christ was God's own Son, there is his Godhead; he was sent in
flesh, there is his Manhood; he was sent but in the likeness of sinful flesh,
there is his purity and holiness.

Having done with the Explicatory part, Use. 1. Information.
I come now to what is Applicatory: Where in the first place (passing by other
things) these two we are mainly informed of,

1. Of the excellency of the Gospel and Christian Religion. 2. Of the
excellency of Christ's Flesh or Manhood.
Of the excellency of the Gospel and Christian Religion.
1. First, that great Truth which I have been upon informs us of the excellency
of the Gospel and Christian Religion. The more raised and mysterious the things
are which the one reveals and the other believes, the more excellent must both
of them needs be; for this is a Principle grounded upon Reason, and strengthened
by the Consent of all who pretend to Religion (whether it be true or false):
What more common amongst men, when they would argue for the excellency either
of that from which they fetch their Religion, or of their Religion it self,
than to cry up the mysteries and to tell us what high, sublime, mysterious
things are contained in them! These make a great impression upon men's minds,
and strongly induce them to believe that whatever has in it such mysteries,
must certainly be of God and have a divine Original: therefore Heathens
themselves (as well as Christians) have much pleased themselves with this, and
have been great pretenders to such and such mysteries, thereby to gain credit
and reputation to their way. Now let us apply this Principle or common test to
the Gospel-revelation and the Christian Religion, and then I Am sure their
excellency above all other pretended Revelations and Religions will be evident.
For look into all those admired and rare Secrets, those high and raised
mysteries, which they who know not the Gospel did so much cry up and magnify;
and do but compare them with this one mystery [God's own Son sent in flesh],
alas! what trifles, what shallow, contemptible, ridiculous things are they in
comparison of it! A God incarnate shames all the little mysteries of the Pagan
Religion (if so good a title may be given to so bad a thing)* they all vanish
before this and are not able to stand in competition with it. Now where is this
profound mystery revealed but in the Gospel? and where is that revelation
believed but in the Christian Religion? therefore how excellent must both needs
be upon this account! The Heathens knew nothing at all of this; they dreamt of
Men being made Gods, but that he who was truly God should be made truly Man,
this they were altogether ignorant of; in all their Religion there was no such
mystery. The Apostle cries out 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the
mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh, etc. his design in these
(and in the following) words was to set forth the excellency of the Gospel,
(which he calls Godliness because its main s^ope and tendency is to that); and
how does he do it? why, by the glorious mysteries held forth therein, of some
of which he there gives a particular enumeration: As to the height and verity
of which mysteries he says, Without controversy etc. confessedly, beyond all
dispute or denial, these are mysteries indeed; it is as if he had said, I know
the poor Heathens pretend to great and high mysteries, but indeed they are so
far from being high mysteries, that they are no mysteries at all (they being
but the fancies of deluded men): but (says he) I Will tell you of mysteries that
are both real and sublime, which are so beyond all contradiction, Without
controversy great is the mystery of Godliness etc. But how does he make that
appear? he makes it out in some instances, and his first instance is in the
Incarnation of the Son of God, Without controversy great is the mystery of
Godliness, God was manifested in the flesh etc. O there is a mystery indeed, a
transcendent mystery, one which all the Gentiles cannot parallel. A very
Learned Jac. Gothofredus in 1 Timothy 3.15, 16. in Critic. vol. 7. p. 3770. etc.
Author in a very learned Discourse upon this whole Verse proves, that Paul
therein throughout had his eye upon the Gentile-Rites, Customs, pretentions to
mysteries etc. especially upon those amongst the Greeks, and amongst them
especially upon those in their Eleusinia sacra (which above all others were in
highest repute at that time when the Apostle wrote this Epistle): Now therefore
against them he sets down the great mysteries of the Gospel and Christianity,
which certainly were infinitely to be preferred before the other. The making
out of this was our Apostles design (according to the Opinion of the forenamed
Author) in every branch of the Words; but I Will go no farther than the first
(that only suiting with the thing I am upon): And there are in it four things
to prove the thing in hand; (1). As to Gospel-mysteries the true God was the
object of them and concerned in them; but the Gentiles in their mysteries had
to do with those which by nature were no Gods, which were but called Gods (as
they are described Gal. 4.8. 1 Cor. 8.5. (2.) In Gospel mysteries one God only
was the object of them, and Christians had to do with this one and only true
God; but the Gentiles in their mysteries had to do with variety and
multiplicity of Gods: and so indeed with no God, for many Gods are no God. 1
Cor. 8.5, 6. Though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in
earth, (as there be Gods many, and Lords many); But to us there is but one God,
the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom are all things, and we by him: it is God (one God) manifested etc. (3.)
In Gospel mysteries there is a God, as incarnate, commemorated and remembered in
them; in the Gentile-mysteries it was not so: In them they had some notions,
and made some commemorations of their Gods, but how? only as common
benefactors, as giving them bread and wine and corn etc, but they went no
higher; but now Christians under the Gospel they commemorate God as taking
flesh and suffering in that flesh for their good; O there is mercy indeed, a
mystery indeed! (4.) Whereas the Gentiles in their mysteries pretended such and
such apparitions of their Gods, in opposition to these the Apostle sets down
the great and glorious appearance and manifestation of Christ: He was indeed
manifested in the flesh, for he was so manifested in the flesh as to be made
flesh, his was not an appearance only but a real assumption; there is a mystery
indeed.
In these respects the Apostle advances the mysteries of the Gospel and of the
Christian Religion, above those which the blind Gentiles were such admirers of
in their idolatrous way. Well! we who know and believe these things, what high
thoughts should we have of the Gospel and of the Christian Religion! how should
we adore and magnify God for his infinite mercy to us, in bringing of us under
that revelation and that Faith wherein this unparalled mystery of a Christ
incarnate is made known and embraced.

Of the excellency of the Flesh and Manhood of Christ.
2. Secondly, this further informs us of the excellency and glory of Christ's
Flesh and Manhood; from the premises it clearly appears that that is (and needs
must be) superlatively great. Was Christ himself sent in flesh? did God's own
Son assume and so assume flesh? O what a luster and glory must there be upon
that flesh (or body) which such a person does so assume! It Is called after its
being glorified in him, a glorious body Phil. 3.21. but 'twas a glorious body
long before, even from the first moment of its formation and assumption. It Is
true, its glory whilst 'twas here on earth did not shine forth in its full
brightness, there was a vail and covering upon it during the state of Christ's
Humiliation; but yet even then 'twas full of glory though the fullness, of its
glory did not appear, (as the Sun is very glorious even when it is hid under a
cloud). And indeed 'twas requisite, not only from the state of his abasement,
but also from the weakness of those with whom he was to converse, that here he
should very much keep in its glory, for we see when at his transfiguration he
let it break forth in a more than ordinary manner, the beholders thereof could
not well bear it, it filled them with consternation; (read Matthew. 17.1. etc.)
But yet, upon its miraculous framing, its unstained and unspotted sanctity, its
near union with the Godhead, even here (I say) its glory was exceeding great. O
what a sight will it be in heaven to see this body of Christ in all its
splendour, and to see him in this Flesh sitting at the right hand of God! As he
was at first sent in it 'twas but mean (in external appearance and to mere
sense), but now he is ascended and has carried it up with him and it is placed
at the right hand of God, so it is an Object so glorious that it is fit only for
a glorified eye to behold.

And does the Body of Christ engross all this glory? has his Soul no part or
share therein? yes surely! it may rather be asked: has not that the greatest
share, (it being the better and nobler part, and capable of that of which the
Body is not)? If God prepare so excellent a body he will be sure answerably to
prepare as excellent a soul to dwell in that body, (as they that build stately
houses will put in inhabitants that shall be answerable to them). Imagine a
Soul untouched and unblemished with sin, fully and perfectly sanctified, filled
with grace to the utmost of its capacity, having nothing in its several
faculties but truth in the Understanding, holy conformity in the Will,
heavenliness in the affections; I say, represent to your selves in your
thoughts such a Soul, and then think what an excellent Soul would that be? just
such a Soul is in Christ. Indeed if we consider these constitutive parts of
Christ's Manhood as they stand apart and by themselves, they are excellent to a
very high degree; but if we go further and consider them in the Hypostatick
Union, then we are at a mighty loss and cannot conceive what a glory is by that
conferred upon them. As suppose a Pearl was put into a glass of Crystal, that
would put a great radiancy upon it; but what if the Sun it self could be put
into this glass, how radiant then would it be? So here, the Lord Christ having
so precious a Soul dwelling in his Flesh, even that (if there was nothing more)
must make it very glorious; but when the Godhead it self dwells in it, how
unspeakable must its glory and splendour needs be!

Leaving the parts let me speak to the whole; the whole humane nature in Christ
is transcendently excellent. If the essential and eternal Son of God will so
far condescend as to assume Man's Nature, certainly in him the Manhood must
have all that dignity, glory, perfection that ever it was capable of: and
surely never was the Humane Nature so advanced as in Christ. If you consider it
as it is in us, so it has its worth and excellency; for man is yet a glorious
creature, (though it is too true by the loss of God's image he has lost very
much of his glory): As he was at first created in the state of innocence he was
high indeed; by the Fall the case is sadly altered, the Humane Nature now is
exceedingly debased and depressed; but yet even in its ruins (as 'twas with old
Carthage) it may be seen what once it was: much is lost and the best is lost,
but all is not lost; the glory of the Saint is gone, but the glory of the Man
(in a great measure) yet remains. He is yet, as to his natural composition and
indowments, very excellent, the top of the whole creation, God's Vid. Nyssen de
Hom. opif. c. 3. p. 51. (...). Euryphamus in Stobae. Ser. c1. p. 556.
Theophrastus calls him (...), as though God in him would vye with and out-vye
all that he had done besides in the whole visible creation. See Weems's
Portrait. p. 60, 61.
masterpiece and highest workmanship, endowed with a body curiously wrought,
with a Soul of divine original, excellent in its being and operations. And
besides this (which is general) it pleases God in some to restore the Humane
Nature (in part) to what it lost in Adam's fall, to advance it again by Grace
and Regeneration; yea, to take it up to heaven to the vision and fruition of
himself: And now it is at its (...), here is its non-ultra, its highest
advancement; it is not capable (as in us) of higher exaltation that what it has
by Grace and Glory. This dignity and glory the Humane Nature has in us; but
yet as it is so subjected, take it even at its highest elevation it comes
infinitely short of the dignity and excellency of the Humane Nature of Christ;
the reason is, because in it there is all that has been spoken in an eminent
manner, and besides (which is higher than all the former) it is taken into a
near conjunction with the Divine Nature. How glorious must that Manhood be,
which subsists in the Godhead and has no subsistence but in that! The nearer
the Union is with that, the greater is the perfection and glory of that which
is admitted into that union: And hence it is that there is such a fullness of
Grace in Christ (as Man) over and above what is in the best of men, that he is
Psalm. 45.7.
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows; that his Manhood bears a
part in the mediatory Office; that it is to be worshipped with Divine Worship
(as has been proved before); I say all this belongs to it by virtue of the
Hypostatical Union, from which in all things it derives super-excellent Glory.
And yet I must tell you this Humane Nature (as high as it is) is the lowest
thing in Christ; that which is the highest in us is but the lowest in him,
Supremum infimi infimum supremi: as Man he is glorious but what is he then as
God! What a Person is Christ take him altogether! O let him be adored and
reverenced by you as Man, but especially as he is God-man. (So much for
Information).

Use 2. Exhortation to several Dutys.
2. Secondly was Christ sent in flesh? hence arises matter of Exhortation to
several Duties:

1. I would exhort you to give a full and firm assent to the truth of Christ's
incarnation, To give a full and firm assent to the truth of Christ's
Incarnation.
as also firmly to adhere to Christ as sent in flesh. Here are two things which
I^le speak to apart: First, see that you give a full and firm assent to the
truth of Christ's Incarnation. It Is a thing which the Scripture lays a great
stress upon; 1 John 4.3. Every Spirit that confesses not [that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh] is not of God: and this is that spirit of Antichrist,
whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now is it in the world. 2 John 7. Many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not [that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh]: this is a deceiver and an Antichrist. It seems
the Incarnation of Christ met with early opposition, his flesh was no sooner
translated to Heaven but 'twas denied on Earth; this Apostle therefore (who in
his Gospel had been a great asserter of it) in his Epistles will be also a
zealous defender of it: and see how warm he was upon it, the denial of Christ's
coming and of his coming in the flesh (for there lies the main emphasis), he
carries as high as Antichristianism and sets no lower a brand upon it:
Antichristianism does not only lie in the opposing of Christ in his Offices
(which is the latter and modern Antichristianism), but also in the opposing of
him in his Natures as God and Man (which was the first and ancient
Antichristianism); to deny Christ's Manhood and assuming flesh this is
downright Antichristian, the very spirit of Antichrist, (if the Apostle here
may be believed). Now there is a twofold denial of this; one open, express,
direct; the other Non attendamus ad linguam sed ad facta; si enim omnes
interrogantur, omnes uno ore confitentur Jesum esse Christum, quiescat paululum
lingua, vitam interroga. Aug. in Ep. Joh. Tract. 3.
implicit, virtual, interpretative: the former (I hope) is very rare, the
latter (I fear) is too common; he is no Christian who comes under the former,
but there are too many Christians who come under the latter. As you read of
some who profess that they know God, but in works they deny him Tit. 1.16. so
here; all that own the Gospel profess they believe Christ's Incarnation, but
yet virtually, interpretatively, consequentially, too many of them do no better
than deny it. Now for you (my Brethren) I assure my self I need not spend time
in warning you against the denial (I mean the rank and gross denial) of our
Lord's Manhood and Incarnation, (that Antichristianism I hope you will never be
guilty of); yet two things I would say to you: (1.) Get such a firm and rooted
belief of this Fundamental Doctrine, as that there may be no secret doubting
about it; no, not the least doubt stirring in the mind, for any doubting may by
degrees by little and little work up to the full denial of it. (2.) That you
will take heed not only of the open and direct denial of it, but also of all
those Opinions and Practices which may amount to a virtual, implicit denial of
it.

This minds me of something (upon which I crave leave a little to digress) that
passes betwixt Papists and Protestants: the former do greatly insult upon the
formentioned Texts, from which they think they have enough to free the POPE (in
whatever notion you consider him) from the charge of being Antichrist; and
therefore thus they argue, He is Antichrist who confesses not that Christ is
come in the flesh, but the POPE does confess this, ergo he is not Antichrist:
(this is one of Vide Whittak. ad Sanderi Demonstr. Resp. p. 765.
Sanders his Demonstrations). To which it is answered,

1. That the Apostle in these Texts does not define or describe the Antichrist
(by way of eminency), him who was to come afterward (who is set forth 2 These.
2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 4.1.); but some lesser Antichrists who were already
risen up in the Apostles days: for he says even now there are many
Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. This is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have
heard that it should come, and even now already it is in the world, 1 John 4.3.
and 2 John 7. Many deceivers are entered into the world etc. this is a deceiver
and an Antichrist (though not the Antichrist). As to the grand Antichrist,
there was a (...) about him, a let and impediment in his way to be removed
before he could come (2 These. 2.7.); but for the lesser Antichrists (the
praecursors of the great one) they were already come: And it is probable that
the Apostle in these descriptions in special-had his eye upon Of him as to this
see Cyrill. Catech. 6.
Simon Magus, who denied that Christ came in true flesh. The Argument then (so
far as it is grounded upon these Texts) only proves, that his HOLINESS is none
of the little Antichrists (of whom John spoke as already come), which we
readily grant, for we make him to be the Vid. Antichristi Demonstrat. per Rob.
Abbat.
great Antichrist (of whom Paul spoke as yet to come).

2. Yet our Divines will not wholly acquit him (and his party) as to this
Character of Antichrist; for though as to words and profession they confess
that Christ is come in the flesh, yet implicitly and by Quanquam P. R. and
cord credit and ore confitetur Jesum esse Christum, hoc tamen non integre ac
simpliciter, sed ex part tantum facit, dum Jesu multa detrahit quae Christo
convenient: and Christum negat in carne venisse, non quidem totidem verbis
atque aperte, sed per consequens and oblique, vere tamen and necessario.
Whittak. resp. ad Sanderi Them. p. 768.
Consequence they plainly deny it, they maintaining those Opinions and
Practices which are interpretatively opposite to Christ's incarnation. As their
burdening the Church with such swarms of unnecessary Ceremonies; if the
substance be come indeed (and they believe it) why do they keep up the shadow?
(...), (Najanz*), under the Gospel the shadows vanish, the truth and substance
being come: Their Doctrine of Pet. Molin. in Th. Sedam. vol. 1. de Transub. p.
2. p. S 31. where he proves Ecclesiam Romanam destruere Naturam Humanam Christi
etc.
Transubstantiation in effect deny's Christ's Body to be a true body, for can a
true body exist in puncto (as they say Christ's does)? can it be a true body and
yet not extense? can it be a true body and yet be present in a thousand places
at once? can it be a body and yet have none of those Adjuncts which are
inseparable from a body? So again, their invading of Christ's great Offices,
advancing of their own Merits, Satisfactions etc. (with many other things which
might be instanced in) are all and each of them interpretative denyals of our
Saviors being come in the Flesh. Now (Sirs!) your Religion does not expose you
to this guilt, but rather highly secures you from it; but take heed you do not
draw some opinion or practice into it, which may also make you guilty of
denying implicitly the Incarnation of the Son of God.

But I go further, it is not enough for you not to deny this great Truth, no nor
just to believe it, but there must be a firm believing of it, a full and steady
assent given to it. I would assure my self that you do believe the verity of
Christ's Manhood, the reality of his Flesh, the truth of his Incarnation; but
do you believe it steadily? do you come up to a full assent to it? are there no
wavering, doubting thoughts about it? are you rooted, stablished, confirmed in
the belief of it? This I pressed upon you before with respect to Christ's
Sonship, and now I am to press it upon you with respect to his Incarnation.
Whence let me tell you, that though the belief of this be not the main, vital,
essential act of faith, qua justifying; yet it is absolutely necessary to that
which is so; for there will be no fiducial reliance upon Christ's Person (which
is the great act of faith as justifying), if antecedently there be not a firm
belief of his being made Flesh: O therefore see that you be fully settled in
your minds as to the unquestionable verity of this great Article of the
Christian Religion. 'Twould be sad if (in our circumstances) we should
fluctuate about it: for did all the Old-Testament-Prophesies point to it, (as
old Zacharias tells us they did, Luke 1.70, 72, 73. As he spoke by the mouth of
his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began etc. To perform the
mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant: The Oath
which he swear to our Father Abraham etc. (in all which expressions his eye was
chiefly upon the birth and incarnation of Christ)? and have these Prophesies
received their full accomplishment? and have we lived to see this? and yet
shall we doubt of the thing? surely that would be sad. The Ratriarchs and they
who lived under the Law, had but some dimmer discoveries of it; here and there
an obscure promise and that was all; to them (for a long time) this was
revealed but in types and shadows): And it was too a great way off from them;
yet they saw the promises afar off, and were persuaded of them (as the Apostle
tells us Heb. 11.13.); and now when Christ is come, when the thing is done,
shall we be doubting and questioning in our selves about it? when our light is
so clear shall our faith yet be weak? Our Lord's coming in Flesh to redeem Man
was that great thing held forth in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and
they are full of it; observe that passage Heb. 10.5, 5, 6, 7. Wherefore when he
comes into the world, be says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but
a body have thou prepared me: in burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou
have had no pleasure: Then said I, Lo, I come (in the Volume of the Book it is
written of me) to do thy will, O God: what does Christ mean by the volume of
the book? I answer, the whole body of the Old-Testament-Scriptures; this was
not written only in this or that particular Text, but you have it all along
interwoven into the body of those Scriptures: now when the whole stream and
current of the Scripture runs to this very thing, shall we yet give but a
languid assent about it? Especially when we have the New-Testament-revelation
superadded to the former? the New Testament (I say), which gives us so full an
account as to matter of fact (in reference to the Conception, Nativity, Life,
Death of Christ); which shows us how this and that Prophecy (pointing to his
Incarnation) was fulfilled; which asserts it over and over again, telling us
expressly that the Word was made Flesh, God was manifested in the Flesh etc.
shall we notwithstanding all this, yet stagger in our faith about the truth of
Christ's being sent in flesh? O believe it, and believe it steadily! so as to
look upon it as a thing without controversy. Satan has all along (more or
less) made his assaults upon Christians in this, as well as in other matters;
and no question he will do the same to you, if it be possible to undermine and
hinder your firm assent to it; but let him not prevail.

Firmly to adhere to Christ, as sent in flesh.
2. But under this branch of Exhortation I am to urge, not only firmness of
assent but also firmness of adherence: I mean this, you must believe that
Christ was sent in flesh so as to cleave and stick to him as sent in Flesh.
There are some amongst us (whom therefore I cannot but look upon as most sadly
deluded, and most dangerously erring in the very Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion,) who make little of a Christ in this notion; they are all for a
Christ within them, but as to a Christ without them or a Christ in flesh, as
born of the Virgin Mary, crucified at Jerusalem etc. I say a Christ (thus
stated) they decry and disregard: (O that from what I have heard and read I had
not too just occasion for this charge!) It Is highly necessary therefore that I
should say something to antidote you against this venom; that under the
pretense of a Christ within you do not lose or overlook a Christ without. In a
sober sense we are for a Christ within as much as any; viz. as he is formed in
the Soul at the new birth Gal. 4.19, as he is united to and dwells in believers
Col. 1.27. Romans 8.10. but yet it is a Christ without, as incarnate, whom we rely
upon for life and salvation; as he is so considered, we eye him in the great
acts of faith and ground all our hope and confidence upon him. I have p. 310.
before told you, that a Christ as formed in the heart is necessary to
justification and salvation (for he saves none but those who have this inward
work); but yet it is a Christ as formed in the Virgins womb and as dying upon
the Cross, who is the proper, efficient, meritorious, procuring Cause of
Justification and Salvation. These two must by no means be parted, yet their
efficiency or causal influence upon Sinners good is very different; for by the
one mercy is procured, by the other it is only applied; the impetration is by
the Christ without, the application only is by the Christ within: And therefore
though you are to put an high value upon the latter, and to endeavor to make
sure of it as the way and condition of receiving benefit by Christ; yet you are
to know that it is the former by which all is merited, and therefore there the
great stress of your Faith must lie: it is a Christ as taking flesh and dying in
flesh that you must stick unto. Matthew. 1.21. She shall bring forth a Son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins:
(Christ the Son of Mary was to save) 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus [came into the world] to save
sinners etc. (the Apostle lays the meriting of Salvation upon a Christ
without, as coming into the world and not as coming into the heart); he who
died upon the Cross, was slain, suffered at Jerusalem, he is the person whom
God has exalted to be Prince, and Savior, Acts 5.30, 31. The God of our
Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree; him has God
exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins: (surely where persons have not
forfeited the very principles of Christianity, this is a thing which needs no
proof). Indeed Christ in the Spirit will very little profit those who disregard
him in the flesh.

But no more of this! Paul has a passage which I would a little open; 2 Cor.
5.16. Henceforth (says he) know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more: how? know
Christ no more after the flesh? what does he mean by this? did he cast off all
respects to him, all relyance upon him, as considered in his Flesh? O no! all
that he aims at is this, he knew Christ no more after the flesh (that is) so as
to have any further converse with him in a fleshly way; he did not expect again
to eat and drink with him (as sometimes the Apostles had done), all that
external converse was now at an end: Or he means that he did not look for any
fleshly advantages by him, (as worldly honor, preferment, riches etc.): Or
again, that he did not know him as in the state of his former abasement and
humiliation; (so the word flesh is sometimes taken more restrainedly, see Heb.
5.7.) Thus you are to understand the Apostle in these words, and not as if he
laid aside all knowledge of or respects unto the Lord Jesus, as considered in
his Humane Nature.

In believing we must eye a whole Christ, Christ God and Christ Man too; his
whole Person with both his Natures is the proper object of Faith: And certainly
there is something in it that believing is so much set forth by its reference to
his Flesh; as Joh. 6.53, 54, 56. Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: Whosoever
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day: He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in
me, and I in him. Take away this Flesh and Christ's fitness to be a Mediator to
God, and a Savior to us, ceases; and consequently his fitness too to be the
object of saving Faith: it is Christ God-Man whom in believing you have to do
with; and you are neither so to eye his Manhood as to overlook his Godhead, nor
so to eye his Godhead as to overlook his Manhood: both together do your work.
Upon the whole therefore, you are in the actings of Faith to look upon Christ
as having assumed your Nature, and so to rest upon him.

2d. Branch of the Exhortation, To be much in the study and contemplation of a
Christ incarnate
2. Secondly, be much in the study and contemplation of Christ as sent in flesh.
What an object is a Christ incarnate for these! I have pressed you to study him
as the Son of God, I would also press you to study him as the Son of Man: to
know him as God's own Son and as having taken our own Flesh, there is the (...)
the Phil. 3.8.
excellency of the knowledge of him. What dry, insipid, jejune knowledge is all
other in comparison of the knowledge of Christ as God-Man. One dram of this
(especially if saving, practical, and fiducial) is better than great heaps of
mere natural and philosophical knowledge. It cannot be enough lamented that
Christ in his Person, Natures, Offices is so little known; as to that which I
am treating of, his assuming Man's nature, how little do the most understand of
it! all hope to be saved by a Christ incarnate but (alas!) they know not what a
Christ incarnate is: in the general possibly they can tell you he was a Man,
but if you examine them about particulars what woeful ignorance will you find in
them! is not this to be greatly bewailed? Nay, go even to Saints themselves how
scant and dim is their light and knowledge about this! none can know it
fully, some know nothing of it, they who know something it is (God knows) but
very little in comparison of what they might, they wade but ankle deep into
this great depth: is there not need therefore of this advice, to stir you up to
the studying of Christ as sent in the flesh? O that you would study other
things less, and this more! that you would every day (with all due sobriety) be
prying, searching, diving into this mystery of a God manifested in the flesh!
so the Angels do, this is one of those things which they desire to look into 1
Pet. 1.12. and we being more concerned in it than they shall not we be looking
into it? David says Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein: here is a great work indeed, the greatest
that ever was done by God; many great and glorious things he has done but the
sending of his own Son in our flesh exceeds them all: now shall not this be
sought out by us? Things are to be studied according to their excellency in
themselves and their influence upon the good of others: there are (in a very
eminent manner) both of these inducements in the Incarnation of Christ, to draw
out our most serious endeavors after the knowledge of it; for what so
excellent in it self, so beneficial to Man as that? It stands very high in the
place and reference which it bears in and to the Gospel; it is the Soul and
Spirit, the marrow and kernel of the whole Gospel, one of the highest
discoveries which the Gospel makes; all the Articles of Faith (says Dr. Sibbs
o^ 1 Timothy 3.16. p. 65.
one) stoop and vail to it: and if so, what a necessity does this lay upon you
to search as narrowly into it as ever you can? Pray do not object the
mysteriousness of the thing, as if it was so much above you that you were not
to meddle with it: for (1.) Though it be a great mystery yet it is a mystery (in
a great measure) revealed. (2.) The more mysterious it is the more need there
is of the most diligent inquisition into it; (3.) It Is a mystery to curb
curiosity and Pride, but not to stifle sober and modest enquiries.


Further, be much in meditating upon and contemplating of Christ as sent in the
flesh. You are to study him that you may know more of him, to meditate upon him
that you may draw out and improve what you do know. O Sirs! he that is in your
Nature in Heaven should he not be very much in your hearts here on earth? A
Christ incarnate? how should our Souls be swallowed up in thinking of him as
such! What does the whole world afford so deserving of our most fixed thoughts?
is there any flower in Natures garden out of which such sweetness may be
sucked? what divine comfort, what heavenly delights must needs flow from, hence
to the Soul that is much in the contemplation of it? Is the foundation of our
eternal happiness laid in it, and shall we not mind it? is it a thing so rare,
so unparalled, and yet shall it be seldom in our thoughts? What fools are we
to suffer our selves to be so much taken up with trifles and shadows, when we
might live in the daily view of Christ God-Man! why should an empty, perishing
world engross our thoughts when we have such an object as a Jesus incarnate to
contemplate? why do we dwell so much upon fleshly things (of a deceiving and
defiling nature), when the flesh-assuming Christ, the spotless and undefiled
flesh of the holy Jesus, is either not at all regarded or very hastily passed
over? It Is said of Isaac Genesis 24.63. He went out to meditate in the field: O
Christians! what a spacious and delicious field is Christ's Humane Nature for
you to meditate in and upon! O that you would go out frequently and so do. You
say, sometimes you would employ your thoughts in divine Meditation and
Contemplation, but you cannot call to mind a proper object for it, or you are
presently on ground and want matter for your thoughts to work upon: 'pray when
it is so, fix upon the Word as made Flesh; there is a fit and full object for
these things, where think and think as long as you will yet fresh matter will
offer it self; that is a Well out of which the more you draw the fuller you will
find it to be. Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him (says David) shall be sweet;
surely the believer may say, My meditation of God (who and as he was made Man)
shall be sweet: O that you would live in the daily exercise of this heavenly
duty upon this excellent object! What a blessed thing would it be if we could
lie down, rise up with a Christ, and especially a Christ incarnate in our
minds! Me thinks that which was the product and matter of God's thoughts from
everlasting, should very much be the subject and matter of our thoughts in time.

3d. Branch of the Exhortation, To adore the mystery it self, and also the
Father and the Son in the mystery.
3. Thirdly, was Christ sent in Flesh, yea, in the likeness of sinful Flesh?
this should strike us all with amazement and astonishment; how should we admire
and wonder at this dispensation! Was it so indeed that such a person did become
man? such a man? O the wonder of wonders! here is nothing but Wonders, a conflux
and complication of Wonders; in this one thing there are many Wonders, and
those too not of the lowest rank but the highest that ever were. Who can duly
think of, weigh, ponder upon what is here laid down, without being transported
and swallowed up in high and holy admiration! The glorified ones in heaven are
always wondering, and what is it which causes them so to do? it is the
beholding of Christ in our flesh: they began betimes so to do (even as soon as
ever Christ had assumed our Nature), and they continue still to do the same,
and so they will to all eternity. The Angels were so full of joy and admiration
upon the first breaking out of this, that they must come from heaven and give
some vent to themselves, in singing Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men: Now when
there is such admiring and wondering in heaven, shall there be none in earth?
Things which are mysterious and strange affect us very much; was there ever any
thing so mysterious and strange as the incarnation of the Son of God? this is a
mystery indeed, the first link in that chain of mysteries 1 Timothy 3.16. When
little things make us wonder it is an evidence of weakness, when great things do
not make us wonder it is an evidence either of great inconsideracy or gross
stupidity. The proud Philosopher scorns to wonder at any thing in Nature, but
the humble Christian (who has things before him far more sublime and
unsearchable than any mysteries in Nature,) may well stand and wonder at those
things in Religion which it is not possible for him to comprehend. Amongst
which, what more incomprehensible (take it in all respects) than the
incarnation of God's own Son! he that does not wonder at this pray what will he
wonder at!

To be more particular and distinct in the urging of this duty (of humble and
thankful admiration), two things I would say;

1. Admire in reference to the thing it self: The mystery of Christ's
Incarnation to be admired.
2. Admire God and Christ, the Persons who had the hand in it.
1. For the thing it self: Christ in our flesh? 'pray pause and ruminate a
while upon it and then tell me what you think of it; the more you look into it
and consider it the more you will admire it. A God to be made Man? a God to
take dust (for flesh is but living or breathing dust) into intimate conjunction
with himself? a God to submit for some time to lie in the womb of a Virgin? O
wonderful! Here Is finite and infinite joined in one, eternity matched with
time, the Creator and a Creature making but one Person, here is the Lord and
Sovereign of the world marrying into a mean and broken Family, the maker of the
Universe made himself; here is two Natures, which stood at an infinite distance
each from the other, hypostatically united; here is the verity of flesh and yet
but the similitude of sinful flesh; here is a man begotten without man, a Filius
Dei de Patre sine matre, Filius hominis de matre sine Patre. Aug. de temp.
Sermon. 23. Vide Tertull de carne Christi. p. 373. Vacabat viri semen etc.
Son without a Father (for though Christ had more than a putative body, yet (as
Man) he had no more than a putative Father, Luke 3.23. Jesus began to be about
thirty years of age, being [as was supposed] the Son of Joseph etc.) here is a
Virgin conceiving and bringing forth a Son, she remaining a Virgin still; Jer.
31.22. The Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a
man: are not all these stupendous, amazing, never enough to be admired things?
How do wonders here grow upon us! no sooner does one go off but presently
another succeeds in its room. Christ wrought many miracles in his Flesh, but
the greatest miracle of all was his assuming flesh: let Jews and Infidels scoff
and deride, the sincere Christian must admire and adore.

2. For the Persons who had the great hand in this they are to be admired too:
I Will instance (1.) in God the Father; (2.) in God the Son.


God the Father to be admired: it is shown how or wherein.
1. God the Father he is to be admired. For 'twas he who sent his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh; he ordained and ordered all about this, he laid the
foundation of it in his own purpose and will: it was the Psalm. 118.23.
Lord's doing (from first to last) should it not be mavelous in our eyes? I
and (as was said before) 'twas the highest thing that ever he did, in this
(with reverence be it spoken) he went to the utmost of all his Attributes. In
Christ's Incarnation (says a Mr. Buroughs Gosp. Conv. p. 89.
Reverend Divine), we may see God as it were resolving to do a work from
himself to the uttermost, to manifest the uttermost of his glory in a work out
of himself. The work of God within himself was his eternal Generation and the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, but now God would work out of himself, and that
to the utmost extent. He had made a World but there he had not manifested the
uttermost of his glory; therefore God will etc. what is that? to take the Nature
of man into a personal union with his Son, that is the uttermost. Now where God
goes to the utmost of his Attributes it becomes us to go to the utmost of our
thankfulness and admiration.

There are Four Attributes in God which upon the account of Christ's
Incarnation can never be enough admired: (1.) His Wisdom; in finding out such a
glorious way for the Sinners recovery. This was his invention and contrivance,
and his only; the wisest Creatures in the world had they united all their
wisdom could never have thought of such a way for the redeeming of lost man: In
so desperate a case God himself (to speak after the manner of men) was fain to
set his own wisdom on work to find out a remedy; and this was that which he
found out and pitched upon: O the infinite, unsearchable, incomprehensible
Wisdom of God! The Apostle speaks of the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2.10. of the
manifold wisdom of God Ephesians. 3.10. of his abounding in all wisdom and prudence
Ephesians. 1.8. what may these expressions refer to, but to God's deep and most wise
designs and methods displayed in the work of man's redemption by a Christ
incarnate? And (which was a great demonstration of his Wisdom) see how the
remedy was suited to the malady; Man at first would be as God and that ruined
him, therefore now God shall be as Man and that shall restore him; Man gave the
wound and Man shall heal that wound; O the wisdom of God! (2.) His Power: for
Christ as he was the Wisdom of God so also the Power of God 1 Cor. 1.24. and as
he was so in other respects so eminently in that which I am upon. 'Twas an act
of mighty power for God so nearly to unite the Godhead and the Manhood; the
bringing of two Natures (so distant) together in one Person must needs be the
product of infinite power. For God to make something out of nothing, that
speaks the greatness of his Power; but for God to be made Man, there being (in
some respects) a greater distance betwixt the Godhead and the Manhood than
'twixt Something and Nothing, this speaks a greater power. It Is much that Soul
and Body (two such different Beings) should be so conjoined as to make a Man,
that such disagreeing Elements should be reconciled in corpore mixto; but what
are these to the joining of the Godhead and Manhood in one hypostasis? (3.) His
Justice: Is sin committed? the holy Law broken? does the Creature lie under
guilt? God stands upon the vindication of his Honor, the making good of his
threatenings, the satisfaction of his Justice: Satisfaction he will have, and in
that Nature too in which the offense had been committed; and because the
Creature was altogether unable to make it, in order thereunto God will have his
own Son to take flesh, that he may be in a capacity to obey, do, suffer what
Justice required; and when this Son had so assumed flesh God fell upon him,
charged him with the guilt of all Believers, exacted of him that punishment
which was due to them, would not spare him in the least or 'bate him any thing;
O the severity and impartiality of God's Justice! (4.) His Mercy, Goodness, and
Love. And does not this Attribute shine forth as brightly in our Savior's
being made flesh, as any of the former? Here was the tender mercy of our God
Luke 1.78. God's so loving of the world Joh. 3.16. the great manifestation of
his Love 1 John 4.9. his glorious grace, and the riches of his grace Ephesians. 1.6,
7.
Did ever God give the world such a demonstration of his Love and Grace as in
the Incarnation of his Son? O matchless, infinite, unlimited Love and Grace! He
had done exceeding well for Man as he made him at first; for he put him into a
very good state, stamped his own Image upon him, made him above all other
Creatures to be his favorite: but he foolishly sinned, and fell from God, and
thereby lost all his happiness: Well! what did God now do? did he let Man
alone, shut up his bowels against him, fall upon him with his utmost wrath? did
he say, Nay, since it is thus let him even rise as he has fallen; since he
would be so foolish as for a trifle to break with me let him rot and die and
perish for ever, I Will do no more for him? O no! not such a word or thought did
pass from the gracious God toward his miserable Creature. He pitied undone
man, found out help for him, yea sent his own Son to restore him: and how did
he send this Son? why, in Flesh; but in what Flesh? surely it shall be
altogether glorious flesh, such as shall be of a quite other Nature than that
is which we poor mortals have? I so it was (in some respects), but in others
but just like to sinful flesh: put all this together and was not here Love? God
will have sin to be punished but then the punishment shall be laid upon his own
Son, and the sinner himself shall be acquitted, O the height of Justice! and
yet O the height of Mercy too! There Is more of Mercy in God's sending Christ
and sending him in this way, than there would have been in his absolute
pardoning of sin without any sending or any satisfaction; because always the
more costly a mercy is the more there is of Mercy in that mercy. And mere
pardon, nay Salvation it self have not so much of Mercy and Love in them, as
what was in Christ's assuming our Nature; for (as to the first) it is more for a
King to put himself into the Traytor's stead and himself to make satisfaction
for his Offense, than just to pardon him: and (as to the second) in Salvation
there is our advancement but in Christ's Incarnation there was his abasement;
now it is more for such a Person as Christ to be abased than it is for such a
Creature as Man to be advanced. All which being considered, what an obligation
does there lie upon us to get our hearts raised up unto and drawn out in the
highest admiration of God's Mercy!

God the Son to be admired; it is shown here also how or wherein,
Secondly, God the Son or Christ himself the Person who was incarnate, he too
is greatly to be admired: with respect (1.) to his Love; (2.) to his Holiness;
(3.) to his Power.


1. For his Love: which indeed was superlative and admirable, transcending the
reach of the highest finite capacity. Christ knew what our flesh was, how much
it was below him to take it, Te propter vitamque tuam sum Virginis alvum
Ingressus, sum factus Homo etc. Lactant. de Benefic. Christi.
yet for our good he readily condescended to it; and was willing to debase and
depress himself if he might but advance and exalt us: here was the mirror of
Love! The greatness of his Person speaks the greatness of his Love: Phil. 2.6,
7, 8.
Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; But
made himself of no reputation, etc. what a Person was Christ before his
Incarnation! what a fall was here thereby for such a Person! Jacet in pannis
qui regnat in coelis. Mundum implens in praecepi jacens: Sidera regens, ubera
lambens etc. Conditor Mariae natus ex Maria: Filius David Dominus David semen
Abrahae qui est ante Abraham: Factor terrae factus in terra. August. de Temp.
Sermon. 20. and Sermon. 23.
He who sat upon the throne was willing to lie in the manger; he that was
clothed with brightness and Majesty disrobed himself, put off his own royal
attire and put on our course rags; he who filled the World confined himself to
a Womb; he who was the Maker of all owned a poor Woman for his Mother; he who
was David's Lord became David's Son: what unsearchable mysteries of the Grace
of Christ are here! He had Angels at his beck and might have employed one of
them upon this service; but he would not, he will come himself and trust no
Creature in such an undertaking: was not this Love? God's first love (says Dr.
Reyn. on the Passions. chapter 11. p. 99.
one) to man was in making man like himself, his Second great love was in
making himself like man. There Is 1 John 3.1.
a what manner of love upon the Sons of men being made the Sons of God; but
what manner of love was there in this that the Son of God should be made the
Son of Man? I have nothing to say but wonder, wonder. This great person
vouchsafed to come so near to believers, that he is not Heb. 2.11.
ashamed to call them Brethren; he was willing to be made like to them that
they might be made like to him, he took of theirs that he might give them of
his; and since they could not Deplorata certe res erat nisi Majestas ipsa Dei
ad nos descenderet, quando ascendere nostrum non erat. Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c.
12.
ascend to him he was pleased to descend to them; O inexpressible Love! He did
not only take flesh but that very flesh and blood which we have; yea he stooped
to the (...) Chrysostom.
likeness of our sinful flesh: and how did he abase himself by and in this
flesh! Phil. 2.7, 8. But made himself of no reputation, ((...), he emptied
himself (as it were) of all his former glory and fullness,) and took upon him
the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in
fashion as a man he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross. Christ's external state in our Nature was so low and mean,
(which he yet never stuck at or regarded, (...) Athan. de Inc. verbi. p. 96.
his design being to do good and not to appear in any worldly pomp or
grandeur), that it seemed to be below him not only as he was God but even as he
was Man; He who before was equal to God was now scarce equal to Man; 'twas
prophetically spoken in his person Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm and no man; nay, he
was scarce equal to the meanest of other creatures, for he says Matthew. 8.20.
The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head: now surely the lower Christ's condition was,
the higher should be our admiration of his Love. When the Humane Nature (as in
us) was at the worst, sadly tainted by Adam's fall, then Christ took it upon
him; though our stock was now sour and degenerate yet he was willing to be
ingrafted into it. When the noblest Families are under an attainder of treason
persons are very shy of matching into them; 'twas no better than so with ours,
and yet the Lord Jesus did not refuse to match into it. My Brethren, had he
assumed our Nature before we had spoiled it, even that had been an admirable
condescension; but to assume it when (in us) it was so spoiled and defaced,
here was the highest condescension that was imaginable. The Angelical Nature
was pure and untainted; for though many Angels had sinned yet their Nature was
not touched, because they not standing in a Common Head as Man did, the Fall of
some did not reach the whole order: and yet Christ meddled not with that Nature
but with ours; Heb. 2.16. Verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but
he took on him the seed of Abraham: O the grace and love of Christ to Man!
There are Five expressions concerning him under the word made, every one of
which holds forth the greatness of his humiliation (and consequently of his
love): (1.) He was made flesh Joh. 1.14. (2.) He was made of a woman Gal. 4.4.
he might have had flesh immediately created but 'twas not so; there was the
instrumental concurrence of a woman to it (which heightens his humiliation
therein): then (3.) he was made under the Law Gal. 4.4. yea (4.) he was made a
curse for us Gal. 3.13. yea (5.) he was made sin 2 Cor. 5.21.
Now though there be some gradual rise (or rather fall) in all these yet I
conceive the first holds forth the greatest humiliation; the reason is, because
there is a greater distance and repugnancy betwixt God and Flesh, than there is
betwixt Flesh and any of the other things which follow: but shall not all put
together highly affect us, and fill our Souls with high thoughts of the Love of
Christ? Blessed God! what hearts have we if such Considerations as these will
not work them up to a Christ-admiring frame? Dear Savior! thou who did once
take our sinless flesh be pleased to take away our lumpish, dull, sinful
hearts; that there may be in us some such warm and raised affections as may (in
some measure) answer to thine immense Love in thy Incarnation.

2. Admire the Holiness of Christ. That he should take true flesh and yet but
the likeness of sinful flesh, be so like a sinner and yet no sinner, come so
near to sin and yet be so far off from it, assume our Nature so woefully
corrupted and vitiated (as it is in us), and live so long in that Nature after
it was assumed, and yet be perfectly free from sin; that so much sin should lie
upon him and yet not the least sin be committed by him; O this is very strange
and wonderful! Who can touch pitch and not be defiled? who can take a Nature
which (in its proper subject) was wholly depraved, and yet be holy? why, Christ
did so and yet was holy: and if he could not have so done without impeaching
his Holiness, as well as he loved man he would never have been made man: O let
the Holiness of Christ be adored by you.

3. Admire the Power of Christ. That that Nature which is so weak in us should
be so strong in him, that he, even in our flesh, should be able to do and
suffer as he did, this is admirable. Therein he bafled a tempting Devil, bore
up under the greatest pressures that ever lay upon any, did not sink under all
his Sufferings, wrought unquestionable Miracles, pacified divine wrath,
satisfied God's Justice, fulfilled the Law, condemned sin, subdued and
conquered all the powers of Hell, held it out till all was finished; all this
was done in our flesh by Christ-Man (though not as mere Man): I say, in our
flesh, for had it not been so (...) etc. Chrysostom. Haec erat Dei virtus in
substantia pari perficere salutem. Non enim magnum si Spiritus Dei Carnem
remediaret, sed si Caro consimilis peccatrici, dum Caro est sed non peccati.
Tertull. adv. Marcion. l. 5.
the thing had not been so great; but that Christ in our very Nature and Flesh
should be able to do such things, there is the wonder: doubtless he must be
assisted and strengthened by an higher Nature, otherwise it could not have been
thus. Nay that Christ-Man should continue yet to do such strange and mighty
things, O stand and wonder at his Power! 'Twas the stone cut without hands (by
which you are to understand Christ in the miraculous production of his Humane
Nature,) which smote the image etc. Dan. 2.34. You read of one sitting upon the
cloud like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his
hand a sharp sickle, for the cutting down of his enemies, Rev. 14.14. and the
Son of man is brought before the ancient of days, and there was given him
dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages
should serve him etc. Dan. 7.13, 14. Now that Christ in the Nature of Man
should be thus exalted, and also do such great and glorious things, is not this
wonderful? Suppose you had seen Exodus 2.3.
Moses (when a child) in his Ark of bullrushes, laid in the flags by the rivers
brink; and then afterward had seen him (when grown up) in the head of the
people of Israel, as their ruler and deliverer (as he is styled Act. 7.35),
subduing Pharaoh and all his Host; would not this have struck you with
admiration? What then shall we say and think of Christ? he that for some time
was shut up in his Mothers womb, lay (as a weak infant) on her lap, sucked at
her breasts etc. and (when grown up) suffered and died upon the Cross; this
very Christ is the redeemer of the world, the Savior of man, the King of all
the earth, the universal Conqueror over Devils and all Enemies whatsoever,
exalted far above principalities etc. what shall we say to these things? verily
they command adoring silence and wonderment.

I have been very long (yet not too long I hope) upon this head; when the
Incarnation of the Son of God is before me (than which there never was a
greater thing to be wondered at) could I say too much in order to the raising of
your hearts to the highest adoration, both of the thing and also of the persons
concerned in it? what more proper and necessary to be urged upon such an
Argument than such a frame of spirit?

Fourth Branch of the Exhortation, To labor after the powerful influence of
Christ's Incarnation upon Heart and Life.
4. Fourthly, this great mystery of Christ's Incarnation must have some powerful
influence upon your hearts and lives. My Brethren! it is not enough to believe
it, to have an ineffective light in the head about it; no, nor sometimes to
have the affections wrought upon in the admiration of it; but this must be
attended with deep impressions upon the heart and have a great efficacy upon
the life. The Apostle having spoke of the 1 Timothy 3.16.
mystery of Godliness presently he falls upon Christ's being manifested in the
flesh, as a great part of that mystery of Godliness; and this in particular (as
well as the whole Gospel in General) is set forth thereby, because (where it is
known and believed aright) it does very much conduce and operate to the
promoting of Godliness. St. John tells us 1 John 4.2. Every Spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: is every Spirit
that confesses this, of God? yes, so far as assent to the truth and a faithful
profession of that truth will carry it: But such as would be said to be of God
in a more special and saving way, they must not only assent and profess but
they must live suitably to what they do so believe and profess; this truth (of
Christ's being come in the flesh) must have an efficacy upon them in what is
practical, and then they will be of God indeed. A God incarnate is both the
great encouragement to Faith and also the great incentive to Duty.

Should I here fall upon the several particulars which offer themselves and
enlarge upon them, I should too much trespass; briefly therefore let me but
touch upon six or seven things: 1. Was Christ sent in flesh? and do you know
and believe it? Christians upon this must be humble.
Oh how humble should you be! What an argument is here from Christ's
Incarnation for humility! in his assuming flesh he has set before you the
highest, the most glorious pattern of humility that ever was, will you not
follow it? Matthew. 11.29.
Learn of me, for (says he) I am meek and lowly; he gave sufficient evidence
of his lowliness in becoming Man; now is it not better to learn of an humble
God than of a proud man? O Christian! after such abasement of thy Lord and
Savior will thou be haughty and proud? how unsuitable is a proud sinner to an
humble Savior! What (says one) more mysterious than God humbled, more
monstrous than man proud? When ever pride, self-conceitedness, self-exalting
begin to rise in the heart, think of the humility of the Son of God; how he
emptied himself, made himself of no reputation, took upon him the form of a
Servant etc. and surely this will be an effectual Antidote against pride: The
Apostle when he would further lowliness of mind in the Philippians, this is the
consideration which he sets before them, Phil. 2.3, 6, 7, etc. Diabolus
superbus hominem superbientem perduxit ad mortem, Christus humilis hominem
obedientem reduxit ad vitam; quia sicut ille clatus cecidit and dejecit
consentientem, sic iste humiliatus surrexit and erexit credentem. August. tem.
3. p. 1051.
We were undone by a proud Devil and a proud heart, if ever we be saved it must
be by an humble Savior and an humble heart. 2. Do not sin. Partly, Must not
Sin.
that there may be in you as full a conformity to Christ as here you can come
up to; he took your Nature and sinned not therein, you should be as like to him
as ever you may: Partly, that Christ may have his end in his coming in the
flesh; for why did he so come? but that he might destroy the works of the Devil
1 John 3.8. that he might redeem you from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. that you being
delivered out of the hands of your enemies, might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of your life, Luke 1.74,
75. Partly too, because upon Christ's sending in the flesh you have so full a
demonstration of the evil of sin, how hateful it was to God etc. for it having
got into the world nothing could expiate it unless God's own Son will take
flesh, yea, and suffer and die in that flesh, and so bring about the expiation
of it: O what an evil is sin! Now notwithstanding and after all this will you
yet love it and live in the commission of it? what will this be but (in effect)
to say you regard not what Christ was or did? that you desire (as far as in you
lies) to make this his great act, the taking of flesh, to be insignificant and
to no purpose? as also to declare to the world by your practices that you have
quite other thoughts of sin than what God himself has. Especially they must
shun those sins which do most disparage and debase the Humane Nature.
3. Of all sins be sure you shun those which do most directly disparage and
debase the Humane Nature; (such as drunkenness, intemperance, bodily
uncleanness etc.): what a sad thing is it that ever such things should be done
where there is such a Nature! When Christ has assumed that Nature, and by
assuming it has so dignified and advanced it, nay when he has so highly
glorified it as to carry it up with him to Heaven, and there to sit with it at
the right hand of God; shall we by such and such sinful courses, the gratifying
of such base lusts, Agnosce (O Christian) dignitatem tuam, and divinae consors
factus Naturae, noli in veterem vilitatem degeneri conversatione redire. Leo de
Nativ.
dishonor and disparage it? God forbid! Sinners! let me entreat you when ever
the temptation comes to excite you to those Evils which in special do entrench
upon the glory of the Humane Nature, (as to drink to excess, to defile your
bodies by fleshly lusts etc.), do but seriously think with your selves that you
are Men, and shall such carry it as beasts? that your Savior has just such a
body as you have, and does he abuse it by the committing of such Evils? that he
has your Nature, and does he so and so sin in it? that he has restored it (as
it is in himself) to its pristine glory, and will you (as it is in your selves)
keep it as vile as ever? surely if such who are drowned in sensuality did but
seriously think of this, they would abandon their base lusts rather than by
them debase their excellent Nature. They must love God and Christ.
4. Love God and Christ: yea, love them strongly, ardently, to a very intense
degree of love. 1 John 4.16.
God is Love, (he has made it appear so in his sending of Christ in flesh),
therefore he deserves love; he has sufficiently acted and declared his love to
you, how will you act and declare your love to him etc. he loved and Joh. 3.16.
so loved you will you not Si amare pigebat, saltem reamare non pigeat. August.
de Catech. Rud.
return love for love? I and so love him too (to the utmost of your capacity)?
What will fire the cold heart with love to God if this will not do it, (viz.)
his sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh? he that knows and
considers this certainly he cannot but be full of divine Love. And then Love
Christ: was he willing to put on your rags, to cloth himself with your flesh?
did he take your Nature? and that too under those circumstances which have been
mentioned? doing this not for himself but wholly for your good? was he pleased
so far to condescend as to become one of you? nay to put himself not only into
your Nature but also into your stead (he might have been a Man and yet not a
Surety)? O let him have your Love! your most hearty and cordial Love: pray let
it be your greatest grief that you have no more love for him who deserves so
much: alas! it is but a drop when it should be an Ocean, but a poor spark when
it should be a vehement flame. And I would have you to love Christ who is
incarnate as well as because he was incarnate: what an alluring, attracting
object of Love is Christ God-man! God loves him as he is in our flesh, the
Angels love him as in our flesh, the glorified Saints love him too in that
notion, will not you also love him as he is so considered? Christ in our Nature
is a Person very amiable; what is there in mear man to draw our love to him
which is not in Christ ( God and Man) with great advantage? he indeed is the
Deliciae humani generis, Psalm. 45.2.
fairer than the children of men, the Cant. 5.10.
chiefest amongst ten thousand, 16.
altogether lovely: those excellencies which are but scattered in us do all
(like lines in the Center) concur in him. A Christ incarnate is the love of
heaven; let him be the love of earth too. 5. So love Christ as to be willing,
nay ambitious to do, to suffer, Be ambitious to do and suffer for Christ.
to be abased for him. O Sirs! what shall we Deus Homo factus est, quid
facturus est Homo propter quem Deus factus est Homo? August. tom. 3. p. 1070.
do for him who has done such inexpressible things for us? shall we be loath to
take his Cross who was so willing to take our Nature? he had but the likeness
of sinful flesh, and yet how willingly and patiently did he suffer! we have the
reality of sinful flesh, shall we hang off from suffering or be impatient under
it? what abasement can be too much for the sons of men when the Son of God was
thus abased? what service can be too mean for us when Christ stooped to the
form of a Servant? He that knows how much Christ's love was above him will
never think any work or service to be below him. 6. As Christ was pleased to
partake with you in your Nature, Labor after the participation of the divine
Nature.
so let it be your desire and endeavor to partake with him in his: I mean that
which the Apostle speaks of when he says, that by these you might be partakers
of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. even man (in such a sense) is capable of this
and therefore should pursue after it. 'Twas part of Christ's humiliation to
take our Humane Nature, but it is our highest exaltation to be brought under the
participation, of his divine Nature: of which though we cannot be partakers as
he was of the former, (for then we should be properly and formally deify'd,
which is high blasphemy); yet in the fruits and effects of it and in regard of
conformity and likeness to it, so we may. God may become very man but man
cannot become very God; he may be like to God by grace and holiness, but that is
all: (thus we are to understand some passages of the Factus est Deus Homo, ut
Homo fieret Deus. Aug. de Nativ. -- Divinitas Verbi aequalis Patri facta est
particeps mortalitatis nostrae non de suo sed de nostro, ut and nos efficeremur
participes Deitatis ejus, non de nostro sed de ipsuis. Aug. tom. 3. p. 1051.
(...) Athan. de Incarn. Verb. p. 108. l. 1.
Ancients which seem to be very high). Now this is that which I would have you
to labor after; that as Christ has taken of yours so you may receive of his,
as he was made like to you in what is proper to Man, so you (according to your
capacity) may be made like to him in what is proper to God. Be thankful, both
for the thing it self and also for the revelation of it.
7. Be thankful: not in a common, ordinary, formal manner, but in the most
lively, enlarged, raised manner that is possible. Where the mercy is high and
great the thankfulness must bear some proportion to it. Did Christ condescend
to take your flesh? for such gracious ends? O where is your praising and
magnifying of God? should not the whole Soul be summoned in to give its most
united acknowledgement of so signal a mercy? The Angels never reaped that
advantage by his Incarnation which we do, and yet as soon as ever that took
place they were at praising-work; Luke 2.13, 14. Suddenly there was with the
Angels a multitude of the heavenly Host praising God, and saying, Glory to God
in the highest etc. Good old Zachary began his Prophecy with thanksgiving,
Luke 1.68, 69. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people etc. and Simeon upon the sight of Christ in the Flesh was
transported with joy, Luke 2.29, etc. Then took he him up in his arms, and
blessed God, and said, Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace
according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation: Which thou have
prepared before the face of all people: a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel. To move you to this thankfulness I can say no
more than what I have already said; let but that be considered and you will
daily, heartily, with the most raised affections bless God for a Christ
incarnate.


And as you should do this for the thing it self so also for the revelation of
it in the Gospel: where the mystery which was kept secret since the world
began, is now made manifest (as the Apostle speaks Romans 16.25, 26.) This we had
never known if God had not there revealed it; and the deeper is the mystery the
higher is his mercy in the disclosing of it. Matthew. 13.11.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, to others
it is not so; how little does the greatest part of the world know of a God in
Flesh! Nature may discover a God but it is Scripture only which discovers
God-man: now why is that revealed to you which is hid to so many? Even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight Matthew. 11.26. Nay further you have
the clear revelation of this; what was hid in darker Prophesies and Types to
the Fathers under the Old Testament, is how under the New made as evident to
you as the light of the noonday: you do with 2 Cor. 3.18^.
open face behold the truth and glory of Christ's Manhood, you live under the
days of the Son of Man; that which others expected and waited for and saw but
Heb. 11.13.
afar off is now accomplished and made good to you. Under the Law believers
looked for the Son of God in flesh, you under the Gospel look on the Son of God
in flesh; their language was I shall see him but not now, I shall behold him
but not nigh, (as Balaam prophesied Numb. 24.17.); but under the Gospel the
language is That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the word of life: For the life was manifested and we have seen it etc. 1 John 1.1, 2. I may say to you what Christ once did to his Disciples Luke 10.23,
24. Blessed are the eyes which see the things which ye see: For I tell you,
that many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and
have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard
them. O put the thing and the revelation thereof together, how should God for
both be magnified by us! had we as many tongues as members, was the whole body
turned into this one member, yet we should not be able for this high and
glorious mercy sufficiently to speak out and celebrate the praises of the most
high God, (as Si certe omnia membra nostra verterentur in linguas, ad
rependendum tibi debitas lauds nequaquam sufficeret exiguitas nostra. Aug.
medit. cap. 15.
Austine pathetically expresses it). So much for this Second Use by way of
Exhortation.

The third and last is for Comfort. 3. Use.
The point in hand is every way as fruitful for Consolation as for Exhortation;
For Comfort^ to Believers.
Christ sent in flesh? made flesh? what abundance of matter is wrapped up in
this for the heightning of the true believers joy! I have brought you to the
very springhead of divine Consolation; O that you might feel it flowing forth
and running into your Souls! Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day (the day of
his Incarnation), he saw it and was glad, Joh. 8.56. let me tell you, you see
that about it which he never saw will not you rejoice and be glad? Fear not
(said the Angel to the Shepherds), for behold I bring you good tidings of great
joy, which shall be to all people: (what were these good tidings? why,) Unto
you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
Luke 2.10, 11. Christ born? the Son of God incarnate? good tidings indeed!
blessed be God that they were ever brought to our ears! surely such tidings
call for great joy. If God would please to open your eyes to let you see what
there is in a Christ sent in flesh, to fix your thoughts upon it, to help you
to make the best improvement of it; I cannot but assure my self, that your
hearts would be brimful of Comfort, that your fears would vanish (like the dark
cloud before the bright-shining Sun); that instead of your sad despondencies of
Spirit you would triumph in Christ and lift up your heads with joy. O how
injurious are they to the Saints in their heavenly glorying who would take away
from them the Manhood of Christ! since (as it is truly said) Nullus potest eo
capite gloriari, in quo asserit Naturam suam non haberi. Leo Epist. 11.
No man can glory in that head in which he believes there is not his own
Nature: And how injurious are the Saints unto themselves, who do so little
meditate upon, improve, and draw comfort from Christ in this consideration!

Wherein does Christ's Incarnation afford matter of Comfort to Believers?
If it be asked, What is there in a Christ incarnate for the strengthening of the
Faith, the heightning of the comfort of God's Children? give me leave to answer
this Question in several particulars: 1. There Is this in it, certainly this
must be an effectual (and the most effectual way imaginable) for the promoting
of God's glory and the Sinners good. This an effectual way to promote God's
glory and the good of Sinners.
If Christ become Man that must be a very proper and powerful Means in order to
these ends, for (besides the greatness of the thing in it self) if it shall
please God out of his abundant mercy to propound to himself the bringing about
of such things, he out of his infinite Wisdom will be sure to pitch upon such
means as shall certainly reach them: and therefore he pitching upon this,
unquestionably it shall attain what it was designed for. Is not this then
ground of joy and a great support to faith, to consider that there is a way and
such a way way found out as shall infallibly and effectually promote your good?
2. In this you have in high demonstration of his Nihil tam necessarium fuit ad
erigendam spem nostram, quam ut demonstraretur nobis quantum nos diligeret
Deus: Quid vero isto indicio manifestius quam quod Dei Filius Naturae nostrae
dignatus est inire consortium? Aug. de Trin. l. 13.
Love, yea the highest that was possible: The highest demonstration of God's
Love.
for there was in it ultimus divini amoris conatus, infinite Love it self could
go no higher than a Christ in Flesh. Now this Love of God is the strongest, the
most heart-reviving cordial that can be given to a gracious person; and
answerable to the degree of that, so is the degree of his comfort; for evermore
where God displayes his highest Love there he has the highest comfort. You
that are such, do you desire an evidence of this? and would that cheer you?
here you have one (the very highest that God could give), viz. his sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh. All the Promises are sealed by this.
3. By this (as has been already observed under a former head) all the promises
are sealed, confirmed and ratified: Christ's Incarnation was not only one of
the promises it self, yea, the grand Old Testament promise, but it was the seal
and confirmation of all the rest. When God would give Ahaz a sign for the
encouraging of his faith as to the making good of a particular mercy promised,
what was that sign? why, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and
shall call his name Immanuel; Isa. 7.14. and so it is in all other respects.
The Promises indeed are confirmed several ways, but there is not any one thing
which gives an higher confirmation to them than this, Christ's being made
Flesh: What ever God has promised it is all sure now to be made good, why?
because his great promise of the Incarnation of his Son (than the which nothing
could be more high and more improbable) is exactly accomplished. A Christ
incarnate is Faith's highest security: Saints! you have no reason now to
question either God's power, (for what cannot he do who can unite the Godhead
and the Manhood? what can be too hard for him who can make a Virgin to
conceive?) or his mercy and willingness to do any thing for you; for he that
will send his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh what will he stick at?
what can come after that can be so great as that? Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his own Son how shall he not with him give us all things?
Well therefore might the Apostle say, All the promises of God in him (in
Christ) are yea, and in him Amen etc. 2 Cor. 1.20.


A very great and precious Truth here lies before me, All the great objects of
the Christians Faith and Hope, are by Christ's Incarnation made sure and
credible: This proved by Instanc^s.
which there-I would fain speak more fully unto: it is this, that all the
excellent Objects of the Christians Faith and Hope are made credible, nay, sure
and certain upon the Incarnation of the Son of God. This I Will endeavor to make
out in some Instances: As the Mystical Union.
1. There Is first the mystical union betwixt Christ and Believers: a very great
mystery (as you have heard)! Christ in believers and one with them? what can be
more wonderful! yet it is sure, there is such a thing and we may be assured of
it for it is made credible and certain by that which I am upon. The Hypostatical
Union ascertains the Mystical Union: the union of Persons is not so much as the
Personal Union; he that has thus united our Manhood to his Godhead in one
Person, why may he not mystically unite our persons to his Person (this latter
union not being so high as the former)? As it is said, Heb. 7 7.
the less is blessed of the better, so I may here say the less is confirmed by
the greater: if Christ had not come so near us in the taking of our Nature the
mystical union might have been more doubtful; but now there is no room for
doubting. Observe that place Heb. 2.11. Both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified, are all of one, (there is the union in the same common Nature);
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren, (there is the near
relation or the mystical union grounded upon the former). Communion with God,
Christ's special presence, the inhabitation of the Spirit.
2. There Is Communion with God, Christ's special presence in the Soul, the
inhabitation of the Spirit. All very high and glorious things! so high that the
poor creature knows not how to believe them: yet they also are very credible
and certain upon Christ's Incarnation. It Is more for God to be made man then
it is for God to converse with man, God manifested in the flesh is more than God
manifesting himself to flesh. Moreover, Christ in our flesh laid the foundation
of the Creatures Communion with God, and removed that which hindered it (namely
distance and enmity); these two stood in the sinners way as to this blessed
communion, but Christ removed them both, and so brought it about. It Is
observable, the Apostle having spoken of the Incarnation of Christ 1 John 1.1,
2, 3. presently he adds, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ. O if he had not condescended to take our flesh there had
been etc. Alioqui nec satis propinqua vicinitas, nec affinitas satis firma,
unde nobis spes fieret Deum nobiscum habitare; tantum erat inter nostras sordes
and summam Dei munditiem dissidium. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2. c. 12.
no such thing as our Communion with God; but now it is sure. And so it is in the
other things which were mentioned: what is Christ's gracious presence in the
Soul, or the in-dwelling of the Spirit in a child of God (both of which are
often spoken of in Scripture) to the personal presence and inhabitation of the
Godhead in the Manhood of Christ? In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily; Col. 2.9. Communications of Grace from God.
3. There are such and such communications of Grace from God to a gracious
heart: these are very secret yet very sure and credible. Upon communion of
Nature communications of Grace do certainly follow; Christ having assumed flesh
there is now a way made, through which God may convey his Mercy and Love to
Creatures as he pleases. The Godhead is the fountain from which all flows, and
there is now a pipe to convey supply's from that fountain, viz. the Manhood of
Christ; 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him; by Christ (in our flesh) all things come to us and we by him go to
God; he is the Way (as he says of himself Joh. 14.6.), the Way by which our
duties are handed to God and God's mercies to us. O so long as Christ is
Mediator betwixt God and Man as God-man, there may and there shall be mutual
intercourses and communications betwixt God and Man. Sonship to God
4. The Scripture speaks much of the Sonship and Adoption of Believers. A very
great and glorious privilege! infinitely too great for such despicable worms
as we are (considered in our selves): yet through the Grace of God in a Christ
incarnate it is ours. This near relation to God upon the Manhood of his own Son
is now made very (...). Chrysostom. in 1 John Si Natura Dei filius propter filios
hominum factus est Hominis filius, quanto est credibilius Natura Filios Hominis
Gratiae Dei filios fieri. etc. Aug. de Trinit. lib. 13. c. 9.
credible; for if the Son of God was made the Son of Man, why may not the Sons
of Men be also made the Sons of God? if the One was so abased why may not the
Other be so advanced? Especially if we consider, that the bringing of Believers
into this near relation was one great and special end why Christ was incarnate;
Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of the time was come God sent forth his Son, made
of a Woman, made under the Law; To redeem them that were under the Law, [that
we might receive the adoption of Sons]. When the Evangelist had laid down the
exaltation of believers to a state of Sonship, Joh. 1.12. and had shown how
that is brought about ( Verse. 13.) immediately he falls upon Christ's being
made flesh ( V. 14.): whether the latter carries any reference to the former,
or is brought in upon this or that account with respect to the Saints Sonship
spoken of, I will not be positive in determining one way or another; only this
I say as to the thing, it is not incredible that such who believe should become
the Sons of God when the Word was made Flesh. The Resurrection of the Body.
5. There Is the Resurrection of the Body. And what more incredible to us than
that! though the S^riptures are very express and plain in the asserting of it,
though we know the Power of God and have many Considerations for the assuring
us of its truth and certainty; yet how apt are we to stagger and to be under
doubtful thoughts about it! But says the Apostle Acts 26.8. Why should it be
thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? blessed
Paul! is the Resurrection of the dead a thing not incredible? what is there to
take off the incredibility of it? why, enough and enough (especially to us
Christians). Christ's Incarnation, and that which followed upon it, is
sufficient to remove the incredibility of this mystery; for he took our flesh,
then died in our flesh, then rose again in our flesh, (I say in our flesh, for
he rose not only with a true Body but with the self-same Body that ours is,
with that very Body in which he died and was buried): and if so, why then
should the Resurrection of our Flesh or Bodies be incredible? This is nothing
but what has been done already to and in our flesh; and it is less to raise
flesh than to take flesh; 'twas more strange for him who was God to die, than
it is for him who is Man being dead to live again. If it be said that Christ was
an extraordinary Person, and therefore that his Resurrection is not to be
bottomed upon for the making of ours sure and certain; I answer, but it is;
because he did not rise as a single Person but as a common Head; and therefore
he rising we may be assured that we shall rise too. 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22. But
now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
slept: For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead: For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. He
that believes Christ's Incarnation will upon that believe the Resurrection: As
it is well observed by some upon that passage betwixt Christ and Martha (which
we read of Joh. 11.); where he asked her ( verse. 25, 26.) I am the resurrection
and the life: he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live;
and whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die; believe thou
this? mark her answer (Verse. 27.), She said unto him, yea Lord, I believe that
thou art the Christ the Son of God, which should come into the world: as if she
had said, yea Lord I do believe that thou can raise the dead, since thou art
the Son of God which wast to be and now art incarnate: he questions her about
the Resurrection, she professes her faith in his Incarnation; yet her Answer
was very pertinent because she believing this could not but believe that also.
6. The possessing of the heavenly glory is the highest of all: The Heavenly
Glory.
and therefore of all the most incredible; for (usually) the higher the mercy
is the harder it is to believe it. What (says the poor Christian)? shall I in
this flesh see God and live with him for ever? O this is a thing very
improbable, much too big for my hope and faith! but whoever thou art (if thou
be a sincere Christian) thou may believe it and be sure of it. For Christ
took thy flesh, purchased heaven for thee in thy flesh, ascended up to heaven
in thy flesh, and is there glorified in thy flesh; and therefore may not
thou assuredly hope, that thou also thy self in thine own flesh shall go to
God, and have it glorified (in its measure) as well as the Flesh of Christ is?
what encouragement is here for faith! By Christ incarnate we do not only see
that the Humane Nature is capable of the future blessedness, but we have
thereby ground of full assurance of it: for what could he aim at in his being
so, short of Heaven? In our Nature he both purchased it and also took
possession of it, and all for us; Heb. 6.20. Whether the forerunner is [for us]
entered, even Jesus, made an high Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. He being glorified, Est in ipso Jesu Christo unius cujusque
nostrum portio Caro and sanguis: Ubi ergo portio mea regnat ibi me regnare
credo, ubi caro mea glorificatur ibi gloriosum me esse cognosco etc. Aug.
Medit. c. 15.
in him we are glorified; as he rose as a public Head so he was glorified as a
public Head too: He who has so advanced our Nature will in time advance our
persons; his Incarnation (which is past) secures our Glorification (which is to
come). 'Twas more for Christ to come down to earth than it is for him to carry
us up to heaven; if he will condescend to be like to us in his humiliation, he
will have us to be like to him in his exaltation. Quid futurus est Homo propter
quem Deus factus est Homo? Prosper.
What can be too high for man when for him God was made Man? Well (Believers)
Christ being sent in flesh what can now be too great for your faith! you have
great and glorious things in your eye, but do not in the least question the
accomplishment of them; all is made easy, credible, nay certain upon Christ's
Incarnation; that being done all shall be done: (this is the third thing for
the Comfort of God's people).


Upon Christ's Incarnation God is knowable and accessible.
4. Fourthly, was Christ sent in Flesh? there is this in it for the strengthening
of Faith and the heightning of Joy, that God is now knowable and accessible.
It Is beyond all contradiction (some may say) a blessed thing to know God, I but
who can know him? can any see God and live? can a finite eye take a view of
such an infinite Majesty (the least ray of which out-shines the Sun in its
greatest brightness)? what? Man to know God? alas poor creature! his weak
faculties will not bear the beholding of so glorious an Object. To which I
answer, all this (in such a sense) is very true, yet let not humble Souls be
discouraged; for this notwithstanding they may yet know God savingly and
comfortably (though not perfectly). In and by a Jesus in flesh the great God is
knowable: partly as he by Christ (so considered) is most clearly manifested; in
Christ God-Man we have the brightest objective manifestation of God. The whole
Creation (though thereby much may be known of God, as you read Romans 1.20.)
makes no such discoveries of him as Christ does; therefore he is said (for this
is one explication which the words will very well bear) to be the brightness of
his Father's Glory Heb. 1.3. and hence some style him Speculum Patris, the
glass wherein the Father in the most clear and lively manner is represented; He
that has seen me has seen the Father Joh. 14.9. and the Apostle speaks of the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face (i.e. in and by the
Manhood) of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. Partly too, as Christ in our flesh is a
fit medium to transmit God as knowable to us: Indeed God (as considered
absolutely and in himself) is so infinitely above us, that we cannot here
immediately behold him; so his Glory, his immense and infinite perfections
should they be let out upon us, would soon reduce us to our first nothing: But
he being considered in Christ, so mediately through Christ we can look upon
him, see him and live; in this way the Majesty of God is (as it were) so
refracted, tempered and qualified that the poor dim eye of the creature may
behold it. As we cannot immediately look upon the body of the Sun, so its
splendour and intense light presently dazzles us; yet we can look upon it in a
pail of water: so here, we cannot immediately behold God in the brightness of
his Glory, (a finite faculty must needs be dazzled by an infinite Majesty); yet
take him in the Flesh and Manhood of Christ, there his Glory is so brought down
to us that we can see him and know him to our comfort. Christ Man interposes
not only between us and God's Anger (to skreen us from it that we be not
thereby consumed), but also between us and God's Majesty that we may not be
overwhelmed by the infiniteness of it: he lets it out as our capacity will
bear, and so by him God becomes knowable: he both carry's us up to God and also
brings down God to us. O study God much! but then be sure you study him in
Christ incarnate; in that way you may come to the knowledge of him. Per illam
Unionem Hypostaticam, and assumptionem Humanae Naturae factum collyrium, per
quod and oculis pene ipsis Divinitas cerneretur. Aug. Tract. 3. in Joh.
Augustine says, by the Hypostatical Union of the Humane Nature with the
Divine, there is such a collyrium or eye salve made for us, that we may with
these very eyes almost see the Deity: how should we rejoice in the Manhood of
Christ! By that flesh in which the Godhead was sometimes hid it is now revealed;
that which was once a vail to cover it, is now a glass to represent it: do but
know Christ and you will know God.

I add, God is now accessible. Christians! Christ having taken your flesh,
carried it up with him to heaven, sitting in it at the right hand of God, and
therein interceding for you; through him you may now go to God, and that too
with all holy boldness and confidence. You have not to do with a Deus absolutus
(which Luther so much dreaded) but with God through a Mediator; and (which may
be a great encouragement to your Faith) that Mediator is the man Christ Jesus 1 Timothy 2.5. You go to God and you go by God (as clothed with your Nature); it is
Deus qua itur and Deus quo itur: the God to whom you go commands your
reverence, the God-man by whom you go incourages your confidence. O that you
would more explicitly in Duty revive upon your thoughts Christ's Mediation and
Intercession in heaven in your Nature! surely that would much embolden you in
your addresses to God. Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with
confidence by the faith of him. Heb. 4.14, 16. Seeing we have a great high
Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our profession: Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. Having
therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new
and living way which he has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to
say, his flesh; and having an High Priest over the house of God: Let us draw
near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Had Joseph's
Brethren known that their own brother had been so near to Pharaoh, with what
confidence would they have addressed themselves to him! Believers! Christ your
Brother, who is flesh of your flesh, is at God's right hand as the great Master
of Requests, the great Dispenser of Mercies, why do you not more improve this
for the emboldening of your Spirits when in Prayer you go to God?

It Is a great thing for the Saints Comfort to consider how things were formerly
under the Law and how they are now under the Gospel. Then God carried it in a
way of greater state and majesty, then he kept a greater distance and was more
hardly accessible: see how the Apostle sets it forth Heb. 9.1. etc. Then verily
the first Covenant had also Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly
Sanctuary: For there was a Tabernacle made, the first wherein was the
Candlestick etc. and after the second vail, the Tabernacle which is called the
Holiest of all: Which had the golden Censer etc. Now when these things were
thus ordained, the Priests went always into the first Tabernacle,
accomplishing the Service of God: But into the second went the high Priest
alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for
the errors of the people. The Apostle here takes notice of the partition or
division of the Tabernacle: for the Of this and of the whole Tabernacle, see
Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 3. c. 5.
Atrium or outer Court where the people used to be, that he speaks not of; only
he meddles with the first and second Tabernacle where the ordinary Priests and
the high Priest did officiate. Now (he says) the first of these were to go no
further than the first Tabernacle (the People might not go so far); the high
Priest might go into the second Tabernacle. (the Sanctum Sanctorum), but how?
with great restrictions; he must go alone, but Austine (whom Sigonius follows)
differs in his interpretation of this: Quod autem scriptum est, Pontificem
semel in Anno solum Sancta esse ingressum, S. Augustinus interpretatur, eum
quotidie quidem ingressum esse propter incensum, ac semel in Anno propter
expiationem cum sanguine purificationis. Verum possumus etiam dicere, eum
quotidie quidem Sanctuarium esse ingressum, sed Sacerdotum comitatu stipatum,
semel autem in Anno solum, i.e. sine Sacerdotibus in die expiationum. Sigon. de
Rep. Hebrae. l. 5. c. 2. For this Opinion he is severely taken up by P. Cunaeus
de Rep. Heb. l. 1. c. 4.
once a year, and that too not without blood (see Exodus 30.10. Levit. 16.); and
God was so strict about this, that it was as much as his life was worth even
for him at any other time to venture into the Holy of Holy's: Levit. 16.2. The
Lord said unto Moses, speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all
times into the Holy place, within the vail, before the Mercy-seat which is upon
the Ark [that he die not]: for I will appear in the cloud upon the Mercy-seat.
Well! (not to instance in the restraints laid upon the Priests, Levites etc.
which the Word also mentions,) what might God's meaning be in this? see Verse.
8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all was not
yet made manifest, while that the way into the Holiest of all was not yet made
manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing: as if the Apostle had
said let not any wonder that God then would keep men at such a distance, here
was the reason of it (or the mystery which was at the bottom of it), Christ was
not yet come; the true Tabernacle was not as yet erected, the first Tabernacle
was only then standing; Christ had not assumed the Nature of Man thereby to
make way for man freely to go to God; therefore the way to the Holiest of all
was not yet made manifest. But now under the Gospel Christ being incarnate and
gone to heaven in our flesh, now all may go to God freely, the way to him is
open, every believer in the world may now enter into the Holy of Holy's, all
former restraints and distances are now taken away. Mark the Scripture cited
already, Heb. 10.19, 20. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the
Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh. By this flesh
Christ's Humane Nature (or Christ in the Humane Nature) is unquestionably
meant, which he calls the vail in allusion to that in the Tabernacle: wherein
there was a twofold vail, one that covered the Ark; Exodus 40.3. And cover the
Ark with the vail: the other which separated betwixt the Atrium and the first
Tabernacle, as also betwixt the first Tabernacle and the second; Exodus 26.33.
And the vail shall divide unto you between the Holy place and the most Holy: so
Heb. 9.3. And after the second vail, the Tabernacle which is called the Holiest
of all; to which he also alludes Heb. 6.19. which enters into that which is
within the vail. Now with respect to these vails Christ's Flesh or Manhood is
set forth by the vail; (1.) as his Godhead for a time was hid and covered under
it: (2.) as believers through this do go to God, as it is the way into the
Holiest:
And so it is here brought in, for he says by a new and living way which he
has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh. You see
what these Texts drive at, and what the Apostle draws from them (viz.) that
Saints now (upon the Manhood of Christ) should with boldness enter into the
Holiest, and draw near to God with full assurance of Faith: this is their
unspeakable privilege under the Gospel which they should improve and rejoice
in. This is the fourth thing for Comfort, God is now knowable and accessible.

The Humane Nature is by Christ's Incarnation highly dignified and advanced.
5. Fifthly, This cannot but be exceedingly delightful to us to consider the
advancement and dignity of our Nature. How is that Nature advanced by Christ's
assuming of it! that which was his abasement was its advancement: As a mean
family is advanced when some person of eminency marry's into it, so Christ
having matched into our broken and decayed Nature what an honor did he thereby
reflect upon it! God put a great deal of glory upon it in its first creation,
Christ has put much more glory upon it in the Hypostatical Union. The
Angelical Nature in some respects is above ours, but in others ours is above
it; the Angels are not so concerned in the mystical conjunction to Christ as we
are; their advantages by a Savior are not so high as ours, they are confirmed
by Christ in a state of happiness and that is all, but we are confirmed and
restored too; the great things which are done by Christ as Mediator he does
them in our Nature, and the great Honor which is conferred upon him refers to
him in our Nature; it is the Son of Man who stands on the right hand of God Act.
7.56. Dominion, and Glory, and the Kingdom is given to the Son of man Dan.
7.13, 14. he will judge the world as the Son of man Matthew. 25.31. Joh. 5.27. But
the main pre-eminence of the Humane Nature above the Angelical, lies in the
intimate uniting of it to the divine Nature; Heb. 2.16. Verily he took not on
him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. Man was the
creature that was to be redeemed, and therefore 'twas the Nature of man that
shall be assumed; can we think of this without great joy? Christ himself as Man
is above us (in all things he must have the pre-eminence Col. 1.18.), but
Angels (who are of another order) in several respects are below us.

Christ incarnate must needs be very compassionate.
6. A Christ incarnate is and must needs be very compassionate. This was one
great reason why he took our Nature upon him, and in that Nature was exercised
with such sorrows and sufferings that he might the better know how to
sympathize with his members in all their sorrows and sufferings. Heb. 2.17, 18.
In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might
be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people: For in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. Heb.
4.15. We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.
He that has felt what others undergo knows the better how to pity them; sense
and experience further compassion (where persons are not made of flint); none
sympathize so much with those who labor under Gout, Stone etc. as those who
have been afflicted with those pains themselves: God told the people of Israel,
they knew the heart of a stranger seeing they themselves were strangers in the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 23.9. How then must the bowels of Christ work toward
afflicted ones, he himself having been afflicted just as they are! besides the
mercifulness and tenderness of his heart, there is also his own former
experience (which is yet fresh in his memory) of their miseries, which does
much draw out his compassion to them. Pray what are your afflictions? let them
be what they will Christ underwent the same: are you poor? so was he; are you
tempted? so was he; are you deserted? so was he; are you burdened under the
weight of sin? so was he (though in a different way); do you suffer by men? so
did he. And if there be any infirmities which he did not lie under, yet he
knows how to pity you; for though he did not feel those particular infirmities
in kind, (such as sickness, blindness etc.) yet he had some others which were
equivalent to them, and so by proportion he knows how to commiserate you: so it
comes in Heb. 5.2. Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that
are out of the way, for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity. It Is
some alleviation to our grief in our troubles when we know we have some who
sympathize with us under them; O you that fear the Lord know, in all your
sorrows, sufferings, troubles whatsoever, Christ in heaven has a
fellow-feeling and sympathy with you; he suffers no more but he sympathizes
still: let this be an allay to your grief and a support to your faith.

There Is ease and relief from this under all troubles of mind.
7. Lastly, There Is something in this which may give ease and relief under all
troubles of mind. There Is such a fullness in this Truth for the comfort of
Souls, that there is scarce any inward trouble or discouragement which gracious
persons here are exercised with, wherein they may not find considerable relief
and satisfaction for conscience from this Incarnation of the Son of God.
Christ's flesh is precious balm for a wounded Spirit, as it is meat indeed to
feed the hungry Soul so it is balm indeed to heal the wounded Soul; it is an
universal, catholic Cordial to revive and cheer under all faintings whatever:
Do I speak to any who are under spiritual darkness? O that a Christ in Flesh
might be thought of and improved by such!

To instance in the special fears, complaints, discouragements, burdens of
troubled Souls, and to show what there is in Christ as incarnate proper for
their support and comfort under all, would be a vast work: I must therefore
only hint a few things.

Are you tempted to entertain hard thoughts of God? to question the
mercifulness of his Nature, his goodness etc? do you conceive of him in some
hideous and frightful manner? you greatly mistake God and think very much amiss
of him. First think of God in Christ, and then of Christ in flesh, and surely
you will have other apprehensions. A Christ sent in flesh represents God as
benign, good, merciful, gracious, full of pity, tenderhearted, as designing
nothing but good to repenting sinners: did he thus send his own Son, and is he
not all this? after he has done such a thing can you imagine that he delights
in the death of sinners? or that he will not be gracious to all who fly to him?

Are you afraid because of the Justice and Wrath of God? pray remember,
therefore Christ came in flesh that he might satisfy the one and pacify the
other; these were the very things which he undertook to accomplish, and what he
undertook no question but he went through with?

Does Sin lie heavy upon your Consciences? mark the Text, God sent his own Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh, for what end? for sin to condemn sin in the
flesh: sin brought Christ from heaven, and he would not return thither again
'till by a Sacrifice offered in his flesh he had fully expiated it. Sin it self
could not stand before him as in our flesh dying and suffering for it: if God
will become Man, the guilt of mere man shall not be so able to damn as the
merit of God-man to save: O (thou true penitent) be thy sins never so many,
never so great, yet do not give way to despairing thoughts! Bring out thy sins
Dr. Sibbs on 1 Timothy 3.16. p. 59.
says one), weigh them to the utmost aggravation of them, and set but this in
the other scale God manifested in the flesh to take away sin, now will all
thine iniquities seem lighter than vanity, yea be as nothing in comparison of
that which is laid down as a propitiation for them: And again (says he) What
temptation will not vanish as a cloud before the wind, when we see God's Love
in sending his Son, and Christ's Love in taking our Nature upon him, to
reconcile us by the Sacrifice of his blood?

But some may object, it is a great while since Christ took flesh, and in that
flesh made satisfaction to God, is not the efficacy and merit thereof impaired
by that? no not in the least! Christ's merits are as fresh and have as great an
efficacy now, as they had at the first moment of his Incarnation and Passion:
may not that of the Apostle Heb. 2.16. have some reference to this, where he
speaks of Christ's taking flesh in the Present Tense as if 'twas done but now?
for it is (...), he [taketh] not on him the nature of Angels, but he [taketh] on
him the seed of Abraham: (I speak this for the comfort of Christians, but not
so as to give advantage to the Socinian, who because the words run in this
Tense would therefore have them to be no proof of Christ's Incarnation).

Do your many defects, the imperfections in your Graces and Duties trouble you?
you have Christ's perfect Manhood, his perfect Holiness and Obedience in that
Nature to fly unto. The Apostle Col. 2. sets down the Hypostatical Union (Verse.
9.) In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: well, suppose it
does so what is this to Believers? why, it follows immediately ( V. 10.) And ye
are complete in him. Christ being such a Person, so full and perfect a
Mediator, in him every believer is and must be complete. So that though the
sense of imperfections in your selves must humble you, yet it must not
overwhelm you because in Christ you are perfect.

Are you afraid notwithstanding all the Calls, Invitations, Promises of the
Gospel, yet to close with Christ? O do not give way to such fears! If you come
to him, cast your selves upon him, will he cast you off? he has assured you he
will not; Joh. 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast off. Besides
his word you have this to secure you, he in his Person came from heaven to you,
and if you by Faith shall go to him do you think he will not give you kind
reception? I am sure (and I will venture my Soul upon it) that the gracious
promises and encouragements of the Gospel to draw sinners to Christ, shall all
be made good; for since he was pleased to take my flesh, I have not the least
reason to doubt but fully to be assured that he is real, hearty, in good
earnest in all of them. (Many things of this nature might here be spoken unto,
but it is full time to put an end to this subject).

ROMANS 8.3, 4. -- And for sin, condemned sin in the Flesh: That the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, --


CHAP. XIII. Of Christ's being a Sacrifice, and expiating Sin thereby.
A Fifth Head in the Words discussed, viz. the End of God in sending his own
etc. or the Effect thereof. How the Wisdom of God is secured by this End. Of
the placing of the Words [for sin]. The whole a little descanted upon. What the
condemning of sin is; opened more generally, more particularly in three things.
The condemning of sin [for sin] opened: a twofold interpretation given of it.
Of the Flesh in which sin is said to be condemned. The Observation raised from
the Words: where 1. Of Christ's being a Sacrifice for Sin. How he excels the
Old Law-Sacrifices, and of their reference to him. Six things in those
Sacrifices, which are all to be found in Christ, the true Sacrifice. It Is
enquired 1. What a kind of Sacrifice he was? proved that he was an expiatory
Sacrifice. Of the difference and distinction of the Jewish Sacrifices. Four
Heads insisted upon for the confirming of the main Truth: As (1.) that our sins
were the meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings: (2.) that he did substitute
himself in the Sinners stead: ( where two Questions are briefly answered, (1)
Whether he underwent the same punishment that was due to the Sinner, or only
that which was equivalent thereunto? (2) Whether he took the guilt of sin upon
himself, or only submitted to the punishment thereof?) -- (3.) that he was
killed and slain and his blood shed, in correspondency with the Levitical
expiatory Sacrifices. (4.) this is proved from the Ends and Effects of his
Death, viz.
Atonement and Expiation; (both of which are opened). Of the concurrence of the
Heathens in their notions about Sacrifices. -- It Is inquired
(2.) When and where Christ was an expiatory Sacrifice? it is answered, when he
died upon the Cross. 2. Of the Effect of his Sacrifice, the condemning of Sin.
Parallel expressions cited. Of the nature of the expiation of Sin: Of the
extent of it with respect to the Subject and Object. Whether were all Sins
expiated by the Law-Sacrifices? Use 1. I infer from the premises (1.) The
verity of Christ's Satisfaction: (2.) The true Nature and principal Ends of his
Death: (3.) The vanity and falsehood of all humane satisfactions: (4.) The true
notion of the Lord's Supper: (5.) The happiness of Believers under the Gospel
above theirs who lived under the Law. (6.) The excellency of Christ's
Priesthood and Sacrifice. (7.) The Evil of Sin. (8.) The severity of God's
Justice.
Use 2. Several Dutys urged from hence: as Holiness, the Love of Christ etc.
Use 3. This improved several ways for the Comfort of Believers.


A Fifth Head, viz. the End of God in sending his Son etc. or the Effects
thereof.
IN the preceding Words [God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful
Flesh,] Four things have been observed and opened; in these now read a Fifth
Head offers it self to our consideration: and that is the Effect of Christ's
mission, incarnation, and of what followed thereupon, or God's End in all this.
Did he pitch upon so admirable a Way and Method? surely some high and glorious
Effect must be produced thereby; and so there was, for thereby sin was
condemned: and surely too, therein the Wise God must propound to himself some
great and very considerable End to be accomplished; and so he did, for he aimed
at nothing lower than that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
Believers.

In the Words then we have both the Effect (what God did by his own Son as
first assuming and then suffering in flesh), and also the End of God in his
taking this strange and wonderful course: for these two though they be distinct
in themselves, and carry in them notions somewhat different, yet here in this
place they both are alike applicable to the matter spoken of, and it to them.
If it be considered with respect to God's intention, so it falls under the
nature of an End; if with respect to his execution (of what he intended), so it
falls under the nature of an Effect. Therefore upon the oneness and coalition
of these two and the equal applicableness of the matter to each, whereas there
are two branches in the Text (each of which contains distinct matter in it), in
the former the thing is expressed under the notion of an Effect [and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh], in the latter under the notion of an End [that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us].

The Wisdom of God secured by the proportioning of his End to the medium which
he pitched upon.
It pleasing God to send his own Son etc. his Wisdom would have been liable to
impeachment, if (1.) he had not effected some great thing thereby; if (2.)
(which indeed should have been first mentioned) he had not designed some great
thing therein: For the Wisdom of an Agent lies not only in his having an end in
what he does, but in his having such an end as shall be proportionable to the
means which he pitches upon; if they be high and the end but low, this speaks a
defect in point of
Wisdom; for that ever shows it self as in the fitting of the means to the end,
so in the proportioning of the end to the means. If therefore the blessed God
will single out such a medium as the sending of his own Son etc. he then stands
engaged upon the account of his Wisdom, to propound to himself such an end as
may be answerable to that medium: which therefore accordingly he did, in as much
as in that great act he had this great End (or Ends), the satisfying of his
Justice, the expiating of Sin, the fulfilling of the Law etc. these were Ends
worthy of such Means as the Coming, Incarnation, Death of his own Son. Now all
these are set down in the Words before us, in which therefore you have that
which is a full vindication, nay the highest manifestation of God's infinite
Wisdom.

Of the pla^ing of the Words [for Sin].
I begin with the first Effect or End here specified [and for Sin, condemned Sin
in the Flesh]. At my first entrance upon the whole Paragraph, I touched upon
the reading of this Clause (there being some difference amongst Expositors
about it), therefore that I will not again insist upon, only let me take notice
of another difference among them which was not there mentioned. That refers to
the placing of the Words; for whereas we take in [for sin] into this Branch,
(...) pertinet ad Participium (...): Beza. Omnino referendum puto (...) ad
Participium (...). Justin. So Cyril. reads them in Joh. l. 9. c. 47.
Some would have it placed in the former, thus, God sending [for sin] his own
Son, in the likeness of sinful Flesh, condemned sin in the Flesh. But though
this ranking of them may possibly seem to some to make the words run more
smoothly, yet if it be admitted of, the conjunctive particle [and] must be
quite expunged; which I should be loath to submit unto because of its special
significancy and emphasis in this place: partly as it heightens the thing
spoken of, and intimates the wonderfulness of the way in which it was brought
about, and partly as it notes the Appositam siquidem intelligimus
Conjunctionem, ad significandam sequelam alterius beneficii; ut scil. notemus,
Deum non tantum misisse Filium suum in similitudine carnis peccati, sed and de
peccato damnasse peccatum in carne. Cajetan.
joining together of that here mentioned with that which went before; God did
not only send his own Son in our Flesh, but (which is to be superadded to that
as an Effect or Consequent thereof) he also in that flesh for sin condemned
sin. I will therefore keep to our methodizing of the Words, and if you take
them as here they lie, there will be no necessity either of putting in or
putting out: yet if you will go by their sense then you may read them with
this addition, And by a Sacrifice for sin condemned sin in the Flesh.

The Words a little descanted upon.
[And for sin condemned sin in the flesh:] good and blessed Words! No
condemnation to them who are in Christ (Verse. 1.)? Sin it self condemned (Verse.
3.)? what could be spoken higher to raise the thankfulness, encourage the
faith, heighten the joy of sincere Christians! The word [condemned] is not so
terrible when applied to the Sinner, but it is as comfortable when applied to
sin it self: that which had been the condemning is now the condemned thing, how
may a gracious Soul rejoice at this! The non-condemnation of persons spoken of
in the first Verse, is secured by and grounded upon the condemnation of sin in
this, for both must not be condemned; if sin be condemned, the sinner shall
not. Observe here, sin was the thing which God fell upon and dealt thus
severely with: the Apostle had told us the Law was weak (unable to help poor
fallen man), whereupon he says God sent his own Son; but wherefore did he so
do? was it that he might fall upon this Law, and condemn the condemning Law? O
no! 'twas so far from that, that he would rather have it fulfilled (for so it
follows Verse. 4.), he had no evil eye at all upon his Law for that was good;
upon what when? why upon sin, for that was evil and very evil; Christ was sent
that sin only might be condemned. And no wonder that God was so set against it
and resolved upon this severe process against it, it being the principal
Offender, the arch Traitor and Rebel against himself, the only object of his
hatred, the bold opposer of his glory, the great obstructer of his Grace, the
cursed fomenter of breaches 'twixt himself and his creatures, the murderer of
Souls etc. did not such a malefactor highly deserve to be condemned? yes
surely, and therefore so it shall be. O (says God) I must take a, course with
this sin, I must and I will dispatch it out of the way, and then my work is
done; all my gracious designs will then be carried on without any let or
impediment, then the happiness of my people will be sure and full, neither my
own Wrath, nor the Curse of my Law, nor the sting of Death shall then be able
to hurt them. Upon such grounds as these God would have sin condemned, and he
was so set upon it that in order thereunto he will on purpose send his own Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh, yea in that flesh to offer up himself as a
Sacrifice, and so to bring about sins condemnation.

The Explication of the Words.
But to come to the close handling of the Words! They being somewhat obscure, my
first work must be to open them (that I may the better make way for the main
Observation which they resolve themselves into). There are three things in them
to be explained, 1. The condemning of Sin. 2. The condemning of Sin for sin. 3.
The condemning of Sin in the Flesh.


What is meant by the condemning of Sin? epened more generally.
1. What does the Apostle mean by the condemning of sin? and for sin [ condemned
sin etc]. The word in its usual acceptance is applied to Persons rather than
to Things; yet in such a sense it is properly enough applicable to them also,
(viz.) as it signifies the disallowing, disapproving, sentencing, or judging of
them to be so and so evil: according to which signification, sin may as truly
be said to be condemned as the sinner himself in any other notion. But this
will not reach the full scope and emphasis of the Word in this place; for
unquestionably there is a great deal more intended in God's condemning sin, than
barely his sentencing or judging it to be a very evil thing; though Christ had
never come in flesh nor suffered in Flesh yet God would thus have condemned
Sin: its condemnation is here brought in as a singular effect of the Grace of
God to Sinners, but (according to this stating of it) it would only be an
effect of his Holiness, not at all of his Grace; he may thus judge of Sin and
yet the Sinner perish by it. It Is very true, that God in the Death of his Son
did in this respect signally condemn Sin; O in that he made it to appear what
thoughts he had of Sin, what an evil thing he judged it to be, how he was set
against it etc. but yet this is not the only thing, no nor the main thing held
forth in this expression of God's condemning Sin.

Well! for the right understanding of that I conceive we must borrow our light
from Condemnation amongst Men, for though sin be not a person yet its being
condemned will best be known by what is proper to condemned persons. Amongst us
malefactors are seized upon, brought to trial, arraigned, proved guilty,
sentene'd to die (if their Offense be capital), then the Sentence is executed
upon them, to cut them off that they may do no more mischief; and this is their
being condemned: just so (so far as the nature of the thing would admit of)
virtually and analogically all this was done by God in Christ's Death against
Sin. It had been an heinous malefactor, guilty of high and notorious crimes,
had done inexpressible mischiefs, for all which God will arraign, judge,
sentence, cut it off, that it also may do no more mischief to his people, and
this is its condemnation. Diverse Expositors in their opening of the Words
conceive of Sin here as a Person, and accordingly they open its being condemned
by this allusive and analogical notion; whatever is commonly done amongst Men
in their judicial processes against great Offenders, all that (in effect) was
done by God through Christ's death against sin; and so he condemned it.

More particularly in three things. In the abolitiof its power.
But not to take up with Generals this may be more particularly opened in three
things: 1. God by Christ condemned Sin as he abolished its power. Sin's
condemnation is its Secundum Phrasin Hebraicam positum est damnavit pro
abolevit, extinxit, sustulit Deus. Perer.
abolition, wherein does that lie? why (partly) in the taking away of its
power, in the divesting it of that Rule and Command which it had over Sinners
for a long time: thus God condemned or abolished sin, he put an end to its
reign and dominion, pulled it off from the throne, turned it out of Office and
authority, yea, adjudged it to die for all the Evils of which it had been
guilty. Thus it is with condemned men; upon the passing of the condemnatory
Sentence upon them they are ipso facto dispossessed of all their power and
authority, and further than this too they must suffer the penalty of death for
what they have done; so answerably it was with Sin in God's dealings with it.
It had acted the Tyrants part in and over the world a great while, had
domineered and lorded it over its poor Subjects at a strange rate, did with men
what it pleased; O but in the Flesh of Christ God condemned it (that is) he
broke it in its power, brought it down to some purpose, stripped it of that
absolute, illimited dominion which it had before: Christ's cross was the ruin
of sins throne. And not only so, but there is a sentence of death too passed
upon it; it shall not only lose its power but its life also, God will have it
killed, slain, put to death in all who have an interest in Christ's Merits, he
would not suffer such a malefactor to live, he will rid the world of it. This
condemnatory sentence was passed upon it long ago, which though it be but
gradually and in part executed whilst the Saints are here below, yet when they
shall once ascend to God then it shall be fully executed; insomuch that then
sin shall quite be taken out of the way, and shall not have so much as a being
in them in the glorified state. Thus many -- (...). Chrysostom. Damnavit peccatum,
i.e. dominio suo mulctavit ne regnaret in carne. Staplet. -- Ut ejus dominium
and robur auferret. Tolet. Damnavit, interfecit; (...) est interficere sicut
(...) pro morte, quia damnati interfici solent. Interfecit vero i.e.
interficiendi vires nobis praestitit. Interficere est efficientiam adimere.
Grot. See Melanch. Bucer. P. Mart. De dieu Deodat. --
Interpreters do open the condemning of sin; and Who renders it by
exauctoravit, extinxit, abolevit etc. De Servat, part 2. cap. 23.
Socinus likes this interpretation so well that he contends for it but fiercely
opposes those which follow. In the abolition of Sins guilt.
2. Sins Condemnation lies in the abolition or expiation of its guilt. It here
properly notes the taking away of that which was the hurtful, destructive,
mischievous part of Sin. Condemned men can do no hurt, let them be never so
hurtful before yet when once the sentence of Condemnation is passed upon them
they can be so no longer: Sin had been a very huriful thing (and would have
been so still) to precious Souls, but God in the flesh of his Son (as suffering
and satisfying) put a stop to it, took it out of the way, condemned it (that
is) disabled it from doing the hurt it had done before, and removed that in it
which was of so hurtful a nature. What was that? I answer, its guilt; O that is
an hurtful thing indeed! it binds the Sinner over to answer at God's tribunal
for all the evils committed by him, exposes him to the Wrath of the great God,
renders him liable to a Sentence of eternal death: but now it pleased God for
sin to condemn sin, (i.e.) by Christ's being a Sacrifice to expiate this guilt
of sin which in it self was so pernicious and hurtful, so that believers should
not lie under it or eternally suffer for it. Now this is that explication of
the Word which is most commonly given by the best Damnatio peccati nos in
juslitiam asseruit, quia deleto reatu absolvimur, uti nos Deus justos reputet.
Calvin. (with many Others). Beza dissents, Non mihi facile persuaserim de
peccatorum expiatione hic agi, est enim pars illa jam pridem ab Apostolo
explicata, adeo ut a v. 12. c. 5. aliud Argumentum sit exorsus.
Expositors, and I prefer it before the former upon these Reasons: 1: As to the
abolishing of Sins power that the Apostle had spoken to already in the
foregoing verse, the Law of the Spirit etc. and he instances in the Spirit
there as he does in the Son here. Now (according to what was said before) as
it is the proper act of the Spirit to free from Sins power (therefore that must
be understood there), so it is the proper act of the Son to free from Sins guilt
(therefore that must be understood here). 2: The Word here used [(...)] all
along in Scripture points to the guilt of sin and the punishment inflicted
thereupon, never to its power or dominion; (for the proof of which several
Texts might be cited if it was denied). It Is usually applied to the Sinner,
here only (if I well ^emember) it is applied to sin it self; and in this
different application it carries a different sense: for as it is elsewhere
applied to the Sinner, it notes the imputation of guilt to him and the passing
of a condemnatory sentence upon him for that guilt, but as it is here applied to
sin it notes the expiation or abolition of its guilt; yet this does not wealien
what I have said, because in both references (though in a different sense) it
still points to guilt and punishment (which is enough for my purpose). 3: The
Apostle speaks of that abolition of Sin which was effected in Christ's Flesh;
therefore it must be understood of the abolition of its guilt rather than of
its power, that being the thing which was most directly and immediately done in
Christ's Flesh. 4: It Is that condemning sin which is for sin (i.e.) by a
Sacrifice for sin; wherefore it must be taken in that sense which best suits
with what was done in and by Sacrifices. Now they abolished sin not so much by
turning men from it, or by lessening its power (though that might follow as a
Consequent upon them), as by the This proved in Essenius de Satisf. Christi c.
8. p. 422. Turretin. de Sat. etc. part 6. p. 202 Dr. O. against B. P. 574.
expiating of its guilt: this was the proper and primary effect of the
Le^itical Sacrifices, in allusion to which when Christ (the true Sacrifice) is
said to purge away sin, to purify etc. you are to understand those expressions
as respecting the expiation of Sins guilt (as I shall have occasion further to
prove in what will follow). For these reasons (though I would not exclude
wholly the former sense, yet) I prefer this before it.
In the punishing of it in Christ's person.
3. There is a See Pareus in loc. and in Dub. 3. p. 779. Condemnare perpetuo
significat Apostolo poenas peccati irrogare. Damnare pec catum est illud dignum
poena judicare, paenasque pro eo exigere. Contzen. his sense of the Word
justified by Calov. Socin. profl. p. 433.
third interpretation put upon the Word; namely God's condemning sin was his
punishing of it in Christ's person, or his exacting of Christ that punishment
which was due to the Sinner himself. For this Condemning must be joined with
that which follows [in the Flesh] and expounded by that; and then the meaning
will be this, For sin God condemned sin in the flesh (that is) he fell upon
sin, severely punished it, inflicted the curse and punishment due to us for it
in and upon the Person of his own Son; he Isa. 53.6.
laid the iniquities of Believers upon Christ, and then punished them in him,
so that he bore that penalty which Sinners themselves should have undergone:
God did of him in our Nature paenas peccato debitas exigere, or maledictionem
nobis debitam irrogare. Man having fined either he himself or his surety must
suffer: the punishment thereby deserved, God will have sin punnish'd somewhere;
therefore Christ having put himself into the Sinners stead he must bear the
punishment due to the Sinner, for though God will so far See of God's relaxing
his Law and the threatening thereof Mr. Baxter Aphor. p. 36. etc. Mr. Burgess
of. Justif. p. 84.
relax his Law as to admit of a substitution or commutation as to the Person
suffering, yet he will have its penalty inflicted either upon the proper
Offender himself, or upon the Savior who was willing to interpose for the
Offender so as to suffer what he should have suffered: and God accordingly
dealing withhim and proceeding against him in the laying of the punishment due
for Sin upon him, this was his condemning Sin in the flesh of Christ. I am not
now to prove the truth of the thing (of that hereafter), at present I Am only
showing how it is held forth in the Word which I am opening: so much for the
first thing what this condemning of Sin is.


How Sin is said to be condemned for Sin.
2. The Second thing that needs explaination is the condemning sin [for sin],
what may our Apostle mean by this for sin? Contra duas Pelagian. Ep. l. 3. c. 6.
Austine gives a threefold sense of it: (1.) For sin, (that is) by that flesh
which looked like to sinful flesh; which therefore might be called sin, since
(as he says) the resemblances of things do usually pass under the names of the
things which they resemble: by that flesh sin was condemned. -- (2.) For Sin he
makes to be as much as by a Sacrifice for Sin. -- (3.) He expounds it of the
Sin of the Jews, not as heightning it (in which sense all the Greek Expositors
take it,) but as pointing to the effect of it, by that sin of theirs in
crucifying Christ eventually Sin was condemned or expiated. But these things
must be further enquired into!


The double Reading of Sin and for Sin, both opened.
It Is in our Translation exactly as it is in the Original, equally concise in
both, and as the One is to be filled up so is the Other also. The Preposition
(...) signifying of or for, accordingly it is rendered both ways: Some reading
it of Sin (as the Old Version, Anselme, the Greek Interpreters generally etc.)
they making the Words to run thus Of Sin God condemned Sin. Parallel to which
(...) is elsewhere so rendered; as Joh. 8.46. Which of you convinces me of sin?
Joh. 16.8, 9. He will convince the world of sin, etc. Of sin, because they
believe not on me: (in all it is (...), just as it is in the Text). They who
follow this Reading make the sense of the Words to be this; God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, in that flesh of his Son (as suffering and
dying) he condemned sin of sin, in as much as by that strange and wonderful
course he made it to appear to the world that sin was full of sin, highly
guilty and criminal, Romans 7.13.
exceeding sinful (as the Apostle speaks upon another account).

Now though I shall not follow this Exposition, yet it containing nothing in at
but what is true for the matter of it, and it being given by some Authors of
great repute, I will so far insist upon it as to give a double illustration of
it.

1. As it is applicable to Sin in the general. Take the whole body of Sin or Sin
in its utmost extent, 'twas all condemned of sin in Christ's flesh (as first
assumed and then crucified), how? why, by that it was proved and judged to be a
thing out of measure evil and faulty; thereby God let the world see what sin
is, what an excess of poison and malignity there is in its nature. Did he send
his own Son? to be incarnate? yea, to appear in the likeness of sinful Flesh?
so to be abased, suffer and die? and was Sin the meritorious Cause of all this?
was all this done and suffered for the making of satisfaction for the mischiefs
and injuries which Sin had been guilty of? O what a condemnation was here of
Sin! Never was there such a demonstration of Sins Evil, what an heinous and
capital Offender it is, as in Christ's being made Man and dying upon the Cross:
the strangeness of the remedy shows the malignity of the disease, the high
terms of satisfaction the greatness of the crime; God's severity laid upon the
Flesh of his own Son in such unparalleled sufferings, made it apparent to the
world that sin is a quite other thing than what men generally take it to be:
had it not been evil, desperately evil God had never dealt with Christ as he
did, therefore in his flesh sin was condemned of sin.

2. This may more particularly be applied to that sin of killing and murdering
the Lord Jesus. God did not only condemn sin of sin in the gross, but in
special that sin which was committed against and upon the Flesh of Christ in
the crucifixion of him: here 'twas the Sin of Sin, here Sin was sinful indeed.
That it should so boldly, so injuriously, so wickedly fasten upon a Person so
near and dear to God, so inoffensive and innocent, so holy and gracious, what
an aggregation of Sins and what an aggravation of Sins guilt was there in this?
Sin never was more sin than in this act; here 'twas in its highest stature and
fullest dimensions, this was its masterpiece, the vilest thing that ever it
did; all its other crimes were but dwarfish things in comparison of this
gigantick and overgrown crime. Well! according to its acting and carriage
herein so God judged it to be very guilty and sinful, and accordingly passed
Sentence upon it. And as to those that had an hand in this horrid fact, whether
Satan (to whom some Damnavit peccatum i. e. Satanam de peccato, quod nempe
Christum innocentem in Cruce interfeciset. Ambros. So also Hilarious in Psalm. 67.
apply the Words), or the Jews, O 'twas in all sin full of sin! their offense
was superlatively great in doing what they did to the flesh of God's own Son;
Sin in this act did rise exceeding high. Now the Vide Chrysostom. in loc. (very
largely insisting upon this).
Greek Expositors are very large upon this notion: of sin God condemned sin
etc. (that is say they) God judged the sin of the Jews (according to what it
was in its own nature) to be very -- etc. (...). Oecum.
great, it (or rather they) were guilty of a most unparalleled offense, --
(...). Theodoret.
high injustice, prodigious cruelty, inexpressible ingratitude, strange
impudency, upon their crucifying of the Holy Jesus, the Lord of Glory. And in
the pursuance of this Explication these Expositors bring in Sin as a Person, as
a person arraigned by God for this particular crime, after trial and process
sentenced to be highly guilty, and accordingly to be dealt with. And they also
insist upon God's way and method in his dealing with Sin, which was not in the
way of Power but of Justice, he did not downright subdue it by plain force but
he condemned it after the hearing of that plea it could make for it self: as
also upon God's order, (...). Chrysostom.
first he condemned it and then he punished it.

This Interpretation some Haec Chrysostomi Expositio convenientissima and inter
omnes accommodatissima videtur. Tolet. Haec Graecorum Expositio ita placet ut
eam caeteris antepon^ndam cum Toleto censeam. Estius. Vid. Alap. Catharin. etc.
latter Writers do fall in with and much applaud: Bneer himself at first was
taken with it, but aft^wards he altered his thoughts; Haec Expositio nihil
aliud est quam subtilis argutia. Beza.
Beza passes a severe censure upon it. The truth is, the Apostle in the Words
seems to look at another thing, this was not the condemnation of Sin which he
had (mainly) in his eye, (viz.) the heightening or aggravating or proving of
its guilt, and then passing sentence upon it according to that; no, but there
was another condemnation which he drove at (viz.) the abolition and expiation
of its guilt; God so condemned sin as that it might never condemn the Sinner,
(that is the Apostles proper and principal scope as I humbly conceive). In loco
prius citato.
Austine though he reads it too de peccato condemnavit etc. yet he opens it in
a different sense, he making this of sin to be as much as by sin: and so he
thus glosses upon it, By the sin of the Jews (in their putting of Christ to
death) God abolished and took out of the way all the sin of all the Elect; he
so overruled the matter that even by sin sin was destroyed, by the greatest
sin that ever was committed sin it self was condemned; had not the blood of
Christ been spilt (though that in it self was a most wicked act) there had been
to believers no remission, no expiation; as Death was destroyed by Death so Sin
by Sin, it condemned Christ but by so doing it was condemned it self. So much
for the first reading of the Words.

2. Secondly the Preposition is rendered by For; and that rendering of it our
Translators (according to other Propter peccatum. V. Sir. Propter ipso^n
peccatum. Tremell.
Versions and the general current of Interpreters) follow, and for sin
condemned sin etc. If we take it so, the Words then may carry a threefold sense
in them:

1. That Sin was the procuring, meritorious Cause of all that which God the
Father did in a way of severity upon and against Christ. He condemned sin in
Christ's Flesh, fell very severely upon him, testified great anger and
displeasure against him, inflicted sharp and dreadful punishments upon him; why
did such a Father so deal with such a Son? what might be the cause that a
person so innocent should suffer as he did? why, 'twas Sin (not his but ours)
which brought all this upon him (...) had it not been for that, God had never
sent his Son in Flesh into the world and then have punished him in that Flesh
as he did. Christ might thank Sin for all his sufferings, and lay all the Evils
which he sustained in Soul and Body at its doors; that set his Father against
him, that laid the foundation of all his sorrows, that brewed that bitter cup
which he was to drink, that was the meritorious cause of all the miseries that
ever befell him: 'twas for sin that God so condemned sin in his Flesh. The
Preposition (...) is sometimes used in this sense; so Joh. 10.33. For a good
work we stone thee not, but [(...)] for blasphemy, and because that thou being
a man make thy self equal with God. 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once
suffered [(...)] for sins etc. (which is as much as (...) Gal. 1.4. Heb. 10.12.)

2. The for sin may be taken finally: Wherefore did God thus condemn sin in his
Son's Flesh? wherefore was it with Christ as it was? O 'twas for sin! namely
that he might take it away, acquit the Sinner from its guilt, make satisfaction
for it, overruled it in all its plea's and power, quite destroy it. God would
deal with Sin in the person of his own Son (he having submitted to take the
guilt of it upon himself), that thereby he might give a through dispatch to it
and thoroughly rid believers of its hurtfulness. 1 John 3.5. And ye know that he
was manifected to take away our sins, and in him is no sin: (Verse. 8.) For this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil: In this final notion (...) is taken Matthew. 26.28.1 Cor. 15.3.

3. It may be understood Materially with respect to Christ's being a Sacrifice
for Sin. For Sin God condemned Sin, how? why, as Christ submitting to be a
Sin-offering was and did that by which this effect was produced. According to
this Interpretation we must read the words (as is noted in the margent) thus,
Phrasi Hobraea peccatum vocat Sacrificium pro peccato. Franz. Schola Sacrif.
disp. 7. th. 56.
By a Sacrifice for sin God condemned sin; whatever there is (...) this
condemning of sin (and there is abundance in it,) 'twas all brought about by
that Sin-offering or Sacrifice which Christ in his flesh offered up to God;
'twas cut off, expiated, disabled as to its destructive and damning nature etc.
all this was effected by Christ's being a Sacrifice. So that the words are
Elliptical, there being in them something cut off and left out which must be
supplied by the inserting or adding of by a Sacrifice, or some other such word.
Which Ellipsis is very usual and common in Holy Writ (especially when it is
treating of Sacrifices); Levit. 10.17. Wherefore have ye not eaten the
Sin-offering (so we read it but in the Hebrew it is only the Sin) in the holy
place etc. ('twould be tedious to cite the very many places of this nature
which do occur in Levit. 4.3.29.33. -- 5.6, 7.9.11. -- 9.22. -- 12.6, 8. --
14.13. -- 16.16.
that Book): Ifa. 53.10. When thou shall make his Soul sin (we fill it up by an
offering for sin): Hos. 4.8. They eat up the Sin of my people, (that is the
Sacrifices which were to be offered up for the people): Ezekiel. 45.19. The Priest
shall take of the blood of the Sin (we read it of the Sin-offering). Sicut
hostias quae pro peccato offerebant in Lege, peccati nomine vocabant cum ipsae
delicta nescirent, sic and Christi caro, quae pro peccati nostris oblata est,
peccati nomen accepit. Hieron. See Grotius de Sat. Christi. c. 1. p. 16.
Nothing more usual in the Old Testament than to make the words ( Chattaath and
Ascham) to be expressive both of Sin and of the Sacrifice too by which that Sin
was to be expiated; answerably to which is (...) used in the New; 2 Cor. 5.21.
He that knew no sin was made sin etc. (that is, a Sacrifice for sin). An
Ellipsis (like to this in the Text) you have Heb. 10.6. In burnt Offerings and
[for Sin] thou had no pleasure, (where Sacrifices is left out but must be put
in); so here in the words which I am upon. This now is that Interpretation
which is most Per hostiam carnis suae quam obtulit pro peccante damnavit
peccatum in carne sua. Orig. Hostia pro peccato damnavit peccatum in Carne.
Melanch. Per hostiam pro peccato Christum; Deus abolevit peccatum in hominibus.
Vatabl. Sed quid fi, mittens filium etc. vult dicere, and quidem hostiam pro
peccato, five ut esset hostia pro peccato. Drus. Ego adduci nequeo ut nomen
Peccati alio sensu hic positum esse existimem, quam pro expiatrice victima quae
(...) dicitur Hebraeis, ficuti Graeci (...) vocunt Sacrificium cui maledictio
injungitur. Calv. For Sin, that he might be a Sacrifice for Sin. Dr. Ham. To be
a propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin. Deod. To the same purpose P. Martyr, Heming.
Piscat. Vorst. Lud. de Dieu etc. (whom I need not cite); yet Beza will not
admit of this exposition; Praepositio (...) nulla ratione potest hanc
interpretationem admittere; neque nunc Apostolus agit de Christi morte and
nostrorum peccatorum expiatione, sed de Christi incarnatione and naturae
nostrae corruptione per eam sublata. Beza.
generally pitched upon, which seems best to correspond with other parallel
Texts and with the Matter and Scope of this which we have in hand, and
therefore that only I shall iusist upon: and indded the two former Senses are
included in this and do most naturally incorporate with it (as you will
perceive in the following discourse).

What is meant by in the flesh?
3. There is a Third thing to be opened (which in a very few words shall be
dispatched); it is said here For Sin God condemned Sin in the Flesh, now this
being indefinitely propounded it may be asked, of what or of whose Flesh does
the Apostle speak? I answer, of the Flesh of Christ: God sent him in the
likeness of sinful Flesh and in that very flesh sin was condemned. I know
Augustinus exponit de nostra Carne in qua peccatum tyrannidem possidet extra
Christum. Muscal. Sed melius est ur dicamus, debilitavit fomitem peccati in
carne nostra. Aquin.
Some interpre it of our flesh, but the most apply it to Christ's Flesh: there
is in dafferent respecis a truth in both, for in our flesh sin is condemned as
to the effect and benefit thereof, but in Christ's Flesh it was condemned
meritoriously and causally. The Syriack therefore (to make this the more
express) turns it and for sin condemned sin in his Flesh. Sin shall be punished
and expiated in that Nature wherein it had been committed; Man in the flesh had
committed sin and God in the flesh (of him who was Man) will condemn Sin, ut
caro humana quae peccaverat eadem pro peccato lueret. Our Saviors being
Sacerdos noster a nobis accepit quod pro nobis offerret, accepit enim a nobis
carnem, in ipsa Carne victima factus est. August. in Psalm. 129.
a Sacrifice pointed to his Flesh, 'twas the Humane Nature wherein he offered
up himself, and therefore in that God is said to condemn sin. And as Sin shall
be expiated in that Nature wherein it had been committed, so Satan too shall be
bafled in that Nature over which he had been victiorious; Christ will beat him
upon his own ground, he had overcome Man and Man shall overcome him; O the
Wisdom, Mercy, Power of God! (but these things were under the former Head much
enlarged upon). I will only further take notice of two things:

1. This condemning of sin is here brought in as God's act; God sent his own
Son etc. and for sin condemned etc. But is not this applicable to Christ also?
yes, if you consider him as Quamvis de Christo ut est Filius Dei posset vere
dici eum expiare authoritative and judicialiter, quatenus ipse cum Patre
potestatem habet remittendi peccata, quia tamen hic consideratur non ut Deus
sed ut Mediator, ut Sacerdos and victima -- non potest aliter expiatio fieri
quam per poenae lationem succedaneam and vicariam mortem explicari. Turret. de
Sat. Christi. pars 6. p. 204.
God and as the eternal Son of God so 'twas and is his act as well as the
Fathers to abolish, acquit and absolve from Sins guilt in an authoritative way:
but in the Clause (which I am opening) Christ is not spoken of in that notion
as he was God, only as he was Man and as a victime and Sacrifice for sin, and
so he acquits from Sin not authoritatively but as the Way and Means which God
made use of for the bringing about of this mercy for Sinners. 2. The Flesh of
Christ here is not to be considered simply and absolutely, but under this
restriction or special consideration Hoc factum est per carnem i. e. per mortem
quam in carne and juxta humanam Naturam passus est. Zwingl. In Carne, i. e. per
Carnem Filii sui suspensam and mortificatam in Cruce. Estius.
as dying, and thereby satisfying divine Justice. I would take in his whole
humiliation, but this being the highest degree thereof therefore eminently by
it sin was condemned: O when this Flesh of Christ hung upon the Cross then sin
received its condemnatory Sentence, its mortal wound; then when Christ was
condemned Sin (in another sense) was condemned also. This (I say) was brought
about in his flesh as suffering the penalty of Death, so the Apostle puts it in
Col. 1.22. In the body of his flesh through death --. I Will add nothing farther
upon this.
The Observation raised.
The Words being thus explained, it is high time that I come to that Doctrinal
Truth which they mainly hold forth; that is this, The Lord Jesus submitting to
be a Sacrifice for sin, and offering up himself as such to God, he did thereby
take away, abolish, explate all sin, in all its guilt, so as that it shall
never be charged upon Believers to their eternal ruin: In the language of the
Text it is in short For Sin, Sin was condemned. You heard but now in the opening
of the condemning of Sin, that that admits of more senses than that one which I
now instance in in the Observation, yet however this being most agreeable to
the nature of a Sacrifice (in reference to which Christ is here set forth), I
therefore only mention it.

In the handling of this Point (which carries me again into the very midst of
the Socinians Camp, where I should not choose to be but I must follow the Word
whithersoever it leads me,) there are two things to be spoken to:

1. To Christ's being a Sacrifice for Sin. 2. To the blessed Effect of that
blessed Sacrifice, (viz.) the condemnation or expiation of Sin.
Of Christ's being a Sacrifies for Sin.
I begin with the first, Christ was a Sacrifice for sin: Which though in the
General none deny, yet when we come to particulars about it as namely the true
notion of his being so, the efficacy, ends, effects of his Sacrifice, the time
when and the place where it was offered, (with several other things which are
incident about it), there many differences do arise. Certainly there are none
who believe the Scriptures but (in some sense or other) they must grant Christ
to be a Sacrifice, because they are so plain and express about it: Isa. 53.10.
When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for Sin. 1 Cor. 5.7. For even Christ
our Passover is sacrificed for us. 2 Cor. 5.21. He that knew no sin, was made
sin (a Sacrifice for Sin) etc. Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in love as Christ also has loved
us, and has given himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor: (where the Apostle seems to allude (1.) to the Cloppenh.
Schola Sacrif. p. 3. Franzius Disp. 13. these. 2, 3.
Mincah and Zebach amongst the Jews; the Former of which did refer to their
oblations of the Fruits of the Earth (set forth here by (...)), the Latter to
the Sacrificing and offering of living Creatures (set forth here by (...)):
(2.) He alludes to the pleasinguess and gratefulness of the primitive
Sacrifices to God: Genesis 8.21.
And the Lord smelled a sweet savor etc. Noah's Sacrifices (spoken of Verse.
20.) were highly pleasing to God: the like you have of the Levitical Sacrifices
Levit. 1.9. an offering made by fire of a sweet savor unto the Lord; (so Verse.
13.17.) answerably to which (yea far above them) Christ was a Sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor to God. Heb. 7.27. -- This he did once when he offered up
himself: Heb. 9.14. -- who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself to
God: (Verse. 26.) -- but now once in the end of the world has he appeared to
put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself: (Verse. 28.) -- So Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many --. Indeed the great business of the Apostle
in his excellent Epistle to the Hebrews, is both to assert and also to
illustrate Christ's being a Sacrifice for Sin, (which he does so fully and
plainly as that one would think there should be no doubts or differences
amongst any that bear the name of Christians, about either the thing or the
true nature and notion thereof).

Of Christ's being the eminent Sacrifice, and the reference of all the old
Sacrifices to him.
Yea, Christ was not only a Sacrifice (a true, real, proper Sacrifice, in
opposition to those who would make him but an improper, figurative,
metaphorical Sacrifice), but he was the Sacrifice (in a way of eminency); unto
which therefore all the Law Sacrifices did bear a special reference: For

1. Those were the Types of this, all of them Propter hoc etiam omnia
Sacrificia Veteris Testamenti leguntur, ut hoc unum Sacrificium designarent:
per quod vera est reinissio peccatorum and mundatio animae in eternum. Ambros.
in Ep. ad Heb. c. 9. -- Fuit apud Veteres oblatio Holocausti Concio quaedam de
morte Christi, qua nes a peccatis per fidem purgati sumus. Quia omnia
Sacrificia Legis in unum Christum recipient, atque unicum ejus Sacrificium
adumbrant. Munster. in Lev. 1.1.
typifying and prefiguring Christ the grand Sacrifice and like the gnomon in
the Dyall pointing to him in this consideration. I say, all were typical
adumbrations of him; therefore we find they are not only in the body and lump
of them, but as taken severally and apart applied and brought down to him: yea,
he was shadowed out by them not only with respect to their matter, but also
with respect to the several rites and modes used about them; (both of which
assertions are sufficiently made out in the forenamed Epistle). And whereas
Socin. de Servat. p. 2. c. 9. Against him in this, see Grotius de Sat. Christi.
p. 126, 127. Turretin. de Satis. p. 216. Franz. Disp. 6. these. 34 etc. Essen.
Tri. Crucis. p. 226. Hoornb. Socin. conf. 597, 599.
Some affirm, that the annual expiatory Sacrifices (of which you read Levit.
16.) only did prefigure Christ and his being a Sacrifice, it is a very great
falsity; those indeed might so prefigure him eminently but not solely: For we
find Others applied to him as well as those, as namely the Lamb in the daily
Offering, the Paschal Lamb (which was partly a Sacrifice and partly a
Sacrament), Joh. 1.29. 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 Cor. 5.7. Rev. 5.6. etc. Chap. 13.8. the
red Heifer (to be Sacrificed upon occasion for the expiating of the guilt of
unknown murder, Numb. 19.) Heb. 9.13. the daily Sacrifices Heb. 7.27. Heb.
10.11. But (passing by these things) I say Christ was typified by the old
Sacrifices; and probably that might be one End of God in his instituting of
them. For that they were of For this vide Suarez. in 3. part. Sum. Aquin.
Quest. 83. Art. 1. Disp. 71. Rivet. in Genesis Exerc. 42. p. 170. etc. and p. 222.
Franz. de Sacrif. Disp. 2. these. 76. Disp. 3 Disp. 76. Disp. 16 these. 33.
Cloppenb. Scho. Sacrif probl. 2. p. 51. etc. Dr. O. de Theologia Adamica. l. 2.
c. 1. p. 133, 134.
divine and positive institution, and not taken up upon the Light or Law of
Nature, is to me (though I know The Papists generally. B^ll^rm. de Missa l. 1.
c. 20. Valentia de Missae Sacrificio. l. 1. c. 4. Others are of this Opinion
also: The Author of Eccles. Policy. p. 100. etc. Defense etc. p. 421. etc. who
yet grants expiatory Sacrifices to be of divine Institution, p. 427. etc.
Others think otherwise a truth clear enough. But why did God institute them?
to appoint the slaying of so many poor Creatures, such various and costly
Sacrifices to be offered, so often to be repeated, such for every day, such for
every Sabbath, such for every New Moon, such every year at the solemn and
anniversary Expiation, besides what were offered at the Passover, at several
Feasts, at the lesser and greater Jubilee upon particular and special occasions,
as dedications etc? pray what might be God's End (or Ends) in all this? Was it
that he might show his dominion over the Creatures? was it that he might by
this demonstrate the Evil of Sin and what the Sinner deserved upon it? was it
to Theodoret for this, Vol. 4. de curandis Graec. affectibus c. 7. p. 584.
gratify the Jews (who having been amongst the Egyptians where Sacrifices did
abound might therefore be taken with them and fond of them), and thereby to
prevent their Idolatry? Several such Ends and Reasons are assigned, but surely
that which I am upon must not be left out (if not preferred before any other,)
viz. therefore God Fagius in Levit. 1.2. gives two reasons of them. Ut populus
in Idololatriam pronus ab idolis averteretur and in cultu Dei retineretur.
Deinde ut typos haberet populus Dei Sacrificii Christi, quem oportebat
aliquando in crucem agi pro peccatis suorum. Rivet. in Genesis p. 222. Praecipue
quia voluit adumbrari Sacrificiis passionem futuram Mediatoris and etc.
did ordain and institute Sacrifices that by them he might typifie and
prefigure that great Sacrifice which was to come; thereby the better to prepare
and inform the world about it; (but how, or in what measure, and in what extent
God did clear up this Notion, Use and End of Sacrifices, I shall not be too
forward to determine).

2. As the Law-Sacrifices were Types so they were but Types: there was little
in them take away the typical nature of them, what poor things were they
further than as they did point to Christ! The Apostle calls them but shadows of
good things to come Heb. 10.1. figures for the time then present Heb. 9.9.
patterns of things in the Heavens Heb. 9.23. examples and shadows of heavenly
things Heb. 8.5.

3. Nay Thirdly, all that Hujus Sacrificii a Christo peragendi Sacrificia
caetera typi erant; quia ut pecus moriebatur pro homine Levit. 17.11. ita and
Jesus Christus esset sanguinem suum effusurus pro nobis. Utraque igitur
auferebant reatum: hoc tamen discrimine, quod Sacrificium Christi id praestabat
virtute sua, illa vero legalia proprie and direct solum tollebant reatum
ratione poenae temporalis: in figura tantum promitterent piis effectum
Spiritualem and aeternum, puta ablationem reatus aeterni five poenae
infernalis. Vossius de Idolol. l. 1. p. 297.
virtue and efficacy which was in them was all derived from and did all depend
upon this great Sacrifice, the Lord Jesus. Alas! what could they do by any
inherent virtue in themselves for the expiating of Sin and pacifying of God!
Heb. 10.4. It is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take
away Sins: how often does the Apostle go over this (viz.) the weakness of the
Levitical Sacrifices with respect to expiation and atonement! doubtless
whatever virtue or efficacy was in them in order to the production of these
effects it wholly depended upon Christ the Sacrifice that was to come.

Yet here I would not be misunderstood, in such a sense I do not make the
Law-Sacrifices to be mere types or altogether weak; for as to that which the
Apostle calls the purifying of the flesh Heb. 9.13. they were more than types
and had more than See Dr. Stillingfleete in his Discourse concerning the True
Reason of Christ's Sufferings. p. 423. etc.
a typical expiation; and with respect to that by virtue of God's institution
they were able to effect it: But besides this there was the making of persons
perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, the purging of the Conscience etc.
Heb. 9.9, 14. now as to this their strength was wholly derived and their use
wholly typical. By the purifying of the Fl^^^, is meant exemption from those
Civil and Ecclesiastical penalties which upon such transgressions of the Law
the Jews were liable to: God gave them with respect to their polity such and
such Laws, which if any did break they were so and so to be punished; yet he
was so gracious to them as to allow in several Cases the offering of
Sacrifices, in order to the expiating of their guilt and the preventing of the
punishment threatened to them (as they stood in such a politic capacity);
therefore as to this Sacrifices had a real efficiency and also a full efficacy.
By the making perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, is meant the doing away
of Sins guilt in the sight of God, the setting of things right betwixt God and
the Sinner, the pacifying of his wrath, securing from eternal punishments: now
as to this the Mosaical Sacrifices could do nothing, here they were mere types
and altogether weak; this was to be done by the alone Sacrifice of Christ. So
that whereas Some do argue against the Sacrifices under the Law as not
prefiguring Christ, because they had no power or virtue in them to take away
Sin, I answer (1.) As to the taking away of external guilt and obligation to
external punishment, so far they had a power: (2.) Suppose they had had This
made good by Jacob* ad Portum contra Ostorod. p. 468. Turretin. de Sat.
Christi. p. 237.
none at all yet for all that they might have had this use; as (I hope) the
brazen Serpent was a real type and prefiguration of Christ, in reference to his
Spiritual healing of the poor Sin-stung Soul, and yet that of it self had no
virtue at all to bring about that effect which should bear any analogy unto
the thing typified.


4. That those old Sacrifices had a special reference to Christ, the great
Sacrifice, is evident from this because with him they Cum pro misso Messia ince
perunt Sacrificia, cum Messia defuncto defuncta sunt etc. Franzius Disp. 10.
these. 98. See him also Disp. 21. p. 757.
began and with him they ended: For as soon as ever Christ had been exhibited
in that primitive Promise Genesis 3.15. that the seed of the woman should bruise
the Serpents head etc. immediately upon this (as Divines do not only conjecture
but prove) Sacrifices did commence; and as soon as he himself came and had
offered himself upon the Cross (as the true Sacrifice), within a very little
while the Jewish Sacrifices ceased. Within a few years after their Temple was
destroyed, and with that all their Sacrifices expired; yea, (in process of
time) though The full story in Socrates. l. 3. c. 20. Sozom. l. 5. c. 22.
Julian gave them encouragement to reedifie the Temple (for this very end that
Sacrifices might again be used), and the Jews thereupon endeavored to their
utmost so to do, yet God from Heaven blasted them in all their attempts in a
miraculous and extraordinary manner: Vide Cyprian. adversus Judaeos. l. 1. c.
16. Tertull. contra Marcion. l. 2.
O the true Sacrifice was come, therefore there shall be no more use of what
was but typical thereof, (as the dark shades of the night vanish when the Sun
itself arises). The Heathen Oracles entrenched too much upon Christ's
Prophetical Office, and therefore at his coming they must Read Plutarch. de
Oraculorum defectu. p. 409.
cease; and Sacrifices did as much entrench upon his Priestly Office and the
oblation of himself, and therefore after his Death they shall and did cease
too. 'Twas prophesied of the Messiah that he should cause the Sacrifice and the
Oblation to cease, Dan. 9.27. and Heb. 10.8, 9. Above, when he said, Sacrifice
and Offering, and burnt Offerings, and offering for Sin thou would not,
neither had pleasure therein, which are offered by the Law: Then said he, Lo,
I come to do thy will (O God). He takes away the first, that he may establish
the second; (that is the observation which the Apostle makes upon it). And this
very thing (the ceasing of Sacrifices) was revealed to some amongst the Jews
themselves, for in the Age before Christ's coming they had got this Prophecy
amongst them; Vorstius ex Jalcutt ad finem Ezrae etc. Sic consentiunt in
abolitionem Sacrificiorum. Alting. Shiloh. p. 423.
Omnes oblationes cessabunt in futuro saeculo, in the Age that is next to come
all Sacrifices shall cease. And if there be not something extraordinary in the
case, why do the modern Jews (they knowing how express and positive God's
institution and command is about Sacrifices) live in the omission of them? (for
as to that which Buxtorf. Synag. Judaica. c. 20. p. 357.
some speak of as to their annual Sacrificing even now at the time of the great
Expiation, I cannot give any great credit to it).

Let not any think that all this Discourse (concerning the reference of the
ancient Sacrifices to Christ the true Sacrifice) is unnecessary; for I have
gained two things by it; (1.) That the Lord Jesus is the great Sacrifice; all
former Sacrifices pointing to him as the end, matter, substance, Omnia haec suo
modo in typo facta perfectissime in Christo praestita sunt in veritate and
reipsa etc. utpote qui mortis suae Sacrificio peccata nostra delevit, ab ira
Dei nobis est umbraculum, and Sacrificio suo apud Deum nos reconciliavit.
Zarnov. de Sat. Christi. p. 38.
accomplishment of them. (2.) That he is also a true and real Sacrifice; for
was there reality in the Type, and shall there not be the same (with advantage)
in the Antitype? or shall they be shadows of a shadow? shall there be such a
shell and no kernel, such a bone and no marrow in it?


But to go on! In the old Sacrifices there were these Six things: Six things in
the Old Sacrifices all of which are to be found in Christ's Sacrifice.
1. The Person who did institute, ordain, and appoint the use of them; who was
God himself, (whose institution of them though it be not expressed in the
Scriptures yet it may very strongly be inferred from them). 2. The Person unto
whom they were offered; and he also was God himself. 3. The Persons offering
(viz.) the Priests, to whom by divine appointment this work was committed, and
it was a great part of their work and one great end of their Office, For every
high Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things partaining to
God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for sins, Heb. 5.1. 4. The
Matter of the Sacrifice, or the thing offered: which was very various according
to what God was pleased to specify and appoint, Oxen, Bulls, Heifers, Sheep,
Rams, Goats, etc. 5. The Oblation it self: when the Beast was slain it was to
be offered up, and then part of the blood thereof was to be carried into the
Holy of Holy's, there to be presented before the Lord; and the main stress of
the Sea Dr. Stillingfl. against Crellius. chapter 5. p. 451.
expiation lay not upon the representation (which followed after), but upon the
mactation and solemn oblation of the Sacrifice. 6. The Altar upon which all was
to be offered.


Now answerably and in correspondency to all these, 1. God instituted,
appointed, ordained Christ to be the Sacrifice; it was his will and ordination
that his Son should offer up himself a propitiatory or expiatory Sacrifice.
Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself etc. 1
Pet. 1.20. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world etc.
It was as much the appointment of God that Christ (the true Sacrifice) should
die, be slain, offered up, as that under the Law any of those Sacrifices should
be so used: and as from all eternity he decreed and appointed Christ to be the
Sacrifice, so in time he fitted and prepared him for his being so; therefore
says Christ Heb. 10.5.
But a body have thou prepared me, (without which he could not have been a
Sacrifice). 2. Christ offered up himself to God. He had to do Grot. de Sat.
Christi. c. 10. p. 121.
with God as he stood in the quality and respect of a Sacrifice, for this was a
part of his Priestly Office which primarily refers to God; as King and Prophet
he has to do with us, but as Priest he had to do with God (that he might
propitiate and atone him). So 'twas with the Aaronical Priests, they were
ordained for men in things [pertaining to God] Heb. 5.1. and surely so it must
be too with the great Priest whom they did typifie. Heb. 2.17. -- that he might
be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things [pertaining to God]: The
Apostle speaks it expressly, -- and has given himself for us, an offering, and
[a Sacrifice to God] for a sweet smelling savor. 3. Here was the Person
offering, and that was Christ himself: he as Mediator, as God-Man was the
Priest to offer up himself. They under the Law had variety of Sacrifices and
variety of Priests, we under the Gospel have but one Sacrifice and one Priest;
who first offered up himself and now continues (in another way) to offer up our
duties and services to God. 4. As Christ was the Priest offering so he was the
Sacrifice offered; for he was both (which was unusual and extraordinary). The
Levitical Priests and the Sacrifices which they offered were distinct; they
were not bound to offer themselves, but our Lord Jesus was Ut quoniam quatuor
considerantur in omni Sacrificio, cui offeratur, a quo offeratur, quid
offeratur, pro quibus offeratur: idem ipse unus verusque Mediator, per
Sacrificium pacis reconcilians nos, unum cum illo maneret cui offerebatur, unum
in se faceret pro quibus offerebatur, unus ipse esset qui offerebat and quod
offerebat. August. de Trinit. Utrum Christus simul f^erit Sacerdos and Hostia?
Aquin. in 3. p. Qu. 22. Art. 2.
Priest and Sacrifice too; in his Person he was the Offerer, in his humane
Nature he was the thing offered. 'Twas necessary that he should offer
something, For every high Priest is ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices:
wherefore it is of necessity that this man have also somewhat to offer, Heb.
8.3. what then did he offer? such things as had been offered before? the blood
of bulls and goats? no, he offered his own blood, Heb. 9.12. his own body, Heb.
10. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. -- through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all: that very body which was so miraculously framed, with which he lived
here on earth, which he carried up with him afterward to heaven, that very
body (I say) he freely offered up upon the Cross as a Sacrifice to God: His
Soul comes in too, (but that is himself) Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin: His whole self in his whole Humane Nature was the
matter of this Sacrifice; Ephesians. 5.2. -- and has given himself for us, an
offering etc. Heb. 1.3. -- when he had by himself purged our sins -- Heb. 9.14.
-- who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God. -- So
Heb. 7.27. The Text says for sin God condemned sin in the flesh; by which
flesh the Apostle understands the whole Manhood of Christ, and that was the
Sacrifice for sin by which Sin was condemned. 5. There was Christ's formal and
proper oblation performed upon the Cross, by and upon which the sins of
Believers were to be expiated. That there was in Christ an oblation none deny,
but that this was done at his Death or here on earth, and was expiatory (in
that sense which we put upon it), both of these are vehemently denied by the
SOCINIANS; (but I shall have occasion to vindicate both by and by). 6. In
Christ's Sacrifice there was an Altar too, namely his Godhead. The Altar
sanctified the gift Matthew. 23.19. so 'twas here; the Deity of Christ did not
only sustain and strengthen his Humane Nature in his being a Sacrifice therein,
but it also gave merit and efficacy to his Sacrifice: for how did that come to
be so meritorious and effectual for the good of Sinners? but from this that he
who offered up himself was God as well as Man; therefore the Apostle speaking
of the efficacy of this Sacrifice above the Levitical Sacrifices, lays it upon
Christ's Godhead, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit (his Deity), offered himself etc.


The chiefest difficultys not lying in these things, I do not (you see) make
any long stay upon them; but there being a twofold Enquiry which will carry us
into the very bowels of the main Truth, and take in what is most struck at by
our Adversaries, that I would rather to spend my time upon. The Lord Jesus
being a Sacrifice it will be asked 1. What a kind of a Sacrifice he was? 2.
When and where he was that Sacrifice?


What a kind of Sacrifice Jesus Christ was? Ans. An expiatory Sacrifice.
To the First I answer, he was a propitiatory or expiatory Sacrifice, answering
unto (yet infinitely exceeding) the Jewish expiatory Sacrifices, by which he
was shadowed out and typify'd. The proof and illustration of this very thing is
the design and business of the Apostle in that Epistle (I mean that written to
the Hebrews), which gives us more light into it than all the Books that ever
were written before or besides. Pray read (again and again) the 5, 7, 8, 9, 10
Chapters thereof, and you will find the Apostle there doing these three things; --
(1.) He proves that Christ was not only a Sacrifice but that he was (truly and
really) an expiatory Sacrifice: for he instances in all the proper,
constitutive ingredients into and effects of the Law-expiatory Sacrifices, all
of which he applys and brings down to Christ. (2.) He shows the analogy and
resemblance 'twixt those expiatory Sacrifices and this of Christ, and what
respect they all carried to this. (3.) He shows wherein and how far the latter
exceeded the former.
The discussing of these three Heads takes up the greatest part of that most
excellent Commentary upon the Law-Sacrifices; the particular Texts in it I will
not at present cite (as they are proper to what I have now laid down), but that
will be done in what will follow.

A short account of the difference and distinction of the Jewish Sacrifices. Of
which (in particular) see Philo. Jud. de Victimis. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 3. c.
10. Sigon. de Repub. Hebr. l. 3. c. 2. (with very many Others). Dr. Owen on the
Hebr. in Proleg. Exercit. 24. Dr. Stillingfl. Answer to Crellius p. 473.
For our better procedure in speaking to this important Truth, before I can
well fall upon the close handling of it, it will not be amiss for us a little
to cast our eye upon and to take a short view of the Jewish Sacrifices. With
the general Nature whereof I intend not at all to meddle, only give me leave
(that being proper to the business in hand and indeed necessary for the better
understanding of it,) to show how these were diversified and distinguished.
Concerning which, several Divisions and Distinctions are given of them, but the
best and shortest is this viz. Some were gratulatory and some Propitiatory, or
some Eucharistical and some Expiatory.

Eucharistical were those that were designed for the expressing of gratitude,
for the giving of thanks and praise to the Lord upon the receiving of mercy: of
which you read Lev. 7.15. -- 22.29. Psalm. 50.14. Hos. 14.2. (but these I am
not concerned about).

Expiatory were those that were designed for the atoning and pacifying of God,
the averting of his anger, the doing away the guilt of Sin, and the preventing
or removing of the punishment of it: these were the Sacrifices which took up
the greatest room in the body of Mosaical Sacrifices, and which did in special
point to the grand Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus, and to that too as expiatory.

Now these expiatory Sacrifices were many and various, all of them carrying
something in them whereby they differed and were distinguished each from the
other; which differences (with the grounds and reasons of them) if we could
exactly hit upon, 'twould be of mavelous great use to us in many things; but
(alas) excepting where the Gospel it self opens this for us, we are much in the
dark about it! the Jewish Writers that should help therein contribute but very
little help (as they tell us who are most conversant in them). If we take a
brief and general Scheme of them, this is clear: the old expiatory Sacrifices
differed in the matter of them; for in some 'twas living Creatures, in others
'twas what grew from the earth; and often these two were joined, the Zebach and
the Mincah going together in the same Sacrifice, (as in the daily Sacrifice
Exodus 29.39, 40. and in diverse others). They differed in the Rites used about
them (all of which were prescribed by God himself); some were to be poured out,
some burnt; some to be slain and offered by the ordinary Priests, some by the
High Priest himself; the blood of some to be carried into the Holy of Holy's,
of others not so; some to be wholly consumed; and God to have all (as in the
Holocausts), some but in part consumed, in which of what was left, one part was
to go to the Priests (as in the Sin and Trespas-offering), and the other to the
Persons who brought the Sacrifice (as in the Peace Offering, provided that that
which was offered was for private persons, for if it was offered for the whole
Congregation then no private person might share in the residue, Levit. 23.19,
20.) They differed in the Time which was appointed for them; for some were to
be offered every day, morning and evening, (called the daily Sacrifice); Exodus
29.38, 39, 40. Numb. 28.3, 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 8.13. 1 Chronicles. 16.40. Ezekiel. 46.13,
14. Dan. 8.11. -- 9.21. -- 11.31. -- 12.11. Nehem. 10.33. Ezra 9.4, 5. -- Some
to be offered but every Sabbath day, Numb. 28.9, 10. Some at the New Moons
Numb. 28.11. Some at the revolution of the Sabbatical year Levit. 25.2. etc.
Some at the great Jubilee Levit. 25.8. etc. Some at the Solemn Feasts, as that
of the Passover Exodus 12. Numb. 28.26. of Pentecost Lev. 23.17. etc. of
Tabernacles Numb. 29.12. Some but once a year at the great aniversary Expiation
Levit. 16. per tot. They differed in the Rise of them; some being purely from
the will of the Offerer (the Vide L'Empereur de Leg. Hebr. p. 264.
Free Will Offerings), Levit. 7.16. Levit. 22.21. others occasioned by some
special emergency of Providence, (when some eminent mercy was received, or some
great judgment to be removed etc. 2 Samuel 6.13, 17. 1 Chronicles. 15.26. 2 Chronicles.
29.21. etc. 2 Samuel 24. ult.) Others were constant being set and stated by God
himself, (as those that have been already mentioned). They differed according
to the Persons for whom they were appointed; some for the Prince, some for the
Priests, some for private men, some for the whole Community, (for each of which
directions are given Lev. 4.) And then as to the kinds or Species of them there
were the Burnt-offerings (about which Rules are set down Lev. 1.),
Meat Offerings (of which Levit. 2.), Peace Offerings (Levit. 3.), the
Sin-offering (Levit. 4.), the Trepass Offering (Levit. 5. and 6.) Philo Jud.
de Vict. p. 648. (...).
Some reduce all to three, the Burnt-offering, the Peace Offering, the
Sin-offering; Joseph. Ant. l. 3. c. 10. (...) etc. --
Some to two, the Holoucast and the Thank-offering; (but of such different
apprehensions there is no end).

Now though these Sacrifices were thus diversified amongst themselves, yet the
most (if not all) of them agreed in this that they were in their Use, End, and
Effects of an expiatory nature: I say all, for unquestionably it belonged not
only to the Sacrifices used at the anniversary Expiation nor only to the
Sin-offering and Trepass Offering to expiate sin, but all the rest (more or or
less) were designed for this end and accordingly did produce this effect.
Agreeably to which, Christ (the true and great Sacrifice) in the offering up of
himself to God did truly, properly expiate sin; for if they did so, he then
much more: because they in their expiation were types of him in his expiation,
now whatever is in the type must needs be in the thing typified; as also
because their expiation was done in the strength and virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice, now surely that which gives expiatory virtue to other things must
needs have such virtue in it self.

Four things propounded for the opening and proving of Christ's being an
Expiatory Socrifice.
For the better opening and proving of Christ's being an expiatory Sacrifice,
by making a collation or parallel between him and the expiatory Sacrifices
under the Law; there are these Four things which I shall endeavor to make
good: 1. That in those expiatory Sacrifices, whatever was laid upon them is was
for the sin of the People, as the impulsive and meritorious Cause thereof; and
that so it was with Christ in his Sufferings. 2. That those Sacrifices were
substituted in the place and stead of the Offenders themselves, bearing their
punishment; and that so it was with Christ in reference to Sinners. 3. That
those Sacrifices were to be offered up, killed, slain, consumed, and in that
way they became expiatory; and that so it was with Christ. 4. That by those
Sacrifices God was actually atoned and propitiated, the expiation and remission
of Sin procured; and that so it was by Christ: These things being cleared and
proved it will be evident that Christ was a true expiatory Sacrifice; (I Will go
over them as briefly as the nature of the thing will admit of).


Of the First; whatever befell the Expiatory Sacrifices was for the Peoples Sin,
and so it was with Christ in his Sufferings.
1. First (I say) in those expiatory Sacrifices whatever was laid upon them it
was for the Sin of the people, as the impulsive and meritorious Cause thereof:
For wherefore were the poor innocent Beasts and living Creatures killed and
slain as they were? what had they done that so many of them must be put to
death from day to day? did God delight in making his Temple a slaughterhouse?
was it his pleasure to have it thus that he might show his dominion and
sovereignty over the Creature? surely that was not the great thing which he
designed therein! he had other ways (which might seem more suitable to his
goodness and pity to his Creatures) wherein he might have made known his
dominion over them: And besides, if this was the thing only aimed at why must
the people lay their hands upon the Cattle when they were sacrificed? why must
they confess their sins over them (as you will see under the next Head they were
to do)? these rites evidently declare, that God did not here proceed in the way
of absolute dominion, but that there was sin in the case as the procuring Cause
of all this: and if so, they having no sin of their own for which they could
thus suffer, their suffering must be resolved into the sin of the people as
that which brought it upon them. So it was with Christ our Sacrifice; his
Sufferings were exceeding sharp, his precious life was taken from him, he died
upon the Cross, endured hard usage indeed; whence did all this befall him? was
there not some special Cause why it should be thus with God's own Son? yes:
what was that? why, Sin, Sin was that cause: but whose sin? not his own, for he
was perfectly free from all sin; he knew no sin 2 Cor. 5.21. he was holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, Heb. 7.26. a Lamb without blemish
and without spot 1 Pet. 1.19. it must be our sin then that was the meritorious
Cause of all Christ's sufferings. Dan. 9.26. After threescore and two weeks
shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. Surely, he has
born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken,
smitten of God and afflicted: But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed: All we like sheep have gone astray; we have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all. Romans 3.25. Who was delivered for our offenses ((...)) and raised again
for our justification: it is the same Preposition in both branches but its sense
is different, (which difference rises from the different nature of the matter
spoken of); for when it is joined with sins or offenses it imports that they
were the meritorious Cause of Christ's Sufferings, but when it is joined with
Christ's resurrection and the Sinners justification there its signification and
import is final, (yet too in such a sense the (...) may be taken meritoriously
in the latter as well as in the former branch). De Servat. p. 3. c. 7. and p.
3. c. 7.
SOCINVS tells us that this (with some other parallel expressions) only notes
our sins to be the occasion, but not the impulsive Cause of Christ's
Sufferings; as also that the particle (...) is both here and else where always
taken in a final, never in any meritorious sense: But most Ubi est (...) cum
Accusativo: quae apud Graecae Linguae Authors Sacros and Profanos usitatissima
est nota Causae impulsivae. Ut cum dicitur (...) propter haec venit ira Dei in
filios contumaciae; Ephesians. 5.6. Grot. de Sat. Christi. c. 1. (in Romans 4.25.).
untruly, for it is said Ephesians. 5.6. -- because of these things the wrath of God
comes upon the children of disobedience; (...), for these things as those which
merit and bring down the Wrath of God upon Sinners. But I will not stay upon
the refuting of the usual Cavils and false assertions about this, because I
conceive this Head may not be so proper to that which I am upon; for I am not
now speaking to the Sufferings or Death of Christ under the consideration of a
punishment (to which a meritorious Cause does point), but of a Sacrifice: The
expiatory Sacrifices it is very true were punished for the Sins of men, but yet
that wherein they were expiatory, and as they were expiatory more immediately
pointed to something else, (namely to that which will follow in the succeeding
Particulars); and so it is here too with respect to Christ. Whose Death (as is
usually observed) falls under a threefold consideration, 'twas a Punishment, a
Sacrifice, a Ransom; with respect to the First, the effect thereof was
Satisfaction; to the Second, the effect thereof was Atonement, to the Third,
the effect thereof was Redemption: now I at present considering it in the
Second notion as it is a Sacrifice, have not so much to do with that which
refers to it in the notion of a punishment; therefore this first particular I
pass over.

Of the Second: the Sacrifices were substituted in the place of the Offenders;
so it was with Christ.
2. Secondly, in the Levitical Expiatory Sacrifices there was the substitution
of them in the place and stead of the Offenders themselves; the Peoples sin and
the punishment due to them thereupon was laid upon the thing sacrificed;
insomuch that whereas they should have died by surrogation and commutation the
poor Beasts died for them. This was the great thing Nequaquam Sacra Scriptura
admittit alium finem Sacrificiorum quam hunc ipsum, quod nimirum vice hominum
sunt passa pecora Sacrificialia. Franzius in Praefat. ad Schol. Sacrif.
Patriarch.
intended and designed in those Sacrifices; and that it was really so done in
them the Scripture is very clear: Take that one place: Levit. 17.11. For the
life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar,
to make an atonement for your Souls; for it is the blood that makes an
atonement for the Soul. In all the four Books of Moses (which treat so much
upon Sacrifices) there is not a more pithy and plain account given of their Use
and End than here in this place: the Lord in the 10th Verse. severely prohibits
the eating of blood, in this Verse. he backs his prohibition with a double
Argument; (1.) because the life of the flesh was in the blood: (2.) because he
had set that apart for an high and sacred Use, viz. to be used in Sacrifices in
order to atonement; and I have given it you upon the Altar, to make atonement
etc. (for this great effect mainly lay upon the blood, it is the blood that
makes atonement for the Soul): Now mark it it is to make atonement [for your
Souls], and it makes atonement [for the Soul] (that is) in the So it is rendered
in several Versions of the Words, set down in Franz. p. 446. See this Text
improved and vindicated in Dr. Stillingst. against Crell. p. 429. etc.
stead of your Soul (he speaking to the people of Israel), so that in the blood
Sacrificed there was Soul for Soul, Life for Life, the Soul and Life of the
Sacrifice for the more precious Soul and Life of the Sinner; was not here
substitution of the one in the room of the other? Hence it is that the
Sacrifices were said to bear the iniquities of the people (because of the
transferring of the guilt and punishment of sin over to them); so you read
Levit. 16.22. Levit. 10.17.
Hence also was the laying on of hands upon the Sacrifice (sometimes by the
Priests, sometimes by the People); you have it prescribed in the Burnt-offering
Levit. 1.4. in the Peace Offering Levit. 3.2, 8, 13. in the Sin-offering Levit.
4.15, 24, 29, 33. at the great Expiation, AARON was to lay both his hands upon
the head of the live-Goat, and to confess over him all the iniquities of the
children of Israel etc. Levit. 16.21. Now what might be the meaning of this
rite? was it to signify that the thing offered was now Deo sacrum (as being
set apart for God and consecrated for his use, upon which account imposition of
hands was used in other Cases)? or was it expressive of obtestation, to hold
forth the peoples praying to God Quicquid a nobis peccatum est sit in hujus
victimae caput, wherein-soever we have offended let all be laid upon the head
of this Victime? or did they by this testify the sense of their deserts to die
themselves? these things I grant may very well be taken in; but the main thing
held forth in it, was the translation of the Sinners guilt to the Sacrifice and
the substitution of it in his stead. Whenever the people thus laid their hands
upon the Sacrifice, they did in effect say Hoc ritu quil offerebat,
significabat se scelera sua conjicere in caput bovis qui propterea mactabatur.
Drusius in Levit. 1.4.
upon this Beast we lay all our sins; and this was the primary intendment of
that rite. And had there not been a strange conveyance or imputation of
something of this nature to the things sacrificed, I would fain know a reason
why the messenger that only went with the Scapegoat into the Wilderness, as
also why he who only burnt the residue of the bullock whose blood had been
carried into the Holy of Holy's, I say why both of these should be accounted
unclean; so unclean, as that before they had been purified and washed they were
not to be admitted into the Congregation, (for so God enjoined Levit. 16.26,
27, 28.). And now after all this, when the great Lord and Sovereign was pleased
to have it thus, has given out so full a declaration of himself about it, when
Scripture is so clear, yea and when Nature too (as you will hear) has given
such a confirmation of it, I say, after and notwithstanding all this for any
yet to deny it, to bring their little Objections against it, (as that because
there was That Objection answered in Grotius de Sat. c. 10. p. 123. Essenius.
Tri. Crucis. p. 218. Turretin. de Sat. p. 246.
no communion of Nature and Species betwixt Men and Beasts, therefore there
could be no substitution etc.) this must needs discover excess of pride and
folly: The thing possibly (in some respects) may seem somewhat strange, but it
becomes us to acquiesce in what God himself was pleased to determine upon, and
then to order and reveal in his Law.

From these Sacrifices I proceed to the much higher Sacrifice, Christ himself;
where we shall find an exact correspondency between the type and the antitype,
the one fully answering to the other. Did they carry substitution in them? that
eminently was in Christ: he indeed substituted himself in the Sinners room,
took our guilt upon him and put himself in our place, died not only for our
good but in our stead, did undergo what we should have undergone, vouchsafed to
dye that we might not dye, bare himself in his Soul and body (as our (...)) the
punishment due to us; here was substitution far above what was in the
Law-sacrifices. But this De Servat. p. 2. c. 4. (and passim). In Praelect. c.
18. with him concur Crellius, Smalcius etc. and all of that party.
SOCINVS and his Followers cannot endure to hear of; O they rally all their
force, unite all their strength, set themselves with all their might to oppose
and beat down this great Truth! there are but few of the Evangelical Mysteries
which these pernicious Gospel-destroyers do not assault (some way or other),
but as to that which is now before us ( Christ's suffering, dying, satisfying
in our stead, the sum of Gospel-revelation, the great Article of the Christian
Faith, the main prop and foundation of the believers Hope), this they make
their fiercest assaults upon; whatever stands (if they may have their will)
this shall not: But alas poor men! when they have done their worst, it will
stand firm upon its sure basis as an eternal, unmovable Truth; it is so
established in the Word and so rooted in the hearts of Christians, that (in
spite of the most subtle and fierce oppositions of all gainsayers) it shall
abide for ever. Well! however let us see what ground we have for our belief of
it; and surely upon enquiry it will appear we have enough and enough. If the
Gospel be not clear in this, it is clear in nothing; and blessed be the Lord,
who in a point of such vast importance to Souls has given the world a
revelation of it so plain and full! Substitution in the case of the old
Sacrifices is not so evidently held forth in the Law, but substitution with
respect to Christ and his Sacrifice is more evidently held forth in the Gospel:
Romans 5.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died [for
the ungodly]: Verse. 8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet Sinners Christ died [for us]: 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once
suffered for sins, [the just for the unjust]: 1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuh then as
Christ has suffered [for us] in the Flesh etc. 1 Pet. 2.21. -- because Christ
also suffered [for us] etc. Joh. 10.15. I lay down my life [for the sheep].
Joh. 11.50. Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die
[for the people] and that the whole nation perish not. Heb. 2.9. That he by the
grace of God should taste death [for every man] 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. -- if one died
[for all] then were all dead: And that he died [for all], that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died [for them],
and rose again. In all these places the Preposition Of this and the other
Prepositions, Grot. de Sat. c. 10. p. 3. etc. 9. p. 115. Hoorneb. p. 566, 567,
568. Calor. p. 421. etc. et p. 453.
(...) is used, which (though not always yet) most frequently notes
substitution, the doing or suffering of something by one in the stead and place
of others, (see Romans 9.3. 2 Cor. 5.20.): and so it is all along here to be
taken, where it being used of Persons, the nature of the matter spoken of, the
use of the word in parallel Texts, as also in Greek Authors, gives this sense
the preference before any other. But suppose this may be eluded, the other
Preposition (...) proves the thing undeniably; Matthew. 20.28. Even as the Son of
Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many, [(...)]: 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom [(...)] for
all: Christ did not barely deliver poor captive-Souls, but he delivered them in
the way of a ransom, which ransom he paid down for them in their stead; so as
that what they themselves should have paid that he was pleased to pay for them.
This is and must be the sense and import of the word, for every one knows that
(...) in Composition (out of that I know it has other senses, see Heb. 12.2. 1
Cor. 11.15.) signifies but two things, either 1 John 2.18.
opposition and contrariety, or substitution and Romans 12.17. Matthew. 5.38. 1
Pet. 3.9. Luke 11.11.
commutation; so that the matter will come to this, we must either carry it
thus that Christ gave himself a ransom against Sinners (than which nothing more
absurd), or else thus that he gave himself a ransom in the stead and place of
Sinners (than which nothing more true).

I might further prove it by 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Gol.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us: If he had not so been in his own person, woe to poor Sinners! they must
then have ly'ne under it themselves to all eternity. What a full and convincing
Chapter is that of Isa. 53. for the proof of that which I am upon! 'twould take
up a great deal of time to go This is done by very many Anti-Socinian Writers:
Particularly see Grot. de Sat. p. 11. etc. (O that he had not afterward
spoiled in his Commentaries upon Isa. 53. what he had before in this excellent
Treatise so nervously and orthe doxly asserted! but there he is as weak as here
he is strong). Dr. Owen against B. p. 499. etc. his vindication of the true
sense of it against Grotius. p. 521. etc.
over it, and to draw out the strength and emphasis of the several expressions
in it; I must not engage so far. But surely the tongue of man could not utter,
nor the head of man invent, any Words or Phrases more plain and apposite for
the setting forth of Christ's substitution, than what you have there: the truth
is, its edge is every way as sharp against the SOCINIAN who denies this, as
it is against the JEW who denies Christ's Messiah-ship. (Verse. 4.) Surely he
has born our griefs and carried our sorrows etc. (Verse. 5.) The chastisement
of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: (Verse. 6.) The
Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all, (or) the Lord has made the
iniquities of us all to meet on him: (Verse. 7.) He was oppressed and he was
afflicted etc. or (as the words are rendered by some) it was So the word Nagas
is taken 2 King. 23.35. Zech. 9.8. Significat. aigere ad solutionem debiti.
Forer. -- opprimi and ad solvendum adigi ab exactore. Morus in loc.
exacted and he answered: (Verse. 8.) For the transgression of my people was he
stricken: (Verse. 11.) -- for he shall bear their iniquities: (Verse. 12.) -- and
he bare the sin of many. Is not all this spoken of our Lord Christ? and is
there not in it sufficient proof of his susception of the Sinners guilt, and
bearing the punishment due for it? It runs much in the style of the old
Sacrifices; they had the sins of the people laid upon them Levit. 16.21. and
the Priests too are said to bear their iniquity Levit. 10.17. that Aaron may
bear the iniquity of the holy things Exodus 28.38. answerably to which, the
Prophet tells us that Christ (our Sacrifice and Priest too) had the iniquities
of all believers laid upon him, and that he bare them in his own person. So the
Apostle Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many etc. and
that is a great Scripture 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree --, (...) he [took them up with him when he ascended the
Cross; the Apostle uses the word Heb. 7.27. Who needs not daily as those high
Priests to offer up [(...) to carry up] Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and
then for the peoples: for this he did once when he offered up himself [(...),
when he carried up himself]: So in the place cited but now, Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, (...): it is an allusion to the Priests who
carried up the Sacrifice (and with it the sins of the people) to the Altar;
Christ did the same with respect to his Cross, whither he first carried up sin
and then he carried or bore it away.

I have but just mentioned these Scriptures to prove the thing in hand, to
which should I have spoken as largely as the matter in them would have born, or
should I now fall upon the refutation of the Adversaries Replys (such as they
are) by which they endeavor to weaken them, I should certainly run my self
upon unpardonable prolixity.

To back this notion of these expiatory Sacrifices (which were of God's own
appointment and institution), I thought (though it would have been but as the
holding of a candle to the Sun) to have shown, that it was the very notion of
the Heathens themselves in their idolatrous Sacrifices; which (whether persons
or things) they always looked upon as substituted in the room and stead of the
offenders themselves: but I have altered my purpose, because I conceive it will
be most proper at the close of the Four Heads which I am upon, to bring in all
together of what I have to say upon those Pagan-Sacrifices, by way of parallel
with the true Sacrifices.

Two Queries propounded and answered.
It Is no time for us to divide amongst our selves, or unnecessarily to run into
parties, when the common Enemy is in the Field, yea, making fierce assaults
upon us; to defend our selves against whom, all our united strength will be
little enough. Otherwise two things should here be further enquired into: As
Whether Christ underwent the same punishment that was due to the Sinner, or
only something equivalent thereunto?
1. It having been said, that Christ did so far substitute himself in our stead
as to undergo the punishment due to us, it may be query'd Whether he underwent
the idem, the very self-same punishment that we should have undergone, or only
the tantundem, that which did amount and was equivalent thereunto? To which I
answer (though I Am very loath to meddle in points wherein persons eminent for
Learning and Piety seem to differ), that in different respects both may be
affirmed: The Mr. A. Burg. of Justif. p. 73, 74. Turret. de Sat. p. 9. p. 281.
punishment which Christ endured if it be considered in its Substance, Kind or
Nature, so 'twas the same with what the Sinner himself should have undergone;
but if it be considered with respect to certain Circunstances, Adjuncts or
Accidents, which attend that punishment (as inflicted upon the Sinner), so
'twas but Non quidem idem Deo solutum quod debebatur ab iisdem, nos etenim
debebamus aeternas poenas exolvere, verum pependit aequivalens Christus etc.
Hoornb. Socin. Conf. p. 253. -- V. Stegm. Photin. p. 260. -- Mr. Baxter's
Aphor. p. 26. Life of Faith. p. 325. -- Also the Author of the Great
Propitiation. p. 71. etc.
equivalent and not the same. The punishment due to the Sinner was Death, the
curse of the Law (upon the breach of the first Covenant); now this Christ
underwent for he was made a curse for us Gal. 3.13; the Adjuncts or
Circunstances attending this death were the eternity of it, desperation going
along with it, etc. these Christ was freed from, (the dignity of his Person
supplying the former, the sanctity of his Person securing him against the
latter): therefore with reference to these (and to some other things which
might be mentioned) it was but the tantundem, not the idem. But suppose there
had been nothing of sameness, nothing beyond equivalency in what Christ
suffered, yet that (say some) would be enough for the making good of the main
Truth against the Adversary; for 'twas not Dr. Stillingst. against Crellius p.
441.
necessary to his substitution that he should undergo in every respect the same
punishment which the Offender himself was liable unto, but if he shall undergo
so much as may satisfy the Law's threatening, and vindicate the Lawgiver in his
truth, justice, and righteous government, that was enough: now that was
unquestionably done by Christ. Whether Christ took the guilt of our Sin upon
himself, or only submitted to the punishment?
2. Secondly, it having also been said that our Savior took upon him the guilt
of our sins, it may further be query'd Whether he took the guilt itself of
them, or whether he did any thing more than bear the punishment due for them?
Answ. he first took the guilt upon him, and then he bare the punishment. Far be
it from me to assert any thing which may reflect the least dishonor upon
Christ (I dread with my soul such a thing); but I see nothing, in the asserting
of his voluntary susception of our guilt which has any tendency to that,
therefore I hope I may affirm it safely and confidently: it is so far from that,
that 'twas the highest manifestation of his Love and that which was necessary
for our Justification. There is in sin the macula and the reatus, the stain (or
filth) and the guilt of it; or there is in it the fact, the fault, and the
guilt: the Suscipiendo paenam and non suscipiendo culpam, and culpam delevit
and paenam. August. de Sermon. Dom. in Luc. Sermon. 37.
two former are solely ours, but the third and last Christ was pleased to take
upon himself. What is guilt but obligation to punishment? if the holy Jesus
will freely put himself under that obligation what can be said against it?
certainly that he might do and yet (in himself) be as holy and innocent as ever
he was, and neither be the committer of Sin nor in the least be defiled by it,
(for the macula and the reatus are two different things). And indeed I do not
well see how he could be said to bear the punishment of sin (that being
strictly taken), if first he should not take its guilt: We all grant Christ's
sufferings to be penal, but how could they have been so without guilt?
therefore having no guilt of his own he must be looked upon as assuming ours,
upon which he might be said properly to undergo punishment. Had no guilt lain
upon him he might have suffered but the could not have been punished, (
punishment always necessarily presupposing guilt). I would not stretch too far
allusive and metaphorical descriptions of Christ; but yet in all-such that
which is the first and most natural import of them must be improved and made
use of: Now such a description of Christ is his being a Surety; of which what
is the first and natural import? surely this, a Surety is one who takes the
debt of another upon himself, and so (in case of the debtors insufficiency)
becomes liable to the payment of it: as to the consequences and inconveniences
that follow if he submits to them that is but more remote, but the first and
proper thing in his suretyship is his making of the debt to be his own: the
application of this to the thing in hand is plain enough. 2 Cor. 5.21. He has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: what is this being made sin? is it Christ's being
a Sacrifice for sin? yes, but that is not all; it notes also (I Am sure I am not
singular in this interpretation) his being under the guilt of sin: where Christ
is said to bear sin that may possibly signify no more than the bearing of the
punishment thereof, (as the phrase is used Levi^. 5.1. -- 20.17. 2 King. 7.9.);
but when it is said he was made sin that implys his voluntary susception of the
Sinners guilt: And that this is the sense of the words in this place is evident
from what follows, -- that we might be made the righteousness of God in him:
it is not said he bare the punishment of sin, that we thereupon might not be
punished, but he was made sin (under the guilt of it, for it is opposed to
righteousness), that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, (i.e.)
that he taking our guilt, (and so taking it away), as that was made over to him
so his righteousness might be made over to us upon which we might be made
guiltless and righteous before God: For my part (unless this sense be admitted)
I do not understand what tolerable interpretation can be put upon the words.
He Is said to carry up our sins in his own body etc. 1 Pet. 2.24. did he carry
up the punishment of them? that is somewhat harsh; 'twas their guilt that he
carried up with him when he ascended the Cross. This was the very way wherein
he must justify and save; for as he could not have saved us if first he had
not taken our Nature, so he could not have justified us or taken away our guilt
if first he had not taken it upon himself. For the macula peccati that he was
not capable of, therefore that shall be removed another way; but for guilt (it
being not contracted but assumed) that he was capable of, and that was the
thing for which satisfaction was to be made; therefore that he must take upon
him and so take it away. O the transcendent love of Christ in this submission!
his righteousness made over to us and our sin made over to him? we made
righteous and he made guilty (by imputation and in a Law-sense)? what grace can
be higher than this!


The Third Head, the expiatory Sacrifices to be consumed and slain etc.
I have done with the Second thing, Christ's substituting himself in our stead
in correspondency with what was done in the old Jewish Sacrifices; the Third
follows, viz. those Sacrifices were to be consumed and slain, their blood to be
shed and offered, and so they became expiatory. Such as consisted or were made
up of inanimate things, were to be consumed; others that consisted of living
Creatures were to be killed: As for instance, the Meat Offering that was to be
burnt Levit. 2.1, 2; it follows indeed V. 12. the oblation of the First Fruits
was not to be burnt (they being to be kept for the Priests use Numb. 18.13.)
but the Meat Offering offered by and for the Priests was to be burnt (Verse.
14.16.): The Sacrifices of this kind and nature were to be consumed as well as
others, for where their materials were liquid, those were to be poured out;
where solid, those were to be bruised and burnt; still in every Sacrifice some
way or other there was destruction rei oblatae. But eminently this was true in
those wherein living Creatures were to be Sacrificed, they were to be destroyed
or consumed indeed: And it is observable, the higher the Sacrifice was the
greater was the destruction or consumption of it; for in such as were more
ordinary (as those that were offered for private persons), there commonly but
part of the Sacrifice was consumed and part reserved for the Priests; but in
the higher and more extraordinary (such as were designed for the Priests, and
the whole Community, especially those whose blood was carried into the Holy of
Holies at the solemn, anniversary Expiation) in them all was to be consumed;
(read Levit. 6.30. -- 16.27.) The Scapegoat seems to be an exception against
this destroying, even of the great expiatory Sacrifices, it being not to be
slain but Levit. 16.21. etc.
sent into the Wilderness by some fit messenger; but the truth is, though that
(for some typical reasons) was not presently and downright destroyed, yet
virtually and in effect it was; for upon the sending of it into the Wilderness
it would in a little time be either starved to death or devoured by wild
Beasts. But to come more closely to the business! The living Creatures in
Sacrifices were to be killed, and then after that their blood (in a special
manner) was to be offered upon the Altar, it being that upon which the
expiation did mainly depend: So the Lord himself tells us Levit. 17.11. For the
life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar,
to make an atonement for your Souls; for it is the blood that ma^eth an
atonement for the Soul: where the first words, for the life of the flesh is in
the blood, come in not only as a reason to back the prohibition that went
before Verse. 10, (in which notion I considered them before); but also as a
Reason of that which follows, viz. why God appointed the use of blood in
Sacrifices for atonement; 'twas upon this ground because therein was the life
of the Creature, now he designing Life for Life therefore he pitched upon blood
wherein the life did lie. The Apostle tells us Heb. 9.22. And almost all things
are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is no
remission; and if you look into the Levitical Sacrifices you will find what he
says to be true: In the Burnt-offering for private Persons there was killing
and blood Levit. 1.5. the same in the Peace Offerings Levit. 3.2, 8, 13. the
same in the Sin Offerings Levit. 4.7, 16, 17, 18. (and so in the rest). And the
observation of these commands (which run so much upon blood) was so necessary,
that should any of the Priests have dared to have entered into God's presence in
any other way than by Sacrifices, and the blood thereof, he would not have
taken it well at their hands; yea, should they have brought into the Temple
never so many Bullocks, Rams, Goats etc. and not have slain them, or having
slain them had not presented their blood before him according to his
Institution, they would have done no good either to themselves or others; for
God (to show his Justice, Hatred of Sin etc) stood upon blood, and blood he
would have. From all this we may infer, that those old Sacrifices did not
expiate as bare Antecedents or Conditions (without which God would not pardon),
or as the offering of them carried in it some Obedience to God's Commands (both
of which were common to many other things as well as to them); surely there was
more in it than so! Dr. Stillingfl. against Crell: p. 516 etc.
for can we reasonably think, that God would have been so positive and so
express in his Injunctions about somany Sacrifices, so severe in the punishing
the neglect of them, have ordered the taking away the lives of so many
Creatures, and have so much insisted upon their death and blood in order to
expiation; had he looked upon them only as pre-requisite and remoter Conditions
of pardon, or common acts of Obedience, and that as such only they should be
expiatory? Certainly had there been nothing in them more than this, the
merciful Creator would have spared the blood of the poor Creatures, and would
have pitched upon some other course which might have seemed (at least) more
consistent with his Wisdom and Goodness! We may conclude them therefore to be
Means instituted by God in order to atonement and expiation, to the effecting
of which, by virtue of his own institution and the mevit of the great Sacrifice
to come, they had a direct and effectual tendency.

This foundation I have laid for the better understanding of the destroying,
killing, shedding of blood that was in the typical Sacrifices, I come now to
build upon it with respect to the real Sacrifice, Christ Jesus. In conformity
to them therefore, Christ was slain, died upon the Cross, his body broken, his
blood spilt etc. all which speaks him to be a true expiatony Sacrifice: Had he
not died and suffered he could not have been such, but upon that he is not only
such a Sacrifice really but eminently, (the dignity of his Person putting a
superlative worth and ^fficacy upon his Death and Sacrifice). O what was the
death of Greatures to the death of God's Son? what was the blood of Beasts to
the blood of him who was God Acts. 20.28.? for such a^person to die, to shed
his blood for the expiation of Sin? here was a Sacrifice indeed! And surely one
great end of God in ordering the death of the old Sacrifices, was to convince
the World of the necessity of the death of this far greater Sacrifice; by them
he designed (in ways best known to himself) to lead men to a dying and bleeding
Christ. How much does the Scripture spoke of his blood! and (though his whole
humiliation must be taken in, as making up his Sacrifice, yet in special) what
a stress and emphasis does it put upon his Death and Blood (wherein his
greatest humiliation lay), with respect to their influence upon the good of
Sinners! Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins: Romans 3.25. whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood etc. Romans 5.9. Much more then, being now justified
by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. 1. Joh. 1.7. -- and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Rev. 1.5. Unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. 1 Pet. 1.19. --
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without
spot. Mat. 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is shed for many
for the remission of sins. Heb. 9.12, etc. Neither by the blood of Goats and
Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in once into the holy place, having
obtained eternal redemption for us: For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats etc.
Col. 1.14. -- having made peace through the blood of his Cross. Surely there
must be some special reason why this blood of Christ is so often mentioned, and
why the great benefits, which Sinners receive by him, are in such a way of
eminency ascribed to it, (of which some account will be given in the following
particular). O the severity of God's Justice, which nothing could satisfy but
the blood of his own Son! O the love of Christ, who thought not the best blood
in his veins too good for Sinners! O the truth of his Satisfaction, for what
could such blood be spilt for but for that? what end could be proportionable to
such a medium but Satisfaction? O the admirable harmony between type and
antitype, the shadow and the substance, Sacrifice and Sacrifice! under the Law
'twas blood, under the Gospel' it was blood too, (only that was common blood but
this excellent and precious).

The Fourth Head; of the Ends and Effects of the old expiatory Sacrifices, and
how they are applicable to Christ.
4. Fourthly, if we compare Christ with the Jewish Sacrifices in their Ends and
Effects, that will further demonstrate him to be a true expiatory Sacrifice.
What were they? atonement and expiation; by them God was to be atoned and Sin
to be expiated: now both of these were designed and admirably effected in and
by Christ, therefore he was what I am proving.

That those Sacrifices were of an atoning nature, and appointed for that end,
what can be more plain? Here the so often cited Text (which indeed is the key
to the whole body of the Levitical-Sacrifices) does recur, Levit. 17.11. -- I
have given it to you upon the Altar (for what end?) to make an atonement for
your Souls: where the word used (as in very many other places) is Caphar, which
signifies to This sense of the word justified by all Anti-Socinian Writers.
Franz. Disp. 15. th. 38. Turretin. de Satisf. p. 208. Grot. de Sat. p. 39.
Hoorneb. Socin. Confut. p. 607. Dr. Stillingfl. p. 509. etc.
pacify, appease, or assuage the anger of one that is incensed; so its taken
Genesis 32.20. I will (says Jacob concerning his brother Esau) appease him with
the present that goes before me; (so 2 Samuel 21.3.): it signifies also to Psalm.
32.1.
cover, to Psalm. 49.7, 8.
redeem etc. but this of atoning or pacifying is most usual. Now in order to
this atoning God appointed Sacrifices, the shedding of whose blood was to make
an atonement (says the Lord here), and he goes over it again for it is the
blood that makes an atonement for the Soul. All along in the several kinds of
Sacrifices it runs, it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him, the
Priest shall make an atonement for them etc. this always comes in as the great
end or effect of the Law-Sacrifices: Whence they are said to be of a sweet
savor unto the Lord, (not only because of their pleasingness to God, but also
because they made him propitious to and well-pleased with such as had offended
him); so Levit. 1.9, 13, 17. It Is the same word, but sometimes it is rendered by
reconciling; as Levit. 6.30. No Sin-offering -- to reconcile withal in the holy
place -- Levit. 8.15. -- to make reconciliation upon it. We find when at any
time in some particular judgments the anger of God did break forth, either
against the people or against particular persons, presently they betook
themselves to Sacrifices thereby to atone and propitiate him: Numb. 16.46. And
Moses said unto Aaron, take a Censer and put fire therein from off the Altar,
and put on incense: and go quickly unto the Congregation and make an atonement
for them; for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun: 2 Samuel 24, 25. And David built there an Altar unto the Lord, and offered
Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings, so the Lord was entreated for the Land and
the plague was staid from Israel.

As to the other End or Effect viz. Expiation, that also belonged to
Sacrifices; they had a power or virtue in them to cleanse and purify from Sins
guilt, to procure pardon and remission (whence they were called Expiatory,),
and had it not been for this effect they could not have passed under that
denomination. A full proof of it you have in that one Sacrifice, the Heifer,
which was to be offered for the cleansing of the people, when murder had been
committed but the acter of it was concealed; Deuteronomy. 21.7, 8. And they shall
answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen
it: Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, and lay not innocent blood
unto thy people of Isreal's charge: and the blood shall be forgiven them. So
shall thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from amongst you etc. was not
here expiation? and wherein did that lie, but in the putting away of the guilt
of innocent blood and in the obtaining of pardon? for it is said and the blood
shall be forgiven them. This is that which is set forth by cleansing from sin,
Levit. 16.30. For on that day shall the Priest make an atonement for you, to
cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your sin before the Lord: Numb.
3.5. -- for blood defiles the band, and the land cannot be cleansed of the
blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. The Apostle
sets it forth by purifying of the flesh Heb. 9.13. (by which he means the
taking away of that ceremonial, ritual or civil guilt which any did lie under):
And he puts it out of all doubt, that expiation in the old Sacrifices did not
point to the abolition of Sins power, but to the ablation of Sins guilt; for
having said that Heb. 9.22.
almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, he tells you what he meant
by that purging, adding, without shedding of blood is [ no remission, or
expiation of sins guilt]: and this is the notion which always he drives at in
that Epistle, in those several words which he there uses, (viz.) sanctifying,
purifying, purging etc. Indeed this was the Vide Essen. Tri. Crucis. l. 1.
sect. 4. c. 8. p. 6.
chief and most proper effect of Sacrifices, other things might be done by them
but this was the main; therefore it so often comes in upon this account, And
the Priest shall make an atonement for them [and it shall be forgiven them]
Levit. 4.20. so Verse. 26. -- 31, -- 35. Causa cur noluerit Deus alteri
Sacrificari quam sibi, ea potissimum videtur quod Sacrificia imprimis fierent
ad expianda peccata, solus vero Deus jus habeat ea condonandi. Vossius de.
Idol. l. 1. p. 977.
And this might be one Reason why God prohibited the offering of Sacrifices to
any but to himself, because the end of them being the forgiveness of sin, and
none being able to reach that end but himself, therefore none should be
sacrificed unto but himself.

Four things laid down concerning Atonement and Expiation by Sacrifices.
For the better understanding of this double Effect of the Law-Sacrifices, I
desire four things may be considered: 1. That the atonement and expiation
effected by those Sacrifices, must be conceived of as done by them in that
notion which was proper to them as Sacrifices: None can deny but that they did
atone and expiate, but how did they so do? there is the question: I answer, this
was done by them as they were substituted in the place of Offenders, and were
slain in their stead and for their sake; (other accounts I know by some are
given of this but that now set down is the true, as appears by what has been
already spoken under the two foregoing Heads). 2. That this atoning and
expiating virtue was not limited only to the Sacrifices used at the anniversary
great Expiation, but it belonged to the other Sacrifices. For instance, to
Burnt-offerings (I take in those that were made use of before the giving of the
Law about Sacrifices); see Job. 1.5. -- 42.8: after the giving of the Law, to
Free-will-offerings Levit. 1.3, 4, etc. to the Meat Offering and Drink Offering
Levit. 2. per tot. Levit. 23.13. Numb. 15.7, 10, 13, 14. to the Peace Offering
Levit. 3.15, 16. to the Sin-offering and Trepass Offering Levit. 4.6. to the
Ram, which was therefore called the Ram of atonement Numb. 5.8. (there is no end
of such instances). 3. That yet the atonement and expiation proper to those
Sacrifices, is to be limited according to the bounds which God himself was
pleased to set; for 'twas but in such cases, and for such sins, wherein he did
admit of them in order to these effects, (of which more by and by). 4. That
these effects were not produced by any inherent or innate virtue in the
Sacrifices themselves, but only as they were instituted by God and as they
derived efficacy from the Sacrifice to come, Christ himself. Take away these
two things, and what could these Sacrifices have done? what could there be in
them to pacisie an angry God, or to to purify a guilty Sinner? what was the
blood of a Beast (as considered in it self) to expiate the sin of a Man? The
Apostle plainly tells us Heb. 10.4. It is not possible that the blood of Bulls
and Goats should take away sin: therefore he says there was no perfection by
the Levitical Priesthood Heb. 7.11. and the Law made nothing perfect Heb. 7.19.
-- in which were offered gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make him that did
the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Heb. 9.9. So that
whatever virtue those Sacrifices had (further than the taking away of civil
guilt, ritual uncleanness, securing from Church and State-penalties,) it wholly
depended upon the institution of God and the merit of Christ. The brazen
Serpent healed such as were stung, yet not from any intrinsic power in it
self, but only as God was pleased to give that power and efficacy to it; and so
'twas here in the case of the old Sacrifices. These four things I have laid
down both to clear up the Sacrifices themselves, and also because they are of
great use to set us right in our conceptions about Christ the great Sacrifice
(which must be opened by them).


Answerably now to these two great Ends and Effects of the Mosaical Sacrifices,
the same were designed to be done, and were actually done by the Lord Jesus,
when he offered up himself to God upon the Cross; whereby he also (1.) atoned
God, (2.) expiated the sin of the Elect.
As God was angry and offended with the Sinner, so Christ by his death procured
atonement, pacification, reconciliation; as the Sinner lay under guilt, so
Christ brought about the purgation or expiation of his guilt: both of these
were done by him, and that too not only really but in a much higher way than
what was done by the old Sacrifices, therefore he was a true proper expiatory
Sacrifice, yea, the most eminent expiatory Sacrifice.

Of atonement and reconciliation by Christ's Sacrifice.
1. For atonement or reconciliation. By Adams Fall a sad breach had been made
'twixt God and Man, Sin had greatly incensed the holy God against his sinful
Creatures, nay there was a mutual and reciprocal enmity contracted between
them: Things being in this dismal state the blessed. Jesus interposed himself,
in order to the appeasing of an offended God and the reconciling of him and the
Sinner (the two parties that were at variance). For the effecting of which, he
did not only as a bare Internuntius treat with both, or only offer up prayers
to the one (in which respect Moses atoned God Exodus 34.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.) and
entreaties to the other (2 Cor. 5.20.), and so proceed by some verbal
interposures; but (when nothing else would do it) he was willing even to lay
down his own Life, to die as a Sacrifice upon the Cross, by this means to bring
God and Man together again in amity and love. By which death of Christ the
offended God was perfectly atoned and reconciled to the Sinner; so as that now,
upon the satisfaction made to him therein, he could without any injury to his
Justice and Holiness receive the Sinner into his favor, and not inflict upon
him that wrath and punishment which he had made himself obnoxious unto: (this
is the true notion of atonement and reconciliation by Christ, and all that we
Non statuimus Deum irato proprie factum esse propitium, sed Christi
Satisfactione causas irae divinae obliteratas esse, ut salva justistia sua
possit gratiam exhibere. Essenius. p. 253.
mean by it). But that this was thus done by him, what one thing is there in
all the matters of Faith wherein the Gospel is more clear and full? 1 John 2.2.
And he is the propitiation for our sins: 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that
we loved God but that he loved us, and sent his Son, to be the propitiation for
our sins: Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith
in his blood etc. Romans 5.10, 11. For if when we were enemies we were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by
his life: And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. All things
are of God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ -- God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself -- Col. 1.20, 21. And (having made
peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto
himself etc. And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by
wicked works, yet now has be reconciled, in the body of his flesh through
death -- So Ephesians. 2.13, 14, etc. -- Isa. 53.6. the chastisement of our peace was
upon him (i. e. by his penal sufferings our peace was made with God). It Is true
(which our Socin. de Serv^ p. 1. c. 8.
Adversanies would fain improve to their purpose), that all along in these
Scriptures the reconciliation is said to be on Man's part, as if Sinners were
reconciled to God, not God to them; but there is a special reason for that,
(viz.) Baxters Life of Faith. p. 189.
because they were the first in the breach, they fell out with God before he
fell out with them; as also because the averseness to reconciliation is on
their part; wherefore if they be willing to be reconciled to God and are
actually reconciled to him, there is no question of it but that he is willing to
be reconciled to them, and is so actually. Some would have the reconciliation
(as on God's part) to be spoken of Heb. 2.17. -- that he might be a merciful
and faithful high Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people; (where (...), is according to the Hebrew Enallage
as much as (...), as De Satisf. p. 93.
Grotius well observes). Howerver (supposing that this Text does not so
expressly hold forth the thing,) yet there is enough in those convincing
Reasons, Arguments, and Consequences which the Word elsewhere affords, to prove
the reconciliation to be mutual (as is fully proved by diverse). Which
reconciliation (you see) was accomplished by Jesus Christ, yea by his death and
blood; so that he exactly answers to the first effect of the Jewish Sacrifices.

Of the Expiation of Sin by Christ's Sacrifice.
2. The for the Second, the expiation of sin, that also was done (with great
advantage) by Christ; his death carried indeed a Sinexpiating virtue in it and
was most truly of an expiatory nature. Let us a little look into the Scripture
and see what it says about this; and that we shall find not only to assert the
thing, but so to assert it as withal to set down and determine the nature and
true notion of it. I mean this, the Scripture does not only in general speak of
Christ's taking away or expiating of Sin, but it shows in what manner he did it
and wherein the nature of that expiation did consist: as namely that he did
expiate it in that way which was agreeable to what was done in and by the old
Sacrifices, and that according to the notion proper to their expiation so his
must be understood. For in speaking thereof it uses those expressions which
point to those Sacrifices and to their expiation; thereby noting (1.) that
Christ did expiate in that very way wherein they did: and (2.) that therefore
his expiation (in the nature of it) must run parallel with theirs.
Take a few Instances: Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and
the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, (...).
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God,
(...).
purge your Conscience from dead works to serve the living God? -- Verse. 22,
23. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood: and without
shedding blood is no remission. It was therefore necessary that the patterns of
things in the Heavens should be (...).
purified with these, but the Heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifices
than these. Heb. 1.3. -- When he had by himself (...).
purged our sins (or as it is in the Greek, he having by himself made purgation
or expiation of our sins): 1 John 1.7. -- -- and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son (...).
cleanses us from all sin; (by which cleansing the Apostle meant the expiation
or remission of sin, for Verse. 9. he puts them together -- he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness). Heb.
10.22. -- having our bearts (...).
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies (...).
washed with pure water. Revel. 1.5. Unto him that loved us and (...).
washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Now pray observe from these Scriptures 1. That the expiating of sin (under the
terms of purifying, purging, cleansing, washing, sprinkling) is expressly
attributed to Christ. 2. That he, as being a Sacrifice, by dying and shedding
his blood, so did expiate sin. 3. That the proper and primary effect of his
death and blood was the expiation of sins guilt, and as a consequent thereof
its remission. Matthew. 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament which is
shed for many [for the remission of sins]. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, [the forgiveness of sins] -- (So Romans 3.25). 4. That as the
Jewish Sacrifices were truly expiatory, they (in their way) taking off sins
guilt and the punishment due thereupon, wherein the formal nature of their
expiation did consist; so answerably Christ Jesus was a true expiatory
Sacrifice, he (in his way too) taking off sins guilt etc. wherein the formal
nature of his expiation did and must consist also.


This I ground upon a twofold consideration: (1.) Because by those very Words
which were proper to those Sacrifices and by which their expiation of sin was
seth forth, I say by those very Words the Sacrifice of Christ and the efficasy
thereof is described; therefore it must be as truly expiatory of sin as they
were; (this is sufficiently proved in the places that have been cited). And I
might further add, that the words there used are the very same with those which
the Greek profane Authors do always use, when they are speaking of their
expiatory Sacrifices and of the effect of them, (of which many instances are
given by the Stuck. de Sacrif. fol. 148. Grot. de Sat. p. 128, 129. (with many
Others).
Learned). -- (2.)Because the Apostle (who most uses these words, and in the
place too where he most uses them, I mean in his Epistle to the Hebrews,) does
professedly draw a parallel 'twixt Christ and the Law-Sacrifices, showing there
was a great analogy and resemblance betwixt them.
True, he asserts a greater excellency and efficacy in the one than in the
other, and as to the manner of working he shows there was a vast difference
between them; but yet as to the great effect of a Sacrifice ( expiation of sin)
in that (so far as the nature of the things would admit of) they did agree.
Well then! if they did purify and expiate, so must Christ; and as they did
purify and expiate (in taking away guilt by death and blood), so must Christ;
otherwise where would the analogy be between them? was it not thus there would
be expiation in the type and none in the antitype, and one way of expiation in
the type and another in the antitype, (both of which are directly contrary to
the Apostles scope and design in the forenamed Epistl^).

Some possibly will ask why I multiply so many words and stay so long upon this
point? I Will tell them, I do it to vindicate both the reality and also the true
notion of our Saviors expiatory Sacrifice. For the SOCINIANS (who have not
left us one fountain of Evangelical Comfort un-poyson'd) herein deal with their
usual subtilty; very fair words are spoken by them as though they were for and
did own Christ's Socin. de Serve. p. 2. c. 11.13, 14, 16, 17. Crellius contra
Grot. cap. 10. sect. 2.
expiation of sin, but when they come to open it and to show what they mean by
it, they make it a quite other thing than what indeed it is; they keep the Word
but quit the Scripture-sense thereof: Christ (say they) did expiate sin, but
how? why, by begetting Faith in the Sinner, by working repentance in him, by
turning and drawing him off from sin, by delivering from the effects of it, by
declaring the Will of God about remission and the way thereunto, as his death
was an antecedent to his exaltation in Heaven where (say they) he only expiates
sin etc. in such things as these, but not in Christ's undergoing the punishment
due to the Sinner and dying in his stead; they make his expiation of Sin to
lie. Now though much might be (and Grot. de Sat. p. 136. Hoorneb. p. 581. etc.
Franz. p. 207. and 450. Dr. Stillingst. against Crell. c. 6. p. 507. etc.
Turret. p. 202. etc. Jacob. ad Portum. p. 464. etc.
is) said against each of these particularly, yet that which I have in the
general insisted upon is a sufficient confutation of them all; viz. Christ must
expiate sin in that way and sense wherein the Sacrifices under the Law did, now
did they expiate any other way than as they were substituted in the Offenders
room and as they died in his stead? therefore that must be the way wherein
Christ our Sacrifice does expiate also. Thus I have gone over the four Heads
propounded for the proving of Christ to be a true, proper expiatory Sacrifice.

Of the concurrence of the Heathens in these notions of Sacrifices.
Only for the further clearing and* confirming of what has been said, it will
not be amiss (before I go off from this) to show how the Heathens themselves,
in their notions about their Sacrifices, did exactly agree with what I have now
delivered concerning the Jewish Sacrifices, and also concerning Christ (the far
greater Sacrifice). The business of sacrificing was not a thing used and
practiced only amongst the Jews, but amongst Gentiles and Heathens also; yea,
even amongst those this practice in ancient times was so Catholic and
universal, as that there was scarce any considerable Nation or People in the
world of whose using of Sacrifices we have not some account. Whence this came
about I am not now to enquire; only (in a word) it proceeded partly from the Sea River. in Genesis Exerc. 42. Dr. Owen Theol. Not. 1. c. 8. p. 89.
instigation and delusion of the Devil, (who loves to ape it after God, and to
stir up his blind and deluded followers to do that to false Gods. which should
only be done to the true God)* partly from the practice and example of the
Prima victimarum Gentilium origo est ex divina institutione Patriarchis facta
urgente insuper Conscientia. Essen. p. 237.
Patriarchs; the knowledge of whose sacrificing (according to divine
institution) being dissus'd and spread over the world by tradition, (which
commenced first from Adam to Seth, then continued from Seth to Noah, then from
Noah to his Sons, and they peopling the world transmitted the use of Sacrifices
to their posterity), it had this effect to draw men universally to conform unto
and imitate the example of these Patriarchs in this matter. And though they
soon degenerated from the primitive and right use. of Sacrifices, in their
departing from the true object of them and in their sacrificing to them that
were Gal. 4.8.
no Gods; yet (in their idolatrous way) they continued and kept up the
observation of them from one generation to another. In process of time when the
Jews (after their coming out of Egypt) were formed into a distinct polity, and
Sacrifices were re-instituted by God, and all things in special Laws made by
him precisely ordered about them, it is probable that from thence the Gentiles
did receive further light (which accordingly they in a great measure complied
with): for do but bate the difference in the object (and in some other things)
and there was a great agreement betwixt the Sacrifices of the one and of the
other, as also in the conceptions of both about them. This being the thing
which falls in with what I design, I must be more particular about it; for
instance therefore thus: In the Jewish expiatory Sacrifices there was a
surrogation or substitution of the things sacrificed in the room and stead of
the Offenders themselves (as has been shown); the same was also done in the
Which therefore they called Hostiae succedancae. Men' piaculum oportet fieri
propter stultitiam tuam, ut meum tergum stultitiae tuae subdas succedaneum?
Plant.
Gentile Sacrifices, and this was that very notion which they in them went
upon. Nothing more usual amongst them than for one to die As the Decii amongst
the Romans, Codrus amongst the Athenians, Menecaus amongst the Thebans etc. --
Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte Daretis Persolvo. Virgil.
for another (especially for the Community); and if they apprehended their Gods
by the inflicting of such and such evils upon them to be angry, presently they
substituted some (whom they called Viri piaculares, In allusion to whom (some
think) the Apostle uses these words 1 Cor. 4.13. Suidas in V. (...) Dr. Hammond
in loc. -- In the lustration or purgation of their Cities they used to put to
death some malefactor, and at the execution of him to say (...), be thou a
Victime in our stead.
(...)) to die in the stead of all the people, so to make expiation. And as the
Jews testified their designing and believing of this by their laying on of
hands upon the Sacrifices, so did the Sea Dr. Stillingst. against Crellius. p.
444.
Gentiles also. In the Jewish Sacrifices there was the killing of them, the
shedding of their blood etc. the -- Et culpam hanc miserorum morte piabunt.
Virg. -- Date gaudia Thebis Quae pepigi, and toto quae sanguine prodigus emi.
Statius: Upon this Porphyry wrote much against those Sacrifices -- (...). l. 2.
p. 59.
Gentiles in their's too were for death and blood: The Jews hoped by their
Sacrifices to propitiate and atone God when offended, the V. Stuekium de
Sacrif. fol. 146. Gyrald. Synt. 17. p. 491. Placuit ad averruncundam: Deorum
iram victimus coedi. Live. lib. 8. Mactata venlet mitior hostia Horat.
Gentiles by theirs designed and hoped the same (for they had their Sacrificia
(...) too). The Jews had their Burnt-offerings, whole Burnt-offerings, their
Sin Offerings, their solemn and annual expiations, and all for purging,
purifying, expiating of sin; the -- Et solida imponit taurorum viscera flammis.
Virgil. See Grot. on Levit. 1.9. -- Soepe Deos aliquis peccando fecit iniquos,
and pro delictis hostia blanda fuit. Ovid. Annua quae differ nefas celebrate
faventes Nobiscum. Virgil. They called these Sacrifices (...), from their
purging and purifying from guilt. See instances in Grot. de Sat. p. 124. --
teque piacula nulla resolvent. Horat.
Gentiles in all these concurred with them. Nay, because they would be sure to
do this effectually, by the sacrificing of their best to their Gods, and
conceiving that the life of man was most proper to expiate for the life of man;
therefore (though this was their great sin) in order to the pacifying of their
Gods and the expiating of guilt, they stuck not at the Sacrificing of Pro vita
hominum nisi vita hominis reddatur, non posse Deorum immortalium Numen placari
arbitrantur, Caesar de Bell. Gallico. Sanguine quaerendi reditus animaque
litandum Argolica. Virg. Sanguine placastis ventos and virgin caesa. Idem.
Omnis and humanis lustrata cruoribus arbor. Lucan. This (...) prevailed so
much, that the Senate of Rome was fain to make a Decree against it. Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 3 c. 1. See of it Eusebius. de Praepar. Evang. l. 4. c. 16. Tertull.
Apol. c. 9. Theodoret. vol. 4. p. 589. Porphyr. (...) l. 2. sect. 27. Saubertus
de Sacrif. c. 21. p. 517. Stuck. fol. 41. Grot. de Sat. p. 132. Cloppenb.
Spicileg. p. 212.
men themselves, yea, of their dearest children: (Instances of which, with
Commands against it, frequently occur in Scripture, 2 King. 3.27. 2 King.
17.31. 2 King. 23.10. 2 Chronicles. 28.3. Jer. 7.31. Jer. 19.5. Jer. 32.35. Psalm.
106.37, 38. Levit. 18.21. Levit. 20.2. In other things the Heathens borrowed
from the Jews, in this the Jews from the Heathens). Upon the whole then it
appears, that Scripture and Nature do both concur in that notion of expiatory
Sacrifices which I have insisted upon: and surely in the applying of it to
Christ (the grand expiatory Sacrifice) the Gospel is exceeding clear. So that
when we assert his substitution in the stead of Sinners, his dying for them,
his atoning God and expiating Sin by his death and blood; we say nothing but
what Jews and Heathens in their expiatory Sacrifices apprehended, believed, and
acted upon. They then who differ in these things (as to the general nature, use
and end of such Sacrifices,) they differ not only from us but from all mankind:
of whom it might be expected they would better agree with Heathens since they
do so ill agree with Christians.

Of the Second Enquiry, when and where Christ was this expiatory Sacrifice?
I have dispatched the First Enquiry What a kind of Sacrifice Christ was? the
Second follows when and where he was such a Sacrifice? To which I answer, when
he was here on earth and especially when he died upon the Cross, then and there
he was this expiatory Sacrifice. All are not, of my mind herein; the Enemy (who
way-lays me in every step I take in these great Truths) is upon me again, and
forces me to defend my self (or rather the Truth I have laid down). Socin. de
Serve. p. 2. c. 12, 15. Small. de Divin. Christi. c. 23. Gatech. Racov. de Mun.
Christi. Sacerd. Quaest. 2.
He says, Christ's being thus a Sacrifice points to his being in Heaven, and
to what he there does; that his death here was but a preparation to his
Sacrifice as there to be made, or but an antecedent Condition to his having of
power there to expiate sin, (with much more to that purpose). Here then lies
the difference between us and S, we say Christ's being the expiatory Sacrifice
belongs to that part of his Priestly-Office which he executed here upon earth,
they make it to refer to that part of his Priestly-Office which he now executes
in Heaven; we time it in Christ's dying upon the Cross, they in his sitting
upon the Throne.

Now that I may at once prove what is true and also confute what is false, I
argue thus:

1. It appears that here Christ's Sacrifice was exhibited (or that here he made
his expiatory Offering), because the Scripture speaks of it as a thing that is
past, and antecedent to his exaltation and glory; and therefore it must be done
here on earth and not in Heaven. Ephesians. 5.2. -- and [hath given] himself for us,
an Offering, a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor: Heb. 1.3. -- when
he [had] by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high; (mark it, the Sacrifice-purgation or expiation of sin was over
and done, and then Christ's exaltation in Heaven followed after): Heb. 9.12.
Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in
once into the holy place, [having obtained] (not to obtain) eternal redemption
for us: Heb. 10.12. But this man [after he had offered] one Sacrifice for sins
for ever, sat down on the right hand of God: he did not first sit down on the
right hand of God and then offer up his Sacrifice for sins, but he first
offered and then he sat down on the right hand of God.

2. When the Scripture speaks of Christ's expiation of sin by the Sacrifice of
himself, it speaks of it as a thing done but once; therefore it must refer to
his death which was but once, not to his intercession (or any other act) in
Heaven which is a Heb. 7.25.
continued, repeated and reiterated act. Heb. 9.26. For then must he often have
suffered since the foundation of the world; but now [once] in the end of the
world has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. -- Verse.
28. Christ was [once] offered to bear the sins of many: Heb. 7.27. -- this he
did [once] when he offered up himself: Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are
sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ [once] for all.
Does this once agree with any thing that he now does in Heaven?

3. If Christ had not dispatched his expiatory work at his death, why did he
then say Joh. 19.30.
It is finished? if his expiating of sin was yet to come and to be done in
Heaven, how could he with truth have spoken these words that all was finished
when the great thing was yet undone?

4. That of the Apostle is pertinent to our purpose, Heb. 10.5. Wherefore when
he [cometh into the world] he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not,
but a body have thou prepared me etc. wherefore did Christ come into the world?
why, to be a Sacrifice and to do that which the old Sacrifices could not; God
was e'ene weary of them, could no longer Heb. 10.8.
take pleasure in them, he will have Christ (the better Sacrifice) to come into
the world, which accordingly he did. I but what was the world into which he
came? surely it must be this lower world: for it must be understood of that
world into which he came to do the Will of God (as appears Verse. 7.9.), now
that was this World below rather than that above; for where do we read that
Christ ascended into the upper World to do the Will of God? especially this
Will of God referring to his assuming a body and offering up that body (Verse.
5.10.)? these were things to be done only on this lower stage of earth: whence
then it follows that here his Sacrifice was made.

5. There was (as has been observed) to be an analogy and resemblance 'twixt
Christ's Sacrifice and the Levitical Sacrifices, and he was to expiate in that
way wherein they did expiate; but if you do not place his Sacrifice in his
death where will that analogy be? or how will he expiate in that way wherein
they did? What is there in Christ as in Heaven that carries any resemblance to
the killing, slaying, shedding the blood, offering of the Levitical Sacrifices?
There he sits in great glory, puts forth his Regal power, is Head of Church
etc. but what is all this to suffering, dying, pouring out his blood, wherein he
was to answer to those Sacrifices? Does the Scripture lay so much upon his
death and blood for expiation, and yet shall that be done where there is none
of these?

'Twill be said, there is this in Christ in Heaven to carry resemblance to the
old Sacrifices, their blood was carried by the High Priest into the Holy of
Holy's, and there sprinkled by him toward the Mercy-seat; upon which expiation
and atonement followed: now parallel to this Christ himself (our High Priest)
is entered into Heaven, the Sanctuary not made with hands, and there he executes
his Priestly Office (after a sort) for expiation and atonement also. To which I
reply, Christ's entrance into Heaven cannot be denied, nor that that does much
resemble what was done by the High Priest under the Law (all that being but
typical of this); Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made
with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into Heaven itself, now to
appear in the presence of God for us. And therein we have the second part of
his Priesthood (the oblation of himself here on earth being the first and his
intercession in heaven the second): which two must not be divided but
conjoined, the former must not justle out the latter nor the latter the former.
Which second part of his Priesthood was necessary partly in respect of Christ
himself; for the completing and consummating of his Priesthood (the perfection
and excellency of which depended upon it); for (says the Apostle) Heb. 8.4. If
he were on earth he should not be a Priest (i.e. not a Priest of the highest
rank, he would come short of the High Priest and be but as one of the ordinary
Priests, if he should only offer without and after that not enter into the
Sanctuary as the High Priest did, and he only): And partly too in respect of
Believers, that he might not only make his oblation for them in order to
impetration (which he had done on earth), but that he might further present and
plead the merit of that oblation in order to application, and the actual giving
out the benefits purchased and merited thereby (which was to be done in
Heaven): therefore this we readily grant and firmly believe. But that our
Lord's whole Priesthood does lie in this, or that he only in this place and
state does expiate sin, or that his resemblance herein to the High Priest is
sufficient, that we utterly deny: For

1. The Scripture (as has been proved) in drawing the parrallel 'twixt Christ
and the Law-Sacrifices, does not instance only in what was done by the
High Priest in the Holy of Holy's, but also in what was done by the other
Priests in the Temple, and in those sacrificial acts which were proper to them
as well as to him. Nay

2. It mainly instances in these; making the resemblance chiefly to lie in the
mactation and oblation of those Sacrifices which was done without; and
therefore it must be Christ's death on the Cross and not his intercession in
Heaven which must be meant by them.

3. As that which is asserted by our Opposers would utterly destroy all
analogy 'twixt Christ and those Priests, and the far greatest part of
Sin-expiating Sacrifices; so it would in truth leave Christ no Sacrifice or
oblation at all: inasmuch as what he does in Heaven cannot (in any strictness
or propriety of speaking) come under the notion of an oblation or Sacrifice.
There indeed is the presenting, commemorating, pleading of the Sacrifice which
he offered here on earth, but that is all; he improves the Sacrifice there upon
the Throne, but he made it here upon the Cross; he applys the expiation there
but he wrought it here.

4. It Is true, the High Priest entered into the Sanctuary and there expiated
sin, but 'twas with the blood which had been shed and offered without: some of
that blood (before offered upon the Priest's Altar) he carried into the Holy of
Holy's, and there presented it before the Lord, and so made atonement. Had he
gone in thither without this blood and only have shown himself before God, it
would have signified nothing; what he there did was grounded upon the virtue of
the preceding oblation, which was only now in a more solemn manner represented
before the Lord. Just so it is with our Lord Jesus, he entered into Heaven and
there intercedes as our High Priest to his Father, but the efficacy of this his
intercession is founded upon his blood shed when he was here on earth: take
away his oblation here and take away his intercession there, for it is that
which gives the efficacy and prevalency to this. Therefore he is said to enter
into the holy place, but how? why, by his own blood Heb. 9.11. he must first
shed his blood here upon Earth, and then carry the virtue and merit of it with
him into Heaven, and so he may expect to do something (which upon his mere
appearance in Heaven he could not have done). So that there must be something
in Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice more than what is proper to him now he is
above, in correspondency to what was done by the High Priest in his entering
into the Holy of Holy's and there expiating sin. I think if all be put together
which has been spoken upon this account, the Truth (which I contend for) is
written as with the beams of the Sun, therefore I Will say no more.

Of the Effect of Christ's Sacrifice, viz. the condemning of sin, (the Second
thing propounded to be spoken unto).
Thus I have finished the first thing propounded for the clearing of the
Observation, namely Christ's being a Sacrifice for sin. Where I have shown that
he was a Sacrifice, what a kind of Sacrifice he was, and when or where he was
such a Sacrifice. The Second thing propounded to be opened was the Effect or
Efficacy of this Sacrifice, viz. the condemning of sin; [and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh]. (In this I Will be but very brief because it falls in with
what has been already insisted upon.

Here was a strange and wonderful Sacrifice, the most costly one that ever was
offered up to God, therefore surely something that is extraordinary and great
must be effected by it; and so there was: What was that? why, Sin was cut off,
taken out of the way (as condemned persons use to be), its guilt abolished or
expiated, (wherein you have heard the condemning of it does mainly consist. How
this is set forth by such terms as answer to the Law-Sacrifices, I have already
shown: Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself [purged] our sins: 1 John 1.7. and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son [cleanseth] us from all sin: Rev. 1.5. Unto him
that loved us, and [washed] us from our sins in his own blood: but there are
some other terms by which it is set forth which have not as yet been mentioned.
As namely the taking away of sin; Joh. 1.29. Behold, the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin of the world: 1 John 3.5. And ye know that he was
manifested to take away our sins --: (which taking away of sin was a thing far
above the power of the Levitical Sacrifices, Heb. 10.4. For it is not possible
that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins). So also the
finishing and making an end of sin; Dan. 9.24. -- to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sins --: where the finishing of transgression is not the
filling up of its full measure (of which you read Genesis 15.16. 1. These. 2.16.),
neither is it the completing or perfecting of it (as we commonly take the
word, in which respect Christ is said to be the author and finisher of our
faith Heb. 12.2. and to finish what he had to do and suffer Joh. 17.4. --
19.30.); but it is (as follows) the making an end of sin, such a finishing as is
destructive not perfective: by Christ's Sacrifice sin was destroyed, he thereby
made an end of it or sealed it up (as the word signifies) so as that it should
never be seen or come forth again to the hurt of God's people. Again, it is set
forth by the putting away of sin; Heb. 9.26. -- but now once in the end of the
world has he appeared [(...)] to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself: the
word is rendered by disannulling Heb. 7.18. by making void or abrogating Mark
7.9. set it as high as you will the virtue and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice
will reach it: by the oblation of himself he has quite disannulled or
abrogated and put away the guilt of sin. Put all together, here is purging,
cleansing, washing, taking away, putting away, finishing, making an end of sin
(all of which are the same with the condemning of sin in the Text), do not all
prove the real expiation of the Sin of Believers as the result and issue of the
Sacrifice of Christ?

I having (in what goes before) said enough for the opening of the true notion
of our Saviors expiating of sin, under the present Head I have but two things
further to speak unto; the one referring to the nature of the act, the other to
the extent of the act.

Of the nature of the expiation of Sin by Christ.
1. As to the nature of the act know, that Christ has so expiated sins guilt as
that it shall never be imputed to the believing Sinner, in order to the
inflicting of eternal punishment upon him: (this must be rightly apprehended or
else we shall run our selves upon great mistakes). When you read of the
expiating, condemning, taking away of sin, (and so on in the other expressions
named but now), you are not only to understand them as pointing to the removal
of sins guilt (in their proper and primary intention), but also as holding
forth no more about that removal of guilt than the non-imputation thereof to
punishment. Christ indeed by the Sacrifice of himself has done all that which
I am speaking of, but how? not but that believers have yet guilt upon them,
that that guilt (as considered in it self) makes them liable to the penalty
threatened, that the formal intrinsic nature of guilt (viz. obligation to
punishment) does yet remain, and is the same in them which it is in others: all
therefore which it amounts unto is only this, that this guilt shall not be
charged upon such or imputed to them for eternal condemnation. Sin is Sin in
the godly as well as in the ungodly, thereupon there is guilt on them as well as
on the other, and upon this guilt they are equally obnoxious to the Laws
sentence; but now here comes in the expiation by the Obedience, Death,
Satisfaction of Christ, by which things are brought to this happy issue that
though this be so, yet these persons shall be exempted from wrath and Hell and
the punishment deserved shall not be inflicted. Thus far we may safely go but
beyond this we cannot; we may (for the encouraging of Faith, the heightning of
Comfort) set this Sin-expiatory act of Christ very high, but we must not set it
so high as to assert Contradictions. (But these things will be more fully
stated when I shall come to the handling of the main Doctrine of Justification).

Of the extent of this act with respect to the Subject and Object.
2. For the extent of the act that must be considered two ways; either as it
respects the Subject for which this expiation was wrought, or as it respects
the Object, the thing expiated.

1. As to its extent in reference to the Subject: And so Christ's expiatory
Sacrifice reaches (1.) both to Jew and Gentile; not to the one or to the other
(exclusively), but to both. 1 John 2.2. And he is the propitiation for our
sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. -- (2.)
To those who lived under the Law as well as to those who now live under the
Gospel: the former had the benefit of Christ's expiation of sin as well as the
latter. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith
in his blood, to declare his righteousness [for the remission of sins that are
past], through the forbearance of God: where by Sins past you are to understand
those that were committed under the first Testament before Christ's coming in
flesh: so the Apostle opens it Heb. 9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator
of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
transgressions that were [under the first Testament], they which are called
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Nay (3.) there is a a
sufficiency of virtue and merit in Christ's Sacrifice to expiate the sins of
all men in the world. Yet (4.) in point of efficacy it extends no farther than
to true believers; others may receive some benefits by a dying Christ, but
this, of the full and actual expiation of Sin, belongs only to those who have
saving faith wrought in them. As this (which I here assert) is matter of
Controversy I have no mind to engage in it; as it is practically to be
improved and enlarged upon so I shall speak to it in the Use; therefore at
present I Will say no more to it.


All Sins whatsoever expiated by Christ's Sacrifice.
2. As to its extent in reference to the Object or the thing expiated, it
reaches to all and every sin. Christ is such a Sin-offering as does take off
from those who believe in him all guilt whatsoever; by his Sacrifice for sin he
condemned sin (that is) all sins whatsoever, it is indefinitely expressed and to
be understood universally. Take sin collectively in the whole heap or mass of
it, or take it distributively for this or that particular sin, all is expiated
and done away by Christ's blood; the expiation is so full and complete that
there is not the guilt of any one sin (little or great) left unremov'd. 1 John
1.7. the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from [all sin]: Acts 13.39.
And by him all that believe are justified from [all things], from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

Whether the Jewish Sacrifices did expiate all Sins?
Whether the Levitical Sacrifices did thus universally expiate sin is a
controverted point; wherein the Socinians hold the Negative, the Orthodox the
Affirmative. The Socin. de Servat. p. 2. c. 11, 12, 18.
former say those Sacrifices did free from the guilt of lesser sins, (such as
were sins of ignorance, committed through incogitancy, inadvertency, humane
infirmity), but for great and grievous sins (such as were committed against
knowledge or willingly and wilfully) they did not free from their guilt: the
Vid. Calov. Socin. proflig. p. 625. Lubbert. contra Socin Hoorneb. Socin.
confut. p. 602. Turretin. de Sat. Christi p. 226. Stegm. Photin. p. 282. O.
against B. p. 474. and p 469.
latter assert and defend the contrary. And not without very good and weighty
reasons; for if we look into the annual expiatory Sacrifice we find that all
sins were expiated by it: Levit. 16.21. Aaron shall lay his hands upon the head
of the live Goat, and confess over him [all the iniquities] of the children of
Israel, and [all their transgressions in all their sins], putting them upon the
head of the Goat etc. And the Goat shall bear upon him [all their iniquities],
unto a land not inhabited. (30.) On that day shall the Priest make and
atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from [all your sin]
before the Lord. (34.) And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to
make an atonement for the children of Israel, [for all their sins], once a
year. And as it was thus in the public Sacrifices for all the people, so also
in the private Sacrifices for particular persons: therefore as you read of the
( Of the difference of these two ( Chataath and Asham) much is written. Fagius
makes the one to refer to sins of Omission, the other to sins of Commission. In
Levit. 4 2 -- Others make the Asham to point to sins particularly enumerated,
Chataath to sins in the general. See Dr. O. Exerc. 24. on the Heb. p. 317. Dr.
Stillingst. against Crellius. p. 474. -- But the most distinguish them, as one
was for Sins of Ignorance, the other for Sins knowingly and willingly
committed. Vid. Petit. Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 8. Saubert. de Sacrif. c. 3. p. 65.
Chataath) the Sin-offering which was appointed for Sins of Ignorance Levit.
4.2. -- 13. -- 22. -- 27. so of the (Asham) the Trepass Offering which was
appointed for sins committed knowingly and willingly, such as were of a more
high and heinous nature; as falsehood in the detaining of what was deposited,
lying, violence, perjury, etc. Levit. 6.2, 3, etc. were not these great and
horrid sins? and yet God appointed Sacrifices for the expiation of them. Numb.
5.6. When a man or woman shall commit [any sin] that men commit, to do a
trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty; Then they shall confess
their sin etc. -- The Priest is said Heb. 5.1. to be ordained in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and Sacrifices [for sins];
('it is set down without any exception or limitation); so Heb. 7.27. It Is true
(which the Adversaries make great use of) the Apostle sets it forth by the
errors of the people; Heb. 9.7. Into the Second went the High Priest alone once
every year, not without blood, which be offered for himself, and for the errors
of the people: But then you must know that by these errors he means not only
smaller sins but all whatsoever, even such as were of a very crimson die. And
the Greek word Acts 3.17. -- 13.27. 1 Timothy 1 13. 2 Pet. 2.12.
(...) (here rendered by errors), with the Hebrew word 1 Samuel 26.21 Job 6.24.
Psalm. 119.21. See Franz. Schol. Sacrif. Disp. 6. th. 60.
Scagag, do often point to great and grievous sins; therefore why should we
limit it to sins of a lower size and stature? especially if we consider that in
that Sacrifice (to which the Apostle here plainly refers) the expiation was
general of all sins, (as you heard but now out of Levit. 16.) And it is very
true too that for Sins which were committed with an high hand, contumaciously,
in open defiance of God etc. there he would not admit of a Sacrifice for the
expiating of sins so circumstantiated: Numb. 15.27. etc. If any Soul sin
through ignorance, then he shall bring a She-goat, -- And the Priest shall make
an atonement for the Soul that sins ignorantly, when he sins by ignorance
before the Lord, to make an atonement for him etc. But the Soul that does ought
presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off
from among his people: because he has despised the Word of the Lord, -- that
Soul shall utterly be cut off, his iniquity shall be upon him. Heb. 10.26. For
if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for sins; But a certain fearful looking for
of Judgment etc. But this does not weaken the truth of what I have said, viz.
that even great offenses were expiated by Sacrifices; because they might be
such and yet not come up to this sinning with an high hand and wilfully against
the Lord; and thereupon might be expiable. Were there no sins of a middle
nature 'twixt such as were of mere infirmity and such as were committed
perversely and obstinately, out of open contempt and defiance of God? surely
there were, (you have had instances of such); and was there no expiation for
such? the contrary has been proved.

To clear up this whole matter I would lay down three things: 1. When we say
that the Law-Sacrifices did take off the guilt of all sins, yea, of great sins,
we always except such as God himself did except; where he was pleased to make
a limitation there we must do the same, but not otherwise. 2. It Is evident that
as to some sins God did make an exception. For the case stood thus; See Grotius
de Sat. Christi. p. 122.
it pleased the Lord to give excellent Laws to the people of Israel, those Laws
he backed with a severe penalty, that penalty was death (which was due upon
every violation of the Law): it being so, yet out of his great compassion he
(who being the Lawgiver might therefore relax and alter his Laws and the
penalties annexed to them as seemed good to him,) would not proceed in the
utmost rigor, but he would graciously moderate and mitigate his threatenings.
And therefore though death was incurred by every sin yet it shall not
accordingly be inflicted; but a substitution shall be admitted of, the Beast
shall die but the Sinner himself shall live: Upon this God appointed
Sacrifices, wherein the punishment due to the Offender should be laid upon the
thing sacrificed and thereby his Sin expiated. Well! but though he will be so
gracious as thus to admit of the expiation of sin, yet (partly out of respect
to his own honor, and partly out of respect to the Jewish polity, Civil and
Ecclesiastical,) he will do this with some kind of restriction; (that is) he
will admit of Sacrifices for the expiating of some sins, but not of all. The
Murderer was to die and no Sacrifice to be accepted of on his behalf, Numb.
35.30, 31, 32. (with reference to which some understand that of David Psalm.
51.16. Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it, etc.) so the
Adulterer Levit. 20.10. the Idolater, (and so in several other cases). Here now
was a limitation set by God himself, and therefore here could be no expiation
(in the external and ordinary way): indeed upon repentance there might be the
doing away of the moral guilt (which made the offender liable to God and to
eternal death), but as to political guilt (which made the offender liable to
temporal death), that (if public and known) could not by Sacrifices be taken
off: when therefore you hear so much spoken of the virtue and efficacy of the
old Sacrifices as expiatory, you must always understand it according to this
stating of it. 3. Those Sacrifices may be considered absolutely or relatively:
Absolutely and in themselves, and so their expiation reached only to some sins
and to the removal of some guilt (viz. that which was ritual and ceremonial):
Relatively with respect to Christ who was typified by them, and so by virtue of
his great Sacrifice to come (which they prefigur'd) to persons duly qualified
their expiation was general of all sins and of all guilt, (I mean of all moral
guilt before God though not of all political guilt before Men).


But though there be this difficuly as to the type, as to the antitype there is
none: by Christ's offering up of himself to be sure all sins are expiated, even
the greatest are washed away by his blood, none can stand before his infinite
merit and satisfaction; former Sacrifices were weak but Christ the grand
Sacrifice he is strong, Heb. 7.25.
able to save to the utmost all that come to God through him. He is not only a
Sin-offering to remove the guilt of lesser sins, but a Trepass Offering to
remove the guilt of the greatest sins; therefore as he is set forth by the
former in the Text so by the latter in Isa. 53.10. Where final impenitency and
unbelief do not hinder the death of Christ is sufficient to acquit from all
guilt; by it all (who perform the Gospel-conditions) have a full and universal
discharge.

Application.
I have now gone through the several things necessary to be spoken unto for the
explaining and confirming of the Point; the Use follows.

Use 1. Of Information.
Was Christ a Sacrifice for sin? and did he thereby condemn sin? I shall from
hence infer something (1.) by way of Information; (2.) of Exhortation; (3.) of
Consolation.


1. Of the truth of Christ's Satisfaction.
First for Information: and so this great Truth may be useful in the informing
of our judgments in sundry particulars: As

1. We learn from it the truth of Christ's satisfaction. Here (amongst many
others) is a very considerable Argument to prove, that Christ did really
satisfy Gods Justice for Man's sin; which therefore all, who write upon and for
the verity of his Satisfaction, do in special insist upon, with great evidence
and advantage to the Cause which they defend. And indeed it carry's such light
and conviction in it, as that the grand Opposer of this Satisfaction was more
troubled to get off from it than from any other Argument whatsoever; for when
he came to answer COVETVS arguing for it from the legal Sacrifices as
prefiguring Christ, he was forced to say -- etc: Socin. de Servat. p. 2. c. 9.
in quo major vis esse videtur, in which (head of Testimonies) there seems to
be greater strength than in any of the former: And the annual, great Expiation
being urged, as to that he says Ibid. c. 12.
difficilis sane nodus solvendus restat, one hard knot remains to be untyed:
('it was an hard knot indeed, which he might endeavor to loose but could not).
The word Satisfaction ('it is very true) we have not (...), expressly, De Servat.
p. 3. c. 6. Ego quidem etiamsi non semel, sed saepe id in sacris monumentis
Scriptum extaret, non idcirco tamen ita rem prorsus se habere crederem, ut vos
opinamini.
in so many letters and syllables in the whole Bible; but the thing we have:
yea, as to that the Scripture is so copious and full that it is not in any one
other thing more copious and full. But suppose we had there the Word as well as
the Thing, what would that signify to those with whom I have now to do? when
SOCINVS is so bold as to say, For my part although I should find that (meaning
Christ's Satisfaction) asserted in Scripture, not once but often, yet I should
not therefore believe the thing to be as Dissenters do hold: (wherein he comes
but little short of what his friend SMALCIUS dared to speak concerning the
Incarnation of the Son of God, of which you had an account before).

It Is not for me here to launch out into that vast Controversy of Christ's
satisfaction, (in the opening, stating, proving, defending of which so many
Volumes have been written); I must confine my self to that one thing which lies
before me. And there is enough in it to stablish you in the belief of what we
contend for: for was Christ ( truly and properly) a Sacrifice for sin? were our
sins the meritorious cause of his sufferings? did he put himself into the
Sinners stead, taking his guilt upon him and undergoing that punishment which
he should have undergone? did he die, shed his blood, that he might thereby
atone God and expiate sin, (all of which have been proved out of the unerring
Word)? and does not all this amount to a demonstration of the truth of Christ's
satisfying the Justice of God for Sin? do we mean any thing by his Satisfaction
but these things? and are not they clear enough from Scripture Light? The truth
is, all the other Arguments brought for the proof of Christ's Satisfaction, I
say all of them do either run into or fall under this one, of his being a
Sacrifice for sin. If God would pardon sin, be appeased toward the Creature
etc. absolutely and without the intervention of any Satisfaction, why did he
appoint Sacrifices under the Law? why must so many Creatures die? why must so
much blood be spilt? quorsum perditio haec? he whose Psalm. 145.9.
tender mercies are over all his works, who has pity and goodness for all that
he has made, would he unnecessarily or merely to show his absolute dominion
have ordered so many Creatures to be killed, slaughtered, destroyed from day to
day? why did he so peremptorily stand upon this, that Heb. 9.22.
without shedding of blood there should be no remission? But I go higher, if
God had not required satisfaction why must Si non fuisset peccatum non necesse
fuerat Filium Dei agnum fieri, nec^opus fuerat ^um in carne positum jugulari,
sed mansisset hoc quod erat in principio, Deus Verbum. Verum quoniam introiit
pecatum in mundum, peccati autem necessitas propitiationem requirit, and
propitiatio non fit nisi per hostiam, necessarium suit provideri hostiam pro
peccato. Orig. in Numb. Hom. 4.
Christ himself be made a Sacrifice for sin? why must he take flesh, and then
die in that flesh? why must his precious blood be poured out? why must he feel
the wrath of his Father? be under a necessity of suffering, and of such
suffering too? was there not a cause for this? yes surely! and what could that
be but satisfaction? God had great and weighty Reasons which made him to insist
upon this, so as that he would in this and in no other way let out his Love and
Mercy to Sinners: for instance, he must vindicate his truth, make good his
threatening, maintain his own honor, as also the honor of his Laws, make known
his Holiness, let the world see what Sin was, what an extreme hatred he had to
it, keep up and assert his rectoral righteousness, etc. for though as Vid.
Hulsium in Theol. Jud. p. 473. Grot. de Sat. c. 2.
pars offensa and creditor he might have done what he pleased, yet as rector
mundi he must do that which shall speak him to be just and righteous in his
Government: now were not these great and weighty reasons for God to do what he
did? and could these high ends have been attained without satisfaction? All his
Attributes were equally dear to him, and thereupon shall all be advanced alike;
he was not for the advancing of Mercy only but of Justice also; and therefore
he will so carry it in his dealings with man* as that he may glorify the one
as well as the other. If he justify the Sinner (wherein he displays so much of
Mercy), he will do it in such a way as that he may display his Justice too;
wherefore Christ must be a Sacrifice, first to expiate Sin by his blood and
then God will not charge it upon the Sinner: Romans 3.25, 26. Whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past etc. (he goes over it
again) To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness; (wherein or son what
end?) that be might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus:
what could the Apostle have spoken fuller and plainer to determine the business
in hand? how can the Denyers of Christ's Satisfaction and of the necessity
thereof stand before the light of this Scripture? Propitiation must be made by
blood, by the blood of Christ, that thereby God might declare his
righteousness; that he might be just, not so much in himself and in the
general, as in this special act of the justifying of a Sinner. Had we no other
Text in all the sacred Records but this one, methinks it should be enough to
silence and convince gainsayers; it is a bulwark for Faith which will stand
firm in spite of all the little batteries that men can make against it. But the
truth of Christ's satisfying divine Justice will yet more fully appear from
what follows in the next Head, therefore I go on to that.

The true Nature and. Ends of Christ's Death.
2. Secondly, this may help us to right notions concerning the Nature and Ends
of Christ's death. For if it be asked, How or in what manner he died? we see he
died as a Sacrifice: if it be further asked, Wherefore did he die or what were
the main ends of his dying? I answer, he died chiefly for such ends as are most
proper to Sacrifices. If God's own Son die undoubtedly there must be something
special in his death, and some great ends must be designed to be promoted
thereby, ( 2 Samuel 3.33.
died Abner as a fool dies?) but what were they? Answ. such as may best
comport and suit with the common ends of all Sacrifices, especially of those by
which he was more directly typified: and therefore the pacifying of an angry
God, the purifying of a guilty Sinner, being the principal ends in the death of
the typical Sacrifices (as you have heard), answerably these must also be the
principal ends of the death of Christ, the real Sacrifice.

The SOCINIANS in this matter run into two dangerous Errors; (1.) they make
that in Christ's death to be supreme and principal which was indeed but
subordinate: nay (2.) they make that which was but subordinate to be the sole
thing therein, altogether excluding and denying what was supreme and principal.
Now this one thing which I am upon (viz.) Christ's being and dying as a
Sacrifice (in correspondency with the Ends of the Levitical Sacrifices), was it
rightly understood and firmly believed would be a sufficient confutation of,
and antidote against their pernicious tenants: For do they say that the main
end of the death of Christ was to turn men from sin? the contrary appears
because that was not the main end in the Law-Sacrifices: or do they say that
Christ died only for our good? 'twas not so because that does not agree with
the Law-Sacrifices, which were offered not only for the Sinners good but in the
Sinners stead: or do they say that he died only as a Witness of the Truth, as
an Example, etc. 'twas not so neither because it shuts out that which was the
principal intendment of the Law-Sacrifices.

But besides this there are some other things of considerable strength, which
that we may the better take in we must more particularly enquire into those
Causes or Ends of Christ's death which Socin. de Serve. p. 1. c. 3. etc. et de
Officio Christi. Crellius de Cause. Mortis Christi (with all the rest). Against
them see Grot. de Sat. p. 26. etc. Franz, de Sacrif. p. 400. etc. et 606 etc.
Hoornb. Socin. conf. l. 3. p. 492. etc. Portus contra Ostorod. p. 447. etc.
Turret. p. 7. p. 247. etc. Dr. Stillingst. discourse concerning the true
Reasons of the Sufferings of Christ. (with many Others).
they assign; that by the removal of false Causes and Ends (I mean in their
exclusive sense), the true ones may the better appear.

They say therefore (1.) Christ died for this End, that he might bear witness
to the truth, confirm the Evangelical Doctrine, and give assurance to the world
of the verity of what he had taught: To which we reply, the question is not
whether these were true and proper Ends (that we readily grant), but whether
they were the principal, much more the sole Ends of Christ's death (that we
utterly deny). And our denial is grounded upon these Reasons: 1. All along in
Scripture the confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel is laid upon Christ's
Works and Miracles, not upon his Death: (read Act. 2.22. Joh. 10.25. and
passim). And he having by these given a sufficient proof or evidence of the
truth of what he had taught, it cannot be imagined that he died only or chiefly
for this, that by his death he might give a further proof or evidence thereof.
Besides, if this was the main thing designed and effected thereby, then in the
remission of sin, reconciliation with God etc. we should owe as much to
Christ's Miracles as to his Death; than which nothing can be more repugnant to
the whole tenor of the Word. 2. This would take away the peculiarity or
speciality of Christ's death. For if there was nothing in it more than bearing
witness to the truth, or confirmation of the Gospel-doctrine, then all the
Apostles and Martyrs (who ever died) did the same, in as much as they by dying
bore witness also to the truth, and confirmed the Gospel-Doctrine: then as he
says to us Matthew. 5.47.
What do ye more than others? we may say the same to him What (blessed Jesus!)
do thou more than others? (and would not this be a fine question?) Certainly
the death of the Mediator and the death of the Martyr are two different things;
not only quoad gradum but quoad speciem: but if it was as this sort of Men
would have it, there might be a gradual difference betwixt them but nothing
more. Must Christ's dying for us amount only to his dying as a Martyr for the
truth? here is the (...) but where is the (...)? Paul laid down his life upon
this account, and yet (says he) 1 Cor. 1.13.
Was Paul crucified for you? 3. Nay thirdly, if Christ had died only upon this
ground and for this end, then several of the Martyrs had gone beyond him. How
readily and cheerfully did many of them die! how desirous were they of laying
down their lives for the Gospel! they did not fear death, all their fear was
that God would not so far honor them as to call them out to suffer it for his
sake: And when they came to die what abundance of inward peace and comfort had
they! how were their Souls brim-full of heavenly consolation! they had as much
thereof as ever heart could hold, so much that all their outward torments were
nothing to them. But was it thus with Christ? true, he was very ready and
willing to die, yet there was a time when he prayed again and again that the
Cup might pass from him; Matthew. 26.39, 42, 44.
Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me: and he had an innocent,
sinless fear of death, for be was heard in what he feared Heb. 5.7. And had he
such raptures and ecstasies of joy at his death as several of the Martyrs had? O
no! his Soul was Matthew. 26.38.
exceeding sorrowful, he was under bitter Luke 22.44.
agonies and conflicts, had great terrors in his Spirit, etc. Now had he died
only as they did, merely to have borne his testimony to the truth, and for the
confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel, would it have been thus? what?
Saints so full of joy and God's own Son so full of sorrow? Saints in their
sufferings to have such a mighty presence of God with them, and God's own Son
to cry out My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Surely there must be
something special and extraordinary in his death above theirs; and so there
was, for he had the guilt of all Believers upon him, lay under the wrath of
God, bare the punishment due to Sinners, was under the curse of the Law etc.
these were the sad ingredients in his death which put such a bitterness into
it. Had there been nothing more in it than bare Martyrdom or what is proper to
that, how would he have been said to be Gal. 3.13.
a curse for us? what singular thing would there have been in his Phil. 3.8.
being obedient to death, even the death of the Cross?


2. Secondly it is said, Christ died for this end that he might set before men
an example of obedience, patience, submission to God's Will, zeal, (and the
like). I answer, that this was one end is very true, but that this was the only
end is very false: Christ did not design his death to be only exemplary to us,
but that it should also be satisfactory to God; he had in his eye the expiation
of our sin as well as our imitation of his example. Christ (says the Apostle)
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1
Pet. 2.21. but was that all? no, (Verse. 24.) who his own self, bare our sins,
in his own body on the tree: here was substitution in our stead, susception of
our guilt, as well as the propounding of an example. If Christ should further
the happiness of Sinners only in this exemplary way, what then would become of
the Fathers and of all those who lived before he came and died in the flesh,
who therefore could reap no benefit by his example? And this would make the
effects of his death to terminate wholly in us, and not at all to reach to God,
whereas he is a Priest in things pertaining to God Heb. 2.17.

3. They say, Christ died for this end, that by his death he might strengthen
and encourage faith, and thereby raise up men to the assurance of the remission
of sin, freedom from eternal death, the possessing of eternal life etc. Answ.
We grant that Faith receives eminent support and encouragement from this, that
it gives the highest satisfaction that is possible as to the certainty of
Gospel-blessings; yet this must not be looked upon as the primary, much less as
the only end of Christ's death. For (1.) the blessing must be procured before
there can be any assurance of it; the thing must be supposed to be before
persons can be sure of it: now how was that brought about but by the death of
Christ? and if so, then the only end thereof was not assurance, but there must
be another antecedent end (viz.) the purchasing or effecting of the thing which
was to be the matter of that assurance. And by that the Scripture mainly
represents Christ's death; Matthew. 26.28. This is my blood of the new Testament
which is shed for many for the remission of sins: mark it, 'twas shed for the
procuring of this great blessing, not for the assuring persons of it. (2.) This
assurance is as much (if not more) the effect of Christ's resurrection as of
his death: Indeed for him to die that contributes very much, but it is his dying
and rising again that has the greatest influence upon it; 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, (by what?) by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. As to purchase and impetration we
owe more to Christ's death than to his resurrection, but as to assurance and
subjective certainty we owe more to his resurrection than to his death;
therefore the Apostle brings this in with a rather, Romans 8.34. It is Christ
that died, yea, rather that is risen again. He is said to be delivered for our
offenses, and to be raised again for our justification, Romans 4.25. the Sinners
justification was merited by his death, but it was manifested by his
resurrection; thence therefore Faith, in its being assured of that privilege,
must fetch its main encouragement: so that this cannot be the only thing aimed
at in his death, since it more properly belongs to another Head. (3.) The
Old Testament Saints were high in their assurance, and yet they lived before
the death of Christ. -- (4.) His death simply considered gives no such
encouragement to faith or ground of assurance: consider it indeed as we state
it (that is) as he died in our stead, to satisfy God's Justice, appease his
Father's wrath, expiate our sin, etc. and so it is highly strengthening to Faith;
but if you take it in itself and as our Adversaries state it, so there is but
little in it for Faith's advantage. What inducement or encouragement would this
be to Sinners to believe, to set before them the death of Christ (unless those
Ends and Considerations about it be taken in which our Antagonists oppose)?
without which it would rather draw out men's fear than their faith, rather drive
them from God than to God; for so, more of his justice and severity would
therein appear to deter them, than of his Mercy to allure and encourage them:
O did God deal so with his own Son, who too was innocent and blameless, what
then will he do to such vile, wretched, guilty creatures as we are? must Christ
so die? would not God spare him in the least? what then will become of such as
we? Upon the whole matter, the Soc. say Christ's death was not at all intended
to be satisfactory to God, I Am sure (according to their stating of it) it is
not at all consolatory to Sinners.


4. They say, Christ died for this end that he might have a right and power
after his death, when he should be in heaven, to forgive sin: Answ. Whilst he
was here on earth before his death he had that right or power; therefore that
could not be any end thereof; Matthew. 9.2. Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be
forgiven thee: and when some murmured at this see how he stood upon the
asserting of it, (Verse. 6.) That ye may know that the Son of man has power [on
earth] to forgive sins etc.

5. It Is said, Christ died for this end that he might procure for himself such
and such power, dignity and glory: But to this we say, it was so far from being
the main end, that it was indeed no end at all; it being but the Co^^^^^ent not
the End of his death; (see Phil. 2.8, 9.).

These defective Causes and Ends being removed, it remains that I set down
those which were the chief and principal. And they were such as these: Christ
died to be a Sacrifice for Sin, Heb. 9.26. -- 10.12. a Ransom 1 Timothy 2.6.
Matthew. 20.28. a Propitiation 1 John 2.2. to reconcile God to us and us to God,
Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. Col. 1.20. etc. to deliver us from the
curse of the Law by his being made a curse for us, Gal. 3: 13. to save from
wrath to come 2 These. 1.10. to justify and make righteous 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans
5.9. to procure remission of sin by his blood 1 John 1.7. Ephesians. 1.7. Matthew.
26.28. to overcome death by death Heb. 2.14. to purchase eternal life Joh.
6.51. Heb. 9.12. As he died in our place and stead (taking our guilt and
bearing our punishment) so he died for these ends, that he might restore us to
God's love and favor, and expiate all our sins by his making satisfaction for
them: these were not only Ends but the supreme and primary ends of his Death. I
do not exclude the former, provided that (1.) they be taken in conjunction with
these; nay (2.) in subordination to them: Christ in his dying might intend this
and that, as his bearing witness etc.
but his main and principal intendments were satisfaction, reconciliation,
forgiveness of sin, etc. in the revealing of which the Holy Scriptures are so
express and plain, that (to me) it is very strange that any opposition (much
more that so vehement opposition) should be made against it: Good Lord! how are
Opposers feign to strain their wit, to summon in all their invention and
subtilty, for the finding out of some forced and pitiful interpretations of the
Texts alleged, thereby to evade the true sense and meaning of them! how do
they set these Scriptures (and themselves too) upon the rack, that they may
seem to reconcile them with their hypotheses's! but all in vain (as is
abundantly proved).

The vanity and falsehood of humane Satisfactions.
3. Thirdly from hence I infer the vanity and falsehood of all humane
Satisfactions. Was the Lord Jesus himself a Sacrifice for sin? and did he
thereby condemn, abolish, expiate all sin for his members? then what needs to
be done (or can be done) further by any Creatures in the way of Satisfactions?
Eccles. 2.12.
What can the man do that comes after the King? I cannot but take notice, how
whoever will engage in these weighty Points he must tread upon thorns and
briars every step he takes; no sooner shall he have got off from one Enemy but
there will be some other at hand with whom he must encounter also: I find it
(I Am sure) to be so, for no sooner have I quit my self of the SOCINIANS, but
the PAPISTS (in a full body) make head against me: The former would wholly take
away Christ's Satisfaction, the latter would add Man's to it; the One denies the
verity, the Other the perfection of it. For they tell us, it is very true that
Christ did fully satisfy the Justice of God by his being a Sacrifice for sin,
and fully expiate the sins of Believers, in respect of their guilt and of the
eternal punishment due thereupon; but not in respect of temporal punishments:
these (they say) they are yet liable unto (notwithstanding all that Christ has
done and suffered), and that too not only in the present but (for some time) in
the future state; for the preventing or removing of which, satisfaction must be
made to God, either by themselves or by others: (this is the ROMISH-Doctrine).
In which so far as I have gone we have falsities enough, but should we go
farther to their particular explication and stating of the latter branch (men's
satisfying by themselves or by others), what a mass and heap of ungrounded,
unscriptural, absurd Opinions should we there meet with! for there come in
their penances, fastings, pilgrimages, corporal punishments, voluntary poverty,
masses and prayers for them who are in Purgatory, Indulgences etc. O what a
big-bellied Error is this of humane Satisfactions! what a numerous train of
falsities is it attended with! Contrary to this we hold, that See the 31
Article of our Church.
Christ by the once offering up of himself to God, did so fully free from all
guilt and from all punishment too whatsoever, as that there is no need of any
satisfaction at all to be added to his.

The truth of ours, the falsehood of their Opinion might very largely be made
out from these following Considerations: 1. In the Jewish Sacrifices (with
which our Lord's does correspond) there was no Satisfaction or compensation,
but only what was in and by the Sacrifices themselves. Indeed in them God
ordered, in case any private person had been injured that Lev. 6.5.
Satisfaction should be made to him by the Sacrificer, but otherwise as to the
expiation of all guilt before God and exemption from all punishment, the
Sacrifices themselves (their absolute and relative notion too being taken in)
were sufficient. Respect being had to Christ and moral conditions being
performed, they alone did acquit from guilt and from eternal punishment, and
they too of themselves did acquit from temporal punishment; without the
intervention of any Dominus qui exactissime omnes expiandi ritus per Mosem
exequitur, nuspiam tamen hanc aut illam Satisfaciendi rationem constituit, sed
totam in Sacrificiis compensationem requirit. Turret. de Sat. p. 329.
other Satisfaction: if the guilty person did offer up his Sacrifice that was
judged enough to free him from all the penalties which otherwise he was
obnoxious unto. And shall more be done by the type than by the antitype? must
they not agree in this as well as in other things? 2. All punishment (in order
to Satisfaction) is inconsistent with the nature and tenor of the remission of
sin. This gracious act is set forth by blotting out of sin Isa. 43.25. by
covering it Psalm. 32.1. not imputing it Romans 4.8. not remembering it Isa. 43.25.
casting it into the depths of the sea Mic. 7.19. It goes so high in its degree
as that God promises upon the Sinners repentance his sin should not be so much
as mentioned Ezekiel. 18.22; if it should be sought for it should not be found
Jer. 50.20. and it is so universal in its extent, that where one sin is pardoned
every sin is pardoned; (Isa. 38.17. Mic. 7.19. Col. 2.13.) Now how is punition
reconcilable with this? for God to do all this and yet to punish (in a
vindictive way or in order to Satisfaction, for I only speak of punishment in
that notion,) is a contradiction. I know what our Adversaries say, that in
remission God acquits from the guilt but not from the temporal punishment: I
reply, this is their (...), that rotten foundation upon which their whole
superstructure is built. I am not afraid (notwithstanding the Decree and
Anathema of the Sess. 4. c 8. can. 13.
Council of TRENT) to aver it to be an utter falsehood: for if the guilt be
done away (as they affirm) what room is there then for punishment? that being
the ground of this, if it be removed this must be removed also: pray let me
ask, a person by pardoning grace being made guiltless whence should the
punishment of this person arise? That common maxim (which our Writers so much
insist upon) viz. Sublata culpa tollitur pana is of most unquestionable truth,
and backed with the concurrent suffrages of the Ancients; the guilt being taken
away the punishment is taken away also (says Exempto reatu eximitur and poena.
Tert. de Bapt. c. 5.
Tertullian); and where there is pardon there is no punishment (says (...).
Chrysostom. Hom. 8. ad^ Romans
Chrysostom). And indeed to assirm the contrary is to make the remission of
sin little better than a ludicrous thing; 'twould then be as if the Creditor
should say to his debtor, I freely forgive thee all thou owe me only I must
throw thee into prison there to lie all thy days; or as if the Judge should
say to the Offender, I acquit thee from all thy crimes only thou must die for
them: just so it would be here if God should remit the fault and yet exact the
punishment. I do not deny but that he may lay many evils even upon pardoned
persons, but then I deny them to be (properly and strictly) punishments; for
the matter of them they may be so but formally they are not so; ohastisements
they are but not punishments; medicinal but not penal; they do not come from
God's vindictive wrath, nor does he design them for the satisfaction of his
Justice, but they proceed from other Causes and are designed for -- ad
demonstrationem debitae miseriae, vel ad emendation em labilis vitae, vel ad
exercitationem necessariae paticutiae, temporaliter hominem detinet poena,
etiam quem jam ad damnationem sempiternam reum non detinet culpa. Aug. tr.
postr. in Joh. Poenae ante remissionem peccatorum sunt supplicia peccatorum,
post remissionem suut certamina, exercitationesque justorum. Id. L. 2. de
peccat. Mer. and rem. c. 34. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 41. in Matthew.
other Ends; (as namely to quicken them to repentance, to make them more
sensible of the evil of sin, to refine them more from their dross, to heighten
their graces, to draw out their patience, to make themselves and others to fear
etc). For God thus to afflict or correct is very well consistent with pardoning
grace, but to punish (under any notion of satisfaction, save only that of
Christ's) is not. In different respects we may (and do) both affirm and deny
punishment to be incident to God's people; for when we have to do with the
Antinomian (in such a sense) we affirm it, but when with the Papists (who would
have it to be satisfactory to divine Justice) we utterly deny it. 3. Thirdly,
humane Satisfactions are but mere humane inventions, groundless, unnecessary,
because Christ himself has made satisfaction, yea, full and plenary
satisfaction: his expiatory Sacrifice being complete and perfect why should any
thing be added to it? Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified, through
the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all: -- Verse. 14. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified: for by that he
procured remission of sins, Now (says the Apostle Verse. 18.) where remission
of these is, there is no more offering for Sin, (that is, no need of any
further expiatory Sacrifice). Has the Lord Jesus (by the Sacrifice of himself)
satisfied, or not? if he has (for that our Opposers dare not deny), then I
argue shall He satisfy and the Sinner too? will God have the debt twice paid?
shall the surety pay it and the debtor too? this double satisfaction would
impeach both the Non patitur justitia Dei ut duas exigat Satisfactiones propter
unum debitum, cum una ei abundantiss^ne est satisfactum. These. Sedan. Vol. 2.
p. 357.
Justice and also the Grace of God. I ask further has Christ fully satisfied,
or not? if he has (for this is not denied neither), then I ask what need is
there of any additional or supplemental Satisfaction? if he has paid the
utmost farthing what has the Creature then left to pay (but only duty, love,
thankfulness etc.)? The PAPISTS speak very high concerning this Satisfaction of
our Savior, for they say it is not only sufficient and full, but redundant and
overflowing; they talk of a (...), a superfluity or pleonasm and overplus,
there is enough in it and to spare: (and this overplus they make to be the
matter of that treasure which is deposited in the Churches-hands out of which
the POPE fetches his Indulgencies). That speech of CLEMENT the Sixth is famous,
One drop of Christ's blood was sufficient for the redemption of all mankind;
(as if all the rest might have been spared, which in effect speaks the Father
to be too profuse and prodigal of his Sons blood). But notwithstanding all
these high words they are not contented with Christ's Satisfaction alone, but
there must be some assumenta some of their own Satisfactions to piece with it.
We do not greatly fancy such high expressions, yet as to the thing we go higher
than they; for we fully acquiesce in our Lord's most perfect satisfaction,
without adding any thing (under the notion of satisfaction) thereunto.


All that they say is this, Christ has fully satisfied with respect to guilt
and to eternal condemnation, but not with respect to teniporal punishments.
Answ. The vanity and unsoundness of this distinction has been already refuted;
all punishment resulting from guilt, if there be a full expiation of that the
punishment ceases (let the kind of it be what it will). But where do we find in
the Word any such restriction or limitation, that Christ satisfied for eternal,
not for temporal punishments? did he not bear the one as well as the other?
Isa. 53.4. Surely he has born our grief and carried our sorrows etc. and did
he not take off from the Sinner whatever he bare in his own person, (so far as
satisfaction is concerned)? As to that Question of De Purgat. l. 1. c. 10. Si
Christus satisfecit pro omni culpa and poena, cur adhuc tam multa mala patimur?
Bellarmine If Christ has satisfied for our whole guilt and punishment, why
after the remission of the guilt do we suffer so many evils? it has been
already answered, they are but chastisements, not punishments; corrections to
us, not satisfactions to God.

4. Take one thing further: To satisfy an offended God is Christ's peculiar,
an act wherein no Creature must share with him. Humane Satisfactions do not
only derogate from the perfection of his satisfaction (in which the strength of
the former Head did lie), but they also entrench upon the confinement of it to
himself: it is for Man to Sin, but it is only for the Son of God to satisfy;
this carries glory in it wherein there must be no partner or corrival with
Christ. Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins: (mark that by
himself, he and he alone could do such a thing as this). What can Creatures do
in God-satisfying work? can they do any thing for themselves that shall amount
to a compensation for faults committed? it is not satisfaction unless it be the
payment of the whole debt, but (alas!) they cannot pay so much as a farthing;
they who when they have done and suffered all they can must say they are Luke
17.10.
unprofitable, are very unfit persons to compensate injurys done to God. And if
they cannot satisfy for themselves much-less can they do it for Os (...);
Basil. in Psa. 48.
others, (as he that cannot pay his own debts is very unfit to pay the debts of
others): the wise Virgins had but just oil enough for their own lamps, they
could spare none for the supply of the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.8, 9. There Is
a great difference betwixt suffering for the good of others, and satisfying for
the fault of others; a Paul may do the former (2. Tim. 2.10. Col. 1.24.) a
Christ only can do the latter.

Obj. Bellarm. de Poen. l. 4. c. 15.
But Christ satisfied that the Saints might satisfy: Answ. we desire a
Scripture Proof of that; otherwise our negation is as authentic as their
affirmation.

Obj. But Christ's Satisfaction is applied by the Saints satisfactions. Answ.
We find no means of applying his Satisfaction, but only the Word and Sacraments
without and the Spirit working faith and repentance within.

Obj. But we (say they) make the Saints only subordinate, not coordinate
Agents with Christ in the matter of Satisfaction: Answ. 1. Even that is too
much: 2. They go higher; for their great Amonst others see Vasquez in 3 part.
Thom. Qu. 94. Art. 2. and 3.
Writers maintain, that the Saints apart, by and of themselves, without being
beholden to Chrst's merit or satisfaction, may as to temporal punishments make
full satisfaction. These are but very weak pretensions to build an Opinion upon
which does so much entrench upon the glory of Christ's person and the
perfection of his Sacrifice. There is but one Argument for humane Satisfactions
which is considerable, and that is that vast profit, those large incomes and
revenues which this brings in to the dispensers of them; and this I confess I
cannot answer: were but these taken away I assure my self this Controversy
would soon be at an end; it is the satisfying of corrupt men (in their pride,
avarice, filthy lucre), rather than the satisfying of a punishing God that is
at the bottom of these Disputes. I look upon this point (with its
appurtenances) to have as much of the core and venom of POPERY in it as any
one point whatsoever, therefore I could not omit to speak a little about it:
but for those who desire to look further into it, to see the things (which I
have but touched upon) fully made out and vindicated, the Arguments to the
contrary answered, they may peruse the Dallzus de Poenis and Sat. Sudeel
adversus humanas Satisfactiones. River. Sum. Controv. Tract. 3. Qu. 12. and.
13. These. Salmur. p. 2. p. 61. etc. These. Sedan. Vol. 1. p. 594. etc. Chamier.
t. 3. l. 23. Chemnit. Exam. l. 2. sess. 4. c. 8. Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 4.
Turretin. de Satisf. Disp. 11. p. 305. etc.
Authors cited in the margent.

Of the true Nature and Ends of the Lord's Supper.
4. Fourthly, hence arises matter of information concerning the true Nature and
Ends of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: (when I have spoken something to
this I hope I shall be off of all briars). The difference betwixt PAPISTS and
PROTESTANTS was not so great about the foregoing Head, but it is every way as
great about this: Council. Trident. Sess. 22. c. 1. etc.
they hold, that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (or Mass as they are
pleased to call it,) under the Elements of Bread and Wine, as broken and poured
out, the body and blood of Christ are offered up to God as a true and proper
propitiatory Sacrifice, and that too not only for the living but also for the
dead: Of this Controversy see Phil. Mornaus de Euch. l. 3 c. 1. etc. Hospin.
Hist. Sacram. l. 5. c. 13. p. 548. etc. Camer. Opusc. Misc. p. 522. (in 4 to.)
Masonus de Min. Anglic. l. 5. c. 1. Forb. Instr. Historico-Theol. l. 11. c. 20.
The Other hold that the Sacrament neither is nor ever was designed to be a
propitiatory Sacrifice, but only a commemoration and application of that one
and only Sacrifice which the Lord Jesus when he died upon the Cross offered up
to God: (now which of them in these different Opinions have truth on their
side, it is our present work to enquire after).

In order to which I have two things to do, (1.) to show what the Sacrament is
not; (2.) to show what it is.


For the first, it is not a Sacrifice, I mean it is not a propitiatory Sacrifice;
as if there was any proper oblation of Christ's body and blood in it (further
than what is done in a Symbolical and Sacramental manner) for propitiation and
expiation. There is in it indeed (in a Sacramental way) that body and blood
which was really offered up to God upon the Cross, but not as so offered up in
this Ordinance. I say it is not a Sacrifice, for it is a Sacrament therefore not
a Sacrifice: these two carry a great difference in them; there is giving in the
one, receiving in the other; Sunt proprie Sacrificia populi ad Deum, ut
Sacramenta Dei ad populum. Morn. de Euch. l. 1. c. 1.
in the one we offer to God, in the other God offers to us. Accordingly with
respect to Christ, as a Sacrifice he was offered for us, in the Sacrament he is
offered to us; which are two things of such different notions as must needs be
the ground of an inconsistency betwixt them; for can he at the same time be
offered for us and to us too? If the Lord's Supper be a Sacrifice it must cease
to be a Sacrament, for it cannot be both. True the Passover was both; it was a
Sacrament (as it was a sign or Exodus 12.13.
token of Isreal's deliverance in Egypt, and as it was to be eaten), and it was
also (in respect of the mactation and killing of the Paschal Lamb) See this
proved in Cloppenb. Scho. Sacrif. p. 142. etc.
a Sacrifice; therefore we read of sacrificing the Passover Deuteronomy. 16.5, 6.
Thou may not sacrifice the Passover etc. -- there thou shall sacrifice the
Passover at even etc. -- But the reason of its being a propitiatory Sacrifice
as well as a commemorative Sacrament was this, because it was a special type of
Christ the great propitiatory Sacrifice, whereupon it is said 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ
our Passover is sanctified for us: had it not been for this its typical nature
and reference, it could not have been both. Now in the Lord's Supper there
being nothing of this (it being wholly a representation of what is past, not at
all a type of what is to come), it is not capable of being a Sacrifice and a
Sacrament too; so that if we give to it the nature and notion of the former, we
take from it and destroy the nature and notion of the latter.

But to argue more closely! That the Eucharist is no propitiatory Sacrifice, I
prove by these Arguments.

1. As Isaac once to his Father Behold the fire and the wood, Genesis 22.7.
but where is the Lamb for a burnt-offering? so I would say, behold the bread
and the wine, the body and the blood, but where is the Priest to turn these into
and to offer them up as a Sacrifice? Are there Priests now under the Gospel
entrusted with an Office and invested with a power of sacrificing? 'twas
always thought that with the ceasing of the old Law-sacrifices the sacrificing
Priesthood ceased also. I know it is very usual to give the title of Priests to
Gospel Ministers (which if taken in such a sense may be admitted); but if by
Priests you understand persons in Office to whom it should appertain to offer
up new expiatory Sacrifices, in that sense all PROTESTANTS deny any such now to
have a being: whence it follows, that as where there are no Sacrifices there
there is no Priesthood, so where there is no Priesthood there there are no
Sacrifices (for these two mutually depend each upon the other); and
consequently that the Lords Supper is no Sacrifice upon the defect of this
Priesthood. We are told indeed that our Savior when this ordinance was
instituted by him, did authorize and empower his Apostles, and after them all
Ministers successively, at the consecration of the Elements to turn them into a
Sacrifice, whereupon they may strictly and properly be looked upon as Priests:
Which if it be so (as it is not) they must then be Priests either according to
the Aaronical order or according to that of Melchisedeck, (those being the two
Orders to which the sacrificing Priesthood did belong); but neither of these
can be true; not the first, the Aaronical Priesthood being abrogated; not the
second, the Priesthood of Melchisedeck being incommunicable to any but to
Christ himself (as the Apostle strongly proves Heb. 7.). It Is observable
amongst the Levitical Priests, whilst the High Priest himself was ministering in
the Holy of Holy's, such as were of a lower rank were not at that time to
sacrifice without: and why not so here? Christ our High Priest is now in
Heaven, presenting the merit of his great Sacrifice offered upon the Cross; and
he himself being so employed, it is not for any ordinary Priests to be
sacrificing (in an expiatory way) here on earth. And further, those Priests so
long as they lived were to execute their office themselves, into which none
were to intrude till by their death room was made for others succession; so
that if they had lived for ever none had meddled with sacrificing but they:
Christ therefore living for ever to manage the business of what is
propitiatory, none without great intrusion can pretend in a thing of that
nature to join with him. Heb. 7.23, 24. And they truly were many Priests,
because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death; But this man,
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, (or that
Priesthood (...).
which passes not from him to another): When Christ was here on earth he
offered up himself as a propitiatory Sacrifice, if any now after him should
pretend in that way to offer up his body and blood, as to the matter of the
Sacrifice they would (in part) do that which he himself did; and so there would
be a passing of his Priesthood (in some way of equality though not of
cessation) to others. 2. It has been observed, that in every expiatory
Sacrifice there was the destruction or consumption of the thing sacrificed,
either in part or in the whole; there being therefore no such thing in the
Lord's Supper, it cannot be looked upon as a true and proper expiatory
Sacrifice. Pray what is destroyed therein? does Christ's body and blood cease
to be what they were? in his Sacrifice upon the Cross there was a destruction
(in the separation of his Soul and Body for a time), but what is there like to
this in the Sacrament? De Missa. l. 1. c. 2.
BELLARMINE having taken notice of this Argument thinks to elude it with a very
pretty distinction; viz. -- De Missacirc;. l. 1. c. 27.
that Christ's body in itself is untouched in the Sacrament, it loosing
nothing of its esse natural when it is eaten there; yet it does loose its esse
sacramentale, the bread being eaten by which it was signified and made visible.
Answ. As if the ceasing of something which was but external, visible and
representative, the thing it self remaining untouched and the same that it was
before, would amount to that destruction which was in the Levitical Sacrifices?
and which was necessary to be made upon the body of Christ at his death in
order to his being an expiatory Sacrifice? Surely either we are a sort of men
so weak and sottish as that we will believe any thing, or they are a sort of men
so wedded to their Opinions as that they will say any thing that will but suit
with their purpose; otherwise so great a Man had never given so pitiful an
Answer to so considerable an Objection. 3. Thirdly, if the Sacrament be a real,
propitiatory Sacrifice, then so many Sacraments so many propitiatory
Sacrifices; and as often as that is administered so often there is a real,
substantial oblation of Christ's body and blood, in a propitiatory way: but
this is directly contrary to what the World says; therefore it is by no means
to be admitted. For that speaks but of one only propitiatory Sacrifice, of
Christ's once offering himself (namely when he died upon the Cross); which one
offering was so full and perfect, so effectual to all intents and purpoles for
redemption, propitiation etc. as that it is not in any wise to be repeated or
reiterated: Heb. 7.27. Who needs not daily as those high Priests, to offer up
Sacrifice, first for his own sins and then for the peoples; for this he did
[once] when he offered up himself: Heb. 9.12. -- by his own blood be entered in
[once] into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us: -- Verse.
26, 27, 28. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
world; but now [once] in the end of the world has be appeared to put away sin
by the Sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but
after this the judgment; So Christ was [once] offered to bear the sins of many,
etc. Heb. 10.10, 12, 14. By the which will we are sanctified, through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ [once] for all. But this man after he had
offered [one Sacrifice] for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God:
For by [one offering] he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: Now
how shall we reconcile the multiplication of propitiatory Sacrifices, the
reiteration of Christ's offering, with these Texts? there is (says the
Apostle) but one only propitiatory Sacrifice (that which our Savior offered
upon the Cross); nay (say our Adversaries) but there is, the MASS is a
propitiatory Sacrifice also: the true propitiatory Sacrifice (says he) was
made but once; nay but (say they) it is not so, it is renewed, repeated, and
made over and over again: Christ (says he) did once (and but once) offer up
himself; nay (say they) but he is offered again and again, as often as the MASS
is celebrated, (in which his body and blood are as really offered as they were
when he died upon the Cross): Christ (says he) by the one oblation of himself
has obtained eternal redemption, put away sin, perfected for ever them that
are sanctified; nay (say they) but he has not, for besides that there must be
the propitiatory oblation of him in the Sacrament. Now let every person judge
whether these things be not flat contradictions to the Word of God (according
to what we charge them with).
For the solving of this therefore they give us another pretty distinction,
(viz.) of our Saviors bloody and unbloody Sacrifice, of that which was offered
on the Cross and that which is offered at the Mass: that (they say) it is very
true was but once and is not to be iterated, but it is not so with the latter;
wherefore the Apostle in all that has been cited, must be understood as
designing to exclude only the multiplying and repeating of the bloody but not
of the unbloody Sacrifice; and so the Mass is not at all concerned therein.

To which I answer, in shunning one contradiction they run upon another; for
what can be more contradictory to the Word (as also to the nature of the thing)
than an unbloody, propitiatory Sacrifice? it says Heb. 9.22.
Without shedding of blood there is no remission: yes (say they) but there is,
in the Sacrament there is no shedding of blood and yet thereby there is
remission: do they not still maintain that which plainly contradicts the
Scripture? and instead of stopping one gap do they not make another? The
Apostle after he had been speaking so fully of Christ's Sacrifice upon the
Cross, in the perfection and unrepeatableness thereof, draws an inference
universally to exclude all other propitiatory Sacrifices; Heb. 10.18. now where
remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin: they then must be
highly bold who will presume to except and limit where the Spirit of God does
not, and where the matter spoken of does not require any such exception or
limitation: nay, where indeed the matter will not bear any such thing (as here
it will not); for if by Christ's oblation sin be fully remitted, how can any
further Sacrifice be joined with it in order to remission? To me this is a most
necessary principle, (viz.) when men will distinguish upon the letter of the
Scripture, so as to affirm what that denies or to deny what that affirms, or so
as to enlarge what that straightens and to straighten what that enlarges; it
highly concerns them to look to this, that their distinctions be well grounded
upon other Scriptures and consonant thereunto; for otherwise they must run
themselves into dangerous errors without all possibility of being convinced;
and without this all Religion will be undermined, and the Word of God made
wholly insignificant: Now to apply this Rule! our Dissenters when we urge the
forementioned places (which are so clear and cogent for what we hold,) would
put off all by distinguishing of a bloody and unbloody Sacrifice; I desire to
know what Scriptureground or warrant they have for this distinction (in the
sense wherein they use it)? what is there to be found there to justify such a
thing as an unbloody propitiatory Sacrifice?

Something I know they offer at, but (alas!) it is that which will not satisfy
or command the faith of such who are serious and considerative. For instance,
Genesis 14.18. And MELCHISEDECH King of SALEM brought forth bread and wine, and be
was the Priest of the most high God: whence they thus argue, MELCHISEDECH did
sacrifice bread and wine, there (say they) was an unbloody Sacrifice, and that
which was typical of Christ's Sacrifice, and of his being offered at the
Sacrament modo incruento under the Species's of bread and wine: therefore there
was such a Sacrifice thereat to be offered; which accordingly was done first by
Christ himself, and yet is done successively by his Ministers: yea, they tell
us that this unbloody Sacrifice was the great thing in respect of which he is
said to be a Priest Heb. 6.20. Psalm. 110.4.
after the order of MELCHISEDECH. Answ. all this is denied with the same (but
better grounded) confidence with which it is affirmed: it is sad that any should
build so great an Article of Faith (as this is amongst the ROMANISTS) upon so
weak and sandy a bottom; but how much more sad is it, that men's zeal should be
so fierce upon it as to make it a matter of Life or Death, accordingly as it is
believed or not believed? (for the truth is, that which they call the unbloody
Sacrifice has occasionally been made bloody enough, in the death of thousands
of Martyrs who could not look upon it as Others do). But as to the Argument our
DIVINES reply, (1.) It Is not evident, that what MELCHISEDECH here did was done
in the way of a Sacrifice to God: it is said he brought bread and wine, it is not
said that he offered bread or wine to God; there is a great difference betwixt
protulit and obtulit, betwixt a civil gift to Men and a religious offering to
God. Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 11. (...) etc.
JOSEPHVS carries this bringing of bread and wine, no higher than MELCHISEDECHS
kindness or hospitality to ABRAHAM and his weary Soldiers. (2.) Suppose this
was done in the way of a Sacrifice, how will it be proved that it was done in
the way of a propitiatory Sacrifice? since it is only said that he blessed
Abraham (Verse. 19.). Nay (3.) suppose that too, yet what will it be to those
who cannot (justly) pretend to be ^riests according to the order of
MELCHISEDECH, (that being an incommunicable order)? And (4.) the Apostle Heb.
7. opening this MELCHISEDECH (in his Priesthood, and in this very act, showing
how he was the type of Christ and wherein Christ the antitype suited with him),
does not at all instance in his bringing of bread and wine or in his offering
any unbloody Sacrifice (which surely he would have done, had the resemblance or
analogy betwixt Christ and him ly'ne in that), but he instances in the oneness
of Melchisedechs Priesthood, in his eternity, in his authoritative benediction
(even of Abraham himself), in Abraham's paying tithes to him etc. these are the
things wherein all along in that Chapter he illustrates Christ's agreement with
MELCHISEDECH.
So that for any to infer, from his bringing of bread and wine that Christ at
the Sacrament (for I do not love the word MASS) is offered up to God, by every
ordinary Priest, as an unbloody, propitiatory Sacrifice; I say, for any to make
such an inference from such premises, it argues them to be either injudicious
or over credulous, or too much devoted to a party. The Paschal Lamb also is
alleged for the making good of this distinction (with some other things), but
neither barrel better herrings, (as is fully made out by our PROTESTANT Writers
where persons are not resolved to shut their eyes upon the clearest light).

4. Fourthly, In the present contest 'twill be best to have recourse to the
institution of the Sacrament. Now if that (with the whole administration about
it) be consulted, what shall we find to give it the notion of a Sacrifice? Obj.
It Is said this we find, Christ there faith Do this in remembrance of me Luke
22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24. now this hoc facite is as much as hoc sacrificate. Answ.
What is it to play with the Scripture if this be not so? a few things being
confidered the vanity of this Criticism will soon appear. If this do was as
much as this sacrifice, certainly that would have been a thing of such high
import, as that of the three Evangelists (which set down the Sacramental
institution) two of them would not have wholly omitted it; and yet so it is,
LVKE recites it but MATTHEW and MARK make no mention at all of it. And if that
was the sense of the word, then the sacrificing act would lie upon the people
as well as upon the Priests, for as the Do this was spoken by Christ to the
Disciples Luke 22.19, so it was also spoken by Paul to the body of the Saints
at CORINTH 1 Cor. 11.24. When there is nothing spoken in the whole Institution
of the Lord's Supper as referring to a Sacrifice, it is somewhat strange that
this Ineptum est interpretari verbum facere sensu sacrificatorio, ubi nulla in
tota reliqua narratione fit Sacrificii aut oblationis mentio. Forbes. Instruct.
Historico-Theol. p. 616.
word should come in by itself and carry such a Sacrificial sense in it.
Besides, does not that which follows sufficiently clear it up? Do this, how? or
for what end? to be a Sacrifice? no, but in remembrance of me. We deny not but
that Cum faciam vitula etc. Virgil.
facere does sometimes signify to sacrifice (answerably to the Hebrew word
Numb. 6.16. Psalm. 66.15.
(...) and the Greek (...). Casaub. in Athen. l. 15. c. 23.
(...)): but where has (...) (which is here used) that signification? nay,
where have the other words that signification, but when they are joined with a
Noune setting forth a thing that is usually designed and set apart for
Sacrifices? whereas the word here is joined with a bare Pronoune.

Object. But they have a stronger plea than this, grounded upon the words of
the Institution: where Christ says This is my body which is Luke 22.19.
given for you, (and 1 Cor. 11.24.
broken for you etc.) This Cup is the new Testament in my blood which is Luke
22.20. Matthew. 26.28.
shed for you etc. now does not this body as given and broken, and this blood
as shed, prove a Sacrifice? yea, that under the bread and wine there was a real
oblation of Christ's body and blood?

Answ. No; unless it be understood (as it ought to be) of his oblation upon the
Cross, and not at the Table. When he says This is my body which is given for
you etc. and this is my blood which is shed etc. did he mean that giving of his
body or that shedding of his blood which was done just at the Sacrament? that
we utterly deny: What then did he mean? why, that which would shortly be when
he should die on the Cross; then his boody should be broken and his blood
poured out in a real and substantial manner, but not till then. And this
Interpretation is not at all weakened by Christ's expressing himself in the
Present Tense [which is given, which is shed], it being usual in the Scripture
to put that Tense for the Paulo-post-futurum: and (I hope) this Answer will not
be either opposed or slighted by our Adversaries, since the Vulgar translation
it self renders the words in the Future tense, which shall be given, shall be
shed; yea, in their Canon Missae too they are so rendered.

2. But Secondly having shown what the Lord's Supper is not, I am now to show
what it is. As to that (in brief) it is a lively representation and solemn
commemoration of that Sacrifice which the Lord Jesus offered up to God when he
died upon the Cross: it is not a Sacrifice but a memorial of a Sacrifice; herein
lies the nature of this Ordinance and this was the great end of Christ in the
instituting of it: Do this (says he) in remembrance of me Luke 22.19. As often
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he
come 1 Cor. 11.26. This too was the great end of the Passover (unto which the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper succeeds); Exodus 12.14. And this shall be unto
you for a memorial. Great mercies have always had their See Vines on the
Sacrament. p. 143, 144.
memorials that they might not be forgotten; what a mercy was Christ's dying
and sacrificing himself! what glorious and unspeakable benefits do believers
receive thereby! therefore least this should wither and decay in their memories
this Ordinance was appointed to be a standing memorial thereof. And this is
that notion which the This proved by Morn. de Euch. l. 3. c. 4, and 5. (with
diverse others).
FATHERS had of the Sacrament (though some would fain draw them to be of
another Opinion, then which nothing more false): it is not to be denied but that
they very often did call it a Sacrifice; yea, sometimes they speak of Eusebius.
Demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c. ult.
unbloody Sacrifices; but did they thereby mean any real, propitiatory,
unbloody Sacrifice in the POPISH sense? no, they explain themselves by the
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in Ep. ad Heb. Quid ergo nos? nonne per singulos dies
offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed recordationem facientes mortis ejus. Ambros.
in Ep. ad Heb. c. 10. Illud quod ab hominibus appellatur Sacrificium signum est
very Sacrificii, in quo caro Christi post ascensionem per Sacramentum memoriae
celebratur. August. de Civit. Dei l. 10. c. 15. Vide etiam contra Faustum
Manichaeum l. 20. c. 21 Theodoret. in c. 8. Ep. ad Heb. -- Sacrificium quod
quotidie in Ecclesia offertur, non est aliud a Sacrificio quod ipse Christus
obtulit, sed ejus commemoratio. Aquin. in 3. p. Qu. 22. Art. 3. resp. ad 2.
Illud quod offertur and consecratur, vocatur Sacrificium and oblatio, quia
memoria est and repraesentatio very Sacrificii and sanctae immolationis factae
in ara crucis etc. Lombard. L. 4. Did. 12.
commemorating of Christ's Sacrifice, by the offering up of praises,
thanksgivings, penitential tears to God (and the like); in which respects only
they did so speak of it.

To this also we may add, the Lord's Supper is not only a memorial of but a See
Dr. Cudworths true Notion of the Lord's Supper. chap. 5.
Feast upon Christ's Sacrifice; the believing Soul does therein by Faith feed
and feast it self upon a crucified Savior. Anciently Sacrifices were attended
with Stuckius de Sacrif. p. 145. Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 3. c. 33. Ubi quod Diis
tributum erat conslagrasient, ad epulas ipsi and convivia vertebantur, etc.
Feasts, nullum Sacrificium sine epulo; as soon as the Sacrifice was over men
used to have a Feast, to eat and drink together: and this custom prevailed both
amongst Dr. C. chap. 2.
Jews and Gentiles. Genesis 13.54. Then Jacob offered Sacrifice upon the Mount,
and called his brethren to eat bread etc. Exodus 18.12. And Jethro, Moses
father-in-law, took burnt offerings and Sacrifices for God: and Aaron came and
all the Elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses father-in-law before God: (See
also Exodus 34.15. Numb. 25.2. 1 Cor. 10.18. etc.) Now parallel to this, after
Christ's Sacrifice there is the Sacramental Feast, wherein the Communicant does
spiritually feed upon the body and blood of the Lord Jesus, eats and drinks of
the bread and water of Life: here is not oblatio but participatio Sacrificii.
The Apostle having spoken to the Sacrifice, Christ our Passover is sacrificed
for us, he presently subjoyns the Feast which was to go along with that
Sacrifice, Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old leaven etc. 1 Cor.
5.7, 8. At the Sacrament there is not only a commemoraion of Christ's death,
but there is the Christians fetching out of the sweet and comfort thereof for
inward strength and nourishment.

Yet further, the Lord's Supper is a Seal of all those blessings which Christ
by his Death and Sacrifice did purchase for his; (but this I must pass over). I
have been very long upon this Fourth Inferenee, but no longer than what the
Nature of the thing and our present state did make to be necessary: it is highly
requisite that we should all have right apprehensions concerning the blessed
Sacrament; therefore to help you therein, and to obviate all POPISH delusions,
I have been thus large upon this Head.

The happiness of Believers under the Gospel above that of them who lived under
the Law.
5. Fifthly, I infer the happiness of such who live under the Gospel above those
who lived under the Law. It Is none of the least of our mercies that we are cast
under the Evangelical, rather than under the Legal administration:
Old Testament believers were the elder brethren, but the younger (those who
live under the New Testament) are the best provided for. For the making out of
this, I shall not insist upon the comparing of Sacraments and Sacraments,
Priesthood and Priesthood, Privileges and Privileges, but only touch upon the
matter of Sacrifices. In reference to which we have the advantage in sundry
respects: for they (in a manner) had but the shell, it is that we have the
kernel; they had but the shadow, it is we that have the substance: they had but
the type, it is we that have the antitype. All their Sacrifices were but darker
adumbrations of that great Sacrifice which is now fully revealed to us and
actually exhibited for us: they had variety and multiplicity of them, we have
all in one; theirs were costly and burdensome, ours costs us nothing but
thankful application; theirs (of themselves) could only cleanse from ritual and
civil guilt, ours from all guilt whatsoever; they had the blood of Beasts, we
the blood of God's own Son. One of the Vide Alting. Shiloh l. 5. c. 17. In hoc
Sacrificio vertitur omnis ratio and variatio faederis etc.
great differences 'twixt the Covenant of Grace as then and as now dispensed,
lies in the difference of the Sacrifices: to them, it was testified and
ratified by the blood of ordinary Creatures; to us, it is so by the blood of
Christ; (compare Exodus 24.8. with Matthew. 26.28.). Surely we have the advantage
over them, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect, (as it is Heb. 11.40.): O what degree of
thankfulness can be high enough for that knowledge of, interest in, benefit by
Christ's Sacrifice which we now have under the Gospel, above what they had who
lived under the Jewish Sacrifice!

And if our state be better than theirs, how much more is it better than the
state of the poor Gentiles! As to Jews and Christians it is happiness and
happiness compared together, but as to Gentiles and Christians it is happiness
and misery: the Jews had their Sacrifices from God himself, to whom they were
offered, and by whom they were owned; but in the Pagan Sacrifices there were
none of these; they were neither instituted by God, nor directed to him,
therefore it could not be expected that ever they should be blessed by him. And
besides this, there was nothing of Christ in their Sacrifices; Men-Sacrifices
they had, but as to the Sacrifice of Christ God-Man that they knew nothing of:
without which, what could all their Sacrifices signify for the purging away of
guilt? They had great variety of them, some blind notions of expiation,
purgation, atonement by them, but (alas!) not being offered to the true God,
nor backed with the true and only propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ, they were
all in vain. They used to twit Christians with their want of Origin. contra
Ceisum. l. 8.
Temples, Altars, Sacrifices etc. but we can easily answer them, we have all in
Christ; whose one Sacrifice upon the Cross was more than all their Hecatombs
and Sacrifices whatsoever: we may be the objects of their derision, but surely
they should be the objects of our compassion; and whilst we pity them let us be
highly See the Grounds of this fully set forth by Stuckius de Sacrif. f. 154.
etc. -- in his Antithesis Ethnicismi and Christianismi.
thankful for our selves, that ever this one, only, perfect Sacrifice was made
known to us as well as offered for us.

Of the excellency of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice.
6. Sixthly, we may from hence take notice of the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood and Sacrifice: (I put them together, because they do mutually prove
the excellency each of the other; his Priesthood must needs be excellent
because he offered up such an excellent Sacrifice, and his Sacrifice must needs
be excellent because it was offered by such an excellent Priest). The setting
forth of the excellency of both, is the main scope and business of the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Hebrews (that full and most Evangelical Commentary upon
the Levitical Sacrifices); but he reduces the latter under the former, proving
the glory and excellency of the Priesthood of Christ from the excellency of his
Sacrifice. Indeed in the making out of that, he makes use of several other
Mediums or Arguments: as (1.) the greatness and dignity of Christ's Person,
Heb. 4.14; (2.) the extraordinariness of his Call, Heb. 5.4, 5. (3.) the
pre-eminence of the Order (according to which he was Priest) above the
Aaronical order, (he being Priest after the order of MELCHISEDECH) Heb. 5.6.10.
-- Chap. 6.20. (4.) his oneness and singleness in this office, Heb. 7 23, 24.
(5.) his solemn inauguration into it, Heb. 7.20, 21. (6.) its perpetuity and
everlastingness, Heb. 5.6. Heb. 7.16, 24. (7.) the excellency of the Sanctuary
where it is discharged, Heb. 8.1. etc. Heb. 9.11, 12, 24. (8.) the betterness of
the Covenant to which it refers, Heb. 8.6. etc.
All these Heads the Apostle does distinctly insist upon; but that Medium or
Argument which he is most large upon to prove the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood, is the excellency of his Sacrifice above all the Law-Sacrifices:
and that he makes out (1.) from the matter of it. The Priests under the Law
offered such and such things only, not themselves: but Christ offered himself;
they the blood of Creatures, he his own blood; Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood
of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place
etc. -- Verse. 14. -- How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself etc. -- Verse. 23. It was therefore necessary
that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these (i.e.
the blood of beasts), but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices
than these: Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins: so Heb. 7.27. --
9.26. (2.) From the virtue and efficacy of it: The Law-Sacrifices were weak and
unprofitable, could make nothing perfect, Heb. 7.18, 19. could not make him
that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; they only
sanctified as to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.9, 13. It is not possible
that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins, Heb. 10.4. But
Christ by his Sacrifice has obtained eternal redemption Heb. 9.12. that
reaches the Conscience to purge it from dead works etc. Heb. 9.14. -- (3.)
Those Sacrifices being thus weak were many, and often to be repeated; but this
of Christ having such an efficacy in it was but one, and but once offered,
never any more to be repeated: Heb. 7.27. Who needs not daily as those high
Priests to offer up Sacrifice, for this he did once when he offered up himself:
Heb. 9.12. by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place -- 25. etc.
Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high Priest enters into
the holy place every year with the blood of others: For then must he often have
suffered since the foundation of the world; but now once in the end of the
world has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself: Heb. 10.1.
etc. The Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things, can never with those Sacrifices, which they offered year by year
continually, make the comers thereunto perfect: For then would they not have
ceased to be offered? because that the worshippers once purged, should have had
no more Conscience of sins etc. to these now the Apostle opposes Christ's
Sacrifice Verse. 5, 6, etc. and of that he says, Verse. 10. By the which will we
are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all:
Verse. 11, 12. And every Priest stands daily ministering, and offering
oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never take away sins: But this man
after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right
hand of God: Verse. 14. For by one offering he has perfected forever them that
are sanctified. The HEATHENS had their Sacrifices which they called Succidaneae
dictae, si permis hostiis litatum non erat aliae post easdem ductae hostiae
caedebantur, quae quasi prioribus jam caesis luendi piaculi gratia subdebantur
and succedebant. Gyrald. Synt. 17. p. 465. Saubert. de Sacrif. c. 19. p. 477.
Hostiae succedaneae, which they offered up to their GODS in case those which
they had offered before did not succeed: the Lord Jesus by his one Sacrifice
did so effectually do what he designed and the Sinner needed, as that there is
no room for or need of any hostia succedanea. -- (4.) The Apostle makes it out
from the sanctity of Christ's Person and the perfection of his Sacrifice. The
Law-Priests offered first for their own sins and then for the sins of the
people Heb. 7.27. they ought, as for the people, so also for themselves, to
offer for sins Heb. 5.3. the High Priest went once every year into the second
Tabernacle, not without blood, which he offered for Levit. 16.11.
himself, and for the errors of the people, Heb. 9.7. But now as to Christ he
was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. he had no sin
(of his own) to expiate by his Sacrifice; he was made sin, but yet he knew no
sin 2 Cor. 5.21. Under the Law both Priest and Sacrifice were to be perfect,
(i. e.) without any open and external blemish: as to the first, read Levit.
21.17. (to the end); as to the second, God gave several precepts about it; the
Paschal Lamb was to be without blemish Exodus 12.5. the oblation for Vows and
for Free-will-offerings, the Sacrifice of Peace Offerings were to be without
blemish, perfect, otherwise they should not be accepted, Levit. 22.18. to 25.
so the red Heifer was to be without spot, and wherein there was no blemish,
Numb. 19.2; so the Firstlings of the Cattle, Deuteronomy. 15.21; and all Sacrifices
whatsoever, Deuteronomy 17.1. (And this the (...). Athen. Deipn. l. 15. c. 5. -- etc.
quas cum immolabant, nisi purae integraeque fuissent, minus proficere putabant.
Gyrald. p. 491.
HEATHENS themselves made conscience of in their Sacrifices). In correspondency
to all this, in a moral and spiritual sense our Lord's Sacrifice was perfect,
without the least blemish; he offered himself without spot to God Heb. 9.14. he
was a Lamb without blemish and without spot 1 Pet. 1.19. -- (5.) The excellency
of Christ's Sacrifice appears from the great effects of it; -- he put away sin
by the sacrifice of himself Heb. 9.26. so that there is no more offering for
sin Heb. 10.18. being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him Heb. 5.9. by this Sacrifice sin was condemned,
abolished, expiated; God appeased; the Law satisfied; Heb. 9.12.
eternal redemption obtained; O what an excellent Sacrifice was Christ's
Sacrifice! and consequently what an excellent Priesthood was Christ's
Priesthood!


Of the Evil of Sin.
7. Seventhly, was Christ a Sacrifice for sin in order to the condemning of it?
and could it be condemned by nothing short of that? hence we are informed that
Sin is a very evil thing and of a very heinous nature. Had it not been a
notorious and capital Offender, would God have condemned, and thus condemned
it? would he so severely have punished it in the flesh of his own Son? must
even this Son be offered up upon the Cross as a Sacrifice for the expiation of
it? O what a cursed heinous thing is sin! that had made such a breach between
God and his Creatures, that Christ must die or else no reconciliation; that had
so highly struck at the Honor of the great God, that nothing below the
sharpest sufferings of his dearest Son could make Satisfaction for it; its
poison and venom was such, that there was no cure for the Sinner (into whom
that poison had got) but only the precious blood of Christ himself: God had
such an hatred and abhorring of it, as that for the Grot. de Sat. Christi. p.
67.
testifying thereof, even he (whom he loved from all eternity) must be made a
Gal. 3.13.
Curse; what a demonstration was this of the transcendency of the evil of Sin!
Would you take a full view thereof? pray look upon it in and through this
glass; a sacrificed Christ gives the clearest, the fullest representation of
sins hainousness. True, we may see much of that in Sins own Nature (as it is the
transgression of God's most holy and most excellent Law); as also in the
threatenings which are denounced against it; and further in the dreadful Effects
of it, both here and hereafter, (the loss of God's image, and favor, and
eternal damnation); is it not a very evil thing? What a mischievous thing has
this sin been! it cast the falling Angels out of Heaven into Hell and turned
them into Devils; it thrust Adam out of Paradise, made God to be an enemy to
him who but now was his favorite, cut off the entail of happiness, and instead
thereof entailed misery and a curse upon all his posterity; it made God at once
to drown a whole world, it laid Sodom in ashes, levelled Jerusalem itself to
the ground, caused God to forsake his own people the Jews etc. ('twould be
endless to enumerate all the sad mischiefs of Sin).

Now (I say) in these things we may see much of the evil of it, but not so much
as what we see in the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Christ; there, there is
the highest discovery and fullest representation of it: He to be Isa. 53.3.
a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief? he to be bruised and broken, yea
and his Father to be Isa. 53.10.
pleased in the bruising of him? he in his own person to undergo the Laws
penalty? to tread the Isa. 63.3.
winepress of the wrath of God? he to be Phil. 2.8.
obedient to death, even the death of the Cross? he to cry out My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? he to be killed, and slain, and Acts 5.30.
hanged upon a tree? and all this for sin? O what an excess of evil does this
hold forth to be in it! Indeed that the poor Creatures should be so destroyed
in the Law-Sacrifices, that so many millions of them (they in themselves being
harmless and innocent) should die and be sacrificed for man's sin, this
represents very much of its cursed nature; but yet that comes infinitely short
of that representation thereof which we have in a dying, crucified, sacrificed
Christ: the death of all those Sacrifices was nothing to the death of this one
Sacrifice; whereby Sin eminently appears in its own colors. What a sad thing
is it that men generally make so little a thing of it (as though there was not
much evil either in it or by it)! but in so doing how do their thoughts differ
from God's thoughts! for surely if he had not judged it to be very heinous, he
had never carried it toward his Son as he did. I would desire Sinners to take
their prospect of it through this medium, of Christ's being a Sacrifice for it;
if any thing in the world will bring them to the sight of its malignity, this
will do it. It pleases God to look upon believers through a dying Christ, and
so he loves them; but could we but look upon Sin (a thing never to be loved)
through a dying Christ, how should we hate it!

Of the severity of God's Justice.
8. Eighthly, this demonstrates also the severity, impartiality, terribleness of
God's Justice. By Christ's death and Sacrifice we have not only a declaration
of the Justice of God in itself, (in that he would not remit sin without blood
for satisfaction Romans 3.25.), but a declaration also of the adjuncts and
properties of his Justice, (viz.) that it is very severe, impartial, and
terrible. He was inflexibly set upon the punishment of sin; such was his hatred
of it and his respect to the honor of his Law, that Sin shall not by any means
escape his punishing hand: and every punishment too shall not suffice, but if
shall be such as may fully answer the heinousness of the offense; I and if his
own Son shall interpose in the Sinners stead, and take his guilt upon him, and
become his Surety, even he (be he never so dear to God) must undergo the utmost
punishment (that ever he was capable of) both for matter and degree; God will
fall upon him and Romans 8.32.
not spare him, no not in the least; O how severe and impartial is his Justice!
Never was there such an instance or demonstration of these, as in the
sufferings of the Lord Jesus: For (pray consider) what it was that he suffered;
besides all the sufferings of his Life, at last he suffered death; and that not
a common or ordinary death, but the very worst of deaths; a death that had all
ingredients into it to make it bitter, wherein was all that bitterness which
either the wrath of man or (which was much worfe) of God himself could sqeeze
into it: And though Christ (foreseeing what this death was) prayed again and
again that he might be Joh. 12.27.
saved from it, that this Mat. 26.39, 42, 44.
cup might pass from him, yet his Father was inexorable and would not hear him;
but die he must, and so die too; surely here was divine Justice under the
highest severity and impartiality, (yet without the least mixture of
injustice). And when the thoughts and sense of this were upon Christ, they made
his Mat. 26.38.
Soul exceeding sorrowful, cast him into most bitter agonies, insomuch that
Luke 22.44.
he sweat as it were great drops of blood falling to the ground; how dreadful
and terrible is punitive Justice! what a Heb. 10.31.
fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God! this we see and
know in our Saviors case, O that we may never know and feel it in our own
experience!

I might further infer from the premises (9.) the unsearchable Wisdom of God.
(10.) also his unconceiveable Love and Grave: (11.) the preciousness of Souls:
(12.) the costliness of Salvation. (13.) the great dignity of Christ's person,
from which his Sacrifice derived all its vir^ue and efficacy: (but I must not
speak to all that this vast Subject would lead me to). So much for the
Inferences drawn from the main Point.

2. The next Use shall be Exhortation, Use 2. Of Exhortation.
in which I would press some of those Duties which do best suit with the Truth
before us: hitherto I have chiefly been upon the informing of the judgment, I
now come to matters of practice.

Christ as a Sacrifice to be much studied and meditated upon.
1. And first, as Christ's Sonship and Incarnation (of which before) so his
being a Sacrifice, and thereby condemning sin, should be very much the object
of your study and meditation. This you are to study that you may know more of
it; to meditate upon, that you may draw out and improve what you already know
about it, (for so I would at present distinguish betwixt these two, supposing
the one to be like the filling of the vessel, the other like the drawing out of
that vessel). As to the first, I would be earnest with you to be much in
studying a sacrificed, crucified Christ; if the knowledge of him as taking
flesh is to be labored after (as you have heard it is), surely the knowledge
of him as dying in flesh, and as condemning sin in his flesh, is also to be
labored after. In this Sacrifice of Christ you have the very mirror of the
Grace of God, the masterpiece and highest elevation of his Love, the glorious
product of his infinite Wisdom, the great basis and foundation of man's
happiness; should it not therefore with the greatest diligence be looked into?
Our excellent Apostle determined to know nothing save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified 1 Cor. 2.2. the preaching of this was the great matter of his
Ministry, 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified --; and he makes the Gospel
in its revelation mainly to point to this, which therefore he calls (...) the
word of the Cross 1 Cor. 1.18. it being so, how should the consideration hereof
heighten our endeavors after a full and distinct knowledge of it! God's own
Son to be offered up as a Sacrifice for the sin of man? O admirable and
wonderful dispensation! what a mystery is this! how should all be prying into
it! Here we have Christ at his worst; now the knowledge of him as at the worst
is the best knowledge for Christians; for they having their best by his worst,
the knowledge of him (under that notion) must needs be the best knowledge for
them. If Christ, as a Sacrifice, in the full import thereof, was but better
understood by Sinners, O what benefit and advantage would thereby accrue to
them! how steddily would they believe, how ardently would they love, how
patiently would they suffer, how thankfully would they adore, how cheerfully
would they walk! should not these be prevailing inducements to such to labor
after a fuller knowledge of him (as so considered)? But in the enforcing of
this duty let me not be mistaken; it is not a notional, historical knowledge
only of Christ as sacrificed that I would have you to pursue after, but I would
state it as practical, as operative and powerful; this, this is that knowledge
which is to be desired. When Paul had spoken so high of the knowledge of
Christ, Phil. 3.8.
Yea doubtless and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; see how he opens that knowledge of him which
he looked upon as so excellent; Verse. 10. That I may know him, and the power of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable
unto his death. It Is a poor thing to have light about this in the head, if that
light be not attended with power and efficacy upon the heart and life; the
clearest notions concerning Christ's death without suitable impressions within,
and that which in the Sinner himself may bear some analogy and conformity
thereunto, do not profit: O therefore so study a crucified Savior as to be
Gal. 2.20.
crucified with him, Romans 6.8.
dead with him; so as to feel the energie of his death in the heavenliness of
your affections, and holiness of your conversations; this is the knowledge
which we should study and pray for and aspire after.

For the Second, Christ as a Sacrifice is also much to be meditated upon: O how
frequent, how serious and fixed should our thoughts be upon this! how should we
be often reviving this upon our minds, never suffering it to decay or wither in
our memories! This is so great and necessary a duty, that we have an Ordinance
instituted by Christ on purpose and for this very end, often to inminde us of
his dying (as our Sacrifice) and to keep it fresh upon our memories for ever: 1
Cor. 11.24, 26.
Do this in remembrance of me; As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup,
ye do show the Lord's death till he come. But it is not enough to think of this
just before or at the Sacrament, but we should live in daily, frequent
meditation upon it: I say we should do so, but (alas!) it is to be feared we do
not so; O how little is a dying, crucified Christ thought of! the dying Friend
or Relation is remembered, but the dying Savior is forgotten: this proclaims to
the world that we have but a low sense of his great love, that we see but
little in his oblation; for surely if we did, we should think oftener of it, and
after another manner, than now we do. Christians! pray be sensible of former
neglects, and let it be better for the future; let not a day pass over you
wherein some time shall not be spent in remembering and considering what Christ
your Sacrifice upon the Cross suffered for you. Upon this also you would reap
great advantages; for certainly was Christ's death but duly thought of and
improved, Oh 'twould highly imbitter sin, effectually wean from the world and
the sensual delights thereof, mightily encourage and strengthen Hope and Faith,
strongly engage the Soul to Obedience etc. therefore pray be persuaded to think
less of other things and more of this! And do not barely think of it but think
what there is in it; yea labor to go to the very bottom of it, and by serious
meditation to press out all that juice and sweetness which is in it: the
believer should be always sitting upon this flower and sucking comfort from
it. What Is the full breast to the child that does not draw it? Christ as a
Sacrifice for sin is a full breast, but yet if Sinners by Faith, Prayer and
Meditation, do not draw from this breast, they will be little the better for
it. He was indeed but once offered, but that one oblation is often to be
remembered and continually to be improved (with respect both to Duty and
Comfort): how that is to be done the following particulars will show.

The Heart (in the sense of this) to be broken for sin and from sin.
2. This should have a very powerful influence upon you to break your hearts for
sin and from sin. First for sin: was Christ indeed made a Sacrifice? as such
was his body broken and his precious blood poured forth? did he undergo such
sufferings in his life, and then complete all in his dying on the Cross? and
all for sin? how can this be thought of (with any seriousness) and the heart
not be kindly and thoroughly broken! what will cause the hard heart to melt and
thaw into godly sorrow for sin, if the consideration of Christ's Sacrifice and
death will not do it! Oh me thinks his blood (as shed for Sinners) should
soften the most Adamantine heart that is. Did we but consider our Saviors
passion in the matter and quality of it, in its bitter ingredients and
heightning circumstances; and then also consider that our sins were the
meritorious cause of it, that they brought him to the Cross and laid the
foundation of all his sorrows; did we (I say) but consider this, certainly we
should be more deeply afflicted for Sin than now we are. What? that I should be
accessory to the death of the Son of God? that I should bring the nails and
spears which should pierce him? that I should be the occasion of all his
sufferings in Soul and Body what a cutting, heartbreaking consideration is
this! Zech. 12. 10. -- they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, (what
follows?) and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only Son; and
shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn:
the true penitent cannot look upon a crucified Savior (especially when he
considers what he has done to further his Saviors crucifixion,) without the
highest degree of holy grief. But especially this heart-brokenness should be in
us when we are at the Sacrament, where we have such a sensible and lively
representation of Christ's Death and Sacrifice: Oh shall we there see his
broken body, and yet our hearts be unbroken? shall we view him there shedding
his blood, and we shed no penitential tears? shall we there behold what he
endured and felt for Sin, and we yet have no pain, no contrition for it? how
unsuitable is such a frame to such an object, under such a representation! What
was the temper think you of the Women who were Mat. 27.55.
spectators of Christ when he was hanging upon the Cross? unquestionably they
were filled with inexpressible sorrow: why (Sirs!) when you are at the Lord's
Table, in a spiritual way you see him also as dying upon the Cross, he is there
before your eyes evidently set forth and crucified among you (Gal. 3.1.); Oh
how should your Lam. 3.51.
eye affect your heart, even to fill you with Evangelical sorrow!

Three things in the Text to set men against Sin.
But this is not enough, therefore (2.) there must be brokenness from sin as
well as for sin: surely after such a thing as Christ's death Sin must be loved
and lived no more; the heart must eternally be broken off from it. Pray look
into the Text and see what pressing motives there are in it for this: (1.)
Here Is Christ dying as a Sacrifice, making his Soul an offering for sin. Now
(Sinners!) shall that live in you or will you live in that which made your
Savior to die? shall he die for sin and will you yet live in sin? shall his
death (as to you) be in Ergo and tu dignum te gere tali pretio, ne veniat
Christus qui te mundavit, qui te redemit, and si te in peccato invenerit dicat
tibi, Quae utilitas in sanguine meo? quid profeci tibi dum descerdo in
corruptionem etc. Ambros. de Virgi.
vain? will you continue sin upon the Throne when Christ was upon the Cross? do
you desire to have him there again, crucified afresh (as the Apostle speaks
Heb. 6.6.)? would you renew his wounds and cause them to bleed again? was it
not enough for such a person to be once sacrificed? can you made even through
his precious blood to the gratifying of your base lusts? O dreadful! I remember
that passage of DAVID 2 Samuel 23.15. etc. where you find him longing for the
waters of Bethlehem, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the Well
of Bethlehem which is by the gate: upon this his earnest desire, three of his
mighty men brake through the Host of the Philistines and brought him some of
this water; but (says the story) he would not drink thereof, but poured it out
unto the Lord: why so? O (says he) be it far from me that I should do this; is
not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? So here;
sometimes your desires and inclinations are strongly carried out to such and
such sins, but pray consider there is blood in the case; those sins cost Jesus
Christ his blood, he did not only jeopard but actually lose his life; will you
then meddle with them (be they never so sweet or pleasing to the flesh)? I hope
you will not, I Am sure you should not. To strengthen this further, pray
consider what Christ's end (or ends) were in his being thus a Sacrifice: they
refer either to God or to you; to God, as he designed to satisfy his Justice,
appease his Wrath, vindicate his Honor etc. to you, as he designed your
Sanctification, Holiness, the abolition of Sins power etc. (I say, the
abolition of sins power; for though the primary end and the most immediate
effect of Christ's Sacrifice was the expiation of its guilt, yet in
subordination to this (however in conjunction with it), the breaking of its
power and freedom from its evil acts were by him also aimed at therein: Gal.
1.4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present
evil world, according to the will of God, and our Father. Tit. 2.14. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should
live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed. Now was this one of
Christ's great Ends in his sacrificing of himself, and shall he not have it?
has he accomplished his ends with respect to God and shall he not accomplish
his ends with respect to you? would you divide and compound with him to let him
have half of what he designed and purchased, but no more? would you separate
between Justification and Sanctification? (that will not be allowed). How
smartly does the Apostle argue for the death of sin from the death of Christ!
Romans 6.3. to the 11. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we
have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his resurrection: Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin. For be that is dead, is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with
Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him: knowing that Christ being
raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. For
in that he died, he died unto sin o^e: but in that he lives, he lives unto
God. Sirs! was Christ sacrificed for sin? I Will tell you what we should now do,
let us sacrifice our sins for Christ; there is a great difference in the sense
of the one and of the other, yet (take but that aright) and both are true;
Christ was a blessed Person and he was sacrificed out of love, but Sin is a
cursed thing which therefore must be sacrificed out of hatred; 'twas pity that
Christ should die, it is pity that sin should live: He was sacrificed for our
sin that he might take that away which was injurious to us, we must sacrifice
our sins for him that we may take that away which is so injurious and offensive
to him. But to go on in the Text! (2.) God condemned sin: there is very much in
this also to set us against sin (in whatever notion the word condemning be
taken); did God condemn it, and shall we approve of it? has he passed a
sentence of death upon it, and shall we yet be for the life of it (as if we
would reverse or contradict his sentence or hinder the execution of it)? did he
look upon it as a traitor, rebel, capital offender, and shall we look upon it
as an harmless and innocent thing? has he in the death of his Son given out
such a declaration of his hatred of it, and shall we yet love it, and like it,
and live in it? Yea (3.) God condemned sin in the flesh of Christ: now shall it
be judged, punished, abolished in Christ's Flesh, and yet Romans 6.12.
reign in ours? shall he in his flesh suffer for it, and we in ours commit it?
what an absurd incongruous thing would this be! Upon the whole matter
therefore, how do we all stand engaged by the strongest obligations that are
possible, to be holy and not to sin! let it be condemned in our flesh as (in a
different respect) it was condemned in Christ's; as God has condemned it (so
as that we shall not die for it), so let us condemn it (so as not to live in
it). And (in special) whenever it shall come to tempt you to what is evil, pray
remember that Christ was made a Sacrifice for it; and let it appear by your
holy and circumspect walking that you have a due sense, thereof, and that you
do not from thence fetch any encouragement to sin against God, (which was one
of (...) l. 2. p. 97.
PORPHYRY's Objections against Sacrifices in general, viz. they would encourage
men to be wicked).


All to labor after an interest in Christ's Sacrifice, and in the benefits
thereby procured.
3. Thirdly, I would excite you to labor after, and to make sure of a personal
interest in this great Sacrifice, and in the benefits resulting from it. For
it is a thing to be resented with the greatest sadness imaginable, that where
^ere is such a Sacrifice (so at first offered up to God, and now so revealed to
men,) that yet so many millions of Souls should perish, and (as to their
spiritual and eternal state) be little the better for it; because they regard
not (as to themselves) either the thing or the good that flows from it. My
Brethren! I beseech you (if you have any love for your Souls) let it not be so
with you; but let it be your greatest care to secure an interest in this
Sacrifice, and to partake of the blessings procured by it: be often considering
and questioning with your selves, here is a Sacrifice for expiation and
atonement, but what is this to us? here is a dying Christ, but did he die for us?
shall we be ever the better for his death? if this propitiatory oblation be not
ours what will become of us? Under the Law the Gentile-strangers were to offer
Sacrifices as well as the born-Jews, (see Numb. 15.14, 15. Lev. 17.8.); and
amongst the Jews the poor as well as the rich; with respect to which difference
in men's outward condition, God accordingly appointed different Sacrifices (Lev.
14.21.); but yet something or other both were to Sacrifice: and in their
offerings for the ransom of their Souls all were to give alike; Exodus 30.15.
The rich shall not give more, the poor shall not give less than half a Shekel:
Now all this was to shadow out two things about Christ's Sacrifice; (1.) its
equal extent to all men, notwithstanding all national or civil differences; be
they Jews or Gentiles, rich or poor, it is the same Christ to all (if they
believe), for there is no difference Romans 3.22. -- (2.) the equal obligation
lying upon all men to look after, make sure of, and rest in this one and the
same all-sufficient Sacrifice; none (in order to remission, justification,
atonement, eternal life) need to carry more to God (by Faith and Prayers), and
none must carry less.
Sirs! let us all put in for a share in Christ's offering, and in the benefits
purchased thereby; for if we should come short of that, we are lost eternally.
Are not reconciliation with God, the expiation of sin, eternal redemption etc.
things most necessary and most desirable? if so, where can we hope to have
them but in a sacrificed Redeemer? but in the imputation of the merit of his
death and Sacrifice? And I add, do not only make sure of the thing (objectively
considered), but labor also after the subjective assurance of it: Oh when a
Christian can say Christ died for me, Gal. 2.20!
gave himself for me, his body was broken and his blood shed for me, he took my
guilt and bare my punishment; how is he filled with 1 Pet. 1.8.
joy unspeakable, with Phil. 4.7.
peace that passes all understanding! what a full-tyde of comfort is there in
his Soul! This is the receiving of the atonement (as some open it), and that is
very sweet; Romans 5.11. And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.

This is to be eyed and only relied upon.
4. In the actings of Faith eye Christ as a Sacrifice for sin, and there let all
your hope and confidence be bottomed. I say, in the actings of Faith eye Christ
as a Sacrifice; for indeed this grace has to do with him mainly and
principally as dying and sacrificed: the Apostle speaks of Faith in his blood
Romans 3.25. it is a bleeding, crucified Savior that is the great and most proper
object of Faith: true it takes in a whole Christ, all of Christ, his Nativity,
holy Life, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession etc. but that which it
primarily and chiefly fixes upon is his death and passion. When a Soul is
brought into Christ to close with him in the way of believing, what of him is
first in its eye in that act? is it a Christ as ascending, as sitting at the
right hand of God, as interceding? no, (thus it beholds him for the
after-encouragement and support of Faith); but that which it first considers is
a Christ as dying upon the Cross, and so it lays hold upon him. And no wonder
that it is so, since all the great blessings of the Gospel do mainly flow from
Christ's death; they are assured and applied by his Resurrection, Ascension and
Intercession, but they were procured and purchased by his death (as the
Scriptures abundantly show, Romans 5.9, 10. Ephesians. 1.7. et passim): now tnat which
has the most causal and most immediate influence upon these, that deserves to
be first and most eyed by Faith. Here Is the difference 'twixt Faith and Love;
this chiefly looks to the excellencies of Christ's Person, but that to the
merit and efficacy of his Sacrifice. When the Apostle Gal. 2.20. had spoken so
high of his Faith in the Son of God, he tells you in what notion he did therein
consider him, by adding who loved me and gave himself for me. The stung
Israelite was to look upon the brazen Serpent as lifted up, and so he was
healed; do you desire to find healing, redemption, salvation by Christ? O look
upon him as lifted up upon the Cross, so all good shall come to you.

Further I say, let all your hope and confidence be bottomed here: this is that
firm rock which you must only build upon for pardon, peace with God, salvation,
for all. Oh take heed of relying upon any thing besides this Sacrifice; Gal.
6.14. God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ: he that glory's or trusts in any thing besides that, his glorying is
vain. The forlorn undone Sinner should be always clasping and clinging about
this Cross, resting upon the merit of Christ thereon, and upon that only; for
all that hope will be but dying hope which is not solely bottomed upon a dying
Savior. The Quum sis ipse nocens moritur cur victima pro te? Stultitia est
morte alterius sperare salutem.
Heathens could not believe that ever the death of Sacrifices should do the
guilty person good, they looked upon it as folly to hope for life by another
death: but (blessed be God) we see that which they did not! we firmly believe
and steadily hope for expiation and Salvation by Christ's one offering of
himself, and lay the sole stress of our Faith and happiness upon that which
they counted folly. But let us be sure we do not mistake here, I mean let us
indeed place our whole confidence in Christ's meritorious death, for if we rely
partly upon that, and partly upon something else, we spoil all.

Gospel-Conditions to be per formed on the Sinners part, notwithstanding
Christ's Sacrifice.
5. Fifthly, you must so confide and rely upon Christ's one, most perfect, and
all-sufficient Sacrifice, as yet withal to be careful that you (on your part)
do perform those Gospel-conditions which God enjoins and requires of you, in
order to remission, justification, glorification: (this word of advice is so
necessary that it is by no means to be passed over). Christians! it is a thing of
very high importance for you rightly to understand your selves in this matter;
therefore take it thus: All your trust and relyance is solely to be bottomed
upon the Death and Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus; but yet you cannot regularly
and warrantably act this trust and relyance upon this ^nly ground or
foundation, unless in your own persons you perform those conditions which God
prescribes in his Word. The whole business of merit and satisfaction lies upon
Christ, that is wholly out of your hands and only in his; but as to believing
and repenting (the two grand Gospel-conditions) they lie upon your selves, (I
speak with respect to the act, not to the power,) and must be done by your
selves: yea, and the doing of these is as necessary on your part under the
notion of Conditions, as suffering and dying was on Christ's part under the
notion of merit. And it is most certain that the latter without the former will
not profit you, because Christ never designed to impute or make over his merit
to any, further than as they should make good these Conditions of Faith and
Repentance. We have here two dangerous rocks before us (and it must be our care
and skill to shun both of them); the one is the setting of inherent grace or
duty too high, as when we make it to share with Christ in merit and trust; the
other is the setting of inherent grace or duty too low, as when upon the
pretense of Christ's alone merit and full satisfaction, we quite throw it off
and are altogether careless about it, as supposing it now to be a thing wholly
unnecessary: Now we are exceedingly prone to dash upon the one or the other of
these rocks; either we run our selves upon POPERY (in the former), or upon
ANTINOMISM and LIBERTINISM (in the latter); O what need have all to beg the
guidance of the unerring Spirit, that thereby they may eavenly steer betwixt
both and avoid each extremes! which they shall most happily do, if Christ and
his Sacrifice be only eyed by them in the way of relyance, and yet Holiness,
Obedience, Faith, Repentance have also that respect which is due to them as
means and conditions. Much has been said concerning the perfection and
sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice, that he has thereby put away all sin, fully
expiated its guilt, perfected for ever them that are sanctified etc. shall any
now from hence infer that all is done by Christ, that the Creature has nothing
to do but only to receive the benefits prepared and purchased? God forbid!
True, Christ's Sacrifice was perfect in suo genere but not in omni genere;
'twas perfect as to what was meritorious and satisfactory, so as to exclude all
other Sacrifices and supplements whatsoever upon that account; but not so as to
exclude all Conditions which God will have the Creature to perform: which
though they can add nothing to the perfecting of the believers great Sacrifice,
yet they do prepare and fit Sinners for the participation of the benefits
merited thereby.

To instance in all these Conditions, or to enlarge upon any one of them, would
be a long work; briefly therefore, as ever you desire to be the better for a
dying Savior, to share in the great and blessed effects of his Sacrifice, look
to it that you repent and believe. O if you be found at last in the number of
the impenitent and unbelieving, all that Christ has done or suffered will be a
very nothing to you; notwithstanding all that you will eternally perish. Here
is indeed an expiatory Sacrifice, I but yet (as to you) no repentance, no
expiation; here is Sin condemned by Christ's oblation of himself, I but yet if
the Sinner does not penitentially condemn ^n in himself and himself for sin,
for all this he will be judicially condemned at the great day. The Scripture
every where makes repentance the way to and condition of remission of sin, Acts
2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins and Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand
to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness
of sins: (with very many other places to this purpose). The Apostle having said
1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin;
presently subjoyns Verse. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: great is the
efficacy of Christ's blood, but it is upon condition of the Sinners Repentance,
if we confess our sins etc. At the JEWISH anniversary Expiation all the sins of
the people were by the Sacrifices done away, yet God would have them then to
afflict their Souls Levit. 16.29. and the High Priest was (in their stead) to
confess their iniquities and all their transgressions in all their sins (Verse.
21.): we under the Gospel have our great expiation by the death of Christ, but
this also must be attended with penitential abasement and humilation. So
likewise as to Faith: this too is a grace or condition indispensably necessary
to the partaking of the benefits of Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice. Therefore
the Apostle (speaking of propitiation) brings in our Faith as well as Christ's
blood, it having an instrumental as well as that a meritorious influence
thereupon; Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood etc. To the blessings of the new Covenant as the blood of
Christ was necessary, that thereby there might be Grotius de Sat. p. 141.
impetration; so Faith also is necessary, that thereby there may be
application. Our Lord's Sacrifice is every way sufficient for atonement, yet he
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36; so also it is
sufficient for expiation, yet it is only whosoever believes on him shall
receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. Under the Law the blood of the Sacrifice
was to be so and so Exodus 12.22. Heb. 9.19.
sprinkled with a bunch of hyssope, (to which custom David alludes Psalm. 51.7.
Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean): now answerably to this, Paul speaks
of the blood of sprinkling Heb. 12.24. 'twas not enough for Christ only to shed
his blood, but that must be sprinkled upon the Sinner, how? why by Faith (which
under the Gospel answers to the hyssop under the Law). Well! after our Saviors
being an offering for sin as we have nothing further to do but only (through
Grace enabling of us) Vid. Cameron. Misc. p. 529.
to perform these Evangelical conditions; so nothing less than that will serve
our turn for a share and interest in the great effects and fruits thereof.

Frequent application to be made to this Sacrifice.
6. Sixthly, you are not to rest in some one, single application of your selves,
or in the first application of your selves at your first believing to this
great Sacrifice, for expiation and remission; but you are to repeat and renew
it daily. For though ('it is true) all the guilt of believers is removed thereby,
yet that is done in this method, it is removed as it is contracted, and as the
benefit of it is accordingly drawn forth by the fresh applications of it. O do
not rest in what you did at your first Conversion, but be you every day
applying your selves to a sacrificed Christ! new guilt must have new pardons,
and daily sins call for daily expiations. It Is observable, that Christ is set
forth not only by the yearly expiatory Sacrifices, or by those that were but
seldom offered; but also by the daily Sacrifices; Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of
God etc. We should not lie down in our beds at night, before we have applied
our selves to a dying Christ, for the cleansing of our persons from the guilt
of the sins of the day past. Yea, we should never go to God in duty but we
should revive upon our thoughts and make use of this Sacrifice: Under the Law
the blood was to be sprinkled even upon the Mercy-seat, Levit. 16.14. God sits
upon a Throne of Mercy, but even that requires the blood of Christ; no mercy
from him, no acceptance with him can be expected, but upon the intervention of
this Sacrifice.

God and Christ to be admired and adored upon this.
7. Seventhly, Upon this Sacrifice and what followed thereupon God and Christ
are highly to be admired and adored by you. This holy admiration has been
already again and again pressed upon you, under the foregoing gracious acts
mentioned in the Text; but surely that (which is now before us) does as much
deserve and call for it as they or any other whatsoever: Is God to be admired
because he sent his own Son? because he sent this Son in flesh? yea in the
likeness of sinful flesh? and is he not to be admired also for his making of
him to be a Sacrifice for sin? and for the condemning of sin in his flesh?
doubtless he is! What? Christ a Sacrifice? a Sacrifice for such as we? such
great things brought about thereby? O what matter is here to draw out
admiration! what so great, so wonderful as this! how much are the highest
thoughts, the most raised affections below the greatness of this mystery! It
has (my Brethren) been largely set before you, now I would ask How are your
hearts affected with it? it is very sad, if we can hear of such stupendous
mercy and yet be but little wrought upon under the hearing of it. Pray fancy to
your selves what the Angels thought of this, what frame they were in when they
saw the Son of God hanging and dying upon the Cross (as an expiatory
Sacrifice); Oh you may well suppose that it filled them with astonishment, they
were even amazed at this strange and wonderful spectacle; never such wondering
in Heaven as when the Lord Jesus was thus suffering on earth: now shall that be
little to you which was so great to them? shall they thus admire, and will you
(who were most concerned in the thing and the greatest gainers by it) be stupid
and unaffected? In Christ's being a Sacrifice God (on his part) has displayed
and advanced all his Attributes, yea, they by this have received their utmost
advancement; infinite Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, Mercy, could go no higher than
a Christ crucified: and (on your part) by this your work is done, your
happiness being every way secured and your misery fully prevented; by this you
are reconciled to God and God to you, condemning-sin is condemned itself, all
its guilt expiated, the righteousness of the Law fulfilled etc. by a strange
and unthought-of method God has fetched the greatest good out of the greatest
evil, by Christ's dying you live: all which being considered, is there not
sufficient ground why you (and all) should admire and adore God? And (amongst
other things) pray in special admire his love, his transcendent, superlative,
matchless love: what manner of love was this that God should give his Son to be
a sacrifice for you! 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Romans
5.8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Had not Christ been a person infinitely dear to God, the
thing had not been so much; but that he should devote him to be sacrificed whom
he so dearly loved, there is the incomprehensibleness of his love. It Is reported
of the PHOENICIANS that in their Sacrifices they did not use to Sacrifice an
enemy or a stranger, but Porphyr. do Abstin. l. 2.
(...) some one that they had a special love for: this I Am sure was done by God
in his giving of the Son of his love to be a Sacrifice for us; therefore what
admiration can be high enough for him! When Genesis 22.10. etc.
Abrahaham had the knife in his hand and was just going to offer his Son Isaac,
God stopped his hand, and provided a cheaper Sacrifice for him: this was more
than what he did for his own Son, him he would have to be offered up, and would
admit of no other Sacrifice; and when the hand of Justice was lifted up, ready
to destroy us, then God (to secure us) interposed and found out a Sacrifice of
propitiation, not a Ram but his only begotten Son: O the heights, bredths,
lengths, depths of his love!

And must not Christ be admired also? surely yes! was not his love too
admirable as well as the Fathers? Oh well might the Apostle say Gal. 2.20. Who
loved me, and gave himself for me: Ephesians. 5.2. And walk in love, as Christ also
has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling savor: Verse. 25. -- as Christ also loved the Church
and gave himself for it. Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own blood: this was loving indeed! When the Joh. 11.36.
JEWS saw Jesus weeping over LAZARUS, they said, Behold how he loved him! but
(alas!) what was Christ's weeping over him to his dying for us! what was the
shedding of a few tears to the shedding of his blood! how may we come with a
more emphatical Behold, behold how he loved us! He that 2 Cor. 5.21.
knew no sin was willing to be made sin, 1 Pet. 2.24.
to bear our sins in his own body upon the tree, to put himself in our stead,
yea to die in our stead, for our sakes to be Phil. 2.8.
obedient to death even the death of the Cross, to let out his precious blood
for the expiation of sin (when nothing else would do it), and when all Mosaical
Sacrifices were weak he (by a far higher Sacrifice) undertook the work, Heb.
10.7.
Lo, I come to do thy will, O God: was not here love? even love Ephesians. 3.19.
passing knowledge? such high affection on his part should draw out high
admiration on our part.

Let me here add, we should so admire God and Christ as to love them and to be
thankful: Have they Joh. 3.16.
so loved us and shall not we return love for love? what monsters and prodigies
shall we be, if after such a manifestation of their love to us there be not
reciprocation of our love to them! God designed and prepared the Sacrifice,
therefore he must have our love; Christ was the Sacrifice, therefore he must
have our love too: both deserve it, both must have it. Joh. 10.17. Therefore
does my Father love me, because I lay down my life --; now does the Father love
him for this, and shall not we much more? did we but think of this Sacrifice
and hold our hearts close to it in holy meditation, surely it would cause them
to love Christ!

Then (I say) be thankful; yea, let your whole Soul upon this go out in
thankfulness; be ever praising, magnifying God for his unspeakable mercy in
Christ your Sacrifice, your Redeemer, your Savior: often call upon your
sluggish hearts and say, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy name. Did God Romans 3.25.
set forth Christ to be a propitiation? did he Isa. 53.5, 6.
lay upon him the iniquities of you all? was the chastisement of your peace
upon him, and by his stripes are you healed? that guilt and wrath which would
have ruined you for ever, are they now both done away, so as that they shall
never hurt you? did Christ die Mediator noster puniri pro seipso non debuit,
quia nullum culpae contagium perpetravit: Sed si ipse indebitam mortem non
susciperet, nunquam nos a debita morte liberaret. Gregor. l. 3. moral. c. 13.
that you might not die, but live for ever? did you sin and he suffer? was the
innocent person punished that the guilty might be acquitted? was sin condemned
for you who deserved to be condemned for it? what praise and admiration can be
high enough for such things as these! The JEWS in the day of atonement were to
make the trumpet sound throughout their land, Lev. 25.9. So we, having received
the atonement by Christ's Sacrifice should evermore be sounding forth the
praises of the most high. You read of the Elders Rev. 5.8. etc. they fell down
before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of
odours, which are the prayers of Saints: And they sang a new son, saying, Thou
art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood etc. Peccat iniquus and punitur
justus; delinquit reus and vapulat innocens; offendit impius and damnatur pius;
quod meretur malus patitur bonus, etc. Quo Nate Dei, quo tua descendit
humilitas? quo tua flagravit charitas? etc. Ego inique egi, tu poena mulctaris;
ego facinus admisi, tu ultione plecteris etc. -- Me ad illicitam
concupiscentiam rapuit arbor, te perfecta charitas duxit ad crucem; ego
praesumsi vetitum, tu subiisti aculeum, etc. August. in Quest. in V. and N.
Testam. Qu. 55.
Christians! why are not your harps always in your hands? why are not your
Souls always full of holy affections (as the golden Vials full of odours), in
the remembrance of him who was slain and sacrificed for you?

Christ having offered his Sacrifice, we are to offer ours.
8. Lastly, Do you offer to God the Sacrifices proper to you as Christ offered
to God the Sacrifice proper to him. For expiatory Sacrifices, as you need them
not (Christ's one Sacrifice being every way sufficient for that end), so you
are not able to come up to them (for you can present nothing to God properly
and formally expiatory); yet there are other Sacrifices which you may offer up
to him: And though the external and fleshly Sacrifices of the Law are out of
date, yet there are the internal and spiritual Sacrifices of the Gospel, which
you now are as much obliged to observe and offer as ever the JEWS were the
former. What are they? why, you are to present your selves, your bodies, Souls,
the whole man, a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. you
are to dedicate your persons to Christ, so as to live to him who died for you 2
Cor. 5.15. yea, so as to be ready to be offered in sacrifice, by dying for him,
(to allude to that Phil. 2.17.). You are as an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. (which
spiritual Sacrifices are spiritual Dutys and Evangelical Worship, prophesied of
Mal. 1.11. -- in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering): Here come in Oration pure directa de cord fideli, tanquam de ara
Sancta surgit incensum. August. in Psalm 141.
Prayer and Praise, those two eminent Sacrifices under the Gospel; Psalm. 141.2.
Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense: and the lifting up of my
hands as the evening Sacrifice: Psalm. 116.17. I will offer to thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving: and will call upon the name of the Lord: (so Psalm.
107.22. Psalm. 54.6.) Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his
name: this is set forth as here by the fruit of the lips so elsewhere by the
free-will-offerings of the mouth Psalm. 119.108. by rendering the calves of our
lips Hos. 14.2. And for the pleasingness of this to God above all the Levitical
Sacrifices, see Psalm. 50.13, 14. Psalm. 69.30, 31. O this is a Sacrifice which
we should often be offering up to God through Christ Jesus. Another Evangelical
Sacrifice is a broken Spirit; than which (next to a broken Christ) nothing more
acceptable to God: Psalm. 51.16, 17. For thou desire not sacrifice, else would
I give it, thou delightest not in burnt-offering: The sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. So
also bounty to the poor distressed Saints, this is an odor of sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God, Phil. 4.18. But to do good and to
communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb.
13.16. And (to sum up all) holiness of heart and life that is an excellent
Sacrifice, excelling all the old Law Sacrifices whatsoever; 1 Samuel 15.22. Has
the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the
voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey, is better than sacrifice; and to hearken,
than the fat of rams. Micah. 6.6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord,
and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body, for the sin of my soul.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? The
Vis Deos propitiare? bonus esto. Satis illos coluit quisquis imitatus est.
Senec. Ep. 9.5. Non immolationibus and sanguine multo colendus est Deus; sed
mente pura, bono honestoque proposito. Idem. (...). Porphyr. (...). l. 2. p.
62. (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 3. (with many more in Stuck. de Sacrif. p. 153. col.
2. Saubert. de Sac. c. 1. p. 4.).
HEATHENS themselves, upon the light of Nature, looked upon moral goodness as
the best and most acceptable Sacrifice; I Am sure Evangelical Holiness is so.
The wickedness of the Jews made God even to abhor and slight the Sacrifices
which were instituted by himself; (as we find Isa. 1.11. etc. Isa. 66.3. Jer.
6.20. -- 7.21. etc. Amos 5.21, 22.): if we live in sin, we may offer this and
that to God but it is all nothing, nay that makes all our Sacrifices an
abomination to him, Prove. 15.8. -- Oh live the holy life, keep the heart pure,
mortify whatever is evil, do good, shun all excesses, be heavenly in your
affections, in all things act in compliance with God's Nature and Will, etc.
this will please him more than the most costly oblations which you can bring to
him. These are the Sacrifices which now under the Gospel we are to offer; and
surely we should offer them with all readiness and faithfulness: our Lord
having submitted to the bloody Sacrifice of himself on the Cross, and left us
none but these easy and delightful Sacrifices, how reareadily should we close
with them! (But so much for this Use.)

A third shall put an end to this Subject, and that is of Comfort. Was Christ a
Sacrifice for sin? Use 3. For Comfort to Believers.
did he thereby condemn sin? what does this Truth drop but honey and sweetness
to them who are in Christ! (I say, to them who are in Christ; for they are the
persons only who can lay hold upon the grace contained in it: as the
non-condemnation of the person in the first verse, so the condemnation of sin
in this belongs only to such). You that are in the number of these to you I
bring glad tidings, matter of great joy: out of the bitter comes sweet; for
Christ to do die as a Sacrifice this was bitter to him but it is sweet to you:
his death, passion, and whole humilation speak nothing to you but consolation.
Oh did Believers (especially such as are under a troubled spirit) but better
understand and better improve this sin-condemning Sacrifice, they would
certainly have more of inward peace and comfort than now they have. I must not
in fist upon the particular and full drawing out of that consolatory matter
which it affords; therefore shall conclude with a brief review only of what the
Text offers.

And so 1. here is a Sacrifice for sin. All men in ADAM having sinned wilfully,
after that they had received the knowledge of the truth, there might have been
no Sacrifice for their sin (to allude to that Heb. 10.26.); but the gracious
God notwithstanding all this was pleased to admit of a Sacrifice; yea, himself
to find out and ordain that Sacrifice; here is matter of comfort.

2. Christ himself was this Sacrifice. And if so, how pleasing must it needs be
to God! Ephesians. 5.2. -- and has given himself for us, an offering and a Sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor: I tell you, there was infinitely more in
this one Sacrifice to please God than there is in all your sins (put them all
together) to displease God. If Christ be the Sacrifice, there must be an
infinite efficacy and merit in it; from the dignity of his person an
infiniteness of merit must needs result: if he will die and shed his blood what
can be too high for you? surely too there is more in his Offering to save you
than there is in Sin to damn you. If he be the Sacrifice, no question but the
Father did accept of it: and indeed of this he has given sufficient evidence
to the world; not only by his carriage toward the Saints, but also (and
chiefly) by his carriage toward Christ himself: for whereas of old he was wont
to testify his acceptance of the Sacrifices, by consuming them by fire from
heaven. (Genesis 15.17. Levit. 9.24. Judge. 6.21. 2 Chronicles. 7.1.); here (with
respect to Christ's Sacrifice) he testified his acceptance in an higher way,
viz. by raising him from the dead, taking him up to heaven, re-admiting him
into his presence, and setting him at his Son, had he not been well-pleased
with his person and oblation? Oh there is a convincing evidence of this in his
going to the Father, Joh. 16.8, 10. By this Sacrifice (thus accepted) you are
made perfect, (as you have often heard out of Heb. 10.14, 18.); there is nothing
now to be done by Christ or by you, but only to apply and improve what he has
already done: is not this ground of strong consolation? And know further (for
your comfort), that the virtue of Christ's Offering is as great now as it was
at the first; his blood is as effectual with God for your good now as it was
when it was just running warm from his veins, and Adeo magnum est hoc
Sacrificium, ut quamvis unum sit and semel oblatum, sufficiat ad aeternitatem,
Anselm.
so it shall be to the end of the world. And that he may make the best of it he
is entered into the holy place, where it is his business to present and plead the
merit thereof; he back's his oblation on earth with his intercession in heaven:
and what can be spoken higher for your support and comfort! he that was the
Sacrifice here is the Advocate there.

3. By this Sacrifice Sin was condemned. Sin condemned? what a word is that!
that which would have condemned you, and which only can condemn you, that is by
Christ condemned itself; condemning sin is condemned by a condemned Savior:
And shall it be condemned and you too? shall Christ suffer the penalty due to
it and you too? O no! as God was just to punish it once so he is gracious (and
just too) not to punish it twice. What this condemning of sin is you have
heard: if you follow the word the comfort lies thus, a condemnatory Sentence is
by God upon Christ's account passed upon it, he has adjudg'd it to die for all
the mischiefs done by it, both against himself and against you too; this
cursed Tyrant, this heinous Malefactor is under a sentence to be cut off, that
it may no longer either dishonor God or hurt you: and should not you rejoice
in this? who fears a condemned person? what do the accusations of a condemned
man signify? sin is a condemned thing, fear it not. If you leave the Word and
come to the main import of it, then the comfort lies thus; the guilt of all
your sins is fully done away and expiated by Christ's Sacrifice; this Lamb of
God (as offered) has taken it all away; his blood has cleansed you from all
sin; your Scapegoat has carried all your iniquities into the land of
forgetfulness. Oh your guilt was charged upon Christ, and it shall not be
charged upon you too; you are to mourn over it, but yet know he has fully
satisfied for it: what would you have more? You have in the former Verse the
power of sin abolished by the Law of the Spirit, in this, the guilt of sin
abolished by the Sacrifice of Christ; O how complete is your redemption! the
plaster is every way as large as the sore. What holy triumphs may you now make
over all which may seem to endanger you! Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns?
it is Christ that Mortuum Caesarem quis metuat? sed morte Christi quid
efficacius? Cyprian. de dupl. Martyrio.
died etc.

4. Observe it is Sin that was condemned: The Apostle speaks of it in the lump
and mass, and so (he says) it is expiated. Our Lord's Sacrifice did not take
off the guilt of this or that particular sin, but of all sin; his expiation was
total and universal: Under the Law-Sacrifices the blood was to be sprinkled
Levit. 16.19.
seven times, thereby to prefigure the thoroughness and perfection of the
expiation of sin by Christ's Sacrifice.

5. This is brought in as God's act: God sent his own Son and for sin condemned
sin. He that was the persona laesa, the injured person, the just Judge, against
whom sin was committed, and who therefore was to punish it, he who is the
supreme and authoritative Agent in and about the great concerns of Souls; he
appointed Christ to be a Sacrifice, owned and accepted his sacrifice, and upon
that acquits Sinners from all guilt; Oh there is much in this to encourage the
drooping Christian. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect? it is God that justifies. The Father cannot but be well-pleased with
Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice, since this was of himself; Romans 3.25. Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation etc.

6. This was done too in Christ's Flesh, (which also has great sweetness in
it). It Is added (says Deodat. inloc.
One) for our further assurance, to the end that we may not doubt of the
forgiveness of our sins, which are destroyed in our proper Nature which the Son
of God took upon him: Had Christ done and suffered what he did in the Nature of
Angels, we might have questioned whether any good would thereby have accrued to
us; but all being done in Addit Paulus in came, quo certior sit nostra fiducia,
dum videmus peccatum in ipsa Natura nostra fuisse devictum and abolitum; sic
enim sequitur, naturam nostram vere fieri participem ejus victoriae. Calvin.
our Nature surely he did it for us, and we shall reap the benefit thereof.

7. To all this let me add one thing further (and it is a great one), namely
That by this Sacrifice of Christ you have not only the bare condemnation or
expiation of sin, but with that you also have a right and title unto, and
collation of all Gospel-blessings and privileges whatsoever. Was it only the
taking off of guilt, and the appeasing of divine wrath, that would be very
much; but over and beyond these there is (Christ's active fulfilling the Law
being taken in) a positive righteousness made over to you, an interest in God's
fatherly love, the purchase of Heaven; (and in this sense we are for a
redundancy of Christ's merit). The benefits of Christ's Sacrifice to Believers
are not only those which are privative (such wherein they are freed from all
evil), but there are also those which are positive, such wherein they are
entitled to and instated in the possession of all good; yea, even of the
heavenly blessedness it self: Heb. 5.9. And being made perfect, he became the
Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Heb. 9.12. -- having
obtained eternal redemption for us; (it comes in as the effect of Christ's
blood and Sacrifice). In his great undertaking to redeem and save Sinners, we
may suppose him to have two things in his eye; the one was that he should have
a people in the world; the other was that through him this people should
partake of all blessings requisite to their happiness: now both of these were
effected and secured by his Sacrifice. As to the first that was made sure by
this, according to that promise or prediction Isa. 53.10, 11. -- When thou
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, etc. He shall
see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: in relyance upon which
he himself said, And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me, Joh. 12.32. and that upon his death and Sacrifice he had a people, and
a numerous people too, the Evangelical History does abundantly testify. Then
as to the second that also was promoted and secured by his Sacrifice, inasmuch
as thereby the Covenant of Grace (the summary of all blessings) was ratified
and confirmed. 'Twas an -- Et caesa jungebant foedera porta. Virgil. See Mr.
Medo on Mal. 1.11.
ancient custom used amongst men at the sanction and ratification of their
Covenants to make use of Sacrifices, (as we find Genesis 21.22, 23, 24, etc. Jer.
34.18. Exodus 34.7, 8. in allusion to which custom it is said Psalm. 50.5 Gather
my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice: Answerably now to this Christ by his Sacrifice confirmed and
ratified the Covenant of Grace 'twixt God and Believers; wherefore he said,
This cup is the new Testament in my blood (i.e. the seal and ratification of
the New Covenant) Matthew. 26.28. 1 Cor. 11.25. and the Apostle does in special
insist upon this in Heb. 9.15, 16, etc. Well then, by Christ's Sacrifice ( the
blood of the Covenant as it is called Zech. 9.11.) all blessings whatsoever are
insured and made over to God's people: and if so, is not that a sufficient
ground of comfort to such? What shall I say? if the atoning of an angry God,
the washing away of all sin, the fulfilling of a righteous Law, the satisfying
of infinite Justice, the ratification of the Covenant of Grace, the purchase of
Heaven; if there be any thing in all these things (as surely there is) to
promote spiritual joy, you have them all by this great Sacrifice: therefore
rejoice, and again I say rejoice. So much for this Head! which I very well know
I might have dispatched with much more brevity, but it containing that matter
in it which is not commonly so fully opened, and which is of so high concern to
us, therefore I have been thus large upon it.

ROMANS 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. --


CHAP. XIV. Of the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness in Believers.
Of the Second End or Effect of Christ's being sent in Flesh, (viz.) the
fulfilling of the Laws righteousness. A general explication of the main Scope
of the Words, and of the principal matter contained in them. More particularly
it is enquired (1.) Of what Law does the Apostle hear speak? (2.) What is the
(...) or righteousness of the Law? (3.) What is it to fulfill the Laws
righteousness? (4.) How the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us?
Four interpretations given of it: (1.) That it is perfectly and personally
fulfilled by the Saints themselves: (2.) That it is personally fulfilled in
them, though not perfectly, yet inchoately, and in respect of God's
acceptance: (3.) That it is perfectly but not personally fulfilled in them,
Christ's Obedience and perfect fulfilling of the Law being imputed to them.
(4.) That it is fulfilled in them in respect of the remission of sin.
Three Propositions laid down to clear up the third interpretation and the main
Truth: As (1.) That Christ was made under the Law: ( that opened in some
Particulars). (2.) That Christ perfectly fulfilled the Law. (3.) That his
fulfilling of it is imputed and reckoned to Believers.
Two Questions raised and answered: Whether Christ's active and passive
Obedience or his passive only be imputed? In what sense may it be said to be
imputed? Use 1. First to show upon what terms Believers are justified and
saved. Secondly, what a respect God had for his Law.
Use 2. To exhort persons (1.) To get an interest in this privilege. (2.) Such
as have an interest in it are exhorted (1.) To go as far as ever they may in
the personal fulfilling of the Law: (2.) To look after the fulfilling of the
Evangelical Law in themselves: (3.) To admire the Love of Christ.

Use. 3. The Comfort of this drawn forth to Believers.

The Second End or Effect of Christ's being sent in Flesh, viz. the fulfilling
of the Law for Believers.
THese words hold forth another end or effect of Christ's being sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh; for I do not understand them to refer to the Clause
immediately foregoing [and for sin condemned sin in the flesh], as if they were
an assignation of the end or effect of Christ's condemning sin by the Sacrifice
of himself; but I take them as referring to that which is before spoken of [God
sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh], and as they do represent
God's end in that: wherefore did God so do? what did he design or aim at
therein? why at this that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us.

The conjunctive particle [(...)] may be taken either (...) or (...): In the
first notion (which is most usual and common) it carrys a final sense, and
notes the end why God sent his Son in Flesh; namely, that he might fulfill, in
his own Person, the Laws righteousness, and so imputatively or in a Law-sense
Believers in him. I say this was God's end; for it does not come in as a bare
event or consequent upon Christ's taking our Nature, and doing in that Nature
what he did; but it was the very Idque totum hoc consilio fecit, ut nos
perfect justi coram ipso perficeremur, non secus atque illi habiti suissent
qui omnia divinae legis praecepta conservassent. Vorst.
end which God designed and propounded to himself therein; (viz.) that Christ
might perfectly fulfill the Law, which to do to the Saints themselves in their
own persons was altogether impossible; and yet upon which (it being accepted of
by God on their behalf and made over to them), they should be accounted just
and righteous, even as if they had fulfilled it in their own persons: this is
the first import of the word. Then it may be taken (...) or by way of
apposition; and so it notes the superadding of some further matter and that
which is See Burg. of Justif. 2. part. p. 361.
distinct from what went before; (in this appositive sense it is used Joh.
15.12. Joh. 17.3.). And so the Apostles meaning is this; God sent his Son into
the World not only to be a Sacrifice for sin, and thereby to condemn sin (by
his bearing the Laws penalty due to it); but also, by his active obedience and
conformity to the Laws commands, to bring things to this that the righteousness
of the Law should be fulfilled in believers. Christ's being a Sacrifice for sin
was not sufficient to answer all the ends and demands of the Law; there must be
the doing of what it commanded as well as the suffering of what it threatened;
therefore Christ was sent for both, and both were accomplished by him. Man in
his lapsed state stood in need of two things, Cum duo nobis peperisse Christum
dixerimus, impunitatem and praemium, illud Satisfactioni, hoc merito Christi
distinct tribuit vetus Ecclesia. Satisfactio consistit in peccatorum
tralatione, meritum in perfectissuna obedientiae pro nobis praestitae
imputatione. G. Vossius in Prefat. ad Grotium de Sat. Christi. In homine lapso
duo consideranda, quod pro peccatis ejus solvendum fuit, ut liberaretur; tum ut
vitae insuper fieret particeps, quod praestari debuit id ad quod vita promissa
erat etc. -- Utrumque Apostolus docet and conjungit Romans 8.3, 4. etc. Hoornb.
Socin. confut. l. 3. c. 1. p 657.
Satisfaction and Merit; Satisfaction, with respect to God's punitive Justice,
the expiation of sin by the undergoing of the punishment incurred by it, etc.
Merit, with respect to eternal life and the possession of the heavenly
blessedness; the measure and foundation of which Merit was the fulfilling of
the Law in active obedience: Now both of these are here distinctly spoken unto;
Christ for sin condemned sin in the flesh, there is Satisfaction; and he also
fulfilled the righteousness of the Law in the stead (at leastwise for the good)
of Believers, there is Merit. So that in the words we have a further account of
that full benefit and complete Salvation which sinners have by the Lord Jesus:
and so much for their main Scope and the general explication of the matter
contained in them.

Four things propounded for the more particular explication of the Words.
In the more particular opening of them Four things are to be enquired into; 1.
Of what [Law] does Paul here speak? 2. What he means by the [righteousness] of
the Law? 3. How this righteousness of the Law is said to be [fulfilled]? 4. In
what sense is it said to be fulfilled [in us]?


What Law does the Apostle here speak of?
To the first of these Enquiries I shall answer very briefly; it is the Moral Law
which is here chiefly spoken of. That which is called the Law of Works Rom
3.27. (in contradistinction to the Evangelical Law, or the Law of Faith); the
Law which God at first made with Adam in the state of innocence, and afterward
(for the matter of it) renewed and copied out again to the people of Israel,
abridging it in the ten Commandments; the Law which called for universal,
perfect, constant Obedience, and promised Life thereupon; which was a draught
or model and summary of all that duty which God required of man; this is that
Law which the Apostle here had mainly in his eye. It Is the same with the Law
spoken of in the foregoing Verse, What the Law could not do in that it was weak
etc. (where I had occasion to speak See page 259, 260.
something about it, to which I refer you). It Is here said that the
righteousness of the Law etc. now the Law to which righteousness is annexed is
commonly the Moral Law; (see Romans 10.5. Phil. 3.9. et passim): And that is the
Law which Christ in special fulfilled; therefore he having said Matthew. 5.17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill; he explains himself (Verse. 21, 27, etc.) what Law he
meant, by instancing in some branches of the Moral Law: And the Apostle having
styled Christ Romans 10^^, 5.
the end of the Law etc. shows that he also by this meant the same Law, as
appears by what he immediately adds, For Moses describes the righteousness
which is of the Law, that the man which does those things shall live by them. I
add further, it is that Law the righteousness whereof is fulfilled in us (that
is, by imputation); now it is the righteousness of the Moral Law, as fulfilled
by Christ, which is most eminently imputed to us, therefore that Law must here
chiefly be understood. I deny not but that there are other Laws, besides this,
with which righteousness is coupled; as those particular and positive Laws laid
upon Christ with respect to the management of his Office: when the business of
his Baptism was before him he would have it done, for (says he) thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. Yea, the Ceremonial Law
it self had its (...), for that is the Word Heb. 9.1. and it is said of Zachary
and Elizabeth Luke 1.6. they were both righteous before God, walking [(...)] in
all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, See Dr. Hammond on Romans 8.4.
in Annot. (b).
blameless; (where some distinguish, making the (...) to refer to the commands
of the Moral Law, and the (...) to the rites and ordinances of the Ceremonial
Law). Neither do I deny but that other Laws besides the Moral Law were
fulfilled by Christ, for he fulfilled all; and that his fulfilling of them also
was for our good: But yet 'twas the Moral Law with which especially
righteousness is joined, which Christ eminently fulfilled, and which fulfilling
is in an higher notion imputed to us: therefore I interpret the word [Law] here
as mainly pointing to that; and in so doing I have the concurrent suffrages of
all the Expositors that I have looked into (one or two only excepted).

What is the righteousness of the Law?
2. What is here meant by the (...) or righteousness of the Law? The Vulgar,
Ambrose, Erasmus, Tremelleus etc. read it the justification of the Law, (as
the word (...) is translated Romans 5.16.); and the Greek Interpreters pitch upon
the sense as to the thing, that the righteousness of the Law etc. (that is, say
(...). Theoph.
they) that the primary end and scope of the Law (viz. to justify, for that
was the end of the Law as given at first,) might be fulfilled in us. Beza (with
diverse others) render it that the right of the Law etc. the Law had a right to
lay its commands upon the Creature, and to exact his obedience thereunto; it
being God's own Law, the declaration of his Will, it having his authority
stamped upon it, and it enjoining nothing but what was righteous, just, and
good, it was its right to command and to be obeyed when it did so command: And
in case it was not so, it had a further right viz. to demand satisfaction in
the enduring of its penalty; for it had (...) duplex, condemnandi peccatores
and rursus exigendi obedientiam perfectam. Pareus. Jus Legis ut qui peccaverant
punirentur, and quiad vitam intrare volebant servarent mandata, Streso. (...)
illud quod requirit Lex; nempe tum plenam Poenae reatibus nostris debitam
luitionem, ut a condemnatione libe^emur; tum plenam legis praestationem, ut ad
aeternam vitam (...) inveniamur, ex illa promissione, Hoc fac and vives etc.
Beza. See Burg. of Justif. part 2. p. 358. --
a double right, one as it did and might require active obedience, the other as
it did and might require satisfaction by suffering in case of disobedience; and
these two put together make up its righteousness. (...) seu jus legis nihil
aliud est quam (...) and damnatoria sententia legis, qua maledictionis and
mortis aeternae supplicio etc. Jacob. ad Portum Fid. Orthod. Defens. c. 34. p.
975. -- Vid. Pareum in loc. -- (...). Chrysostom.
Some make this to lie in the Laws threatenings or damnatory sentence against
Sinners, in that curse which it denounces against the transgressors of it, Gal.
3.10; as the (...) spoken of Romans 1.32. is God's punishing and avenging
justice, and that dreadful sentence passed by him that they who do such things
are worthy of death; so the (...) is the penal or maledictory part of the Law.
But this is only a part of its righteousness, and the secondary part thereof
too; its preceptive righteousness in its demanding of active Obedience must be
taken in, and that too as that which is primarily and principally intended by
it; therefore it is Significat eam rectitudinem quae praecipitur in lege. P.
Martyr. Justitia quam Lex exigebat. Vatabl. Totum quod Lex praecipit. Alap.
(...) ipsa legis praecepta etc. Perer. Justitia Legis est justitia quam
praecipit Lex. Estius. Implere justum legis est totum quod Lex precipit
efficere. Tolet. Ut justificatio legis i. e. justitia quam lex prescribit and
exigit impleretur etc. Staplet. Antidot. p. 627. Ut ad impleret opus
praeceptorum legis. Ver. Aethiop. Ut nos praestaremus omnia quae in lege Mosis
per se honesta sunt. Grot. Jus, justitia, justificatio legis in eo consistit,
ut per omnimodam cum lege conformitatem justi atque inculpati habeamur coram
Deo. De Dieu. (...) is any thing that God has thought meet to appoint or
command his people. Dr. Hammond.
generally opened by that. The Scripture speaks of the Law of righteousness
Romans 9.31; of righteousness by the Law Gal. 3.21. of the righteousness of the
Law Romans 2.26. (and in the Text): Some difference there is betwixt these, but
that I shall not stand upon; the latter, is all that duty, righteousness,
obedience which the Law requires, with the penalty which it threatens and will
have inflicted upon disobedience.

What is it to fulfill the Laws righteousness?
3. We are to enquire what this fulfilling of the Laws righteousness is? Answ.
The former Head being rightly apprehended there will be little or no difficulty
in this: To fulfill the righteousness of the Law it is fully to answer all its
demands, to come up to perfect and universal conformity to it, to do whatever
it enjoins or to suffer whatever it threatens, or both. For so it was fulfilled
by Christ; in his active obedience as to the one, in his passive obedience as
to the other: as he was perfectly holy he did what the Law commanded, and
besides this as he was made Gal. 3.13.
a curse he underwent what the Law threatened. It Is questioned whether one of
these be not enough for us, either to obey or to suffer; but all grant that
both were necessary on Christ's part, and that both were done by him; and so he
fulfilled the Laws righteousness. This is the genuine and plain notion of the
word, yet I know other interpretations are given of it: The righteousness of
the Law was fulfilled inasmuch (say This interpretation noted and confuted by
Burg. of Justific. P. 361, 362.
some) as that righteousness which it did foretell was actually accomplished in
Christ; Romans 3.21. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets: that righteousness,
which before was witnessed, promised, foretold in the Law, received in Christ
its full accomplishment; and therein lies the fulfilling of its righteousness.
But this exposition of the word is (I conceive) not so proper to the thing here
spoken of, it is another fulfilling which is here intended; not so much that
which is the bringing into act what was foretold or which is the verifying of a
prophecy or prediction, (in which sense it has usually joined with it (...);
as Matthew. 13.35; or (...), as Jam. 2.23; or (...), as Luke 24.44; or (...), as
Matthew. 13.14.); as the perfect obeying of what was enjoined in the Command, and
the doing to the full what the Law as preceptive did require rather than what
the Law as predictive did foretell.

Again, Bodius in Ephesians. c. 5. v. 28. p. 799. who yet afterward sets down that
notion which I close with; Impleri quoque dicitur cum perfect praestatur and
observatur, quod a Christo pro nobis factum est, etsi ea praestatione vitam
aeternam non dicatur nobis acquisivisse.
Some make this fulfilling of the Law to be no more than adeptio finis, the
bringing about of that which was the great end of it; what was that? why, to
drive Sinners to Christ. By its discovering sin and guilt (for the Law was
added because of transgressions Gal. 3.21.), and wrath (the consequent
thereof), and the Sinners utter inability to help himself, eventually it was a
means to bring such to look out for help in Christ. Therefore Gal. 3.24. it is
said, The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ; and in this sense
some take that passage Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness; (i.e.) that which God mainly designed in the Law and which was
the great end that he aimed at therein, it was to drive Sinners to Christ, to
obtain righteousness in and through him. This explication I do not close with
neither, for I suppose the Apostle is not here speaking so much of the
fulfilling of the end of the Law, as of the fulfilling of the matter of the
Law; for he speaks of that which is imputable to us (as you will hear), now
it is Christ's performing the matter of the Law, and not the end of the Law in
itself, which comes under imputation.

That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled, that is, (say Deodate in
loc.
others) that it might not be commanded in vain, nor without effect, as it is
in respect of Unbelievers: But this exposition will carry us to that fulfilling
of the Law which is in our own persons (which is not here intended); and this
will better suit with the (...) Romans 2.26, and the (...) Romans 2.27. rather than
with the (...) in the text. These (and such like) explications of the word
therefore being rejected, I stick to that which was first laid down; to fulfill
the Laws righteousness it is fully, exactly, to do and to suffer whatever that
righteous Law demanded.

How the righteousness of the Law may be said to be fulfilled in Believers?
4. The resolution of the 4th Enquiry will take me up more time; How are we to
understand the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness in the Saints? that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled [in us]; (he means in such who are
in Christ Jesus and who do believe on him): Every true believer is a fulfiller
of the Law; but how or in what sense he is so, there is the difficulty: in one
sense nothing more true, in another nothing more false.

In the resolving of this, a fourfold Answer is given and a fourfold
Interpretation put upon the words:

The first Answer or Interpretation about it; (viz.) that the righteousness of
the Law is perfectly and person^lly fulfilled by the Saints themselves.
1. First (say some) the righteousness of the Law is perfectly and personally
fulfilled by the Saints themselves. This the POPISH Writers (in their Polemical
discourses, and also in their Commentaries upon the Text,) do assert; wherein
yet (to give every one their due) they Hinc Patet persolam Naturam and Legem
sine gratia Christi, hominem in hac corruptione non posse totam legem totumque
Decalogum implere. A-Lapide.
differ from the old PELAGIANS: For whereas they held that a man by the mere
power of Nature might perfectly keep the whole Law, these hold, that a man
cannot do this without the assisting grace of God: but that being vouchsafed
(they say) regenerate persons may keep the whole Law. Thus they expound the
words, and then from them they endeavor to prove (against us) a possibility of
perfect obedience to the Law of God by the Saints in this Life: insomuch that
(say they) Saints may here live without all Sin, ( Venial sins only excepted,
which break no squares betwixt God and the Creature); that they may do all the
good which the Law requires: nay, that this perfect conformity to the Law is
not only possible but easy; nay, that such, who are high in grace, may not
only do just what the Law demands, but that they may superogate and do more
than what it demands: This is the Doctrine which Council Trident. Sess. 6. c.
18. Bellarm. de Justif. l. 4. c. 10, etc. Becan. Man. Controv. l. 1. c. 17.
Perer. Disp. 3. in c. 8. ad Romans -- Ut justificatio Legis etc. i. e. ut nos
legem impleremus, idque faciendo justi essemus, quia factores legis
justificabuntur. Estius. Peccato in nobis per redemptionis Christi gratiam
abolito, factaque cum Deo reconciliatione, legem implere nobis est jam
possibile, and facile. Tolet. Vide Justinian. Catharin. Staplet. Rhemists in
loc. etc. -- Nemo miretur quod dixerim posse nos absque omni culpa absolute
esse. Nam and iterum dico, posse per Dei gratiam and libetum arbitrium, hominem
perfectam assequi justitiam coram Deo, immunitatem scilicet ab omni peccato,
modo voluntas ejus non desit, adjuvante divina open: C. Mussu^.
they of the ROMISH-Church teach and maintain with great zeal.

We are not ashamed to declare See Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 7. sect 5. Chemnit.
Exam. De bonis Operibus 3. Qu. p. 181. Chamier. t. 3. l. 11. Whittak. contra
Duraeum. de Parad. l. 8. p. 201, 202. Bradsh. de Justif. c. 11.
our dissent from them in this proud Opinion, which (in a great measure) owns
its descent from the old Pharisees. We believe that since Adams fall no man
(Christ only excepted) did ever thus in himself fulfill the Laws righteousness:
Indeed in the state of innocence man had a power to do this, but not since; and
to hold the contrary, is to confound the two states and to make little
difference between man as standing and man as fallen. The Laws righteousness is
a draught or copy of man's primitive holiness; so that to say that he can now in
himself come up to that righteousness, is in effect to say he is as holy and
righteous as ever he was, and no ways impaired by Adams Fall: By that we are
all made unrighteous, and such as are unrighteous can never perfectly fulfill a
righteous Law. He must be sinless, do no evil, who will exactly reach the Laws
righteousness; but are any (...). Clem. Constit. l. 2. c. 18.
such here on earth? 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not: Eccles.
7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not.
Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all. 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Prove. 20.9. Who can
say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? -- (read Psalm. 130.3.
Psalm. 142.2. Job 9.2, 3. Job. 15.15, etc. Romans 3.19. Gal. 3.22.). Further, he
must not only do good, all good, but he must do it in the most intense and
highest degree that he is capable of; or else he does not fulfill the Laws
righteousness; Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind: but where is the man who
thus loves God? now if there be but a Peccatum est cum non est charitas quae
esse debet, vel minor est quam esse debet. Aug. de Perfect. justitiae.
gradual defect the Law is not fulfilled. Its righteousness extends to the
inward man, and to the inward acts the Soul: as to external acts, if evil
(especially if grossly and scandalously evil,) it is possible for one to
refrain from them; if good, it is possible for one to come up to them; but this
will not amount to the perfect keeping of the Law, unless there be an
abstaining from Heart-evils, from evil thoughts and concupiscence within, (so
Christ, the Maker and Expounder of the Law, opens it against the Pharisees
Matthew. 5.): and unless also there be the doing of what is good from a right
principle to a right end: If the righteousness of the Law did lie only in
external acts, something might be said; but when it reaches to internal acts,
who can say that there all is right? O how great is the Laws strictness! Deuteronomy.
5.32. Ye shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God has commanded
you: you shall not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left. And its
demands are so severe that if you fail in any one point you are gone, you fail
in all. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them: Jam. 2.10. For whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: and if
so, he must be strangely arrogant and ignorant too that will pretend to come up
in himself to the Laws righteousness. If any could so do, to him the reward
would be reckoned not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4.4; his justification would
be by works, (whereas the Scripture excludes any from being justified that way,
Romans 3.19, 20. Gal. 2.16.); his righteousness would be of the Law, and so (as
to him) Christ died in vain Gal 2.21. If the Laws righteousness was fulfillable
in this sense, why did the Apostle in the Verse foregoing speak of the Laws
(...) or weakness? whence does that proceed but from our weakness and utter
inability perfectly to obey it? If it be said (as it is) that Christ came in
flesh for this very end to take off this weakness, that we might be able fully
to keep it in our own persons; that we peremptorily deny: he came that the
righteousness of the Law should be fulfilled for us and in us imputatively, but
not personally. Had he designed the latter, it is strange that we should not
have one Instance in all the New Testament of any one person who ever did so
fulfill the Law: I know some are mentioned; but all that is said of them does
amount only to integrity of parts, not to perfection of degrees; to eminency in
Grace and Obedience, but not to Law-exactness; to Evangelieal but not to legal
perfection.

Obj. But does God enjoin the Creature that which is Bellarm. de Lib. Arb. l.
5. c. 18.
impossible?

Answ. Just thus the PELAGIANS of old argued for the possibility of men's
keeping the Law; and De Not. and Great. c. 43. De Peccat. Mer. and Rem. l. 2. c.
6, 7, 9.
AVSTINE (writing against them) was fain again and again to answer this very
Objection. We say, what is Vid. Chamier. tom. 3. l. 11. p. 328. These. Sedan.
Vol. 1. p. 479. Pet. Martyr (in loc.) Quanquam si quis recte^ etc.
simply and absolutely impossible God does not impose upon the Creature; but
what he himself has made impossible voluntarily and by his own default; that
the great Lawgiver may and does impose: This impossibility does no way entrench
upon the goodness of God, because the Sinner has contracted and wilfully
brought it upon himself. I hope the Creditor may demand his debt though the
debtor cannot pay it, if through sloth, prodigality, bad husbandry he has
disabled himself thereunto; that is the Sinners case with respect to perfect
obedience to the Law: God may demand his right though the Creature has lost
his power. This Objection at the first hearing seems to have something in it,
and it is very plausible to put an ugliness upon the PROTESTANTS doctrine; but
when it is looked into and duly weighed, there is nothing at all of strength in
it. Others (for brevity sake) I must omit. It appears then, that the fulfilling
of the Laws righteousness in this sense (viz. of the Saints perfect and
personal fulfilling thereof in themselves,) is not according to truth, and
therefore must be rejected.

Second Interpretation. The Laws righteousness is fulfilled in Saints
personally, but not perfectly.
2. Secondly, it is said that the Law is fulfilled in and by the Saints
inherently and personally, but not perfectly: Thus some of our own Divines do
expound the words; they making them to refer to that Obedience which belongs to
Sanctification, and which sanctified persons in themselves come up unto; who
though in the high and rigid notion they do not fulfill the Law, yet in a soft
and mild notion Lex data est ut gratia quaereretur, gratia data est ut Lex
impleretur. August. de Spir. and Lit. l. 1. c. 19.
they do. There is a begun, inchoate Obedience in them thereunto, which is
continued and carried on higher and higher till it be consummate: they do not
only love and like the Law, and consent to it that it is good, but they obey it
in part; which though it be but in part yet they being sincere therein and
desiring to arrive at what is perfect, God accepts of them as though they did
perfectly fulfill it: thus Evangelically though not Legally the Laws
righteousness is fulfilled in them. It Is not unusual in Scripture to set forth
inchoate, partial, imperfect Obedience, by the fulfilling of the Law: Romans
2.27. And shall not uncircumcision which is by Nature, if it fulfill the Law,
judge thee etc. Romans 13.8. He that loves another has fulfilled the Law;
(Verse. 10.) Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Gal. 5.14. All the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self:
Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ: Now in
this sense the Saints in themselves, in this life, may be said to fulfill the
Laws righteousness. They who go this way differ in this, Id quod nonnulli de
justificatione interpretantur etc. ideoque de Sanctificatione vitae
intelligitur -- Nam quod objici potest, nos non esse perfectos, ideoque etc.
illud non sequitur, quia etsi legem non compleamus simpliciter ac simul,
complemus tamen secundum quid, secundum omnia praecepta inchoata obedientia,
and successive. Gomar. (in loc.) -- Balduin. Deodat. etc.
Some interpret the words solely of inherent and personal Obedience, Pareus in
Dub. p. 780. P. Martyr.
Others take in that also which is by imputation.

I cannot deny the truth of what is here said (as to the thing), but whether it
be the proper interpretation of the Text, that I question; I think not. My
reasons why I so think, are these; (1.) The Apostle speaking of that Obedience,
or fulfilling of the Law, which was one of the great Ends of God in sending his
Son, it must be most proper here to understand that Obedience and that
fulfilling of the Law which was first effected in the person of this Son, and
then made over to Believers by imputation. (2.) This Lawfulfilling coming in as
the high product of the Love and Wisdom of God, it may very probably be
conjectured that if there be one fulfilling of the Law higher than another, the
highest here must be taken; and therefore it must not be that which is but
inchoate and imperfect, in us, but rather that which was complete, full,
perfect, in Christ. (3.) Though the fulfilling of the Law be sometimes taken in
that lower sense which has been mentioned, yet the Law-righteousness more
usually notes that exact, universal Obedience which the Law requires; which
notion therefore we may the rather be induced here to follow. (4.) The
Interpretation given by these worthy persons will not so well suit with what
the Apostle is now upon; he is in short summing up the grand benefits that
Saints have by Christ, showing how they are secured from Condemnation and
restored to a state of happiness.
In order to which, he first sets down the expiation of Sin, the satisfaction
of God's Justice etc. which were done by Christ's Sacrifice or passive
Obedience in dying: Then he goes on to that which was further to be done, the
Holiness of God and of his Law must be satisfied also, eternal Life must be
merited etc; now these must be done by Christ's active Obedience or fulfilling
the Laws righteousness; therefore that he adds, that the righteousness of the
Law etc. Wherefore we must here understand Christ's Obedience (as imputed), not
our own as inherent (if that word be proper), otherwise we shall leave out one
of the great benefits which we have by Christ (viz. that which results from his
active Obedience), and one of the ways wherein he did promote our salvation;
whereas the Apostle designs to set down both distinctly.

Third Interpretation, the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in Saints
perfectly, yet not personally, but imputatively.
3. Thirdly, Others open it thus, the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in
Believers perfectly, yet not personally, but imputatively. Their meaning is
this, the Lord Jesus in his own person whilst he was here on earth did fully
obey the Law, perfectly conforming to it in all its holy commands; now this his
most perfect obedience to the Law is made over, reckoned, imputed to his
members, as if they themselves in their own persons had performed it. The Laws
righteousness is not fulfilled in them formally, subjectively, inherently or
personally; but legally (they being in Christ as their Head and Surety) and
imputatively, so it is. This is the fulfilling which suits with the words, for
it is said that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, not by us
but in us; in us, (that is) not only for our sake and for our good, but as
Christ's Obedience is ours by imputation. If the former senses be rejected this
must be received; for since the Laws righteousness must be fulfilled in the
Saints, (otherwise what the Apostle here affirms would not be true), and since
there are but two ways wherein it can be fulfilled, either by themselves or by
some other; it necessarily follows, if they do not fulfill it the first way that
the second must take place; and so it must be fulfilled by Christ for them and
his obedience be imputed to them. And this is that Exposition of the words
which our etc. Obedientia Christi, quae in carne nostra exhibita nobis
imputatur, ut eo beneficio pro justis censeamur. Calvin. Quomodo justitia
Christi in nobis impleta est per Christum? Duplici nomine, 1. imputative,
aliena justitia quae Christi est adeoque and nostra etc. 2. Quod per Spiritum
Christi regenerati, pro mensura Gratiae Dei vitam and justitiam eam exprimimus
quam Lex Dei exigit. -- Magis placet prior Sententia hoc loco. Muscul. Vide
Bezam in loc. Vorstium in loc. Justificatio legis, quae requirit vel opera vel
poenam, impleta est in Christo per se, and ut sic dicam inhaesive, quia ipse
praeterquam quod passus est, etiam operatus est perfectissime; in nobis vero
impleta est per fidem, and ut sic dicam applicative, nam per fidem fit ut
Christi justitia, nostra quodamodo evadat. Rolloc. See Fulke and Cartwright
against the Rhemists. Elton upon Romans 8. p. 97. etc.
PROTESTANT Divines (so far as imputation in general is concerned) do commonly
give: but about it many things are necessary to be spoken unto, both for the
explaining and also for the vindicating of it (which therefore shall be done by
and by).

Fourth Interpretation: The Law is fulfilled in us as Sin is remitted.
4. Fourthly, the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness (say some) is no more
than the remission of sin. He that has his sins pardoned is a fulfiller of the
Law; Christ by his death having procured for us, the remission of all our sins,
upon that we are looked upon by God as if we had done or kept the whole Law;
(thus Christus sua morte nobis acquisivit remissionem omnium peccatorum, ac
proinde effecit, ut habeamur pro iis qui perfectam Legi obedientiam
praestiterint. In Paraphr. The righteousness etc. quatenus Christus sua morte
eis acquisivit omnium peccatorum remissionem, quod perinde est ac si perfectam
legi obedientiam praestitissent; aequipollent enim haec Nihil peccavisse, and
perfectam legi obedientiam praestitisse, In Observe.
Piscator opens the words). And before him Ambrose speaks the same, Quomodo
impletur in nobis justificatio Legis nisi cum datur remissio omnium peccatorum?
how is the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us, unless it be in the
remission of all our sins? To which we may add that of Retract. l. 1. c. 19.
Austine, Omnia mandata Dei facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit
ignoscitur; all the commands of God are deemed to be done, when that is
pardoned which is not done (if it be good, or which should not have been done
if it be evil).

Two things I would say against this Interpretation: (1.) It sounds very harsh
to say We fulfill the Law when God is pleased to pardon the violation of it;
nay, the thing is not true: God's remitting the breach of the Law and our
actual fulfilling of the duty's of the Law, are not aequipollent but distinct
and different things. Upon remission the Sinner is exempted from the Laws
penalty, but he cannot upon that alone be said to fulfill it: If the Prince be
pleased to pardon the breaker of the Laws, will that amount to the making such
an one to be a keeper of the Laws? there is enough upon his pardon for
non-punition, but nothing more. (2.) In the justification of Sinners there is
not only the remission of sin, but also the imputation of Christ's
righteousness; these are the two parts of justification and which take in the
whole nature of it; it is not complete in the one or in the other apart, but in
both conjunct.
I know some very Wotton. de reconc. pec. part. 1. l. 2. c. 3. etc.
learned persons make remission of sin to be the whole of justification; I
humbly differ from them: When God justifies, he does not only pardon and so
look upon the Sinner as not guilty; but he does also Vide Zanch. ad Ephesians. c. 5.
p. 249. (and quam plures alios). Uti Christus nobis factus and (...), ita ad
salutem atque justificationem requiritur, praeter remissionem peccatorum etiam
justitiae Christi imputatio, qua vitae jus nobis addicitur. etc. Hoorneb.
Socin. confut. l. 3. p. 658.
impute Christ's righteousness, upon which he looks upon him as positively
righteous; (this will hereafter be made out more fully if God give leave). Thus
it is in the justification or righteousness of the Law; to the making up of
which it is not enough only to be pardoned, and so not to be judged a breaker of
the Law; but there must be the doing of what the Law enjoins, otherwise its
righteousness is not fulfilled. It Is one thing to be Justus dicatur cui peccata
omnia remittuntur justitia innocentiae, quia posita hac remissione innocens
censetur etc. sed non justitia obedientiae cui praemium vitae debetur, etc.
Turretin. de Sat. Christi. p. 273.
innocent (in the taking off of guilt), and another thing to be righteous in
the way of positive obedience; both are necessary as to that which I am upon,
and included in it. Not guilty is not a sufficient plea or answer to the Laws
demands; there must be something, either in the Sinner himself or in his
Surety, which may be looked upon as a formal and actual obeying of it.

Thus I have given a fourfold explication of the fulfilling of the Laws
righteousness in the Saints. The third is that which seems to me to be the
best; viz. this righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in the Saints, as Christ
for them in his own person did perfectly obey the Law, and as that his perfect
obedience is imputed and reckoned to them, upon which it is theirs to ^^l
intents as if they had so obeyed in their own persons. But there being many
difficulties about this, and it leading me to the main Truth which the words
hold forth, I must endeavor further to open it.

Which I shall do in the discussing of these three Propositions, Three
Propositions to clear up the third Interpretation and the main Truth.
1. That our Lord Christ was made under the Law. 2. That being made under the
Law he fulfilled it. 3. That his fulfilling of the Law is imputed to Believers;
so as that in him they fulfilled the Law also.


1. Proposition Christ was made under the Law.
1. Christ was made under the Law. The Apostle is express in this, When the
fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made
under the Law, Gal. 4.4. ( made under the Law (that is) made subject to the
Law, so as that he was under the obligation thereof and bound in all things to
conform to its righteousness). And this subjection of Christ to the Law, did
result partly from his Nature, partly from his Office: From his Nature, as he
was Man and so a Creature (for his Manhood was a created thing); now every
creature as such is indispensably subject to the Law of God, a Creature
necessarily must be under the Law of his Creator and Sovereign: so far
therefore as Christ was such he was indispensably obliged to the Law, so far
his subjection was natural, and thereupon necessary. From his Office or that
economy and dispensation which he had submitted unto as Mediator, Redeemer,
Surety, etc. with respect to this he was to be subject too, yet in it his
subjection was purely free and voluntary. It Is a See Bodius on Ephesians. c. 5. p.
812. etc.
nice Question which some discuss, Whether Christ's subjection to the Law did
arise from the natural necessity of his being, as he was Man and a Creature; or
whether it did arise only from that mediatory Office which he had submitted to?
I think (things being rightly stated) both may be taken in, both Nature and
Office did require that Christ should be subject to the Law (though This opened
in Turret in. de Sat. Christi. p. 277, 278.
in different ways).

For the better understanding of Christ's being made under the Law I desire you
to take notice of four or five things: Five things to open the Proposition. 1.
Christ subject to the Law as Man.
1. This must be understood of him with respect to his humane Nature. This was
the Nature which only was capable of subjection, Christ as man only could be
obedient: As to his divine Nature he made the Law, so he was the Lawgiver, and
so he was in all acts of power and authority equal with the Father; 'twas
solely in respect of his humane Nature that he was made under the Law, (which
was part of that form of a Servant which he took upon him Phil. 2.7.). As he
was God 'twas proper to him to command, as he was Man only 'twas proper to him
to obey; in the former notion he was Lord of the Sabbath Matthew. 12.8; in the
latter he was bound to keep the Sabbath: Christ as man and because man was
subject, but then 'twas only as such. 2. As Man in the state of his humiliation.
2. Christ, as being made under the Law, is to be considered not merely as a
Creature (upon which he was subject to it), but as a Creature in the state of
his humiliation and suretyship; during which state only his subjection to the
Law was to continue. For his humane Nature now in Heaven is a Creature, and yet
there it is not (if we speak strictly) under the Law, for though Christ there
does materially the things which the Law requires (as to be holy, to love God
etc.), yet he does not do them formerly as acts of obedience to the Law, but as
things which spring from the perfection of his nature and state: therefore (I
say) when we are speaking of Christ's being subject to the Law, we must not
consider him only as Man but as Man in such a way or state, in the carrying on
of such an undertaking, which when he had effected his subjection was to cease.
Some say, that though the subjection which Christ was under in reference to his
Office (as Mediator) be at an end, yet his subjection to the Law which was
natural and did arise from his being a Creature, that yet remains: I answer, if
by this natural subjection they mean only that which results from his Being, or
that obligation which results from the intrinsic goodness of things, so we
grant him even in Heaven to be under it; but if they mean that subjection or
that obligation which relates to and results from an external Law, so we deny
Christ there to be under it; in his glorified state he does the things which
the Law commands, but not as or because they are commanded by the Law. 3. He
was principally subject to the Moral Law.
3. The principal Law that Christ was made under and which he was principally
obliged to fulfill, was the Vide Bradsh. de Justif. c. 18.
Moral Law. This was the Law which at first was made to Adam, which he brake
and so entayl'd the curse upon all his posterity; therefore Christ (the serond
Adam) was also made under this Law, that he might fulfill it and so restore man
to his primitive happiness. This was the Law which was the rule and standard of
righteousness; wherefore if Christ will convey a righteousness to the creature,
he must be made under and fulfill this Law. He is said to be a curse for us; now
that curse does mainly refer to the Moral Law, (though it is very true, by way
of allusion it is set forth by that which was proper to the judicial Law Gal.
3.13.): And he is also said to redeem us from the Law, (that is) from the curse
of the Law; now it is the curse annexed to the moral Law that he redeemed us
from; therefore that was the Law which he was made under. This was the Law most
excellent; if Christ would submit to put himself under the obligation of a Law
less exeellent, surely he would not refuse to submit to put himself under the
obligation of this which was the most excellent Law. Especially considering,
how necessary this was for the good of Sinners; for since God stood upon the
performance of this Law as the way wherein he would justify, it was most
necessary that Christ should be subject to it and perform it, or else there
would have been no justification. Had he been made only under the Ceremonial
Law, than the benefits of his Obedience would have reached no further than that
people who were concerned in that Law; and so the Jews would have had all and
the poor Gentiles nothing: If Christ will redeem and save both, he must make
good that Law which did equally oblige both; now that was the moral Law: Gal.
4.4. -- etc. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we (Gentiles as well as Jews) might
receive the adoption of Sons. Christ came not to save this or that nation or
people, but mankind; wherefore he must be subject unto and fulfill that Law (in
order thereunto), in which not any particular people but all mankind were
concerned; which (I say) was the Moral Law. 4. Over and above the Moral Law
Christ was subject to other Laws.
4. Yet besides this general Law which concerned all mankind (which therefore
the Savior of mankind subjected himself unto), there were other Bradsh. of
Justif. c. 19.
particular and special Laws to whose obligation he submitted, and unto which
he was obedient. As he was a man, he was subject to the Moral Law; as he was of
the seed of Abraham, of the stock of Israel, so he was subject to the
Ceremonial Law; as he was Mediator, there were some particular and positive
Laws laid upon him; to which he was subject also. In obedience to the
Ceremonial Law he was circumcised, Luke 2.21. presented in the Temple (with the
usual offering of the poor and mean) Luke 2.22, kept the Passover Matthew.
26.17. (and the like). In obedience to the special Laws laid upon him as
Mediator (the chiefest of which was that he should so and so suffer, yea, lay
down his life), he did according to the Will of his Father; therefore he is said
to be [obedient to death], even the death of the cross Phil. 2.8. and to learn
obedience by the things be suffered Heb. 5.7. and Joh. 10.18. No man takes it
(his life he speaks of) from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to
lay it down, and I have power to take it again: [this commandme] have I
received of the Father: (so Joh. 14.31.) We commonly distinguish, between the
Moral Law (under which as being general Christ was) and that special Law which
was laid upon him as Mediator: but Burg. of Justif. p. 2. p. 396. etc. Bodius
on the Ephesians. p. 386, 387.
some I find do not very well approve of this distinction; their reason is,
because it seems to assert that something was imposed upon Christ by the latter
Law; unto which he was not obliged by the former; which (say they) was not so.
For there was nothing enjoined in the mediatory and positive Law, unto which
Christ was not obliged by the Moral Law; there was indeed in it a more
particular application and determination of Christ's duty in his circumstances,
but the thing it self was pre-enjoyn'd and he pre-engag'd thereunto from the
Moral Law: (but this I will not concern my self about). He that would see a
particular draught of Christ's obedience to the several Laws which he was made
under, and the several capacities in which he all-along obeyed, may find it
done to his hand by others largely and distinctly; (as particularly by Zanchy
on Phil. 2.8. p. 114. etc.). 5. His Obedience imputable to us and meritorious
for us.
5. Though Christ was thus made under the Law, and so obliged to keep it, yet
this notwithstanding, his obedience thereunto was meritorious for us and
imputable to us. For this is usually objected by the SOCINIAN Quo circa nec pro
aliis magis quam quilibet alius homo, legem divinam conservando satisfacere
potuit, quippe qui ipse eam servare omnino deberet. Socin. de Servat. p. 3. c.
5. Against him see Calov. Socin. proflig. Sect. 5. Controv. 1. page 642.
Opposers of the imputation and merit of his Obedience; for if Christ (say
they) was subject to the Law (as he was), and so bound for himself to do what
he did, how can his obedience be made over to others or merit for others? for
debitum tollit meritum.


For answer to this several things are said, but I Will instance only in three:
1. In the business before us Christ is not to be considered only as Man, but as
God-man. Had he obeyed as mere Man his Obedience could not have been
meritorious, for so all would have been but a due debt and for himself; but he
obeying who was Obediens factus fuit ad mortem Patri, non necessum id habuit
natura sed oeconomia nostrae redemptionis. Ut etiam meriti vis non naturae
humanae qua natura, sed qua Deo unita, ost adscribenda. Stegman. Disp. 23. p.
266.
God-man so it became meritorious for others. His obedience and subjection was
indeed terminated in his Humane Nature, but that must not be abstracted from
his Divine (both being now united in one person); which Union though it did not
make Christ incapable of obeying, yet it did put a singular virtue and worth
and merit into his obeying. And as to his obeying for himself, take the
explication of that in the words of a Mr. Perkins on Gal. 4 4. p. 274.
Reverend Divine; It is, (says he) alleged that Christ as Man fulfilled the
Law for himself, and therefore not for us: Answ. The flesh or manhood of Christ
considered by itself, apart from the Godhead of the Son, is a creature that
owes homage unto God: yet if it be considered as it is received into the unity
of the second person, and is become a part thereof; it is exempted from the
common condition of all other men, and is not bound to perform subjection as
all men are; for if the Son of Man be Lord of the Sabbath then also is he Lord
of the whole Law. Quicunque prose and suo loco vel Adae vel Abrahae factus est
filius, is quoque pro se and suo nomine ad Legem implendam tenebatur, qui vero
non pro se sed pro aliis vel homo fieri vel Israelita nasci voluit, is quoque
non pro se sed pro aliis ad legem quamlibet implendam obligatus est. At
Christus etc. Turret. de Sat. p. 276. Vide Polanum in Dan. 9. p. 196. Bodium on
Ephesians. p. 811, 812. -- Hoorneb. Socin. confut. l. 3. p. 627. Quamvis humana
natura, ut creatura quaevis, Deo sublex observantiam debuit, attamen quia nec
eam assumere tenebatur, neque simplicis creaturae obedientia fuit, sed (...),
ideo pro quibus hoc and istud factum, quidni and pro iisdem satisfecisse
dicatur?
2. Though Christ when he had submitted to assume man's Nature was bound to keep
the Law, yet his keeping thereof was in effect free and voluntary (and so
imputable and meritorious), inasmuch as he for the sake of man freely consented
to the taking of that Nature, without which he had not been under any
obligation to the Law. When he was man he was bound to obey, but he was not at
all (but by his own consent) bound to be man; and therefore his Obedience was
free, because his Incarnation was free and without any obligation. Mr. Baxt.
Aphor. p. 58.
A worthy person thus expresses it, Even Christ's Obedience to the Moral Law
was not his duty, till he voluntarily undertook it: it being therefore upon his
consent and choice, and not due before consent, must needs be meritorious. And
though when he was once a Servant he was bound to do the work of a Servant, yet
when he voluntarily put himself in the state of a Servant, and under the Law,
not for his own sake, but for ours, his work is never the less meritorious. As
it is with a Surety, he having engaged with and for the debtor is thereby bound
to pay the debt; yet he pays it freely, inasmuch as 'twas his own free act to
bring himself under such an obligation; and so 'twas here in what Christ did.
3. It Is further added, Burg. of Justif. p. 2. page 409.
That though Christ considered simply and absolutely, as man, might be obliged
by the Law, yet as our Surety and undertaking for us in a fide-jussorial
manner, so his obligation was wholly voluntary and free: My Author goes on and
opens himself thus; Suppose Christ to be made a Man, and thereby absolutely
obliged to fulfill the Law for himself, yet that he should enter into agreement
with the Father, to obey it as a Surety, for such a term of years upon earth,
thereby to procure Salvation for a Sinner undone otherwise; this was wholly
gracious and voluntary, and Christ was not obliged to it as Man. Upon the
whole, these three things being well weighed the Objection is sufficiently
answered; for suppose that Christ in such a sense was bound to keep the Law,
yet there were other respects (peculiar to his Person and Obedience) which made
it so voluntary and for us, as that it may truly be looked upon as meritorious
and imputable. So much of the first Proposition.


2. Proposition. Christ being made under the Law fulfilled it.
2. The Second is this, Christ being thus made under the Law he fulfilled it:
Matthew. 3.15. -- thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness; Matthew. 5.17,
18. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am not come
to destroy but to fulfill: For verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth
pass, one iota or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled; Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes; (the end of the Law, viz. as the Law in him received its
full and final accomplishment). Two things (as you have heard) were contained
in its righteousness, the duty it commanded, the penalty it threatened; in both
respects Christ fulfilled it: For in his active Obedience he did the former,
and in his passive Obedience he underwent the latter. The preceptive and
mandatory part of the Law he fulfilled actively, both as he shunned whatever
evil that prohibited, and also as he did whatever good that enjoined: he was
originally and actually holy, acted all along in exact and universal conformity
to the Laws commands; so he fulfilled it actively: Joh. 8.46. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1
Pet. 2.22. 1 Pet. 1.19. Acts 3.14. Dan. 9.24. 1 John 2.2. Heb. 7.26. The penal
and minatory part he fulfilled passively, by his bearing of its curse when he
died upon the Cross. With respect to both Christ's Obedience was so full and
perfect, so adaequate to all the Laws demands, that it could not but say I have
enough, I am fully satisfied, I can ask no more.

And this fulfilling of the Law was the foundation upon which his Satisfaction
and Merit was built; without which he could neither have satisfied, nor
merited. O says God, Son! if thou will satisfy me, there is my holy and just
Law satisfy it, unless that be satised I cannot be satisfied; by its violation
I was offended, by its fulfilling I must be appeased: Well! Christ accepts of
the terms, Lo (says he) I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me:
I delight to do thy Will, O my God: yea, thy Law is within my heart, Psalm.
40.7, 8. And what he undertook he made good; he went so far that neither the
righteous God nor the righteous Law could tax him with any defect. If it had
not been thus, though he had obeyed never so much for us, though his Obedience
had been never so free and voluntary, yet it would not have been either
satisfactory or meritorious; for all satisfaction and merit are founded upon
the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness. The gracious God, is pleased to
accept of an imperfect Obedience (if sincere) from us, but the just God would
have a perfect Obedience for us; he can accept of a mite from us, but from our
Surety he would have the whole debt paid down.

Whether Christ's active fulfilling of the Law as considered in itself, in its
intrinsic worth and value, could properly and formally merit of God (as Some
Opera Christi absolute considerata meriti proprie dicti rationem habent; non
respectu promissionis alicujus sed insita sua vi, tanquam opera (...) absolute
indebito. Eadem autem benigna promissione Dei niti, quatenus meritum illud ad
nos refertur, omnio concedimus. Essen. Tri. Crucis. p. 294.
hold); or whether it did merit respect being had to God's Ordination, Covenant
and Promise (as Equidem fateor, si quis simpliciter and per se Christum
opponere vellet judicio Dei, non fore merito locum, quia non reperiretur in
homine dignitas quae possit Deum promereri. Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 17. sect.
1. Vide Chamier. tom. 3. l. 9. c. 1. sect. 7. Nec aliter Christi meritum
accipimus, quam quod legi plenissime satisfecit, non solius obedientiae insita
vi ac dignitate ad divini juris rigorem appensa, -- sed ad legem
satisfactoriae, sic meritus ex divina promissione fuit, non absque ea. Meritum
ad foedus non extra illud aestimatur, non ad merum Dei jus, quasi ulla
cujusquam action in rationem debiti trahi posset. Hoornb. Socin* conf. p. 627.
Others); is a nicety that I have no mind to engage in: that was the way
wherein he merited (which is the thing that I only design to speak unto).

3. Proposition: Christ's Obedience is imputed and made over to Believers.
3. The third Proposition; Christ having thus fulfilled the Law this his
Obedience is made over and imputed to Believers. For otherwise how does the
Apostle here say, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled [in us]?
This is that imputed righteousness which is so often spoken of in that one
Chapter of Romans 4; in reference to this Christ is said to be made righteousness
to us, 1 Cor. 1.30. to be the Lord our righteousness, Jerem. 23.6. and we are
said to be the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21; to be accepted in him,
Ephesians. 1.6; to be presented to God as not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, Ephesians. 5.27. by his Obedience to be made righteous, Romans 5.19. Many other
Scriptures might be cited which hold forth this great Evangelical Truth, and
also these that I have cited might be much enlarged upon; but the difficulty
lying not so much in the general, as in the particular stating and explication
of it (where indeed there is enough of difficulty), therefore I shall rather
direct my self to that.

Two Questions raised and answered.
And here two weighty Questions must be discussed;

1. Whether Christ's active fulfilling the Law, or his active (as well as his
passive) Obedience be imputed to Believers? 2. In what sense may it be said to
be imputed to them?
My Text and the Subject which I am upon from it, lay a necessity upon me of
speaking something to these Points, otherwise I should most gladly have passed
them by: It Is much against my spirit (God knows) to revive and keep up those
Controversies, which I could wish with all my soul had never been started, but
being started that they might now be buried: And (further) it grieves me
exceedingly, to meddle in those matters wherein I must unavoidably differ from
some or other of those who for their Piety and Learning are of great eminency
and repute in the Church of God, and for whose names and persons I have a very
high veneration. Yet for all this, I dare not (to please my self and to avoid
what is ungrateful to me) go out of my way; It Is merely sense of duty (as I
apprehend it) which makes me to engage in this unwelcome province. These
Controversies, as they are managed by some in their utmost latitude, are grown
to a great vastness; but it would be highly inconvenient for me (now I am upon
the close of this work, which is already grown above its due proportion,) to be
prolixe about them: I shall contract my self therefore, and only in short speak
to that which I conceive is absolutely necessary for the clearing up of the
things in question.

Of the First: Whether Christ's active fulfilling the Law, or his Active
Obedience be imputed to Believers?
As to the first question, Whether Christ's active fulfilling the Law, or
whether his active as well as his passive Obedience be imputed to Believers? I
shall not spend any time about the Terms, in enquiring whether they be proper
or not; or whether the things be rightly distinguished or not, (since there was
action in Christ's passive Obedience, and passion in his active); all
understand the thing which we intend in the use of the words, therefore without
any further debate I Will take them as they are commonly used and understood.

In answer to this Question I find Four Opinious about it: 1. That neither the
active, nor the passive Obedience of Christ, are properly and really imputed to
Believers. 2. That the passive Obedience of Christ only is imputed. 3. That
both active and passive are imputed. 4. That the active Obedience of Christ is
imputed as well as the passive, but not in the same way; not quatenus active
but as it was a part of Christ's Satisfaction and Merit.


For those who espouse the first Opinion, SOCINIANS and PAPISTS, I will not at
present meddle with them: One of their great Arguments against the imputation
of Christ's Obedience (particularly his Active Obedience about which only I
would contend), viz. that he being a Creature was under an Obligation to obey,
that he obeying for himself his Obedience could not be imputed to others; this
Argument (I say) has been already answered: And as to the other Arguments
which they use, they will fall in with those which shall be presently spoken
unto, as they are urged by others (who yet are far from being Socinians or
Papists) against the imputation of Christ's active Obedience.

Of the Second Opinion: Christ's passive Obedience only imputed.
Secondly, there are Others (much more orthodox and sound in the Faith than the
former) who though they hold the imputation of Christ's Obedience, yet they
limit that imputation to his passive Obedience; asserting that that only is
imputed to Believers. They deny not but that his active Obedience was necessary
for his Person and Office, for the qualifying of him for his Mediatorship; but
that it is formally imputed to them who believe, that they deny: They say, God
did accept of the Death and Sufferings of his Son as a full satisfaction for
his violated Law; that the righteousness thereof is fulfilled by his bearing
its penalty; that upon the alone bearing of that penalty Sin is remitted and
the Sinner completely justified; that this passive Obedience is sufficient to
all intents and purposes (for Satisfaction and Merit too) without any further
imputation of his active Obedience; so that if the Sinner do but perform the
Conditions on his part, of believing and repenting, in Christ's death alone
there is every way enough for him. The Grounds they go upon in the defense of
this Opinion, are many; One is, that when the Scripture speaks of
reconciliation with God, remission of sin, justification etc. still it lays the
stress of all upon Christ's passive Obedience, or upon his death and blood: so
Matthew. 20.28. Matthew. 26.28. Joh. 6.51, etc. Acts 20.28. Romans 3.25. -- 5.9. Gal.
3.13. Ephesians. 1.7. -- 2.13. etc. Col. 1.20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 1.19. Heb. 9.12. Heb.
10.14. Besides this they prove it by several Reasons, which are chiefly drawn
from the sufficiency of Christ's passive Obedience for the Sinners relief in
his lost condition, and also from the great difficulties, if not absurdities
(as they judge) which attend the other Opinion for the imputation of his active
Obedience. This Opinion has the more prevailed since the first broaching of it
(which was not very long ago, for 'twas not made matter of Controversy till
these latter Ages of the Church), not only from the strength and weightiness of
the Arguments with which it is backed (which cannot be denied), but also from
the Assertors of it; they being many, and some of them persons (deservedly) of
very great reputation in the Church of Christ; (such as PISCATOR, PAREVS,
SCVLTETVS, CAPELLVS, CAMERO, FORBES, with diverse others).

Of the third Opinion: both active and passive Obedience imputed.
The third Opinion is, that Christ's whole Obedience, active as well as passive,
is imputed to us: his obeying the Law to the full, perfect conforming to its
commands, his doing as well as his dying Obedience, is (say these) made over
and reckoned to Believers in order to their Justification and Salvation. This
also is asserted by several Cum Christus descenderit de Coelis, omniaque,
egerit and passus sit propter nos homines, and propter nostram salutem (nobis
enim natus est, nobis vixit, pro nobis factus est sub lege, ut eos qui sub lege
erant redimeret) idcirco utraque pars obedientiae Christi, i. e. tota ejus
obedientia nostra facta est, cessitque in salutem nostram. Zanch. in Phil. c.
2.8. p. 115. See Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 5. This way goes Junius in
these. de Justif. Polanus in Syntag. l. 6. c. 36. and in Comment, in Dan. p.
186. etc. Brocmand. de Servat. Jesu Christo Art. 16. Sect. 12. Qu. 4. Gomarus
de Justif. (against Kargius). Rivet against Camero. Lutius against Piscator and
Gataker. Downeham of Justif. l. 1. c. 4. p. 24. etc. Burgess of Justif. 2.
part Sermon. 34. p. 338.
Divines of great note; and that not only by some of them by the by (...), but
also by others who do largely insist upon the proof and making of it good,
against those who think otherwise.

The Reasons upon which they ground this Opinion, are such as these: 1. Arg.
for the imputation of Christ's active Obedience.
1. As the disobedience of the first Adam, in which he brake the Law, is imputed
to men upon which they become guilty; so the Obedience of Christ the second
Adam, even that in which he kept the Law, must be imputed also to them that
thereby they may be made righteous: For their guilt and righteousness must not
only be conveyed in the same way or manner, viz. by imputation; but these
(being opposites) must proceed from like opposite Causes; and therefore if
their guilt arises from Adams breach of the Law (which is imputed to them),
answerably their righteousness must arise from Christ's Obedience to the Law,
which therefore must also be imputed to them. So the Apostle draws the parallel
or comparison Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so
by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Where observe, (1.) He
speak of Christ's Obedience in the general; [by the obedience of one etc.];
wherefore to limit this to one branch of his Obedience (his passive obedience,
as though by it alone Sinners were made righteous), is neither safe nor
warrantable. (2.) If we will proceed in that way, so as to single out this or
that part of Christ's Obedience and ascribe righteousness to it, then the
Antithesis will carry it for his active rather than for his passive Obedience:
for that being the Obedience which stands in direct opposition to Adams
disobedience, it must, by the rules of Opposition, most properly here be
understood. (3.) The Apostle makes the imputation of both to run parallel,
according to the acts and effects which are proper to each; As by the
disobedience of one many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous: So that as the one act is imputed for guilt, so the
other is imputed for righteousness; and as in the one person (he being a
public person and Head) we broke the Law, so in the other (he being a public
person and Head too) we perform the Law.
If it be said, that Adams disobedience did not lie in the transgression of the
Moral Law, but only of that particular, positive Law which God gave him of not
eating of the tree of knowledge; and so that Christ's Obedience did not lie in
the keeping of the Moral Law, but in his obeying of that positive Law which God
laid upon him (namely of laying down his life); which if so, then the Text
proves nothing of that for which it is alleged but rather the quite contrary: I
answer, though it is very true that in Adams disobedience, immediately and
proximately there was only the transgressing of that positive Law, yet in the
transgressing thereof there was virtually and collaterally the breach of the
whole Moral Law, (all this Law being In hac lege Adae data omnia praecepta
condita recognoscimus, quae postea pullulaverunt data per Mosen etc. -- Igitur
hac generali and primordiali Dei Lege, -- omnia praecepta Legis posterioris
specialiter indita fuisse cognoscimus, quae suis temporibus edita
germinaverunt. Tertull. adv. Jud. c. 2.
summed up in and guarded by that Lex primordialis as Tertullian calls it). The
Argument then from the comparison holds good; as Adam violating the Moral Law
his active disobedience is imputed for guilt; so our Lord Jesus obeying the
Moral Law his active obedience thereunto is imputed for righteousness (which is
the thing to be proved). 2. That Obedience of Christ must be imputed without
the imputation of which the righteousness of the Law is not, 2. Arg.
or could not be fulfilled in believers: (this cannot be denied, for it is
brought in here expressly as the end of God's sending his Son, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us). Now I assume, but without
the imputation of Christ's active Obedience, the Laws righteousness is not and
could not be fulfilled in believers, ergo. This I prove from what has been
already said; the Laws righteousness consists in two things, (1.) in its
requiring perfect conformity to its Commands: (2.) in its demanding
Satisfaction, or the undergoing of its penalty upon the violation of it: This
being so, how can the Laws righteousness be fulfilled in Saints either by the
active or by the passive Obedience of Christ apart and alone? put them both
together and the thing is done, there is that in both which is fully adaequate
to the Laws demands; but divide them, and it is not so.
The passive Obedience satisfies as to the Laws penalty and secures from the
Laws curse, but where is our performing of the Duty which the Law requires if
the active Obedience be not imputed also? And it is conceived, that this
righteousness of the Law does mainly and primarily refer to the preceptive and
mandatory part of the Law, and but secondarily to the penal and minatory part
of the Law: For in all Laws ( Civil or Sacred.) that which is first intended in
them is active Obedience; the bearing the penalty is annexed but to further and
secure that: so that he who only bears the penalty does not answer the first
end and the main intention of the Law. Whence I infer, since the righteousness
of the Law is fulfilled in believers (as the Apostle here says it is), that
therefore the commanding part of the Law must be fulfilled in them, (that being
the main branch of its righteousness and that which is principally designed by
it); but that cannot be, unless the active Obedience of Christ be imputed to
them. This Argument (with submission to better judgments) is to me of great
weight. And I desire the words may be well observed; it is not said that the
righteousness of the Law might be endured, suffered, or undergone by us, as if
it did relate to the penalty of the Law; but that the righteousness of the Law
might be filfilled in us, which surely most properly must relate to the doing
part of the Law: does he Qui maledictionem legis perpetitur, per hoc non implet
mandata legis, aut operatur justitiam etc. Wegelin. de Obed. Christi.
fulfill who suffers? that is very harsh. To say that one of the things that have
been spoken of was or is sufficient, viz. the undergoing of the punishment
without the doing of the duty, and that therefore the imputation of Christ's
death and sufferings is enough: I say for any to assert this, they do (in my
thoughts) offer some violence to the Text in hand, which tells us the
righteousness, the whole righteousness of the Law was to be and is fulfilled in
believers. 3. It Is urged thirdly, 3. Arg.
it is necessary not only in respect of the Law, but of our selves also, that
Christ's active Obedience should be imputed, inasmuch as our righteousness and
title to eternal life do indispensably depend upon it. The Law is the measure
and standard of righteousness; let that be fulfilled and a person is righteous,
otherwise not; without this none can stand before the great God as being such.
Well then, the Sinner himself being altogether unable thus to fulfill the Law
thereby to be made righteous, Christ's fulfilling of it must be imputed to him
in order to righteousness. Guilt and righteousness do both carry in them a
reference to the holy Law; when that is broken, it is guilt; when that is kept,
it is righteousness: therefore as, supposing that Law had not been transgressed,
we had not been guilty, so unless that Law be fully conformed to, we cannot be
Deuteronomy 6.25.
righteous. Now where shall we find this full conformity to the Law but in
Christ? and what will that in Christ avail us if it be not imputed and made
over to us? So as to eternal Life, unto which without fulfilling the Law we can
have no claim or title: For the old Law-condition or Covenant being yet in
force, Hoc fac and vives, do and live, (Levit. 18.5. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12. Luke
10.28); unless this Condition be performed we cannot hope for life. True
indeed, under the Covenant of Grace God accepts of what is done by the Surety,
and he does not exact of the Sinner in his own person the perfect obeying of
the Law as the condition of life, but yet he will have the thing done either by
or for the Sinner, either by himself or by his Surety, or else no life: does
not this then evince the necessity of the imputation of Christ's active
Obedience?


But it is queried, Was not Christ's passive obedience, without the active,
sufficient for both of these? for righteousness and for life? To which they of
this Opinion answer, No; they say upon Christ's death and suffering we are
freed from guilt, but upon that ( abstractly from his active obeying of the
Law) we are not strictly and positively made righteous: So also, upon his death
and suffering (they say) we are saved from wrath and Hell, but yet upon that
alone we are not entitled to Heaven: they grant in Christ's death a fullness and
sufficiency of Satisfaction, but as to merit for that they must take in the
holiness and obedience of his life. I do but recite, not undertaking (at
present) to defend what is here asserted: only let me close this Head with one
thing which (to me) is observable. Our Lord being both to do and to suffer, to
obey actively and passively (that he might fully answer the Laws demands for
the justification and salvation of Sinners); it is considerable how the New
Testament, in two eminent places, speaks distinctly to both these parts of his
Obedience, in their distinct reference to both the parts of the Law under the
old Testament, and in their distinct influence upon the Sinners good. Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us; for it is written, Cursed is every one etc. or as it is Verse. 10. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things etc. -- here is Christ's passive
Obedience (with respect to the old curse or penal part of the Law here
mentioned), and the benefit which we reap thereby viz. deliverance from the
Laws curse. That Is one place; the other is Romans 10.5. Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes: for Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does these things shall
live by them: here is Christ's active Obedience (with respect to the mandatory
part or doing righteousness of the Law here mentioned also,) and the imputation
and benefit of this to believers viz. righteousness and life: Christ is the end
of the Law for righteousness, (that is, to convey that righteousness which the
Law could not, or to perform the Law in order to righteousness which the Sinner
could not); take it as you will, it must have reference to the Moral Law and to
the preceptive part thereof, for so the Apostle opens it in that which follows
Verse. 5. Now Christ's active Obedience thereunto is imputed to believers,
otherwise why is it said that he is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes? All that I drive at is (1.) That the imputation of
the passive obedience in Gal. 3.13. must not justle out the imputation of the
active obedience in Romans 10.5. (2.) That as the imputation of the one is
necessary to free from the Laws curse, so the imputation of the other is
necessary for the having of righteousness and life.


4. If Christ actively fulfilled the Law for us then his active fulfilling
thereof must be imputed to us, 4. Arg.
but so he did, ergo. The Consequence I judge to be good and strong; for surely
whatever Christ did on our behalf, in our stead, as designing and aiming at our
good as his main end, that must needs be imputed to us; otherwise he and we too
might lose that which he principally designed in his Obedience (which is not to
be imagined). As to the Assumption that Christ actively fulfilled the Law for
us, that is generally asserted and defended by Divines against SOCINIANS and
Others: For whereas these affirm, that Christ fulfilled the Law for himself (he
as a Creature being under the obligation of it), they prove the contrary (of
which before); showing, that Christ was not, in that way wherein he fulfilled
the Law, at all obliged so to fulfill it for himself; but that all was done by
him purely upon our account: he obeyed not merely as a Subject but as a Surety
therefore his Obedience must be for us, and so imputable and imputed to us. And
whereas others affirm, that Christ actively fulfilled the Law that he might
thereby be fitted and qualified for his Mediatory Office, two things are
answered: (1.) The Scripture, when it speaks of Christ's subjection to the Law
and accomplishment of it, does not lay it upon this end or upon what refers to
Christ himself, but upon that which refers to us (as the proper end thereof):
He was the end of the Law for righteousness to them that believe; -- etc. made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons. (2.) They say, that Christ's fitness for his Mediatory
Office did result from his Person, from the personal Union of the Divine and
Humane Natures in him, rather than from his active Obedience to the Law; for
else he could not have been looked upon as one fit to be a Mediator till he had
finished his whole Obedience to the Law; whereas from the first instant of the
personal Union he was fit for that Work and Office.
'Twas fit, nay necessary, that Christ the Mediator should conform to the Law;
but these are two different things, what was fit for the Mediator to do and
what must fit him to be the Mediator. These Ends therefore respecting Christ
himself being removed, it follows that it was wholly for us that he fulfilled
the Law: whence then I infer that that must be imputed to us, otherwise the end
of it would not be attained; for without the imputation of it we should neither
be the persons designed in it nor profited by it. To prevent mistakes and to
give this Argument its full strength, I would state it thus: Whatever Christ
did that we were obliged to do and which was to be our righteousness before
God, that certainly must be imputed to us; I do not say that all which Christ
did is strictly and properly imputed to us, but whatever he did if we were
bound to do it, and if the doing of that was to be our righteousness, that must
be imputed (or else we are in a sad case). He was incarnate for us yet that is
not formally imputed, why? because Sinners were not under any obligation to any
such thing; so I might instance in his working of Miracles, Intercession etc.
But now if our Lord will be pleased to put himself under the Law and to fulfill
the Law, that must be made over to us because that was a thing which we our
selves (according to the capacity of Creatures) were bound unto, and this was
to be our righteousness before God: what is so circumstantiated, must be
imputed; therefore this being taken in the Argument is good.

Several other Arguments are produced for the imputation of the active as well
as of the passive Obedience: As that both together make most for the Sea Bodius
in Ephesians. p. 796. --
glory of Christ, and for the ease and Neque conscientias pacaret aliqua
justitiae portio; sed perpetuo illas trepidare necesse esset, nisi firmiter
persuasae forent totam justitiam Legis sibi imputari. Polan. in Dan. p. 187.
comfort of burdened Souls: That it is a mighty loss for Christians to lose
Christ's active Obedience; and why should it be the active only or the passive
only if they may have both? quidni utraque (says Pareus himself)? can we have
too much of Christ? is not all of him precious? and do not we need all? Surely
the Certe tutius ibit ille, qui plus Christo ad majorem gloriam ascribit quod
in eo quaerat, quam qui ei quicquam adimit. Et qui totam Saivatoris and
Sponsoris nostri Obedientiam Legi divinae praestitam amplectitur, quam qui
praecipuam ejus partem pro justitia coram Deo sibi imputari non credit.
Wegelin. Disp. de Obed. Christi.
safest way is to take-in as much of him as ever we warrantably may. They (who
go this way) also urge the Consent of the Reformed Churches, the Suffrages of
several famous Divines as concurring with them; that their Opinion has the
advantage of being judged the more ancient and Orthodox, (which that excellent
person Noram probe, sententiam priorem antiquiorem and Orthodoxam magis passim
audire. Sed and re apud me accuratius. perpensa penitiusque perspecta, suo
merito ea id audire visa est. In Praefat. ad Tract. de Justif. p. 6.
Mr. Bradshaw, though he somewhat dissents about the thing, does ingeniously
confess). But these things I shall pass over; if the foregoing Arguments will
not convince and satisfy I shall hope for less from these. (So much for this
third Opinion).

Fourth Opinion: Christ's active Obedience imputed as a part of his
Satisfaction.
4. There is a Fourth; Say some the Bradshaw de Justif. in Praefat. p. 10.
active as well as the passive Obedience of Christ is imputed, yet not in the
sense of the promoters of the former Opinion, but only thus as Thus Grotius de
Sat. c. 6. p. 89. Bradshaw de Justif. c. 18. sect. 5, 6. Mr. Baxters Aphor. p.
54. Great Propit. p. 92, 93.
it was a part of Christ's Satisfaction for the violation of the Law; as it is
so considered (they say) it is imputed, but not in any other notion. They say
Christ's active obeying was satisfactory and meritorious as well as his
passive; than which nothing more certain: And indeed the passive without the
active had not been satisfactory or meritorious; 'twas Christ's Neque tamen
excluditur reliqua pars obedientiae qua defunctus est in vita: etc. Et sane in
ipsa (i. e. in morte Crucis, for that he is speaking of and does immediately go
before). primum gradum occupat voluntaria subjectio; quia ad justitiam nihil
profuisset Sacrificium nisi sponte oblatum. Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. sect.
5.
voluntary subjection to the Will of his Father (which was an active thing)
even in his dying, which put such an efficacy into his death: Now his active
Obedience being thus taken, is (they grant) made over and reckoned to
Believers. Gataker. Animadv. in Lucium. p. 1. sect. 1. p. 2. Bodius in Ephesians.
p. 798.
Others (to the same purpose) consider Christ's active Obedience two ways;
either strictly as active, as it lay in conformity to what the Law commanded,
or as there was humiliation and abasement attending that Obedience: in the
former respect they deny it to be imputed, in the latter they say it is. This
middle and reconciliatory Opinion is somewhat new and modern, and owned (as
yet) but by very few, but in those few (for their worth and eminency) there are
very many. I shall not set my self to argue or object any thing against it,
(though something might be said upon that account); I rejoice with all my heart
that we may have the active Obedience of Christ upon any terms or under any
considerations. I am so far from arguing against it that I keep it by me as a
reserve; that, if there be not solid and satisfactory Answers to be given to
the weighty Objections made against the imputation of Christ's active Obedience
as commonly asserted (which is to be tried by and by), I may fall in and close
with it. No more at present therefore about the First Question.

Of the Second Question: How the imputation of Christ's fulfilling the Law is
to be taken?
I go on to the Second; The imputation of Christ's fulfilling the Law or of his
active obedience being granted, it is further to be enquired In what sense this
imputation is to be taken? and how far it is to be carried? This Question has
its difficulties as well as the former: the Learned differ not only about the
matter of imputation or what is imputed, but also about the nature and the
right stating of the act. Even they who agree in the imputation of Christ's
active Obedience, do yet differ in the stating of that imputation.

For it is the Opinion of some, that Christ's active Obedience is so imputed to
believers as that God reckons it to them as done in their stead; that in his
obeying and fulfilling the Law, they, legally and in God's estimation, obeyed
and fulfilled the Law also; that his obedience is accepted for them and made
over to them even as if they had so obeyed in their own persons. Others cannot
close with this high and rigid imputation (as they are pleased to call it);
they say the imputation is to be carried no higher than thus, that Christ's
Obedience is imputed to Believers (that is) it is reckoned to them for their
good, but not as done in their stead; that it is theirs in the effects and
benefits of it but not as to the thing it self, so as that they in their
persons should be looked upon as having in Christ fulfilled the Law: they are
for Christ's obeying propter nos, but not pro nobis.

This latter stating of imputation is that which some follow whom (upon many
accounts.) I am bound to respect and reverence; and I acknowledge (as before)
the former stating of it to lie open to very weighty and considerable
Objections: Yet (in compliance with my present light) I must crave leave to
differ from them (though I do it with all modesty and submission); and the
Objections made against the high and strict imputation will (as I judge) admit
of fair and satisfactory Answers. Therefore I believe and affirm, that our
Saviors active Obedience is imputed, reckoned, made over to us, as being done
in our stead, and not only finally for our good; that it is ours, not only as to
such and such effects but that the thing itself is ours, in a Law sense; that
God reckons it to us as if we had done it in our own persons; and that therein
(in part) consists our righteousness before God.

The Arguments upon which I build this position, are these: Arguments to prove
the strict imputation of Christ's Obedience.
1. If the imputation of Christ's righteousness or Obedience be not taken for
the imputing thereof to us as done in our stead, but only as done for our good;
then whatever he did, or does, may as properly be said to be imputed to us as
his righteousness and obedience. The reason of the Consequence is plain;
because that all which Christ did, or does, is for our good; his Incarnation,
Nativity, Ascension, Intercession etc. all are for the good of those who love
God: If therefore there be nothing more in the imputation of his Obedience than
the reckoning of it to us for our good, then the forementioned things may
equally and as properly be said to be imputed to us, as it; (which I suppose
will not be affirmed; if it be, it will admit of a very easy confutation). 2.
That must be the right stating of the imputation of Christ's Obedience which
best suits with his Suretyship; but that which I I plead for does so, ergo. A
Surety does not pay the debt only for the debtors good, but as standing in the
debtors stead; and so his payment is reckoned to the debtor: The same we must
hold with respect to Christ and Sinners, or else we quit the main notion of his
being a Surety. Take away Christ's obeying in our stead and make it to be only
for our good (and so imputed), and you may then suppose him to be a loving and
compassionate Savior, but not (strictly) a Surety: for to that it is requisite
that he pay our very debt, and that that payment be accepted of as made in our
stead. 3. Christ's Obedience is imputed as Adams disobedience was imputed: this
is grounded upon the Apostles parallel between them in Romans 5. (of which
before) Now how is Adams disobedience imputed to us? Answ. not only for our
hurt or in the mischievous effects of it, but the guilt itself of his
disobedience is imputed; insomuch that in his sinning we all sinned. Answerably
ex opposito Christ's Obedience is, and must be, imputed to us; viz. not only
for our good and in the happy effects of it, but the thing itself is ours;
insomuch that in his obeying, reputatively and legally, we obeyed also. I
cannot understand the analogy 'twixt the two Adams (wherein the Apostle is so
clear), unless this imputation, as here stated, be granted: and I humbly
conceive he who grants we disobeyed in Adam must grant we also obeyed in
Christ. 4. Christ's righteousness is imputed to us in that way wherein our sin
was imputed to him; this is grounded upon 2 Cor. 5.21. Now our sin was imputed
to Christ, not only in the bitter effects of it but he took the Sea Mr.
Bradshaw de Justif. c. 16. p. 77.
guilt of it upon himself (as has been already See page 489 of this Book.
proved): so then his righteousness or active obedience itself must be
proportionably imputed to us, and not only in the effects thereof. 5. The
proper terminus of imputation is righteousness; it is (according to its notion
in Scripture) the reckoning or making over of a thing to a person for
righteousness: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, Romans 4.3. If therefore Christ's Obedience be imputed to us, it
must be so imputed as to be our righteousness before God; no imputation lower
than this will serve our turn nor suit with the Scripture-notion of the Word.
6. They (who dissent) bring in the imputation of Christ's active Obedience as a
part of his Satisfaction; whence I argue, he satisfied in our stead, as he
obeyed he satisfied, therefore he obeyed in our stead. Christ's active
Obedience being satisfactory as well as his passive, why should not that eo
nomine come under the same imputation which the passive does? 7. If this be all
in the imputation of Christ's Obedience that it is reckoned to the Sinner for
his good, then we are all agreed, all Controversies are at an end: for who,
even amongst the rankest denyers of imputation, do not assent to this, that all
was done and suffered by Christ for our good? and is so far reckoned to us?
Wherefore either our Protestant Divines have been grossly mistaken in disputing
for that which was not denied, or else they had other apprehensions about
imputation.


Objections answered which are brought against the imputation, and such an
imputation, of Christ's active Obedience.
These (in short) are the Arguments which incline, yea command me to believe the
high and strict imputation of Christ's active Obedience or fulfilling the Law.
But I have as yet done but half of my work; the Objections which are made
against what has been asserted, must be answered. It has been affirmed that
Christ's active as well as passive Obedience is imputed to Believers; now that
is objected against: It has been affirmed also that the imputation of Christ's
obedience is to be taken as has been stated; that too is objected against:
both therefore must be defended. The Objectors do not all concur in their
Opinions about these two Heads, yet in their main Objections about them in a
great measure they do: wherefore I shall take them as they lie before me
promiscuously and in common, and so endeavor to answer them.

Obj. First it is objected, 1. Object.
that in the Scripture remission of sin, justification, reconciliation with
God, eternal life, are wholly and solely ascribed to Christ's passive
Obedience, to his death on the Cross, (under which yet is included the whole
humiliation and abasement of Christ): The particular Scriptures cited for the
proof of this have been already set down.

Answ. They who are for the active Obedience as a part of Christ's humiliation,
Answ.
and as such do hold the imputation of it, making it and the passive to be but
one and the same Obedience, only diversified in its acts, all of which do yet
meet and concur in his humiliation; these (I say) are not at all concerned in
this Argument. And they who take them as distinct parts of his Obedience and as
such hold the imputation of them, are very little pinched by it; for the answer
is easy and obvious, these great effects are attributed to Christ's death and
blood not exclusively and solely (as to justle out the influence of his holy
life and active obedience), but eminently only. In his dying there was the
highest piece, the consummation of all his Obedience, therefore the main stress
is laid upon that (the chiefest part being by an usual Synecdoche put for the
whole); but yet the obedience of his life is to be taken in, in conjunction
with the obedience of his death, and so the Sinners happiness is completed.
It Is not only here said that God for sin condemned sin (which refers to
Christ's death), but also that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us (which refers to his life); as we read of our being justified by his
blood (and the like), so we read of his being made under the Law, to redeem
them who were under the Law that we might receive the adoption of Sons; and of
his being the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.

Obj. If Christ's active Obedience be imputed, 2. Object.
and in such a manner too, so that in his obeying and fulfilling the Law
Believers did obey and fulfill it; thence it will follow that his passive
Obedience, his Death itself was in vain and needless: for this being so, the
Saints must be perfectly righteous as having done what the Law required; and so
there would be no need of Christ's Suffering or Satisfaction, for that supposes
guilt and the nonperformance of the Law.

Answ. This Objection is very considerable yet I conceive the Consequence is
not so pressing; Answ.
the reason is, because though upon the imputation of Christ's active Obedience
one part of the Law is satisfied, yet there being another part of the Law to be
satisfied also, for that his passive obedience was necessary. Suppose that
Believers upon the former might be looked upon as now fulfilling the Laws
commands; yet guilt being before contracted, the penalty of death thereupon
iucurred, that the one might be expiated by the undergoing of the other it was
necessary that Christ should die and suffer. The Law requiring both of these in
both it must be satisfied; insomuch (says Mr. Burg. of Justif. 2. part page
411.
one) that if we could have had a perfect righteousness conformable to the Law,
de novo, and not have satisfied the punishment, our debt would not have been
discharged, we had still been in our sins. The twofold Obedience or double
righteousness of Christ do not destroy or undermine each the other; 'twas
necessary that he should obey actively for the doing of what the Law enjoined,
'twas necessary also that he should obey passively for the suffering of what
the Law threatened; for both of these were necessary to reach the Laws
righteousness, and so to lay the foundation of a complete righteousness for the
Creature: in order to which therefore both must be imputed to him. (I know what
is objected against this but all cannot be spoke unto at once).

For the better answering of the Objection in hand, it is said by some that the
imputation of Christ's passive Obedience must be supposed to antecede (in order
of nature though not of time) the imputation of his active: for in the
justifying of Believers God dealing with them as Sinners, we must suppose him
first to take off guilt and punishment due for what was past, before he makes
over a positive righteousness to them for the time to come. If this be so, we
shall easily get off from what is objected; wherein Dissenters go upon this,
that a person being judged righteous upon his imputative, active fulfilling the
Law, to him no further or subsequent imputation is necessary. We say so too;
but then we suppose an antecedent imputation of that Obedience which was proper
to free from guilt and wrath, viz. Christ's passive Obedience. So that the
matter comes to this; though Christ's active Obedience being imputed a child of
God is righteous and a fulfiller of the Law, and so nothing further is
necessary for him; yet it does not hence follow that Christ's passive Obedience
was in vain or needless, because, in the methods of divine grace, that is first
imputed for freedom from guilt and Hell before the active is imputed in order
to righteousness and Heaven. Very large discourses there are abroad in the
world about these things; I only design to set down in short what is
satisfactory to my self, but how far it may be so to others that I must leave
with God.

Obj. Christ's passive Obedience was sufficient: 3. Object.
for thereby the justice of God was fully satisfied, the Sinners guilt fully
expiated, full payment made of all that he owed etc. what need therefore is
there of any imputation of his active obedience to be superadded to the
imputation of the former?

Answ. If the passive Obedience be taken in conjunction with the active, Answ.
we grant the sufficiency of it to all intents and purposes; but if it be taken
disjunctly from the active, then we grant its sufficiency for such and such
ends or effects, but not for all. For the removal of guilt, the satisfying of
the penal part of the Law, the freeing from Hell and death, so it was
sufficient; but besides this, the preceptive part of the Law was to be
fulfilled, the condition of life was to be performed, the Sinner was to be made
positively righteous, Heaven was to be merited; now as to these, abstractly
from the active obedience of Christ, the passive was not sufficient. Upon his
dying Believers shall not die or be damned, or be looked upon as guilty; but
for their being righteous and entitled to eternal life, Christ must actively
fulfill the Law; for the promise of life is annexed to doing, Do this and live,
Levit. 18.5. Romans 10.5. There needs no more (says Blake on the Covenant c. 12.
p. 77.
a Reverend Person) than innocence not to die, and when guilt is taken away we
stand as innocent, no crime then can be charged upon us: But to reign in life
(as the Apostle speaks), to inherit a crown there further is expected, which we
not reaching Christ's active obedience supplied to us, not adding to ours but
being in itself complete is accounted ours, and imputed to us.

Obj. But it is said, 4. Object.
the Law requires no more than either doing or suffering; if one of these be
done, it is enough; both of them the Law neither does nor can demand. Wherefore
if we suffered in Christ and that be reckoned to us, it is not required that we
should also obey in Christ?

Answ. The truth of the Antecedent is not only questioned but flatly denied;
Answ.
and the contrary thereunto is proved, viz. See Advers. inter Piscat. and
Lucium. p. 1. sect. 4. Polan. in Dan. p. 191, etc. Turret. de Sat. par. 8. page
271, etc. Bodius in Ephesians. p. 805.
That in statu lapso the Laws obligation is not disjunctive, ad alterutrum,
either to do or suffer; but it is conjunctive or copulative, ad utrumque, both
to do and suffer. Indeed (say they of this Opinion) if man had continued in the
state of innocence one of these had been enough; namely the active obeying of
the Law; for he being then without sin could not lie under any obligation to
suffer. But he being fallen stands obliged to both; to obey, as he is a Creature;
to suffer, as he is an Offender: So that it was not enough for Christ in
suffering to answer the one obligation, but he must also by doing answer the
other also. In the Laws of men one of these is enough, but in the Laws of God
(there being a vast disparity 'twixt the Creatures subjection to him and to
men) it is not so. And (as I apprehend it) they who differ in this point, do
too much run themselves upon that absurdity which they would fasten upon those
from whom they differ: for whereas they charge the Opinion of these that it
acquits us from all obeying on our part, this principle (which they maintain)
seems to do it much more; for it either obeying or suffering be as much as the
Law requires, then Christ having suffered the utmost of the Laws penalty, we
are not under any obligation to obey too.

Obj. It having been said, 5. Object.
that Christ's passive Obedience was necessary to free from guilt and eternal
death, and his active necessary for righteousness and eternal life; against
this it is objected, that it supposes a medium betwixt being freed from guilt
and being made righteous, and so betwixt being freed from eternal death and the
having of eternal life (which is a great mistake). For these are such
Contraries as do admit of no me^^^m between them, and therefore upon the
negation of the one the affirmation of the other (in a fit Subject) must needs
follow; and so vice versa: As if it be not night it is day, if it be not
darkness it is light, if it be not crookedness it is streightness etc. So here;
if it be not guilt it is righteousness, and if it be not eternal death it is
eternal life, (these being Contraries (...)). Therefore they who grant freedom
from guilt and Hell upon Christ's death, and yet assert the necessity of the
obedience of his life for righteousness and Heaven, build upon a false
hypothesis.

Answ. To this it is answered, Answ.
what is here alleged holds true in Natural and Physical Contraries, but not
in Moral or Law-contraries: The Malefactor upon his Princes or the Judges
Pardon is acquitted from his guilt, and with respect to that he is innocent;
but yet he cannot upon this be looked upon as being righteous, or as having
done what the Law required of him: so it is in that which I am upon. It Is one
thing for the Sinner not to be unjust, and another thing for him to be just;
upon the non-imputation of Sin he is the former, but the latter he cannot be
without a positive righteousness. Not to be judged as a transgressor of the Law
and to be judged as a fulfiller of the Law, are two distinct things. And so as
to the other; although there be no medium 'twixt natural life and death (so
that upon the negation of the one there is always the position of the other),
yet between eternal life and eternal death there is a medium: For we may
suppose a person to be freed from the one and yet not presently admitted into
the other, he may be saved from Hell and yet not be taken up to Heaven, for he
may be annihilated or continued in some state of happiness here below this
notwithstanding: (I only speak of the possibility of the thing, not asserting
that ever de facto it is so). The Traitor may be freed from death and yet not
restored to all those high dignities and privileges which he had before; and
why not so here? It Is true, whoever is freed from Hell is admitted into Heaven,
but this is not necessary from the nature of the thing (as though there might
not be a status intermedius); but only from the will and ordination of God. The
necessity therefore of the imputation of Christ's active obedience for
righteousness and life is not weakened or nulled by this objection.

Obj. To put more strength into it it is further urged, 6. Object.
that the Opinion (argued against) makes Justification to consist of different
parts (viz. remission of Sin and imputation of righteousness); also it makes
these different parts to proceed from different Causes, (as the remission of
Sin from Christ's bearing the penalty of the Law, and the imputation of
righteousness from his fulfilling the precepts of the Law). Whereas (say some)
the whole nature of Justification lies in the remission of sin; to be pardoned
and to be made righteous are in Scripture terms equipollent and synonimous: And
(say others) all in Justification is but one act, proceeding from one and the
same cause; that very act which makes the Sinner not guilty makes him also at
the same time to be righteous; as that which takes away crookedness at the same
time makes straight, that which expels darkness at the same time introduces
light; the putting on of the garment and the removal of the nakedness are but
one and the same thing and done together.

Answ. Many things are here mentioned which cannot so distinctly be spoken to
in the answering of an Objection. Answ.
What place remission of sin has in Justification, whether of being the form
of it, or but an integral part, or only an effect and Consequent, is a thing
that Divines are not very well agreed about: whether the whole of Justification
does lie in remission is a point wherein also they differ. But I must not at
present engage in these debates, I will defer the discussing of them till I
come to open the Doctrine Doctrine of Justification (which the 30 Verse of this
Chapter will lead me to). I shall now only suggest what is proper for the
answering of the Objection before us.

And 1. what if the Opinion (argued against) does make remission of sin and
imputed righteousness to be different parts of Justification (they both as See
Burg. of Justif. 2 part Sermon. 27.
integral parts concurring to the completing and perfecting of it)? I say,
what if it so does? is it the worse for that, is this a novel tenent or that
which but few or none do own? have not several with great solidity and judgment
defended it? as to any error in it or any absurdities that will follow upon it,
I must confess I do not (as yet) understand either the one or the other. A
difference of parts in Sanctification is commonly granted, viz. mortification
and vivification; the abolition of the power of sin and the implantation of the
divine Nature; the putting off the old man and the putting on the new man (Ephesians.
4.22.); now why may not Justification have its parts as well as Sanctification?
If the Believers righteousness does lie in the fulfilling of the Law, and there
be different parts in that Law (its commanding and its punishing part), then
that righteousness which results from the fulfilling of it must admit of
different parts too. So that remission of sin is one part (that being grounded
upon the satisfying of one part of the Law), and imputation of righteousness is
another part (that being grounded upon the satisfying of the other part of the
Law). The Scripture speaks of these not as one and the same, but as distinct;
Romans 4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses (there is remission), and was
raised again for our justification (or righteousness, there is the other part):
how the latter is attributed to Christ's resurrection is not my business now to
enquire, I only cite the words as holding forth a distinction betwixt remission
and righteousness: (So Romans 5.9. compared with Romans 5.19.). And Dan. 9.24. --
to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness;
(here are the two parts of Justification set forth as different and distinct).
It Is true, the Apostle Romans 4.6, 7, 8. speaking of the Sinners righteousness
instances only in the forgiveness or non-imputation of sin; but he does not do
it as if that was the all in that righteousness, but (1.) because that being
one eminent part thereof he puts it for the whole: (2.) because that remission
of sin and the imputation of a positive righteousness being never parted, in
naming the one he included the other: not as if they were one and the same in
their nature but because they are never separated in the ^ubject.
I cannot yet be convinced but that the removal of Sins guilt and the
introducing of a positive righteousness, are things of a different nature and
carry distinct notions in them: for (besides what has been already said,)
though in God's dealing with fallen. Sinners they are never parted, yet as they
are considered in themselves they may be parted. Amongst us sometimes sin is
remitted when yet the offender is not justified, (as we see in the case of
Joseph's Brethren, Shimei, Abiathar etc.); and it is possible for a person to be
justified though he has no sin to be remitted (as it would have been with Adam
had he stood, he was then capable of Justification but not of remission): now
this their separableness evinces a difference or distinction betwixt them. To
object therefore against the imputation of Christ's active Obedience as well as
of his passive, (one being supposed to free us from guilt, the other to make us
righteous), that this would infer two different parts of justification; this is
so far from being an Objection that it is but a plain asserting of what is so
indeed.

2. Whereas it is said that this does also make different causes of
Justification, I say as before, what if it does? Provided, that by those ye
understand only the different grounds or matter of Justification according to
its different parts; (that is) as Christ died and shed his blood there is the
ground of the Sinners discharge from guilt, that which is imputed to him in
order to that effect; then as he in all things actively conformed to the Law
there is the ground of the Sinners positive righteousness, or that which is
imputed to him in order to that effect. Such a multiplication of Causes, which
are not so of a diverse nature but that they do unite and concur in some one as
the general Cause (as these do in Christ's righteousness or Obedience), carries
in it nothing repugnant to Scripture or Reason. This righteousness of Christ is
the one only material Cause of the Sinners righteousness; but that dividing
itself into his active and passive righteousness, accordingly the Causes of
the Sinners righteousness are diversified.

3. The allusions (brought against the Truth in question) seem to fasten some
absurdity upon it: For they tend to this, that for any to say upon one act sin
is remitted, and upon another the person is made righteous; it is as if one
should say, that by one act the crookedness of a thing is removed and that by
another it is made straight, (and so as to light and darkness).

To which I reply; I except against these similitudes as not suiting with the
thing in hand; they are proper for things of another nature, not for that which
we are upon; for that being a Law-act is not to be judged of by things of a
physical nature. Suppose the effects mentioned are produced by one and the same
act, yet they are not so pertinently alleged because what we are speaking of
falls under another consideration. We are not concerned about crookedness and
streightness, but about guilt and righteousness; all allusions which suit not
with these (as things of a legal nature) are insignificative. Will they say,
that that which frees the Offender from guilt (when he stands arraigned before
the Judge), does also make him a true and exact keeper of the Law? that at the
same time, and by the same sentence, wherein he is acquitted from the violation
of the Law, that he is also thereupon to be looked upon as a person that has
really kept the Law? such an Instance as this would be pertinent; but then we
should determine it in the Negative. And indeed I could humbly desire, that in
these Points we might be very sparing in argumentative Similitudes of this
nature; for it is very well known how by them some endeavor to decry and
undermine all imputation of Christ's righteousness. To be made righteous by the
righteousness of another? it is (say they) as if a man should see with another
eyes, or be learned with another learning, or wise with another wisdom etc.
(there is similitude for similitude, though upon a far more pestilent and
mischievous design). Therefore in Law-acts (such as we all grant Justification
to be), let us keep to those allusions which are proper to such acts; or else
(upon the disparity of Physical and Law-acts) we shall run our selves and
others upon great mistakes.

Obj. This seems to reflect upon God some error or mistake in his judging, 7.
Object.
as if be should esteem the Sinner to do that in Christ which he did not do,
and which he knows the Sinner did not do. And it is said, that it is not possible
that we (by any estimation) can be the Subjects of those acts, qualities,
accidents, which belong to another Subject.

Answ. Though the debtor himself does not pay the debt, Answ.
but the Surety in truth pays it, yet without any mistake the Creditor may in
a Law-sense look upon the debtor as having paid it, inasmuch as his Surety paid
it for him; and what his Surety does, he does (they being in Law but one
person): the application of this, as to God's judging with respect to Christ
and Sinners, is plain and obvious. But I ask, why should this be thought a
mistake in God to look upon us as obeying in Christ, when (I hope) it is not
made a mistake in him to look upon us as disobeying in Adam? wherein is the
truth of God more impeached in the one, than in the other? we did not
personally eat of the forbidden fruit, and yet I presume it will not be denied
but that in Adams eating of it legally we did eat it too; and that God does
most truly and righteously reckon us guilty of it as though we had done the
fact in our own persons: Grant then that there is no mistake there, and it will
follow that there is none here. Nay further, why may we not as well be said to
obey in Christ as to suffer in Christ? his Sufferings were as remote and aliene
from our persons as his active obeying; and yet it is granted, that they are so
reckoned to us as that in them even we may be said to suffer and satisfy; and
if the passive Obedience of Christ be thus imputed without any mistake, why may
not the active without any mistake be imputed also? clear God in the one and
you must likewise clear him in the other. And whereas it is said, that those
acts, qualities, or accidents, which belong to one Subject cannot be made over
to another; this strikes at all imputation (though I suppose it is not so
designed), for that which is imputed must be out of that Subject unto which
it is imputed; otherwise it is inhaesion, and not imputation. Adams disobedience
was his own personal and subjective act, and yet it is ours imputatively and
legally. (But of this I Will say no more).

Obj. If Christ actively obeyed and fulfilled the Law, 8. Object.
as in our stead, so that his Obedience be imputed to us; hence it will follow,
that we are not at all Mr. Bradsh of Justif. p. 85.
obliged our selves to obey or keep the Law, Christ having done that in his
person for us. For as he bearing the curse and penalty of the Law, in our
stead, we are thereupon freed from that curse; so if he did obey the Laws
commands in our stead, we must also thereupon be freed from any obligation to
obedience on our part thereunto.

Answ. All that follows from hence is this, Answ.
that Christ obeying the Law for us and in our stead, we are not bound to obey
it Vid. Luciam in Advers. p. 1. Sect. 5.
for those ends and upon those accounts upon which he obeyed it, (as namely for
satisfaction and for righteousness before God): but as to other ends and upon
other accounts, we are yet (and must be so) under an obligation to obey it. For
being Creatures we are indispensably bound to keep that Law which our Creator
and Lord is pleased to lay upon us, so as that nothing can absolve us from that
obligation: And besides, not only love and gratitude to God do call for this
Obedience from us, but it is the way wherein we can only hope for benefit by
Christ's satisfactory and meritorious Obedience. We must not carry our Saviors
fulfilling the Law for us beyond what he intended; now it appears by the whole
tenure of the Gospel, that he never intended it to exempt believers from
Obedience as it speaks duty, but only as 'twas the Condition of the first
Covenant. I therefore think that it may as well be argued, that Saints should
not die, or bear any punishment for sin, because Christ died for them and bore
the penalty of the Law for them; as that they should not obey actively because
Christ obeyed the Law for them. It Is true, upon the imputation of his passive
obedience they are freed from Suffering in order to Satisfaction, yet in other
respects suffer they shall: and so upon the imputation of his active Obedience,
they are freed from obeying (so as that their righteousness before God should
not lie in that), yet upon other accounts obey they must notwithstanding all
that Christ has done. In short, we may as well argue against others that upon
their principles God's people are not liable to any punishment, as they do
against us that upon our principles God's people are not under any obligation
to obey the Law: and that explication or distinction which will clear and
justify their Opinion in the consistency of the Saints Sufferings with
Christ's passive Obedience, will do the same for ours in the consistency of the
Saints Obedience with Christ's active Obedience.

Obj. It Is objected, 9. Object.
that the imputation of Christ's Obedience (as thus stated) makes Believers to
be no Sinners, yea as righteous as Christ himself was: they in him fulfilling
the Law, where is their sin? and his righteousness being made over to them, are
they not as righteous as he was?

Answ. This is one of the beaten, Answ.
threadbare Arguments with which the ROMANISTS impugn (in general) the
imputation of Christ's righteousness: Our PROTESTANT Writers thus answer them;
though Christ's righteousness be imputed to Believers yet for all that they are
Sinners, and may justly be so denominated, inasmuch as the denomination is
taken from what is inherent in them, notwithstanding what is imputed to them.
Saints may be considered either as they are in themselves, and so who can deny
them to be Sinners? (so the best must cry out Unclean, unclean): or as they are
in Christ, they being justified through the imputation of his righteousness,
and accepted in him as their Head and Surety; and so who will deny them to be
righteous? He fulfilled the Law for them, which obedience of his being reckoned
to them in God's account and imputatively they may be said to be without sin,
(there is no ANTINOMISME in this if it be rightly understood); yet as they are
in themselves and as to what is inherent and done by them, there is (God knows)
too much of sin in them. It Is no absurdity, for the same Subject under diverse
considerations to be looked upon as sinles^, and yet as sinful; Cant. 1.5.
I am black but comely: O what a pure, spotless, righteous person is the
Believer in respect of imputation; and yet what an impure, defiled, sinful
person is he in respect of inhering corruption.

As to the other part of the Objection I deny the Consequence; may we not be
righteous but upon this we must be as righteous as Christ himself was? as the
former I would be loath to deny, so the latter I would be as loath to affirm. It
does not follow, if Christ's obedience and righteousness be imputed to us that
therefore we must be as righteous as he was; because it is made over to us not
in the fullness and infiniteness of it, but Per justitiam Christi nobis
imputatam non possumus dici absoluta sive omni modo justi etc. -- sed --
eatenus nos justos factos aestimat Deus quatenus Legis Divinae transgressores
extiterimus: Ut in tantum ex illa Christi justitia justi facti dicamur, in
quantum ex inobedientia nostra injusti constituti simus. Bradsh. de Justif. c.
24. sect. 27.
only so far as our case and necessity does require; or not absolutely in the
utmost extent and degree of it, but in tantum quod hoc that we may be looked
upon as fulfillers of the Law, and as partakers of that righteousness which we
need and are capable of. And (pray) wherein does the imputation of Christ's
passive obedience come short as to what is here charged upon the imputation of
his active? will not the Argument lie as much against that as against this? For
upon that ('it is said) the Law was fully satisfied and received from Christ in
our stead its full accomplishment, upon that we are looked upon as having
committed no evil and omitted no good, that Christ's infinite merit and
Satisfaction is ours etc. wherefore may it not with equal strength be inferred
from the imputation of this that we are not Sinners, and that we are righteous
as Christ was, as it may from the imputation of the other?

Obj. This makes Christ to have done that very thing (for matter) which we our
selves should, 10. Object.
that he paid that very debt of Obedience in kind (and not in value only) which
the Law required and which we should have paid; which if so, and that that be
reckoned to us, we are then justified by Works and our righteousness is Legal
rather than Evangelical.

Answ. Answ.
I have had occasion (in what went before) to speak a little of the idem and
tantundem as they refer to Christ's Sufferings in answer to that Question
Whether he suffered the self-same penalty which the Law threatened and the
Sinner himself should have endured? or whether he suffered only that which was
equivalent thereunto? In the deciding of which I closed with the common
determination, that Christ's Sufferings for kind and substance, were the same
which the Law threatened; but as to some certain Circumstances and Accidents
they were but equivalent: The same resolution I shall give concerning the idem
and tantundem with respect to his active obedience; as to the substantial
duties required by the Moral Law, to them in kind he submitted, and to that
very obedience which we were obliged unto; so it was the idem: But then there
were some Circumstances (arising from some special Considerations about his
person) which in other things made a difference; with respect to which it was
but the tantundem. What all were bound to do in the great and indispensable
duties of the Law (as Holiness, Love to God etc.), that Christ did; but what
some only are bound to do, upon certain special obligations lying upon them as
they stand in such and such relations (as Magistrates, Husbands etc.), that was
not done by Christ in specie (he not standing in those relations). In the
substantial duties of the Law and in those acts of obedience which were in
general necessary, Christ did just that which we should have done; (understand
me that I speak of Legal not of Evangelical Obedience, for though Christ did
that for us which the Law demanded yet he did not do that for us which the
Gospel demands): but as to some particular duties of the Law, proper to such
persons in such circumstances, those he (not being under those circumstances)
did not do: and yet there is no defect in his Obedience, the want of this
particular being supplied and made up by his general Obedience. The Text says
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; now why may we not
content our selves with this that Christ fulfilled the Laws righteousness,
without running of our selves upon perplexing debates about the idem and the
tantundem? The case (in brief) stands thus, the Law must be obeyed, in our
selves we neither did nor could obey it, our Surety therefore must do it for
us, he doing it for us his Obedience must be imputed to us, this imputation
must be of that very obedience which we were bound unto, otherwise (this, and
not something else in the lieu of it being demanded by the Law) we are yet
debtors to the Law: therefore it follows that Christ did the idem which we
should have done. For as he delivered us from the curse of the Law by bearing
that very curse in his own person which we should have bore, so he fulfilled
the righteousness of the Law for us by comforming to that very righteousness in
his own person which we should have come up to.

As to our justification by Works (which is pleaded against this imputation) to
that I shall speak immediately in the Use.

And thus I have (with no small grief and trouble (the Lord knows) to see in
this point differences amongst persons so godly, so learned, and as to my self
that I should so unavoidably be concerned in these unhappy Controversies,) gone
over and answered the most material Objections (that I have met with) against
the imputation of Christ's active Obedience. I would not be so fond or weak as
to hope, that what I have said should have any influence upon those learned and
judicious persons from whom I differ, so as to alter their opinion; (they knew
it all before, and had it from others with great advantage, and yet could not
be thereby convinced). However I thought I could not do less than what I have
done: possibly thereby weaker Christians may come to some clearer insight into
these matters; if there too I be disappointed, yet I have laid down the grounds
of my own pe^suasion (which this Subject made necessary). Whether the Answers I
have given to the Objections will be satisfactory to others, I know not; but I.
seriously profess (as to the main) they are so to me. I must acknowledge in
some of them there are those difficulties which it is not an easy thing to get
over; yet upon the whole matter I must say, that (after the most serious
thoughts) I (as to my self) can with more ease and satisfaction answer the
Arguments brought against the imputation of the active Obedience, than I can
those which are brought for it; otherwise I had not embraced an Opinion which
some knowing men oppose with scorn and derision.

I come to the Application (wherein I must be very short).

From the Truth I am upon we learn (1.) in what way or upon what terms a
Believer is justified. the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness; which though
it could not be done by the Believer himself, yet by Christ it is done for him.
In the justifying of Sinners God proceeds upon the perfect righteousness and
full demands of the Law; and being justified they are righteous according to
that etc. justi sumus coram Deo ex illa etiam absolutissima legis formala.
Beza. If with our justification from Sin there be joined that active Obedience
of Christ which is imputed to us, we are just before God according to that
perfect form which the Law requires. Engl. Annot.
strict and exact righteousness which the Law itself holds forth. You read
much of Legal and of Evangelical righteousness, of justification by works and
by faith; there seems to be a contrariety between these two (and so there is in
some respects), but if you consider them materially and fundamentally they are
one and the same: The righteousness by which we are justified, it is both legal
or the righteousness of works and also Evangelical or the righteousness of
faith; in reference to Christ it is legal (as he exactly fulfilled the Law), in
reference to us it is Evangelical (that righteousness which was never performed
in our own persons, being graciously made over to us and accepted for us). And
so as to our selves we are justified by faith, but as to our Head and Surety we
are justified by works: God deals with us in our own persons upon the terms of
the Covenant of grace, but he dealt with us in Christ upon the terms of the
Covenant of works: and indeed in the justification and salvation of a Sinner
all these concur. The Scripture ('it is true) sets them in opposition one to the
other, and makes them incompatible; but that is only in reference to the same
subject under the same personal consideration: The same person as considered in
himself, and by himself, cannot be justified by Works and by Faith too, by the
Covenant of works and by the Covenant of grace too: but let Christ be taken in,
and so these things are reconcilable. As Christ in his person did all which
the Law or Covenant of Works required, so in him our justification is by the
Law of Works etc. but as that his righteousness is imputed to us and applied by
us, so our justification is of grace, by faith etc. That very righteousness
which is legal in the Head is Evangelical in the members (in respect of the
application of it). Blessed be God for the sweet harmony and concurrence of
both Covenants, of Law and Gospel, Works and Faith in the Sinners justification
and salvation! it is admirably brought about by this great thing which the Text
speaks of, Christ's fulfilling the righteousness of the Law for us.

2. Secondly it shows us, what great respect and value the great God had for
his holy Law, and what an high honor he put upon it. Which appears from this;
the Apostle here setting down God's high and glorious ends in the sending of
his Son into the world, he makes them all to center in the satisfaction and
accomplishment of his Law: that it might be satisfied in its penalty, Christ
shall be a Sacrifice (as you had it before); that it might be satisfied in its
commands, Christ in his own person shall fulfill the righteousness of it (as you
have it here). Here was by both plenary satisfaction made to the Law, which was
the very thing which God stood upon and would have done: and rather than it
should not be done, his own Son must come from Heaven, and put on flesh, and be
himself made under the Law; he must live an holy life and die a cursed death
and all to satisfy the Law. And this was a thing so great in God's eye, as
that he looked upon the fulfilling and answering of the Laws demands as a
valuable compensation for all the abasement and humiliation of his dearest Son:
Oh let us think honorably of the Law for surely God did so. The Apostle had
seemed to speak somewhat diminutively of it before, what the Law could not do
in that it was weak; but here he puts a great deal of glory upon it, in making
this the end of the Incarnation of the Son of God that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us. God never designed by the sending of Christ to
have his Law Nota per Christum non abolitam esse Legis justitiam non respectu
quidem nostri, verum impletam eam etiam respectu nostri and in nobis. Rolloc.
abolished or abrogated; no, but rather to have it accomplished and fully
satisfied: Matthew. 5.17.
think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to
destroy but to fulfill. In Christ's obedience, active and passive, we have an
high demonstration of that singular respect which God bare to his Law. Sin was
a base thing therefore that shall be condemned, but the Law was good therefore
that shall be satisfied.

Secondly, Exhortation I would urge a few things upon you: As (1.) make sure of
an interest in the privilege here spoken of. To have the righteousness of the
Law fulfilled in us? O what a privilege is this! is it yours? are you in the
number of the [us] in the Text? is Christ's obeying the Law so made over to you
as that, in God's estimation, the righteousness thereof is fulfilled in you?
Sirs! this is a thing that must be done either by you or for you; the former
being impossible what relief have you from the latter? If you cannot plead this
fulfilling of the Laws righteousness, either by your selves or by your Surety,
you are lost for ever; you are under that Gal. 5.3.
debt to the Law which you will never be able to pay, you are yet in your sins,
un-justified persons, you lie open to the wrath of that God whose Law you have
violated, can make no good claim of life (for the Law is not done, its
condition of life is not performed); and (which is very dreadful) if the Laws
righteousness be not fulfilled in you the Laws curse will most certainly be
inflicted upon you. God will have a perfect righteousness and obedience some
where, or he will not justify and save; if therefore the perfect righteousness
and obedience of Christ be not imputed to you, what will you do? what will
become of you? woe to that man who when he shall come at the great day to stand
before God's Tribunal, shall not be judged in and through Christ, a fulfiller
of the Law! that shall then be, found without the garment of Christ's imputed
righteousness! how will the Law fall upon him for non-obedience, and thereupon
demand satisfaction of him in the suffering of eternal torments! Pray think of
this in time, so as to get an interest in Christ's fulfilling the Laws
righteousness. Some dispute whether his righteousness be imputed to any; let
your enquiries (you taking the thing in thesi for granted) be about something
else, viz. whether in particular it be imputed to you? and what you may be and
do that it may be imputed to you?

For your direction and help in both of these enquiries, look to three things,
Union with Christ, Faith, the Spiritual conversation; these are the evidences
of the privilege, and also (especially the two former) the grounds and means
of obtaining it. The us (of whom the Apostle speaks) in whom the Laws
righteousness is fulfilled, are (1.) Such who are in Christ: 1. Cor. 1.30. --
(2.) Such who believe: Romans 3.22. Romans 4.24. Phil. 3.9. -- (3.) Such who live
the Spiritual Life; for so they are here uncharacterized, that the righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the
Spirit.
So that would you either know whether Christ obeyed the Law for you, and that
that his obedience be imputed to you; or would you take some course in order to
the securing of this grace to your selves; these are the things which your eye
must be upon, that you be in Christ, that you be true believers, that you be
holy and spiritual in your walking: God never intended that his Sons Obedience
should be imputed to any but only to such as these.

2. You who pretend to the having an interest in this glorious privilege, I
would (with the greatest earnestness) exhort you to go as far in your own
persons as is possible in the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness. And this I
would with the more vehemence press upon you, because of those ugly aspersions
and calumnies which some do cast upon this precious Truth, and the worthy
Assertors of it: How do Ita nunc juxta hujus bestiae Sanctimoniam (he means
Beza), renatus in Christo and credens in eum, Christi que justitiam forti fide
apprehendens, fornicetur, inebrietur, omni spurcitia contaminetur, peccatum pro
nihilo habetur, utcunque supersint reliquiae ejus in nobis. Staplet. Antidot.
p. 630. Haec (...) sunt and daemonum praestigiae quibus Legem Dei eludere etc.
Vid. Con^^^n. in loc. Qu. 1.
Papists let fly whole volleys of bitter invectives against Protestants,
because they assert the imputation of Christ's Obedience (and so expound these
Words)! And there are some Others who are high enough in their censuring and
calumniating of this Doctrine, as if it tended to nothing but to make men
careless and loose and profane, as if it opened a wide door to all
licentiousness, and did cut the sinews of all piety and godliness. O therefore
I would entreat you to be the more strict, exact, holy, obedient in your
course, that you may live down all these scandals and that your conversation
may be a ^isible confutation of them. It Is no new thing for the Doctrines of
imputed righteousness, of not resting on the Law for justification, the
decrying of Works for righteousness, the crying up of Faith as the great
condition of righteousness and life; I say, it is no new thing for these
evangelical Truths to be reviled by some, and perverted by others. Therefore
(as to the latter) the Apostle when he was speaking of them was fain ever and
anon to interpose something by way of Caution, that he might obviate those
misinterpretations, perversions, abuses which some might make of what he had
said; Romans 3.31.
Do we (says he) make void the Law? Gal. 2.17.
is Christ the minister of sin? And surely we have need to do the same as to
that which I am upon: O (say some) did Christ in our stead obey the Law? is his
fulfilling the Law made over to us? then we have nothing to do, we are under no
obligation on our part to obey too; is not Christ's perfect fulfilling the Law
enough? what can be further required of us? what need we trouble our selves
about any obedience or holy walking? But God forbid that any of you should thus
reason! We are indeed too prone to such reasonings; it is very natural to us to
catch at any thing that may comply with the gratifying of the flesh, and with
the easing of us as to the severities of an holy, obediential course: and hence
it is that we suck poison out of the sweetest flowers, turning the grace of God
into wantonness. But (I assure you) there is nothing in Christ's Obedience and
in the imputation thereof; that has any tendency or gives any encouragement or
patronage to any such loose inferences: for though he obeyed the Law for us yet
we our selves must obey it too; his obedience must not justle out ours, both
together (upon different accounts) do very well agree. Indeed he having obeyed
the Law, we are not bound to obey it for such an end, as for satisfaction and
merit, for righteousness and life; yet in other respects and for other ends, as
that we may conform to the Will of God (and so please him), that we may (in our
sphere) imitate our holy Savior, that we may testify our love and gratitude
to God etc. so we are as much bound to keep and obey the Law as ever. O it is
such an excellent Law in the commands and injunctions of it, that all should
delight in conforming to it! as it is the Law of works (calling for perfect and
personal Obedience, and giving no strength thereunto) so it is burdensome, but as
it is puts the creature upon works and is the rule and matter of obedience, so
the gracious Soul will delight in it. Wherefore though Christ has fulfilled it
for you, yet it becomes you too to live in all obediential compliance with it
and subjection to it.

And (I say) herein go as far as is possible. You cannot perfectly fulfill it
(blessed be God that is not required of you!) but yet you should do as much as
ever you can; you should endeavor after perfect obedience though you cannot
arrive at it. Our Saviors perfect obedience may encourage us in our lamented
defects, but we must not thereupon stint or limit our selves in our obedience.
A gracious man's will is always above his power; he can do but little but he
would do all. 'Twas an high commendation given to Caleb; says God of him Numb.
14.24.
he followed me fully, or (as it is in the Hebrew vajemalle achari) he fulfilled
after me; and thus it is with every Caleb (one that is after God's own heart as
the word signifies) he is for fulfilling after God. The Apostle speaks of
(...), the fullness or fulfilling of obedience 2 Cor. 10.6. Epaphras prayed for
the Colossians Chap. 4.12. that they might be complete in all the will of God;
and it is said of Zechary and Elizabeth Luke 1.6. they were righteous in all the
commandments and ordinances of God: O that it might be thus with you! If
straight bodies be put together there is an universal contiguity betwixt them,
they will meet and touch each the other throughout; and so where the heart is
sincere it will close with every part of God's Law. Christians! pray rejoice in
Christ's fulfilling the Laws righteousness, and rest upon that only; but yet in
the way of duty and obedience aspire in your selves at the highest fulfilling
of the Law which here you are capable of.

3. Thirdly, the Law-righteousness Christ has fulfilled for you, but the
Gospel-righteousness you must perform your selves: The Moral Law (as 'twas
strictly and properly the Covenant of works) Christ has satisfied in his doing
of what it required, but the Evangelical Law (requiring Faith and Repentance)
you your selves must satisfy: Christ's obedienee to the former is made yours
by imputation, but as to the latter there must be your own personal and
inherent obedience. We read of Christ's being made under the Law* and of his
fulfilling the Law, but we never read of his being made under the Gospel or
fulfilling the conditions thereof: no, you must repent your selves, believe
your selves, or else all that Christ has done upon the account of the Law will
not profit you. I would not be mistaken in this; therefore (1.) I do not mean
that you are to perform the Gospel conditions in your own strength; was it so,
you might as well do what the Law as what the Gospel requires, (it being as
easy in your own strength to obey the one as the other): You your selves are
to repent and believe, but it is not of your selves; these are the gift of God.
Nor (2.) do I mean, that the performing of the Gospel-conditions is left to the
lubricity of your Wills, so as that it should be uncertain and undetermined
whether you should perform them or not; for, upon the Election of God, and the
purchase of Christ, all that do belong to him shall certainly believe and
repent. Nor (3.) do I mean, that upon the fulfilling of the Gosp^^-Law, you
should have another formal righteousness before God distinct from that which
results from Chaist's obeying the Moral Law, (which is imputed to you); but
only that upon your performing of the Gospel-conditions way may be made for the
application of Christ's legal obedience to you, as the only thing wherein
stands your righteousness: (these are things which might be very much enlarged
upon, but I am now in have).
All therefore that I drive at is this, Christ fulfilled the Moral Law for you
but he never fulfilled the Gospel-Law for you; you must repent and believe your
selves, or else you cannot rely upon the imputation of Christ's Obedience to
the Law: if you be impenitent and unbelieving, both Law and Gospel are
unfulfilled and in full force against you. 'Twill be an insignificant plea at
the great day when the Laws righteousness shall plead against you, for you to
say, Lord! Christ fulfilled that righteousness; true (will God say) he did so,
but the Gospel-righteousness was not fulfilled by you; therefore what my Son
did as to the other is nothing to you.

4. One thing more, you that are Believers take a further view of the great
love of God and Christ, and let the sense of it work up your hearts to the
highest thankfulness. Was God pleased to send his own Son in flesh, for this
very end that he might fulfill the Law? and when his Son had so done, does he
reckon that obedience to you as if you had done it your selves? O
incomprehensible, infinite, amazing love! Was Christ willing to submit to this,
on these terms to take flesh? O the transcendent, superlative love of Christ!
He who made the Law to be made under the Law? he who was the Lord and Sovereign
to be willing to become a Subject? he to undertake to do that which you could
never have done, and without the doing of which you must have eternally
perished? he to condescend to do what the Law demanded, to suffer what the Law
threatened? what shall we say to this love! surely we can never enough adore it
or sufficiently bless God for it. Saints! did you but consider what humiliation
this was in the Son of God, what a dreadful enemy this Law would have been had
not its righteousness been fulfilled, into what a blessed state things are now
brought; it would certainly highly affect you with the love of Christ, and
engage you to love, serve, praise him eternally.

The third Use is Comfort to the people of God; righteousness of the Law
fulfilled in us? great and blessed words! Did God employ such a person, in such
a way, for such an end? that end must needs then be attained; and if so, what
shall hurt them for whom it was attained? You who believe do often fear that
the Laws righteousness is ready to rise up against you, you tremble at the
thoughts of it when you consider how short you come of it; but fear it not, for
in Christ it is exactly, perfectly fulfilled; and that for you too, in your
stead, that it is as well as if you had obeyed it fully in your own persons; is
not here ground of Comfort? You eye the imperfection of your own obedience (and
you do well), but pray eye too the perfect obedience of the Lord Jesus which is
yours by imputation. There is now no condemnation to them who are in Christ;
why now no condemnation? because now Christ has fulfilled the Laws
righteousness for such; and thereupon who or what shall condemn them? You are
troubled because of the Law of Sin, but that the Spirit has freed you from;
you are troubled because of the Law of God (inasmuch as you come so much short
of its righteousness), but that by Christ is fulfilled for you. You desire a
righteousness, such an one as will bear you out before God; here it is for you,
Christ's own righteousness is yours; O you may say Isa. 45.24.
In the Lord we have righteousness. When you had none of your own God provided
another and a better for you; Assignata est ei aliena (justitia) qui caruit
sua, ( Bernard. Epist. 190. ad Innoc.); Christ was Delicta nostra sua delicta
fecit, ut justitiam suam nostram justitiam faceret. August.
willing to be made sin that you might be made the righteousness of God in him.
You may with holy confidence say Law thou demandest much of me (and that very
justly), and I cannot my self answer thee in these demands; but there is my
Savior, my Surety, he has paid the full debt for me, he has in my room and
place done and suffered all that thou can require, to his satisfaction I
appeal: (a good appeal! the Lord give you more and more of the comfort of it).
That which often causes a gracious Soul to be troubled, is the consideration
not only of the Laws penalty but also of the Laws purity; Oh it is a righteous
Law and it calls for an exact doing righteousness in the Creature, what will
become of me who cannot answer it herein? Now under this trouble, the belief of
the imputation of Christ's active obedience may be of great use: And this is
one reason why I would be the more loath to part with the imputation of that
obedience, because under troubles of Conscience it is so proper, so necessary,
so sovereign a Cordial for many fainting Christians. To shut up all; Believers!
Christ's whole Obedience ( active and passive) is yours, what would you have
more? what can Sin, or Satan, or Conscience, or the Law it self now object
against you? be humble and mourn in the sense of the imperfection of your own
inherent righteousness, yet withal rejoice and glory in the fullness,
perfection, everlastingness of that righteousness which is imputed to you. It Is
a terrible word to Sinners the righteousness of the Law must be fulfilled on
them, it is a comfortable word to the Saints the righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in them.

ROMANS 8.4. -- Who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit.


CHAP. XV. Spiritual Walkers the Subjects of the foregoing Privilege.
The Sixth Head in the Words, viz. the Description of the persons to whom the
privilege belongs. Some short Animadversions upon the Words. The main Doctrine
raised from them; (but not handled): A brief Survey of these Four Verses and
recapitulation of the principal matter in them. The Conclusion of this Volume.

IN the opening of the matter which the Apostle is upon in this and in the
preceding Verse, I have taken notice of 1. The act itself; viz. the sending of
Christ. 2. The person whose act this was; God sent etc. 3. The person who was
sent, as he stands in a very near relation to God; God sent his own Son etc. 4.
The way or manner in which this Son was sent; in the likeness of sinful flesh.
5. The great Ends of God in all this, or the great Effects produced thereby;
namely the condemning of Sin etc. and the fulfilling of the Laws righteousness
in and for Believers. (These several Heads have all (more or less) been
opened). 6. The Apostle having appropriated the last End or Effect (the
fulfilling of the Laws righteousness) to such a sort of persons, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled [in us], he goes on to describe
those persons by their qualification and course; they are such who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


This Description or Character we had before, with respect to Union with Christ
or exemption from condemnation; there is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Here it is
repeated with respect to Christ's fulfilling of the Law, and the imputation of
that his Obedience: who are the persons who have a share also in this and who
shall be the better for it? why, such who walk not after the flesh but after
the Spirit. As the mystical Union and freedom from condemnation, so the
imputation of Christ's righteousness is attended in every Subject (that is a
real partaker thereof) with a spiritual and holy conversation. These are
different privileges, but for the evidence of them the Apostle makes use of
the same character or description.

Who walk not after the flesh etc. The words are not descriptive of the nature
of the thing spoken of before, as if the righteousness of the Law was fulfilled
in Believers in their not walking after the flesh etc. (as Pererius Disp. 3. in
c. 8. ad Romans
Some would have it); but they are descriptive of the persons for whom and in
whom that thing was done. There Is a vast difference betwixt these two;
Apostolus non affirmat justificationem Legis a nobis impleri, sed in nobis; nec
quia incedimus secundum Spiritum ut haec causa sit, sed ut hoc testimonio and
judicio intelligamus legis justificationem in nobis impleri qui secundum
Spiritum incedimus. Whittak. contra Dura^m de Patad. l. 8. fol. 203.
our holiness is not the fulfilling of the Law, but whoever is an holy man
Christ's fulfilling of the Law is imputed to him; and so he does fulfill it.

In the bringing in of this description three things might be designed by the
Apostle: 1. To assert the happiness of all who live the spiritual life; in them
by Christ the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled. Ideo Apostolus admodum
apposite etc. Vide Bezam. (in loc.). Christus est illis justitia qui juxta
Spiritum non juxta carnem ambulant; Christus enim iis duntaxat justitia and
Legis satisfactio est, qui crucifixo jam vetere homine Spiritui obtemperant.
(h. e.) solis fidelibus. Zwingl.
2. To stave off all others from laying claim to this grace; none but holy
livers can warrantably apply Christ's satisfying of the Law to themselves. 3.
To obviate all Quia suam justitiam nullis communicate Christus, nisi quos
Spiritus sui vinculo sibi conjungit, additur iterum regeneratio, ne putetur
Christus esse peccati minister, sicuti proclive est multis ad carnis lasciviam
rapere quicquid de paterna Dei indulgentia traditur. Calvin.
abuses of this precious Truth, all mis-interpretations of it, as also all Vide
Chrysostom. and Oecum. (in loc.)
security and carelessness in them who have an interest in the privilege. Has
Christ fulfilled the Law for us? some from hence might be apt to infer then we
may live as we list, there is nothing now for us to do; no, not so (says the
Apostle), for though Christ has fully satisfied the Law, yet all for whom he
has done this do and must walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


Who walk not etc. Faith being the proper and immediate condition of the
imputation of Christ's righteousness or obedience to the Law; why does not the
Apostle instance in that rather than in spiritual walking? Answ. Etsi fides
principalis conditio sit, quia tamen interna est etc. ideo addit illam
externam, de qua nemo gloriari possit, nisi se liabere foris demonstret. Par^us.
because he is not here so much showing how Christ's righteousness is imputed,
as who they are (or how they carry it) to whom it is so imputed. He that would
have Christ's righteousness to be his, must believe (for that is the proper act
in order thereunto): but he that would know himself, or would manifest to
others, that he is righteous in Christ's righteousness, that must be brought
about by the heavenliness of his conversation.

The Observation which lies plainly before us from these words is this; That
all such who have Christ's righteousness imputed to them; they are not fleshly
but spiritual walkers; they do not live the carnal and sinful but the holy and
the heavenly life. Or thus, None can warrantably pretend to an interest in
Christ's Obedience ( active or passive), but only such who in their course are
acted by the Spirit, and not by the Flesh. But I shall not say any thing upon
this Point; both because this walking not after the flesh but after the Spirit
has been already fully opened; and also because as to the inseparable
connection bewixt this imputation and this conversation, I may hereafter have
occasion to speak more conveniently to it when I shall have more room for it
than here I have.

I will close all with a brief Survey of the Verses which I have gone over,
that we may the better understand the Apostle's method in them, and also what
progress we have made in the thing which he is upon.

He first lays down his main foundation, in this Proposition* There is no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, (Verse. 1.): Then he amplifies
himself about this Proposition; where (1.) He characterises the proper Subject
of the privilege (viz. of non-condemnation), [who walk not after the flesh but
after the Spirit]: this only he names in the general Verse. 1. and 4: but then
Verse. 5. he falls upon a more full and particular illustration of it, which he
continues in several Verses. The Second thing he does about the Proposition is
to prove the truth of the Praedicate; that there is no condemnation etc. And
this he does by these mediums; They who are freed by the regenerating Spirit
from the power of Sin, and by Christ's death and Sacrifice from the guilt of
Sin; as also who have Christ's full Obedience and Satisfaction of the Law
imputed to them; to them there is no condemnation: But thus it is with all in
Christ Jesus; by the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ they are freed from
the Law of sin and death, (there is deliverance from the power of Sin); God by
Christ's being a Sacrifice has condemned Sin (there is deliverance from the
guilt of Sin); and the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in them (there is
Christ's Obedience imputed to them); upon all this it must needs follow that to
them there is no condemnation, (which was the thing to be proved).

Now these being things of great weight and importance, wherein the very vitals
and Spirit of the Gospel do lie, the due and distinct opening of them (with
other Truths interwoven in the words), has made this Volume grow to a far
greater bigness than what I expected. Wherein I have been unnecessarily prolix
I humbly beg the Readers pardon; but truly in speaking to the Saints
exemption from Condemnation, the mystical Union of Believers with Christ, the
Spiritual Life, the Spirits agency in freeing Souls from the bondage of Sin,
the Laws inability to justify and save, Christ's Mission, eternal Sonship,
Sacrifice, active fulfilling the Law etc. I say in these weighty and
fundamental points (so little understood by the most, so much oppugned by
Some,) I thought I could scarce say too much. Yet if such who are judicious
shall tell me this is a fault, I Will endeavor to mend it in what shall follow;
wishing that I could as easily mend other faults as that. Well! I have begun,
and having so done I purpose (with God's grace and leave) to go on till I shall
come to the end of this excellent Chapter: with this proviso, if I may have
some encouragement that these past labors may (in some measure) be useful and
profitable: without that, why should I proceed to trouble others and my self
too? The good Lord give a blessing to what is done and assist in what is yet
further to be done.

FINIS.
The Index, Directing to the principal Things insisted upon in this Book*
A.
SVch as are in Christ must abide in him Page 73 Of Christ's Active Obedience.
Vide Obedience. Particular Acts do not evidence the State but the general
Course. Page 92 Of Spiritual Affections. Page 109 There is no Condemnation yet
much Affliction to Believers. Page 7 It Is Antichristianism directly or by
Consequence to deny Christ's coming in Flesh. Page 422 Of Atonement by Christ.
Page 498
B.
Baptism alone not sufficient to prove Union with Christ. Page 62 Fleshly
Walking contrary to Baptismal Dedication. Page 122 Being in Christ opened. Page
42 Christ being sent by God, that is a great engagement and encouragement also
to Sinners to believe on him. Page 310, etc. How Sin exerts its power in and by
the Body. Page 183 The miserableness of the Sinners Bondage under Sin opened
and set forth. Page 189, etc. The proper and only Cause of Deliverance from
Sins Bondage. Page 242, etc.
C.
Great Changes in the Godly with respect to their inward Comfort or Sorrow.
Page 5 The weakness of the Ceremonial-Law: Page 262 Of Union with Christ. Vide
Union. Of Christ's being sent by God the Father. Vide Sending. Of Christ's
Sonship to God. Vide Son. Of Christ's Incarnation. Vide Incarnation. Of
Christ's being a Sacrifice. V. Sacrifice. Of Christ's Obedience. V. Obedience.
Christ's praeexistence before he was born of the Virgin proved. Page 284.
Christ is a Person. Page 287 His Personal distinction from his Father proved.
Page 287 Christ's Godhead proved. Page 349 His Manhood. Vide Man. The
excellency of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice. Page 539 Christ's fitness to
be a Redeemer and to be sent by God opened in some particulars. Page 299
Communion depends upon Union and follows upon it. Page 69, 84 Communion with
God and Communications from him are made credible by Christ's Incarnation. Page
444. Christ being Man must be compassionate. Page 452 Concupiscence is Sin.
Page 8 No Condemnation to such as are in Christ. Page 7 proved. Page 20
Condemnation opened as to Word and Thing. Page 17 It refers to Guilt and
Punishment. Page 18 There Is the Sentence and State of Condemnation. Page 19
It Is Virtual or Actual. ibid. There is matter of Condemnation in the Best. Page
8 Condemnation by Men, by Conscience, by Satan. Page 10 Condemnation under the
Gospel as well as under the Law. Page 13 It Is not only No Condemnation to
Believers but positive Salvation. Page 16 Of the dreadfulness of Condemnation.
Page 25 How it may be avoided. Page 32 Persons exempted from it are to be
thankful and cheerful. Page 37, etc. What the Condemning of Sin is. Page 460
There may be troubles in the Conscience after Sin, and yet Sin may reign. Page
212 The Contrariety of the two Walkings. Page 95 The Corrupt Nature set forth
by Flesh. Vide Flesh. The Covenant of Redemption touched upon. Page 298 Of the
New Creature. Page 65 Of the crucifying the Flesh. Page 66
D.
The Law of Death opened. Page 152, 249 Sin and Death go together; especially
when it is the Law of Sin. Page 250 How the Regenerate are freed from the Law of
Death. Page 253, etc. Comfort from hence to such against the Fear of Death.
Page 257 In temptations to Sin it is good to consider that it is Sin and Death.
Page 254 Comfort to Believers as to Death from their Union with Christ. Page 81
Christ's Death a strong Dissuasive from walking after the Flesh. Page 128 The
main Ends of Christ's Death made good against the Socinians. Page 518, etc. Man
had not died if he had not sinned. Page 250 Of the Saints Dignity from their
Union with Christ. Page 96 Of the Dominion of Sin. See the Law of Sin.
E.
The converting Spirit works efficaciously and irresistibly. Page 234 Of the
spiritualness of a man's Ends. Page 111 Expiation of sin by Christ's Sacrifice.
Page 449 That finished on Earth, not done in Heaven. Page 505 The Nature of
this Expiation. Page 510 The Extent of it. Page 511 Vide Sacrifice.
F.
God the Father's Love to be admired in his sending of Christ. Page 303 Saints
are to think well of God the Father as well as of God the Son. Page 305 Faith
the Bond in the Mystical Union. Page 49 Faith to be repeated in fresh
applications to Christ. Page 553 There are but few in Christ. Page 118 Flesh is
in the Best. Page 91 All particular Sins comprehended in Flesh. Page 97 Of
being in the Flesh and walking after the Flesh. ibid. Flesh taken for corrupt
Nature. Page 99 Why that is set forth by Flesh? Page 100 Flesh considered more
Generally. Page 99 Particularly. Page 101
The Philosophical notion of Flesh and Spirit. Page 105 What it is to walk
after the Flesh. Vide Walking. What the Flesh is by which the Law is made weak.
Page 263 Of Christ's being sent in Flesh; that opened. Page 375 He did not
bring his Flesh from Heaven. Page 376 Of the verity of his Flesh (against the
ancient Heretics). Page 377, 379, 380 That proved. ibid. How he was sent in
the likeness of sinful Flesh. Page 406, etc. And but in the likeness of sinful
Flesh. Page 410, etc. Of the excellency of Christ's Flesh. Page 417 He as sent
in Flesh is to be believed on. Page 424 Of Freedom from the Law of Sin. Vide
the Law of Sin. Freedom from its Guilt and from its Power. Page 150 Of Christ's
Fulfilling the Law. Vide Law.
G.
The eternal Generation of Christ the Son of God, proved. Page 324, etc. The
difference between that and common Generation. Page 356 Its mysteriousness.
Page 354 Of the excellency of the Gospel and Christian Religion. Page 415 The
Privileges of Believers under the Gospel above those under the Law. Page 450
Grace set forth by Spirit, and the Reasons why it is so. Page 104, etc. There
should be in Saints a Growth in Spiritualness. Page 137 Of the Spirits being a
Guide. Page 108 Whether Christ took our very Guilt upon him? Affirmed. Page 490
H.
Heaven made credible upon Christ's Incarnation. Page 447 Holiness pressed from
Union with Christ. Page 75 From being made free from the Law of Sin. Page 225
From the Incarnation of Christ. Page 437 The Holiness and sinlesness of
Christ's Humane Nature. Page 411 The necessity thereof. Page 414 The difference
of the Humane Nature as in Christ and as in us. Page 386 Of the advancement of
the Humane Nature by Christ's assuming it. Page 451 Christ to be highly
Honored. It Is shown wherein. Page 363 Humiliation the way to Consolation. Page
5, 6 Saints to be humbled, that they were so long under the Law of sin, and
that sin still has such a power in them. Page 217, etc. As also that there
should be that Flesh in them by which God's own Law is made weak. Page 271
Humility pressed from Christ's taking our Nature. Page 437 Of the Hypostatical
Union. Vide Union.
I.
About the Idem and the Tantundem With respect to Christ's Sufferings. Page 489
To his Active Obedience. Page 608, etc.
Of the Imputation of Christ's Active Obedience. Vide Obedience. How the
imputation thereof is to be stated. Vide ibid. The Incarnation of Christ
largely discoursed of. Page 372, etc. His Mission and his Incarnation two
distinct things. Page 376 The Latter not impossible, not incredible. Page 386
The Grounds laid down why Christ was Incarnate. Page 387, etc. Prophesies and
Types of it. ibid. Seven Propositions insisted upon for the explication of it.
Page 393, etc. What benefit had they by Christ who lived before his
Incarnation? Page 397, Why he was Incarnate just at that time when he was
incarnate? Page 398 A firm Assent is to be given to the Verity of Christ's
Incarnation; as also a firm Adherence to him as incarnate Page 420, etc. Many
other Duties urged from this Incarnation. Page 426, etc. As also the Comfort of
it. to Believers is set forth in several Particulars. Page 441, etc. Whether if
Man had not sinned Christ had been incarnate? Neg. Page 406 Of Inclinations
Good or Evil, and their difference in the Godly and Others. Page 110 The
severity of God's Justice in Christ's being a Sacrifice. Page 543 The Law
unable to Justify. Page 266 Whether there be two distinct integral parts of
Justification? Page 602 In the Justifying of Sinners God proceeds upon the
fulfilling of the Laws righteousness. Page 610 As to Christ we are justified by
Works, as to our selves by Faith. Page 610
L.
Law of Sin, what it is. Page 151 What the Law of the Spirit is. Page 159 All
Unregenerate persons under the Law of Sin. Page 169, etc. How Sin is a Law;
opened in the proper and improper notion of a Law. Page 172, etc. Wherein Sin
acts as a Law. Page 177 How it may be known, when it is the Law of sin; That
particularly opened. Page 179, etc. All the Regenerate are freed from the Law
of Sin. Page 154, 203, etc. They are freed from Sin only as it is a Law. Page
149, 203, 206 Their freedom from the Law of Sin proved from Scripture and
Argument. Page 207, etc. How f^r men may go and yet not be freed from the Law
of Sin. Page 210 A serious Exhortation to all to get free from it. Page 214,
etc. One Direction given in order to it. Page 217 What is incumbent upon those
who are made free from the Law of Sin? Page 217, etc. Comfort to such. Page
225, etc. Of the Law as weakened by the Flesh. Of what Law does the Apostle
speak Page 259 How it is said to be weak. Page 263 Wherein it is weak. Page 260,
266, 267 Grounds or Demonstrations of its weakness. Page 268 Yet the Law is
holy and good, and (...) disparaged by this. Page 272, etc. Nor to be cast off
as useless. Page 274 Nor is it altogether weak in other respects. Page 275
There Is no looking for Justification or Righteousness by the Law. Page 276,
etc. Of the Law as Christ fulfilled the righteousness thereof. Page 567 Which
is to be understood of the Moral Law. ibid. Of the Righteousness of that Law.
Page 569 In what respects Christ is said to fulfill it. Page 570, 584. How the
Laws Righteousness is fulfilled in Believers? Four Opinions about it. Page 572,
etc. Christ was made under the Law: opened in Five things. Page 579 Whether the
Law required both Suffering and Doing too? Page 600 Of the Honor that God had
for his Law. Page 611 All to get an interest in Christ's fulfilling the Law.
Page 612 Believers themselves to go as for as ever they can in the fulfilling
of the Law. Page 613 The admirable Love of Christ in being willing to be made
under the Law. Page 616. The Comfort that res^^ts from thence to Believers.
ibid. Christ has fulfilled the Moral Law, but we our selves must fulfill the
Evangelical Law. Page 615 Saints being made free from the Law of Sin, must
stand fast in their Liberty. Page 219 And walk suitably to it. Page 225 Also be
very thankful for it. ibid. Christ to be loved greatly for his readiness to
come when he was sent. Page 306 The Love of the Father in sending Christ. Page
366 Of Lust (or Lusts) the most natural act of the Flesh. Page 101, etc. Lusts
distinguished Page 102, 121
M.
Of Christ's Manhood. Page 375 He was a real Man. Page 377 Had a Soul and Body
as we have. Page 383 Yea he submited to all our sinless Infirmities. Page 385
The excellency of Christ's Manhood. Page 419 Marks and Signs grounded upon
Sanctification not to be neglected under the Gospel. Page 115 Our Sin the
Meritorious Cause of all Christ's Sufferings. Page 467 Whether there be a
Medium betwixt not guilty and righteous? Page 601 Of Christ's Mission. V.
Sending. The Misery of all out of Christ. Page 25 The Moral Law as given to
Israel not only a Covenant of Works. Page 260
N.
The two Natures in Christ united but not confounded, nor converted. Page 403
Negative Promises carry a great Emphasis. Page 16 Negatives in Religion not
sufficient. Page 94
O.
Of Christ's Obedience (Active and Passive). Page 570 His Obedience imputed to
us. Page 576 He being bound to obey, how does his Obedience become imputable to
us or meritorious for us? That cleared up in Three things. Page 582 Whether his
Active as well as his Passive Obedience is imputed? Four Opinions about it.
Page 585, etc. Arguments to prove its imputation. Page 588, etc. Whether it be
imputed as done in our stead? Aff. Page 595 Arguments to prove it. Page 596,
etc. Ten Objections against both answered. Page 598, etc. Though Christ obeyed
yet we also are bound to obey. Page 606 The Opposition which Sin makes to what
is good. Page 178.
P.
Against PAPISTS it is proved That in all in this life there is that which
deserves Condemnation. Page 8 That inherent Righteousness is not the proper
Cause of Justification. Page 145 That their granting of Christ's being come in
the Flesh, does not acquit their Supreme Head from being Antichrist. Page 421
That no man in this Life does, or can personally and perfectly fulfill the Law.
Page 572 That their Calumnies against Protestants, as if they were against
Inherent Righteousness and Good Works are false and groundless. Page 116 That
their Humane Satisfactions are vain and groundless. Page 523 That the Lords
Supper is not a Sacrifice but a commemoration only of Christ's Sacrifice. Page
528, etc.
Pardon of Sin plenary. Page 14 Persevenrance inferred from Union with Christ.
Page 83 Of the different Principles by which men are acted. Page 105 The Spirit
the Principle in the Regenerate. Page 107 Sin the Principle which acts the
Unregenerate. Page 175, 176 All the Promises sealed by Christ's taking Flesh.
Page 443 When Propensions to sin are entire it is the Law of Sin. Page 180
Protestants Vindicated. Page 116 The people of God are liable to Punishment for
sin. Page 7 But not under the notion of Satisfaction or in a vindictive way.
Page 524
R.
Christ's fitness to be a Redeemer. Opened in some Particulars. Page 299, etc.
The Work of Redemption a great Work. Page 352 All Believers have an equal share
in Remission. Page 15 Remission of Sin not the fulfilling of the Law. Page 577
Of the Necessity and Efficacy of Renewing Grace. Page 200 Also of the necessity
and mighty power of Restraining Grace. Page 197 Resurrection sure from our
Union with Christ. Page 82 Also from Christ's Incarnation. Page 446 The Laws
Righteousness. Page 569
S.
Christ a real, proper Sacrifice for sin: proved. Page 471 All the old
Sacrifices Types of Christ the great Sacrifice Page 472 They received all their
virtue from him. Page 473 They all began and ended with him Page 478 Six Things
in the Levitical Sacrifices: all which are answerably to be found in Christ.
Page 476 Christ a propitiatory and expiatory Sacrifice. Page 478 Four Heads
(much enlarged upon) to prove Christ to be such a Sacrifice. Page 481 Of
Atonement and Expiation (and the true notion thereof) by his Sacrifice,
according to what was done by the Jewish Sacrifices. Page 494, etc. to 502,
etc. Christ was a Sacrifice when he died upon the Cross. That proved. Page 504,
etc. Of the Nature and Extent of the Expiation of Sin by Christ's Sacrifice.
Page 508, etc. The excellency of Christ's Priesthood and Sacrifice. Page 539
Duties incumbent upon us in reference to this. Page 544, etc. The Comforts
which flow from it to Believers. Page 560, etc. Whether the old Sacrifices were
merely typical? Page 474 The Division and Distinction of the Jewish Sacrifices.
Page 479 Whether they did expiate all sin? opened. Page 511 Of the Gentile
Sacrifices and their notions in them. Page 502, etc. Evangelical Sacrifices now
to be offered up by Christians. Page 558 Salvation under the Law and
Condemnation under the Gospel. Page 14 The truth of Christ's Satisfaction
proved. Page 515 The Vanity of Humane Satisfactions. Page 523, etc. Of the
Sending of Christ. Page 282, etc. When the case of Sinners as to the Law was
desperate, Christ was sent. Page 282 God the Father sent him. Page 283 Christ
came not till sent. Page 288 What this sending of Christ was not. Page 289 What
it was: opened in Five things. Page 290 How this was consistent with his
equality with his Father, explained. Page 294 The Grounds of Christ's being
sent. Page 296 The Love of Father and Son to be adored upon this. Page 302,
etc. All are to go when they are sent, not before Page 307 None to rest in the
external sending of Christ. Page 309 Christ as sent to be believed on. Page 310
Comforts from Christ's being sent. Page 313 None free from Sin here. Page 8 Sin
a vile and base thing. Page 190 The Tyranny of it. Page 192 Its advantages
against us. Page 232 It has not barely a Being but too great a power even in
the Regenerate. Page 203 The special and most prevailing Sin must be most
resisted. Page 222 Christ's Death the highest Demonstration of the Evil of Sin.
Page 541 What the Condemning of Sin is. Page 460 Of the breaking of the Heart
for and from Sin upon Christ's being a Sacrifice. Page 546 SOCINIANS dealt
with, and these great Truths made good against them: 1. That Christ did
praeexist before he was born of the Virgin. Page 284 2. That Christ was the Son
of God, not in respect of the things which they allege (Seven of which are
instanced in and largely refuted), but in respect of his eternal Generation.
Page 323, etc. 3. That he who was antecedently the Son of God was in time made
the Son of Man (or was incarnate). Page 393, etc. 4. That Christ was a true and
proper Expiatory Sacrifice; and the true notion of his Expiation is made good
against them. Page 481, etc. 5. That he made Satisfaction to the Justice of God.
Page 515 6. The principal Ends of Christ's Death are asserted, and their Ends
thereof proved not to be the principal. Page 517, etc. 7. That Christ is truly
and Essentially God. Page 349
Sons of God by Creation, by Grace, by Nature. Page 321 Christ God's Son. Page
319 Scripture attestations of it. Page 319, etc. Christ God's own Son. Page 321
That opened Comparatively and Absolutely. ibid. His b^ing the Natural Son of
God, Coequal, Co-essential, Coeternal with the Father, begotten of him by
eternal Generation, is explained, proved, and largely vindicated against
Opposers. Page 323, etc. He is not God's own Son partly in respect of eternal
Generation, and partly in respect of his miraculous Conception etc. Page 345,
etc. Of the different communications of the Divine Essence from the Father to
the Son and to the Spirit. Page 348 Christ's Godhead inferred from his Sonship.
Page 349 How Christ's Sonship is to be studied. Page 354, etc. All are to
believe Christ to be the Son of God, and to believe on him as such. Page 358
How he is to be Honored as the Son of God. Page 363 What Comfort does arise
from Christ's Sonship. Page 368 How the Spirit is the Spirit of Life. Page 162
How it is said to be in Christ Jesus. Page 161 He is the Spirit of Life
Formally. Page 162 Effectively. Page 163, etc.
What is meant by the Law of the Spirit. Page 158 His making free from the Law
of Sin, opened. Page 228 Of the Necessity, Sufficiency, Efficacy of the Spirits
Power and Operation in that. Page 230, etc. The Spirit the sole Efficient
therein* Page 243 How he secures against the Law of Sin after Conversion. Page
240 Deliverance from Sins power is to be expected from this Spirit, and to be
ascribed to him. Page 244, etc. Of the Spirits greatness and glory. Page 241 He
is greatly to be honored. Page 247 How the Spirit may be obtained. Page 70 The
Spirit taken Personally and Habitually. Page 104 What it is to Walk after the
Spirit. Vide Walking. Of Christ's Substituting himself in the Sinners stead.
Page 483 The true Nature and Ends of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Page
528, etc. Christ sympathizes with his Members. Page 80
T.
The Tabernacle a Type of Christ's Body. Page 389 Of the Distinction of the
Persons in the Sacred Trinity. Page ^87 Great relief under Troubles of Co^^ence
from Christ's Incarnation. Page 513
U.
How Sin reigns in the Understanding. Page 181 How the Spirit works on the
Understanding in order to freeing from the Law of Sin. Page 236 Of the Union Of
Three Persons in one Nature. Of two Natures in one Person. Of Persons where yet
both Natures and Persons are distinct. Page 44
Of the Hypostatical Union. Page 399 Of the Sublimeness and Mysteriousness of
it. Page 400 Opened in Four things. Page 401, etc. The Mystical Union opened.
Page 42, etc. That also is a great Mystery. Page 43 Of the threefold Union
'twixt Christ and Believers, Mystical Page 48 Legal Page 48 Moral Page 48
The Bonds of the former, the Spirit and Faith. Page 49 Several
Scripture-Resemblances by which it is set forth. Page 52, etc. Six Properties of
it. Page 54, etc. How Persons may know whether they be under it. Page 60 Of
Natural and Spiritual Union with Christ. ibid. Of External or Common and
Internal or Special Union. Page 61 Sinners exhorted to labor after this Union.
Page 68 How it may be attained. Page 70
Without Union no Communion. Page 69 Several Duties urged upon such who are
united to Christ. Page 72, etc. Several Comforts directed to such. Page 78,
etc. The Mystical Union made credible by Christ's Incarnation. Page 444
W.
Of Walking not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. Page 88 Why the Apostle
pitches upon this Evidence. Page 90 Spiritual Walking not the Cause of the
Privilege, but the Property of the Person to whom it belongs. Page 93 The
contrariety of the Two Walkings. Page 95 Men must be in Christ before they can
live the Spiritual Life. Page 96 There always was and always will be
different Walkers. ibid. What it is to Walk after the Flesh: opened. Page 97,
103, etc. Walking in the Flesh taken in a good sense. Page 98 Of the more gross
and the more close Walking after the Flesh. Page 120 Men dehorted from Fleshly
Walking. Page 121, etc. The Dehortation enforced with diverse Motives. Page
122, etc. Directions in order to it. page 129, etc. What it is to Walk after
the Spirit. Page 104, 106 Opened by the Spiritualness of the Principle Page
106, etc. Guide Page 106, etc. Affections Page 106, etc. Propensions Page 106,
etc. Ends Page 106, etc. All in Christ thus Walk. Proved. Page 112 This Walking
Excellent Page 132, etc. Pleasant Page 132, etc. Saving. Page 132, etc.
Spiritual Walkers are To be very thankful. Page 136 To be yet more Spiritual.
Page 137 To take the Comfort of it. Some Discouragements about it removed. Page
139
The Will is the principal Seat of Sins Power. Page 181 How the Spirit works
upon the Will efficaciously, yet without the infringing of its Liberty. Page
238
Reader:
In the drawing up of this Index many things occasionally spoken unto have
slipped me; but thou will find them under those main Heads which I chiefly
insist upon, to each of which thou art here directed.

FINIS.

