THE STRANGE and WONDERFUL VISIONS AND PREDICTIONS OF WILLIAM JUNIPER Of
Gosfield in Essex, Relating to the Troubles of ENGLAND, As they were by him
delivered to Dr. JOHN GAUDEN then at BOCKING. AND NOW LORD BISHOP OF EXON.

LONDON Printed for J. Davies, and are to be sold ^y Simon Miller at the Star
in St. Paul's Churchyard 1662.

The strange Dreams and Predictions of William Juniper of Gosfield in Essex,
relating to the after Troubles of England, as he related them to Dr. Gauden, at
Bocking.
ALthough I am far from that vulgar Credulity, or prophetic Itch, to which
the Learned Earl of Northampton, and Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Viscount Verulam,
with others observe, the English humor is very subject, but have rather a
regardlesse diffidence of those Fancifull toys, as things commonly rising,
either from the distempered fancies, or popular artifices of some people, who
love to make themselves appear somebody by amusing others; and also having no
great reputation at stake, do easily put the veracity of their fore-tellings
upon the contingency and hazard of such future events, in which they know there
can be no great variety or odds; all things, (by an even-lay) falling out
either contrary to, or consonant with that tenor, which they venture to
foretell, and wherein they can forfeit little of their credit, though they
fail; especially if they have the old art of Oracles to wrap up the mysteries
of their conceptions in such Generalities, Obscurities, and Ambiguitie of
words, which like pleited Pictures shall have several aspects or
representations, according to the several stations of spectators:

. Yet having had opportunity more exactly to know the person, and to receive an
immediate account of himself, who died Three or Four years before the happy
event verifyed some of his late predictions, I think it not amiss by way of
diversion to give even the graver and more serious world (upon the occasion of
my publishing those papers written in the darkness and horror of those times)
some account of what I know in those particulars, and with which I was
beforehand acquainted in the worst of Times and Things; not that I then much
valued them, but yet I did not wholly disregard them; but having made diligent
enquiry of them, I then laid them up in my Memory, and for fear of mistake, I
presently wrote them down in my Memorialls, soon after I had received a
punctual information of them, from his own Mouth.

. There are two things which give some repute to that that goes under the
notion of Prophecy or Prediction; First, The credit of the Person foretelling;
Secondly, The accomplishment of what was foretold. The Validity of both these I
shall with all Fidelity and Impartiality present to the Readers, having no
design herein, but to let them see in a true Glass, what my self have not a
little wondered at, since I have lived by the Mercy of God to see those things
accomplished, which were then so improbable, when I first heard them; England
being then buried in such a Chaos of Confusion, and oppressed with such a
Tyrannous and vigilant power, as required a great faith to expect any blessed
Reformation of Church and Kingdom; which was not to be relieved indeed by any
ordinary power and humane counsel, but only by divine Wisdom and Omnipotent
Mercy.

. For the credit of the person, William Juniper, ^^ Gosfield, I knew him many
years, while I lived at Bocking; he dwelling at Gosfield a mile from me, and
often working in his Trade as a Bricklayer, at Squire Wentworths House, the Lord
of Bocking my next Neighbor; who would sometimes tell me merrily, that Goodman
Juniper had strange Fancies, Dreams and Visions, but withal that he was a very
honest man.

I took little notice of the Man, or his Fancies, supposing him to be but a
weak and crazy minded Man, whose simplicity and Honesty were the best Apology
for all he said; possibly without fraud or affectation, but mixed with some
Fatuity.

After some years, now full of trouble and terror, when the new Modelled Army
had showed the King, the two Houses, their own Associates, and all the world,
what Soldiers, and Saints, what Preachers, and Princes they would be, by
levelling all things in Church and State, to a Democracy, Stratocracy and
Anarchy; about the year (as I remember 1649.) in the spring time Juniper comes,
one morning betimes to my House, very importune to speak with me; being told by
my servants, that I was not yet risen, he desired he might have access to my
Chamber, which I permitted him, (looking upon him as a very harmless poor
man) when he was come to my Chamber door, he told me (after the usual civility
of a good morrow) that he was that night commanded to come to me, and to
signify to me what I should Preach, Holiness to the Lord, Holiness to the
Lord, Holiness to the Lord; which he repeated three times with an Emphasis;
and so took his leave; hastening though a wet morning to go to Four or Five
other neighbor Ministers, and sound the same Alarm to them.

This sudden and odd access of Juniper, confirmed me in the thoughts, that he
was a little crazy; full of Fancies, and more to be pitied, than regarded.

Afterward as our English Affairs grew perplexed, deplored and desperate, my
Neighbor Mr. Wentworth, would now and then intimate to me what strange
confidences Juniper had of a Revolution and Restoration of the Church and
Kingdom. How he had foreseen and foretold many Calamities which were come to
pass, etc. Yet nothing could so weigh with me as to give Juniper any occasion
to think that I had the least consideration or confidence of his Dreams,
Visions, and Predictions.

Yet at last hearing from diverse hands many strange expressions of his,
referring to the public; I sent for him one day, as desirous alone and at
leisure to speak with him, and to see whether the man had such defects or
darknings of reason, as might wholly impute his Fancies to a crazy brain, or
melancholy dotage; or whether there were any thing extraordinary and
remarkable in him.

. He very Officiously came in a fair Summers morning to my house, and walking
with him alone in the very pleasant walks of my Garden, I told him, that I had
heard many strange things relating to our times, which were Fathered on him; I
seriously conjured him as in Gods sight to tell me the truth of things; I told
him he could not be ignorant how great a sin a lie was, especially when being
forged in a man's own heart and imagination, he should impute it to God, as a
Revelation, Vision, or prediction.

. The good man (now above Sixty years old) of a very comely and honest aspect,
with great plainness of Speech, gave me thanks for my favor to him, that I
would vouchsafe to speak with him, and to admonish him of that duty in
truth-speaking, which he owed to God, to his own Soul, and to all Men;
professed to me he would not speak any thing but what was represented to him as
true; For Sir, said he, I fear God, to whom I must give account of my words,
etc.

Having thus sounded the sincerity of the Good Man, and finding him a true
Nathaniel, not only with out any feining, guilt or affectation, but so serious
and conscientious, so knowing in the Scriptures, so judicious in his Religion,
so steady in his Judgment, so discreet in his Expressions, and so pious in his
Conversation; I had then a further curiosity to see the bottom of his business;
and entreated him to tell me, since what time he had perceived any of these
impresions on his spirit or fancy, or what he thought of them? how they were
upon review presented to him? whether he had them Waking or Sleeping, etc.

. The good man with great Veneration of God, and more respect to me than I
could deserve; assuring me again of the truth of what he should relate to me,
thus began;

. Sir, The experiments I have had of these impressions at sundry times upon my
mind in the night have been both sleeping and waking, or as it were between
both; I suppose they begin in my sleep, and when I am assuredly awake, they do
still continue with so quick and clear representations to me, that I cannot
well distinguish the difference of them, as to my imagination; either sleeping
or waking: They are always so exactly the same in my mind and memory; they
make so deep impressions on me, that I never forget them. All particulars are
still the same before me, as they first appeared.

. I asked him what was the first instance in this kind which made him take
notice of such Fancies beyond ordinary Dreams? This he told me was thus; I had
been married (Sir) Seven years and had no Child (a blessing desirable to the
poor as well as the rich) for which I besought God with more then ordinary
earnestness of devotion; soon after I dreamed I had a Son, and saw the Child
in such a party colored Garment: according to the time of life (which was his
very words) the Lord gave me a Child by my Wife; who (unwillingly) made it is
first Coat of a stuff so colored, as I saw in my Dream; which seemed to me as
some special instance, that this Child was a gift of God in answer to my
prayers.

. After this the Troubles and Terrors of times coming on, to the ruin of our
Church and Kingdom, I was (quoth he) much afflicted in my soul to see the sad
dissentions raised between the King and the two Houses of Parliament; having
learned in the word of God, that the honor of true Christian Religion,
consists much in the patience and obedience of Subjects to their lawful Kings.
The War growing hot, and little hope of Peace, (my heart being full of Fears) I
had this Dream in the Night; Passing by such a Neighbors House to a Water-Mill
(which he named) and having two little Beagles following me, (a sport of foot
Hunting, which he had sometimes used in his younger days) there came out two
great Dogs, Full and Fat, which fell on my Beagles, and worried them
exceedingly; At which I was so moved, that to preserve them, I laid on as hard
as I could with this Quarter staff, (which was now in his hand as he used to
walk with it) upon the great Curs, but in vain; for they were so smooth and
fat, that no stroke would fix on them, to make them feel the smart; upon which
I called to the Miller, whose those Dogs were, and asked him, if he were not
ashamed to see his great Curs, thus abominably worry my two little Beagles; he
with indifferency, answered, it was no wonder; for (says he) my Dogs are
called Will and Power; upon this answer I was the more amazed, because I
bethought my self that my two Beagles were named Love and Obedience.

I interrupted him, Goodman Juniper, would you call any Dogs by those Names of
Love and Obedience: No (Sir) replied he, God forbid, but in my sleep they were
thus presented to me; as so named; the interpretation he easily made, according
as he thought the justice of the Causes and Merits of the parties would bear.
For he was a most Loyal Subject to his King, and a most Religious Son of the
Church of England, a lover of Truth and Peace.

. After this, (as he then told me) he had another Dream a good while before the
King was destroyed; in this manner, I was walking in such fields (naming them)
by the hedge side, over which as I sometimes looked, I saw a great company of
people as Soldiers, Horse and Foot in confused motions: while I got on the
higher ground to see more exactly what the matter was; I saw men flying this
and that way, many fallen and slain on the grounds, and amidst the Corpse, one
that lay higher than the rest by himself, with Robes or Garments about him very
goodly, as if he were some great personage or Prince, but besmeared with blood;
while I beheld with grief this spectacle, I saw a Woman in a rich mantle of
purple come riding amain to that dead Corpse, and casting her self upon it she
rent her mantle, tore her hair, and fell into a most bitter Lamentation, being
forsaken of all: This he told me seemed to him to represent the death of the
King and the Church of England, deploring it with such bitterness, as that
Tradegy deserved; which soon after came to pass.

After this (as he proceeded) the Year before King Charles the Seconds coming
to Worcester, I had another Dream; My thoughts I saw a goodly young Lion in a
large Field; the other Beasts, as Horses, Bulls, Bears, Asses, Wolfes, Dogs,
Hares, Foxes, Apes, with others, that followed him with such a perulant and
scornful importunity of gesture and noise, as that they would be gladly rid of
him; and showed they had reverence for him. The Lion marched away without
betraying any fear; but yet so, as he seemed not pleased with such rude
company: when he was quite gone out of sight, all the beasts gathered together
as in a round, and sitting down on their hinder parts, made their several
noises as loud as they could, bellowing or roaring, or braying, or howling, or
crying out in a kind of hideous triumph and joy, that they had thus driven the
Lion out of the Field, and forced him to hide himself from them. The event was
so evident an interpretation and completion of this prediction, as nothing
could be more easy and obvious to the good man, than to see how his thoughts
were adapted to those things, which he lived to see fulfilled.

. Soon after this, when an horrible darkness with all manner of licencious
confusion and tyrannous oppression, had covered the face of all things in
Church and State, (the glory of England in its established Religion and
excellent Laws, (which were formerly carried on by the ancient ways of
Government Regal and Episcopal,) being now quite departed;) in the same year.
He had another Dream or impression on his mind; which he related to me;

5. My thoughts I was in such a Church attending upon those holy Duties, which
I there expected (as indeed he was a very diligent and devout attendant upon
those services both on the Lords day and other occasions,) while I was looking
when Prayers should begin, and the Minister come, I saw of those, which were
gathered together (no very great Congregation,) some prating and talking, some
playing and toying, others rude and loud; I was in the Chancel, and being much
offended at this rudeness in the House of God, I lift up my self on a Seat to
see that there were no men of worship (that was his word) in the Church; when I
saw three or four (who seemed Gentlemen of some fashion,) I took the boldness
to call to them; Gentlemen, you seem men of worship, it is a shame to have this
rudeness and profannesse in the House of God, pray be pleased to command them
to leave: They looked carelessly on me, as not regarding what I said, nor
concerned to keep better order: I attended till the Minister came, hoping then
there would be silence and soberness: After I had long looked; me thoughts a
Minister came, as through an obscure and narrow passage of the wall, into a
very little Pulpit; when he there appeared, there was no regard had, but the
former noise, and rudeness continued; which gave me so great an offense, that
again I called aloud as before, for regard to be had to the House and worship
of God; But in vain: The Minister could not be heard, nor at last could I see
him, a thick mist of darkness, as smoke coming between him and the people,
which hid the Father from the eye of the Congregation; this was to my great
grief: Afterward walking softly into the Churchyard as weary of this
fruitless attendance, me thoughts, I saw a kind of grass which is called
penny grass, all withered in the ground, where it had flourished before in
great plenty.

This Prediction he lived to see fullfilled, in those persecutions which were
severely carried on by potent factions against all the constitutions of the
Church of England, the insolences daily used in Churches, and in the Mechanic
Usurpation of the Pulpit, and in the contempt generally brought on all decent
and orderly Religion, by those whose designs were to be advanced only by
Schism, Faction, Falsity and Confusion.

6. To all these he added, at that time, which was Five or Six years at least
before the Kings happy restoration; this last Vision or Dream, which he thus
told me: Me thought (said he) I was in such a large Field, and looking about
me, I saw from the East a very goodly Lion coming at a stately pace; on the
West I saw all sorts of Beasts coming toward him, with all reverent and lowly
behavior, crouching and fawning. The Lion advanced till he came into the midst
of the Field, and the highest place of it, there he sat down on his hinder
part with such Majesty, as seemed to keep all the Beasts in aw; they came in
very lowly manner toward him, prostrating themselves, and at last they lay on
the ground quietly round about him, but at a good distance; The Lion using no
revenge upon any of them, sat composed in great state and quiet.

I said, Goodman Juniper, this seems to import the Kings peaceable and happy
Return again to his Kingdoms, and that we may live to see all people subject to
him. He replied, Sir, I nothing doubt of that; God will certainly Restore his
Majesty, and subdue all his enemies; though I may not live to see it, yet your
Worship may: Thus he; Then professing, by many words, his sincere and unfeined
truth in relating these things, as they were evidently at several times and
years represented to him, and so vehemently impressed on his mind, that he
still remembered the circumstances of persons, time and place; this house, that
field, and this tree, which seemed to attend his Dream. He assured me, that he
did not delight to tell these things, as having any boast in them; nor did he
usually do it, but sparingly to some sober friends, as occasion offered and
they desired. But he had seen the verifying of some things, and this made him
the less doubt that the others would be fulfilled in God's due time, which he
heartily prayed; That so the King and Church, or Religion and Laws, Peace and
Piety might be again restored to England.

. After this Discourse we parted, and I never spoke more with him; for he died
within one year or thereabouts. I having this immediate relation from him, and
finding him, as of a very sober and settled mind, so very constant, exact and
conscientious, in what he said or did: that he was a plain man, of no great
fancy, reach or invention; of no vapor, flash or ostentation, but pious,
honest and prudent: I presently after his departure from me, set down in
writing (as is formerly touched) the sum and main of what he told me; and which
I have now (to my best remembrance) imparted to the world; not under the
Authentic Authority of any Spirit of Prophecy, but only as offering these
things to sober and wise men, who can better judge, of proportions between the
Predictions and their accomplishments, neither of which are to be so lightly
considered, as not to acknowledge something strange in such a series or
succession of appearances so distinctly represented; in such very apt Figures,
or ingenious Emblems, and these followed with such suitable Events; nor was
either the humor of the man to be suspected, being so plain Hearted and
Religious, nor yet his condition to be despised, being a very good Christian,
living comfortably by his calling as one that feared God with all his heart; a
man of a strickt and holy Life, without any tincture of Faction or Schism, a
Lover of Truth, Holiness, Order and Peace. I confess I so much valued his
words, after I had thus personally confirred with him, that I have often told
them to others long before the dawning of his Majesty's return: so I did
believe and do, that there might be something of a Diviner stroke or Beam
sometime upon the good man's devout soul, whose heart and ways were so upright
before God, and so inoffensive before men.

. It Is true, I have heard and read as in Neptredane and others, many things
relating to the former Tragedies of our times, as portends presages or
Predictions, and some of them from persons of good credit, which forbids me to
despise them wholly, though I do not much dote upon them.

. I know all Histories ancient and late, Divine, and Humane, Ecclesiastical
and Civil are full of such like series of Divinations and Dreams, Previsions
and Predictions, as in those which Sir Henry Wotton's Father had with many
others, to which the private and public events have often corresponded; from
what genius or temper of spirit, of body, or mind they arise; whether from a
presaging power, native in the rational soul, which may sometimes if rightly
disposed and cleared as it were through little cranies or crevises, look
forward, and foresee things to come beyond its senses: or whether there be such
a ( spiritus mundi) general correspondency or conspiring of that one harmonious
spirit, which is in all things under the Sun, that by some consent, or secret
sympathies, it so affects some men's minds and fancies, who are tuned and fitted
for such special impressions, that they have some sense of things to come,
while yet their nearer causes are wrapped up and undisclosed: Or lastly,
whether the wise and blessed God may not be pleased sometime to grant some such
special indulgence to some men, as to St. Paul in a dark night and dismal
storm, especially in cases where providential Riddles seem so contradictory to
the rules of right reason and justice, to Morality and Religion, where the
scandal of men's actions, pretending to godliness, is exceeding great; where
their hypocrisies are most impudent, cruel and oppressive (as in Athauasius his
speech of Julian the Apostate, Nubecula cito transibit, that he was but a cloud
which should soon vanish.) Lastly, where even such as fear God, are prone to be
grieved and perplexed at the long prosperity of wicked men; (who speaking lies
in hypocrisy, seek to make God the Patron and Protector of their sins,) I will
not determine any thing: only this I am confident of; That there was nothing of
falsity, vanity, affectation, or ostentation in this Good man: Nor were the
impressions upon his fancy transient and volatile, as is usual in Dreams, which
soon lose themselves, and vanish without any retriving, but these were still
pregnant and constant, the same in their quick representation, not impertinent,
as to the aspect of our Affairs, nor yet extravagant, or unapt as to the
Schemes or Emblems, and appearance of them; which made me think them not wholly
unworthy my notice of them, nor of my communicating them upon this occasion to
others; who may if they are wise, make a good use of them; if they are vain and
foolish people, these will not much add to or detract from that folly, which is
most predominant in them. This is certain, there is no effect but has it is
cause, though nothing be more uncertain than to assign the Genuine and proper
causes of things, especially such as are under no regular method and course of
elementary nature; but fall under that infinite variety, which befalls the soul
of man in its motions Sensible, Fancyfull, Rational and Religious; Among which
none have more in all Ages amused the world, than those which have been in the
way of Dreams, concerning which who so desires to be satisfied, shall do well
to read those Authors Ancient and Modern, who have made the best calculations
of them. This is sure, nothing is less to be seriously regarded by wise men,
than Dreams, which are as pebles on the Sea shore, of various forms and
colors, none like another; yet among these sometimes there may be found one or
two that are very splendid and precious stones, no way to be undervalued or
lightly cast away: and such it may be these were, and will by others as well as
my self, be esteemed.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed and Sold at the Star in St. Paul's Church yard.
1. THe Reconciler of the Bible enlarged wherein above 3000 seeming
Contradictions throughout the Old and New Testament are fully and plainly
Reconciled; Useful for all those that desire to understand the Sacred
Scriptures aright unto Salvation: in Folio.

2. A New Book of Loyal English Martyrs and Confessors, who have endured the
Pains and Terrors of Death for the Maintenance of the Just and Legal Government
of these Kingdoms both in Church and State.

FINIS.

