THE REFLECTIONS Of the Reverend and Learned Monsieur Iurieu, Upon the strange
and Miraculous Exstasies of ISABEL VINCENT, THE Shepherdess of SAOV in
Dauphine; WHO Ever since February last has Sung Psalms, Prayed, Preached, and
Prophesied about the Present Times, in Her TRANCES.

AS ALSO Upon the Wonderful and Portentous TRUMPETINGS and SINGING of Psalms,
that were heard by Thousands in the Air (in many Parts of France) in the Year
1686: Taken out of the PASTORAL LETTERS of the 1st and 15th of October last.

To which is added, A LETTER of a Gentleman in Dauphine, to a Friend of His in
Geneva; Containing the Discourses and Prophesies of the Shepherdess.

All Faithfully Translated out of the French Copies, for Public Information.

Discite Justitiam moniti, and non temrere Dives. LONDON, Printed for Richard
Baldwin in the Old Bailey, 1689.

REFLECTIONS Upon the MIRACLE Happened in the Person of A Shepherdess of
Dauphine. MADE By the Reverend and Learned Mons. Jurieu, IN HIS PASTORAL LETTER
Of the 1st of October, Anno 1688.
YOU may perhaps think it very strange, my Brethren, that being accustomed to
entertain you with all such extraordinary Matters as relate to Religion, we
have not yet acquainted you with what has happened in Dauphine; where GOD (for
so many Months past) has made use of the Ministry of a simple Shepherdess that
can neither Write nor Read, (a Child of about Fifteen or Sixteen years of Age)
to declare his Marvels, and to publish his Truth. The occasion of our so long
Silence, has been the Time and Care we have taken to be fully informed of the
Reality of the Fact, that so we might not build our Reflections upon false
Grounds. After all the Assurances imaginable, we have found the Matter of Fact
in short to be thus:

She is but a young Girl of about Fifteen or Sixteen years of Age; her Name is
Isabel Vincent, a Country-mans Daughter near Saou, within two Leagues of Cret
in Dauphine, by Profession a Shepherdess, dwelling with her Uncle, having been
born of a Father, who (several years before the Revocation of the Edict of
Nantes) had left his Religion in consideration of Money: She fell into an
Exstasy upon the Twelfth Day of this present February. Her Exstasy did not seem
at first to be any thing else, but a sort of Apoplexy, or Natural Lethargy;
into which she fell without any appearance of a violent Motion. She returned
out of it again after having been in it some hours, her Health not being in the
least impaired by it. In this first Fit, she neither said nor did any thing
extraordinary. Upon the following Night, which was that of the Second or Third
of February, she fell again into those Fits, that have held her ever since that
time. They did not seem to be any thing but a kind of a profound Sleep, out of
which it was not possible to fetch her: They pulled her, they thrust her, they
called her, they p^t her till the Blood came, they pincht her, they burnt her,
yet nothing would awake her: So that she was in an entire and absolute
Privation of all Sense; which is the true Character of an Exstasy. In this
Condition she spoke, and uttered many Excellent and Divine Matters. She can
neither Write nor Read: She never had learnt any other Prayer in her life, but
her Pater Noster and Credo: She could speak no other Language, but the Vulgar
one of her own Country, which has nothing of French in it. The first Five
Weeks she spoke (during the time of her Ecstasies) no other Language, but that
of her own Country* because she had no other Auditors but the Country People of
her own Village: For by all the Relations that we have seen it is apparent that
she speaks according to her Hearers. After these first Five Weeks, the Noise of
this Miracle being spread abroad, there came People that could Speak and
Understand French: Then she fell a speaking of French, and that in as an exact
and correct a Dialect, as if she had been brought up at Paris, and that in one
of the Families where they speak French best. The Subject of her Discourses is
always about Religion, and therein she uses to follow very near the Order and
Manner of Our Divine Service; and tho she never in her life learnt one Psalm,
nor over understood one Tune, yet notwithstanding this, she Sings them without
missing one Syllable or on Note: yea, she Sings them very sweetly, and
agreeably too; and for the most part quite thorough. And here it is that she
ordinarily begins. After this she makes Prayers, which are very admirable and
excellent ones. Oftentimes she names certain Texts of Scripture, which she
takes for the Subject of her Discourses. She explains them, and speaks upon
them, and that not after the manner of Preachers, or in a set Method; but in a
manner very singular, and always full of good Sense; and it being out of the
ordinary Rules of Method, it gives the greater Character of Divinity to what
she says: For we do not find, that Inspired Persons use to follow. Human
Methods in their Discourses Her Expressions are always very vigorous and
touching. She is quick in her Reprehensions, which she Addresses above all
others, to such as through Baseness have changed their Religion for Interest,
and so have sold their Souls for Money. She very often Addresses her self to
the CONVERTERS (as they call them) calling them Merchants and Truckers for
Souls She endeavors to make them see the Foulness of their Conduct, and of the
Means they use to make their Conversions by. If there be any one among her
Auditors that is found to be distinguished by any Baseness of this kind, she
never fails to direct her Discourse to him. Her own Father confessed, That
coming one Night into her Chamber, she cried out aloud, as he was coming in,
without ever seeing him, That they would take away that Wretched Judas, who had
sold Jesus Christ for Money. Sometimes she handles the Controversies betwixt Us
and the Papists, and she handles them with a great deal of strength, tho
without any Method; and with Reasonings (as it were) broken and unjoyned, but
such as are always very Just, and principally by applying several Passages out
of the Holy Scriptures. After having Encountered against the Sacrifice of the
Mass, she concluded one day with these Words; In one word, There can be no
Sacrifice, where there is no Remission of Sin. Another time she would condemn
the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, by such Texts of Scripture as appoint the
Worshipping of One GOD only. Sometimes she repeats a part of the Mass, or of
the Office in Latin; and the refutes it, by showing the Abominations contained
in it. She Pronounces the Latin she speaks very truly, and very intelligibly.
Her Motions in Delivery are not at all violent, neither does she use any strong
agitation of her Body: She puts her Arms out of Bed, and with them forms
certain graceful and well-ordered Gestures. Her Voice is clear and
intelligible; but without any Affectation: She moves her Lips, but it is but
slowly, and without any appearance of a Convulsion. There have been some
Physicians to View and Examine her in this Condition; but they could observe
nothing in her that savoured of any Sickness or Bodily Infirmity. Among the
many Menaces, which she makes against the Wicked, she mixes also Promises to
the Faithful and to such as shall Repent. And her Promises are not only General
and indeterminate ones; but it is very certain, that she has made some very
particular Predictions also. But as the Wise men of that Country do not think
it proper at present to say any thing of her Predictions, I shall say nothing
neither This much is most certain, That she has promised the Church a very
sudden Deliverance. When she is come out of her Exstasies, she remembers
nothing at all of what has passed, nor of what her Self has said. She
affirms, That she has slept very well, and seems not at all Tired after having
talked sometimes three, four and five Hours together: For her Fits are of no
less continuance. True it is that she speaks but by fits all this time, and her
Discourses are not always connected. And although the Motions and Actions,
which the Holy Spirit of God causes in her, make not any impression on her
Imagination and Memory (since she remembers nothing of them) yet it is
notwithstanding certain, that her Natural Sense becomes thereby more clear and
resined. For in the beginning she was observed, after her Waking, to return to
her Natural Simplicity, and to the Ignorance of a poor Shepherdess, and of a
Country Girl without any Education, and whose Instruction has been wholly
neglected. But it is now apparent, by several Relations that her Sentiment is
become solid; nay, that she has something in her that even sparkles. Which
has been more especially noted since her falling into the hands of our
Enemies. She was Apprehended upon the beginning of the Month of June, and
carried to Cret; and examined three several times, both at Cret and at
Grenoble. It is very easy to imagine, that there has been nothing omitted to
lay her open, and to find her a Counterfeit, and to induce her to discover her
pretended Accomplices. But she has still answered all these Interrogatives
with so much Justness and Discretion, and with so many Marks of Sincerity, That
the most able Advocate in the Kingdom could not form a better Reply after
fifteen days study upon the Interrogatives. These are the very words of our
Relations, and of the Officers of Justice that have Examined her. She Answers
to every thing they ask her with very good Sense, and not without quickness of
Wit; the renders a Reason for her Faith, and easily confounds all such as come
to Pose her with Questions. She has been removed from place to place; first to
Cret, then to the Hospital at Grenoble, and then to a Convent of Nuns near
Grenoble. In all which places she continues to fall into her Trances, and to
discourse in her Fits. They have shaved her Head, and taken away all the
Clothes and Linen she had, pretending she might have some Charm hid somewhere
about her: Nay, some Priests came and Exorcised her with Holy Water, as tho she
had been possessed with some Evil Spirit. But to no purpose at all, she is
still the same. Sometime they have given way to some of the New Converts to
approach her in the day time, while she was in Prison, or in the Hospital of
Grenoble: But they would never give leave to any of them to pass the Night in
her Company, nor to be Witnesses of what she said when she sell into her
Exstasy. The last Letters say, That the Rage of the false Devotes was so great
against her, that she could not be thought secure of her life, but for certain
Persons of the first Note in that Country, who gave Orders about her. All that
I have here said is the Naked Truth; but it is not all the Truth: For we give
you no particulars of what She has either said or done. There are some
discreet, able and unprejudiced Persons of that Country, who labor to make an
exact Collection of all that is certain and well-proved about her. And we have
most assured hopes, that the Time is now coming, in which it will be both safe
and free to see it.

The long time for which we have deferred to speak of this Miraculous Event,
has given us Opportunity to understand the different Judgments of other Men
about her, and to make our own Reflections upon these different Judgments. It is
no marvel at all, if from the side of the Esprits forts (or Strong Heads) there
have proceeded an infinity of things, in which Sense and Reason can never give
men any better satisfaction than Religion can: Since even from the Side of
those that are truly good, and that have a great sense of Religion on their
Minds, there have come to us many things that have very much startled us, so
terrible they appeared to us. To speak in general: As Incredulity was never
seen to be pusht to that height, nor (with respect to the present Matter) to
fall into so great an Excess; (from which even discreet and wise Persons have
not been preserved:) So the Papists have certainly nothing at all to apprehend
on Our part, nor have they any Reason to be afraid, lest Our Reformed should
get any advantage hereby against them; for They do all they can possibly do to
disparage and ruin the Story. This is such a sort of Ingratitude against the
Providence and Goodness of God, that it ought not to be any longer endured. We
must therefore at length plead the Cause of God, and let these Incredulous
Spirits understand, into what a danger they throw themselves; either while they
deny a Matter of Fact so apparent, or while they turn into Ridicule this Story,
when they even allow of the Verity of the Fact. Jesus Christ accused the
Pharisees of sinning against the Holy Ghost, because they attributed to
Beelzebub (Prince of the Devils) those Miraculous Actions which he had produced
by the Spirit of God. In very deed, this makes me Tremble for these Mockers,
who at this Day laugh at this great and wonderful Accident: I wonder they do
not consider, that if peradventure this should come from God, they do despite
to the Spirit of Grace, by attributing its Works either to Human Contrivance or
Fraud, or else to a Diabolical Spirit, as some do. It is indeed a Mark of great
Discretion, not to believe any thing lightly: And therefore any one may very
lawfully suspend his Judgment, if he find not the Proofs of Fact sufficiently
convincing. But a Good man (much less a Christian) ought never to run the
Risque of doing Despite to God's Blessed Spirit, by attributing to Impure
Spirits the Works that appertain to him. Some there are that have gone so far
as to say, That allowing the Fact to be true, and that the Work moreover did
proceed from God, yet it should not be divulged, by reason of the hurt it may
do. Certainly, one knows not how to Christen such Extravagancies as these. This
is no other than to raise ones self above the Wisdom of God; that is to say,
That he does certain Extraordinary Works, which not only do no good at all, but
a great deal of hurt. In one word: It is as much as to say, That God had done
wiser to have let them alone. For it is very plain that Wisdom requires, that
one should omit the doing of such Actions; as when they are done, ought to be
suppressed and kept silent: And since we have employed our selves so long time
in hearing the Opinions of other People, we hope it will not be imputed to us
as a Fault, if we give our own; and offer our Reflections upon these different
Sentiments.

In the first Place, There are some People who support themselves upon the
Falsity of the Matter of Fact; and this perhaps is the greater Number. And it
may be also, that this is the best Retrenchment that our Bold Wits can shelter
themselves in; and yet notwithstanding it is good for nothing at all. For I
cannot imagine, how they can call in question a Fact of so great Notoriety as
this is; a Fact, whereof there is an infinite Number of Witnesses; a Fact, that
has continued so many Months together; a Fact, whereof our very Enemies are at
this Day witnesses, and the Truth of which they have sufficiently convinced us
of by their own Conduct.

It is now Three whole Months that this Girl has been in their hands; since
which time she is altogether inaccessible to all such as are styled New
Converts. If the Matter of Fact be Fabulous, ought they not to call together
all the People of Dauphine, to let them see this Girl sleeping quietly, like
another Person, without Talking? Or, if she does Talk, that they may see she
Talks nothing but Extravagances, and Matters of no Connection or Coherence, as
has been given out by some People? Would the Papists have failed to have sent
for the New Converts, that they might take notice of these Extravagances; and
that they may see how they have been imposed on hitherto? Instead of this, What
Instance soever an infinite Number of New Catholics, have at any time made to
be present at this Girls sleep, they would never grant it to any one of them.
Here we declare to the Enemies of the Truth, That as long as they shall persist
in this Conduct, they will still the more persuade us, that this Girl continues
to Talk against their Religion, and to confound them. Besides this Proof, which
alone is capable to convince People as to the Reality of the Fact, we have
several others that are Positive ones; that is. So many Declarations and
Relations of discreet Persons, who are enlightened, knowing, and intelligent;
and not at all Superstitious, or pre-ingaged by any Prejudice; who were present
upon the Places, and who have seen and heard with their own Ears. An Account of
all has been Written in Dauphine, by very considerable Persons of that
Country, who have Addressed themselves to Men of Letters, both wise and
knowing; and that after having Examined the Girl very carefully in their own
Persons, and with their own Eyes. Several Questions have been sent them; and
they have returned back the Letter, together with the Questions that were sent
them, with their Answer subjoyned to them; by which it appeared plainly, That
the things were very true as they were at first represented, except certain
little Circumstances, which made no change or alteration in the Miraculous part
of this Accident. After all this, they who are not willing to give Credit to
these Relations, may furnish themselves with what other Assurances they shall
think fit. They will not fail to say, That this pretended Public Notoriety,
and that these Testimonies of Discreet and Worthy People, is not without some
danger of Illusion, for that we have an hundred Experiences of Facts, that have
passed for Notorious and Certain, which notwithstanding have been found false.
To which we Answer, That what they suppose, neither is nor can be true, that a
Matter of Fact of equal Notoriety with this, should ever be found false. It is
true, That this sometimes happens in such transient Facts as happen but once
only, and which are of no long continuance. A great Company of People may
possibly suffer as great an Illusion, as two or three Persons. And thus an
Accident which appears surprising, may deceive an infinite Number of
Spectators, and so make a false Notoriety, when it is of no continuance, and
when People have neither Leisure nor Liberty enough to examine it. But an
Accident that continues for the space of Eight Months, and that all the World
has had the Liberty carefully to Examine, and that without any suspicion of
Prejudice; such an Accident, I say, never yet produced a false Notoriety: And I
challenge any one to give me an Example of it. Some indeed have produced
several Letters that have either called in question the Matter of Fact, or else
extenuated it: Some of them urge, That this Girl says nothing, that has any
Connection in it; Others, That she has spoken but very little, and that she
has not spoken above two or three times in all. All these Suppositions are not
only false, but notoriously so; for the contrary of all this is notoriously
true. However, ought it to be any matter of Astonishment, that there are such
various Accounts about it in Letters? Are there not in all Places, a sort of
Spirits that value themselves much upon calling in question, yea, and
Ridiculing all such Events as seem to bear an Extraordinary Character? Who can
doubt at all, but that there are in that very Province, a sufficient number of
this sort of Spirits, who do all that ever they can to call in question what
they themselves have a mind to doubt of? If some do but see a Letter from one
of these Gentlemen, that alone will be sufficient to ruin the Attestations of
any hundred Grave and Intelligent Persons, that shall say, We have seen and
heard it. Besides all this, We should examine well from what side the Stories
of Miracles come, in order to judge of their Truth. When they come to us from
People whose Trade and Profession it is to forge Fables, it must be confessed,
that all ought to be suspected. Popery has lost all Shame upon this Chapter:
It is an unexhaustible Fountain of Lies. So that whatever comes from that Side,
ought to have a thousand and a thousand irreproachable Testimonies before it be
believed. But since We of the Reformed Religion, have never yet been Reproached
with having contrived any Pious Romances; We are therefore to be looked upon as
People in a quite opposite Extreme: For we would have nothing at all believed,
that is not within the Rules of Nature. Last of all, The Doctrine taught ought
to be to us an infallible Touchstone, to judge of Miracles. For we believe,
and have good reason to believe, That Miracles are not designed to prove the
Truth, but only to awaken men's Spirits, and to render them attentive to the
Truth: and therefore when they tell us a Miraculous Story, to maintain the
Idolatries of Popery, how well proved soever; it may appear, we ought to be
sure that there is some Illusion in it, from what side soever it may come. But
the Spirit of the Devil never makes any Illusions to encounter against
Superstition, Idolatry and Error, which are the only Props of his Empire. One
cannot be sufficiently astonished at the Opposition that is made by Men, to the
receiving the Truth of this Story. And this has given me occasion to study
carefully the several Tempers of Men's Spirits, and the several Reasons that
induce them to this strange Incredulity. I have found that there is a great
Number, that are thus disposed by a certain peculiar Character of an Esprit
fort, (or Bold Spirit, as they call it:) This I confess is the Name they use to
give to certain Persons that do not believe overmuch in God. But it is none of
my design, to accuse the Persons whereof I now speak of the Crime of Atheism,
or Irreligion. But the Vulgar sort of Mankind, and even of the Learned part,
have a false Idea of Providence; and this same false Idea is one Branch of that
they call Esprit fort, and an effect of the little Devotion which we find in
most People. They who are replenished and enspirited with God, look for him
every where, and find him every where: But the Irreligious neither look for
him, nor find him any where. They believe one God, and one Providence, and that
bona fide in some sense: But according to the Idea which they have formed
themselves of this Providence, God is always confined to the Machin. It is he
that has given Laws unto it, it is true; but he always follows them, and is
(as it were) a Slave to them by confining himself never to depart from them, or
to act without them. Every thing has its Natural Causes, according to these
Gentlemen; and whatever has not such, is false, fabulous, and impossible. I
shall omit at present to say, how mischievous, how false, and of how dangerous
a Consequence such a disposition of Spirit is: For it may bring one to any
thing. The Truth is, That God in the most part of his Actions, hides himself
(as it were) behind his Creatures; and yet notwithstanding this, he acts both
in his Creatures, and by his Creatures; and that almost as immediately as if he
acted without his Creatures; for he is in such a manner the Soul of the whole
Machine, that it cannot advance one Line without him. It is he that determines
their Motions, and makes them all to tend to his Ends: He makes the Laws of
Nature, but yet sometimes he quits them when he sees good. There are an hundred
and an hundred Accidents, where one thinks that one sees nothing at all above
Nature, where notwithstanding it is very certain, that God comes in freely, and
by a special Dispensation. Those Souls that are touched by God perceive this,
though others feel it not; but think they see nothing but human and natural
Efforts in all. It cannot be denied, but that this holy disposition of Mind,
that finds God in every thing, does sometimes degenerate into fond
Superstition: And that there are certain Tempers that receive every thing for
Truth that they hear, and that fancy with themselves, that they see a Miracle
every where: This is a Vicious Extremity; but the other is infinitely worse.
The Wise will take the Middle Way betwixt these two Extr^, and so will neither
be Credulous nor Superstitious. They will examine with a great deal of Care,
such Facts as are Extraordinary: They will not give Ear to all Persons, nor
believe the first Reports that are made unto them. But when a Fact is attested
by a great Number of Witnesses of all sorts, and that after a most careful and
severe Examination, then to value ones self upon being Incredulous, is in my
Opinion, (to speak my Mind freely) to value ones self upon a Temper of Mind,
that has (to say no worse of it) very little of Reason in it. I have but one
Question to ask of these Gentlemen, who with so much disdain look upon us of
another Sentiment, as poor little mean Spirits. My Question is this; Is God
able to work this Miracle, or no? It may be they believe he is not, and that he
has been long ago too Old to do such great and extraordinary things as these
are. Yet I believe they will rather choose to say, that he is able but not
willing; and then I will entreat them to tell me, Where God has said, That he
will no more do any Extraordinary thing?

These Gentlemen, whereof we speak, being overwhelmed by the many Proofs of
Fact that have been given them, to acquit themselves of the business, are fain
at last to retreat themselves into places where there is not so much as a
shadow of Sense or Reason. Some there are that say, That it is very possible
that this young Shepherdess having heard certain Sermons in times past, had
retained something of them: and that so her Imagination being heated, it
brought them again to her Remembrance in time of Sleep. This is well thought,
that a Child of Fifteen years of Age, that perhaps never heard any Sermons in
her life; and that could not possibly hear any, but about the Age of Ten or
Twelve; should Three or Four years after repeat them in her Sleep. Besides,
what she says cannot possibly pass for a Repetition, or an Effect of Memory:
For her way of Delivery has nothing in it of the nature of Sermons: She speaks
things that are very singular, and in a manner as singular, it bearing no
Resemblance with the Discourses or ways of Preachers. Is it by the help of her
Memory that she so often speaks Latin, and that she mixes it with her French so
appositely? Is it by the help of her Memory, that she treats of Matters of
Controversy? By what lucky hit comes it, that all her Images, whereof not the
least Footstep appears in her Brain when she is awake; yet appear so exact and
distinct while she sleeps? Whence did she Learn this Correct French which she
speaks in the Night, and of which she cannot speak one word by Day? Yet these
Gentlemen will not yield for all this. They say, There are so many Effects in
Nature for which we can give no Reason at all, and of which for all that, the
Machin is the only Cause. And hereupon they tell us the Story which Monsieur la
Motte le Vager gives us in part, of a certain Countryman, That at certain
times spoke all sorts of Languages; of which at other times he understood not
one word. They also add, the History of the Country man of Burgundy, who in his
Sleep heard a certain Verse repeated out of Homer, which he remembered very
well, though he could not understand it. This Countryman applied himself to a
Learned man, whose Name is still alive, and will for ever live in the
Commonwealth of Learning: He told him his Dream, or rather his Vision, together
with the Words, which he still remembered. This Learned man found, that it was a
Verse out of Homer, which foretold him, that his House should fall in a little
time; which did not fail to happen accordingly. Behold say they, a thing no
less Miraculous than your Shepherdess. We are not bound to grant, That these
two Facts were as Miraculous, as that whereof we Treat: But the Examining of
this is not necessary. It is sufficient to maintain to these Gentlemen, that
these two Facts did nor happen by Natural Causes. Whether indeed it was the
Holy Ghost, or the Wicked Spirit that possessed them, that is the only
Question: But it can be no Doubt to any Reasonable Mind, whether the Machin
alone either did, or was able to do this thing. And it is still much more
certain, that our Miracle could not be perform by the Machin; for it is much
more Miraculous to Talk whole Nights, to speak what one never knew; and to
speak things Divine and Heavenly too, and that in very good order and sense;
than to hear something one time in a Dream, or to pronounce certain Words
formed as by another Tongue: The Wicked Spirit might produce this; but it
could never inspire into a single Soul the wonderful things of God. In the mean
time, It is certain that the Fact related by Monsieur la Motte le Vager, and
such others like it; are not done by Natural Causes. But, say they, how know
you how far the Powers of Nature may go? Wretched Objection! We know it by
Experience; we know it by the use of Reason. It is true that Nature does an
hundred things Mechanically, whereof we can give no Reason. But it does them
always, and always alike: If it varies sometimes, it is no surprising thing, if
while we know not the Causes, we are ignorant of the Principle of these
Variations. When Extraordinary Accidents consist but in Corporeal Motions, one
may then with less Injustice refer their Causes to the Machin: At least it will
be more difficult to persuade the Incredulous in this Case, than in others;
although many times they have no more Truth and Reason on their sides here,
than elsewhere. But to Reason and Discourse Divinely, without having learnt any
thing at all, and without having so much as the Images of what one says
impressed upon the Machin of the Brain; This, I say, is entirely beyond the
Powers and Action of the Machin. Moreover, this wicked Solution of theirs may
be justly looked upon as an open way to the most Criminal of all Incredulities.
For we may then with the same Freedom say, of the Miracles of Jesus Christ and
of his Apostles, that we cannot determine, whether they are true Miracles or
no; for that one does not know how far the Operations of Nature may go.

This may suffice for an Answer to the Esprit sorts (or Strong Heads, as they
call them:) We will answer the Objections of others in our next.

Oct. 1. 1688.
A Continuation of the REFLECTIONS Upon the MIRACLE OF DAUPHINE: WITH An
Examination of the Question, Whether the Time of Miracles be absolutely ceased?
IN Our former Letter we have fully answered what has been advanced by those
called Strong Heads, to encounter with the Verity of the Fact happened in
Dauphine, in the Person of a Shepherdess: It is now time to take Notice of
Persons that have much more Wit, and which we can by no means suspect of the
least thought tending to Infidelity; but yet cannot without good Reasons do
otherwise, than call in question the Accident here treated of. Let us now hear
what they have to say: They say in the first place, That we are not now in the
Age of Miracles, that being long since past. This Maxim of theirs, to which the
Controversies of these latter Ages have given so much Authority among us, ought
to be understood in a sound Sense. We are not, it is very true, in the Age of
Miracles at present: That is to say, we have not any longer such Men among us,
as God has bestowed the Gift of Tongues, or of Healing upon, and such as can
ordinarily, and whenever they please, put the Omnipotence of God into act: This
we must own to be true. And for this Reason it is, that when we see a poor
sorry Friar running all Europe over to Heal the Sick, to give Hearing to the
Deaf, and to restore Sight to the Blind, and pretending to Bless the Christian
Armies; as if the Success of their Arms depended upon his Blessings; we dare
boldly then pronounce, that such an one is a Knave, and an Impostor. When they
tell us of Miraculous Cures* that have been done by the Image of our Lady, and
by the Relics of such a Saint; we may then without Hesitation aver, That
these are but Tricks and Illusions. And the Reason is very clear: For that God
in the Ages of true and indubitable Miracles, never made use of such Ways as
these in order to work Miracles. Did the Prophets and Apostles ever make use of
the Images of their Predecessors? Did they ever Consecrate their Bones or their
Ashes? Did they ever make use of them to work Prodigies or Extraordinary
things? One single Resurrection* caused by a Dead man's touching the Ashes of
Eliseus, can be no sufficient ground for these Vain and Idolatrous
Superstitions: For this is but one single Instance, and one that had no
Consequence founded upon neither. But I will assure you, my* Brethren, that the
best way to unburthen our selves of the Load of Popish Miracles, is not always
that which our People ordinarily fly to; which is utterly to deny the Matters
of Fact, and always to say, This is False; this is a Lie; or This is a Cheat of
some Priest or Monk. This Accusation is indeed often very just: For it is
certain, that the greatest part of the Miracles of Popery are but Fables and
Impostures. But yet for all this we must not deny, that among these False
Miracles there are many Matters of Fact that are true. The Writers of the Port
Royal were extremely in the right, when they said, There would-never have been
any False Miracles, if there had been none True. For Fictions and Cheats are
but Imitations of the Truth. What has been said by these Gentlemen of Miracles
in general, that I say with much confidence of the Miracles of Popery; That had
Images and Relics never done any true Prodigies, or Extraordinary thing at
all, the Imposture could never have been supported so long. All these Cheats of
Monks, and all the Tales of Legends, have been contrived and imitated upon the
Platform of certain Extraordinary Accidents, which at some time or other have
been procured in the presence of Images, and in the use of Relics. And the
Scripture has expressly foretold as much: It says, That the False Christ's, and
the Antichrist, shall work Signs and Miracles, so as to make Fire to come down
from Heaven. It does not say, That these will be always mere Impostures. It is
not therefore to be doubted, but that the Spirit of Lies has sometimes by God's
Permission wrought Real Prodigies, to maintain and establish a False and
Idolatrous Worship. So that supposing that the Gentlemen of the Port Royal had
those Incontestable Proofs, that they pretended to, for the Miracles of their
Holy Thorn, I should not Conceit ever the better of Popery for that, nor should
it be this that should induce me to think the better of Jansenism.

Here then you have showed unto you the Sense in which that Maxim, That we are
not new in the Age of Miracles, in true. But if hereby it be understood, that
since the Apostles and their Age, God has confined himself within the course
of Second Causes, so that he does no longer any thing, but according to the
Laws of the Machin: That he speaks no longer to Man by the Extraordinary
Actions of Providence; and so that all the Prodigies and Events that are
accounted Miraculous, are either Counterfeit, or Natural ones. If, I say, this
Sense be given to this Maxim, this is one of the greatest Mistakes that can be,
and even the most Dangerous one. The quite contrary to which is precisely true;
that is, That God never ceased to give Extraordinary Testimonies of his
Goodness, or of his Justice, or of his Power; and that by such Miraculous
Events, as being either against the Laws of Nature, or else above them, are
notwithstanding this dispensed with by a singular Providence of God at certain
times, to awaken the Attention of Mankind. Where do we find that God has Marked
out certain Ages, out of which he has tied his Hands from Working any thing
Extraordinary more? If there ever have been such Ages as these, they were
certainly those wherein the Covenants were established. I find not above two or
three of these Ages: That in which God Renewed his Covenant with Mankind in
general, in the Person of Noah; that in which God made a Covenant with Abraham,
for his Posterity; and that in which Moses gave to the People the Covenant and
Economy of the Law. This Age of Moses abounded with Miracles, and those very
great Miracles; if ever there were such. I am well satisfied, that this was
very necessary to confirm the Covenant which Moses gave to a People Naturally
Unbelieving, and that still called for Signs. But Moses and Joshua being new
dead, and the People put in Possession of the Land of Canaan; and the Service
of God now Established in the Form prescribed by the Law, without any
Contradiction; behold now the Age of Miracles, according to the present Notion,
quite past. For to what purpose should God continue his Extraordinary
Operations, when he had no longer any Covenant to Establish; if it were true,
that Miracles were only designed for the Ages of the Covenants? And yet one
sees in the History of the Old Testament, That from the time of Moses, to the
Destruction of the First Temple, Good gave from time to time certain
Extraordinary Marks of his Power, by Miraculous Events* Nor was this any longer
fixed to particular Persons, as formerly to Moses and Joshua; in whose Hands
God seemed to have deposited his very Omnipotency it self. Had not the Prophets
the Power of working Miracles? Do we not see that Samuel, Jeremy, Ezekiel,
Daniel, and almost all the rest, confirmed their Words by Miracles? And not
only so, but from time to time God (when he saw good) wrought Signs and
Miracles before the very Eyes of the People. Why then would they have the Ages
of the Gospel best favored? The Apostles Age, was (I confess) the true Age of
Miracles. And it may be that since their time there have not been any men, who
could ordinarily work Miracles. But it is very false, That since that time God
has never wrought any Extraordinary Work, either by men, or without men.
Neither is it only in the Church, nor only with respect to the Church, that God
has in all Ages wrought Events above the Ordinary course of Nature; but with
respect to Mankind in general, and to a general Providence. This is a Truth
that might be supported by a Thousand and a Thousand Arguments drawn out of
Histories, as well Sacred as Profane: From which it is apparent, that there
have happened in all Ages Prodigies and Surprising Things, both against and above
the ordinary Course of Nature.

I know very well, that the Weak Heads, who suffer themselves to be carried
away by the lively and extravagant Imaginations and Conceits of the Bolder
Wits, treat all these Miraculous Accidents as mere Fictions. I know very well
also, that among these Relations of Prodigies there are some that are
altogether false; and others enlarged upon; and others again overmuch
aggravated. I know very well in the last place, that by reason of the mixture
of True and False, It is not very easy to know precisely what is True and what
is False. But to conclude that all is False, and hereupon to set up a perfect
Pyrrhonian Skepticism in History, which some of the Fine Wits of this Age go
about to do; this is (in my Opinion) the greatest Rashness in the World, and
one of the greatest Extravagances into which the Mind of man can possibly fall,
and a sort of Madness, that seems to me to be scarce Human. And the more is the
Pity, there is something in it besides that is worse than Madness. For these
Wholesale Scepticks in History entice men by degrees into Impiety; and
encourage a certain Spirit of Libertinism that is quite opposite to all
Religion. These Gentlemen raise their own private Judgments above all the
Testimonies in the World, whether Living or Dead; and will needs have it, That
even men that shall say and affirm, I have seen it, I have heard it; must needs
be Liars. Certainly this is to fall foul upon a great part of Mankind at once.

I am so well persuaded of the Falsness of this Maxim, That God has now left
off all Extraordinary Operations, that I believe in my Conscience, that there
is not any one Country or Town, that might not afford a true, a fair, and a
very large History of such Supernatural or Extraordinary Accidents in their own
Precincts and Territories: Such as are Sings appearing in the Heaven or in the
Earth, Prodigies and Monsters, Miraculous Dreams, or other such like things,
that betoken the Providence of God, and the Care He takes of Mankind. But men
are in this respect regardless to a Prodigy, and even to Stupidity it self.
When any thing very Extraordinary happens, the Common People startle at it for
the present; the Wiser sort laugh at it; and in a few days they say no more of
it. For Instance, There is a Public Notoriety of Fact which I find still in
this Country; That in the Year 1672, when the English were upon the Coasts with
a formidable Naval Army, just ready to enter into the Rivers and Ports of this
Country, to finish what the French had already so far advanced; there were two
Ebbs in one Day, and that without any Flow at all: Which retarded the Enemies
Fleet, and gave time to that of this Country, to oppose their designs. At that
time every Body took notice of it; many Persons of good Credit assured me of
it. But who is there, that gave any Attention to so great a Marvel? And did not
this deserve well, to be formally put among the Public Records? The
Inhabitants of Maesland-Slayce were more exact upon the occasion of a Prodigy,
that was seen in the Air by certain Seamen, a little before the War which
Cromwell made against this State: There were seen in the Air Armies,
Engagements, and the Shapes of Lions coming from different parts of the
Heavens, which made diverse sorts of Motions: The Magistrates of the Place cited
these Persons to their Town Hall, where they took their Depositions upon Oath.
And I my self have seen, and read a Copy of their Informations Never was there
any sort of Prodigy, that has afforded more frivolous Stories than that of
Apparitions in the Clouds. Notwithstanding, this Instance shows, that it is not
Reasonable to hold all that is said of this kind for Fabulous. For there can be
no Reason to Accuse men of Lying and Imposture, that Depose upon Oath what has
passed before their own Eyes.

I will Conclude after this, That no Soul (that has a true sense of God) will
Temerariously pronounce. That the Age of Miracles is now past; so that God does
nothing any longer immediately, or above the Common Laws of Nature. All that
has been Written against Presages in this Age are but so many Sportings of Wit,
that serve to no other End, but to call the Providence of God in question.
These Gentlemen think they have done Wonders, when they have Tacked together a
Parcel of Prodigies that were thought significant, and yet nothing followed
them. They ought to remember, that their Knowledge is too narrow to comprehend
every thing, and that they are not Ingenious enough to dive into the Designs of
Providence, nor into all the Resemblances that are betwixt the Events and the
Signs which God gives to Mankind, to Forewarn them of them. All Prodigies and
Presages are not necessarily designed to Betoken dismal and sad Events; their
use is to render men's Minds attentive to the Works of God, and to excite in
them a Belief of a Divine Providence. If God leaves some Ambiguities in
Presages; if he sends them not at all times; and if we cannot discern the
reason why he sends them one time and not another; we ought not to be
concerned* For this is the most usual Course of God Almighty, he Discovers
himself in part, and Hide himself in part: He leaves some Difficulties in every
thing, and Stones of Stumbling for Rebellious and Unbelieving Spirits. And this
is the first thing I have to say upon the Occasion of this Maxim, That the Age
of Miracles is now past.

See here now a Second; who has Informed these Gentlemen, That this same Time
of Miracles is so past, as never to return again. I would not be thought
absolutely to assure any, That an Age is now coming in which there shall be Men
and Saints seen with Miracles, as in former Days. But really I see a great deal
of likely hood of it notwithstanding; and it may be Miracles are as necessary
to consummate the Establishing of the Reign of Jesus Christ, as they were to
begin it. What is already come to pass, is nothing in comparison of what is yet
behind: The Conversion of the Jews, and that of the rest of ^he Pagans, and the
Fall of Babel, are such great Works, that according to the Order in which God
ordinarily does Extraordinary Works, they who shall accomplish them may very
probably be furnished with Miracles to Amaze men, and beat down the Rebellion
of their Spirits. Above all, The Conversion of the Jews can never be wrought
without Miracles, I believe I may safely affirm it without Rashness. For this
is the Character of that Nation, The Jew seeks a Sign. And the Opiniatrety of
this unhappy People is now mounted to such a pitch, that God must be forced to
employ all his most powerful Engines to overcome it. As to the Conversion of
the Infidel Nations, which we also expect, it is true that it may be
accomplished without Miracles, as there have been so many Nations Converted
already (since the Death of the Apostles) only by the Preaching of the Gospel.
Yet this great Work will never be brought about, until God shall advertize us
of it by such Events and Signs, as being not performed by Men, will the better
show us the Finger of God. For what relates to the Fall of Babylon, and the
Resurrection of the Church, which we expect in a little time; this is so great
a Work, that it is no wonder at all, that God gives us such Extraordinary Signs
and Presages of it, and those so very significant. It may be, there were never
seen so many as have happened within these Three Years, without looking nay
higher. One must be very dull (in my Opinion) not to see, and not to feel the
Hand of God, and his very Finger in what happened in the Church of St. Malo's, by
the Fall of a Thunderbolt; and in the Strokes of Heaven, which have burnt and
beaten down so many Churches within this two last years; in this dreadful
shaking of the Earth, which has overturned Great Cities in Italy, the Country
of Antichrist; and which has caused a Trembling to the very Root of the
Vatican, the Seat of the Beast. And lastly, I see no cause why one should be so
obstinate, as not to see a Miraculous Token of the Will of God in those
Singings that have been heard in the Air at the beginning of this Persecution.
Not to be touched with this Miracle, Men will be wilful Doubters: And yet there
may be found in France above Thirty thousand Witnesses of it. Monsieur Vivens,
who was a Preacher in the Cevennes, and held Assemblies there for the space of
almost Two years, brought us about Thirty or Forty at one time; and we have it
from his own Mouth, that he himself heard these wonderful Singings several
times.

Now to have the satisfaction of Treating this as a Fiction, it is suggested by
some, That even in our Seventh Letter of the first Year of our Pastorals, we
have related nothing but Hearsays. Yet notwithstanding, would they but take the
pains to Read, they would find that I have given the Certificates of Monsieur
Mai^poey, Monsieur Bergeret, Monsieur de la Bordette, Mademoiselle de
Formalagues; Monsieur de Vallescure, a Gentleman of the Cevennes, who said he
heard Sung in the Air five or six of the Verses of the fifth Psalm. Since which
I have received* and have now in my Custody the Testimony of Monsieur de la
Bastide of Tourtelon, Son to the said Vallescure, who Attests the same thing
with his Father. I have also Reported the Testimony of Mademoiselle de Vebron;
who assures me, that she has distinguished in these Miraculous Singings above
Thirty of our Psalms. I have (besides all this) the Attestation of Monsieur de
la Gardicalle, a Gentleman of Honor, who is now in this Country, who has
Deposed betwixt my Hands, and in the Presence of five other Gentlemen, all the
Circumstances of these Singings, he having heard them himself, within Two
hundred Paces of the Town of Vigan. The Truth whereof he assured me upon Oath,
nay, with Tears in his Eyes; not being able to think of this Miracle, without
being sensibly touched* I have also the Depositions of two Inhabitants and
Burgesses of the Town of Mauvezin in Armagnac, who speak of it as Eye
witnesses* And last of all, here is the Letter of one Monsieur de Besse,
written from Swisserland: It is too Remarkable upon this Subject, not to be
made public.

SIR,
THere are a Multitude of People that say, they have heard in France the Sound
of a Trumpet, and the Singing of Psalms, all coming out of the Air. But perhaps
I am the only Man of France, that is a Refugie in this City, that can say, that
I have heard it my self in an infinite number of places. The first of April
last was the first time that I had this privilege in a Place called Viane,
which is in the Upper Languedoc. There it was that I heard the Sound of a
Trumpet at Berlieres, which is in the Neighborhood of Viane; I heard the Sound
of a Trumpet, together with a Harmony bearing much Resemblance to the Singing
of our Psalms: But I heard this Harmony in so admirable a manner near St. Sebe,
hard by Rovergue; and so did the Sieur Calas, our Clerk, and an Uncle of his,
as well as my Self, that we all Three together lifted up our Hands to Heaven,
being Ravished and Charmed with what we heard: I crossed Rovergue, Gevaudan*
Auvergne, the Forests, the Lyonnois, and a part of Savoy; and in all these
Places I heard either the Trumpet, or the Harmony: But I observed, that in the
Plains it was always the Trumpet, and in the Vales always the Harmony: And this
happened both by Day and by Night time; but in the Night in a more clear and
distinct manner than in the Day; you may easily imagine the Reason of that.
Before I had this advantage my self, I always slighted such as spoke of it; and
I was used to tell them, That this would be a Miracle, and that it was not
necessary for God to work such in these days; because he is not now to
establish a New Religion, nor to authorize the Vocation of certain Persons to
persuade men to it. But I am now convinced of the Truth of it by my own Ears.
Some have imagined it to be the Singing of certain Persons met together in the
Woods, or in the Caves: But they are deceived for I have heard the very same
thing in an infinite number of Places; and even at the very time that I heard
it at Viane, and at Berlieres, others heard it at Mazamet, and in the Cevenes;
as appeared by many Letters written from these Hills. This is so true, that
Five Gentlemen of Mazamet were brought into the Prisons of Castres, for having
said, That they heard the Sound of a Trumpet, and the Singing of Psalms, coming
out of the Air. And Monsieur la Poire^ of Viane was brought into the same
Prisons, by two Soldiers of the Regiment of Coningsmark, for having spoken the
same Truth. But they were not there above Twenty four Hours; and when they were
discharged, they were forbid to say any more of it. I was still at Viane, at
Monsieur la Poires Return. I have also seen a Letter of Monsieur Descalmels,
written to Mad amoiselle de Severac his Sister, where he takes Notice to her,
that he had heard a Symphony that Ravished him; and that Monsieur de
Mont-vaillant heard it also. I had a great desire to communicate this News to
you, that you might acquaint our Friends with it; but especially the Renowned
Monsieur Claude: Be so kind as to entreat them to make no doubt of it upon the
assurance that you have of my Sincerity. I have forgot to tell you, that the
Trumpet sounds always as if an Army were going to Charge, and that the Harmony
is like a Composition of many Voices, and of an infinite number of Musical
Instruments, and that sometimes more and sometimes less Ravishing, according to
the situation of the Vales. You will oblige me exceedingly, to let me know what
Conjectures you shall make upon it; in the mean time I will send you mine. I do
believe that the Trumpet is a sign of a Cruel War, that will be made in a
little time; and that the Harmony comes from the Mouths of Angels, who to put
our Enemies in the last Confusion. Thunder out the Praises of God, at a time
when these Wretched Men forbid it to Reformed Christians. This War will most
probably be made against those, who at this time make it against us in the most
barbarous and unjust manner that can be: For we very well know, that God
punishes (sooner or later) the Outrages committed upon his Children, as once
appeared in the Example of Pharao and Herod, and many others. God grant us the
gift of the Spirit of Consolation and Constancy, that we may bear up against
these Evil days; and that he may bestow upon us the happiness of being in a
Capacity to pass them together, is the most ardent desire of him, who is,

Sir, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, BESSE.
Lausanne, May 25. 1686. This Monsieur de Besse is a Minister, who had the
Misfortune to be under Confinement in France, not being able to get out of the
Kingdom; but at last found means to Escape.

This is a True Copy, Extracted from the Original which I have in my Hands.

F. MVRAT, sometime Minister of the Church of Marseille, Aix, and Velaux.




I do Avow, That after so many Testimonies of such as say, I have heard, and I
have seen; I have not the hardyness to believe, that all these People are
Liars: And am willing with all my Heart to pass for one of a poor
Inconsiderable Spirit, without any Judgment, and for one overgone in Visions
and Revelations. However, I hope, I have still sufficient Judgment to
distinguish what is probable from what is not, and Doubtful things from
certain: And for this Reason I shall forbear to say any thing of many other
Prodigies that are much spoken of abroad, and whose Reality time may perhaps
discover. However that may be; that much that is unquestionable, is sufficient
to persuade me, That God is now ready to do his Work, and that therefore he
will bestow Signs upon us to strengthen and confirm our Expectations, and to
awaken the Enemies of our Holy Religion, that they may give the better
Attention to the Truth.

This is one of the Objections of our Infidels: To what end, say they, should
God work Miracles in these days? We have no need of them to confirm our
Religion: It is not a new Dispensation that we are going about to establish. If
God had had any Reason to work Miracles, he should have wrought them rather in
the Last Age, when our Reformers began to Preach their Doctrine first.

In the first place I Answer, That when once one assumes to ones self the
Liberty of asking Questions of God, and of demanding of him the Reasons of what
he does, one may then proceed far enough. Why did God cause the Israelites to
pass over the Red Sea, when he brought them out of Egypt; and not rather
conduct them by that slip of Land that parts the Mediterranean from the Red
Sea? That had been the shortest Cut to the Holy Land. Wherefore did he make an
Ass to speak? Why did he permit that Sampson, so express a Type of Jesus
Christ, should do so many strange and unjustifiable Actions? And, why did he
confine this man's Strength to his Hair? Why would he trouble Himself to work so
many Miracles before Men, in order to Convert them? He needed but to accompany
the Preaching of the Apostles, with such a Victorious Grace, as should over
come all the Contradictions of their Hearts. It Is neither safe nor becoming to
search for Difficulties in the Conduct of God Almighty, and to call him in
question for his Methods. Why has he Chosen a poor Shepherdess to be the
Instrument of this great Miracle? Why did he do this in the further end of
Dauphine? Why did he not rather choose a larger Theater? All Persons that have
but a little Penetration, will be sufficiently sensible, that an Answer may be
made to all these Questions: But were there no Answer at all to be made to
them, that would be no Reason to call in question matters of Fact that are well
Attested, and whereof there are an Hundred and an Hundred Testimonies worthy of
Credit. We ought to show God Almighty so much Respect, as to believe, That
whatever he does is very well and very wisely done. As to what is said, That in
the Last Age God did not precede the Work of Reformation with any such
Presages; I Answer, That what is here suggested is not perhaps very true; there
were some then observed, and it may very well be, that many Signs and Notable
Presages have escaped the Notice of History, by reason of the little Attention
that was then given them; and by the great Prejudice men then had against every
thing that was called a Miracle. Besides, the number of False Miracles being at
that time infinite, and God having not then enlightened Men's Spirits upon this
Point, it may be he thought it not convenient to work any true Sign then, that
they might not be inveloped in a heap of Impostures and Fables. In the last
place I boldly affirm, That the Work that remains yet to be done, for the
entire ruin of Antichristianism, appears plainly to me to be incomparably more
difficult than what has been done in the Last Age. At that time the World was
weary of Popery, by reason of the horrible Corruptions of its Ministers. At
that time the darkness of Ignorance was thick in the very Supporters of Popery.
A small Light was then sufficient to discover to the People with ease the
turpitude of Antichristianism. At that time the Defenders of the Romish Errors
were neither Able men, nor Learned, nor fit to defend them. And that was the
Reason that the Reformers baffled them so easily. But now adays Popery has
taken new Roots. Its Ministers are less impure; its Doctors are infinitely more
Learned. They have studied out and invented wicked Sophisms, and wicked Answers
to our charges; how wicked soever they may be in our Opinion, yet they have
given them so plausible an appearance of Cogency, that they impose upon the
Knowing as well as upon the Simple. Hereby Prejudices become more insuperable,
and Popery has recovered new strength every where. They are now fortified
against our strongest Arguments: And their being no longer New, is now a Reason
they should be no longer Effectual. And therefore I do not at all wonder, that
the Providence of God begins now to interpose its Power, as having a greater
Enemy to subjugate. It is alleged, That the Proofs from God's Word are
sufficient; they are so without question; and therefore these Miracles are not
intended in the least to Prove our Religion, but to oblige our Adversaries to
give fair Attention to our Verities. It is impossible, but they must be
astonished at so many Prodigies; and this Astonishment will oblige them to
apply themselves, and to examine the Truth in its Nakedness, without Passion.
We have no need of these Confirmations, say others. And therefore (say I) it is
not for us principally, that these Signs are given. It is for Misbelievers; and
yet should not we our selves, (although our Faith have no need of such new
Supports) yet be very glad, that God works such great Marvels in our behalves?
Have not we great need to be fortified in our expectance of the accomplishing
of Gods Promises?

Last of all, some say, Who is it that believes these Sings? and, why should
God do Miracles for Persons that have no Faith in them? Where do you find any
Converted by them? It may be they that Talk thus, have little Reason to esteem
themselves for all the World. They ought not to conclude, That what does them
no good, is therefore wholly useless to others. There are a vast number of
Simple and Devout Souls, who behold in it the Finger of God, and give him the
Glory of it. If there has been none Converted by it as yet, it does not
follow, that it will be therefore always useless. The Crops of Corn are a long
time hid in the Ground, before they make any appearance above.

I know but one thing more, that these Gentlemen often tell us. To believe (say
they) such Toys as these, would be to give room for Papists, to scatter about
their false Miracles. Have we made so much noise against their Legends, and do
we go to set up others in their steads? How shall we at another time deny our
Belief to those numerous Fables, which Popery imposes upon us for Truths; if we
once give credit to a Story in all respects like the Fictions rejected by us? I
do avow, that I scarce have patience to admit of such Comparisons as these.
What reason is there to compare the Fact whereof we now Treat, to the places
where Popery sets up an Office of Miracles; where the Sick, the Blind, the
Deaf, the Lame find a Miraculous Cure for having performed a Neufvaine, or Nine
days Prayer only? To certain Miracles wrought betwixt four Walls, and whereof
there are no better Proofs than Heaps of Crutches behind a Door, or some little
Paltry Book, of as much Authority as Almanacks, or the Testimonies of some two
or three Impo^rous Monks or Priests? Is there any Justice, I say, to compare
such things as these to a Notorious Fact, which has happened and continued for
Eight or Nine Months together, in the fight of the very Enemies of the Truth?
The Miracles of the Legends are for the most part Ridiculous, Impertinent, and
Unworthy of the Majesty of God: As for Instance; Here is a Friar assaulted and
beaten by the Devil: Here is another Friar, that went about to Eat certain
little Birds roasted upon a Spit, and afterward repenting him of his Liquorish
Tooth, drew them off again; and making the sign of the Cross upon them, made
them recover their Lives and Feathers, and fly away: Here is again a certain
Saint, that turned some Pounds of Butter into Gold; And a certain Dead Woman.
that nourished an Infant with her Milk, and at her Breast. With many more
Impertinences of this Nature. Now what is there in this Story that is
Ridiculous, or any way like unto these? What can any one find here, that is not
worthy the Greatness of God? In fine, Does it follow, that because the Devil
has invented a thousand Fabulous Fictions, that therefore we are to deny
Credit to constant, certain, and well-proved Truths? Is this Reasonable? If the
Papists can make their Pretended Miracles appear to us with as great Evidence,
as we can these, we will believe them; but we will not for all that believe
their Doctrine. That is to say, We will believe the Facts; but not that these
Facts happened for the Confirmation of their Superstitions and Idolatries; or,
that it was the Power of God that produced them with any such intention. For
Dogmes and Verities ought to have their proper Proofs, and their clear Evidence
independent upon Miracles, which were designed for no other use, than to Combat
with, and remove Prejudices. But we absolutely deny, that there are among the
Miracles of the Roman Church, any one of the same kind with the Miracle of this
Shepherdess, that has been well proved.

It is not impossible, but that a Sick Person might have been really Cured,
after having performed the Neufvaine (or Nine Days Prayer) near some Saint, and
after the touching of a certain Relick. But besides that, this might have
happened by Natural Means; the Devil may very well work an Extraordinary Cure.
And therefore these sorts of Sings, and all those that the Church of Rome
shows, are but Equivocal ones: But now here, there is nothing at all that is
Equivocal; for it is impossible, that the Devil should destroy the Honor and
Adoration of Creatures, where he so well finds his Account, and which has
restored him a true Paganism in the Place of that which he lost.

Lastly, some may say, What is the Consequence of all this; and what is the
Conclusion that should be drawn, and the use that should be made of the Sings
that God bestows in favor of the Protestant Religion? The Conclusion that
should be drawn from it is; That God showing (in favor of the Protestant
Religion) such Signs as he never showed before, does certainly intend to do
that for it that he never did before. These Miraculous Singings, which have
been heard in diverse places of the Kingdom, and that precisely at the Beginning
of the Persecution, and the Mission by Dragoons; and this ignorant and simple
Shepherdess, whom he inspires to perform Divine Service in her Trances, exactly
in the manner that we used to perform it before our Dispersion and Ruin, are
so many certain and manifest Proofs, that God approves our Worship and
Religion; and are such Presages to us, as I look upon as unquestionable, that
he will not only not suffer the Work of the Reformation (which our Forefathers
have so happily begun) to fall to the ground; but also that he will carry it on
to its farthest Perfection. What we ask of the Papists is not, that they will
(upon the Credit of these Miracles) believe the Truth of what we propose to
them; but that they will be cured of their Prejudices by them, and that they
will carefully examine the Signs, that they may see whether they proceed from
the Devil, and the Spirit of Lies, or no. And that they will open their Eyes,
that they may hear without Passion the Arguments we bring them, That their
Religion is True and Real Antichristianism

Last of all, After all that has been said, whatever Difficulty may be found
in the thing, we ought to hold to what shall be found both well proved and well
known: For there is nothing that makes a man look more Ridiculous in
Conversation, than after all the Proofs of Fact possible, still to pronounce
This is impossible; and that without giving any other Reason: For Proofs of
Fact can never be destroyed, but by other Proofs of Fact more strong and
convincing. But now never any Event or Accident in the World, had more speaking
or lively Proofs, than this has. And since we spoke of this in our former
Pastoral, there have appeared in Public many more Attestations of Persons that
have both seen and heard it, and that were Eyewitnesses of it.

October. 15. 1688.
A LETTER From a Gentleman of DAUPHINE To one of his Friends at GENEVA,
Containing what he heard said of ISABEL VINCENT THE SHEPERDESS.
Printed first at Geneva, and Reprinted at Amsterdam, and now done into English
from the French Copy.
SIR,
YOu were pleased to send to Me for the News about the young Girl that you were
told of; and I had not deferred so long to give you an Account of this Wonder,
had I not waited for some Particulars more at large. Her name is Isabel
Vincent, Daughter to one John Vincent of the Liberty of Saou in Dauphine, Aged
about Fifteen Years; She can neither Write nor Read. She was heard on the Third
of the Month of February, as She lay in her Bed, to speak the Mighty things of
God. Her Godfather, with whom she served as his Shepherdess, and who dwelt
there and the other People that Lived in the said House with him, believed it
to Proceed from some Lightness in her Head: but perceiving it to continue for
several Nights, they went to her Bedside to awake Her, but were not able: She
still spoke as before. She speaks with her Eyes Closed, putting out her Hands
one after another; After which She sings Leve le Caeur (or Lift up your Heart)
or some other Psalm to the End: After this She Expounds several Passages out of
the Holy Scriptures, with a pretty strong Voice, and then makes Her Application
on the present Good or Evil Circumstances of the Church; or on the Repentance
of a Sinner, which is ever the principal End of all her Exhortations: She
speaks very good French in all her Exhortations, excepting that ever and anon,
when she falls upon the Abuses of the Roman Church, she speaks her own Natural
Language: But when she awakes, she does not remember that she spoke any thing,
neither can she speak any French at all; And after her Exhortation she Sings
again another Psalm without missing any thing, either as to the Words or Tune.
After this she makes a very handsome Extemporary Prayer, and that either upon
what she had Treated of before, or else upon the present Affliction of the
Church, which she foretells will be but Short, but very Violent. At other times
she Treats also of Matters of Controversy, in which she Expounds some Point or
other with wonderful clearness, which she chooses according to the Occurence of
the time: As for Instance, Upon Easter Eve she chose the matter of the
Eucharist for Subject, and spoke very pertinently upon it; But more especially
she made certain Comparisons concerning the Mass, which I never heard any make
before, whereof this is one, She clapped both her Hands together, and then
turned them several ways, saying, Dear Christian Brethren (for so she begins
most commonly) suppose these to be a couple of Silver Plates; look upon them on
this side and on that, there can be nothing in the World more Gay or
Glittering, the Workman has Polished them and made them look very sine; but
now open them and look withinside, It is a Void, there is nothing within; and
this she showed by opening her two Hands again: Just such another thing is the
Mass; There is nothing in the World more Gaudy in appearance, it promises much
to the sight; But if you look but on the inside, there is nothing. We offend
God by Adoring that which is but Bread, and by setting the Creature in the
place of the Creator: Go you not after the Infidels (for so she culls them
oftentimes) Above all, Communicate not with them; Rather Administer the
Communion among your selves. She would also repeat the Pater, the Credo, the
Ave Maria, the Confiteor, all in Latin, and that without missing one syllable:
After which she would say to those that stood by, by way of derision. Does it
not Edify you very much, my Dear Christian Brethren, that I have spoken to you
so many Words that you understand not, when you repeat them your selves? Look
you, said she, how they abuse the poor People, appointing them such things as
Good has not Commanded, and omitting those things he has Commanded! My Dear
Christian Brethren, amend your Lives, God will have Mercy upon you; Search the
Word of God wherever you find it. I should write to you more than one Letter
to acquaint you with all that she said; It would have made great Volum, if any
had taken the pains to Collect all: All her Discourses have a Mavelous
Connection in them. At times she ceases to speak for about a quarter of an hour,
after which she resumes the Thread of her Discourse without missing any one
thing: As she has not discontinued to speak since the time I before told you,
so this has drawn into the places where she has been, People from many parts,
as well within as without the Province, in so much that the matter could not be
concealed. The Sieur Boudra Lieutenant Particulier to the Vicarial of Cret,
ordered her to be apprehended by the Arches at Saou, as she followed her Flock
on Tuesday last, being the eighth Current: And thereupon after he had
Interrogated her upon four several Heads one by one, she answered him Head by
Head very Pertinently and in good French, which she had never done waking
before. He ordered her to be conducted the next day, being the Twenty ninth, to
the Prisons of the same City of Cret, and Interrogated her several times; she
answered him in very good and solid sense; I shall understand better the
particulars of her Answers hereafter, and shall inform you. I am just now
informed that she Preaches in the Prison, and that she has spoken every Night
of late: And although she is shut up in the uppermost part of the Prison, in a
Chamber very near to the Roof, yet she may be heard in the Street. Her Enemies
Treat her as a Mad Woman, but she is not in the least so. It is purely the
Spirit of God that speaks by her, it is not the Spirit of Lies, as some have
told you: For then he would labor to destroy himself, which would contradict
the saying of our Savior, That a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand.
The end of all her Exhortation tends to the Conversion of Sinners, and the
Destruction of the Works of the Devil: We shall see what consequence it will
have, and I will communicate to you what shall pass on this Subject.

The Following Words were related to me by persons worthy of Credit, who heard
them themselves.
THere will be a Year in which the Sacks will be dearer than the Corn; The
Second Year, will be followed with a Famine; And the Third, with a Pestilence
that shall begin one the side of Rome, the Friday before Easter day: Since you
cannot Communicate at Easter, you would do well to fast: This was the Day on
which Jesus Christ did Eat the Paschal Lamb; and if you cannot Communicate in
public, do it in private, and what you have done in secret, he shall repay you
openly.

There is a little Root that shall increase by little and little; Our
deliverance also shall come by little and little, like this little Root.

If any come that are not of the Faithful, I shall catch them, for I will say
nothing at all.

Have a care you come not hither out of Curiosity; God will not be well pleased
if the Wicked come to make them sport: Better it were for them that hot Coals
of Fire should pass through their Mouths, than that they should mock at the
Word of God; They had better swallow a Serpent with all its Poison; For a
Serpent wounds but the Body; but Satan's Poison wounds both Body and Soul.

If all were observed that I shall say, it would contain as much as three
Bibles of a Cubit Height.

It is not I that speak, but the Spirit that is within me: In the later Days
your young People shall prophesy, and your Old Men shall dream Dreams.

If you pray, you shall obtain Mercy; for a Servant cannot receive his Salary
if he has not Faithfully served: Do not you like the Foolish Virgins: Keep
your Lamps ready: Have a care lest the Measure being full, the Lot do not fall
upon you, but that your Fervent Prayers may make it fall upon your Enemies. Our
Lord has given us Forty two Months of Persecution, we have no longer time to
suffer, and our deliverance shall be in the time of the Vintage.

The Day on which our Lord Jesus Christ was Crucified, which was upon Friday,
in the beginning of the said Month there shall be a great Persecution, but it
will not last: He will yet have Mercy upon such as have turned, but not upon
such as have taken Pensions.

Observe, that before she went to her Bed, she desired that certain Children
that were unknown to her might be put out of the Room: And it was believed,
that it was that that gave the Spirit occasion to say. That such should go out,
that were not capable to understand the Word.

A sincere and true Relation of what was spoken by the Mouth of ISABEL VINCENT,
as she Slept on the 20th of May at Night, in the Year 1688.
AFter she had Sung the 42d Psalm, Ainsi quon oit le cerf braire (or, As the
Heart pants, etc) unto the next pause, with a clear and Audible Voice, without
missing one Musical Note, she then made a little stop, and then spoke of the
necessity of hiding the Word of God; saying, that it ought not to be spoken to
such as could not understand it; nay, that they ought to be bid go out of the
Room. Then she presently fell upon the Persecutions, and Wrongs that had been
done to the Faithful, and said, that it was Sin that was the cause of them, and
that we ought to avoid the occasions of Sin; saying if you knew the uglyness of
Sin, you would be much more afraid of committing it, than you are. And
notwithstanding the Evils inflicted upon you, you ought always to say, I will
praise the Lord; for God chasteneth whom he loves, but God will tame all the
Wild Beasts that persecute you. She said also That we ought to prepare our
selves for the Table of the Lord; saying, Let us go and taste of his Paschal
Lamb: Take, eat this Body that has been Crucified for you; and do not believe
that Jesus Christ is there in Body and Soul, for he is in Heaven; It is by
Faith that we are to penetrate into this Mystery. He should have a good many
Bodies to be given to so many People at once: And continuing upon the Subject
of the Persecutions made upon the Faithful, she Exhorted them to hold fast, and
to Repent; and when God shall come, he will say to the Faithful, Come, etc. And
continuing to speak of the Assurance we have in his Promises; she said, The
Heavens and the Earth shall pass away, but the Word of God shall continue. The
Wicked shall be mowed down like the Grass that is mowed; wherefore Christians
hold fast, and let your Faith be always founded in Jesus Christ, who has shed
his Blood for our Sins. For he that shall persevere to the end, shall receive
Eternal Life We must suffer for his Word, for he says. He that will love me
must bear my Cross. It is upon Jesus Christ that we must bestow our Love: It is
he that has said, He that shall love another more than me, is not worthy of
me. The Angels and the Saints groan when they see you in Persecutions. But
Christians, have a good Courage, and repent you of your Sins; search his Word,
and you will find it by Repentance; obey the Commandments of God and not those
of Men: For he that will follow the Commandments of Men, shall dye the death.
Be ye assured Christians, that if he loved not his People, he would not
Chastize them The People of Israel was always persecuted; but he that shall
persevere to the end, shall obtain Eternal life.

Here was a Silence of about half an Hour, and then she resuming her Discourse
said:

Be not ye surprised, my Brethren, if you have selt the Anger of God; for we
have trampled upon his Word, and put it under our Feet; but Repent and Seek
God, and he will be in the midst of you. The Wicked shall perish: They shall
have Courage enough to harm you now; but they will have no power at the Hour of
Death. Have pity upon us O God! We are poor scattered Sheep, thou hall gathered
us, according to thy good pleasure, have pity upon us.

Heve she stopped for the space of about two hours, and after that she sung
about two or three Verses of the Commandments of God in Rhyme; and continuing
the Threatenings against the Wicked, that persecute the Faithful, she said,
their Efforts and Malice was like the Stones flung against Trees, and like
Feathers cast against the Wind. The Wicked shall perish with their
Wickednesses, and shall be mowed down like the Grass of the Fields, which is
withered. And therefore, Christians, let us refer our selves to God, and then
God will refer himself to us, for his Mercy is not yet exhausted. O Lord,
mavelous are thy Works; the Wicked shall make a loud enough Cry, but God will
no more hear them; he will exterminate them under his hand: But as for the
Good, he will say to them, Come ye Blessed of my Father, possess ye my
Inheritance, the Kingdom that was prepared for you before the Foundation of the
World. Let us go then to search the Word of God, and we shall find it; and
persevere ye unto the End, and ye shall obtain Eternal Life: For when we search
his Word, we search God himself. It is Earthly Goods that have occasioned our
Purgatory, and our Destruction; but let us not rely thereon any more, and cease
not to bewail your Sins. Look you, there are but two ways in all, that of Hell
and that of Paradise: The former of these is a large and spacious way, by which
the Wicked go in great Numbers; but the Way of Paradise is strait, they that
are laden with Sins cannot pass by it because it is uneven and crooked. They
must pass by Persecutions to come thither: But to you, Faithful Ones, he will
one day say, Come ye Blessed of my Father. As to the Wicked, he will say to
them; Go to the Eternal Fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
The Wicked have persecuted you: but, O Faithful Soul! thou ought to be
assured of this, That tho thou die, thou shall yet live. Repent you, and Sin
no more; for a day will come when you must appear before God. We ought then to
fear offending of him, and not to follow the course of the Ungodly; for they
shall perish. Let us search his Word, and hide it in our Hearts, and God by his
Grace will make his Glory shine upon us. And hereby the Wicked shall be
disabled from hurting us, their Arrows shall be broken. Let the Word of God be
your Fortress, and then God will bless you, and preserve you from all the Evils
that they can do you. He is always the same God, his Arm is not shortened, he
has always the same Power. You may assure your selves, that if the Wicked had
the same power over God, that they have over you, they would do the very same
to him: But God will pronounce the Sentence of Malediction upon them, and will
say unto the Wicked, Go thou into Eternal Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; for thou have persecuted my Children and me. The Wicked cry to God
continually, but God does not hear them, because they have no Repentance: But
thou, O Faithful Soul, bless the Eternal God, and say unto him: As long as I
shall have a being, I will sing a Psalm unto thee. As for thee, O Wicked Man,
thou

Agatha. Is it not known what she does there?


Paulina. The last thing I could learn of Her, is, That she constantly Sings
Psalms during her Exstasies; and that a certain Counselor of Gren^ble chanced
(...) to say, That she did it very harmoniously.


Agatha. Tou do not question then, but that what they Write of this Poor Girl,
is really True*


Paulina. No, for I have spoken with Persons of great Honor, that have passed
the whole Night in her Chamber, and that have themselves heard what has been
told me of Her; there are above Two hundred Witnesses, who can Attest the same
thing. It was first known upon February last, That a young Girl of a Place
called Saou n^^r Cret, about Fourteen years of Age, had certain Transports by
Night time, which seemed much to resemble Exstasies; She was heard all on a
sudden to Sing Psalms, and that in a due and Regular manner This Voice both
A^^righted and Rejoiced those that heard it: For as she had been very much
neglected in her Education, and therefore could neither Write nor Read, so they
were very much affrighted at this Accident. But they were much more so when she
made a Prayer in French, a Language she had never learned in hor life; and then
took a Text of Scripture and handled it, and spoke very many excellent things
upon it. Her principal Exhortation is, to break off all Commerce with Popery:
She threatens Gods severest Judgments against such as will not do it: She
blames her Father much more than other Men, for having sold himself for Money,
and Revolted without any compulsion. After this she treats of Controversy;
upon which Subject we are assured, that she says many close and convincing
things, and that she Cites Passages very pertinently out of Scripture.


Agatha. I have heard something muttered about, of a certain Able and Learned
Physician, that should make her a Visit, to inform himself at the first hand,
of what he had understood but confusedly before.


Paulina. You have been rightly informed in that particular: For that Physician
went to the place, and both saw and heard the surprising Effects of the
Exstasie of this Shepherdess. She Sung, Preached, and Encountered the Sentiment
of Rome, after her usual manner: She Expounded those Words of the Third Chapter
of St. Matthew; The Ax is laid to the Root of the Tree, etc. upon which she
spoke excellent good things, with relation to the Times in which we now live.
The Physician that heard her Talk, felt her Pulse, to inform himself, what
Effect this Effort of hers might produce in her Body; but he found it very
uniform and regular, and such as is usual in persons of good Health, and that
Sleep quietly. He observed her again the next Morning, and found that she had
been awake all that Day, and that she had resumed the ordinary Care of her
Flock.


THE END.

