A JUST VINDICATION OF THE Honor of King James Of Blessed Memory. Against the
vile Aspersions cast upon it, and Him, by a late Pamphlet, Printed by B. Took.
And pretended to be Presented by the Grand Jury for the Town and Borough of
Southwark, etc.
THERE is nothing so Sacred, but Detraction will Blaspheme it; nothing so High,
but Envy will Attack it; nothing so Excellent, but Ignorance will Persecute it.
If the Dignity of the Regal Office, The Majesty of the Person, The Acuteness of
Parts and Understanding could have given Privilege and Protection to Princes,
the Honor of King James had been Impregnable: But the blind Beetle durst once
Assault the Royal Eagle, when it had taken Sanctuary in Jupiters Bosom.

This Wise and Learned Prince, out of a pious and politic Design to season the
tender Years of his Son Prince Henry, then Heir Apparent of his Ancient Kingdom
of Scotland: And that he might not only leave him a Kingdom to Govern, but
qualify him for the Art of Government, Composed that Excellent Piece, Styled,
Basilicon Doron; or, His Majesty's Instructions to his Dearest Son Henry the
Prince. This Incomparable Book his Majesty thought no ways convenient, nor
comely to be Proclaimed to all, which to one only appertained; And therefore
for the more secret and close keeping of it, He only permitted Seven to be
Printed; the Printer being first sworn to Secrecy.

But notwithstanding, all his circumspection and caution, whether through the
treachery of the Printer, or the mistaken Zeal of some Courtiers, who would not
have the World deprived of so rich a Treasure, as from its own innate worth,
which like the Diamond, shone most in the Dark; the Book was made Public, and
thereby became subject to every Man's Censure.

So Great a King could not want Enemies; The Sun it self is obscured by those
ungrateful Vapors which are raised out of the Earth by his Influence: but
amongst all his Enemies, none were more concerned out of Interest to Asperse
his Pious Intentions, than the Jesuits, (and particularly Becanus) who have
greedily laid hold on some few passages in the Book, to Reproach the Puritans,
by which Title they branded in those days all Reformed Protestants.

It is very true, that the Papists had a deeper reach in their Calumniating
that Great King, than every one could discover; for they knew him to have been
well grounded in the Protestant Religion, by Education; Confirmed therein by
his own judgment, and engaged to espouse it by his true Interest; and that he
had a Pen that was able to Defend it: and knowing in their Consciences, with
regret, That upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, he must by undoubted Right and
Title Succeed her in the Crown of England; and that such Succession would prove
a fatal blow to their conceived hopes and pretensions of Establishing their
long since exploded Religion: Hereupon they employ all their Engines, Summon
all their Artifices, and rowze up all their fury and policy to Bespatter him,
as a Person of a Vindictive Spirit, that would Avenge upon the English his
Mothers Quarrel; and as a Person not well fixed in the Principles of Religion.

And herein they were wickedly subtle; for by the former Slander, they hoped to
engage against him all those Grandees and Statesmen in England, that might any
ways be supposed to have had a finger in the Death of his Mother; and by the
latter, they fancied they should prejudice him in the thoughts of those Persons
who were commonly, though falsely, called Puritans in England, who were no
inconsiderable Party for Number, Interest, or Piety.

Nor did Jesuitical Malice rest here, but they set on foot many false Titles to
the Crown Imperial of this Realm; some to amuse the Vulgar, others to engage
the Spaniard, and all of them to hinder his Just Succession here, if either
Heaven would have favored them, of Hell could have kept them.

That passage which their Malice fixed upon in his Instructions to his Son the
Prince, to exasperate the Minds of many Sober Protestants in England against
his coming to the Crown, did serve their Turns pretty well, for indeed it
sounded harshly in common Ears, and carried some Intimation of his Displeasure
against that sort of People, with those who only looked upon the surface of the
Words, and were not privy to the Design of his Majesty.

But the King being timely Informed of the Scandal taken, and that he might
obviate the Design of it, caused his Book which before had been Printed
privately, and under an Oath of Secrecy, to appear Publicly, and that
praemunited with a Preface, written by his own Hand; wherein with mavelous
Clearness he Vindicates his Royal Intentions, from those Sinister Constructions
put upon them, and therein has said so much as might have silenced Detraction,
knocked out the teeth of Envy, and set his Name right in the thoughts of all
good Men for ever: And this Preface was added to his Reprinted Book, in the
Year 1603. at London, by Felix Kingston, for John Norton.

And now it might have been expected, That after Fourscore Years lying in the
Grave, the Calumny had been Rotten, and the Memory of that Learned King might
have Survived in his Writings; since Envy, which commonly preys upon the
Living, uses yet to spare the Ashes of the Dead: When contrary to all our
hopes, A late Pamphlet, Printed by one B. Took, revives the Reproach, as if it
would challenge the King's Sacred Dust to awake, and rise up in their own just
Vindication.

For we meet every where in the Streets, A Paper which pretends to the Title of
Presentiments of the Grand Jury of the Town and Borough of Southwark: Which
begins thus: We the Grand Jury Summoned, and Sworn for this present Sessions of
the Peace holden for the Town and Borough of Southwark, do with all humble
deference to our Superiors Present as follows, viz.

THat the Wise and Learned King James, His Majesty's Royal Grandfather, of
blessed Memory, has from his own observation, and sad Experience (among other
things) so Solemnly Asserted in his Excellent Book of Instructions to his
Eldest Son Prince Henry, concerning the Puritans of that Age, may as truly be
affirmed of the generality of the Sectaries of our time; to wit; That they are
the very Pests in the Church and Commonwealth, whom no deserts can oblige,
neither Oaths nor Promises bind; breathing nothing but Sedition and Calumnies;
Aspiring without measure, Railing without reason: and making their own
Imaginations (without any Warrant of the Word) the square of their Consciences;
and that ye shall never find with any High-land, or Border-Thieves, greater
Ingratitude, and more Lies and Perjuries, than with these Phanatick Spirits.

I shall not need to observe, how the Pamphlet suppresses those Words in the
entrance of the Paragraph, which had given some light to his Majesty's meaning;
Take heed therefore, my Son, to such Puritans. Implying, that there were
another sort of Men, who though they were invidiously branded with that Name,
yet were nothing akin to their Sentiments or Principles: nor shall I need to
note, how he advises the Prince to beware alike of both the Extremities, As
well as ye Repress the vain Puritan, so not to suffer the proud Papal Bishops:
Nor shall I concern my self, whether ever there was such a People in the World
called a Grand Jury, that Presented this matter; though I confess it highly
Improbable, That Persons of their Character should ever have read, much less
understood Bazilicon Doron; and it is utterly incredible, that Men of Inferior
Trades, most of them Mechanics, should venture upon a Point so Tender, when
it is more than an even Wager, not two of them could Read the Title: nor am I to
dispute how they could Present it upon their Oaths, That what King James
Asserted of those Puritans, may as truly be Affirmed of the generality of
Sectaries of our Times; because it is scarce Imaginable, that such Persons have
been able through the narrowness of their Employments to understand what the
Principles of the generality of the Prosestant Dissenters are, so well as King
James, who had advantage to search into the Principles, and Practices of those
Puritans, whom he so severely, and yet justly lashes; Nor yet can I debate it,
how these Men can do this that they have done, with all humble deference to
their Superiors; although it is a Question to some, Whether they understand the
meaning of the Word Deference, any more than that of (...), or how their
Conductor has Inspired a Salter, or a Plummer, a Brawers Clark, or a Drummer; a
Meal-man, or a Baker, a Talley-man, or Comb-maker; a Vinegar Merchant, or a
Cartwheel-maker or a Smoothing-Iron-maker, etc. that they should ever profound
into the secrets of State, or dive into the meaning of that Learned King: But
there is that which I am concerned to make out, That the Words of King James
are grossly mistaken, or wilfully misapplyed; That he means not by those
Puritans, such as the generality of Dissenters now are; and that he has in his
Preface to his said Book, abundantly satisfied the World of his true and pious
Intentions. A brief Account whereof I shall now give the Reader, that he may
learn, if ever it should be his misfortune to come upon a Jury to which Matters
out of his reach and depth should be offered for his Subscribing, Swearing, and
Presenting, to demean himself with that Prudence and Uprightness that becomes a
Christian.

1. Let us then hear King James himself, his Royal Comment upon his own Royal
Text: The first Calumny (says he in his Preface) is grounded upon the sharp and
bitter words that therein are used in the description of the Humors of the
Puritans. First then, as to the Name of Puritans, I am not ignorant, that the
Style thereof does properly belong to the vile Sect among the Anabaptists,
called The Family of Love; because they think themselves only Pure, and in a
manner without Sin, the only True Church, and only worthy to be participant
of the Sacraments; and all the rest of the World to be but Abominable in the
sight of God: of this special Sect I principally mean when I speak of Puritans.
And partly indeed, I give this style to such Brainsick and heady Preachers,
their Disciples, and Followers, as refusing to be called of that Sect, yet
participate too much of their Humors, in maintaining the abovementioned
Errors.

Very good! I would humbly ask then, How a Grand Jury can Swear in Knowledge,
Judgment, and Righteousness, with Truth and a Good Conscience, That those words
of the King may as truly be Affirmed of the generality of Protestant Dissenters
here in England at this day, as they were asserted of those Puritans so
described by His Majesty in his times? It is very well known to all the World
(though it be not expected from men of mean Occupations to know it) That the
Dissenters do generally detest the thoughts of imagining themselves the Only
Pure People, or to be without Sin, or to be the Only True Church, in
opposition to other Reformed Churches of France, Holland, Germany, and England;
but do perfectly Harmonize with that whole Body of Protestants in all the
Articles of Faith, and Fundamental Points of Religion: nay, it is most
apparent, that his Majesty would be Interpreted to speak of none but the Family
of Love, or such as maintained their Error, wherein the generality of
Protestant Dissenters are not in the least concerned or involved.

However, let His Majesty proceed: It is only of this kind of Men, in this
Book, (says the King) that I write so sharply -- but all that other part (N.
B.) I protest upon mine Honor, I mean it not generally of all Preachers or
others, that like better of the single form of Policy in our Church (the Church
of Scotland) than of the many Ceremonies of the Church of England: That are
persuaded that THEIR Bishops smells of a Papal Supremacy: That the Surplice,
the cornered Cap, and such like, are the outward badges of Popish Error. May we
then believe His Majesty's Words? Then how can they justify their Oaths, who
Swear, and Declare, That the Kings Words may as truly be affirmed of the
present Dissenters, (whom the Pamphleteer is pleased to style Sectaries) as of
those Puritans, when the King who doubtless understood his own meaning, better
than these Men of Blow Aprons, openly declares the contrary, and has left it
upon Record under his own hand to Posterity? Let us then for once suppose, that
the generality of Dissenters among us in England should judge, That the plain
simple Form of Government used in Scotland in those days, was more desirable
than many Ceremonies at that time (or since) used in the Church of England.
Suppose (if you please) That the generality of Dissenters should think, that
the English Bishops did a little smell of Papal Supremacy: Suppose further,
that they should fancy that their Surplice, their cornered Cap, and such like
usages, as the Cross in one Sacrament, Kneeling in the other, were Badges of
Popish Errors; however, they may be mistaken, yet King James will acquit them
of having any share upon that Account, in those severe Characters he then gave
of that kind of Puritans. No, (says he) I am so far from being Contentious in
these things, (which for my own part, I ever esteemed as indifferent) as I do
equally love and honor the Learned and Grave Men of either of these Opinions;
it can no ways become me (so he goes on) to pronounce so lightly of so old a
Controversy (He knew as well as any man, that the difference had been from the
Infancy of the Reformation;) Nay, he knew that it had generally obtained in his
Church of Scotland: He adds; We all (God be praised) do agree in the grounds;
and the bitterness of Men, upon such questions, does but trouble the Peace of
the Church, or give advantage and entry to the Papists by our Division.

Let the Matter then be Referred to the Impartial Reader, or to whomsoever it
may pertain, Whether King James designed to lash those who were not reconciled
to Ceremonies and Prelacy, by that Expression, which our Jurymen, do upon
their Oaths Present to be equally applicable to the Protestant Dissenters
(disguised under the odious Name of Sectaries) as to those Puritans whom his
Majesty has so clearly Deciphered?

Nay, the King proceeds further, and goes higher; Advising those that differ
from the Established Form of Government and Worship, to possess their Souls in
peace, and to press by patience, and well-grounded Reasons, either to persuade
all the rest to like of their Judgments; or else, where they see better grounds
on the other part, not to be ashamed peaceably to incline thereto; laying aside
all preoccupied Opinions: And I think I may engage for all the Protestant
Dissenters in England, that they would rest satisfied, might they have the
choice of what His Majesty so frankly offered to them in that Generation.

To shut up his Majesty's Apology: he tells us, he doubts not to satisfy all
the World, That this is the true and only meaning of his words, from the place
it self: where (says he) After I have spoken of the faults of our
Ecclesiastical Estate, I exhort my Son to be beneficial unto the good Men of
the Ministry, (understand him of the then Church of Scotland) praising God
there, that there is presently (i. e. at that present time) a sufficient Number
of good men of them in this Kingdom; and yet they are all known to be against
the Form of the English Church.

To shut up all: Let the Sober, the Wise, and Impartial judge, and all that are
not frantic with Malice, and Drunk with Rage, Whether His Majesty could
possibly understand by those Puritans, the Ministers of the Presbyterian
Persuasion, such as were the generality of the Scottish Church, and yet they
were well known (if we may believe His Majesty) to be against the Form of the
English Church.

It cannot therefore enter into my Head, how it should once enter into the
Heads of a Grand Jury, made up of Persons so Uncharacterized as before, to
Present upon their Oaths, That King James's Words against the Puritans may be
as truly Affirmed of the Modern Dissenters. I must therefore Conclude, That
either the Printer has abused their Honesty, or some subtle Instrument imposed
upon their Understandings, and drawn them in to Swear Implicitly to a meaning
so Contradictory to the Declared Judgment, and Avowed Sentiments of the King
himself: And there are some, I perceive, do conjecture that a certain
Law-driver on the other side of the Water, to whom Heraclitus Ridens by his
Last Will and Testament, bequeathed his Scraps and Fragments of Law, who misled
the poor Innocent Souls into this gross Mistake, no less Scandalous to that
Glorious Prince, than Opposite to his Intendments. And to confirm my own
Apprehensions in this matter, I shall Present, (though not upon Oath) the Names
of the Grand Jury to the Reader, and then Commit it to his Judgment, Whether
such Persons may be rationally conceived to have ventured to quote Basilicon
Doron, A Piece so infinitely beyond the Comprehension of such Persons.

John Page, Woollen Draper. Robert Sparks, Weaver. Henry Beresford, Brewer.
Daniel Duthess, Vinegar Merchant. Thomas Hatcher, Tally-man. Thomas Ainsworth,
Dyer. Richard Smart, Gartwheel-maker. Matthew Pierce, Meal-man. William Smith,
Salter. William Wornham Baker. William Duk, Thomas Morgan, Grocer. Francis
Walker, Comb-maker. Carty Stanton, Carpenter. Philip Barker, Brewers Clerk.
Francis Pound, Smoothing-Iron-maker. Joseph Garret, Plummer. Thomas Waker,
Cheesemonger. William Green, Drummer.


LONDON, Printed for R. Oswell.


