Monsieur PETER JVRIEV's PASTORAL LETTER ON THE DEATH of the QUEEN.

A PASTORAL LETTER Written on the Occasion of the DEATH Of the Late Queen of
England Of Blessed Memory. WITH REFLECTIONS ON THE Greatness of that Loss to
EUROPE.

By PETER JVRIEV, Professor of Divinity, and one of the Ministers of the French
Church at Rotterdam.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Bible without Temple Bar: And Richard
Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCXCV.

A PASTORAL LETTER ON THE Death of the Queen.
Most Dear Brethren,
MY Thoughts are so fixed upon the sad Object of our Grief, that it is impossible
for me to divert them from that, to the Consideration of those Subjects with
which I had designed to entertain the Public. The Death of the QUEEN of
ENGLAND, whom God has lately taken away from us, does too entirely possess
every Mind that is touched with it, to leave room for any other Reflections. Out
of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth must speak; Our Loss is too great, and
our Grief too strong to be suppressed. And to whom can I speak of that Loss more
fitly than to you, my Dear Brethren, to whom that Great QVEEN was both a Mother
and a Protectress? But what shall I say to you on this Occasion? Shall I
attempt to write Her Funeral Oration? That is a Design far above my strength to
execute. It may be said, without flat^ering that Great Princess, that Her high
and extraordinary Merit had raised Her above all Praise. At least it is certain,
that he that would praise Her worthily, must be Master of all that Elevation of
Thought, and Beauty of Expression, which we admire in the best Orators. But
besides, this is not, in my Opinion, the Task that is prescribed to us by our
Duty, and the Great Design which I have in my view, to instruct and support you
under your Temptations. It Is the misfortune of our Time or rather of all
former Ages, that it is impossible, by these Elogies (...) to distinguish
between Truth and Falsehood, or between real and counterfeit Merit, by reason of
the flattering Colors with which Vice is daubed over. There is indeed a
certain kind of Shame that restrains men from running to an Excess in the
praise of Living Persons, whose Actions are for the most part daily Refutations
of their Elogies: But it is looked upon as a Duty, and matter of Conscience, to
observe no measures with respect to the Dead. The Heathens did not only Deify
their Emperors, for we are informed by the Learned, that there were generally
three Letters engraved on the Tombs of deceased Persons, which signify, Sacred
to the Gods Manes. When Death has drawn the Curtain, it is only the shining part
of a Life that breaks through, and all the shadows, or rather dark parts of it
remain hid. Which is the Reason that Orators imagine that they are priviledg'd
to use all manner of liberty on these Occasions: Every thing appears strained
and exaggerated; they tell us not only all the good Qualities that their Heroes
and Heroins had, but also alls those that they wanted. And even sometime, they
proceed to such a height of excess, as to make Heroical Virtues, of Actions and
Sentiments that are real Crimes, not only according to the Spirit of the
Gospel, but even according to the dictates of Human Morality. It Is plain that
Panegyrists labor more for their own Glory, than for that of their Heroes.
They would inspire us with Grief; but the Pains which they take, and the Art
which they use to compass that design, serve only to convince us that they
neither believe, nor are touched with what they say. True sorrow is altogether
inconsistent with so much Art; so prevailing a Disorder does almost deter
grateful Minds from paying just Homage to true Worth. For in few years, say
they, it will not be known who is the Flatterer, whether he that Writes the
Elogy of a Vicious Person, or he who Celebrates a Heroin. But I leave this
difficulty to be considered by those who shall be called to immortalize the
Memory and Virtues of this Great QVEEN, and they will easily surmount it. For
let the Age be as unjust, Calumny as spiteful, and Flattery as universal as
it is possible to conceive them to be; the Brightness of that Princess's Life,
will still be sufficient to dissipate all the Clouds, with which a Party that
are Enemies to God, would darken it.

It was the Custom to visit the Tombs of the Illustrious Deceased, either to
Weep over them, or to cover them with Flowers: But it is not barely with such a
design that we approach the Tomb of our Great Queen. It Is true, we cannot
behold this great Triumph of Death, without feeling our Souls pierced with
Grief, and without watering our Bosoms with Tears: But far from coming thither
to Weep, we rather come to dry our Tears, and seek for Comfort; neither do we
bring Flowers, but come to seek Fruit. For never did there happen a more
instructive Accident, or which could better teach us what we are, what we ought
to be, and what we ought to think: These are the Lessons that I intend to lay
before you at present. But these Instructions have so great a dependence upon
the Worth and Excellency of the Princess whom we Mourn, that I must say
something of Her great Qualities, of the Beauties of Her Body and Mind, and of
the Circumstances of Her Elevation and Fortune.

MARY Princess of England had certainly all that could render a Persons lovely,
either in respect to the Body or to the Mind. The Spirit of Christianity, which
despises Flesh and Matter, will not suffer me to insist upon those visible
Beauties with which that Princess was Enriched: I shall content my self with
applying to her what was said of another Queen, whose Memory is not yet lost,
that She was altogether Lovely, and that it was impossible not to love her. But
She did not in the least resemble those Princesses who have all that is
necessary to inspire Love, but are destitute of that Virtue which is necessary
to preserve them from Love. It Is well known that Beauty is one of the greatest
Temptations to which a Woman is obnoxious: For that is a Temptation which is
ever present with Her, even when She is farthest removed from Tempters. Our
QUEEN was from Her Birth of a Sweet and Mild Temper; She was not capable of
uttering a hard word; but she was armed with so powerful and perfect a Modesty,
that never any guilty Thought durst arise in Her presence. She was naturally
Devout, the bent of her Heart was toward God; She was full of Compassion for
the Miserable, Humble without Meanness, Great without Pride, Easy of Access,
and Affable; and none ever went from her Presence without being Charmed by Her.
With all these great Endowments which she owed to Her Blood and happy
Constitution, rather than to Her Education, She fell into the Hands of WILLIAM
HENRY Prince of ORANGE, while She was yet almost a Child. That Prince, at that
time in the hottest part of his Youth, had acquired in the School of
Affliction, all the Ripeness and Solidity of the Wisest Old Age. He found in
the Princess a Soul tender and capable of every good Impression. And it may be
said, that the Prince never gave a more illustrious Proof of his great Ability,
than in the manner by which He stamped His own Image on Her soft Mind. He was
Her Husband, Her Father, and Her Guide; and in a little time rendered Her one
of the best Accomplished Persons in the World. This was His Masterpiece; He
taught Her to Reign long before She was a Queen; He inspired Her with that
Wisdom, that Silence, that Reservedness, and that Moderation, which is
hereditary to the Family of WILLIAM of Nassau, Prince of ORANGE; who was
Sirnam'd, the Silent, or the Reserved. The Court of this Young Princess was
diametrically opposite to all the other Courts of Europe: No gaudy Pleasures,
no Conversations of Vain Wits, no scandalous Divertisements, no Intriegues of
Gallantry were to be found there. She never would endure any Persons to be ill
spoken of in her Presence, not even the Enemies of the Prince Her Husband: For
though She detested the Crime, yet She would not suffer the Faults of Mankind
to be made the matter of common Talk: And as soon as any Persons opened their
Mouths on such a design, She never failed to impose Silence, at least by a
certain coldness, and an Air which chilled the most fiery Tongues. Nor did she
take pleasure in the Relations of public News, and the Reflections that are
usually made upon them; because she had learned never to discover her
Sentiments on such Subjects. And therefore those who made Court to Her, never
entered upon these Matters, or at least did not insist upon them: For Courtiers
study the Inclinations of the Prince, to follow them. So that 'twas no wonder
that the general Conversation before the Princess did often seem dry: For take
away Backbiting and Public News from ordinary Discourse, and there will be
very little left. But to make amends, Her Confidents, who had the honor to see
Her in private, found in Her an admirable Openness of Mind, and a Solidity of
Judgment altogether beyond Her Sex: Yet She was still reserved to those whom
prudence forbid Her to confide in: These Perfections were accompanied with a
brisk and pleasant Wit and Humor, which might have seemed inconsistent with so
clear a Judgment; for the pleasant Humor of Ladies proceeds usually from the
Heat of their Imagination, which gets the better of their Judgment. But Her
Airiness never carried Her to the least Indecency: I believe there is not one
Man or Woman in the World that will dare to affirm that they ever heard Her
speak a Word that ought not to have been spoken, or saw Her do an Action that
ought not to have been done. This is indeed a high Commendation, but it is
literally true, and without the least Exaggeration. Her great Soul was never
put to a harder Trial, than on the occasion of the Revolution in England; and
Her Wisdom never appeared with greater luster. Never was there a nicer Juncture
for a truly Christian Soul, for a Wife that was still a Lover, and a Daughter
deeply sensible of Her Duty. I know some persons to whom She then did the
honor to discover the bottom of Her Soul, which was agitated by so many
troublesome, different, and even contrary Motions; where the Husband and the
father were contending together, in that tender Heart, which became the Field
of all their Battles. But it may be truly said, that She disengaged Her self
out of all these perplexing Circumstances in an admirable manner: And that She
Sacrificed Her Love, Her Quiet, and Her Tenderness, to Her Zeal to Her God, to
the Public, and to Her Religion.

Such is the Character of our QUEEN, for the truth of which, and that I have
not flattered Her in the Picture that I have made of Her, I may appeal to the
King Her Husband, and to the Public that adored Her. It Is well known, that
Conjugal Love is rare, and usually very cold among the Great; the Delights of a
Court enervate the Soul, and Criminal Passions destroy Lawful ones, as the
flame of Powder and Saltpeter extinguishes the brightest Torches. But our pure
and chaste Princes did not dissipate their Hearts and Affections on Foreign
Objects. The Court of England was become a Holy Court. Concubines, Amors,
Mistresses, Intrigues and Jealousies were not heard of there. All the Royal
Houses by the Piety of these Great Sovereigns were happily changed into Temples
and Oratories; where God was served sincerely and purely; where the Divine
Service was no longer made a Ceremonial Part of the Royal Grandeur. The Queen
had her Hours of Devotion exactly regulated. In the Morning, before She went to
Her Chapel, She entered into Her Closet, where She remained several hours. In
the Evening She observed the same Method, after She came from thence. How many
Prayers did She put up, how many Exercises of Devotion and Humiliation has She
been seen to practice upon Extraordinary Occasions, such as that of the Prince
Her Husband's Expedition to England!

After She came to the Throne, Her Advancement made no change in Her Manners,
in Her Sweetness, and Mildness; in Her Piety, Modesty and Abstinence from all
the Criminal Pleasures of Worldly Courts. With Her cheerful Temper, she lived
more contentedly among Her Women, Her Work, and Her Gardens, than other
Princesses, do in the midst of all Their Studi'd Delights, and Pompous
Effeminacies. The Court began to put on a very different Air, from that which
it had formerly. Vice, which reigns insolently everywhere else, began to hide
its face there; a happy presage that it would quickly disappear! That Great
King, being deeply touched with all the Excellent Perfections of His
Incomparable QUEEN, after a Possession of Seventeen or Eighteen Years, loved
Her with more Ardour than others do at the birth and height of their Passion.
Besides a thousand Proofs that he has given of His rare Tenderness, the
QUEEN's Death has confirmed it beyond exception. He never stirred from Her
Chamber during the whole course of Her Sickness. He was often seen to burst
forth into Tears; and when She expired, Death seemed resolved to put an end to
two Lives by one Blow: For the Living KING had as many Signs of Death as the
Dying QUEEN. He who never feared any thing; whom the greatest Dangers could
never daunt, had not Courage enough to bear so Cruel a Separation. Those
numberless Deaths which he had often looked in the face, were never able to
shock his great Soul. The QUEEN's Death alone found out his tender part, and
made him give ground. That lively and unusual Grief in a Prince, who is
naturally of a dauntless and unconcerned Temper, and incapable of being
disturbed by Passions, is a certain sign, that the Bonds which united these two
Souls, were unexpressibly strong; And at the same time it is a clear Proof of
the Heroical Virtue of both. They loved each other almost to excess, because
they knew one another to be perfectly virtuous, and worthy to be loved. For the
Love of God, and of his Glory, was the source of their Conjugal Love. And upon
this Occasion give me leave to represent to you the greatness of our Obligation
to these two Illustrious Lovers. They were linked together by the closest Ties,
they were passionately enamored of each other; and yet suffered themselves to
be separated every Year by a voluntary Exile of Six Months. The King sacrificed
His dearest Delights to the Public Good, and to the Glory of God: And the
Loving QUEEN, during these tedious Campaigns, sacrificed that Dear Husband, and
exposed Him to the Faithlesness of the Sea, to that more terrible treachery of
Men, and to the Dangers of Battles, in which His Courage engaged Him every
moment: And all, for the Public Good, for the Quiet of Europe, and for the
Glory of Her God.

Nor was the End of this Princess unsuitable to Her Beginning. Young and Fair
as She was, a QUEEN, and a Happy QUEEN, adored by Her own Subjects, and by
Strangers; She welcomed Death like one that had reason to be weary of the
World, and as if the World had been weary of Her. Being informed on the second
day of Her Sickness, that Her Disease was the Small Pox, and of a very
dangerous Kind, because they did not come out; She addressed Her self to God in a
most devout Prayer, and resigned Her self to his Hands. When She was advertised
of the fatal Approaches of Death, She received the news with a great deal of
Firmness, and without the least Disturbance. She made Her Peace with God, and
received the stroke of Death, bowing down Her Head, and lifting up Her Soul
toward Heaven, like and Innocent Lamb, or a pure Victim, that offers up it
self to its God in a voluntary Oblation.

Think what Advantages the World received, and might have received from such a
Queen. And indeed it may be said that never any Person of her Sex, that had a
King and a Husband alive, was so useful to Mankind. Private Persons may speak
of this from their own Experience, What a vast multitude of Alms, of Pious and
Charitable Works are now with Her before God. She was sensibly touched with the
Affliction of the People of God. She maintained every where a great Number of
Women of Quality, who had left their Estates and Country. She contributed large
Sums for the Entertainment of so many indigent Persons, who being driven from
their own Habitations, had without Her assistance, led a most wretched and
languishing Life. She had the Blessings of the Widow and the Orphan; and Her
only Grief was that She could not provide for all their Necessities.

These Advantages which we received, were indeed very precious in the fight of
God. But there were others that shined brighter in the Eyes of Men. Who can
enough admire her Wisdom, Prudence and Courage in sharing the burden of
Government with Her Illustrious Husband. By Her that Great King could be
present in several Places at once. By Her He extended his Empire beyond the
Sea. While He commanded Armies on our Frontiers, and set bounds to that
ambitious Grandeur, that would have swallowed up all the World: The Queen
supplied his place on the Throne; She assisted at Her Council four or five
hours together, answered all Proposals with an admirable Presence of Mind, and
with a piercing clearness of Judgment unfolded the most knotty difficulties.
And in what Time did She rule so successfully? In the most difficult Times that
England ever saw; in the midst of a thousand Conspirators who covered their
pernicious Designs with the specious pretext of a tender Conscience, and
Allegiance to their Sovereign. The Enemies Fleet appeared on the Coasts under
the formidable Name of an injured King, and an incensed Father: within Cabals
were formed to introduce the Enemy. The King was absent, busied in defending
the Frontiers of His Allies. The Queen watches, labors night and day, takes
Her measures, prevents the Conspirators, sees that Fleet dispersed which came to
put Her in Chains, and like a Rock remains unmoved in the midst of so furious a
Tempest. Every Campaign renewed Her Labors, and still She was attended with
the same glorious success. When the King returned, She returned to Her Rest,
She retired peaceably to Her Works and Gardens, as if She had been capable of
nothing else. Just like those Heroes of ancient Rome, who left their Country
Labors to command Armies, and having routed the Enemies, and secured the
Commonwealth, returned again to their little Employments. We have already seen
what a Queen we have lost: let us now hearken to the Instructions that are
offered to us by the Illustrious Deceased,

In the first place, She gives us a Lesson, concerning the Vanity of the World,
which ought to have a great influence upon us. It Is true we see daily Examples
of it; but they are so many, that they cannot make a lasting Impression upon
us. We are so accustomed to them, that we must have remarkable Examples set
before us from time to time, to rouse us out of that Stupidity in which we are
buried. The common People, Citizens, and Tradesmen perish before our eyes; but
these are unpriviledg'd Heads which fall in heaps, and dye unregarded. A
thousand Funerals pass along our Streets; and are no sooner past than
forgotten. They tell us of Princes and Kings that died some Ages ago, which now
are only so many vain Names in History. The Preachers draw these Goblins out of
their Sepulchers, to affright us: but they lose their labor. Death seizes on
as many Crowned Heads in this, as in any former Age; for a Crown has no more
power now to bestow Immortality upon him that wears it, than it had a thousand
years ago. But we have always some pretext ready to excuse our want of
attention, and to elude the force of such Examples. That Prince was old, and
'twas time for him to be going. This Princess was tender, and could not live
long. Another had done a great deal of mischief, and 'twas just that he should
go to receive the Punishments that he deserved. One was hated by his Subjects,
and therefore Death was a Blessing to him. And another, it is true, did little
harm, but less good, and therefore the World was well rid of him.

Come, my dear Brethren and Fellow Mourners, come and see: Behold an Instance,
that cuts off all such pretexts. Behold a Young Person who had received from
Nature all imaginable Favors; see a Great Princess in the flower of her Age,
of a sound Constitution, which promised a long Life; behold a Charitable Soul,
an inexhausted Source of Good Works, and the Delight of all the World. Behold
in this Instance the Vanity of the World unvailed, the meanness of the most
shining Creatures, the weakness of Humane Confidence, and the disappointment of
all the Hopes of Man. Learn to ralse your Minds to more solid Enjoyments, which
Death cannot rob you of. And You, who abuse your Beauty to serve your criminal
Designs, instead of making a right use of it, as this Great Princess did of
Hers; come and see, in this great Mirror, what e're long you shall likewise be.

Palaces, Guards, well manned Walls, Ornaments, rich Furniture, delicious
Tables, numerous Trains of Servants, and the magnificent Pomp of your guilty
Pleasures; all these things shall not save you from the insults of Death. For
if those things be done in a green Tree; what shall be done in the dry? Weep,
says that Great Princess, weep for your selves, and not for Me. Let us weep
for our own Vanity. For She is crowned with Glory in the Heavens, where She is
now receiving the Recompense of Her Good Works. But we are left in a World,
which rouls like a furious Torrent, where Young and Old are carried headlong to
the Abyss of Death. You Great Persons, who abuse your Power, behold this
Example; and remember that you shall be quickly summoned to receive the
Sentence of Death from that Judge, who has lately rewarded our Queen with a new
and glorious Crown.

I proceed to a second Lesson, which is no less important than the former. The
Queen's Death by discovering to us the Vanity of the World, teaches us how to
Live. And the Piety and Resignation with which She received Her Death,
instructs us how to Dye. After the second Day of Her Sickness, they did not
conceal from her the Nature of her Distemper: and she received the News with an
extraordinary strength of Mind, and with a perfect Submission. Yet there were
still some hopes left till the sixth day of Her Disease. But then the
Combination of several deadly Symptoms, the Smallpox, the Measles, Erisypelas,
Purple Fever, oppression at Her Breast, and loss of Blood took away all hope of
Life. My Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, who never left Her, delivered the
dismal Message to Her (...) the whole Court and City were in despair, all
Persons were covered with Tears, there was nothing to be heard but Sighs and
Groans: the King lost all his Courage, and both He and She were equally
bewailed. The Queen alone received the fatal Tidings without trouble: She
answered, that She was ready to render to God that Soul which She had received
from him: She addressed her self to him with a most ardent Devotion, to obtain
his Mercy; She resigned Her self to His Will; She begged forgiveness in the
Name, and through the Blood of Her Savior, Jesus Christ; and recommended to
Him, that which was dearest to Her in the World, the King Her Husband. The rest
of Wednesday and Thursday even to Her Death She past in a perfect freedom of
Mind, and in the Transports and Raptures of a Soul that was wholly devoted to
God: She comforted Her Comforter, and edifi'd all Her Assistants; She received
the Sacrament devoutly, and at last yielded up Her Soul to God, without
suffering it to be forced from Her.

My Brethren, the most wretched Creatures are not willing to die; they have
oftentimes no reason to desire to live; yet they will not be persuaded to a
religious Preparation for Death. Let us hearken to this Example, which sets
before us a Queen, Young, Fair, Happy, Loved and Adored, Tied to the World by
the firmest Bonds: yet all these Ties were broken by the hands of Her Piety, as
if they had been made of Chaff. O Death, said a certain Wise man, how bitter is
the remembrance of thee to one that lives peaceably in his own House: but how
much more bitter might it have been to Her who lived gloriously in a
magnificent Palace? Let us labor then my Brethren, to cover our selves with a
holy Confusion: Let us learn to die in our Meanness, in our Baseness, in our
Poverty, in our Cottages; as this Young Queen has done in the midst of all Her
Grandeur, and of all Her Glory.

These are truly great Lessons, but I have sound out others that are both
higher and more Mysterious.

First, I admire the depth of the Providence, and Judgments of God. Who knows,
whether we have not occasioned the death of our dear Princess, by our excessive
Love of Her? If you have studied the History of Providence, you ought to have
learned there, that God takes pleasure to break our Idols. Of these Idols some
are vain, such as were those of the Gentiles; and these God breaks to pieces in
his indignation, and in the Fury of his Jealousy: Others are good and worthy
to be loved, but they cause us to learn too much to the Creature; which is
always displeasing to God, and therefore he breaks these Idols in his Mercy,
and for our Salvation. Sometimes he produces those Masterpieces of his
Goodness, he sets them before us, and leaves them with us, so long as it is
necessary to make us know them and love them: and then he withdraws his Work
and his Image from us, and takes them to himself, least we should run to an
Excess, by loving those Excellent Persons too much with respect to Themselves,
and too little with regard to Him, who is Author of all their Grandeur and
Perfections.

Secondly, Here we may see the Condemnation of the rash and unwarrantable
judgments of some who say, that God in his Justice shortens the days of those,
who make a bad use of them. If ever Person made a right use of her Time, and of
her Life, it was certainly our Great and pious Queen. But why then did not God
prolong Her days? These are the depths of God, and the Abyss of his Wisdom
into which we must not search. No man knows either love or hatred, by all
that is before them; there is one event to him that sacrifices and to him that
sacrifices not. There is a Just Man that perishes in his Righteousness, and
there is a Wicked Man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness, says the
Wise man. The Wicked descends to the Grave with a hoary head; and he whom God
loves is withdrawn from the Evil that is to come. Nor have the Godly any
Reason to complain of their Lot; they shall receive Crowns in Heaven more
valuable than those which they may have lost on Earth. Indeed we who are left
here, are wont to complain, but unjustly; God takes from us Persons of whom the
World was not worthy: and why did not we render our selves worthy to enjoy them?

Thirdly, Let us learn from hence silently to adore the unsearchable Judgments
of God. God leaves in the World an infinite number of Persons, that are like
Blemishes on a fair Face: Clouds they are without Water, carried about of
Winds. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame. Spots in our
Feasts of Charity. And without reckoning the Wicked, how many useless Persons
are there in the World? If we consult our own false Wisdom we may perhaps break
forth into such Complaints are these: Ah! why are there not a Million of those
base and guilty Wretches sacrificed for the Preservation of One so dear and
precious a Life? Why do Persecuters and the Disturbers of the Public Quiet
prolong their days to be Scourges of Mankind; whilst the Delights of the World
fly away with the swiftness of a shadow, which vanishes away, and returns no
more? Let us learn, O Christians, to make a right use, or rather to make no use
at all of that Word which is so common amongst us: It had been better
otherwise. To how many Persons do we apply this Word; if such a Person dies,
immediately, we cry, It had been better otherwise. Thou know, O God, and
thou make us know that this is a great Error! Whatsoever thou do is always
best. Thy Will is ever good and perfect. Grant then that we may acquiesce in
it: Instruct us in the Depths of thy Wisdom, and make us sensible of the
Justice of thy Actions; that we may henceforth avoid such profane Expressions.

In the last place, we ought to admire with the Prophet, the conduct of that
God, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. His Providence does
often set in order second Causes, for the production of Effects, which his
eternal Decrees will bring forth in their due time. And this Order appears so
natural to us, that we cannot believe, that he will change it for another: But
on a sudden we see this Order reverst, and those Chains of second Causes broken
to pieces. We are in an Age of Iron and of Brass, we live in the Dregs of
Time, a Time in which the World and the Church have need of great Agents, and
Examples for the Reformation both of Doctrine and Manners. God seemed to have
united the two wisest, most pious, and most zealous Persons of our Age, to
accomplish his work, and make a new Christian World. The Union of these two
great Souls appeared to us like the Conjunction of two great Stars, which, we
expected, should have shed their influences on both sides of the Seas, by
making Peace to spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness to come down from
Heaven. And indeed these effects were already produced in a very sensible
manner. Already God had begun to fulfill our hopes, and accomplish his own
Designs. When, lo! by an unexpected stroke, he had at last interrupted the
Course of those Prosperities, which that Union could not fail to produce.

By this Conduct God would teach us two things. The First is our own Ignorance:
We believed that he would proceed in one Method, and we see that he has taken
another. Which ought to make us acknowledge our ignorance of the Depths of his
Providence. The other thing, that God would teach us, is, that we should
always live in an entire, and even in some measure, in an immediate dependence
on his Will. He would not have us to depend too much on humane means. He would
give us to understand, that his Wisdom is infinite, and that he has a thousand
ways to arrive at the same end. He deprives us of Persons that seemed to be
most necessary for the execution of his Designs; and yet he would not have us
doubt of the accomplishment of them. Let us leave all to him, for if he does
not finish his Work by this Way, he will certainly do it by another. We
thought that he would have performed that great Work by two excellent Persons:
And he has now taught us that having begun it by Two illustrious Heads, he will
perfect it by One. Our Great Queen has been not a little useful to produce
those great Events: If she did not lead the Prince to the Throne, she
facilitated the ways to it, which his own Wisdom and Courage had opened. She
was the Bond of Union between the King and the Nation: She has established that
Union during Six years. She has in in her time raised our dead Hopes, and
revived our dead Church, God resolves to finish without Her, that which he
begun by Her. And so long as God shall preserve to us Him who is the Breath of
our Nostrils, according to the Style of the Prophet, we will breath still, we
will hope, and we will live.

I am not ignorant, that the Enemies of the Peace of Europe will be ready to
conceive great hopes from this mournful Accident. But He that sits in the
Heavens shall laugh at their devices. He has already sufficiently explained his
gracious intentions: And so favorable a Providence appeared evidently in this
sad Juncture; that we may plainly see, that he that gave the blow, has no mind
to destroy us. It was more natural that this Misfortune should have happened to
us in the Heat of Summer, which is the proper season for Malignant Diseases:
And then the King's absence might have put an opportunity into the hands of his
Enemies to plot mischief at home. This fatal Death might have also surpised
us, when the Parliament was not assembled; and by this means have given
occasion to the vain hopes, and perhaps also to the treasonable attempts of our
Enemies. But the Presence of the King, the sitting of the Parliament, and the
entire Union that is between Him and them, are sufficient to dispel all our
Fears, and give us a comfortable assurance of the future success of the just
Cause. God has indeed discharged the Torrents of his indignation against us,
but he has set bounds to them: He has poured forth the Vial of his Fury upon
us; but he stopped it before it came to the bottom. We ought every one of us to
stand between the Dead and the Living, that the Plague may be staid. We ought
to beseech God to inspite that Great King with wise Counsel, that he may
continue his assistance to those to whom his presence is so necessary; and to
enable him to fill up that great Breach which will be made by his absence, and
by the death of his other Self: And if God shall vouchsafe to grant these our
Petitions, we may still without vanity preserve our hopes.

Thus, my Brethren, in the midst of those Tears, which ought never to be dried
up, since our Loss can never be repaired; let us trust in God, and in the
goodness of the King, who is of himself full of compassion, as you have found
by frequent experience. And henceforth we have reason to hope, that he will
unite in his own Heart all that Charity and Mercy which were formerly divided
between Him and the Queen. He that loved that amiable and pious Princess with
so much ardour, will certainly cherish Her memory, and Her Works will be dear
to Him. And since Her Goodness and Beneficence to you was one of her most
glorious Works, we may be assured that our Great Prince will perfect it, rather
than over-turn it. All that vast number of Altars and living Temples, where
that Great Queen offered up daily Sacrifices of Charity, are so many glorious
Monuments, by which the honor of Her Memory is more exalted, than by the most
Magnificent Tombs. It Is true those Altars are but Dust, and these Temples are
made of Flesh and Blood, and must e're long be destroyed by Death. But the
sweet odor of these Sacrifices shall never perish; it shall spread it self
through the whole Universe, it shall ascend to the heavens, and endure
throughout all Ages: And we hope that the Royal Bounty of that afflicted
Prince, will also preserve and maintain the Monuments of his dear Queen's
Piety, so long as our miseries shall require his Assistance.

As you must now unite in the King alone, all those hopes which you formerly
divided between Him and the Queen: you ought also to join for Him alone all
those ardent Prayers, which you were wont to offer up for Them both, Let us
then humbly address our selves to God, beseeching him to cover that Great
Prince with his Providence, as with an impenetrable Shield; to preserve his
sacred Person from all the Attempts of his Enemies; to continue and increase
the Affection and Zeal, which those Nations that God has committed to his
charge, have for him; to make him a Terror to all the Wicked, and the Delight
of all Good men; to place him for a Sign in Israel; to increase that piety with
which his Soul is already filled; to establish him in the possession of that
Grace, which shall guide him happily in his Race through this World, and at
last bring him to Eternal Glory.

January 15. 1695.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Dan. Brown, at the Swan and Bible without Temple Bar.
Rules for Decyphering and explaining all manner of Secret Writing, with exact
Methods for Understanding Intimations by Signs, Gestures, or Speech: Also an
Account of the Secret Ways of Conveying Written Messages. Discovered by
Trithemius Lord Bacon, Bishop Welkins, etc.

The Cause and Cure of Offenses, by R. Kingston.

The Spanish Decameron, containing Ten Curious Novells, viz. The Rival Ladies,
the Mistakes, the Generous Loves, the Libertine, the Amorous Miser, etc.

The History of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors; together with the Life of
the most Illustrious Monarch Almansor, and of the several Revolutions of the
mighty Empire of the Caliphs, and of the Affrican Kingdoms.

The Vanity of Arts and Sciences, by Henry Cornielus Agrippa.

The Travells of Love and Jealousy, a Novel.

Monsieur Serron's Novels, viz. The Hypocrite: The Innocent Adultery: The
Miser: Unexpected Choice, etc.

BOOKS Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
THE French King's Declaration for Settling the General Poll-Tax: Together with
his Edict, ordering all Communites both Regular and Secular, and all particular
Persons, who have any Water from Rivers, Brooks, Springs and Fountains, or
otherwise, (whether for the Ornament of their Houses, or the Improving of their
Estates,) to pay such Sums as shall be imposed upon them in Council, in order
to have the Benefit of the said Waters confirmed to them for the future. Given
at Fountain-bleau, October. 1694. and Recorded in Parliament.

A New and easy Method to understand the Roman History: With an exact
Chronology of the Reign of the Emperors: And Account of the most Eminent
Authors, when they flourished; and an Abridgment of the Roman Antiquities and
Customs. By way of Dialogue, for the Use of the Duke of Burgundy. Done out of
French, with very large Additions and Amendments, by Mr. Tho. Brown.

Miscellaneous Letters, giving an Account of the Works of the Learned, both at
Home and Abroad. To be published Monthly.

The Works of F. Rabelais, M. D. in five Books; or the Lives, Heroic Deeds,
and Saying of the good Gargantua and Pantagruel, and his Voyage to the Oracle
of the Bottle. As also his Historical Letters. To which is added the Author's
Life, and Explanatory Remarks. By Mr. Motteux. Never before printed in English.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments, as
well against as for the late Revolution, are impartially represented and
considered, In XIII Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, an Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

A Collection of Speeches of the Right Honorable Henry late Earl of
Warrington, viz. I. His Speech upon his being sworn Mayor of Chester, in
November 1691. II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13th, 1692.
III. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County
of Chester, on the 11th of October, 1692. IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at
the Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester on the 25th of April, 1693.


Letters of State, written by Mr. John Milton, to most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe, from the Year 1649. till the Year 1659. To which is
added, an Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; and a
Catalogue of his Works, never before printed.

An Answer to a Paper written by Count d'Avaux, the French King's Ambassador in
Sweden, concerning the Proposals of Peace made by France to the Confederates.

An Essay concerning Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and the Duty of Subjects
in all Revolutions. With some Considerations touching the present Juncture of
Affairs.

An Essay concerning the Laws of Nations, and the Rights of Sovereigns. With an
Account of what was said at the Council Board by the Civilians upon the
Question, whether Their Majesty's Subjects taken a Sea, acting by the late
King's Commission, might not be looked on as Pirates? With Reflections upon the
Arguments of Sir. T.P. and Dr. Ol. The Second Edition both by Matthew. Tyndal,
Doctor of Laws.

The Antiquity and Justice of an Oath of Abjuration: In answer to a Treatise,
entitled, The Case of an Oath of Abjuration considered.

A Poem on the late Promotions of several Eminent Persons in Church and State.
By N. Tate, Servant to Their Majesty's.

The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity placed in its Light, by an Answer to a late
Book, entitled, Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, etc. Also the
Doctrine of the Incarnation of our Lord asserted and explained.

FINIS

