JUST PRINCIPLES OF COMPLYING With the NEW Oath of Allegiance. By a Divine of
the Church of England.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.



LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old-Bailey.
1689.

JUST PRINCIPLES Of Complying with the New Oath of Allegiance.
THE New Oath is certainly an intricate case, and encumbered with no small
difficulties: But it will appear unexceptionably lawful, if (without
intermedling with the Politics of these times) we suppose, that there may be
three Parties concerned in an Oath of Allegiance;

A Ruining-Prince, A Savior-prince, And innocent Subjects. The terms of
ruining and destroying are ambiguous, and may signify in a lax or strict
acceptance; and therefore a Prince may be ruining and malificent in several
degrees. He may be so far ruining and malificent, as to Abdicate his People
from being his People; whereby he loses and forfeiteth all Title to them and
their Allegiance. Grot. de J. B. ac P. l. 1. c. 4. S. XI.
Existimat Barclaius amitti Regnum, si Rex vere hostili animo in totius populi
exitium feratur, quod concedo; consistere enim simul non possunt voluntas
imperandi and voluntas perdendi; quare qui se hostem totius populi profitetur,
is eo ipso abdicat regnum. If a King makes Himself a Destroyer of his whole
people, He Abdicateth the Kingdom (according to Grotius and Barclay) because
the Will of destroying is inconsistent with the Will of being their governing
Head. It is possible, that a Bigoted, pontifician Prince may not be in this
notion a ruining Prince; for although He manifestly designeth to subvert and
extirpate the Protestant Religion, and to introduce his own (which every Prince
desires,) yet He may not design to extirpate the Body of Protestants out of
his Kingdom. But the World need not be told, that the Principles of his
Religion oblige Him to it; And it is not probable, that the French King's
principal Allie would be better natured to his Protestant Subjects, than his
most Christian Majesty. The sinking calamities which He was gradually
introducing, Popery and Gallican Slavery (which have all manner of Evils in the
Bowels of them,) as also his Combination with the common Enemy of Christendom,
ruinous to the State of Europe, and the Protestant Party in Europe, may justly
denominate Him a ruining Prince at a Superlative rate.

The notion of a Savior-prince usually occurreth in History; as in the
instances of Ptolomy, Antigonus and Demetrius (...). Under this notion our
present King ought to be considered, (which is far more honorable than the
style of a Kind, de facto, competible to every vile Usurper;) nor is He only a
Savior-prince to these Nations, but to harassed, afflicted Europe, and the
Reformed Churches abroad. A Savior-prince may be such before his entrance upon
the Government, if with vast expense and hazard He becomes our Redeemer from
the calamities of Popery and Arbitrary Power; And being seated in the
Government, He subsisteth in the quality of a Saviour-King. A man shall be an
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water
in a dry place; as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

By innocent Subjects I understand Subjects unconcerned in the Revolutions of
Government, who cannot be thought under any Obligatio delicti to their former
King, and who will not fail to judge of all his pretensions ex aequo and bono.
Subjects are thought incompetent Judges of the Rights of Princes: but they that
dare not swear Allegiance to an Usurper against their rightful Sovereign, must
take upon them to make a judgment of his Pretensions, that calls himself by
that venerable name. Having thus represented the notion of Innocent Subjects,
and of two opposite sorts of Princes, we may proceed to affirm,

I. If the main of our Allegiance to a Ruining-Prince, out of possession, be
ceased and expired, and the rest be forfeited by Him, it is lawful to swear
Allegiance to the King in possession. The Law determines our Subjection and
Allegiance to the King in possession: but the same Law (and our Oath also)
determines, who it is, that should be, and be continued King in possession.
From whence it follows, That the Duties of Allegiance (which is the business
of being Liege-Subjects) are of two sorts: Bounden Duty to Government, which is
plainly legible in the Law, ( Submission, Obedience, Tribute, Gratitude, and
such more) and bounden Duty of Friendship and Adherence to the rightful
Governor, commonly called the King de Jure. If the rightful Governor was by
fraud and violence kept out of possession, or unjustly thrown out of place,
faithful Subjects (in former Ages) supposed themselves under an Obligation to
this Jural King. Which supposition of theirs was not ill grounded, as appears
from the contexture of the old Oath of Allegiance, from our Obligations to
Justice, and from the Nature of Fidelity and Friendship (for the relation
between Sovereign and Subject is a relation of Friendship, amicitiae imparium:)
but to this latter sort of the Duties of Allegiance, a Ruining-Prince out of
place can pretend no Title. If He be kept out of possession, faithful Subjects
are not bound to introduce Him, but rather to endeavor his legal Exclusion: or
if He be thrust out of place, they are not bound to adhere to him, own him,
reduce him, fight or struggle for him; they owe him nothing, but may entirely
forsake him, and be glad that they are rid of him, for (by seeking their ruin)
He has justly forfeited the Friendship of his innocent people (and therefore
the fidelity of their Friendship) and all the Offices of Friendship, which are
otherwise due to a rightful Governor out of place. The other sort of Duties of
Allegiance, Duties to Government, the Law transferreth to the King in
possession, and they are deservedly given to a Saviour-King. If therefore a
Ruining-Prince be out of Place and governing Power, the Bond or Relation
between Him and his innocent People is entirely dissolved, by a Cessation of
one part, and a Forfeiture of the other part of their Allegiance, and the whole
business of their Adherence, Fidelity and Allegiance to him is at an end. A
faithful Subject will not easily forsake a tolerable Prince: but there may be a
Prince of such a character, that there is no owning Him, adhering to Him, or
suffering for Him with Honor and Conscience. And if He ought to be entirely
forsaken by his innocent Subjects, they are not bound to reserve for Him any
Allegiance, nor to make his pretended Rights the matter of their care.

II. There are several Total Modes of destroying a King's Right of Regality;
and there are several Partial Modes of destroying it, approaching to a Total:
If by this latter sort of Modes the Competitor-King's Right of Regality be
sufficiently destroyed, innocent Subjects may swear Allegiance to the King in
possession.

Suppose a King has not alienated or given away his Kingdom, nor thrown it
away and abandoned it, nor has sought in an hostile way the destruction of his
whole People, or the Body of them (which are total Modes of destroying his
Right of Regality;) yet if it plainly appears, that the kindness which he
has for Protestants (the Body of his People) and the usage which He designeth
them, cannot be much dissonant from his Neighbors, ( Tell me with whom thou
go, and I will tell thee what thou art, says the Spanish Proverb.) This can
be thought nothing less than a partial Mode of destroying his Right of
Regality, approaching to a total. If a King has laid a design (and managed it
for several years) of ruining his People in every thing that is dear to them,
in their Laws, Liberties, Property and Religion: This also must be thought a
partial Mode of destroying his Right of Regality, approaching to a total; for
it approaches to an Abdication of his People. And there is the same reason for
Abdicating the Government.

The Violation of Laws ought not to be aggravated beyond its just bounds, no
more than Recessions from the great Rule of Government, the public good: but
many heinous Violations of the Laws in several great instances; the assuming a
Power of Dispensing with Laws at pleasure; and a declared resolution not to
administer the Government according to Law, are an Abdicating the legal English
Government in a great degree; they are such Violations of the Coronation Oath
as approach to a nulling the contract between King and People, (whatever that
signifies;) And if a Prince affects Arbitrariness at such a rate, that
nothing less will satisfy him than the administering all things according to
his own will, (without regard to Oaths, Laws, Property;) if he alters the
whole Species of the Government, or manifestly makes it his design to
exterminate it, This is a total Abdication of our legal English Government, and
a deposing that officiary Dignity, the legal Regality. But that the string may
not be over-stretch'd in any thing, let all that has been done in the late
Reign toward the subversion of our constitution, and the introduction of the
French Mode of Government, be thought nothing more, than a partial destroying
the Right of Regality approaching to a total.

A King may make such a Recession from the Government, as may be a degree of
abandoning the governing of us; and there may be a fair appearance of a
Conquest of the King: For although there was no formal Declaration of War upon
the King in the Prince of Orange's Descent, it seemed not an hostile
aggression, nor any thing more than a request of Right with the Sword in his
hand: yet it must be acknowledged, that the Prince did expressly declare War
against all those that opposed his designs (which implies a Declaration of War
upon the King,) the King expressly declared War upon the Prince, and therefore
they were in the state of War; the issue whereof was the King's removal from
the Government and out of the Kingdom, which carries a fair appearance of a
Conquest of the King. A Conquest of the King is a Mode of total destroying the
Right of Regality: But because the Army of Multitudes of the Subjects, and a
desertion of the Soldiery, were complicate with the Prince's Arms, we will
suppose this appearing Conquest of the King, to be nothing more than a partial
destroying the Right of Regality approaching to a total.

If a King be ruining at such a rate, that He is as unfit for Government as an
Idiot or Lunatic; and if a Regency be necessary for the safety of the Nation,
This must be thought a partial destroying the Right of Regality approaching to
a total.

There are some Doctrines in the Roman Church destructive of civil Society;
such as the principle of not keeping Faith with Heretics: If any King should
expressly own this principle, it would be totally destructive to his Right of
Sovereignty in a Protestant Kingdom, (for He could have no Right to demand the
Faith and Allegiance of the People; nor could He be a capable object of Faith
or Credit, nor of Promises, Contracts, and Oaths:) if he does not expressly avow
this principle; yet if it be highly probable (from many indications) that He is
a Man of that principle, This can be thought nothing less than a partial
destroying the Right of Regality approaching to a total.

If Kings of the Pontifician persuasion manage Government at such a rate of
Craft and Cruelty, that there is no living for Protestant Subjects in Society
with such Sovereigns; insomuch that they have made it matter of dispute,
Whether a Nation of Protestants (especially an unenslav'd Nation) be bound to
be Liege-Subjects to Kings of such a character, that keep no Faith with them,
observe no Rules of Justice toward them, stick at nothing to destroy them,
This must be thought a partial destroying the Right of Regality approaching to
a total.

If a Ruining-King be thrown out of place, this is a total destroying his Right
of Regality in respect of his innocent Liege-Subjects, whose Friendship and
Adherence he has justly forfeited, as is before discoursed: but because these
are only part of the People, let this be thought nothing more than a partial
destroying the Right of Regality approaching to a total.

If upon a Breach between King and People (justifiable on the People's part)
the King recedeth, and there be no place for a tolerable re-coalition, nor for
any tolerable projects of Government consistent with his Allegiance, This can
be thought nothing less than a partial destroying the Right of Regality
approaching to a total. Breaches with the King are not easily reconcilable
with the Law of God and of the Land, nor with the Doctrine of the Church of
England from the rise of the Reformation, That it is not lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King. But doubtless the Doctrine
of due Non-resistance ought to be restrained to such resistance which is
hurtful and destructive to the King (agreeably to the usual sense of that
Political Aphorism, The King can do no wrong, his Ministers only are
accountable and punishable;) it designeth not to abridge the Body of the People
of the Right of resisting an extravagant Prince in cases of evident and great
necessity; provided, they contain themselves within the limits of just bounding
their Prince, and of just Self-defence and Self-security; for beyond these
bounds Protestants never pretended to proceed in their Oppositions to their
Princes. But there may be a Prince not to be bounded or brought to any thing
(which is the general sense of Wise men touching our late King,) the Estates of
the Realm have adjudg'd, that there was no reducing Him upon terms or
conditions, no place for Treaty; they have debated the project of a Regent, and
determined it impracticable; and that no provision could be made for the
Government, but by a new Establishment and a new Allegiance inconsistent with
any measure of his Allegiance, supposing them to have proceeded upon great
Reasons, and with all imaginable fairness and equity; at what a rate has his
late Majesty destroyed his Right of Regality? For having upon other accounts
reduced it to multifarious next to nothings, He had brought things to such a
state upon his Recession, that any further adherence to his Allegiance was
become impracticable, and all provisions for the Government consistent with
that Allegiance. If it be unlawful to comply with the new Allegiance, it must
be Virtue and Duty to contest for some other establishment, consistent with
some degree of former Allegiance: but no such Model is yet proposed, and
probably the Quadrature of the Circle is of as easy investigation.

These several Modes of destroying the Right of Regality ought to be
considered, not only confusedly and in an heap, but in orderly connection and
succession one ought to be super-added to another. An imperfect Abdication of
the Administration of Government, and an imperfect Conquest may be thought
sufficient to extinguish such a Right of Regality, that was before dying and
expiring: or if some little of it still seems to remain, (yet if the Estates
of the Realm have judged aright, that all former Allegiance was become
impracticable) this little will be nothing more than such a rigor of Right,
that in common Equity is not demandable. If upon a full and just computation of
things it appears, That nothing of the People's Subjection and Allegiance is
reasonably and in common Equity demandable by the King out of place, than his
Right of Regality must be thought sufficiently destroyed: The Subjects must be
bound to more than natural and reasonable Subjection and Allegiance, if they be
bound to such a degree of Allegiance, which cannot in reason be demanded; such
Allegiance is like a pretended Debt, that in common Equity is not demandable,
which no man in conscience is bound to pay, and which He is absolved from
before God.

This Account of things pretends not to any Authority in the Nation to depose
the King, and to absolve the Subjects from their Allegiance, by virtue of our
(ancient) English constitution: But it appealeth to common Equity (which is
germana justitia) touching the total Non-obligation of innocent Subjects from
their Allegiance; which is no more a deposing the King than a Debtor's Plea of
Absolution in Conscience from an undemandable debt is a deposing his Creditor,
or than a Servant's Plea of discharge from an undemandable Service is a
deposing his Master.

III. Suppose the Competitor-King's Right of Regality be not reduced to none;
yet if it be reduced to next to none, innocent Subjects may swear Allegiance to
the King in possession: For although good Subjects suppose themselves under an
obligation, to reserve an Allegiance for an undoubted rightful Governor, yet
not for such a Governor that has either no Right at all, or next to none; for
Niceties and Nothings confronted with mighty Motives and Obligations, signify
nothing. If the Competitor-King's Title to the Government be so extremely
infirm and invalid, it cannot create a valid Obligation upon the Subject to
adhere to his Allegiance against the King that is in possession (perhaps upon
tolerable fair terms) the Authority of the Nation, public Determinations, and
all the mighty Interests of our Country and Religion.

IV. They that suppose a Regality to be justly and necessarily destroyed, must
suppose themselves discharged from its Allegiance, and that they may
confederate a new Allegiance; for it cannot be said without a contradiction,
that a Regality justly and necessarily destroyed, retains the Right of
Government, and ought to subsist. Some Ruining-Regalities ought to be bounded
only, and reduced to reason; others ought to be demolished, both upon the
account of their vast Maleficence to their Subject-Nations, and because the
Interest of the whole necessarily requires it; which is the case of the late
Regality, A branch of a certain reigning Power and Interest, ruinous to the
Nation and to the whole. Philo. Opusc. p. 158.
No Artificer makes the whole for a part, but the part for the whole; and if
the part be for the whole, it is Justice and Duty to destroy a part, as
Physicians do, (...), Porphyr. Ap. Cyrill. c. Jul. p. 166.
for the necessary conservation of the whole. It is Justice and Duty to
demolish that part of a City whose standing is destructive to the whole (it
ought not to subsist;) no wrong or injustice is done to any, if a part be
demolished, when the safety and interest of the whole necessarily requires it;
for every part and its Rights are for the whole. On the contrary, it would be
monstrously unjust and uncharitable, to uphold a Cock-loft to the ruin of the
whole House, and to preserve a Cabin to the sinking a Ship. The best Account of
our late Revolution and change of Government is, Duty to the whole, (which in
our case is Europe, more especially Reformed Christendom,) and the safety
thereof necessarily required it.

He is a great stranger to the World, who knows not, that of late years there
has been in the World a reigning Power and Interest (the French-Papal) ruinous
to the whole in all its branches; and that the redemption of these Nations of
Europe, and of the Protestant Party in Europe, from the reigning and ruining
Power and Interest of France and its Allies, is vastly just and necessary. If
this Nation had continued subject to that ruining Power and Interest, such a
posture would have been ruinous to the rest of Christendom (being employed to
serve the French Interest) which is no tolerable posture of humane affairs. As
a branch of that reigning Interest, and because its standing is ruinous to the
whole, the late Regality (like an House infected with a fretting Leprosy)
ought to be demolished.

But although it ought to be demolished, yet not in the method of popular Fury
(by Subjects taking Arms to depose or destroy their King, and then absolving
themselves from their Allegiance) the Christian Religion and Protestant
Profession, Nil nisi justum suadet and lene: but a just method will appear in
this following Hypothesis. In the late Expedition of our generous Prince, there
was a twofold Design and Undertaking, complicate and conjunct, yet of separate
and distinct consideration; the one respects the whole, the other a part; the
one was oppositive to that reigning Power and Interest, ruinous to the whole:
the other was redressive of the Grievances of the English Nation. If in order
to the first design, the Citizens of the whole (the Estates of Europe) combine;
if one of their number (an Independent Prince) becomes a kind of Savior and
Redeemer to the sinking estate of Christendom, and undertaketh a design (either
by the calmer or severer methods) to break the Power and Interest of the common
Enemy of Christendom in this Nation; if in his just Expedition He proceeds to
a removal of his late Majesty, and his Heir, of the French-Papal Interest (if
he had any) from the Government and Kingdom, there can be nothing unjust in
this method of demolishing the Regality; nor is it unjust, if good Subjects
suffer it to be demolished (both because of their own danger and their
paramount obligation to the whole;) nor is it unjust, if the Estates of the
Realm add an Epicrisis, that his late Majesty's removal from the Government was
(in this notion) just and necessary. It is certain, that his removal from the
Government (though his Recession was not altogether forced and involuntary) was
the effect of the Prince's Arms Driven out of his Dominions. Letter to a
Bishop, p. 21, 22.
, and of his Conduct of affairs, and ought chiefly to be ascribed thereunto;
And that in an Exigence of the whole, a Savior-prince may reasonably proceed
to so great an extremity, (whereas if a Nation only be in danger of Persecution
from their King, their Saviour-Princes usually proceed no further than to
divert the present storm;) And if a Savior-prince justly and necessarily
proceeds to so great an extremity, the Nation is discharged from their former
Allegiance; the Right of Government belongs no more to his late Majesty, or
his (pretended) Heir of the French Papal Interest, but our Subjection and
Allegiance to that line of Succession is at an end. Which if the Nation be
absolved from, they necessarily become a free people (sui juris) if the next
Heirs will make them such, and the Crown becomes vacant. The Revolution in
this Nation is a Case of the whole, and the Act of the Citizens of the whole. A
Transcendental to Civil and Municipal Law, but not the less lawful for being so.

There was a second Design, co-incident in time, concurrent and complicate with
the former, (part of it, as the Nation is part of the whole, but of separate
consideration from it) peculiarly redressive of the Grievances of the English
Nation. Multitudes of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation (intent upon the
saving their own Freehold) addressed a Neighbour-Prince, to come to their
rescue from an Hurricane of Popery and Arbitrary Power, and to support the
tottering Fabric of their Government; they assisted him by Associations and
Arms, both Subjects and Soldiers made a defection from the late King, which
issued in his Recession from the Kingdom, and a Vote of the Convention of the
Estates absolving the Nation from their Allegiance. If this Scene of affairs be
considered as one continued Design to demolish the late Regality, it is not
justifiable by English Law or English Divinity (It is all one, whether the
People demolish the Regality by their own or another's hand:) But this Scene of
affairs ought to be distinguished into three periods of time; the Time before
the Breach, the Time of the Breach between King and People, and the Time after
it. The Time before the Breach necessitated an Address to a Neighbour-Prince,
and a Desence of the Established Religion, and Laws, the Lives and Liberties of
the Subjects from a violent Rape. During the Time of the Breach, the Affairs of
the Kingdom were in suspense, and therefore the Breach may be considered as
nothing more than a just and necessary Self-defence. In the third period of
Time, the Estates of the Realm deliberate touching the remainder of Duty to
their withdrawn King, and proceed to a definitive Sentence, That He had
Abdicated the Government, and the Crown was become vacant. To make the Justice
of this definitive Sentence appear, part of it, (the vacating the Crown) ought
to be considered, not in a separate and solitary notion; but as the late Design
redressive of the Grievances of the Nation was concurrent with another Design
oppositive to that reigning Power and Interest ruinous to the whole: So I
understand this part of the definitive Sentence, only as a concurrence with the
former Mode of vacating the Crown; and in such a notion it is necessarily just,
because the former Mode is certainly so. With the former Mode of demolishing
the Regality, there was also a concurrence of his late Majesty's will to be
gone; and his Mode of Recession (leaving no Commissioner, withdrawing the
Seals, destroying the Writs for a Parliament) is necessarily a Degree of
Abandoning the governing of us. If this Degree of Abandoning the Government be
considered with its Antecedents (subverting the Constitution, violating the
Fundamental Laws, designing his People's ruin, and such more) and also with its
Consequent (that no provision can be made for the Government consistent with
his Allegiance,) the Sum-total is supposed to amount to thus much, No further
Subjection or Allegiance is in equity demandable from the People: And if no
further Subjection or Allegiance of the People be in Equity demandable by the
King, He has Abdicated the Government. In this notion the late Revolution is
of a better appearance than usually changes of Government are: But we will
suppose, that in this notion it is not absolutely just; yet because in the
former notion, and as to innocent Subjects it is unexceptionably just,
therefore a good Man may be rationally satisfied, that the late Regality is
justly and necessarily demolished.

V. The King in possession (upon several accounts) may justly demand the
Allegiance of the People; not upon the account of Conquest, for there is no
pretense to the Conquest of the People; the contract also between the Prince of
Orange and the Nation (which we are Letter to a Bishop, p. 22.
told of) ought to protect the People from any such claim; and although his
Majesty may be said to have conquered our late King, yet not at all as a common
Conqueror, contesting for Dominion or Possession, but as a Savior-prince to
the Nation and to the whole; agreeably to the style of his Declaration, and his
public Profession, that He came not hither for any Interest, but to save us
from Popish slavery. First therefore his Majesty is justly said to have a
degree of Propriety in the People by Right of Redemption (having done enough to
Merit the Name of a Redeemer of the People) according to the known Sentiments
of Gratitude, which is the main source of our Obligations. A ruined People
(actually ruined in part, and designed for further degrees of ruin) owe
themselves to him, and their former Sovereign deserves to lose them for ever
to a Savior Prince, having manifestly designed to make them extremely
miserable. In the next place, because of his just Propriety in the People, and
because of the vast Beneficence of his Government (which obliges to the Duties
of Gratitude) a Savior-prince in possession has a better Right to the
People's Allegiance, than a Natural-unnatural Prince out of place, that has
reduced his Right to none, or next to none; and therefore in case of
competition, the former is rather the rightful King. So if an Heir of the
French-Papal Interest, (not fairly and legally ascertained to the Nation) come
in competition with the Queen, it is a known rule of the Casuists, In rebus
dubiis melior est conditio possidentis. Moreover, if the Nation, or the major
part of it, be fairly disobliged from their former Allegiance, our present King
is in the Government by an unexceptionable Right, the Election of a free
People. His Majesty has also an higher Title than any national Law-Title, and
is King by an higher Law, (that which is in it self Law:) for in a grand
Exigence of the whole (the greatest that ever was) He is in the Government upon
the score of a just and necessary Redemption of us and of Europe, and therefore
ought to be in the Government. A Savior-prince in the Government, upon the
score of a just and necessary Redemption of us and of Europe, is the most
desirable thing in this World, and is next door to infinitely just and
necessary: All pretensions therefore to National Law-Titles, ought to lay
themselves at the feet of his Paramount-Title. And as the late Reign was not
for the main a lawful, civil Government (in respect of the Administration,) but
a branch of that reigning Power and Interest which is ruinous to us and to the
whole: So we confederate Allegiance with our present King, not only as with a
lawful King in respect of his Administration (who is to govern us by Law,) but
as with a Savior-prince unto us and to the whole.

VI. Innocent Subjects, that by the fault of their own Ruining-Prince, are
necessitated to crave and live under the Protection of a Savior-prince, either
at home or abroad, may and ought to become his Liege-People. For a
Savior-prince may justly demand of all that are necessitated, to crave and
live under his Protection, that they make Faith and Allegiance to him: thus far
Protection and Allegiance are manifestly reciprocal, Accipe beneficium, read
debitum. Which contract of Allegiance with a new Prince (because it is just and
necessary) is a just and necessary Abrenunciation of all Allegiance to their
former King, which perfectly dissolveth the bond or relation between them. Thus
a people persecuted by their own Prince, betake themselves usually to a Foreign
Savior-prince (without crime or blame) as their sanctuary and shelter, and
give up themselves to his Allegiance. But whether this be done at home or
abroad, whether we go to a Savior-prince, or a Savior-prince comes to us, it
makes no alteration in the case of innocent Subjects. They may be necessitated
to crave and live under the Protection of a Savior-prince at home, to shelter
them from a reigning Power and Interest (ruinous to them and to the whole,) of
which their natural Prince is a branch. And they that are rationally satisfied,
that this is indeed their case, may conscientiously give up themselves to a new
Allegiance. Which may be done with greater satisfaction upon the account of
those additional Considerations: By complying with the new Oath, we do nothing
at home now, but what must have been done abroad within a while (perhaps before
this time) if his late Majesty had continued in the Government.

If by a noncompliance with it, Protestants should fall into divisions, and
Popery should once more regain the Throne, who shall answer for the tremendous
consequences? Some suppose, it was the duty of the Convention of Estates to
deliver themselves effectually, when Providence gave them an opportunity, and
to rid their hands of Popery for ever, because of the inhumanity which it
involveth; if this be doubtful, yet it is past doubt, that every good Man will
be loath to advise or contribute to the re-enthroning it.

VII. A Ruining-King out of place, cannot be thought King de jure, when his
non-reigning condition must be thought, de jure, perpetual. If having before
invalidated his own Right, and reduced it to nothing, or next to nothing; such
a Prince persevereth (for a considerable tract of time, past all hope of
better) a branch of that Power and interest which is ruinous to the Nation and
to the whole; It is reasonable to suppose him irrecoverably such, and that a
non-reigning condition ought to be to him perpetual (for He can have no Right
to reign, but in consistence with the safety of the Nation and of the whole;)
And if the business of his reigning in point of Right be at an end, then his
innocent People's Allegiance is also at an end.

But if any should suppose, that his Right is not totally extinct, that still
they ought to reserve some little Allegiance for him; yet when the Nation is
generally under a new Oath, that little is become utterly impracticable, and
therefore may be safely dismissed.

Upon these Principles I have proceeded in complying with the new Oath (without
extenuating the sense of it, which is to render it ineffectual to the support
of the Government) making a Protestation against the King-deposing Doctrines
and the rest of the wild Fanatic Principles of the Age; not receding (so far
as I know) from the sound Doctrine of Protestants touching Duty to Government,
nor from the Doctrine of the Church of England (which is no longer valuable
then as she retains her Virtue and Glory;) not conjuring up again any evil
spirits of the late times; not going to School to Mariana to learn Theology and
Politics; not pretending to swear Allegiance to any King de facto (quo jure
quave injuria) to swear, unswear and swear again as the times turn; not
acknowledging Protection and Allegiance perfectly reciprocal, as if it was
lawful and consistent with virtue to abandon the best of Princes when unable to
protect us; which is an abandoning the due adherence to justice, and can be
nothing better than the crime of abandoning our Sovereign Friend when he
falls into adversity. God forbid that Protestants should ever part with their
sound Doctrine and Principles (which no deliverance can compensate the loss
of,) that the Consciences of Men should be debauched in matters of Morality and
Virtue (which are far more valuable than States and Kingdoms;) or that the
Oath, for want of clear Principles of Justice to proceed upon, should be matter
of scruple to any good Men, that are not prepared to swallow Camels.

THE END.

