A JOURNAL OF THE Venetian Campaigne, A. D. 1687. Under the Conduct of the
Capt. General Morosini, General Coningsmark, Providitor Genesis Cornaro, General
Venieri, etc.


Translated from the Italian Original, sent from Venice, and Printed by Order
of the most Serene Republic.

Licensed, December. 16. 1687.

R. L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed by H. C. and sold by R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1688.

To the READER.
THE famous Sabellicus, Bembo, and others, give this account of the Original of
the Venetian Commonwealth. In the Year of Christ, 421. the Inhabitants of
Aqulteia and Padua, through dread of the Hunns, and finding their own Cities
destroyed, betook themselves to Flight, and made themselves Masters of the
Islands of the Adriatic Sea; and retiring first to the upper Shore, now called
the Rialto, there laid the Foundations of Venice. The City it self is seated in
the inmost recess of the Adriatic Bay, containing almost Sixty Islands, at a
very small distance one from another, divided by narrow Eddies running between,
with a small Mount (provided by Provident Nature) defends from the Violence of
the Sea. It is stored with convenient Rivers, which import all thiugs as well
for Delight, as for the Necessities of Mankind.

The whole City consists of three Ranks of People, the Patricians, or
Gentlemen, the Citizens, and Mechanics. The Supreme Power of Government, is in
the hands of the Patricians. It is divided into six Quarters, containing
Seventy two Companies of Common People: One and forty Religious Houses,
Seventeen for Monks, and Twenty four for Nuns. Upon the Front that looks toward
the Shore, stand two very vast Pillars, the one bearing the Winged Lion of St.
Mark, and the other the Statue of St. Theodorus; and in the Space between, all
Malefactors are Executed. The Cathedral of St. Mark, is a most Sumptuous and
Magnificent Structure, all of Marble. The Streets are divided with small
Channels, or Caneales, joined together with several Bridges, part of Wood, and
part of Stone, to the Number of 440. The Arsenal, is a place every way
surrounded with strong Walls, wherein Four hundred Workmen are continually
employed in preparing Materials for the Building of Galleys, and the Reparation
of the Bridges, who are every Week paid their Wages to the value of 2000.
Crowns. In a word, Venice is the Queen of all the Cities in the World, and
which is more, never Subdued to Foraign Subjection. This is She, that has for
so many Centuries of Years been the Bulwark of Christendom, against the Power
of the Turks; being Married to the Sea every Year, by the Ceremony of throwing
a Gold Ring into the Neighboring Ocean upon Ascension-Day. In a word, such is
the strength of her Situation, such the Constitution of her Government, such
the strict Observance of her Constitutions, and so exact the Fidelity of her
Subjects under an easy and gentle Rule, that she may well be counted the most
Renowned City in the Universe.

If we consider the Diminution of her Territorys by the loss of Candy, we shall
find that Loss in some measure Repaired by the Recovery of the Morea, to the
Extermination (as it may well be hoped) of the Turks, from the most flourishing
and fairest Portion of all Greece.

The Morea, formerly known by the name of the Peloponnesus, is a Peninsula,
from North to South, an Hundred and fifty Miles in breadth, that is, from
Corinth to Cape Macapan, and a Hundred seventy five from East to West, and in
Circuit Six hundred Miles, or thereabout. Formerly it was divided into Achaia,
Arcady, the Argives, the Territories of Corinth, Elis, Laconia, Messenia, and
Sicyonia. Now it is divided into the Dukedom of Clarentia, containing Achaia
properly so called, Belvedera, containing the Territories of the Messenians,
and those of Elis. Saccania containing the Country of Argos; and Tzaconia,
containing Laconia and Arcady.

The chief Cities of it were Argos, Argo; Corinth, now Corinto; Corone, or
Coron; Dyme, now Clarentia; Elis, or Belvedera; Epidaunes, or Malvasia;
Megalopolis, or Leontati; Messene, or Mosseniga, Modon, Nauplia, now Napoli di
Romania, Patrae, or Patrasse, and Militra, formerly Lacedemon.

This Peninsule is divided from the rest of Greece by a narrow Neck of Land,
not above Forty Furlongs, or five Miles wide: Which King Demetrius, Nero,
Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero, and some other Princes, endeavored to have Cut
through, and so to have let in the Sea round about it; but their Labor proved
in vain, by reason of the Rockie substance of the Earth. However, Succeeding
Ages reared up a thick Wall in the same Place, from Sea to Sea, which Amurath
the II. afterward Levelled with the Ground, when he Conquered and Sacked the
Peloponnesus. It was after that Rebuilt in the Year 1453. by the Venetians in
fifteen Days, with the Assistance of 30000. Men, but then again utterly Ruined
by the Turks, when they made themselves Masters of the whole Country.

Patrasso, anciently Patrae, from Patreus, who Peopled it, and Surrounded it
with Walls. By the Romans it was called Augusta Aroe Patrensis, and by reason
of its commodious Situation for Commerce, by them much frequented and filled
with Inhabitants; it is seated about Seven hundred Paces from the Gulf of
Patrasso. In this City Diana was formerly Worshipped, under the Name of Diana
Triclariena, to whom the People made an Annual Sacrifice of a Young Man and a
Virgin, the most Beautiful they could find to Expiate the Crime of two Persons,
that were Sacrificed for Marrying in that Temple without the consent of their
Parents. Here St. Andrew the Apostle suffered Martyrdom, as also Herodian, who
was one of the Seventy Disciples and Bishop of this Town.

It is Peopled at present for the most part with Jews, who make it a place of
Trade, not only with the Neighboring Islands, but with the French and English.
However the Air is none of the Wholesomest, by reason of the High Mountains
which overlook it, always covered with Snow, and for that the Ground about it
is all Marshie. In the time of the Despotes, it was a Duchy; but those
Princes not finding themselves strong enough to keep it, Sold it in the Year,
1408. to the Venetians, from whom it was taken by the Turks, in the Year 1463.
In the Year 1533. it was Besieged and Taken by D'Oria, but the very next Year
the Turks Retook it again, and held it till this last succesful Conquest of the
Venetians.

Lepanto, formerly called Naupactus, is seated near the Gulf of Lepanto, so
Famous for the Battle of Lepanto, wherein the Turks were Overthrown by the
Christians, with a great Slaughter of Men, and loss of Ships: It is an
Archiepiscopal City, built about a Mountain rising in the form of a Sugar Loaf,
whereon the Fortress stands, encompassed with four large Walls, separated by
Valleys, whereon the Houses of the Inhabitants stand; the Port is but small,
and might easily be secured with a Chain. In the times of Heathenism, it had
four Temples dedicated to Venus, Neptune, Esculapius, and Diana. Under the
Jurisdiction of the Turks, it contained seven Mosques, two Churches for the
Greeks, and three Synagogues for the Jews. In the Year 1408. Emanuel, Emperor
of Constantinople, put it into the hands of the Venetians, not able to defend
it himself. But in the Year 1477. it was Besieged by the Turks, with an Army of
30000. Men, who after they had Battered it for four Months together, were
forced to raise their Siege, and leave it under the Venetian Government, till
the Year 1498. Bajazet with an Army of 150000 men, forced it to a Surrender.
However the Arms of St. Mark remained, till it was now last Regained by General
Morosini.

Corinth, so called from Corinthus, the Son of Pelop's, was accounted the most
Noble and Wealthy City of all Greece; and by the means of its Situation, it
arrived to that degree of Splendour and Pride, as to abuse the Ambassadors that
were sent by the Romans; which the Senate took so hainously, that they sent
Memmius, with Orders when he had taken the City, to Level it with the Ground,
and to put all the Inhabitants to Sale. Memmius according to his Instructions,
set it on Fire; and the mixture of metals in that dismal Conflagration,
produced that sort of Brass, called Corinthian Brass, much more esteemed then
Silver or Gold. Augustus afterward Rebuilt and Peopled it; but it retains
nothing of its Pristin glory, being nothing but a heap of Ruins, serving to
harbor a small number of People. Amurath the II. and Mahomet his Son, made it
the Seat of their Barbarous Cruelties, and so Ruined it, that there are very
few Houses to be seen, and those built out of the Ruins of the former
Structures. The Fortress that both Commanded and Secured it, was called
Acro-Corinth, seated upon a high and almost inaccessible Rock, furnished with
Wells of excellent Spring Water; and among the rest, the Fountain Pirene, which
was Consecrated to the Muses, the Water being very clear, and most pleasant to
the taste.

Misitra, was the Ancient Sparta, or Lacedemon, so famous in Ancient Story, and
when in its Splendour, two Leagues in Compass. This City is divided into four
Parts, all distinctly separated one from the other. This was the Habitation of
Menelaus, the Husband of Helena, who being Ravished away by Paris, occasioned
the Siege and Destruction of Troy. Here the Laws of Lycurgus took place;
Constitutions contrived with that Wisdom and Policy, that their Observance
preserved the Splendour of this City, for the space of 880 Years. It was taken
by Mahomet the II. in the Year 1460. and 3200. after its first Foundation.

Castel-Nuovo is the Capital City of the Province of St. Sobba, ten days march
in Length, and four in Breadth, bounded by Bossina and Dalmatia. It was built
by Tuardus King of Bossina, and is seated upon the Banks of the Canal of
Cattaro, three miles from the mouth of it, and just opposite to the Levant Sea,
about 800. Paces in Compass. It has two Towers in the West side, and one upon
the Sea-shoar; but the Walls having been often shaken by Earthquakes, are
neither very strong, nor yet Terrass'd. The Castle of Salimanega which joins to
the Town, and is built upon a Rock, is commanded by the Mountain of Santa
Veneranda; from whence you may likewise batter the Castle of Testagick, which
is Terrass'd, and built partly upon a Rock, partly upon a Mount of Earth, and
served the Turks for ae Magazine of Powder.

The upper Fortress that goes by the name of Gornigrade, is 650 Paces from the
City. Northward; one of the Angles stands upon Earth, the other three upon a
Rock. The whole Fortress is not above 250 Paces in Circuit, and might be easily
ruined by a Battery from the Mountain of Sliebi. In the Year 1572. the
Venetians having lost it before to Ariadene Barbarosso, made an Attempt to
recover this Place, under the Conduct of General Venieri, but they met with so
many Obstacles, and such considerable Opposition, that they were forced to give
over the Enterprise, which they never afterward ventured any more till this
present Year, under the more succesful Conduct of General Cornaro.

The onsuing Journal is a Prospect of the last Summer's Conquests under the
succesful Banners of the most Serene Republic of Venice. The particulars of
which are from day to day set down, as it may be supposed, by the style of the
Original, which is in Italian, by some great Officers, that were Eyewitnesses
of the Success in both Places, and of no small Credit for the truth of the
Relation, as being Allowed and Licensed by Public Authority.

As for the Negropont, which it is thought will be the first Enterprise of the
next Campaigne, if it be not already taken according to Report, and the general
Expectations, it was anciently called Abantis, afterward Euboea, from the name
of a Matron of Masculine Courage that governed it. This Island may well be said
to be the Queen of all the Islands in the Archipelago, as being in length 130
miles, in breadth 30, and in Circuit 300. It lies stretched all along to the
North upon the Coast of Achaia, from whence it is divided by a narrow Frith,
not above 50 Foot over; the chief City is Chalcis, now Negropont, joined to the
Continent by a Draw-bridg. In so much that some Geographers believe, it was
formerly a part of the Continent it self, and only separated from it by some
Earthquake, to which the Island is subject sometimes. It was formerly subject
to the Venetians, to whom it was assigned by Rabanius Carcerius, who was Duke
of it; but in the Year 1470. it was subdued by Mahomet the II. with a great
slaughter of the Christians. It has a very strong Castle with four Towers, and
a well stored Arsenal.

And thus we see the haughty Turk run down on every side, chased out of
Hungary, expelled the Morea, losing Ground in Dalmatia; and in a word, the
Ottoman Empire, according to all human Reason, hastening to its period. For
there is a Spirit of Conduct, Magnanimity and Gallantry, which ranges about the
World, and fixes sometimes here, sometimes there, as Destiny designs to turn
the scales of Success. And this is the reason that decaying Empires Languish
under sloathful and effeminate Princes. A Critical Season which the Prudence
and Vigilance of Inferior Dominion always lay hold of, to wrest from the feeble
hands of Potentates subjugated to their pleasures, the wrongful Conquests of
their Ancestors. As if the Spirit and Vigor of their Forefathers were departed
from them to their Enemies. Such a conjuncture as this, now luckily fell out at
Venice, which was never better stored then now, with Personages not only
Illustrious for the antiquity of their Descent, then for their own personal
Virtues.

For of the Name and Family of the Morosini we find in History, no less then
Three who were Dukes of Venice.

The first was Dominico Morosini, the 37th. Duke of Venice, who cleared the
Gulf of the Corsairs of Ancona, among whom Guiscard, who was the chief, was
taken and hanged: He recovered Pola, and Parenzo, revolted from the Signorie in
Istria. He adorned Venice with Beautiful Structures, and began the Tower of St.
Mark.

Next to him was Marino Morosini, the 44th. Duke of Venice; in whose time a
Colony of Nobility was sent into Candy, who Built Candy.

The third was Michele Morosini, the 61st. Duke of Venice; a Person of great
Learning and Wisdom; who though he lived but a short while, Enacted several good
Laws for the benefit of the Republic.

The Family of the Cornari is likewise very Ancient, and reckoned into their
Number. Marco Cornari, who reduced the Rebellious Candiots to their Obedience
to the Common Wealth, in the time of Urban the 5th. Of the Family of Venieri,
was Francesco Venieri, 81st. Duke of Venice; who, though the Turk at the same
time, made War upon Puglia, and the King of France in Florence, yet entertained
the King of Poland in Venice. And Sebastian Venieri, the 86th. Duke of Venice;
who was chosen with that unanimous consent, that even several of the Turks
themselves, came to kiss his Feet.

To Speak more of their Living Descendants is a labor beyond the task of these
few Sheets, which only gives a rough draught of their Great Achievements, for
public and present Satisfaction; leaving the rest for Histories more Polite
and Copious, to render Glorious to Posterity.

map of Greece MOREA olim PELOPONESUS

By John Seller.



A JOURNAL OF THE FAMOUS Venetian Campaigne.
From the Venetian Fleet in the Seas of Lepanto and Patrasso, July 25. 1687.
AFTER some little Heats and Contentions, which redounded much to the Honor of
his Excellency, my Lord Admiral, though they put some stop to this present
Campaign, this Morning with loud Peals of great Guns aboard the whole Fleet,
and with most Devout Thanksgivings to the Supreme God of Victory, was
solemnized the appearance of this day so much wished for, which restoring
Universal Prattick to our Vessels, and safeguard to our Seas, has brought us
that Joy and Consolation, which it is not possible for any Person to
comprehend, that does not foster Sentiments of Christianity in his Heart. After
which, his Excellency made it his Business. After which, his Excellency betook
himself, according to the Dictates of his own Religious Zeal, to return to the
God of Mercy, the most Devout Remonstrances of Humiliation, for so miraculous a
Blessing. So that upon Sunday, the 20th. of this Instant Month, being attended
by all the Chief Commanders at Sea, and by all the young Patritian Nobility,
under a most pompous Pavillion he caused Te Deum to be Sung; and the whole
Fleet at the same time to acknowledge the signal Favors of Heaven, to the
Confusion of our Infidel Enemies. Thus after their Excellencies had heard the
Holy Mass, and received the most Holy Sacrament, they retired every one to
their particular Commands.

This necessary Christian Duty, being thus ended, and a Resolution being taken
to carry on the Invasions toward the Castle of Lepanto and Patrasso to
complete the entire Possession of the Morea, his Excellency failed not in the
first place to furnish himself with all sorts of necessary Provision and
Ammunition. He reduced the Foot that was to land to about Nine thousand Foot,
all sound Men, in separate Bodies according to their Nations, under Officers of
Valor and Conduct. With these he joined a strong Body of Thirteen hundred
Horse, and had not sickness very much afflicted the Soldiery, their number
would have been much greater.

Having Embarked all his Forces, he weighed and set sail from Glimeno, the 20th
of July in the Evening, with twenty six Galleys, fourteen Galeots, six
Galeasses, Vessels with square Sails, what with Ships, Fly-boats, Pinks,
Brigantines, and Tenders, to the number of Eighty Seven. Which Body was under
the Command of Captain Zaguri. The Lighter Vessels, by the help of their Oars,
made a shift to leave the Greater Vessels behind, though they put forth to Sea
many hours after the others had set Sail.

21st. Next Morning the Fleet arrived within sight of the Castles, and
Patrasso, having had a fair Wind, and no less prosper'd by the Gales of a
Celestial Benediction.

Coming near the Shore, they discovered the Enemies Tents pitched in great
numbers upon a Hill, which overlooks the Fortress; and another great
Encampment, between the same Fortress, and the Castle of the Morea, seated also
in a very advantageous place. Now to obtain some understanding of the Enemies
design, our Ships coasted along the Shore within Musket shot, at what time we
could discern the Enemy running busily to and fro, under the protection of a
Breast-work by them erected above a Mile a this and that side Patrass, making a
show of a great number of Ensigns, and of much Courage and Resolution.

But where the Breast-work ended, there they gave over appearing; Which being
observed by his Excellency; after he had amused 'em for some time longer with
his Galleys, he past on to the Shore of Rumelia, which he saw likewise very
strongly Guarded with Soldiers, and such another Breastwork, and near to the
Castle was discovered another great Encampment.

General Coningsmark had embarked himself aboard the General's Gally, which was
therefore so desired by his Excellency, that he might have the more opportunity
to confer with him about their manner of Landing.

That, it was foreseen, would be difficult if the Ottomans, were resolved to
hinder them; because they might do it safely under the protection of their
Works. Being therefore so much as they were a head of the rest of the Fleet,
they resolved to effect it, in the place before mentioned, where the
Breast-work ended upon the Right side of Patrass, because they could command it
with the Prows of their Galleys.

22d. The next Morning therefore the whole Fleet made an attempt to Land, and
first the Galeots and Galleys themselves being come to the place first pitched
upon, the Foreigners first set foot ashore, who were afterward followed by all
the rest of the Militia.

The Turks did not appear to oppose them, for that the Rising Ground being
passed, the other part being all Marshie, they thought it not worth their while
to make themselves masters of it, not knowing where to retire, should any
disaster befall them. Therefore Marching in sight of our Vessels, they went with
a Body of about Three hundred Horse to attack the Right Wing where were those
of Brunswick, and the Foreigners; who giving them the Liberty to approach,
plied them so well with their Musket shot, that the Turks were forced to
retire, who being pursued by the Foreigners left many of their People dead upon
the spot, whose Heads became a prey to our own Men.

By this Time the People in the Galeasses disembark'd, and the Ships, and flat
bottomed Vessels being arrived, all the rest of the Horse and Foot landed,
Three Miles from the Fortress; which could not happen sooner, by reason the
Winds happened something contrary. The Turks showed themselves in good Order
upon the Curtins under the Fortress, and were entrenched upon the Shore after
that manner, that they took up two Miles in Front, with a Battery of two pieces
of Cannon.

In the Night, by the favor of the Darkness, the most Excellent Sanudo, with a
Squadron of Eight slender Galleys, passed within the Castles, on purpose to
destroy the Barks, to the end the Turks might be deprived of the Opportunity of
transporting their Soldiers out of Grecia into Morea.

The 23d. the Galeasses, and one Pinnace got within Musket shot of the Face of
the Battery, and in less than Three Hours with their prow-Cannons beat it down,
and in many places ruined their Trenches, and with another Pinnace that shot
Stones, drove the Turks quite from their post.

The 24th. this Morning which was St. Christins day, beginning their March
again by Break of Day, in regard they had a long way to go, they Marched but
slowly, and keeping an exact Order, at what time General Coningsmark showed his
great Knowledge in Military Discipline. The Enemy abandoning their Breast-work
upon the Coast, and leaving their Tents, began their Approaches nearer and
nearer to our Army, making a show of great Resolution, but soon after turned
their backs, as if they intended to flee. But the more uncertain their Motions
were, so much the less did we alter our March, yet with an Ardent desire,
however, to come to handy strokes.

At length, after eighteen hours thus spent, the Barbarians approached, and
began to Skirmish with a Batalian of the Oltramarine's, Commanded by Colonel
Ceclina; at what time our Forces embodying, and the Enemy approaching with all
their Forces, the Sign of Battle was given, and the Christian Army prepared
themselses for the so long experienced Trial of their Valor.

The Turks fired very thick with their Muskets upon the Oltramarines which were
upon the Right Wing, and with their Swords in their hands, made a bold Attaque
upon their Rear.

But then the Oltramarines being bravely flanked by the Frisian Horse of the
Left Wing, plied their Small-shot so nimbly, that the Enemy slackened their
Fury, and were repulsed with great loss.

Quitting therefore this Attaque, they made another Assault upon the
Brunswickers in Flank, where intending to have broken in with their Swords in
their hands, they met with such a solid and vigorous resistance, that being
well mortified with the well ordered Volleys of the Muskets, and seeing many of
their Men fall dead upon the place, after a close Fight of four hours,
maintained by our Men, who upon all occasions were still succored by the
Sclavonians and the Cavalry, they betook themselves to an ignominious flight,
being valiantly pursued by the Oltramarines, and by the Marquess Corbon, with
his Cavalry. However, General Coningsmark would not suffer ours to pursue the
Enemy very far, for fear of falling into any Embuscado, and because he would
not that the Army should break their Order. So that the Turks making haste to
their Tents, pulled up the greatest part, at what time they in the Piazza of
Patrass setting fire to a Magazine of Ammunition, joined with the rest, and
leaving in a moment all that compass of Ground in our Possession, they all
disappeared. In this Fight, singular was the Conrage and Experienced Conduct of
General Coningsmark; and the valorous Arm of the Prince of Turrena did great
Execution, who being joined with the Marquess Corbon, lead the Horse: Nor did
the Prince of Brunswick less generously behave himself, who with his Troops was
still in the hottest of the Action. The Death of Colonel Ceclina, shot in the
Breast with a Musket-Bullet, is univerfally lamented; who being by Nation an
Oltramarine, though he had lost his Chief Commander, understood so well with so
much vigor, to humble the furious Pride of the Muselmen. Of whom there were
Five hundred slain upon the place, and it is believed a great many more were
killed, in regard of the great number of Tents that were left for want of
Owners.

We took five Pieces of Artilery, besides two Pieces of Cannon, which were
found planted upon the shore within their Trenches, when at the beginning of
the Fight the General ordered the Volunteers to land, on purpose to divert the
Enemy. On the other Side we had little loss, in regard we kept the Enemy at a
distance with our Muskets. It added also to their greater fear, for that the
General in the heat of the Fight, had caused a great number of the Seamen to
land, who possessing themselves of the Trench aforesaid, found therein the two
forementioned Brass Pieces, and two others at a little distance from thence,
which formed the Battery already spoken of; besides which, the Enemy left
behind them six Fieldpieces which they lost in the Conflict. Great was the
number of the Ottoman Colors, which the Christians brought away as Trophies of
their Valor, and that which added to the Glory of their Triumph, was, their
taking of three Ensigns with Tails, besides a very rich Standard gilded; with
which the Fringe and Blazon were evident Signs of the Basha-Generalship; of
which the Serasquier is deprived. His Flight, together with that of the Army,
was immediately followed by the Flight of their other Party at Rumelia, and the
abandoning their Tents. And the Night after, his Excellency understanding that
the Turks had left the Castle of the Morea, he turned the Prows of his Galleys,
and he no sooner came in sight of the place, but he saw some part of the Wall
toward the Sea, on Greece side, blown up by Gunpowder, and the Castle left
under the Dominion of the Venetians, with forty Pieces of Cannon.

The General for all this, would not suffer his wonted heat, for the Good of
his Country and Christendem, to cool, but held on his Voyage for Lepanto, to
make the advantage of his good Fortune during this Consternation of the Turk:
And indeed the Favor of Heaven prosper'd his zealous Designs, for the
Barbarians being still more and more seized with Panick-Terror, could not
endure the sight of our Vessels; so that seeking their safety in other places,
they retreated, and left to the Victorious Venetians the Piazza itself. And
thus, to the great wonder of every one, this most Signal Victory was obtained
through the Favor of the God of Hosts, with the most Glorious Conquest of four
Fortresses in the turning round of one Sun: By which the Public gained One
hundred and sixty Pieces of Cannon almost all Brass, besides a great quantity
of Provisions and Warlike Ammunition, together with fourteen Pyrate Barks. So
that the most Serene Republic now Commands a most Delicious, Fertile and
Spacious Gulf, a Spacious and Rich Country, to the incredible Contempt and
Loss of the Persecutors of the Holy Religion and the Christian Faith. Carlo
Pisani, Captain of the condemned Persons, is also designed by His Excellency,
to take all the Turkish Vessels which he can find in the vast Gulf of Lepanto.
So that after such mature and timely Provisions, we have no reason but to
promise ourselves from the Assistance of God, for the future, Progresses of
most Remarkable Consequence for the Honor of the Christian Armies, and the
greater advantage of our Invincible Republic.

From the Fleet, in the Bay of Corinth, August 17. 1687.
SO glorious was the Fame of the Valor of the Venetian Armies upon the
Overthrow given to the Serasquier in the late Battle, in the Campains of
Patrass, and by the gaining of Patrass, Lepanto, and two Castles besides, that
the Turks, now taught by the fortunate Success of the Christians, are
sufficiently convinced, that Fortune, which for so long time has favored the
Ottoman Armies, to the great Oppression of the Christians, has now forsak'n
their Side. After these glorious Acquists, we understand, that Kamor, Basha of
Avaruti, and Gavar, Basha of Vallona, both fell under the Valor of the Venetian
Victors, being the Persons who were ordered to guard the Shore of the Continent
from this Place to the Prevesa; and that of an Hundred and twenty Colors which
they had, to every one of which belonged fifty Men, that only three remained
safe, the rest were all destroyed.

They reck'n lost of the Ottoman Side, about a thousand slain outright, and
above as many more wounded, which died in the hasty flight which the Serasquier
made to Corinth. For the greater Proof of which, there are many Carcasses to be
seen upon the Road. Besides a great many which are also found in the Country
Houses by our Adventurers, who range the Country to make Slaves of both Sexes,
who averr that the Enemy were about Twelve thousand, being recruited but a
little before with Three thousand Soldiers from Negropont. Mustapha Basha, who
guarded part of Rumelia, that is to say, the Castle and City of Lepanto, fled
with equal Cowardice, without being pursued, and abandoning all, was followed
by a few of his own Men, the rest, to the number of Eight thousand, taking the
Hill-way, while he with hardly Fifteen hundred, marched toward Salona: But that
he had not marched far before he was met by Ismael Basha, who brought along
with him about a thousand Soldiers from Salonich, who then turned back also,
and stopped two days March from Salona, giving out a Report, that the Reason of
his Flight was upon a Rumor of the Death of the Serasquier, which happened soon
after the Fight, but understanding afterward that he was at Corinth, he
departed also from thence, without any hopes of ever being reconciled to him
again, for fear of proving the fatal Effects of his Anger.

How great the fear of the Serasquier was, may be easily conjectured, by his
causing part of the Houses of the Fortress to be burnt, so soon as he came to
Corinth: Which Fortress stands upon the top of an Hill, three Miles and more
distant from the Sea. He also burnt a good part of the City, to hinder the
Christians from taking Possession of it; commanding also all the Families of
the Turks to depart the Morea, and hastening the flight of those from the
places abandoned; and to facilitate their Motion, leaving the Remainder of his
Baggage and his Army at Thebes. He attributed it very much to his good fortune,
that he was not pursued by us, as he thought he should have been: which enabled
him to save the Remainder that were left him, and those that were spread
through the Kingdom.

The foresaid Places were provided with Governors; in Patrasso, the Signior
Gerolamo Priuli, under the Title of Proveditor Extraordinary; Signor Pietro
Grioni is made Constable; Tadio Gradenigo was made Proveditor Extraordinary of
Lepanto, and the Marquess of Meliluppi Constable of the Castle: In the Castle
of the Morea, Marco Barberigo is designed for Proveditor, and for Governor of
the Castle Geronimo Tiepolo: In the Castle of Rumelia was designed for
Proveditor Ordinary Aloisio Sagredo, and because the Castle of Tornese is since
surrendered, Zorzy Toscarini was sent thither to Command it. At the same time,
the Places were all successively provided of Governors, Chaplains, Physicians,
Chyrurgeons, Hospitals, Medicines, and all necessary Provisions for War and
Food. There are many Families of the Gastuni, and of their Ample Territory,
which contains an hundred Towns, who desire to be admitted into the holy Faith.
To which purpose there is intended a Solemn Office of Baptism, and to perform
the Solemnity with peals of Cannon, and with all other Demonstrations, which
may serve the more to confound the Ottoman Sect. For this glorious Conquest, by
which was gained the Possession of all the the Morea, all due Thanksgivings
were rendered to the God of Victory, with peals of Cannon from the whole Fleet,
and in the foresaid places Te Deum was sung with a general consent. Afterward
the whole Fleet set Sail for the Coasts of Corinth, whither a small Squadran
had been sent before to secure the Position of some places; for because this
Gulf is usually very tempestuous, it did not fail to show its fury at this
time, there being no Port for an hundred Miles together on the Morea Side; and
on the other Side, only a small Bay very incommodious, and capable to receive
but few Vessels.

Upon our approach to the Great Bay of Corinth, there were some Horses still to
be seen, and the Fire was still burning which the Bassa had set to the Houses.
But the Enemy soon disappearing, we understood by the Country People, who came
to humble themselves with the Primates of that place, that those of Misitra,
Caritenae, Drapolizza, and other Towns, who had randezvouz'd to one particular
Town, that they might march in an entire Body, still stayed at the Entrance
into the Morea, and were under the Command of Mahomet Bassa, who stayed at
Caritena, and had about Two thousand Men; the rest, to the number of Ten
thousand Families, being all the Inhabitants of the said deserted Places.

There were found in the City many Pieces of Antiquity, among the rest a Statue
of Janus. We had also the opportunity in our Voyage, to see in the opposite
part of Rumelia the Mountain of Parnassus, the Fountain of Helicon, so much
celebrated by the Poets, not far from which there stands a Town which preserves
the Name still: And not far from thence stands Pindarus, now all over Woody,
the Grandeur of those Ages being all devoured by Time, and vanished.

It was thought fit to send back the said Vessels to the Castle of the Morea,
and while they were considering what other Important Actions to go upon, they
did not forbear to mind one thing of Principal Moment, which was to take a
strict view of the Straight, and of the Place itself, as well in order to
necessary Deliberations, as to find out a way to prevent the Return, if they
should attempt it, of the Turks into the Morea; which as it could not be
performed but with a strong Force, therefore they set Sail with the whole Fleet
to that Station, where they Embarked all their Companies of Foot, marching the
Cavalry by Land: They also filled some of the fourteen Galeots which they took
in the Port of Lepanto with Italian Soldiers, to make use of in conjunction
with the rest. And with all that remained with the Cavalry, General
Coningsmarck, when they came to the Place of Business, caused the Infantry to
be landed, under the Command of a Sergeant Major of Batalia. Thus they
possessed themselves of the City, where they lodged themselves the best they
could, and to the Fortress was dispatched Colonel Bonomitti, with his own and
Count Verroual's Company; who presently set up the glorious Standard of St.
Mark. And there they found many Houses untouched, with forty six Pieces of
Cannon all Brass, and four of Iron, besides Ammunition and Victuals.
Immediately His Excellency dispatched away three Galiots to the Castle Fornese,
with Letters to the Aga of that place, inviting him to a Surrender, but
severely threatening him if he refused, who immediate delivered up the Place to
our Men, imbarking himself upon a Vessel of Ragusa, by him freighted for
Smyrna, leaving behind him an Hundred and fifty Turks, who being illuminated by
Heaven, resolved to be Baptized and follow the True Faith. Upon the Castle they
found nine Pieces of Brass Cannon, and twenty of Iron.

Now while it was believed that Mahomet Bassa, with his Forces abovementioned,
was not as yet departed the Kingdom, there was some assurance that laying hold
of the Conjuncture while the Pass was free, he had made the more haste to get
out of Rumelia, and retire to Thebes, where the Serasquier had his abode, with
those Forces which he could retain in their Obedience. But then it was that all
the Albaneses and Walachians in the Kingdom were in chase of the Ottomans that
lagg'd behind, for the most part Women and Children; but the Value was
Considerable, of Four thousand of all Sexes and Ages, which they and the
Adventurers resolved to make Slaves, finding them straggling among the
Mountains, whither, through the Violence of their Fears, they had made their
Escapes. Nor were the Greeks exempt from the last Severities of the Turks, who,
wherever they passed along, by force drove all into Slavery, and carried away
all the Beasts of Carriage, to carry their Baggage. Many Parties of the
Albanesi ventured as far as Megara, which is the first Main Land without the
Isthmus, and attacking the Rear of the Fugitive Enemies, made many Prisoners,
and gained a greater number of large and small Beasts which they brought off
with them. Soon after the Desires of General Coningsmark were accomplished by
the arrival of the Ship St. Dominic at Zant, whither she was sent to fetch his
Wife, and bring her to the Fleet, whither she came, and with her a Convoy of
seven Ships, under the Command of Zuanne Morosini, on the Seventh of this
Instant, with the Soldiers aboard, which were landed and joined with the rest,
to supply the number of the Sick, which, as it was then reported, were many.

By Letters from the Signior Captain of the Men of War, dated the Last of June,
came Advice, that having shut up the Sultan Ships of the Turkish King, with
several other Vessels of the Barbarians, laden with Provisions from
Constantinople, and Land-Soldiers, he kept them there penned up, having also
met with certain Corsairs which he kept with him, as being bound from the Coast
of Syria with Provisions and Soldiers, and pretending to relieve the Besieged.

As to the disposal of the Churches, made choice of in every one of the Places,
conquered by the most Serene Republic, they are the fairest of the Moschees, of
which there are a very great number.

In Patrasso, within the Fortress the Moschee was given to the Franciscan
Friars of the Order of the most holy Conception, and the Provincial Buonanome
has the Possession of it. And in the, City was given another with the Title of
St. Andrews to the Barefoot Carmelite Friars.

In Lepanto the fairest Moschee was Consecrated by the Name of St. James, and
the Solemnity was performed presently after the gaining of the City. In the
Castle of the Morea another was dedicated to our Lady of Health or Salvation,
and a Priest was placed therein. In the Castle os Tornese, another was
dedicated to our Lady of Loretto; and St. Anthony of Padoua. But there was no
Chaplain appointed, nor any Disposal then made at Corinth. The two Ships, the
St. John Baptist, and the Factor of Zant, Master Anzolo Michiel, are returned
from Napoli in Romania, which in the time of the Sickness there, were sent
thither to reinforce that Important City; but there being no need of any
Reinforcement, they have returned the Three hundred Foot which were aboard,
though they have not prattic allowed them as yet, because those parts are still
suspected.

The Captain Bassa, with his Fleet, suffered heavily while his Fleet was
infected with the same Distemper, so that he was forced to re-enter the
Dardanels to recruit his Vessels almost empty of Men. Scio and Senirna are
infected with the same Distemper, but the Islands of Paris and Lemnos are free.

The Metropolitan of Corinth, which is a Dignity of great Honor, came to visit
the Captain General, with a large Train of Priests of his own Religion; and was
received with the same Demonstrations of Affection, as the Addresses of so
worthy a Prelate were humble and condescending, and becoming a Person so
greatly esteemed both in these and other parts.

And indeed, new Subjects come in every day to do Homage to his Excellency; and
to obtain positive Orders not to be molested by the Soldiers or Seamen, to the
end they may undisturbed enjoy those Felicities, which they have so long wished
for in being freed from the slavery of the Barbarians.

Misitra still remains to resemble the Ancient Sparta, rich in Gold and
Merchandise, and peopled with Twelve thousand Souls. His Excellency has sent
thither the Proveditor of Zarnata Palani, with Six thousand Mainotts, and other
Country Men, to compel it to submission by a Siege.

The first fight of the Besiegers brought the Affrighted Enemy to so much
complacency, that they hung out a White Flag, and after Hostages given on both
sides, they went so far as to resign three principal Members of this Place, to
the Supreme Authority of his Excellency, with Letters from their Bassa, that
they were ready to abandon the whole Territory, provided they might have
passage for themselves, their Families, and their Baggage. But in regard they
had held out to the last gaspings of the whole Kingdom, and thereby had
forfeited Compassion, he denied their Propositions; only he was content, to let
the Women, Children, and Aged Persons to go; but as for them, they should
remain Slaves, with this Liberty to redeem themselves at the price of Two
hundred thousand Reals; leaving them upon refusal of both these Proposals, to
shut themselves up within their Walls, from whence it would be afterward his
part to expel them by force of Arms.

The three Commissioners being thus sent back with the General's Answer, we are
in expectation of the Resolution of the Citizens.

Upon the 13th. Instant, his Excellency went with a stout Body of Horse and
Foot, to visit the Isthmus or Neck of Land, between the Ionian and Egean Sea,
and which joins the Morea to the Continent, and marched as far as the footsteps
of the Ancient Walls, which closed up the same, made by the Grecian Emperor, in
the year 1413. and demolished afterward by Armurath the Second, in the year
1424. afterward re-edifi'd by the Captain General Luigi Loredano, who landed
the Soldiers of his Fleet, under the Command of Bertaldo D' Este, by means of
whose laborious Toil, as the Historians testify, and the assistance of Eighty
thousand Workmen, in fifteen days they sinish'd the whole Work, in the year
1463. fortified with One hunderd thirty six Towers, and Three Motes, now
dismantled and levelled, so that no footsteps thereof remain in many places. He
also viewed the Fortress called Acro-Corinto, seated in a place of great
advantage, which though it be placed upon a very high Hill, is nevertheless
furnished with Wells of excellent Water, as also the Fountain Pyrene, so much
celebrated by Homer. The importance of the Place, and the easiness of it to be
made Tenable, induced him to believe that it was of necessity to be provided
with all things necessary both for Defense and Offense, and requisite
Provisions of Victuals; and Anzolo Michiel, a Gentleman of Discretion,
Abilities and Virtue, was designed extraordinary Proveditor for that place;
being also resolved not to let slip the remaining part of the Season, without
making some other progress in his Conquests, which will fall either upon
Negroponte or Athens, yet not so, but that he will take his Measures from the
Effects of the Season, and the variety of the Weather, which he may meet with
in the Seas of the Archipelago, and to facilitate his Voyage, the Foot and
Horse shall be left at Cortuno, which shall afterward be carried to the Coasts
of the Egean, from the other part of the Isthmus.

Signor Daniel Venier died of an Inflammation, which killed him in few days;
and Peter Marcello was conditionally ordered to Command his Galley.

The Knight, Sir Cittadella a Padouan, comes under Conduct, being sent to be
Governor of Corinth, which place will be well Garrisoned.

Many Families in Rumelia desirous to pass into the Morea, to withdraw
themselves from subjection to the Turks, have made their Applications by their
Commissioners to the Captain General, and having had audience, several Barks,
and some Galleys have heen ordered for their Transportation.

There is great solicitation made to remove with the Fleet, and make a long
Voyage to the other straight of the Egean, so to proceed upon other designs,
which are agreed upon to advance the Fame of the Arms of the most Serene
Republic.

From the Venetian Fleet, under Castle Novo in Dalmatia, September 16. 1687.
THis most Serene Republic, makes it her Business to mind the Security and
Prosperity of all Christendom, and the Holy League, having generously resolved
to purge the Adriatic Sea of that pestilent Rabble of Corsaires of Castle
Novo, and other adjacent Places, which with their Barks and Pyracies they
render impassible, and all the Neighboring Coasts unsecure for Trade. To which
purpose, at the vast expense of her own Treasures, she has raised a strong Army
in Dalmatia, under the Command of his Excellency Girolamo Cornaro: For that
those Places being attacked and reduced, which serve as a Sanctuary and
Security to those Enemies of the Christian Name, the Triumphant Standard of the
Cross will be gloriously advanced by the zealous Valor of the Venetian.
Thereupon an Enterprise so important being concluded upon, it was agreed that
the Enemy should be attacked wherever he should be found. Nor was the Sieur
Janco second to any, a Person of great Courage, and much dreaded by the Turks;
who setting out of Spalatro in company of his Morlacks, and understanding that
in the Plains of Dunno, beyond Cettina, about Three hundred Turks were got
together, went resolutely to fight them; and the Fray being begun, having
himself with his Cutlace laid a Turk sprawling upon the ground, believed him
dead: but the other having a Pistol in his hand, let fly at the Victor and shot
him. However, there were killed and taken fifty of the Turks by the Morlacks,
with the loss of only two Men; all their Tents and Baggage were also taken.

His Excellency therefore being resolved upon his intended Design, took
shipping with his whole Army, and after contrary Winds which kept our Fleet
thirteen days at Sea, not without some detriment to the Horse for want of Water
and Forage, our Fleet arrived with a propitious Wind, the second of September,
within the Roses over against Castle Novo, which to the number of a hundred and
thirty, or more Sail, made such a Majestic show of it self, which considered
together with the Courage of those abroad, struck no ordinary Terror into the
Turks: Which was by them made the more manifest, for that they let us sile off
our Men within Cannon shot, without so much as firing one Gun at us.

The next day about Six a Clock, our Army landed not above two Miles from the
Fortress, and then advancing slowly in good Order toward the same Fortress, and
about a Mile from the same, they found some Opposition from the Turks, who
being got to the top of a little Hill, and posted in a Church, called by the
name of Santa Veneranda, occasioned a bloody Skirmish. Presently the General
dispatched away Orders to the Auxiliaries, to advance with the Galleys within
Cannon shot, and to bring their Guns to bear upon the Enemy, by that means to
disloge them, and to hasten their own landing, to reinforce our Men. At the
same Instant, the General mounting a Horseback with all the Cavalry, consisting
of Four hundred able stout Soldiers commanded by the most Illustrious Giovanni
Loredano, appointed by his Excellency Proveditor of the Cavalry in the Camp,
and ordering the Oltramarine Militia to land, threw himself personally together
with them, into the Place of the Conflict, which lasted for two hours with
great obstinacy on the Turks side. But at length the Auxilaries being landed
under the protection of the continual firing of the great Guns from the
Galleys; and our new Reinforcements being discerned by the Turks, who
surrounded his Excellency in very good Order, the Enemy retired toward the
place continually skirmishing, and firing upon our Men; who having possessed
themselves of the most advantageous Posts of the said Church, the Marquess of
Borro, Sergeant Major of Battalia, went in the Night time to take a view of an
advantageous Post, in a House within Cannon shot of the lower City: where our
Banditti of Abruzzo being posted, and our paid Foot being entrenched a little
behind together with the Auxiliaries, his Excellency commanded two of our
Galleys, commanded by Ludovic Balbi, and Benetto Zorzi Querini to take two
small Vessels grappl'd together, and bring them within shot of the City, which
was done not without great difficulty, by reason of the continual firing of the
Enemy, tho to no purpose. The same day Eighty Men were killed of the Enemy,
together with three Aga's, which was told us by a Slave that was taken
Prisoner. And of ours five or six were slain, among whom a Knight of Malta, and
some few common Soldiers, with two Knights of Malta wounded.

The fourth day upon opening the Trenches to advance our Works, our Men found
obstinate resistance from the Turks, who having strengthened themselves in
another House, and entrenched themselves within half Pistol shot of our people,
there happened all that day continual firing on both sides, not without some
loss of blood, besides, that the great Guns continually played upon our
Battalians, and did us some mischief. However, the Pinnaces failed not to play
continually upon the low City with their Bombs, to the considerable damage of
the Enemy.

The Fifth day his Excellency observing the Resolution of the Turks, who
vigorously maintained their Post in the foresaid House, resolved to bring two
Sacres to dislodge the Enemy from that Post. For the Execution of which design
the Guns arrived about the 21st. hour, at what time they were mounted, and
began their Battery upon the said House, which did not a little scare the
Enemy; who having nevertheless secured themselves with new Trenches, as also
the advantage of a continual Rain and Wind on their side, those advantages not
only hindered the battering the House, but very much endamag'd our Men, who
while they endeavor to keep their Muskets dry, were themselves almost drowned
in the Rain, which fell so excessive that Night, that it was impossible to
shrowed their Arms.

The Fifth day, though it continued rainy Weather, yet acts of Hostility did not
cease for all that, for their was continual firing of Small-shot on both sides,
and continual shooting, as well from the upper Town, as the Castle with their
Cannon, but so ineffectual to us, that we received little or no damage, though
the Turks were tormented by the Bombs of our small Frigates, which the Sieur
Pietro Duodo, having by Order of his Excellency brought within an easy reach
of the Town, very much incommoded the Town by the perpetual firing their Bombs,
to the number of five hundred, among which there was one that brought to the
ground a part of one of their Moschees, and another fell into one of their
great Towers over against the upper Castle, while they landed their Cannon and
Mortar Pieces to perfect their Battery.

Upon the 6th. day, the Turks made a shift to advance to our Battery of the two
Sacres, which were valiantly defended by our Dragoons in the Post, advanced by
the Brandi Stocchi of our Soldiers, upon which day the number was small either
of slain or wounded.

The 8th. day, being the Festival of the Blessed Virgin, was designed by his
Excellency to land more Men upon the West side, to the end there might be a
Communication between our Men, and to prevent the like between those that were
besieged in the upper Fortress and the lower. For the Execution of which, the
Auxiliary Galleys were commanded by their continual firing to secure our
landing, at what time our four Galleys, with the Militia aboard them, with
several small Vessels grappl'd together, advanced to the West side, the
Proveditor General leading the way with his Feluque. The first that landed were
Fifteen hundred Dragoons, who were placed in the Van, on purpose to take any
advantageous Posts, who found certain Houses for shelter near the City, to the
succor of whom his Excellency sent a good number of the paid Soldiers of the
Galeots, as also a considerable number of the Morlacks of Spalato, and Chissa.
At length the Turks secured from the frequent Peals, as well of our Auxiliary
Galleys, as our own, his Excellency in person causing two Battalions of
Infantry to land, the Turks retired, leaving the Houses of the City exposed to
Plunder, which consisted of some small quantity of powdered Flesh, the Truks
having carried away all the rest into the Fortress. At the same time the
Maltesi and Papalines, who that day guarded the Post upon the West side, where
the Turks were fortified in a certain House, from whence they had not a little
perplexed our Men, having got over the Trenches with Drums beating, advanced
toward the Turks, who dismayed to see the Courage of the Assailants, basely
quitted their Posts, which was possessed by the Maltesi, who not so content,
trarsported by their Courage, attempted to make their way into the City, in the
hurly burly and confusion of the Turks, that thronged into it. Which fell out
unfortunately, for that near the City, they met with a numerous Embuscado,
where five Horsemen were slain, whose Heads the Turks cut off, and took away
their upper red Coats, with the white Cross upon their Breasts, and about
twenty more were wounded, besides a good number of their Foot killed, as some
report sixty, as others seventy.

In the mean time our Perastines crept down from a little Hillock to the
Cavalier of the Fortress, and advanced to another Post within Musket shot of
the same Forts, in hopes to have cut the Embuscado in pieces, which had so
endamag'd our Auxiliaries, but the misfortunes of the Rain, which caused great
overflowings of Water at that time, would not permit them to make any other
attempts, while our Men had all their Fire Arms all over much wet. Only they
made a shift to lodge themselves within Musket shot of the City, the Perastines
entrenching themselves near the upper Castle, and the Maltesi retreating in
good Order to the Post, first taken from the Turks.

The 9th. day his Excellency designed to go in person to review the Post,
possessed by the Perastines, as also that which commanded the upper Castle, and
riding a Horseback to that part; the Turks who observed it, to show their
Courage, Sallied out of the Castle, to the number of Four hundred, and
attempted to recover the Post which the Maltesi had gained the day before, and
then defended by the Marquess of Boro, Sergeant Major of Battalia: But they
were received by ours with hail of Musket shot, so that being beaten back, they
attempted to win the Post which was kept by the Perastines. To which purpose
with large, Poles in their hands, they advanced toward their Trenches: Upon
their first Charge the Perastines were a little disordered; but being
encouraged by the presence of his Excellency, who immediately sending a good
Body of the said Militia to their Assistance, they forced the Enemy to retreat.
Our small Frigates also pursued their firing into the City and the Lower
Castle, with wonderful Effects. That day there was but little Rain, but the
same night following it fell with an unspeakable violence.

The Tenth day, his Excellency caused two great Cannons of Fifty pound Bullets
to be mounted, which, together with two more of Twenty pound, were to batter
the Lower Fortress, but the Rain was so violent that there was no playing of
them: However, they were mounted, and upon the Eleventh, at Night, they played
upon the lower Castle from the West. By this means His Excellency thought to
procure a Parley; to which purpose he sent the Sieur Doliza Dicattaro, well
known to them, who approaching the City in a Feluque, he was answered in
Musket-language, though without any hurt done to any that were in the Felnque.

On the Eleventh, we began to play upon the Enemy with our Battery, and it was
our good Fortune with two shot of a Cannon of Fifty pound Bullet to light into
their Platform, to the considerable damage of the Enemy. The Enemy made good
their Defense with extraordinary Courage, more especially expecting to be
relieved by the Bassa of Azugouina, who was approaching to their succor with
Four thousand Men; and at this Instant, we are preparing to march forth to meet
him and give him Battle; to which purpose His Excellency also goes in Person,
and it is hoped that our Courage will be such as to beat the Enemy.

Toward the Evening of the Eleventh Day, an Old Woman was taken Prisoner, whom
the Turks made use of to send to the Bassa. There was found about her under one
of her Breasts, a Letter, wherein the Besieged earnestly besought the Bassa's
Relief.

Upon the Twelfth, Letters were brought to His Excellency from a Confident,
which set forth the weak Condition of the Bassa, who was not able to muster
together above Eight hundred Turks: Which is the more probable, because it
comes from a Person of Credit: and a Consident of the Bassa's. There are some
that report him not above Four thousand of all that he can scrape together.
However, His Excellency is resolved to meet him, though it is supposed the Bassa
will not advance forward. This day our Batteries have considerably endamag'd
the the lower Castle; beginning to batter the upper parts to take from them
their Places of Shelter, and chiefest Offense, which consists in a great Piece
of Cannon of Fifty pound Ball, and two Falconets, which play hard upon the
Battery. The Turks have this day made many shot to dismount our Battery, but
with no success. At this Instant His Excellency is gone to the advanced Post,
to review our Batteries.

From the Venetian Fleet, under Castle Nuovo, in Dalmatia.
THe Siege of Castle Nuovo continuing with extraordinary vigor on the part of
the Venetians, as has been declared in the last. Upon the Twelfth day, the
Turks showed but little Courage, so that ours got ground, and the Abruzzesi
extended their Line with an Intention to encompass the Upper Fortress. In the
Nightime about Seventy Christians, Men, Women and Children, that were in the
Upper Fortress, rendered themselves, who related that they were very much
pestered by the Carcasses of the Turks, who lay slain in their way, to the
number of a hundred, slain in the Skirmishes of the former days: That an
hundred and thirty lay wounded in the Castle, and about forty sick, that the
wounded perished for want of skilful Men to look after them: That the Beigh, or
Principal Commander, was slain upon the Eight day by the Maltesi: That the
Governor of the Upper Fortress lay very ill; and that if that day the Rain had
not fallen so violently, but that our Men in the pursuit of the Enemy had
entered the City, the Turks, dismayed with the Isiue of the Conflict, would
certainly have left the Gates open in the Consternation of their flight;
besides, that the Conduit being broken, they must of necessity have been forced
to a Surrender for want of Water, had not the Rain fallen.

The same-Day, His Excellency sent for a Mortar-piece from the West side, in
regard the Bombists sent from Venice were busied in raising of a New Battery.

This Day appeared two Deputies from the Commonwealth of Ragusa; the one to
Congratulate His Excellency for the News of the Conquest of Morea, the other
was sent to the General of Malta upon the same account.

The Thirteenth we finished our West and East Lines, and joined them together;
as for the Turks, they shut themselves up in the City, and there stood upon
their Defense.

The same Day two Turks were made Slaves, sent from the Bassa of Archigouina
with Circulatory Letters to the Territories and Villages adjoining, with Orders
to raise Forces within their Limits; but not a Man was raised, under pretense
that they had no Men fit for Service.

After Dinner, came to the Camp some of the Principal of Mount Nisita, in the
Sclavonian language, Mount Ninick; where lie several small Territories
confining upon Mount Negrini, of the Greek Church. They surrendered themselves
wholly to the disposal of the Serene Republic, with all their Country, two days
distant. They left Ten Hostages, and the Chief Heads were rewarded with a
Donative of an Hundred Checkines. They reported that a Turk that was wounded in
the last Battle of Hungary, was by the Prime Vizier Elected Bassa of
Archigouina, who rambles up and down picking up what Fugitives he can find, to
succor this Place; but the Subjects of Nisita were resolved openly to declare
for the Republic of Venice. To which purpose they had requested a Standard;
upon which one was given them, they promising within three or four days such a
sufficient Number, as should be able to hinder the Passage of the Enemy. For
which His Excellency promised an Exhibition of a Thousand Checkines, every time
they should rout the Enemy's Forces. In the Night, two Pieces, Fifty Pounders,
were desired for the Battery against the Roundels, in the midst of the City.

The Fourteenth, two Mortar-Pieces were brought from the West, and a
Cannon-shot fell into a Palander, and wounded two Men, and another fell into
the General's Caick, while it was rowing a Mortar-Piece ashore, and hurt two
of the Rowers. The Turks toward the Sea sent forth several Women to fetch
Water, which could not be prevented by our Men, by reason of the Assistance
which the Enemy gave the Women. At the same time a Turk flew up in the Air,
being tossed up by the breaking of a Bomb. The same day, Advice came, that the
Bassa's of Arcigouiana and Albania were within four hours March of our Army,
with a considerable number of Turks and Christians; so that we stood all the
time to our Arms: The Passes were reinforced with other Companies, and with an
Hundred and Twenty Zupponi that came in the mean time under three Banners; and
from those Fortifications were flung about Six hundred Bombs.

The Fifteenth, came Letters to His Excellency from Ragusa, that the Turks were
at a small distance off, and that the next Morning they would Attack the
Trenches. Thereupon His Excellellency reviewed the Posts; the Batteries were
advanced to the City, and the half of the Roundels Defense was beat down by the
Cannon, being almost laid level, notwithstanding the Walls were two Cubits
thick.

At the same time two Men of War were brought from the East part to play upon
the Enemy, if they attempted to pass that way: And for the same reason the
Auxilaries were brought and planted upon the West side, where our Men had
thrown up a Counter-Line. Besides that, they cut down several little Groves,
under the Protection of which they might be securely assailed by the Turks.

Toward the Eighteenth hour, the Turks appeared, who came to relieve the Place,
so soon as they had forced their way through the straight Passes which were
guarded by our Men; who instead of making that resistance which they ought to
have done, abandoned their Station at the first sight of the Enemy, and retired
to certain Valleys. The Turks at the same time made long strides toward our
Lines upon the West, of which the Count of Mutia, Sergeant Major of Battalia,
being advised, presently got his Companies in order.

And as soon the Turks with great Fury and loud Cries invested our Trenches;
which proved much to their Advantage, while the Squadron on the Town-side being
terrified, without so much as discharging a Musket, began to fly amain. So did
the Squadron of Colonel Perini, being disordered by the flight of the first; so
that the Enemy made themselves Masters of our Works, which they began to ruin.
But the Count of Mutia presently dispatched Colonel Adelman with a Squadron of
Dragoons, and another of Granadeers, and restored the Battle. In flew also
Colonel Conti, with his Men, encouraged by the Squadron of Carponese, which,
without staying for Command, broke in, to the great advantage of the Combat.

The Turks thereupon, tried with a hasty March, and no longer able to make
resistance, after a long Fight, turned their backs, and betook themselves to
flight. The pursuit was attended with a great slaughter, and they who had let
them pass by before, observing the Rout, fell upon their flanks; so that the
Perinists and Montenegrini much increased the Havoc.

His Excellency rode to the Place of the Conflict, to animate his Men, and to
be ready with Relief upon all occasions; nor would he stir, till several Heads
and Colors were brought him, with certain Advice of the Victory.

There were above Three hundred Heads to be seen, besides many slain upon the
Place; Twelve Colors, and Twelve Slaves, of which one was of Castle-Novo, who
had got out of the Town to solicit the Relief; a Principal Person of Scutari,
very Rich, and one Cozzo of Muster.

His Excellency showed the Signals of his Conquest to those of the Upper
Fortress, who might well observe the Fight, exposing to their view the Heads
that were cut off, the Colors, and part of the Slaves, and gave the Besieged
to understand, that seeing they had no hope of Relief, there Army being routed;
and considering the streightness of their own Condition, they ought to submit
to the Victorious Arms of the Republic, and s^^cease all future fruitless
Obstinacy: But the Defendants cutting off all long Preambles, made Answer, It
was not yet time, and at the same Instant discharged a Volley of Musket Shot.

From the Slaves they understood, that the deposed Bassa of Archigouina was
Elected Bassa of Bossina; that he who had exchanged with him, had only Ten
Persons in his Train; that the Remainder, part Christians, part Turks, amounted
not to above Four thousand at most; that they both came with a Body of Two
thousand severally; and that the Bassa of Aroigouina was the Person that
invested our Men, the Bassa of Bossina staying behind; and that the Government
of Ragusa had accommodated these Commanders both with Provisions and Money.

But notwithstanding Night came on, the Turks were pursued by the Militia,
among whom the Sclavonians signalized themselves, who served in the Galleys,
the Burghers of Spalatro, Sebenico and Trau, who were the first that leaped out
of the Redoubts with their. Swords in their hands against the Enemy.

Upon this Victory, which cost little Christian Blood, depended the Conquest of
this Place. So that

In the Evening, all the Guns in the Fleet were shot off in Token of Victory,
and a Squadron of Morlacks was sent to reinforce the advanced Posts.

The Sixteenth, His Excellency caused Te Deum to be sung, as a return of Thanks
to Heaven; while the Enemy turning their backs, retreated a whole days March
from these Parts. Eight Slaves were also brought in, of which one was the
Brother of a Captain of a Dolcignota Galley, and a Colonel of Master; also two
Heads, the one of the Giambeck of Bossina, who Commanded a Thousand Persons;
the other of a Captain of Retino.

Among the other Heads beforementioned, that of the Brother of the Slave of
Scutary came to be known. The same day, two of the Cannons which were in the
Upper Battery, were removed into the Lower, and another Battery was built of
two Pieces of Fifty; so that the Place was played upon with a Battery of Ten
Pieces.

Soon after, His Excellency exposed the Heads and Standards a second time, and
made a second Summons; but was Answered, That so long as the Red Standards were
displayed upon the Walls, it would be a Sign of Hostility; That it was not a
Time for Treaties, and that God would assist the Defendants.

That day the Batteries beat down altogether the Defense of the Roundel, and
they raised Bonnets and Lines to surround the Fortress.

A Bomb falling upon some pieces of Timber and Materials of Earth, reduced all
to Ashes. Our Militia also on the East Side, by the benefit of the Night,
possessed themselves of a House near to the Castle, being a fit place to form a
Shelter for Miners. The Maltesi also having got ground, threw up a Line of
Circumvallation to surround the Castle, and as they were making a great round
Platform, the Turks sallied out to hinder them, but were beaten back.

The Fifteenth, a Battery was finished of one great Gun of Fifty, and a Cannon
of Twenty, and two Mortarpieces of Five hundred on the East Side, and began to
play upon the Curtin of the City near the Roundel, which opened a Breach in the
solid Wall, but not low enough.

About the middle of the day was brought a Colors, and the Head of one Deli, a
Person of Quality, cut off by one of the Chief of the Perastines who guarded
the advanced Posts; and he that was the Messenger said, that the Enemy was very
much shattered in their flight; that many of our People were at their heels,
cutting of those that lagg'd behind and thought to hide themselves. Another
Slave said, That the Enemy were above Four thousand, most Men that were forced
from Provinces afar off; and that the Bassa of Bossina, with Two hundred Horse
only, remained to show his back to his own People. That he was overruled to
attack our Men by the Bassa of Arcigouina, who was the first that with Two
hundred Horse entered our Trenches, and that in his flight the Bassa of Bossina
was flightly wounded. No more then Eight hundred of our Men entered the Battle,
and dispersed so great a Party of the Turks, with the loss of only Four of
ours, and Five and twenty wounded.

After Dinner, the Besieged set up Gabions, and palizado'd the Bastion and
Roundel, and gave some disturbance to those that assisted at the Battery. But
our Men turning two Cannon upon them, the Shot fell among the Gabions, turned
them topsie-turvy. and made a great slaughter of the Turks. After that, four
Mantelets were set up in places agreed upon, which served for Defense of the
Miners, who wrought underneath. All night it Rained, and the Turks made a great
Salley, in hopes to surprise our Men; and it might have fallen out luckily for
them, for our Men began to fly in disorder, and made loud Cries: But that,
instead of encouraging the Enemy, rather daunted them; so that believing they
should meet with a numerous Opposition, they retreated without any more to do.

The Eighteenth, the Enemy mounted two Falconets, the one upon the Great Tower
toward the Sea, the other upon the Castle of the City; which very much
prejudiced the Camp. But one of our Bombs revenged us; for lighting upon a
Barrel of Gunpowder in the Upper Fortress, it did great damage, besides the
killing of twenty Persons, Men and Women.

The same day, we had Advice, that the Bassa's beforementioned, upon a Muster
of their Men, found missing Six hundred thirty five, among which were between
Fifteen and Twenty five Persons of Note, for the most part Officers, whose
heads were known by the Slaves. Moreover the Bassa of Albania goes about
picking up Soldiers as the other two did, not sparing Persons exempt, to
increase his Number, and try the Fortune of another Combat, resolved to do
their utmost to relieve the Place, which they believe to be reduced to the last
Extremity.

Late there came a Bombist, sent by the most Serene Duke of Tuscany; whereupon
Orders were given to get ready new Mortar-pieces. At Night the Turks with a
numerous Sally gave us an Alarm, but were valiantly repelled.

The Nineteenth, a Person of the Greek Church being stopped who had been abroad
the night before, reported, That the Defendants, seeing the ill success of the
Fifteenth Day, believed it to be a Design concerted among our Forces, not being
able to conceive that so great a Power should be so easily routed; but being
afterward certify'd of the Truth of the Fact, they were very much disheartened;
yet they remained obstinate in their own Defense, and had made a Circle of
Palizadoes, Beams and Faggots round about the Breach.

There were found three Turkish Colors more in the hands of the Perastines,
and a Slave of Quality and Honor, Ali Bei. Of ours in the Campaigne between
killed, wounded and sick, there are about six hundred. But the three hundred
Florentines being arrived, and those of Baraide being not far off, the losses
of the Camp were sufficiently supplied.

From the Venetian Camp, under Castle Novo in Dalmatia, September 19. 1687.
THE Turks made more sallies upon the City, showing very great Courage.

They killed several Soldiers, and among others wounded a Knight of Malta, who
died the next day.

Our Men made themselves Masters of diverse little Houses adjoining to the City,
still more and more uniting their Lines, striving also to hinder the
Communication between the upper Fortress and the City; which they continually
played upon with their Batteries, and infested with their Bombs; no less
diligent in hastening their Mine, though that Night they could not do much, by
reason of the abundance of Rain that fell.

The 20th. the Florentine Forces arrived, Soldiers picked and called out of the
Garrisons of Livorn, commanded by Signor Cancelli^^i, to the number of Three
hundred.

There was also about the same time taken young Lads that belonged to the City,
who reported, that the Turks labored continually to fortify the Breach, and
that they designed to cast up two Pieces of Fortification, that should
withstand all Assaults. Whereupon all the Artillery was brought to bear upon
that part to level the Breach, and beat down the Tower.

That Night our Men near raised their Works, and cleans'd their Trenches, which
the Rain had ruined.

21st. They made Ladders to storm the City in several places, and weakened the
Defense of the Besieged.

A report also ran that Soliman Sangiac of Scutari was geting Forces together,
to relieve Castle Novo. Whereupon his Excellency designed to send several
Vessels and Men of War, under the Command of Signor Duodo, toward Dnlcigna, a
City greatly beloved by the Sangiac, on purpose to divert him; but the Time
would not permit him.

Thereupon they prosecuted their Mining with more industry then before, to the
end they might come at the Foundations of the City, thereby to enlarge the
Breach toward the City.

The 22d. was spent in expediting the Men of War, and other Vessels toward
Dulcigna, but the Rains, and contrary Weather would not suffer their departure.

But then the Rumor increasing of the Turks drawing together to relieve the
City, they set themselves to raise other Works, and to finish some Bonnets.

At which time there arrived other German Foot, under the Command of Colonel
Baracter, to the number of five hundred in all.

The 23th. they went on finishing their Works, and bringing their Mines to
perfection; not ceasing to thunder from their Batteries, which were continually
visited by his Excellency, and his Lieutenant General.

The 24th. the Men of War, and other Vessels set sail for Dulcigna; at which
time the Turks opened their Gate toward the Sea, which they always kept shut
before, by which means they had Water to their own content.

The 25th. a Mine was set to work under the upper Tower, to the end it might
fall together with the City: But the success was bad by reason of the
Opposition of the Enemy, and the Engineer Baerbieri was wounded in the Head
with a Stone; but the Mine toward the City advanced to the very sides of the
Wall.

About the same time, the Enemy made a sally unexpectedly, and Assailing our
nearnest Trenches, cut off the Heads of two of our Men, and carried away
another.

The 26th. the Perastines made themselves Masters toward the North, of the
Turks Magazines, which they made use of instead of an Arsenal, seized upon two
Barks that were there, and a Mortar-peice.

The same day they set the Mines to work at the Fortress, laboring more
securely under the protection of Mantclets; but to no effect, for that the
Enemy disturbed the Workmen with Granado's, and continually throwing down
Stones, the Ingineer Carnuto being wounded first in the hand with a Fuzee, and
afterward in the Foot.

While thus nothing of Military Diligence and labor was neglected, his
Excellency resolved to try what Policy would do, and considering there were
great Divisions in the Town, between the Inhabitants, and the Garrison,
consisting of many Albanese's;

These Albanese's therefore, the General designed to persuade to leave the
Town, by the means of the Perastines, on purpose to weaken the Enemies
Garrisons, and force them to a Surrender, when they should find themselves
abandoned by so considerable a part of their Defendants.

Upon this, two of the Turkish Albanesi were by the Perastines towld forth,
upon the General's Parol, that they should receive no injury, who being treated
with all civility, engaged the rest to depart the Garrison the next Night, to
the number of two hundred and twenty.

(...) the mean time, all diligence was used to advance the Mine, but meeting
with nothing but Freestone, the work went on but slowly.

The Turks, however, endeavored to Countermine it, upon intelligence given
them by the Fugitives, but meeting the same Opposition of Freestone, all their
industry was in vain.

Now it was agreed with the Albanesi, that they should go forth at the great
Tower, which looks toward the Sea; whereupon his Excellency imbarking three
hundred select Foot upon two Galleys, the Brazzana, and the Achesana, and
himself going aboard a Feluque, he made it his design not only to get out the
Albanesi, but to introduce his own three hundred Men into the Great Tower.

But 'twas impossible for him to bring the Albanesi to that. For though they were
willing to leave the City themselves, under pretense that they were denied
their Pay, they could not be brought to forfeit their Allegiance to the Grand
Signor, by betraying the Place to his Enemies.

Having therefore proceeded so luckily thus far, and the Breaches being
sufficiently widen'd, his Excellency resolved upon a General Assault, seeing he
could so suddenly bring his Mine to perfection.

The 28th. it was agreed upon, that the Assault should be delayed, by reason of
the ill weather, and the continual Rains that fell like a Deluge.

The same day a Florentine Bombist let fly a Bomb into the Great Tower of
Kernegh next the Sea Shore, which lighting upon several Barrels of Powder, sent
a great number of Turks into the Air with their Wives and Children.

The Perastines having accomplished their first design, conducted ten more
Albanesi toward the Seaside, who had let themselves down from a great Tower,
and after they had been made much of in the Camp, were put a board with the
rest.

Soon after the Weather clearing up, the General in pursuance of his good luck
resolved upon a general Onset.

And it was so ordered, that the Auxiliaries with the C^llies, should lie close
to the Shore, and play with their Cannon for several hours together. Also the
five Batteries played without interruption, Sieur Vicenzo Grittie, Proveditor of
the Artillery, Signor di Bucant Superintendant, Signior Grancesco Maria Scotto,
and Signor Francesco Gonner Ville, behaving themselves with extraordinary
diligence, and assisting with all their might at so important a Duty.

Signor Giovan Battista Calbo, Signor Pietro Perini, Superintendent, the
Oltramarine Militia, the Perastines, and the rest that belonged to the Post on
the North side, with Lieutenant Colonel Canagitti, were ordered to assail the
City on that side.

On the Breach side were ordered the Germans under Baraitex, the Florentines,
and part of the Auxiliary Militia assisted by diverse Knights of the Order, and
Companies of Dragoons.

Thus the Granadiers being sent before, the Soldiers ran upon the Breach,
entered the great Tower in part demolished; but the Houses being destroyed that
were behind, was the reason that they could not thunder upon the Enemy, as they
would have done with their small Shot; yet many Florentines, Lieutenant Colonel
Satonini, and others made their way to the Moschee. But the Turks being
fortified in the Houses, killed Santonini, the Captain of the Granadiers, and a
great many Soldiers of his Excellenties Guard, the Harquebusiers, and many
other Florentines, the main Body of the Turks, with their Wives and Children,
being got into the Castle of the City, from whence they shot without ceasing.

The Christians having thus lost the best of their Officers upon the Breach,
with two Knights of Malta, and one wounded, it could not be guessed, whither it
were out of fear of some supposed Mine, or whither it were by the fall of a
Banner set up by the Maltesi, not only Baraiter's Companies, but the Gentlemen
Auxiliaries began to retreat.

However, this disorder did not put the more Courageous into any Confusion, but
having got the great Tower, with two Pieces of Cannon, and three Patarrs, they
kept Possession: the Abruzzesi having bravely behaved themselves, in
maintaining the Combat, being assisted by the Valor of Signor Bori, Sergeant
Major of Battalia.

Signor Giovanni Loredano, Signor Tranquillo Bolani, the Marquess Orologio,
showed very great Courage: and all the while his Excellency attended by many
Noble Volunteers, and other Adventurers, in all the heat of the Combat took no
rest, exposing himself to all danger, and running from Hill to Hill to give out
all fitting Orders, and to animate the Assailants, both with his Presence, and
his Exhortation.

Signor Gramani, the Lieutenant General led up to the very brink of the Breach,
encouraged the Men in falling on, and forced back the Fugitives.

Also Signor Lexio Balbi, Governor of Cattaro, and Bernardo Barbaro, being near
to the Prazza and the Breach, were punctual at this time of Exigence.

The 29th of September, a Turk of Tabiach was taken, who having been in Castle
Novo, was making his escape to his own Country, and reported that there were
burnt in the great Tower the day before, by the Barrels of Powder fired by the
Bomb many Goods of Value, and about One hundred and sixty Persons, Men, Women
and Children.

By and by his Excellency discovering the earnest desire of the Morlacks, and
the Levies of the Territories of Sebenico, Trau, Spalatro and Clissa, as also
those of Cattaro, and the Montenegrine had to enter the Breach, he gave them
their Liberty, to which purpose he caused the five Batteries to fire, and play
upon the Castle, and the great Tower toward the Sea, and the City Houses for a
good while, and then let them go on.

They would have entered by the great Tower, but that being already won, and
maintained by the paid Militia, it would not be permitted them, so that they
were necessitated to pass on the other side the Breach, where they met with
many difficulties in getting down, and were a good while before they could get
footing. However, their Courage overcame the difficulty, and they got with
three Colors flying into the City; about forty recovering a House, which they
got possession of. The rest returning back with their Booty, making the others
believe, that they retreated without Walls, as being pursued by the Turks, were
somewhat disordered at the sight, though without having damage, only Zuranne
Marowich, Governor of the Men of Trau, being wounded in the City, with some few
of the same Nation; whom nevertheless, the Sieurs Balbi, Barbaro and Girolamo
Bochio, Antonio Bochi, and Count Francisco so prerecover'd to their former
Courage.

These things thus done, the General resolved to send for some Petars to break
open the Doors of the Houses, where the Enemy had fortified themselves; and to
fill up the Mores and Trenches with Timber and Bavins, and to Level, to make
the Access to the City more easy to the Body of the Army, and to fill the town
with Soldiers, to which purpose there was brought together in a short time a
vast quantity of Tools and Materials. Toward Evening the Work going busily
forward, his Excellency, persuaded some of the Turks, who were in the great
Tower toward the Sea, to surrender, upon Condition that they should be sent
away to the rest of the Albaneses, and so to have the Liberty to repair home to
their several abodes. Who having thus quitted the great Tower in the Night, our
Men took possession of it, and found therein two Pieces of Cannon, one Saker,
and a Standard: All this while our Men made diligent have with their Timber and
Fagots to finish their Works, that they might be able to pass from the Tower of
the Abruzzesi, to the Walls, and so get into the City; wherein the Signors
Antonio Canel, Alvise de Mula, and Count Porro, Colonel Conductor of the
Soldiers introduced signalized their industry, together with Lieutenant Colonel
De Terms.

The 30th being the day dedicated to the glorious St. Girolamo, Native and
Protector of Dalmatia, it being the pleasure of God to restore to the Bosom of
Christianity, a place which formerly, through the Ottoman Power, under the
Magnificent Empire of Solomon, was esteemed the Rampart of Turkey against the
Valor of Charles the Fifth; so it happened, that his Excellency being sent with
a noble Fleet, and a courageous Army quite reduced it, and subdued it, to
augment the glorious Conquests of the most Serene Republic of Venice.

Our Men being thus got into the City, made some Slaves, and set at Liberty
several Christians, that had been shut up by force within the Walls of the
City. By the Prisoners we were informed of the death of Kirbasse, in the
Opposition which was made to our first entering the Breach: which discouraging
the hearts and spirits of the rest, they consulted all that Night, what to do,
finding it was but mere rashness to think of holding out any longer. Thereupon
they gave Commission to a Turk to go and fall at his Excellency's feet, and
implore Acts of Humanity.

His Excellency therefore considering, that the Castle was fortified, and which
was more, fortified by Nature withal, as being seated upon a high Rock, which
it would require a long time to level, the following Articles were agreed upon.

That the Turks with their Families should depart.

That they should have Vessels allowed to transport them into Albania.

That they should take nothing along with them, but such effects as every one
should carry off armed with Sword and Pistol.

That the Castle with all the Cannon, Standards, Arms, Ammunition should be
delivered immediately to his Serene Highness the Duke of Venice, without any
imbezelment, leaving the Renegado's to his Excellencies Discretion.

Sending therefore for some Perastine Shallops, near to Castle Novo and drawing
up the Soldiers on both sides the way from the Castle to the Seaside, in the
presence of his Excellency with all the Noble Men of Venice, and some Knights
of Malta, to prevent the Soldiers and Morlocks from doing any injury to the
Turks, they departed with all their Families, the Articles being punctually
performed without any detriment to any person.

The number of the Enemies, which were in the said Castle, amounted to near
four hundred, what with Old Men, Wounded, and those that were able to bear
Arms, a People fierce and warlike, besides about a thousand Women and Children.

The First of October, the Turks which were in the upper Fortress, moved with
the Indulgent usage showed their Friends, made an Agreement upon the same
Conditions, and had their departure so, and with the same Formalities; to the
number of about a thousand five hundred Men, Women and Children.

Thus therefore fell to the Patrimony of the Most Serene Republic, one of the
strongest Holds of these Provinces, by the Valor of His Excellency Cornaro,
after it had been some hundreds of years in Possession of the Turks; being now
made the Metropolis of Arcegouina, of which Signior Girolamo Donato is
appointed Governor, who having been Governor of the City and Island Liessia,
has, in the Employment of Commissary of the Camp, augmented the Honor of his
Name, by his Sedulity in providing Provision for the Camp.

From the Venetian Fleet, near Athens, September. 21. 1687.
HAving fetched their Compass round about the Morea, after the surrender of
Misitra at Discretion, and the Ruin of all Malvasia with Bombs, to let those
haughty Turks understand the Power of the Serene Republic, His Excellency, the
Lord Admiral, having rendezvouz'd his Fleet within the Straight of Corinth, in
the Gulf of Egena, had an earnest desire to put an end to this years Campaigne
with the Conquest of the Negropont, so much by him desired; but considering,
together with the other Superior Commanders and Sea-Captains, who are admitted
to Council, not only the difficulties of the Season, far advanced in the Year,
but the numerous Garrison, of above Five thousand Foot, which guarded that
Precinct, and the Opposition which the Serasquier might make, with the
unanimous consent of the whole Council, the Siege of Athens was agreed upon, to
make way the next Season for the Conquest of the Negropont.

Thereupon the Men of War being sent away to this Island in a distinct
Squadron, to amuse the Enemy, and draw the Serasquier thither with his Forces,
they steered directly toward Port Draco the Twentieth in the Evening, and the
next Morning reached the Port.

On the Twenty first they landed all their Militia, Horse and Foot, but not so
much as one Turk appeared in the Field; whereupon they passed on to Athens, and
made themselves Masters of the Town, which is only inhabited by the Greeks,
while the Ottomans were retired into the Upper Enclosure.

His Excellency understanding the strong Situation of the Place, because he
would not be constrained to ruin it with his Bombs, summoned the Defendants to
a surrender: But the Enemy returned Answer by word of mouth, That they were
resolved to hold out.

The Twenty second, two Mortar-pieces of Five hundred, and two Pieces of Cannon
of Fifty, with two lesser Guns of Twenty, were landed, which were easily
brought to the Batteries that were raising, because the Way was smooth and
level, and but six Miles in length.

On the Twenty third, they went on with their Work in raising their Batteries,
during which labor, Sergeant Major Perez of the Regiment of Cleuters, died the
Twenty fourth at Night, of a wound received by a Musket-Bullet.

The Twenty third, four more great Guns, two of Fifty, and two of Twenty, with
two Mortar-pieces, were landed and brought to the Battery.

The Twenty sixth, they began to play with their Bombs upon the Fortress; one
of which fell among their Ammunition, and fired a great part of it, to the
great terror of the Besieged, whose Defenses began to fail them, their Parapets
being ruined, and their great Guns dismounted.

The twenty seventh, This day the Trenches were opened in order to make the
Approaches, and to advance under the Walls.

The Twenty eighth, toward Evening, through the continual playing of our
Bombs, which fell all into the small Enclosure, there hapen'd another great
Fire, which increasing upon the fuel of the Houses, and the continual playing
our Bombs, endured so furious all that Day and the next Night, that the Enemy,
astonished to see their Houses and their Goods consumed, and their Families
burned, resolved to hang out a white Flag; and with earnest and loud cries
toward the Battery of the Super-intendant, Count Felice, begged 'em to fling no
more Bombs; which the Count understanding, caused all Hostility to cease.
Whereupon General Coningsmark gave leave for five Hostages to come forth, who
being sent to the Lord Admiral and Captain General, the following Capitulations
were agreed upon: Which being translated into the Turkish Idiom, one Copy was
Signed by the Hostages aforementioned, and the other sent to the Fortress for
punctual performance.

His Excellency was glad of this Advantage; for though the Enclosure were but
small, yet it would have cost a great deal of Time, and loss of much Blood, to
have Mastered it, by reason of the strength of the Situation.

Moreover it was of great consequence, because it Commands not only a Country
of Spacious Extent, but also a Large and Wealthy City lying under it; a Place
of great Trade for several sorts of Merchandise that are brought to this Town;
and which will therefore, in Time of Peace, bring great Revenue to the Public
Treasury.

Porto Lion, September. 29. 1687.
ALi Aga, Kussein Effendi, Kussein Aga, Kazi-Mahomet, Acamet Effendi Poscha,
Turks, sent by the Commander of Athens, in the Quality of Hostages, being all
together in the Admiral Galley, to treat upon Conditions of Surrender with His
Excellency Procurator, and Captain General. The Articles were agreed upon in
the Form following.

I. That as an Act of Gracious Clemency, all the Turks, with their Wives and
Children, should be permitted to depart and quit the Enclosure within the space
of Five Days, begun this present Day; with liberty to carry forth as many
useful Necessaries as every one can be able to carry on his back, Arms only
excepted.

II. That they shall have leave at Noleggio to hire Vessels at their own
Charges, to carry them to Smyrna, or where they please.

III. That at their departure they shall not put any force upon any Person that
is not willing to go along with them, and shall leave all the Slaves behind
them of what condition soever.

IV. That in case there shall be at present found any want of Water, or any
scarcity of Ammunition or Provisions, that then these Articles are to be void
and of no effect, and that the Defendants shall run the risco of being
compelled to surrender at Discretion.

The Fourth of October, the Turks quitted the Place, to the number of Three
thousand Souls, of which there were about Five hundred Soldiers, and coming to
the Seaside with what Goods they could carry, were put a-board four Foreign
Vessels which they hired themselves.

8. Ditto. Were found in the Castle eighteen great Guns of several sorts; and
though now it be a heap of Ruins, yet in a short time it may be made a Place of
great Strength.

And in regard this Important and Glorious Conquest presages not only to the
Most Serene Republic, but to all Christendom far greater Progresses, the City
of Athens being now become Tributary ever since the beginning of this Month to
the Venetian Armies; it will not be amiss to consider the Importance of the
Situation, and the present Condition of that Ancient and most Renowned City.

It is situated not far from the Seacoasts, in the midst of the Gulf of
Engia, in Greece, and the Capital City of all Attica. It is now called by the
Greeks Setine. Anciently Oenopria, afterward Egina, the Mother of Eacus and
Rhadamanthus by Jupiter. Dispeopled by Pestilence; afterward Re-peopled at the
Prayer of Eacus by Emmets transformed into Men, and therefore called Myrmidones.
Anciently it had several Names from the several Princes that Reigned therein,
subject more then other to Changes of Government. It has a Citadel built upon
a Rock of Freestone, surrounded with Walls joined together to the Points and
Circuit of the Rock, which is about a Thousand and two hundred Paces in
compass. Below the Hill are to be seen distinctly the Foundations of another
Wall which surrounded almost all the whole City, and rendered it very difficult
of access. There, that is in the Citadel, the Turks inhabit only, who are upon
continual Guard against the Surprises of the corsairs.

In this Enclosure stood a Temple Dedicated To the unknown God: The Inscription
of whose Altar is still to be seen; and though the workmanship be very costly for
the Marble, yet it serves for no use, either to the Christians or Turks.

The Second part of this City, which is in the middle of the First and Third,
is inhabited solely by the Christians: And the Third, which is lower than the
two former, contains a most stately Palace of Marble; upon the Gate of which
are Engraven in Greek Characters, certain Words that signify,

Behold Athens! formerly the Seat of Theseus.

There is also to be seen in Athens another Structure, the most Beautiful that
can be imagined, called the Pantheon; upon the outside of which are engraved
the Atchievments of the Greeks.

Among other Miracles of this Sumptuous Building, at the larger Gate are to be
seen two Horses cut to the Life; the Workmanstip of Prapiteles.

The Areopago, so much frequented in former Ages, is now reduced to a Monastic
Solitude. Nor is there any thing of the Famous Academy remaining, but only a
Greek Iuscription which wishes Travelers a good Journey.

It is thought that the Enclosure of Athens far exceeds that of Prague, the
Capital City of Bohemia.

There are an Infinite number of other Antiquities to be seen; among which the
Arsenal of Lycurgus, after the Doric Order, where their Arms were stored; the
Lanthorn of Demosthenes; the Tower of the Winds, of an Octaginal Figure, of
which Andronicus Cirestes gave the Model; and the Temple of Theseus.

Formerly Learning and Learned Men flourished in high reputation in this City:
Nevertheless She suffered her Vicissitudes, when in the 39th. Olympian, Draco
instituted those Bloody and Cruel Laws, which were afterward abrogated and
abolished by Solon, the Fourth wise man of Greece, all but those against
Robbers. He punished Laziness with equal punishment to death. Xerxes Four
Hundred and Fifty Years before the coming of CHRIST having broke through the
Streights of Mount Olta, now called Bocca di Lupo, or the Wolf's Mouth, burnt
this City, though empty of Inhabitants, who at the same time were aboard Two
Hundred Vessels at Sea.

From the Reparation of the Walls of this City, the Civil Wars had their
Original; which after Greece was freed from their Fears by the means of
Leonidas and Spartan, divided all Greece into two Parties; while the
Lacedaemonians pretended That there ought to be no place without the
Peloponnesus, or Morea, where the Barbarous Nations might harbor and fortify
themselves.

Lastly, In the Year Four Hundred and Four (before the birth of CHRIST) after a
Fierce and Bloody War of Seven and Twenty Years standing, the Athenians being
overthrown near to Aegos Potamos, they became subject to the Spartans.

The Schools of Athens were the most Famous in the World; and while the City
flourished, bred the most Famous Persons, beyond the Schools of any other City
or Nation.

To Plato Succeeded Speussippus; to him Zenocrates; to him Zenephon, so Famous
in War: Then came Polemo, Crates, Crantor, Archesilaus, who erected the
Academy; whose Learning was in the midst between the Aristotelics and
Platonics. Epicurus, Zeno the Founder of the Stoics; Demosthenes the Tully of
Greece. Aristotle founded the Sect of the Peripatetics, and his Successors were
Theophrastus, Strato, Lycus, Chrysolaus, Lacides the Cyrenaean, and Diogenes,
who raised the Fame of the Stoics to their highest Splendour.

The Dukedom of Athens formerly reckoned under their Jurisdiction One Hundred
Seventy Four Villages or Towns; some of which were equal to many Cities. Now
the greatest number lies in the Plain of Mesogia, which are not a few.

The Air is sharp and clear, and consequently very wholesome; the Land is
watered with most limpid Fountains, so that the Meadows produce all manner of
Herbs, as well for Physic as for Sallads, which grew there as in a most
Fruitful Garden: It abounds with Groves of Olive Trees, that yield a most
perfect Oil in great quantity, and serve for the use of the Grand Signior's
Palace at Constantinople.

Of all her Mountains the chiefest is called Hymettus, which being mighty
pleasant and rich in Flowers, produces a most delicious sort of Honey in great
quantity, and excells all the Mountains of Greece, and perhaps of any other
Country.

In the series of several Ages, it has been under the Dominion of several
Princes. Sylla, after a long Siege made himself Master of it, and reduced it
under the power of the Romans.

Bajazet triumphed over it, when it was in subjection to Aristonicus the
Epicurean Philosopher. After that, Renizer Acciajali was Lord of it, from whom
the Venetians won it; but afterward recovered by the same Acciajoli, who
possessed at the same time Attica and Boeotia. In the Year One Thousand Four
Hundred Fifty five, Dlahome II. besieged it, and sacked it for want of Relief:
Since which time 'till now, it remained all along in the Power of the Ottoman
Emperors.

The News of the great Victory was brought upon the the Tenth of August by a
Feluque, which before she came within ken, they knew not what the sight might
mean; but when they saw the Ottoman Colors and Standards exposed to view, the
People crowded to the Seaside with shouts of Victory, and immediately the News
spreading with the swiftness of the Wind, presently a humming noise of Joy ran
through all the Streets, while the People gathered in clusters gave ear to the
Speaker, who undertook to give a relation of the Victory, before he knew it
himself. By and by the loud Acclamations of Long live St. Mark, filled all the
neighboring Sky, while the Bells with their brazen Throats proclaimed the
joyful tidings to places more remote; and the Vessels in, Harbor discharging
their great Guns, with their gladsom terror diffused a pleasing Satisfaction
into the hearts of the Faithful.

The same night the Most Serene Republic ordered Bonfires to be made upon the
Piazza, accompanied with several Volleys and Peals of small and great Shot for
two Evenings together; at both which times was to be seen the Great Steeple,
resembling the Castle of Babylon, with her Head and Shoulders stuck with
Lights, resembling an Immense Atlas, bearing upon his bunchy Back another
Heaven, adorned with Stars propitious to the desires of the People.

In the Ducal Church was Sung Te Deum, accompanied with Music so charming, that
it was a difficult thing to judge, whether Paradise did not congratulate us for
the advantages of so great a Victory.

And to show that this Serene Republic never suffers Great Actions to go
unrewarded, nor Valor to be deprived of its due Recompense. No sooner did the
welcome News of so many Noble Atchievments reach the Ears of our Senators,
together with the Names of the Commanders and Volunteers, who had been sharers
in an Action so renowned, but they voted a Statue to be erected to the Admiral
General Francisco Morosini, in the Council Chamber of Ten, with an Inscription
in Letters of Gold.

To General Coningsmark, they ordered his Employment to be continued for Five
Years longer, with a considerable addition to his Pension, which is at this
time above Twenty Four Thousand Ducats a Year.

To the Prince of Brumswick was sent a fair, large and rich Diamond, of a
considerable value. A Sword enchased with Diamonds was sent to the Prince of
Turena. And acknowledgment was made to the Marquess of Corbous, by augmenting
his annual Pension, and declaring him Sergeant Major of Battalia.

Medals of Gold were also ordered to several Officers, who signalized their
Valor in so important and famous an Enterprise.

And for a Conclusion, give me leave to insert a short Panegyric Presented to
General Coningsmark, by Signior Antonio Martinelli; thus in English;

To the Most Illustrious, and Most Excellent Lord, General Coningsmark: Upon
the Rout of the Serasquier, and the Conquest of Patrasso, and the Dardanel of
the MOREA.

BRave Hero, with Venetian Laurels Crowned!
How loud thy Glories through the World resound?
Thou but unsheath'st thy Conquering Sword, and straight
The Prostrate Turk falls tamely at thy Feet.
This the Serasquier witnessed, bold in Fight,
'Till in thy Looks he saw thy Courage writ:
But then thy Fame Despairing to with-stand,
Quitted the Field to thy Supreme Command.
Nor does Morea won, thy Name confine,
So fast the affrighted Turks their Posts resign;
Too narrow is the Achaian Theater,
'Till at Bysantiums Walls thy Strength appear:
And that, if my Prophetic Muse foresee,
Is the next Work by Heaven Ordained for Thee.
FINIS.

