THE Justice of our Cause In the Present War, In respect of what is Peculiar to
the English, in matter of CIVIL RIGHT.
THE Author foreseeing that our late Peace was not like to continue long, and
considering the Great Advantage of a Good Cause in all Differences, out of
great Concern for the Good of his Country, has for some years been
endeavoring, in the best manner he could, that ours might be made such, both
in respect of Religion, and of Civil Right, while the Peace continued.

As to Matters of Religion, he knew very well long since how Indefensible a
Cause we have, and was endeavoring that that might be regularly brought to the
Consideration and Cognizance of a Proper Judicature, that is, of a National
Synod, or a Convocation of the Clergy.

He observed two great Mischiefs in it: One that by how much the worse our
Cause is, so much the better is that of our Adversaries against us; whereas was
ours but rectified, as it ought to be, it would make that of our Adversaries
utterly Indefensable. and necessitate them to mend theirs too; and then that
part of the Difference would cease: and besides we should by the same means be
freed from the other Mischief too; which is so great, that it has been the
principal Occasion of all the Confusions and Scandals both of the former Civil
War, and of the late Revolution. For wicked crafty designing Men of no
Religion, or any real Virtue, under pretense of concern for Religion, abused
the People with most wicked contrived Lies and Calumnies, till, running
themselves into a desperate Case, they run all into those Excesses, which have
been the greatest Shame and Dishonor to this Nation, that the Subtle Spirits
of, Achitophel and Balaam, or the Devil himself could devise. But the
Consideration of these matters of Religion, belonging properly to the Clergy,
and such as are in Authority, what is written for that purpose is reserved to
be communicated to them, and but few others.

As to what is here published concerning Civil Right, the Author at the time of
the Peace concluded, had not so much as any suspicion of the Secret Practices,
which have since been brought to his Knowledge by such degrees and means, as
seem to have been ordered by some Special Divine Providence, without any
inquiry by him, except for his farther Satisfaction afterward. But as he came
to the Knowledge of them, he constantly gave notice from first to last, of what
he observed or understood, to such in Authority, as he thought most proper; and
at last by A Petition and Demand of Right and Justice, as one of the Commons of
England, on behalf of himself and the rest, in a Letter to his Representative
in the last House of Commons. And since there was so little regard to either by
those Gentlemen, he conceives it so great an Injury to all the Commons of
England, their Principals, as obliges him in Duty to the God of Truths and
Righteousness, to his Prince, and to his Country, to acquaint them a little
farther with the Case; that they may consider of farther Special Instructions
to their respective Representatives.

It is what was at first intended only for Part of a General Preface to things
lately written for the Service of the Church and Kingdom of England; but upon
farther Consideration is thought, fit to be published alone: as follows.

I COME now to the other part of our Case, concerning CIVIL RIGHT: of which I
have already declared my Thoughts, as I found, from first to last, as far as
was proper for me to do. The Paper entitled, The Fidelity of a Loyal Subject,
was sent to King William 10 June, before he went into Holland, and to diverse of
the Lords of the Privy Council, and Members of Parliament. And all that part of
this Collection, entitled, A Message of Peace, was sent to those Lords, and to
the Speaker of the House of Commons, and some others, a little before King
William's Fast. That concerning the Birth of the Prince of Wales, is part of
that, and was also sold alone. And that in the third, entitled, A Petition and
Demand of Right, etc. after it had been sent to the Member to whom it was
directed, with both our Names at length, and to the Speaker and other Members,
was publicly sold at the Exchange and Westminster, etc.

In these and the rest is sufficient Matter of Fact set out, and such as
neither was, nor could be denied, and had it been questioned, I was ready to
have appeared, and declared upon what Grounds I writ it. Taking that therefore
for granted, I am to consider the Justice of our Cause, in respect of the
Pretended Prince of Wales, as he is styled, not only in the Addresses of the
Abused People, but in the Speech of King William to his last Parliament,
wherein he abused not only Him, but them, and himself too; and even in the
Declaration of War, since his Death. For I meddle not with the Common Cause of
the Confederates; which whatever it be, I think not much advantaged by that
Addition.

That King James the Second was Lawful Successor of King Charles the Second,
and rightful King of these three Kingdoms and the Territories thereunto
belonging, is out of all question with all Men of Sobriety and Conscience.

And that there were those things done by his Authority, which were great
Violations of the Rights of the Subjects, is likewise out of all question.

But 1st. by whose Advice those things were done, which ought in the first
place to have been inquired into, (whether by Popish Counsels, or Protestant
Treachery, and Conspiracy with Fugitive Rebels and Traitors) was never yet made
any question; no small Argument that Truth was not their Interest, who might
have done it, if they pleased.

And 2dly, that by the Known Laws of this Land, the King in such Cases is not
to be questoned, but his Evil Counselors, by Complaint and Remonstrance to
him: especially not till he refuse to do Right, maintain and protect them
against Right, and so make himself a party with them against the true
Constitution of the Government, is, if not asserted, yet admitted and supposed,
in all the Proceedings in the late Civil War, while any thing of Law was
regarded. But the quite contrary in this Case has been done; the King driven
and excluded from the Throne, and the Traitors received and harbored.

And 3dly, Whether to take up Arms against their King upon any pretense
whatever, though doubtful with many, yet with many was out of all doubt, that it
was unlawful, by reason of the Public Declarations of the Nobility, Gentry,
Citizens, Burgesses, Civil Officers, and of the Loyal Clergy, according to
three several Acts of Parliament: But to do it upon Pretense grounded upon
Treachery, is without all doubt, not only unlawful, but abominable with all
Men, who have any sense of Conscience or Religion, of Honor, Justice, or of
Common Honesty. And yet has this been done in this Case.

4thly, Of the Matters alleged against King James, there was one, concerning
the Birth of the Prince of Wales, which had it been true, had been sufficient
to have justified all that was done against him: but being false, and not only
false, but a contrived Calumny, is as great a Demonstration of the Wickedness
of them.

5thly, And this, having been alleged by the Prince of Orange in his
Declaration, and referred to the Examination of a Free Parliament; the question
in effect was, Whether King James or himself was the Impostor? And his neglect
of that Examination, when it was in his Power, notwithstanding all the
Occasions for it, was a manifest Injury to King James, and Evidence of it
against himself.

6thly, All these Injuries to King James, by Treacherous Counsels, by such
abominable Lies and Calumnies, by driving him out of his Kingdom upon such
false and wicked Pretenses, and refusal of Justice in all these particulars,
all contrary to the Fidelity and Allegiance sworn to him, and his Lawful
Successors, was the Introduction to that which Crowned all; that which came in
course to be read for the first Lesson, while I was writing this, Hos. 8. Where
God complains, Israel has cast off the thing that is good; the Enemy shall
pursue him: They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and
I knew it not: I mean the Act of Setlement.

7thly, This Act is not only an Addition to all the precedent Injuries, but a
farther Proof and Confirmation of the Iniquity of them: For the Convention
being Conscious, that all the other Pretenses were as insufficient in Law, as
deficient in Truth, were forced to strain their Wits, as well as their
Consciences, to find out some other more plausible; which at last was a very
lame one in the bottom, only made more passable with the abused prejudiced
People, by new Adopted Terms of Abdication and Vacancy of the Throne. For
Abdication is a voluntary Act, without intent to reassume, or return to what is
forsaken. But King James, from the Experience he had of the Usage of his
Father, and of the Attempts against his Brother and himself, by desperate
Factions, had just Cause of Fear; and besides, was persuaded by the Prince,
under Pretense of Kindness, to withdraw from the Fury of the People; and did
actually return again as soon, and as far as he could.

8thly, To all these Injuries done to King James, that is no small Addition,
which is done to his Son, to Exclude him, to Attaint him, and to Abjure him;
and for no other Cause or Pretense, but his Education in a Religion different
from this, which I have showed to be so faulty before; and which brings forth
such Fruits, as I am considering now; and which is so little regarded by such
as make it their Pretense, as to be used by them for no other purpose. But as
this is a great Addition to all these; so all these are to be taken into the
Account of the Injuries done to the Son, as the Ground of them.

And now by all this, I think it very apparent to all, who have any sense of
Justice or Honesty in them, how monstrously unjust a Cause this is among Men:
but to understand more fully how wicked it is in the Sight of God, there is
more yet to be considered.

It was not King James alone, and his Son, and Family, who were greatly injured
by these things, but also the People of this Nation, and of all the three
Kingdoms, though this most of any. Which, though it may seem strange, by reason of
their free Concurrence, yet it is never the less true, if they were abused and
imposed upon in it.

Two things there were, which were much cried up, and by which the People were
most incensed against the King; One, That he and the Queen had agreed to impose
a Supposititious Child upon the Nation: The other, That the Bishops were sent
to the Tower for that purpose, that the Business might be the better managed in
their Absence. But the first was not only false, but a most Devilish contrived
Calumny, as I have sufficiently showed in my Papers, and could say more if
there was occasion; and that it was contrived contrary to certain Knowledge.
And the other not only an improbable Suggestion; for, what could their Absence
avail, when so many others were present? But the very depth of Satan, and a
treacherous Practice, whereby the poor King himself was imposed upon contrary
to his own Mind, that they might not be present at the Labor, and Witnesses to
it, and that the Belief of that Lie and Calumny might be thereby confirmed. So
that by both these they were most wickedly abused and imposed upon; and the
English being naturally a plain downright resolute People, and abominating
Tricks and Cheats, but especially to be so abused as they were made believe,
this made them so ready to receive him as their Deliverer, who was in Truth the
Principal in the Abuse and Imposture put upon them. Their Concurrence therefore
in fact, in what they were themselves abused, is not to be imputed to them as
their reasonable and deliberate Act.

But the Business was undoubtedly managed by Conspiracy between some Fugitives
at the Hague, upon Monmouth's Defeat (who it is said was betrayed into that
Undertaking, by such as made their Advantage of it) and their Treacherous
Correspondents in King James's Court: with whom many others of like Loose
Principles struck in afterward for Preferment, and composed the desperate
wicked Faction, which being hardened with the Success of so great Wickedness,
cast off all regard to Religion, Morality, and Common Honesty, and have run
things to such Madness and Extravagances. But their great Support being now
removed, it is to be hoped we may come at last to more Sober Counsels: and that
all these Injuries shall be righted as soon as may be. For, besides the
Indignities done to the Royal Family, those to the People are very
considerable. For they have been injured in their Honor and Reputation, by the
Abuses put upon them; in their Religion, by the Scandals brought upon it; in
their Estates by the vast Expenses they have been at, and all consumed in
foreign Parts, to the advantage of our pretended Friends, but secret Corrivals,
and in the vast Debts contracted; in their Peace by an Unjust and Wicked
Occasion of an endless War intailed upon these Nations; and in their Souls by
manifold Sins and Wickedness, and strong Temptations to greater; as if the
Spirits of Achitophel and Balaam were come amongst us. By the Mischiefs to the
Nation, as well as to the Royal Family, may be perceived what Interest has been
promoted, and what Vipers we have had in our Bowels.

But since it has pleased God to give us an English Heart again upon the
Throne, and one so obliged by the Laws of Nature, of God, and of the Land, and
sensible, I hope, of these great Obligations, we may hope to see the true
English Spirit again revived in the People, with a just Resentment of the
Abuses, and some Reparation for the Dishonor and Injuries done unto them: and
to learn by dear bought Experience to beware of such Factions at home, and of
Foreigners abroad; to value those, who are true to the Principles they honestly
own; and beware of those, who have either none at all, or such as are uncertain
what they are, or certainly very bad: and to see Truth and Righteousness again
restored amongst us, after such Experience of the unhappy Consequences of
Wicked Policies, and the indirect Practices of Lies, Calumnies, and all
Iniquity.

And our Hopes may be not a little encouraged by the Easiness of our Work, if
it be duly considered: For as the ways of Falsehood, Treachery, and Iniquity,
are always not only unhappy in the End, but indirect, rugged and dangerous in
the passage; so the Ways of Truth and Righteousness are not only happy in the
End, but direct, plain, easy, and pleasant Paths. We need nothing but true
English Spirits, among the Commons, and true Christian Spirits among the
Clergy, and a Religious Observance of the Coronation Oath upon the Throne, and
that it be indeed a Throne of Righteousness, and not of Iniquity.

But it must be remembered that the True English Spirit is not only a Spirit of
Honesty and Generosity, but a Spirit of true and sincere Religion at the
bottom: And if we have such a Spirit return again into St. Stephen's Chapel,
we shall not only have the Honor of the Nation restored by eminent
Demonstrations that it was only a prevalent Faction, by which all the Dishonor
and Mischiefs have been brought upon us; but the Honor of God in the first
place restored in Truth and Sincerity in that Sacred place, by proper
Demonstrations that it was not only a Prevalent but an Impious and Hypocritical
Faction that did it. Of which we have had sufficient Divine Admonitions in the
Answers to those two Formal Fasts; that upon the Address of that short-lived
Parliament, and that upon the Princely Consideration, and Religious Disposition
of King William, if they be well considered.

And it must be remembered also, that the true Christian Spirit is a true
English Spirit, in the perfection of all its most excellent Qualities. And
therefore unless the Cranmerian, Temporizing, Treacherous Spirit be cast out of
the Jerusalem Chamber, or at least out of Hen. 7. Chapel, the casting out the
Factious, Impious, and Hypocritical Spirit, out of the Commons alone, cannot
bring our Work to its due Perfection: and if we have both those true Spirits in
Unity upon the Throne, we shall see those Cursed Roots of Perjury and all
Wickedness planted in this Nation by Hen. 8. and his Daughter, utterly
exterpated, and the kindly Plants of Truth, Righteousness, and true Piety,
abounding in the pleasant Fruits of Peace and Happiness, revived and flourish
again amongst us: Which is the only aim of all my Labors, which have been
opposed with so much Wickedness and Madness, notwithstanding the plain honest
Design, and Sound effectual Expedients proposed in them.

THESE things having been laid before the Lower House of Convocation, and the
House of Commons, it is fit they should be considered by the Clergy of the
several Diocesses and Universities, and by the Commons of the several Counties,
Cities and Buroughs before those Assemblies meet again, or as soon as may be:
And none but Factious Spirits can be against it.

FINIS.

