THE Upright Man's PEACE AT HIS END: Opened In a Funeral Discourse, December. 18.
1681. upon the Death of Mr Martyn, Citizen of London.

By T. Jacombe, D. D.

(...) -- (...).

Plutarch: (...) P. 476. LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Sign of the
Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, 1682.

To Mrs MARTIN, the Sorrowful Relict of Mr MATTHEW MARTIN Citizen of London,
lately deceased.
My good Friend,
UPon the late afflictive Breach, which it pleased the Holy and Sovereign God
to make upon you, in the taking away of your dear Husband; it was your request
to me, to Preach upon some Subject that might suit with this dark Providence. I
most readily complied with you herein; not only to testify my respect to the
Dead, but also (and chiefly) to take the advantage of such an Opportunity to
promote the Good of the Living.

The Text, (upon which the following Discourse is ingrafted,) was chose by your
self. And could you, or any other, have chose a better, for such an Occasion?
It being so well adapted to the General Case of Gods People, and to the
Particular Case of your dear Husband, both as to Life and Death. It Is true, it
is a common Text, much beaten, often and often insisted upon, upon the like
Occasions: yet, the Matter wrapped up in it is so Weighty and Momentous, as that
the frequent handling of it did not in the least discourage me, from giving my
Thoughts too and Meditations upon it. And indeed, although several have, from
time to time, been drawing from it; yet it is far from being drawn dry: it
being like the Breast, which, though often sucked, yet remains full; or like the
Spring, which, though many Pitchers be put into it, yet by new supplies it is
still kept from being empty.

The Argument, which it leads unto, is very plain, wholly Practical. And
accordingly, so is this Treatise upon it: I hope, none that are judicious and
serious will despise it because it is so: Plain Truths, because such, are
disrelisht only by vitiated and distempered Palats. It Is common Food, not
Dainties and Curiosities, that sustain the Natural Life; and sure, the
Spiritual Life does most depend upon, is most supported and strengthened by the
plain and easy Truths of Religion, in the most familiar and intelligible
opening and pressing of them. Wit may please the Fancy, but it will never reach
the Conscience; abstruse and knotty Points may break the Head, sooner than the
Heart: when all is done, it is the frequent, plain, powerful inculcating of the
most known and familiar Truths and Duties of the Gospel, that must bring Souls
to God, and Heaven. Oh give me to hear and read, that which tends to further
Faith in Christ. Real Godliness, universal Obedience; that, which will promote
the holiness of my Life, the peace and happiness of my End; let these be urged
and pressed upon me, with plainness and earnestness: This, this is that
Preaching which through Gods blessing must save my Soul.

This is the thing designed in this Sermon; viz. to prevail with Sinners to
engage in serious Piety, in holy and Upright Walking with God. And what an
Incentive have we in the Text hereunto! The End of that Man is Peace: Peace?
peace in a dying hour? What are a thousand Worlds to this! to live in Peace?
and then to die in Peace? What higher felicity is the Creature capable of! What
have we here to do, to be sollicitous about? but this, first to live well, and
then to die well: all other Things are merae Nugae, baubles and trifles in
comparison of these. Well, I have here cast in my poor Mite to further them; oh
that it may find acceptance with God, and success with Men! (with as many as
shall peruse what here is published!

But why do I erect a Porch before such an inconsiderable Building? I return to
your self* After I had done what first you desired, you then would have me
Print what I had preached. That troubled me, and brought me into a straight; I
being loath to deny, and yet not knowing well how to gratify. The doing of it,
might be some kindness to you, but then I very well knew therein I should be
unkind to other Friends, (whom I had denied in the same request, upon the same
Occasion;) and most unkind to my self, in publishing a thing so raw and
indigested as this is. But that which drew me to a compliance with you, was,
your Relation, (whom you sent to me about this) told me, you desired only a few
Printed Copies for your self and your special Friends; this I thought not my
self much concerned to oppose.

To lessen my pains, you got a Friend to transcribe what I had preached. He
most accurately had taken in Writing what (upon the Review) I found I had not
been so accurate in speaking. I perused his Transcript, mending and altering
some Expressions, (so far as Interlining would admit of;) but as to any
considerable alteration of the Matter, (in some necessary additions to it,) I
could not have the advantage of second Thoughts, (unless, I wrote all over
again.) So you must take it as it is!

I commend you, and all yours, to the blessing of the great God. Praying, that
this smarting Rod may be sanctified and sweetened to you all; that, God will be
your God and Portion forever; that, what you have lost in the stream may be
abundantly made up to you in the full and never-failing Fountain; that you may
all imitate his holy Example whilst he lived, and so partake of that
unspeakable happiness which he possesses now he is dead. So prays

Your true and faithful Friend to serve you, Tho. Jacomb.
Febr. 14. 1682.
PSALM 37. v. 37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the End of
that Man is Peace.


UPON the late sudden and afflictive Death of Mr. Martin, (an excellent and
useful Member of this Congregation,) I am desired to Preach upon this Text: a
Text, which from the suitableness of its Matter, is often insisted on upon
these sad Occasions.

The principal Design and Scope of David in this Psalm, is, the quieting and
comforting of the People of God, under their own Afflicted state, and the
Prosperous state of the Wicked: (this is the main Argument which he insists
upon throughout the whole Psalm.)

In order to the more effectual furthering of this Design, he Sums up various
weighty Considerations; wherein he sets forth the Misery of the Wicked (though
they be Prosperous,) and the Happiness of the Godly (though they be afflicted.)
It would take up too much of my time to go over these several Considerations,
as they lie scattered up and down in the body of the Psalm; I shall therefore
go no further then that One in the Text: Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the
Upright, for the End of that Man is Peace: As if David had said, You see the
Godly here for a time exercised with many Troubles, many Afflictions, whilst
the Wicked prosper, and flourish in the World; live in Health, Ease, and
Plenty, in the Affluence of all Creature Comforts: But yet, do not think their
Condition better than the Condition of the Former, because the Godly have the
Advantage as to the End and Issue of all; their End is Peace. Sinners seem to
have the better of it in the beginning, but the Saints have the better of it in
the End: Sinners have the bright Morning, but then their Evening is very Dark;
Saints, (on the other hand,) have the dark Morning, but then in the Evening all
is Light: Zech. 14.7.
Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, the End of that Man is good; it
is Peace: But the Transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the End of the
Wicked shall be cut off; (as it follows in the next Verse.) Here is the
comparing of End and End; and it is a very blessed and gracious End to Gods
People, their End is Peace; but the End of the Wicked, that is very sad, the
End of the Wicked shall be cut off.

Observe in the Words, Three things:

1. The Subject spoken of; or the Character, Qualification, and Description of
the Person; the [ Perfect and the Upright man.]

2. The Act required as to this Subject, [Mark] the Perfect Man, and [Behold]
the Upright.

3. The Ground or Reason of this Act; Mark the Perfect Man: why is such a
Person to be taken notice of? because the End of that Man is Peace. He deserves
to be marked and observed upon this Account, and for this Reason. Or (if you
please) you may bring it under the Notion of the Matter and Object of this Act:
Mark the perfect Man, etc. What are we to mark, observe, and take notice of
concerning this Man? why this, that that End of this Man is Peace; this is one
special thing to be considered about him.

We have two Observations to handle from the Words.

1. Obs. That such who are Perfect and Upright with God, their End is Peace.
Let their Life be what it will, never so dark and afflictive, yet their End is
Peace.

2. Obs. That this blessed Event and Consequent of Vprightness and Perfection,
is a thing that should be Marked, Observed, and duly considered by Others: Mark
the perfect Man, etc.

I give you these Observations according to our Reading of the Words; not in
the least troubling you with the various Versions of them by the Ancients. Our
Translation suits very well with the Original, therefore I keep to that.

I begin with the First.

Obs. Such who are Perfect and Upright with God, their End is Peace.

In speaking to which, I will 1. A little touch upon the Subject: and then 2.
Come to that (which I design most to enlarge upon,) to show, that the End of
this Subject is Peace.


1. For the Subject, The perfect Man opened.
[The Perfect Man and the Upright:] So we render it in the Concrete, but
several render it in the Abstract; reading it thus, Keep Perfeclion, slick
close to Vprightness: not as we, Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright:
(So the Chaldee, the Septuagint, Symmachus, Jerome, and some Others.)

Here are Two Words, Perfect and Upright; (...) they are Synonymous and
aequipoilent Terms, both in this place importing but one and the same thing;
the Perfect is as much as Upright; and the Upright as much as Perfect.

As to the former, it may be queried.

Quest. Is any Man Perfect in this Life? Can any be said to be Perfect in this
Life?

Answ. As to the strict, absolute, and legal Notion of Perfection, so there is
no Perfection in this Life; so, none are Perfect whilst they are here on Earth.
We were indeed perfect in the past state of Creation, as God made us at first;
and we shall be perfect again, in the future state of Glorification; but in our
present, fallen, and middle state, so we are not capable of this Perfection;
(this strict and legal Perfection.) This lies in full, exact, universal, and
adaequate Conformity to the whole Law and Will of God; in being freed from all
inhaesion, acts, and mixtures of Sin, and in having all the several Graces
raised up to their highest pitch: this is the Perfection of the Law. And who
can Pro. 20.9. Eccl. 7.10.
say, that in this Life, he comes to this Perfection? He knows but very little
of himself that dreams of any such Perfection. In this sense, there never was
in the Earth one perfect Man, (excepting Adam before he fell; and that Man,
Christ Jefus.)

But then there is an Evangelical Perfection; that which speaks Perfection only
in a qualified and Gospel sense: And thus, every Godly Man is a perfect Man,
even while he is here on Earth.

Take the Explication of this, in Four or Five things:

1. He is perfect as to his Justification. In the first Moment of the Sinners
believing, he is perfectly Justified; his Sin being fully pardoned, his Guilt
fully expiated, his Person made completely and perfectly Righteous, through the
Imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness to him; (for he that has a perfect
Righteousness upon him, must needs be perfectly Righteous.) Sanctification,
that is a progressive Act, that goes on by little and little, Step by Step, by
degrees; but Justification is of a different Nature. That is a continued, but
not a progressive Act. We are not Sanctified all at once; but we are justified
all at once. And all the successive Pardons that we have of Sin, are but the
Effects of one continued Justification, as that is particularly applied and
drawn forth. Justification is Simul and semel, altogether and at once, (as the
Schools speak.)

2. A gracious Man also is perfect, in some sense, as to his Sanctification:
Not as to the perfection of Degrees, but only as to the Perfection of Parts.
Every Sanctified Man has the Perfection of parts, though not of Degrees; the
whole Man is Sanctified, though not wholly; every 1 These. 5.23
Power and Faculty in the Soul, has something of Sanctifying Grace extended to
it, and terminated in it. And besides that, every true Convert has something
of the two Essential and Constitutive parts of Sanctification; ( viz.
Mortification and Vivification;) and so he may be said, to be perfect with the
Perfection of Parts: As the Newborn Babe has all the Essential parts of a Man,
as well as the grown and perfect Man.

3. He may be said to be a perfect Man, as perfection is the thing that he
wishes, desires, endeavors, and aspires after. All upright Christians are
sensible of much imperfection; are not satisfied with what they are, or have,
cannot take up with their present Seize, either in Grace or Comfort: but
they are ever longing, and panting, and laboring after the perfecting of
these; 1 Th. 3.10.
the filling up of the (...), what is lacking in them. Perfection is the thing
they aim at and press after. You see it in the Apostle, 3 Phil. 12. Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after,
if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus:
Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things that are behind and reaching toward the things that
are before, I press forward, etc. And sincere Christians are daily growing up
toward this Perfection, as well as aiming at it, and aspiring after it, Job
17.9. The Righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that has clean Hands
shall be stronger and stronger: The Path of the just (says Solomon) is like
the shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day, Prove. 4.18.
Thus little Grace is perfect, inasmuch as it is continually growing up to
Perfection.

4. Though the Saints are not perfect here on Earth, yet in Heaven they shall
be perfect, It is indeed the imperfect Man here, but it shall be the perfect
Man there. All our Graces in Heaven shall be filled up, elevated, and raised to
their highest pitch, and all our Corruptions thoroughly purged away. In Heaven,
we shall know even as we are known; 1 Cor. 13.12.
(what an expression is that to hold forth the Perfection of knowledge!) We
shall love God in Heaven, to the utmost of what the Creature can come up unto
in Love; (and so in the rest.) When that which is perfect is come, 1 Cor. 13.10.
then that which is in part shall be done away. -- To the Spirits of Just Men
made perfect. Heaven is a State of Perfection, Heb. 12.23.
and all that are sincere shall at last arrive at that Perfection.

5. Uprightness is perfection, as God accepts it for Perfection. In God's Eye,
every upright Christian is a perfect Christian. Therefore, they are often
linked together; and the One is exegetical of the Other: Mark the perfect Man
and behold the Upright; the Upright and the Perfect, are all one; the perfect
Man is the Upright Man, and therefore Perfect because Upright. It Is said of
Noah, he was a just Man, and perfect in his Generatior, Genesis 6.9.
and Noah walked with God: Was there no sin in him? we (know the contrary.) was
he perfect in Holiness? No, but he was perfect, in that he walked with God, and
was Upright. They are again put together in the Character of Job, Job 1.1. That
Man was Perfect and Upright. Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty, walk before me, and
be thou Perfect; ( i. e. be thou Upright.) Phil. 3.15. Let as many therefore as
are Perfect, be thus minded; (it cannot be spoken of any Perfection, other than
what is wrapped up in Sincerity.) And this is the meaning of the Words here,
Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright.

It would be a vast Subject, particularly to describe and Characterize this
Upright Man; I must only touch upon it when I come to the Use. So much of the
Person of whom the Text speaks, The perfect Man and the Upright.

2. Secondly, The Happiness of the upright Man.
I come to the Happiness of this Man. How does it fare with this Man? very
well, as well as Heart and Soul can desire, The End of that Man is Erit ad
Extremum vir pax. Hieron.(...). Sym. Quoniam sunt reliquiae homini pacifico.
Vulg.
Peace.

We Will consider this End in a threefold Reference, (according to which, there
must be also a threefold Explication of the Peace annexed to it.) It refers, 1.
To the final Issue of all God's Providential Dispensations toward Upright
Persons. 2. To Death, the End and Period of their Natural Life. 3. To their
End, State, and Condition after Death in the World above. In each of these
respects, the End of the Godly upright Man, is Peace.


1. As it refers, to the final Issue of all God's Providential Dispensations.
And so, the sense of it will come to this: Good Men, Holy Men, their Condition
here (for a time) may be very dark, afflictive, and troublesome; God may see it
good, in his infinite Wisdom, to exercise them with various Afflictions and
Trials; the chastnings of God may be very severe upon them, ( without and
within.) Well! yet stay but a little, till the End come, ( i. e. till God has
done his Is. 10.12.
whole work upon them; till the close of all his Afflictive Providence, till
the time is come that he has set for Mercy and Comfort;) and then all is
Peace. The End of that Man is Peace, with respect to God's Providence; as God
does End and Wind up all his Providential Workings (whatsoever they are)
toward him in Peace and Comfort: It falls in with that, Psalm. 30.5. Weeping
may endure for a Night, but joy comes in-the Morning. And with that of the
Apostle, Heb. 12, 11, 12. No Chastening for the present seems to be joyous
but grievous; nevertheless, afterward (at the end,) it yields the peaceable
Fruit of Righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby. You have an
expression, Jam. 5.11. Behold, we count them happy which endure, (that One
would think was a very strange counting,) You have heard of the Patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender Mercy. You have seen to what end the Lord brought things with this Job:
In the beginning of God's dealings with him, he did not appear to be so
merciful, pityful, and gracious; but when it came to the End, when things were
brought to the final Issue, then he appeared to be very pitiful and
compassionate toward him; then it was Peace and Comfort to poor afflicted Job.
It is said of him, the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more then his
beginning, Job 42.10. Oh, the Condition of upright Christians, for a time may
be very stormy and tempestuous; but in the Close, all is serene and calm As I
said before, The Morning may be Dark and Cloudy, (nay it may be so the whole
Day, the whole time of Life,) but yet in the Evening all is Light. Affliction
may for a long time be their Lot and Portion, but all shall end in Peace. This
Explication (I conceive,) does best suit with the main Scope of David in this
Psalm; but because it does not so well suit with the Providence of God before
us this day, I shall not further enlarge upon it.

2 This End here carries a special reference unto Death, the end and period of
Life. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end! Death is our end, it puts an end to Life, (to
the Natural and Temporal Life:) When a Manis dying, he is at his great End, his
last end.

Now, mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, the End of that Man is
Peace; that is, in a dying hour, upon his Bed of pain and sickness, when he is
breathing out his last Breath, he has Peace, he dies in Peace.

There is a twofold Peace that belongs to the godlyman at this End.

1. Peace with God; (the highest, most blessed and most glorious Peace.) Being
justified by Faith we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. The holy Soul, lives in
this peace with God, and dies in this Peace with God too. The Wicked live, and
die, in a State of enmity with God, all along they are Enemies to God, and God
an Enemy to them; there is is no Peace, no reconciliation betwixt God and them.
But sincere Christians, both living and dying, have peace with God; they have
in Life, a God reconciled to them through Christ; and at Death, they go to a
reconciled God and Father; not to an angry, an hating, an hostile God, but to a
pacified and loving God; to a God that is their Friend. Oh this is the great
Happiness of God's People! the End of such is this Peace.

2. Their end is peace as to Peace from God. Peace in themselves and with
themselves, the Peace of Conscience; Gaudium in fine, sed Gaudium sine fine.
Bern,
that Peace, which is called the Peace of God, which passes all understanding,
Phil. 4.7. Oh when Death comes to lay his Arrest, his cold hands upon an
upright Christian, when he is going the way of all Flesh, when the Grave is
opened and ready to receive him, when he is just dropping into the House of
rottenness; even then, (through the Grace of God) he has inward Peace,
Serenity, and Comfort, The Plato in Phel. p. 84.
Swan sings and dies, dies singing; the godly Man dies rejoicing. Sampson found
Honey in the Lion; so it is here. Prove. 14.32. But the Righteous has hope in his
Death; (that Hope that rises up to Peace:) The Wicked is driven away in his
Wickedness, (in the former Branch of the Verse;) God deals with him in a
terrible manner, drives his Soul out of his Body whether he will or no: ay, but
it is not so with the godly, the Righteous has hope in his Death. There is hope
in thine End, Jer. 31.17. (I do but allude to this Text, for the End in it, is
not that which I am at present speaking of.) Good old Simeon, he died with this
Peace; Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace: there might be
something special and peculiar in his case; Luke 2.29.
but as to the substance, so it reaches to all Gods People. It is said of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.5. He died according to the Word of the Lord: the Jewish
Interpreters carry it, he died at the Mouth of the Lord; and they say, that
(when he came to die) God kissed out his Soul; See Bishop Hall. 1 V. 959.960.
he gave in such manifestations of his Love and Mercy to him, as that he even
kissed his Soul out of his Body: and surely, here was Peace at the End. So it was
with Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.3. with holy Paul, I am ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand; (now see his peace,) I have fought the good
Fight, etc. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown, etc. 2 Timothy 4.7.8. So with
various Martyrs, (as might be shown in several Instances.)

Here three Questions should be resolved: 1. Q. Has the Upright Man Peace only
at his End? The End of that Man is Peace? Has he no Peace while he lives, but
only when he comes to die? 2. Has every Upright Man this Peace? 3. Is it only
the Upright that have this peace? Do we not see many die with a great deal of
Peace, who yet are far from being in the Number of these Upright and perfect
Ones?


But I will rather reserve the Answering of these Questions to the Application,
(when I shall have first finished the Doctrinal part.)

3. Lastly, Take this End here, for the blessed State and Condition that
follows after Death, in the World above, And certainly, here is Peace in the
highest Notion of it! The End of the Perfect Man, is this Peace. Gracious
Persons, (such who have feared God, and lived a Holy life,) they die, leave
this World, enter upon an everlasting State: What a kind of State is that? Oh
it is a State of Peace! He shall enter into Peace, Isa. 57.2. It is not only,
he shall go out (or die) in Peace; that follows in the next Branch, They shall
rest in their Beds, each one walking in his Vprightness:) but he shall enter
into Peace, into a State of Peace. Heaven is such a State, it is a place of
Peace; and much of the Happiness of Heaven lies in the Peace that is there
enjoyed. In the glorified Condition there is nothing but Peace, there all is
Peace. Therefore, Peace is often brought in as one great Ingredient into, and
Part of, the Heavenly Felicity: 2 Romans 9.10. Tribulation, and Anguish, upon
every Soul that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; but
Glory, Honor, and Peace, to every Man that works good. Romans 8.6. To be
carnally-minded, is Death; but to be spiritually-minded, is Life and Peace; it
is Peace at present, and it ends in Peace, in Heavenly Peace hereafter, Gal.
6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, Mercy and Peace be upon them, and
upon the Israel of God.

Peace, in the large acceptance of it, takes in all Good whatever: It is the
abridgment of all Good, the Sum and Center of all Felicity. So the Jews used it
in their Common Salutations, Peace be unto you; (that is, all Good, all Mercy.)
Thus Heaven is a State of Peace, there being in Heaven the concurrence and
possession of all good. There Is nothing that the Soul of Man (in its utmost
cravings) can desire, but it shall have it in Heaven. There Is not the presence
of the least Evil, nor the absence of the least Good.

Then take this Peace in the stricter Acceptance of it; so the glorified
Condition is a Condition of Peace. There is Peace with God, Peace with Men, and
Peace with a Man's own self Peace with God; Oh there are no breaches with God in
Heaven! we have too much of These here, but above there is nothing of them. All
is Amity and Peace with God there. Peace with Men: how are all the Saints
united and agreed there! there is no discord or contention, nothing but Oneness,
Harmony, and Love. There Luther and Calvin, the greatest Dissenters are fully
reconciled. The World is in flames here, but there all these shall be fully
quenched. We that cannot agree now, while upon Earth, shall perfectly agree in
Heaven; whatever our Differences may be in this lower Region, they shall all
vanish in Heaven; there we all shall be of one mind. And it is no small part of
the happiness of the godly, to be taken into this Peace.) Further, the Saints
there have peace in and with themselves: All those Passions and perturbations
of mind that here pursue and vex them, shall all there cease; there is no inward
Commotions or Storms; all is sedate and calm within, in the Thoughts and in the
Conscience. Storms are only in the lower Region; there is not the least trouble
of Mind in Heaven, the Soul there lives in constant Repose and Quietness. All
jarrings, commotions, that are in the Soul here, Heaven frees from: Oh there is
Peace!

And this Peace, this glorious Peace, is the Upright Man's Portion; the End of
that Man is this peace. He has the beginnings of it here, but he shall have
the completion and consummation of it there. This Heavenly Peace, (this Peace
of the glorified state,) belongs to this Man. Whatsoever inward troubles and
disturbances he may have in this Life, in the Life to come all shall be peace;
not one sad Thought to trouble him, not one Temptation to assault him, not any
Desertion to afflict him; all peace! all comfort!

So much for the first Observation, that whoever are Perfect and Upright with
God, their End is Peace. I shall speak a little, (and but a little,) to the
Second; and that is this:

2. Obs. This blessed effect, Event, or Consequent of Vprightness, this
happiness and felicity of Upright Persons; is a thing to be marked, taken
notice of, and duly considered, by Others. Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the
Upright; i. e. fix your thoughts upon them, consider and ponder and weigh with
your selves, how it is with them; take notice of them with respect to their
End, that it is Peace.

Two things are implied in this Advice: 1. The Notoriety of the Thing: 2. The
Valuableness and Considerableness of the Thing:


1. The Notoriety of the thing. The Marking (here directed to,) extends both to
the Vprightness it self, and also to the happy Consequent of that Uprightness:
and it implies, that both are Visible, lying open to our knowledge and
Observation. It Is true, both of them, in some respects, are hidden and
indiscernable by us: Sincerity lies deep and hidden in the Heart, is that
which God alone can immediately see and take notice of. And so the Peace (that
results from this Sincerity,) that too is a secret and an hidden thing: As the
Heart only knows it is own bitterness, Pro. 14.10. Rev. 2.17.
so the Heart only knows it is own peace; it is the hidden Manna that Upright
Persons have which none know but only they who feel it. But yet this
notwithstanding, there are some such external manifestations and eruptions of
both of these, as that they may be taken notice of: Otherwise we had never been
called upon to Mark the Perfect Man, and Behold the Upright. Uprightness, as it
lies inwardly in the Heart, God alone sees; but as it shows it self in the
visible Acts of Obedience and Holiness in the Life, so we may see it also. So
inward Peace and Comfort. As that is lodged and seated in the Soul and
Conscience. So he only discerns it who enjoys it; but as it breaks forth and
vents it self, in such and such Words, Expressions and Carriages of living and
dying Persons, so the Standers by and the Hearers of it may come to the
knowledge of it. It is a thing may be known, there is a notoriety in it; and
therefore ehe Psalmist commands Mark, observe, improve your knowledge about
this, that the End of the perfect Man is Peace.

2. It implies the importance and observableness of the thing. Are any Persons
holy and good? And does it fare so well with them at Death? do they reap this
Blessing upon Upright walking in a dying hour? Oh let all mark, and seriously
consider this! for it is a thing that deserves the most serious Consideration.
And that upon a twofold Account;

1. Because the due marking of this will much tend unto, and be a very probable
Means, to beget in Others a firm and steady belief of the Goodness of God
himself, and of the Goodness of the Ways of God. Has a godly Man this blessed
Peace when he dies? And a better Peace after his Death, (the peace of Heaven?)
Surely this must convince Men that God is good, his ways too very good! This
would highly vindicate Religion to the World, and take off those prejudices
that are in Sinners against a holy Life. If they would but mark and take notice
of the happy End of those who live it. Holiness may expose Men to Sufferings
and Afflictions here (for a time,) but then, sooner or latter, it will
abundantly compensate and recompense all those sufferings and Afflictions by
internal and eternal Peace. Oh how could any be prejudiced against Holiness,
did they but believe and observe how well it goes with Gods People in a dying
hour, Considerate vias eorum qui integre vivunt, ut discatis ex operibus eorum;
quia finis viro (tali,) pax. Rasi in Muis in Loc.
and after Death? Certainly, this would silence all those Reasonings that are
in Men against strict and afflicted Piety; and bring them over to, and fix them
in, the Life and Practice of of serious godliness. Holy David brings in the
Words upon this Account, (as I showed at first.)

2. The Marking and considering of this, would be a very powerful Motive and
Incentive to excite others, to imitate the Examples of Upright Persons. To live
with Peace, ( the Peace of God which passes all understanding? then to die in
Peace? then to enter into Peace in the presence of God in Heaven? What great
and desirable Blessings are these! But (I beseech you,) how are they to be
attained? No other way but by Upright and Holy walking with God. Mark therefore
the perfect Man, How? so as to tread in his Steps, so as to follow his Pattern,
so as to live as he lives; and then you may hope to attain to his Peace: Live
the Uprightness of that Man, and then enjoy the Peace of that Man. This (in
short) shall suffice for the Second Observation: I come to the Use:

Use I. Where first, we have a clear view and prospect of that great Difference
that is betwixt Saints and Sinners, betwixt the Godly and the Wicked. The End
of the One is Peace; is that the End of the Other too? Oh no! the End of the
Wicked Man is no Peace; There is no Peace to the Wicked, says my God: Mark the
Assertion, and the Confirmation thereof; No Peace to the Wicked? Sinners have
quite other Notions, are very hardly brought to believe this; ah but we have
it, asserted from God's own Mouth, (from which nothing but Truth can proceed,
Isa. 57.21
) no Peace to the Wicked [saith my God]. Oh the End of the Saints is not so
happy and comfortable, but the End of Sinners is as sad and miserable!

I might bring this down, to the three Explications of the End in the Text.

1. Such who live in Sin, it is thus with them as to their external Condition,
they have their best at first and their worst at last. Gods People have their
worst at first, and their best at last; Trouble at first but Peace at last: but
it is quite otherwise with the ungodly. They begin with Mercies Psa. 73.11.
( prosper in the World, are not afflicted as others, enjoy Health and Wealth,
variety of all Creature-Blessings:) but then they end with dreadful Judgments.
Their Sweet is soon turned into Bitter, their Honey into Gall and Wormwood;
their Prosperity (often) ends in great Adversity: Oh there is is a Sting in the
tail of all their Blessings! And so, with respect to the Providence of God
toward them, their End is no Peace.

2. They come to die; Death makes its approaches, (which it will do sooner or
later to all of them;) they are cast upon Beds of Pain and Sickness: And how is
it with them then? Oh, no Peace! They had not much Peace, (indeed no true
Peace,) in their Health, and while they were in their best State; but they have
less when they come to die. We must mark, as the Perfect and the Upright Man,
so also the Wicked and the Ungodly man: The former we may mark upon a
Comfortable account, (their End is Peace;) but the Latter upon a sad Account,
(their End is trouble.) Alas, how it it with them in a dying Condition? very
bad! How full of Fear are they then! Nay, (where Sin has been very high, and
Conscience is awakened to purpose,) how full are they then of inward horrors
and terrors! Oh Day and Night they Is 33.18.
meditate Terrors, (according to the Threatening.) How do their guilty Souls
quake and tremble in them! Oh, they are in Hell, before they are in Hell! What
sad Reflections do they make upon a bad Life! and what torments do they feel in
themselves upon those Reflections! They see they must die, but how do they dread
to die! They are going to an everlasting State, and it wounds them thorough and
thorough to think what little ground they have to hope, it will be to them a
State of Happiness. What dreadful Agonies do they feel in themselves! crying
out, oh, what will become of us to all Eternity? Oh my Soul, my Soul, whither
art thou going? How do they wish, that they never had been Born, had never seen
the Light! All their former Hopes and Confidences, now vanish: (their hope is
cut off, and their Trust is like the Spiders Web, Job 8.14.) Prove. 10.28. Prove.
11.7. They kindled a Fire, and for a time warmed themselves with the Sparks
they had from that Fire; but now they hear that dreadful Word from God, this
shall ye have of my Hand, ye shall lie down in Sorrow, Isa. 50.11. This is the
dismal Condition of all that forget God, when Sickness and the pangs of Death
are upon them.

3. For the Future, the Heavenly Peace, the Happiness, Joy, and tranquillity of
the Heavenly State; that they have no sense of, no Title to: It belongs not at
all to them; Romans 2.9. Heb. 10.27.
they can look for nothing but tribulation and anguish, the fiery indignation
of the Great God, to be their Portion for ever.

And now, do not these things prove a vast difference betwixt the Godly and the
Wicked? It Is sad that Sinners will not believe this till they feel it; till
their late Conviction of it will be so exceeding dreadful. Mark the Upright
man, for the end of [that Man] is Peace; he is a Man by himself in this happy
End; it is appropriated and confined to himself, and is not common to other
Persons. It Is Childrens Bread, which God never casts to Dogs.

Use 2. This may put us upon Examination; upon serious enquiry, what is our
state and course? Are we in the Number of these Perfect, and Upright Ones?
brought under the Qualifications here mentioned? If we be, then we may hope for
Peace; but if not, then there is no expectation of it. Therefore does it not
highly concern us, with the greatest seriousness, to reflect upon our selves,
to call our selves to account about this. Oh what am I? What is my way and
Course? Am I Upright with God in Heart and Life? Joh. 1.47.
a Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed, one that is without guile? single-hearted
toward God?

To help you in this Trial, know that Uprightness may be considered either more
largely, or more strictly.

1. More largely, as it stands in opposition to all Wickedness in General. So
the Antithesis lies here in the Words; Mark the perfect Man, and behold the
Upright, but Transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the End of the
Wicked shall be cut off: (the Transgressors and Wicked are set in opposition to
the Perfect and Upright.) If you take it thus, then the Perfect and Upright Man
is the Holy or Godly Man, (in the comprehensive import of that Character.) He
is One who loves and lives Holiness, that walks not after the Flesh but after
the Spirit; who orders his Conversation aright, Romans 8.1. Ps. 50.23.
according to the Rule of Gods Word; who rests not in the form of Godliness
only, but lives up to the power of it; whose whole Life is a continued Walking
with God; who does not allowedly lie and live in Sin, (in any one known Sin),
but he endenvours and strives to come up to an universal Conformity, (to the
utmost of his power and strength,) to the whole revealed Will of God. In a
Word, one who is Good and does Good. Now is it thus with you? Are you thus
Holy? Holy in all manner of Conversation, if this be your Way and Course, 1
Pet. 1.13.
then your End shall be Peace. This is the large Notion of Uprightness.

2. Consider it more strictly, as it is more particularly, set in opposition to
Hypocrisy. And so the Upright and Perfect Man, is one who is not false with
God but hearty and sincere: One who is not a mear pretender to Religion, but
in-wardly has the Life and Spirit and power of Religion; One, that is not one
thing without and an other thing within, that has an Heart and an Heart, Jam.
1.8.
is double-hearted, (which is the very Core and Venom of Hypocrisy;) but he is
single hearted toward God: One, who insimplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor.
1.12.
not with fleshly Wisdom, orders his Conversation in the World. One, that is
sound in the Statutes of God, Psalm. 119.80.
(as David prayed he might be;) What he appears to be that he is, with the
external Profession there is an inward Principle in him: The fixed and main bent
of his Heart is for God. Are you thus Upright? if so, your End shall be Peace;
but the false Hypocrite must look for no Peace.

I should have descended to Particulars, to have helped you in this Enquiry:
they are very many, but I must only single out a few of the great Marks and
Evidences of Sincerity, without any enlarging upon them.

1. The doing of good from an inward Principle: The bare doing of Good, will
not prove a Man to be perfect and Upright; but the doing of Good from an inward
Principal, that will prove it. As mere motion will not demonstrate Life; but
when that motion is ab intra, that demonstrates Life.

2. The Universality of Obedience. When a Man is not partial in the Commands of
God; picking and choosing in Duties, (something he will do something he will
omit: No, but he Number. 14.24. Ps. 119.6.
follows Godly fully, and has respect to all the Commands of God.

3. Constancy and fixedness in what is Good. Hos. 6.4. Mat. 13.21.
The Upright man, his Righteousness is not like the Morning dew that goes
away; not like the Fruit that grew up, but had Root, and therefore dured but a
while; he is one that is uniform, constant, and fixed in what is Good.

4. Walking always as under Gods Eye, Genesis 17.1.
and doing all as in the sight of God.

5. The making of the glory of God the Supreme and ultimate End, in all
actions; Whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, 1 Cor. 10.35.
doing all to the Glory of God.

Here Is the Perfect and Upright Man.

1. He is one, that whatsoever he does in the things of God, he does it from an
inward Principle. 2. He is one that is Universal in his Obedience. 3. He is one
that is steady and persevering in the good ways of God. 4. He is one, that
wherever he is, and whatever he does, he always looks upon himself as under
God's Eye. 5. He is one who in all his Actings, intends and aims at Gods Glory,
as his Supreme End. (But I am straightened by the Time, and must not enlarge upon
these Heads.)
Use 3. The third Use, shall be to excite and urge all to endeavor after the
Qualification and Character here laid down. I would improve the Opportunity
which the present sad Occasion gives me, to be earnest with you to labor after
Sincerity. Oh, Sirs, I beseech you Hear, Pray, Read, Meditate, mortify
Corruption, use all Means for the attaining of it!

What a world of Arguments might I set before you, to raise and elevate your
desires and endeavors after it! Satan, Sin, the World, the Flesh, all have
their Arguments against it (such as they are;) but they are all weak and
fallacious, of no weighth, if compared with the Arguments which I might set
before you for it.

Upright Walking, sincere Godliness, is a thing that God is highly pleased with
and takes singular delight in: Such as are Upright in the Way, are his delight,
Prove. 11.20.

God has a very open Hand and Heart to upright Christians; he thinks nothing
too much to give to them, or to do for them: Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun
and a Shield, the Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them that walk Uprightly: ( No good thing? What a comprehensive
Expression is that!)

Poor and Afflicted Sincerity is infinitely better then Rich and Prosperous
Wickedness; (it may not appear so at present, but it will be found to be so at
last.) Pro. 28.^6. Better is the Poor, that walks in his Vprightness, than he
that is perverse in his ways, though he be Rich. The Upright Man does not only
do good to himself, but to his Posterity also; Mercy is entailed by him upon
his Offspring: Prove. 20.7. The just Man walks in his Integrity, and his Seed
are blessed after him. Such who are Upright with God, God will be Upright with
them; with the Upright, thou will show thy self Upright, Psalm. 18.25.

But passing by these Motives, this One in the Text (methinks) may be enough to
prevail with you to close with and endeavor after Sincerity and real Holiness.
Is the End of the Perfect and Upright Man, Peace? Such Peace, (as has been
described?) Oh who would not be Such a Man, that he may partake of Such an End!
Holy Paul looked upon all his Sufferings as nothing, Acts 20.24.
if he might but finish his Course with joy; (Such an high Sense had he of this
Peace at his end.) It is precious at all times, but most precious in a dying
hour: Oh when the King of Terrors, the most terrible of all terribles, Job
18.24.
shall approach us; then to be above affrighting Fears, to have all paecate and
quiet within? What a blessed thing is this! How does it Magna res est, and diu
discenda, cum advenerit hora illa inevitabilis, aequo ammo exire. Sen. Ep. 30.
concern us all to make sure of it! The poor besotted Sinner, who slighted this
Peace when Death was at a distance from him; now upon it is near approach to
him, (if Conscience be not quite seared, and he void of all sense of Eternity,)
what would he give for it? had he a Thousand Worlds at his dispose, he would
willingly part with them all for a little of this inward Peace. But (alas,) in
his Life he knew not the way of Peace: ( Romans 3.16.) and therefore in his Death
he must not have the Blessing of Peace. What an Incentive to Holiness is the
bad End of bad Men! they all say, (...) Herodot.
Whoever looks upon us, let him learn to be Religious; (according to the
Inscription upon Seunacherib's Statue or Tomb, in one of the Aegiptian
Temples.) And can it be otherwise with them? Can it be imagined, that he who
has lived a Wicked Life should die a comfortable Death? No, no! He that lives
ill, cannot die well; (unless it please God to work some great Change at the
last.) If it be Sin in the Life, (allowed and unrepented of) it will be dread
and horror in the Death. 'Twill not be enough for us when we come to die, to
wish for a peaceable and happy Death, (the Death of God's People;) this Balaam
did, Numb. 23.10. Oh, (says he,) Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and
let my last End be like his! (he knew that to be a good End, and therefore he
desired that his might be like it; but that would not bring him to the
attianment of it.) I say it is not enough for us barely to wish for this End,
but we must take the right Course, and use those Means that have a proper
tendency to it: (Such as fervent and frequent Prayer, Serious Repentance,
thorough Mortification of Sin, Holy and Upright walking with God,) for there is
no separating of the Means from the End.

Oh that I might this Day prevail with you, with every one of you, to resolve
for sincere Godliness! Mark the Perfect Man, the End of that Man is Peace; God
seems to single out this Man from all other Persons, to lay his Hand upon him,
and say, Ay this is Man, the only Man who shall have Peace: Others may presume
upon it, but this Man only shall enjoy it. Here Is Certainty as to him; and also
Exclusion as to others: the End of [that Man] is Peace; of that Man only;
Others are altogether Strangers to it. If thou art not such an one as that Man,
there will be no Peace for thee at thy End, whenever it shall come; (and God
knows how soon it may come.) Shall we not all endeavor upon this, to be
Upright, Holy, and Good? To bid adieu to Sin, for will not that be bitterness
in the latter End? ( As Abner spoke to Joab concerning the Sword, 2 Samuel 2.26.)
The Evil of Sin, and the Good of Holiness, will never be fully understood till
we come to lie upon a Deathbed. We have strange Notions about These, whilst
all is well with us; judging, there is but little goodness in the one, but
little Evil in the other. Ah but Sickness and Death will undeceive us, and
alter our apprehensions about them. You that take sinful, profane Courses now,
how will your Souls wish then that you had lived otherwise! that you had never
been so loose, so vain, so atheistical, so debauch and vicious: that you had
not so profaned the Sabbath, so neglected God, lived in such excess of Riot,
Uncleanness, Whoredom, (and whatever is naught:) How will thou then cry out, Oh
would to God I had lived a better Life! That I had not closed with Sin as I
have done! that I had not opposed and derided Holiness! oh that I had spent my
Time better! and hearkened to the good Counsel that Ministers gave me! (and so
on.) But what will this avail or signify when the Soul shall be in this
distress? Nothing at all! Pray think of this, and reform your Course before it
be too late.

This being the great Motive to Sincerity, (Peace at the End,) here are Three
Questions to be answered;

1. Q. Has the Upright, Godly Man, no Peace before his End? Has he only Peace
at his Death? None in Life? Is all his Peace and Comfort reserved for a dying
Hour?

Answ. Not so! He has peace in Life as well as at Death; He lives with it,
has it abiding in him (if he does not lose it by sining against God.) Great
Peace have they that love thy Law! Psalm. 119.165. The work of Righteousness
shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and assurance for
ever, Isa. 32.17. Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, (Hebr. Peace, Peace,)
whose mind is stayed on thee; Isa. 26.3. (The perfect Man has perfect Man.)
Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you; Joh. 14.27. -- These things
have I spoken that in me ye might have peace, Joh. 16.33. 2 Cor. 6.10. Yet
always rejoicing; A good Conscience is a Continual Feast.

But why then is it said, the End of that Man is Peace?

1. Because, then Especially and Eminently, the People of God have this Peace.
They need it more then than at other times; and therefore they have more of it
then. Oh when they are grappling with the pangs of Death, just launching out
into boundless Eternity, how do they then want this Peace! Wherefore, then the
gracious God vouchsafes it to them; in an higher degree than before.

2. Because, then their Peace is of the greatest use and efficacy, to work on
Others; to draw them in to God, and to make them think well of his Ways.
Therefore it pleases God sometimes to let his People be without this Peace in
their Life time; because then it would not so much be taken notice of: but when
they come to die, when many Eyes are upon them, to observe what comfort they
have then, then they have it. And by this, Spectators are brought to judge well
both of the Persons, and also of the Practices of these that are so full of
Comfort in such a time of need.

2. Q. Have all Upright Souls this Peace at their End? Is the End of every
Godly Man, Peace? Do all such, when they come to die, die with this Comfort?

Answ. I dare not say so! I have reason to believe, that many live without this
Peace, and die too without this Peace, who yet are truly Gracious. Some want it
in Life, but then (possibly) they have it at Death; (As the Martyr, Now he is
come, he is come.) Some have it in Life, but then want it when they come to
die; God (at the last) withdrawing their Peace, and causing their Sun to set in
a dark Cloud: (thus it sometimes fares with some, whose Grace here, and
Salvation hereafter, I dare not question.) Others go without it, in the
sensible part of it, both in life and in Death, (that is fad indeed!) True Grace
is in their Hearts, but yet this Peace from God is not in their Hearts. It
pleases God very much to show his Sovereignty, in his various dealings with his
People as to sensible Comfort.

But then, this we may say as to every Sincere and Upright Christian.

1. Ordinarily and commonly he has this Peace at his End: it is but now and then
that God varies his Method in this.

2. The root of this Peace is in him, although he may not-have the Blossoms of
it; Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the Upright in heart,
Psalm. 97.11.

3. He has Faith to rely upon Christ in a dying hour though he may not have
the Peace and comfortable effects of Faith then. Oh though he is much in the
dark, yet he cleaves to Christ, holds fast upon Christ, and goes out of the
World with this [If I perish, here I will perish.] Oh (says he) I have little
Peace, Light, and Comfort; but I dye resting upon Christ; let God do with me,
what he pleases.

4. Whenever God denies this Peace to dying Upright Persons, it is for some
special Reasons; he designs some other way to glorify himself: And if he will
glorify himself any way, though that Way may be painful to us, we must submit
to it.

5. If it be not Peace in Death, it shall certainly be Peace just after Death.
It may be Trouble in a dying hour, even to the Godly; but as soon as ever Death
has done it is Work, I am sure then they have Peace. Thou may die without it,
but in Heaven thou shall certainly have it. As soon as ever the Soul is out of
the Body, it is filled with Peace.

3. Q. Is this the End of that Man only? Is Peace limited and peculiar to that
Man? Do not we daily see, many Sinners and wicked Persons die in Peace? They go
out of the World like Lambs, (as we commonly express it;) have no troubles, no
commotions, no disturbance at all upon their Spirits; all is quiet. Wherefore
then is it made such a special and peculiar Privilege in the Text to the
Upright?

Answ. I deny what is alleged. The Persons (spoken of) may have a seeming, an
imaginary Peace; but assuredly they have no real and true Peace. There Is a vast
difference between the real Peace of a godly Man, and the Counterfeit Peace of
Sinners, in a dying hour: The Peace of the One, is but stupidity,
insensibleness, security, and presumption; but the Peace of the Other, is a
well-grounded Peace; Peace rightly bottomed upon the due application of Gods
Mercy in Christ, and upon the faithful Testimony of an enlightened Conscience:
It is quite otherwise in the Peace of the presumptuous Sinner, that dies
quietly though he has lived wickedly. We see many a Man is fast asleep in his
Bed, unconcerned, undisturbed, even when his House is on Fire, and he is just
ready to drop into the Flames: Or he is at Sea in a Storm, yet insensible of
any danger, though the Waves threaten to swallow him up every Moment. Such a
thing is the Peace of these Men; all is quiet within, when (alas) there is but
one poor breath between them and Hell. They are dropping into Eternal Flames,
but they see not their danger; and therefore are without trouble. But the Peace
here promised to the Godly Man, is a quite other Peace, a real Peace, not a
flashy Peace; a well-grounded Peace, not a presumptuous Peace. And fuch Peace,
the Godly only have at their End; they only are within that blessed Ps. 85.10
Link, Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other.

Use 4. I Should (in the last place,) have turned my Discourse to these Perfect
and Upright Persons. Three things I should have urged upon you who are such.

1. To admire and adore the Goodness of God. Oh that it should please him to
reward imperfect Grace, imperfect Obedience, imperfect Holiness, with this
blessed Peace! Not only with Peace in Life, but in Death too! Ay and with that
Peace too which infinitely surpasses what we have here, (the Heavenly peace,)
what matter of admiration is this! The End of that Man is Peace; but why so?
not from any Merit or Worthiness in him, or in his Holiness, Uprightness; but
merely from the infinite dignation and grace of God. Oh let him be adored for
this by all Saints!

2. To presevere in upright Walking with God. You are in a good way; oh hold on
it! You shall not lose by an Holy life; sincerity shall not be in vain to you;
you shall be a Gainer by it while you live, when you come to die, and then in
Heaven to all Eternity. Pro. 23.18. Surely there is an End, and thine
expectation shall not be cut off: There is an End, this end by Death is sure
and certain; and whenever it shall come, thine expectation shall not be cut
off; thy hope in God, as for other good, so for inward Peace, shall be
accomplished, oh hold on in the good ways of God!

3. Be as chearsul as ever you can. Living or dying, let this Peace that you
have, be made as visible to Others as may be. As your light of Grace should
shine forth, so your light of Comfort should shine forth too. Let it appear,
Male vivit, quisquis nescit been mori. Sen. de Tranq.
you have lived well by dying well; Men are to mark and observe you in your
Course, and in your End, (that your End is Peace:) if you walk dejectedly, live
and die dejectedly; what will become of this marking? What will Men have to
observe about you, to make them in love with Religion? Oh (amongst other
things) you must improve your Peace for God, to credit his Service and Ways!
(But I must not further stay upon these things!)

I would say something upon the sad Occasion that is before us, the Death of a
worthy Member of this Society, Mr. Martin: I think I may say, with a great deal
of Confidence, this Scripture was verified in him. He was indeed an Upright and
Perfect Man; a truly pious Man, one that was very sincere in his Profession. I
have known him long (somewhat above Forty Years,) and in all my knowledge and
observation of him, (abating humane infirmities,) I never saw any thing in his
Conversation or Carriage, but what did speak him a downright Godly Man. In
his Calling, in his Trusts, in his Relations, in all the personal Duties of
Religion, he carried it like one that did sincerely fear God: (this many of you
know as well as my self.)

And I question not, but when Death made its seizure upon him, (which it did
very suddenly, for it dispatched him in one Night. and a sew hours in the
Morning; just about the time, when he used to come hither to wait upon God in
his Ordinances, he went to Heaven:) But I say, at his Death and End, I question
not but he had this Peace: In the midst of all his Pains and Agonies (which
indeed were very sharp,) yet all was quiet and calm within. And I do less
question, but that he is entered into the Heavenly Peace. Oh he is there, in the
full fruition of God and of all Good in God, receiving a full Answer to all his
Prayers, reaping the fruit and benefit of all his Holy walking with God. He
fully knows, what the Peace of Heaven is, of which we have been speaking but
very imperfectly this day. Well, his Life was good, and his End was good; and
what can I say more! and what can you expect or desire more.

Let this comfort us, under this very sudden, and very afflictive stroke of
Providence. You especially, his near and dear Relations, let it comfort you.
Your Loss, is his Gain; Your loss is great, his gain is far greater; you have
lost the Comfort of a Creature, but he is full of Comfort in the enjoying the
ever-blessed God. Be you at Peace, in this respect; i. e. be patient, quiet,
submissive; considering, who has made this breach upon you, and what a blessed
state your near and dear Relation is now put into: He is not lost, but
advanced. Cur doles, si periisse non credis? Tertull.

We, in this Congregation, have a great loss; being deprived of one that was
discreet and prudent, considerably active and useful to us upon many Accounts)
Let me hereupon, commend three things to you:

1. Pray to God that he will make up this breach: That now when such a Mnason,
such an old Disciple of Christ is taken away, it would please God to work upon
some Young Ones in his room, to bring them in to God. It Is sad to see how many
old Professors die, and we have but few young Converts brought in, to succeed
them in what is good. If the old Plants be plucked up, and there be no young
Ones set in their stead, the Plantation is like to come to nothing.

2. Let the suddenness of his Death, quicken and awaken you to a speedy and
serious preparation for your own Death. He was in all appearance, in very good
Health a few hours before he died; In hoc fallimus nur quod moriem prospicimus.
Sen. Ep. 1. ad Lucil.
he went to Bed well, but never came out of it more; no sooner was he laid down
in it to sleep, but violent pains surpised him which put a speedy Period to
his Life. Oh Sirs! are we prepared for such a sudden Change? Shall we have such
Memento's of our frailty, and yet be secure? We cannot assure our selves of a
long sickness, that Death will make its slower steps toward us; we may be cut
off in a Night, yea in a Moment, oh let us always watch and be ready!

3. Let us follow the good Example of this good and Holy Man; that living as he
did, we may die as he did; and experience this as to our selves, that our End
is Peace. May we but so live, and so die, we shall not need much fear to die.
God make us all wise unto Salvation.

FINIS.

