Monsieur JVRIEV's Judgment Upon the Question of Defending our Religion by
Arms, WITH REFLECTIONS UPON THE Affairs of England, IN HIS Ninth Pastoral
LETTER of the Third Year.

Faithfully Translated out of French.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey, and are to be
sold by Richard Baldwin, next the Black Bull in the Old-Bayly. MDCLXXXIX.

THE Translator TO THE READER.
IT IS said by the Prophet Daniel, That many shall run to and fro, and knowledge
shall be increased: The Commerce of Nations, the Translating from one Language
to another, is this running to and fro, whereby Mankind communicate their
general Sentiments, improve by the Correspondence, and are absolved from the
Curse of Babel.

People that only measure themselves by themselves, and compare themselves
among themselves, take very scanty measures, and make very fond comparisons:
when they are mistaken, they have no way of rectifying themselves, but enjoy a
very great satisfaction in being positive and immovable, though they are never so
much in the wrong.

In opposition to this, the World has always had a great deference to a
Catholic Sense; so soon as ever Christianity enjoyed its liberty under the
Glorious Emperor Constantine, there was such an assembling of Councils,
communicating the Judgment of particular Churches for Agreement of the whole,
that the Heathens were wont to deride the Christians for tiring the
Posthorses, and wearing out the Stage-Coaches of the Empire.

When Christianity was Transubstantiated into Popery, and all the Methods of
Religion turned against it self, then was Catholicism made use of as the grand
Instrument of its own Ruin: The general falling away, which was the Prediction
of a false Religion prevailing was the chief argument, why that Religion was
not false which had prevailed.

So that we have the Judgment both of Friends and Enemies, those who first
settled Religion, and those who afterward overthrew it, that the general
Opinion of the Church of God ought to be of the greatest esteem, especially in
those difficult Cases, where we are not our selves able to determine our Duties
out of the Holy Scriptures.

It Is then only disputed, which is the Catholic Church; that which shone
bright immediately after our Savior's time, or that prevailing Faction of
Apostates which clouded the Heavens, and cast a mist over the face of the
Earth? But the Light of Truth is so sprung forth again, that the Question
vanishes; it is easy to distinguish between Day and Night.

Now if the Christians had so great an Opinion of their common Agreement,
before their Religion was corrupted, why should not we honor the same way?
And, since Reformation is but the Restoration of Primitive Religion, be glad to
hear what foreign Churches say of those Doctrines which are disputed amongst us.

He is an Enemy to the Church of England, who would set it up against the
Reformed Churches of France and Germany, and of the Northern Crowns, where God
is worshipped also after the manner which his Enemies call Heresy: Why should
not the Church of God be esteemed one Catholic Church since its Reformation as
well as before its grand Depravation? There were as many Heresies and Schisms
and Errors within its bowels then as now, but the common Agreement of the
greater part in substantial Truths, made the Advice of one Church to another,
to be very much reverenced and regarded.

The Judgment of Monsieur Jurieu is not to be looked upon as his private
Opinion, but as the general Sense of the good Christians of France; for the
Papists had an Intrigue to destroy the whole Reformed Religion all over Europe,
by persuading the Protestants to stand still while they were ruined; and to
this purpose Monsieur de Meaux picks up and ridicules the Decisions of their
Synods, That it was lawful to make use of Arms in favor of Religion. So that
this is a Defense of their ancient Doctrine, and rescuing the Right of
Self-preservation from the hands of their Enemies, in a most needful time when
they would have taken it away from all men, in order to an Universal
Destruction of the Truth. Certainly the French have demonstrated such eminent
Loyalty and Patience, that they well deserved to be heard upon the Question.

We may in England look back with some horror upon the danger we have escaped;
this piece of Policy was framed also for the finest and strongest Intrigue that
could bring about our Destruction; it was the presumption of Arbitrary and
Irresistible Power, of Absolute and undeniable Obedience, which heartned our
Enemies to such attempts, as they durst not otherwise have thought upon.

They had the advantage of many Years to make preparation, by preferring such
to Places of Honor and Power, who were themselves generally the greatest
Slaves, and so were willing to enslave others. The choice was made with a great
deal of Judgment and Curiosity; either of such whose Atheism and Debauchery
made them ready to do any thing, or of such who had suffered under the
Pretenders to Liberty, and therefore were inclined to an excess of Duty.

The former run into all the extravagancies of Blasphemy, having their mouths
full of great swelling words, That the King was above Jesus Christ; that
Tyranny and Oppression themselves, if acted by Persons in Authority, were the
Ordinances of God, and not to be resisted under pain of Damnation. But Death
has eased some places of their burdens, and called those Followers of Balaam
before a Tribunal, where they shall behold him whom they pierced.

The better part considered the Glories of suffering Relion, how much it was
able to bear, and that Passive Obedience had first made its triumphant entry
into the World; they therefore encouraged the inferior Clergy to such a
degree, that it was almost received as the Doctrine of the Church of England,
that an Unlimited Authority was of Divine Right; and that though Religion was
never so much our Property, yet it had a property in it, to yield up itself and
every thing else to the will of the first Invader.

But so soon as the Rights of our Religious and Civil Liberties were found to
be mortally wounded, and that its Interest was to be destroyed by such
Sufferings as neither the Laws of God or Man required, then could the Fathers
of the Church no longer conceal a Truth, the neglect whereof had near cost
them, that which was dearer to them than their Lives; the tenderness they bore
to their Children would not expose them to an unnecessary Destruction.

After their personal Sufferings, and the Daybreak of our Deliverance
appeared, the late King James was alarmed with an expression in the Prince of
Orange's Declaration, That he was most earnestly Invited hither by diverse of
the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and others. He
therefore sent for the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London,
Peterborough, and Rochester, to sign an Abhorrence under their hands of the
intended Invasion.

But this they refused to do; not being able to give up a Church, which by the
Providence of God was by Law established, and which they had the Care of
committed to them: They durst not discountenance a Deliverance which (every
body was then sensible) was so divinely offered, and wherein all the Protestant
Interest of Europe was embarked. This Refusal the Bishop of Rochester has
lately published, and the Archbishop of Canterbury has favored with a License
under his own hand.

So soon as the late King James had thrown up the Government, cancelled the
Writs of Parliament, and withdrawn himself from the Kingdom, then did the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of Winchester, St. Asaph, Ely,
Rochester, and Peterborough, with the Lords Temporal that were about London,
assembled at Guild Hall, devolved themselves upon the Prince of Orange,
acknowledging his great Kindness, his v^ss Expense, his Hazard to Rescue them
from Popery and Slavery.

The Convocations of England had formerly assisted the foreign Protestants both
with their Prayers and Purses, now was the happy day of Retribution come, when
we were to eat that Bread which was cast upon the Waters an hundred Years
before; It had been a renouncing of the ancient Church of England, and the old
Charity laid up in store for us, if we had not accepted so great a Deliverance.

The common pertness of young Divines, and the inveterate prejudice of some
elder, will not be able to rencounter the more ancient Judgment, and this late
authentic Practice of the Church of England. It will be satisfaction to behold
here the concurrence of a foreign Church, for we have always valued
Catholicism; but now we much more desire it, now we are under the Head of the
Protestant Interest, and hope that our present Sovereign of Great Britain will
be another British Constantine to the World. Those Churches which never had the
Favor of Princes, cannot but want many advantages, and we who were Reformed by
a Prince, who did not only shake off the Pope's Usurpations, but reserved
several of them to himself, are capable of being made more happy.

Those that have traveled abroad, and searched the Archieves of the Protestant
Churches, find how the principal Reformers and Establishers of our Religion
consulted them, and how greivously they were afflicted to be overruled by
secular Men in the Establishment of those things which were not to be found in
the Catholicism of the Reformed Religion.

And we have sadly found the mischief thereof, for men who are the Authors and
Abettors of those things, which are particular to themselves, are apt to be
more fond of their own Institutions, than of the Catholic and Divine
Ordinances; and so the zeal of a particular Church has been in danger of
spending it self without being concerned for, and sometimes in opposition to
the Universal.

As I began with one Prophet so I Will conclude with another; let Isaiah now
revive us with an Assurance, that God will at last give Kings to be
Nursing-fathers, and Queens to be Nursing-mothers to his Church. And such as we
now have, England never had before.

He has prophesied also, That the light of the Moon shall be as the light of
the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals
the stroke of their wound.

We have such a litteral accomplishment of this, that it is hard not to believe
it the design of the place; we have such a seven fold influence of our Sun to
revive and comfort the distressed part of the World, and our Moon is equally
Sovereign with him. Shall not all this make us happy, the greatest Authority
and the best Examples? if not, it is because we are the worst People that ever
enjoyed the Sun shine.

THE Ninth Pastoral Letter of the Third Year, Wherein this Question is
Examined, Whether it be Lawful to Defend our Religion by Arms? WITH REFLECTIONS
UPON THE Affairs of England.
Our most Dear Brethren, Grace and Peace be given to you by our God and Savior
Jesus Christ.
WE did in our last leave Monsieur Bossuet endeavoring with all his might to
overthrow Doctor Burnet, by making him contradict himself; he was also
laboring to render the Reformation of England Odious, and seeking for some
Variations upon the Article of the Lord's Supper.

But these Variations being laid aside, and reserved for Volumes, and perhaps
for future Ages, Mr. Bossuet in the remaining part of his tenth Book enters
upon the Wars of Religion.

The conspiracy of Amboise comes upon the Stage, dressed up with I don't know how
many Reflections, and as many Demonstrations to prove, that it ought entirely
to be imputed to the Huguenots, and had no other cause but Religion.

All the Civil Wars of the (...) Age are made to re-appear; both the
Assassination of the Duke of Guise before Orleans by Poltrot, and that of. the
President Minard by Stuart are remembered.

And amongst all this are inserted some Decisions of Synods, and other
Arguments to prove that the Calvinists think well of maintaining the Gospel by
Arms.

All this fine parcel of History is composed of many matters of Fact, and one
question of Right. The Fact relates to the Civil Wars of the last Age, upon
which it is not here my business to discourse, an Answer may be given, if it be
thought requisite; and for me, that which has been already said in my Answer
to the Jesuit Mainburg's History of Calvinism, may be sufficient.

The Question of Right is concerned in the taking up, and using Arms for the
Defense of Religion, which Monsieur Bossuet proposes as a great Crime in the
Protestants.

For since the Gospel acknowledges no other Arms but those that are Spiritual,
the Church is not to attempt any thing but by the Word, nor to defend itself
but by Patience.

Thus the Primitive Christians defended themselves; we cannot find that they
repelled force by force: Their Prayers and their Tears were the only Bucklers
they opposed to the Violence of their Persecutors: but behold now a new sort of
Christians, of Reformers of the Church and the World, who take up Arms, that
they may repel the Violences of others by Violences of their own.

These are the fine common places wherewith the Protestants of all Europe are
at this day entertained, to persuade them that they ought patiently, without
any Emotion, to suffer the utmost Efforts of Popery to their Ruin.

The circumstances of the present time oblige us to enlarge a little upon this
Question; not only in way of Answer to Monsieur de Meaux and his Friends, but
principally with a design to satisfy some who are truly Conscientious, and not
well instructed as to the sense of this Maxim, That it is not lawful to make
use of Arms in favor of Religion.

First, does it not well become M. the Bishop of Meaux, and in general the
whole Papistry to raise the Reputation of this Maxim, that the Conduct of the
Protestants might be rendered Odious? The Papistry, I say, which may be reviewed
in all Ages as an unchain'd Fury, carrying a Sword in one hand, and Fire in the
other, filling Europe with Desolations, and bathing the Earth with Blood, to
Establish and Defend itself, But it is not lawful to employ our Arms in Defense
of our Religion.

But, why then did the Papistry endeavou^ to replant Christianity in the East,
by so many millions of People under the Badge of the Cross? Why were Wars waged
expressly under the name of holy Wars? Why did the Popes (to establish the
Authority, they pretend to have received from Jesus Christ) bring Desolation
upon Europe? Why did they dethrone Emperors and Kings? Why have they raised
Arms, and bid Battles? Why have they engaged the Father against the Son, and
the Son against the Father? Why have they employed the Armies of the Cross, to
massacre an hundred thousand Waldenses, and Albigenses? Why does the Tribunal
of the Inquisition find Employment for Hangmen, Fires, Tortures, Executions in
favor of Religion?

Why, when the Papistry would first set its Foot in any place, does it run to
Arms with the utmost Fury? Why to advance it self does it make use of the most
Abominable Crimes, Assassinations, Treasons, Poysonings of the nearest
Relations, and Benefactors themselves, burning of Cities, Suppositious Shams,
and other such like Actions, of which both ancient and modern Histories are
able to furnish us with Examples?

Why does Papistry employ Dragoons, and Soldiers to violate Consciences, to
make People deny a Religion which they believe to be true, and to embrace that
which they believe to be false; thereby constraining them to Profane and
Sacrilegious Communions?

Certainly it is a great fineness of Wit for Monsieur de Meaux to retail this
severe Maxim in the present juncture, That it is not lawful to employ our Arms
in Defense of our Religion.

These Gentlemen might have been happy in honoring themselves with so fine a
piece of Morality, if their Conduct had left no such Footsteps behind: But now
the Papistical Excesses are so far from allowing themselves a justification,
that they even take away any right of insulting over their Enemies.

But without all this Monsieur de Meaux is to know, that we are not ashamed to
have several decisions found in our Synods from whence a conclusion may be
drawn, that according to us, it is not always forbidden to make use of Arms in
favor of Religion.

An Abbot is applauded for this, that he bore Arms to maintain the Gospel. Mr.
Bossuet has found it in the National Synod of Lions 1563, and he has made it to
be printed in Capital Letters, for the greater remark, and that it might be an
Eternal Disgrace upon all the Party.

What extravagancy of Thought was this in a time, and in a Kingdom, where so
many Soldiers and Officers bear Arms, not to maintain the Gospel, but to plant
Popery in the Hearts of the Calvinists.

It is then very necessary to distinguish between Establishing Religion, and
Defending of it. And it is certain, that the Christian Morals do not permit the
Establishment of Religion by Arms. I have no need to prove it, the thing is
evident of its self, and there can hardly be found any people that dare impugn
this Truth; and from hence I conclude, that Popery is really Antichristian, the
Antipodes of the Christian Religion.

I know not any other Religion in the World, which forces People by Fire and
Sword to renounce their own Sentiments, and to make Profession of that which is
offered.

Mahomet has enlarged his Empire by Arms, and the enlargement of his Empire
has conduced very much to the enlargement of his Religion: But we do not see
at last, that the Califs and Mohammedan Princes have put the Knife to the
Throats of Christians, to make them abjure Christianity, and to embrace
Mahometanism, it is true, the Christian Religion has perished under their
Domination; but by Poverty, and Meanness, and Misery, and Ignorance, to which
they had reduced the Christians.

The Glory of Planting Christianity by Arms has been due to Popery, and its
Princes.

But to Defend Religion by Arms is another thing, and there is neither Reason
nor Authority by which it can be proved to be a Crime. All the World is agreed
that Defense is lawful, and allowed by the Laws of Nature, to which the
positive Laws of God never made any Contradiction.

It is then lawful to defend ones Life, ones Honor, one's Wife, ones Children,
ones Country, and ones Goods by Arms; and is it not lawful to defend ones
Religion by the same means?

I would fain be showed a little from whence the difference arises, and who it
is who has so disarmed the Religion, as to leave it exposed to the Violence of
the first comer?

This Maxim is proved false by the common reason of all Mankind, since a Maxim
contrary to it has passed into a Proverb, Vsque ad aras, even to the Altars, we
say, which is as much as to confess that Complaisance and Patience should take
place in all things but Altars and Religion.

If this Maxim be true, it must be so Universally, or else the Exceptions ought
to be made known to us: If this Maxim, That it is unlawful to defend Religion
by Arms, be true without Exception, it follows, that an Army of Turks invading
our Frontiers, and over-slowing our Provinces, only for the Establishment of
their Religion, and for the Ruin of ours, it will be unlawful for us to defend
our selves. If they do but say, that they desire neither our Goods, nor our
Liberties, nor our Country; but only demand of us, to receive their Religion,
and quit our own, because there shall be no other Interest in this Demand, but
only that of Religion, therefore we must presently lay down our Arms, admit
Mahometanism, of at least be content to suffer Martyrdom.

Is it not lawful to repel such Violence by Arms? Who dares advance such an
Extravagance!

Our Children, our Goods, and even our Country ought to be sacrifie'd for
Religion, when it is necessary for the preservation of it; and I shall not dare
to defend my Religion by the same means by which I should defend my temporal
Interests. This may be sufficient to make it apparent, that the Maxim is false,
if taken without any exception.

Now, if there must be exceptions, let them be set forth; here we shall not
fail of being told, that it is unlawful to Defend our Religion by Arms, when it
is attackt by the lawful Sovereigns of the State. But is this agreeable to the
Consciences of the Papists, who make it so criminal in us, that we will not
abandon our Religion to the Injustice and Violences of Sovereigns; dare they
affirm, that they are disposed to suffer the utmost upon this account?

If their Kings in the most Arbitrary Governments should endeavor to plant, I
don't say Mahometanism or Paganism, by destroying Christianity, but Lutheranism
or Calvinism by Violence, would they suffer it, and believe themseves obliged
to employ no other Arms but Tears, and Patience, and Martyrdom?

I cannot tell whether they would dare to say so; they dare say any thing
according to the diversity of Times and Interests; but we know very well, that
if they should dare to say so, it would be a lie; for it it is certain, there is
no sort of Violence which they have not made use of to arrest the designs of
such a Prince, and deprive him of his Life. We cannot take one step in the
History of Papism, without finding proofs, but it is needless to report them.

Kings are not Masters of Conscience and Religion; they are not so much as
Masters of the Lives of their Subjects, how then should they be Masters of
their eternal Salvation, and their Religion?

All those who are not devoted to Flattery, do avow, that the right of
Self-Preservation is a right which cannot be alienated: a People has always
right to take care of themselves by all manner of ways, against a Tyrant who
would ruin and destroy them.

Suppose a Sovereign for some worldly Interest, for the refusal of Tribute or
Homage, or in an Humor, should resolve upon Massacring a whole Nation, or one
great party, is there any one so much a Flatterer, as to assert, that such a
Sovereign has right to do it, and that the Subjects have no right to defend
themselves, to oppose such Violence with Force?

Such an one will be confuted by all Mankind, for it is believed by every one,
that he has a right to use all means for his own preservation, when he is set
upon by an unjust Violence.

Having made this Supposition, let us make another; Suppose a Sovereign should
attempt to Massacre his Subjects upon the account of Religion* shall this cause
of Religion, which intervenes, tie the hands of the Subjects, annihilate the
Laws of Nature, deprive them of the inalienable Right of Self-Preservation?
Shall it be lawful for a People to preserve and defend themselves when they are
to be massacred for refusing unjust Taxes, and shall it not be lawful to defend
themselves when they are to be massacred upon the account of Religion?

I must say this is a sottish piece of Morality: let him that desires to lie at
the Foot stool of a Throne, and flatter Kings, maintain it; no man will ever
really believe it.

It Is of no great advantage to argue upon the Rights of Sovereigns; it is a
question we will not enter upon. But thus much we ought to know, That the
Rights of GOD, the Rights of the People, and the Rights of Kings are
inseparable: This good sense demonstrates, and therefore a Prince that
annihilates the Right of GOD and the Right of the People, does thereby
annihilate his own Right.

Nothing is due to him who pays nothing to any one, neither to God nor men.

The Supposition we make, is not a Castle in the Air; and, without speaking of
Princes called Christian (who have massacred their Subjects upon the account of
Religion) the History of the Church presents us with Dioclesian, who
enterprized the extirpation of Christians by an universal Massacre: Where is it
to be found in the Gospel, that the Christian-Subjects of the Roman Empire had
no right to oppose this Violence; whereas, if for any other cause than that of
Religion, their Emperors had oppressed them in such a manner, they might have
had right to defend themselves? If this be so, Religion is of the meanest
concern in the World.

If the whole World had courage enough to suffer Martyrdom, the Spiritual
Interest of Religion would not be so deeply concerned; but when it is to be
considered, that in a Million of Christians, perhaps not ten Thousand of them
are so disposed as to endure massacring, we are to recollect, that such an
exposing the Truth, exposes the Faithful to the dangers of Apostasy, gives up
an innumerable company of the Weaker to ruin, and suffers the whole Church to
be destroyed.

If this be so, that it is always unlawful to maintain the True Religion by
Arms, wherefore is the Memory of the Maccabees so blessed in the Church? Why
are they not accursed by the Wise? Why are they applauded for having taken Arms
against the Kings of Syria, their lawful Sovereigns? The Persecution of the
famous Antiochus was merely upon the account of Religion: for the Jews were
very submissive both in their Tribute and all other Homage: But he would oblige
them to abjure their Religion, for which many suffered Martyrdom with admirable
Patience. The Maccabees had also the same way to signalize their courage; but
they took another way, they took up Arms, they defended their Religion, they
shook off the Yoke of the Kings of Syria, not only as to their Spiritual but
their Temporal Bondage.

An exact president for the States of the United Provinces in the last Age, who
having taken up Arms first to maintain their Religion, then shook off the
temporal Yoke of Spain, and made themselves a separate State.

Monsieur de Meaux and his Friends, who so boldly censure the Hollanders for
taking Arms upon the account of their Religion, and for having taken that
occasion to shake off an insupportable Yoke, ought to make out the difference
between the case of the Maccabees, and that of the Low Countries.

It is incumbent upon him, who so furiously rallies our Synods for recommending
an Abbot who bore Arms in defense of the Gospel, to draw an Indictment against
the Memory of those grand Hero's of the Jewish Church, whom all Christians
admire, and whose Conduct they approve.

But there is now an Objection framed from the Conduct of the Primitive
Christians, who during the ten Persecutions never rencountred their Persecutors
with any thing but Patience. God forbid, that I should diminish their Worth, or
abate any thing of those Acknowledgements which are due to them: but I want to
be instructed, how they were in a condition to provide against the Violences of
the Roman Emperors.

I don't know that the Christians were as one to five hundred, if you take the
whole extent of the Roman Empire: There are Authors that believe Rome it self
could not number above forty thousand Christians in the second and third Ages;
whereas in the last accounts, the Christians were reckoned to rise to many
Millions. If then there were so few in the capital City, how could there be so
great an appearance in other places? How then could so small a number of
People, scattered thorough the extent of so vast an Empire, maintain
themselves, where there were numerous Armies on foot to guard their spacious
Frontiers? 'Twas not then only Religion but Prudence in the first Christians
to suffer a less evil to avoid a greater: if they had opened themselves into a
state of Defense, they had been exspos'd to inevitable Death, so that they had
no other way but to conceal themselves.

Tertullian is cited upon this occasion, who reports that the Christians filled
the Cities, the Castles, the Armies; but it is known that Tertullian was an
Orator, and amplified things more than ever any Writer in the Church did. It
would be a very hard thing to make good all he has ventured upon.

But, there is something else very considerable as to the conduct of the
Primitive Christians in the point of taking Arms: there were many then who
believed it altogether unlawful to use the Sword upon any occasion, either in
War or Judgment for the punishment of Criminals. This was an extravagant
Opinion, a Maxim generally acknowledged to be false at this day; so that
Patience was sometimes an Error, and a piece of Morality not well understood.

At the bottom, it was not this fineness of Conscience, which hindered the first
Christians to defend themselves against their Persecutors: for the Devotional
Persons, whose Morality was so severe, were a small number in comparison to
others. And by the complaints which the Fathers make of the Christians Manners
in their Age; it is easy to collect, that so many Christians, being then
irregular in the other conduct of their lives, did not suffer themselves to be
massacred for Conscience sake, but because they were impotent and indefensible.

Yet suppose the Primitive Christians did merely out of tenderness of
Conscience neglect to defend themselves, it shall be confessed, they did not do
ill: and yet it does not follow, that those who do not imitate them do ill. For
it is always lawful to remit ones right; a man may do with his own what he will:
yet another man does not sin, because he will maintain his right.

It Is a very high degree of Regeneration, to quit ones Goods to an unjust
Invader, for avoiding of Resistance: but still those who have not advanced so
far in their Regeneration, are not in a state of Sin.

There is a difference between better and well: He that gives his Virgin in
marriage does well; but he that gives her not in marriage does better.
According to St. Paul. Suppose then these Christians did better in not taking
up Arms to defend themselves from Persecution, it does not follow, but others
may do well, though they do otherwise, and perhaps better in their different
circumstances.

Another Objection is found out in the words of our Savior: Whosoever shall
smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also.

First, It must be observed, that our Savior Jesus Christ designed this for
particular persons, not for Societies and Corporations: it is an extravagance to
maintain, that Societies, and States, and Kingdoms are obliged to submit
themselves to every unjust Oppressor, that does Invade them. Private persons
for the public peace do well to observe this direction of Jesus Christ: but
for the public good, Governors of States are obliged to act otherwise. Now the
Church is a Corporation, a Society, and by consequence ought to preserve her
Assemblies, and her Subjects, and to do it in all those ways which are lawful
by the right of Nations, and of Nature.

Secondly, Our Savior there speaks of worldly Interests, not of sacred things
and Religion: Jesus Christ never bid us quit our Religion, our Temples, our
Altars, to him that would ravish them from us; but to part with our Coat and
our Cloak. There is no manner of consequence from the one to the other.

Certainly our Lord never had any design to convert the proceedings of Justice
into Crimes; when a man endeavored to run under covert from the violent
persuits of an Invader that would take away his Goods from him: Christian
Morality never pushed on Severity at such a rate. If then, notwithstanding this
Precept of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is permitted by the Laws of the Gospel to
resist an unjust Oppressor that would take away our Goods from us; by much
stronger reason is this Commandment far from prejudicing our right of defending
Religion by Arms.

Lastly, This Commandment is so far from favoring such extravagant Morality,
that it gives no countenance to it; for in this passage our Savior sets forth
how far our Patience is obliged: It Is that we suffer moderate Injuries, a box
of the ear, tolerable losses, as to be robbed of a Cloak, or such temporal
Goods, whose preservation was not equivalent to the loss of our Peace: but he
does not say, if any one would take away thy Life, don't defend it. So that
take our Savior's words in the utmost rigor, he has not left it unlawful for
a man to defend his Life.

Now if it be lawful for a man to defend his Life against Tyrants, that would
take it away for temporal reasons; I cannot see why it may not be lawful to
defend it when they would murder us upon the account of Religion. We ought then
to suffer even to the last extremity, but this extremity is come when they
would ravish from us that which is more dear than Life it self, our Religion
and our Eternal Salvation.

Another Argument, for maintaining this piece of severe Morality, that we ought
not to take up Arms for the defense of our Religion, is drawn from the words of
Jesus Christ to his Disciples upon the Samaritans denying him reception: The
Disciples said to our Lord, Will thou that we command fire to come down from
heaven, and consume them even as Elias did. The Lord answered them. Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of; for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives.

Now what does this signify? You shall have it in a word, that it is never
lawful to open a way for Jesus Christ to enter by force, nor to establish the
Gospel by Arms: but if the Samaritans had come to a House that belonged to
Jesus Christ, or any of his Disciples, would have driven them out of it and
dispossed them, think you that our Lord Jesus Christ would have ordered his
Disciples to be gone and seek a lodging some where else? I see nothing like it.

For once again, there is a vast difference between Attacking and Defending:
The Gospel has not taken away from any man the right of defending himself
against violent Aggressors.

And this without doubt our Savior intended, when he was walking in the
Garden, where he knew the Jews would come and seize him by violence; he then
ordered his Disciples that he who had a Sword should take it: and when one
said, Behold, here are two Swords, he answered, it is enough.

This was not enough to repel the violence he was to meet withal, for two armed
men were not able to oppose the armed Multitude, that accompanied Judas; but it
was enough for his purpose, to let his Disciples know, that upon such an
occasion they had a right to defend themselves with Arms.

For otherwise what sense can there be in this, Take your Swords: of what use
could they be if they might not defend themselves? It is true, that Jesus
Christ commanded St. Peter to put up his Sword into his Sheath; and he healed
the Ear of Malchus: But by this he gives us to understand, that though he has
right to repel force with force, yet he would have his Disciples make use of it
only as a proper time and occasion may require. And he there gives the reason
of it: it is because that ought to be accomplished which was ordained by the
Father. And that which he adds to St. Peter, when he bid him put up his Sword
into the Sheath, viz All they that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword,
cannot signify that using the Sword is always unlawful, or chiefly when it is
employed upon the account of Religion, it cannot I say, signify any thing like
it: For, First, it is false; since there are an hundred occasions, where the use
of the Sword is notoriously known to be lawful. Secondly, Jesus Christ would
have contradicted himself upon the very spot; for there he says, Let him that
has a Sword, take it: Behold two, it is enough.


So that this must signify that he who strikes unjustly with the Sword, shall
perish by the Sword. Now one may strike unjustly with the Sword upon these two
accounts, either when he does it that he has no right, or when this right is
made use of upon some occasion that is not agreeable to the Pleasure of God.
St. Peter had not used his Sword in a proper season; not but that he had a
right, which it was not then a time to exercise, for then God would have Jesus
Christ die, and St. Peter ought to have understood it.

In a word, Jesus Christ commanded to take the Sword, for establishing the
Right which the Church has to defend herself against unjust Oppressors; and he
forbid Peter to strike, to teach the Church, that she ought to submit when God
has made known his Will, that she must suffer.

If Mr. Bossuet the present defender of this severe Moral, That we are
forbidden to maintain the Gospel by Arms, finds our Morality to loose in this
point, he will do well to call into his help for our Correction, Escobar,
Tambourin, Caramuel, and all the Tribe of new Casuists, who are very good
Catholics, and as good Catholics as they are, make it lawful to kill a Man
for a Crown-piece, or an Apple.

Nevertheless we have no design at all to inspire with the sentiments of
Revenge, those who have suffered so cruel a Persecution in France upon the
account of Religion. God forbid, we do on the contrary render thanks to God,
that not one of them has been prevailed upon to do any Action of Violence; for
though they could not have destroyed others, without having been destroyed
themselves, yet it is a surprising consideration, that among so many people of
different Characters, there should not be found a great number, who would act
the part of Sampson, to bury themselves, and their Enemies under the same
Ruins, which was easy for them to have done. But the Patience wherewith they
have suffered is an Argument that the Spirit of God has sustained them in
their Calamities.

Nor do we pretend here to make a defense for all the Wars which have been
undertaken upon the account of Religion, nor all those which were for the
Defense of a good Religion.

As the taking up Arms has always dreadful consequences, it is certain that of
two Evils the greatest is to be avoided, and that it is better to suffer
moderate Oppressions, than to run to extreme Remedies.

But my Design is to let Mr. Bossuet see, that he does not know what he says,
when he would make it so criminal in our People, to approve those who bear Arms
to maintain the Gospel. As if in this they had done any foolish and odious
Action. There are some Extremities beyond which Christian Morality does not
oblige us to carry our Patience. And I think no one can imagine a greater
Extremity, than when it comes to massacring.

When the first War of Religion began in the last Age, the Massacre of Vassy
had given the signal to all France. There was no longer any place wherein the
Protestants could be with safety. And by consequence it was time to make use of
the Right of Self-preservation, which no Prescription, no Usurpation of the
Mighty can ever annihilate.

But when only the Preservation or Death of some particular Persons is the
concern, as it was in the Reigns of Francis the 1st, and Henry the 2d, then was
it a time for Patience, but when the Life of a whole People is in hazard, and
in extreme hazard, then there must be a recourse to extreme Remedies.

There may be also certain Circumstances, when People are not obliged to attend
the most extreme Evils before they run to Redress them. When the whole Nation
sees the Prince in a Resolution to extirpate the established Religion, a stop
ought to be put at the beginning.

It Is therefore that the English Nation cannot be blamed, in their present
Conduct against their King, except it be by those People who are full of their
Prejudices, or Slaves to the great ones under whom they live, or else
altogether ignorant of the Laws of England.

When the King had once made himself Master of the Laws and Religion, it would
then have been too late to have sought for a Remedy.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Affairs of England.
WE know very well, my Brethren, that in the Kingdom where you are, it is made a
point of Honor, and of Conscience, to speak all that can be imagined cruel and
outrageous against the English Nation, against the Church of England, and
against all those illustrious Persons who are at the head of that Action which
is now brought to pass in England. This great and sudden Revolution, which is
at this day the astonishment of all Europe, is the execration of Bigots, who
discharge their fury upon those names which will one day make them tremble.

Behold (say they) the Spirit of your Religion, it is Rebellion, a Revolt from
Sovereigns, it is a black Invasion of the powers ordained by God.

I know well that you ought upon this occasion to have a strict guard over the
measures you take, and to conduct yourselves with a great deal of discretion:
and I fear there are some amongst you ill enough informed to give an ill
account of an Affair, not only most innocent, but even the most glorious and
the greatest that has been achieved for many Ages.

To convince you of this Truth, you ought to know principally that the
Qualification of the King of England is as inconsistent with that of a Roman
Catholic, as the Qualification of a Lutheran or Calvinist is with that of a
Pope. Nothing is more opposite to the Fundamental Laws of the State.

I. It is forbidden under the pain of High Treason to perform any Exercise of
the Romish Religion within the Kingdom. How can this be consistent with a
Popish King, who requires Mass to be said publicly in the most eminent places
of the State, in his Royal-houses, in the Countries, in the Cities of the Realm.

II. It Is the Crime of High Treason in the first degree, against the State and
the Laws, to give reception to Priests and Monks within the Kingdom. How can
this agree with the condition of a Popish King, who provides for Covents of
Monks in his own Palace, and every City.

III. It Is a Crime forbidden by the Laws, and punishable with Death, to
acknowledge the Pope to be Head of the Church, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. How
can this be consistent with a King who makes public profession of recognizing
the Pope as Head of the Universal Church?

IV. It Is the Law of England, that what man soever holds correspondence with
the Pope in any manner, he shall be deemed guilty of High Treason. How can this
be consistent with the quality of a Papist in a King, who believes himself
obliged to receive the Pope's Nuncio's in his Court, and to send his
Ambassadors to him?

V. By the Laws of England, the King is obliged to make the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance to be tendered to all his Subjects; by which the King is
acknowledged the only Supreme Governor of the Church of England, and wherein
the Superiority of the Pope as well in Spirituals as Temporals is expressly
renounced. I would fain know how this can be adjusted with the nature of a
Popish King? What kind of Monster is it, whose Body is a Protestant Church, and
whose Head is an utter Popish King?

VI. It Is a capital Crime by Law to solicit People and Subjects to be
rec^nciled to the Sea of Rome. How can this be consistent with the Constitution
of a Popish King who believes himself obliged in Conscience to bring back all
his Subjects to the Romish Church, by Threats and Promises, by Punishments and
Rewards, and Seducements?

VII. It Is a capital Crime in England for any person to promise Obedience to
the Bishop of Rome. How can this agree with the nature of a Popish King who
calls the Pope Holy Father, and submits himself to him, at least in Spirituals?

VIII. It Is one of the Laws of the Kingdom, that whoever enjoys any public
Office, shall be obliged to take the Oath of the Test; by which the Romish
Religion is abjured and detested. But how can this be consistent with the
constitution of a Popish King, who possesses the principal Place of the
Kingdom, and therefore so publicly embraces and defends the Romish Religion?
There is no end of reciting all the Laws of England, from whence there is an
absolute inconsistency between the being of a King, and the being of a Papist
in the same Person.

Thus then it is evident, that without Injustice, the English Nation, and the
Church of England might declare to the King, that his Religion rendered him
incapable of the Crown.

It is true, the Crown of England is Successive; but according to all Laws, and
in all places of the World, he that receives a Succession, receives it with all
the Charges, which by Law are annexed to it, or he falls from it: He that
receives an Estate charged with Rents and Obligations, must perform them, must
yield Faith and Homage, if he would enter into possession of the Inheritance.

It is yet more certain, that in Successive Crowns there are certain
Qualifications which ought to be in the Successor; if he has them not, he must
have a Guardian, or a Regent must be made, or the Crown devolves to the next
fit Heir, who has the Qualifications required by Law.

The Crown of England has a Happiness above any other Crown in Europe, to be
subject to certain Laws which are above the King; so that a person who has not
the qualities requisite, or such as are inconsistent with the Laws, is not
capable of being admitted to the Crown, though he should have the Right of
Inheritance.

All the World knows, that the French Popish Lords who were in the Interests of
Henry IV, after the Assassination of Henry III, prayed him to receive the
Crown, but in the quality of a Roman Catholic King, as inseparably requisite
to the quality of a King of France: They had not the same right to discourse at
such a rate: for the Kings of France had for a long time raised themselves
above the Laws; and Henry being in such a State, might have taken it with his
Privileges.

Besides it was false, that there were any Laws in France, which made the
quality of a King, and the quality of a Protestant to be inconsistent; whereas
in England it is apparent, that the condition of a King, and the condition of a
Papist are irreconcilable.

Nevertheless, such was the goodness of the Church of England, and the English
Nation, that they would not exclude James II. from the Crown; persuading
themselves that they had laid an inviolable Obligation upon him, religiously to
keep the Oaths made at his Coronation, in preserving Religion and the Laws as
he found them.

But this Prince suffered himself to be lead by the most impudent of Mankind,
who lifted him up above the Laws, and made him forget the Devoir of the Kings
of England, which is to Rule according to the Laws. He made a League with a
great neighboring Prince, to ruin the Protestant Religion in all Europe: He
dispensed with all the Laws both of Government and Religion: He made Mass be
said publicly in the three Kingdoms: He invested the Papists with the
principal Offices of State, turning out the Protestants: He would constrain the
Bishops by corporal Punishments, to those things which were against their
Consciences.

And that which is the unconceivable Prodigy of Ages, in a Protestant Kingdom,
he raised up a Jesuit to be a Member of the Council of State, of the
Privy Council, of the Council, in a word, that Governs the whole Kingdom. So a
Jesuit was seen Master of the Kingdom, Master of the Bishops, Master of the
Church of England.

It was necessary therefore to think of securing Religion and the State; and
this the Nation was indispensably obliged to. To this purpose did she implore
the Succor of that Prince, who, now in England, is the greatest Person of
Europe: and therefore it is against him chiefly, that the Country, where you
are, discharges its Rage; as if he had violated all the Rights of Nature, and
trampled under Foot the Obligations of Consanguinity.

First, it appears, that he was called upon by the Nation; this, I say, appears
by the suddenness of the Revolution, which was brought to pass so soon as it
began: The only Princess of the Blood, that was in England* and the Prince her
Husband, declared themselves for him* all the great Men, the Peers, the Cities,
the Provinces, acknowledged the Justice of his Demands, and supported them.

If this Prince had refused to have afforded Succor to the Nation, she would
have done the very same without him, that she now does under his Banners; and
from thence would have unavoidably followed the ruin of the Monarchy.

For the State was divided into diverse Parties, as it was under Charles I: It
is apparent that the Anarchical and Independent Party have once gained the
power over it; so that we might have seen the Nation return to the same Estate
it was under Cromwell, and perhaps to a worse. The King might very possibly
have been exposed to the same Miseries which his Father suffered.

The Prince therefore, for the Interest of the State, for the Interest of the
Princesses, for his own, and also for the King's, could not dispense with
putting himself at the head of an Expedition, which might have been ruined, if
it had not been governed by so great a Soul.

And then for the pretended Obligations of Consanguinity, they are mere
appearances: there are Obligations much more indispensable: He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. We owe to God, to the Laws,
to Religion, more than to our Kindred. It had been a cruel piece of Piety to
have seen a Church and a Kingdom perish without relieving them, for fear of
offending one Person with whom we have some relation of Flesh and Blood.

I know our Enemies will not scruple saying, that it was not Piety, but
Ambition, that gave life to these great Motions; which this Great Prince was
very sensible of. But we who are near him, and have known his sentiments for
many Years, are able to witness two things; one is, that he is truly touched
with the Love of God and his Religion. The other is, that he did not undertake
this Enterprise till the last Extremity.

And we know with the greatest certainty, that the English were twenty times
refused upon the Proposition which they made; because he always hoped that God
would open some softer Methods to protect Religion from the Oppression which
was prepared for it. Those that are near him, can witness, that there never was
a Prince more Zealous, and better affected to the Truth.

The Success, which God has given to his Enterprises, may convince us, that he
it is, whom God is pleased to make use of, for accomplishing his great Designs,
and for the establishment of the True Religion.

One might further say things much more considerable for Justification of this
Great Enterprise, with respect both to the Nation and the Prince: but time will
place them in a better Light, and it shall be made known, that those who have
shed so much Blood, and have had no respect to the Laws of Consanguinity, merit
not regard upon their account.

Nevertheless, the Prince has, and always will have a regard to the King, whose
Destiny is so much lamented: for he has no design against his Person, or
against his Dignity; he would only take away from him the means of hurting
others, and of hurting himself: But this Unfortunate Prince, by following the
Inspirations of that unhappy Genius which has animated him for so many Years,
has cast himself into a Precipiece, and saught his Safety by forsaking his
Palace and his Kingdom, without having any just cause for it.

It cannot be said with any truth, that the King of England could observe,
either in the Conduct of the Prince, or the Lords, or the Bishops, or the
People, any design to attack his Person, his Life, his Liberty, or his Dignity.
On the contrary, every thing was so disposed, that Affairs might be treated of
with the greatest sweetness.

In the first Address, which was presented to the King, after the Prince's
arrival, by fourteen or fifteen of the Lords Ecclesiastical and Temporal, they
promise, after they have entreated for a free Parliament, to serve him with all
their power, and the power of their Friends.

And in the last great Council held December. 9th, constituted of all that were
considerable at London, it is certain that the King was only asked to call a
free Parliament; but this was done with such respectful and tender Expressions,
that it is evident the Nation had no design against the Person, or Dignity of
the King.

And the King having agreed upon the meeting of a Parliament upon the 25th of
January, the Prince accepted of it upon the most reasonable condition that can
be imagined: Which was, that neither his own, nor the King's Army should come
within forty Miles of the place where the Parliament sat.

Here it appeared, that the King had no sincere intention in calling the
Parliament, and that it was only to gain time, and to receive the foreign
Assistance which he expected. These Succors failing, and his own Troops
declaring, that they could not fight against the Laws and Religion of their
Country; he was resolved suddenly to play the part of quitting his Throne:
Choosing, rather not to Reign, than not to Reign over the Laws; and to take the
advantage of an odious imputation against the Protestants, that they had driven
him from his Kingdom.

But all Europe is witness to the contrary: and if hereafter he looses the
Crown, it is a loss for which he can only blame himself, having drawn it upon
himself, partly by Violation of the Laws, and partly by his Desertion.

If there had been any design violently to drive him from his Throne, why was
he so stopped in his Flight? What an Object is a King Arrested as a Fugitive! But
why was he staid to do him Violence?

Was he not honorably entreated to return to his own Palace? Had he not the
liberty given, to retire as he was best pleased?

I question not, but all this shall be reflected upon us with the most
malevolent Influences; for it is a common thing with the Papism in its rage, to
take hold of all that may any way serve its Revenge.

But be wise, and Adore the profound Judgments of God. You see in this Event,
the first blow to the ruin of Popery, which we have proposed apparently near,
out of the Prophecies of the New Testament: This great and surprising
Revolution will without doubt draw others after it, which shall be no less
considerable. The Empire of Antichrist has not received so terrible a check
since the last Age: it rouls down to its Fall, and God visibly pushes it upon
the Precipiece.

Keep silence then, my Brethren, but do not suffer your selves to be carried
down the stream of Outrages against him whom God has chosen for the Instrument
of his great Work.

Remember the Injustice which the Papists have been guilty of at this time: To
violate Laws, which ought to have been most inviolable, to break their Oaths,
to trample under Foot the most sacred Engagements, to seize upon the Miserable,
and force them to Abjuration, to throw them into Prisons, to send them to
Galleys, to Banish them, and confiscate their Goods: This is all good and
lawful for advancing the Catholic Religion.

But to maintain the Reformed Religion by maintaining Laws, and to repress the
Enterprises of those that would violate them, this is an horrible Attempt, an
infernal Action.

Is not this to weigh Actions in unequal Balances?

January 1, 1689. With the Privilege of our Lords the States. Rotterdam, at
the House of Abr. Acher, near the Bourse.
Books lately Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey.
I. A Discourse concerning the Nature, Power, and Proper Effects of the Present
Conventions in both Kingdoms, called by the Prince of Orange. Quarto.

II. A Political Conference between Aulicus a Courtier, Demas a Countryman,
and Civicus a Citizen, Clearing the Original of Civil Government, the Powers
and Duties of Sovereigns and Subjects, in a familiar and plain Way, which may
be understood by every ordinary Capacity. Quarto.

III. Liberty of Conscience Explicated and Vindicated, and the Just Limits
betwixt it and Authority Sacred and Civil Cleared. Quarto.

IV. The Triumphs of Grace: or, the last Words and Edifying Death of the Lady
Margaret de la Musse, a Noble French Lady, Aged only Sixteen Years. Twelves.


